THE SE^^^T HISTORY OF White Hall, FROM THE Restoration of Charles II. Down to
the Abdication of the late K. James. Writ at the Request of a Noble Lord, and
conveyed to him in Letters, by -- late Secretary-Interpreter to the Marquess of
Louvois, who by that means had the perusal of all the Private Minutes between
England and France for many Years. The Whole consisting of Secret Memoirs,
which have hitherto lain concealed, as not being discoverable by any other
Hand. Published from the Original Papers. By D. JONES, Gent.

LONDON, Printed, and are to be Sold by R. Baldwin near the Oxford-Arms Inn in
Warwick Lane. MDCXCVII.

THE PREFACE.
I Do not question but the Reader will expect somewhat should be premised, by
way of Satisfaction, to such Scruples as may be suggested in general,
concerning the Authentickness of the ensuing Letters; which, as I conceive,
they are reducible to the following heads, viz. An Account of the Author, and
the Means whereby he got his Intelligence; the Verity of the Matters related;
the Nature of the Correspondence; and what part the Methodizer has had in the
Undertaking; so I shall endeavor to give as distinct and satisfactory a
Solution of each Particular, as may reasonably be expected from me, or the
Circumstance of the Things will justly admit of.

First then for the Author, and his Intelligence: The first time he went over
into France was in the Year 1675, where he had not stayed above a Year, but
that the place of General Commis, or Clark of the Dispatches, and Particular
Commis Interpreter to that great French Minister of State, the Marquess de
Louvois, for the Affairs relating to our Three Kingdoms, falling vacant by the
Death of one Mr. Kilpatrick, a Scotchman' s Son, that same Employment was
conferred by him upon a Frenchman, a Favorite of his, named Belou; Who
understanding no English, and therefore not being able to manage the Affair
without an English Man, our Author was recommended to him for that service (as
he hints in his first Letter) which yet you are to Note by the way, was not the
first he writ from that Country, to that Noble Person he corresponded with, and
to whom he was previously engaged to transmit all the Intelligence he could
learn of the Proceedings of the French Court, before he entered upon the said
Employment, (but they being not very material, he took no care to reserve the
Transcripts by him) and continued to be Interpreter of the English tongue till
after the time of our Grand Revolution, when he came over into England; where
his stay was not long, but that he was employed by the same Noble Person to
return into France again, where the dangerous part he was to Act may be better
conceived than now expressed, but concerning which you may hear more hereafter.

Its no hard matter to imagine what Qualifications were necessary to recommend
our Author to the Employment before noted, and how far his outside must differ
from his inside during his abode there, which together with that part which he
has Acted in that Kingdom, since his present Majesty King William' s Accession
to the Throne, and that he knows not how soon he may still be engaged to return
(though he be at present in London) are Reasons of themselves, without
superadding any other, of the many that might be produced, more than sufficient
for the suppression of his Name, and of my being engaged in the Work; which yet
rather than Truth should suffer, I am satisfied he will be as forward to
render, as well known to the World, as it is to that Noble Person who has
employed him.

I am of Opinion, the Reader will be much better persuaded of the verity of the
Facts, as well as much more pleased with the new Discoveries of State-Mysteries
he will meet with here, by the perusal of the Work himself, than by any thing I
can pretend to say in the Defense of the one, or the Commendations of the
other; And were it not to obviate a vulgar Error and Objection that I foresee
would be made upon this Subject, That all that could be Writ has been written
already, concerning the late Reigns, I should dismiss it; But now I am
necessitated not to single out, but promiscuously to call to mind a few Heads
(for to make an Enumeration of all the remarkable Particulars were to run
through the Contents of every individual Letter) and to ask the Objector, where
it is he meets with an exact Account of the Private League between King Charles
the Second, and the French King; The Duke of York' s secret Correspondence with
that Court; Coleman' s interventien with both for his own Advantage; The
Interest the French made both in England and Holland among the several Sects
and Parties of Men, to prevent the late Queen's being married to his present
Majesty: The Methods concerted to Trapan her into France with her Father's
concurrence, and how prevented; Father St. Germain's attempting King Charles
the Second in his Religion, with the King's Answer, etc. His unseasonable
boasting of it, the Occasion of his flight into France, and the Censure he
underwent from those of his Order for it; Coleman' s Wife's Petition to the
French King, the Answer, and her destroying her self; Monsieur le Tellier' s
Speech about the Invasion of England; the Duke of York his pervertion to the
Church of Rome; King James his Private League with France, when Regnant; the
Essay made by Don Ronquillo, the Spanish Ambassador, to draw him into the
Austrian Interest, with his Answer, and Refusal, in savor of France; How
Father Petre came to be made a Privy Councellor; wherefore Mr. Skeleton was
imprisoned in the Tower, etc. which, to name no more, though the rest are of
equal curiosity, as they had, in all likelihood, been for ever buried in the
profoundest Oblivion, had not the Fate and Address of this Gentleman led him to
fetch them out of the Dark, and almost inscrutable Recesses of the French
Cabinet-minutes, so the Reader will find they carry so much Evidence of Truth
with them, not only by the Connection they have with many material Passages in
Sir William Temple' s Memoirs, Mr. Coke' s Detection of the Court and State of
England during the Four last Reigns, etc. but by so natural an unfolding of
what is obscurely, or but transiently hinted at by those learned Authors, who
could not see beyond their light; and yet so remote from those Scurrulities, as
well as Inconsistencies, to say no worse, which occur in some other pieces of
the same Reigns, that it were a Crime to make any farther Apology for them: Yet
it may be noted by the way, that this same does evince the necessity of this
Supplemental Part, as well for the detecting of past Falsities, as for the
perfecting of past Discoveries: And it is hoped no body will quarrel, that this
Piece which is Entitled by the Name of a Secret History, etc. should be
written in an Epistolary way, when it be considered that such a Form was
indispensibly necessary under the Circumstances of the Author, and his Noble
Correspondent, and that there is a very engaging part naturally couched under
such a method of bringing State-Arcana's to light, by way of Letters, which, in
the very Notion of them carry something of secrecy; Though after all, the
Reader cannot but observe an Air of History to run, in a manner, through the
whole composition; but whether arising from the Mode of those Minutes from
whence our Author drew his Intelligence, or from his own natural Genius, or
partly from both, is, I confess a Question I never asked him, neither do I
think the determination of it of any great consideration.

As to the nature and manner how this Correspondence was managed, the Inquirer
may take notice that the conveyance was not so difficult; For the Post, during
all the time these Letters were continued, was free between both Nations,
though he is also to observe, that some of them occasionally for fear of
interception were written in Ciphers, which I retain by me, as I do the rest of
the Original Papers, for my own and the Worlds satisfaction: But for the method
pursued by him, during the present Reign, It will then be time enough to give
such hints thereof as in prudence shall be esteemed safe and necessary.

But though the Station this learned Gentleman was in, did, together with his
own industry and curiosity, entitle him to the vast Discoveries made in these
Letters; Yet the ticklishness of his Circumstances, and the fears of being
surprised, together with a natural tendency that is in Mankind, to take notice
of present rather than past Occurrencies, would not admit of a continued
succession of writing Matters of Fact as they have fallen out in order of time;
Which as it is a most convincing Reason of so many inverted and promiscuous
Dates, so it has introduced the Methodizer: First, under a necessity of
frequently altering the prefatory and conclusive parts of the Letters, and then
of making up some small breaches, which under the forementioned Circumstances
must necessarily happen, and which yet are grounded upon the most irrefragable
Authorities, that there might be a connection between the several Parts, and
the History appear entire, and all of a piece. And it could not be thought
ungrateful to our Reader to have the Contents inserted before every Letter,
with the Observation of the Years, so far as was needful, when each Matter was
transacted, whereof there neither was a necessity for the Author to observe to
that Noble Lord to whom he was the Intelligencer, who is too great a Critic in
History to need it, unless it were upon some very special occasions; neither
indeed would the promiscuous way of Writing, which the stinted Opportunities,
he was under, forced to him, admit well of it; especially when these Papers at
the first taking of them were not designed to be made public. Though his own
Curtosity led him to keep Copies of whatever he writ that was material, then
which nothing is more common with Persons under the like Circumstances; The
many Letters and Memoirs that have from time to time appeared in the World,
being a convincing proof hereof; And without which Method it had been
impossible to have transmitted to Posterity the thousandth part of what the
World has been obliged with, in things of that kind.

Its true there are some Letters to be met with now and then in the course of
this Correspondence, which, at first sight, may seem to be foreign, and have
little or no relation to the main Subject; But besides that there are few or
none without some sort of connection, and do not in one degree or other
interfere with the British Affairs, they are so much an imbellishment to those
parts they fill up, as not to merit so severe a Censure, as to undergo the fate
of being castrated.

And here is a spacious field before me, were it advisable, or any ways
necessary, to descant upon the excellency and usefullness of these Discoveries
which are wholly new; But I shall wave that, and only observe; That there is no
one Party, or sect of Men in England, much less the Court exempted, but may
draw very seasonable Informations, and no less timous Instructions herefrom,
seeing they have all of them, in their respective turns, though many quite
against their knowledge, been imposed upon by French Emissaries, and made Tools
of to serve the Interest of France, to the prejudice of themselves, and of
their own Country; And how far the same Emissaries, though under different
shapes, according to time and occasion, have prevailed to nourish and
perpetuate those Intestine Feuds, and Cruel Animosities which they formerly
sowed amongst us, during the present Reign, will in part, among other
surpri^ing Secrets, be the subject matter of the next Volume, which will be
continued down to the present year 1696, and which I could not forbear
mentioning upon this occasion, though it comes in by way of Anticipation.

D. Jones.
From my House in Clerkenwell, Nov. 9th. 1696.
LETTER I.
Of the Author's being introduced to the Place of Interpreter of the English
Tongue, etc.

My Lord,
I Am not so pleased with my Preferment of being made Interpreter for the
English Affairs, to the Principal Commis or Clark of the Dispatches under the
Marquess De Louvois, to which Employment I have been lately admitted, as I am
with the Thoughts of the Opportunity I shall have to serve your Lordship, with
much better Intelligence than hitherto my Circumstances would admit of; most of
my time, since my admission into the said Office, has been taken up in
inspecting into Mr. Kil-Patrick's Method, who was Predecessor to the Person to
whom I am Interpreter, and I have under my Hands all his Papers and Minutes for
near Twenty Years backward; whereby I do not question, but I may in time give
your Honor much light into the Intrigues of the Ministers of State in this
Kingdom, and the Maxims they have and do go upon, for the producing such
Accidents and Revolutions in their Neighbour-Nations, and especially in our
Kingdoms, as may favor the Aspiring Endeavors of this Court toward an
Universal Monarchy, and obviate all such cross Events as may fall out contrary
to their Designs; I have seen some strange things already, in relation to our
Country, Contrived and Agitated by them, but my Business requires so much
Attendance from me at present, and the minuting out of any thing but what
belongs to the Service of the Office, requires so much Circumspection and
Privacy, that I durst not hitherto venture upon any such thing; but I hope a
little time will put me into a freedom of Circumstance, that may in some
measure be answerable to my readiness to serve you, and make appear how much I
am,

My Lord, Your Lordship's most Humble Servant.
Paris, Ian. 8. 1676. N. St.
LETTER II.
Of the Opposition made by the French Ministers of State to K. Charles IId's
Restoration, with their Answers to the Queen-Mother's Resentments thereupon.

My Lord,
ACcording to the Expectation I may have raised in your Lordship by my last, of
some Notable Intelligence from me, I am to acquaint you with what perhaps you
will hardly believe; that this Court, considering the near Alliance between the
Burbonian and English Royal Family, should as much as once think to obstruct
the King's Restoration to the Throne of his Ancestors: but for my part, I
clearly find there is neither Father, Brother, nor Cousin, between Kings and
Kingdoms, and that France used the utmost of her Policy, at that time, to keep
us Embroiled at Home, while she might have her Hands loose to play her Game
Abroad; but because I conceive it may not be ungrateful to your Lordship, to
understand what those Stratagems were, which they own themselves to have
practiced upon that Occasion, I shall briefly hint them unto you, as I find
them entered here in their Cabinet-Minutes; Monsieur Bourdea^x was then their
Ordinary Ambassador at London, whose Instructions were, both by himself and
several other Emissaries which they had there, to raise all the Jealousies
imaginable in the several Factions of Monk and his Adherents, and at the same
time to make Overtures to Monk, to assume Oliver's Post and Power; urging with
great vehemence that he might with much more Justice and Security do it, as
having (what the other had not) a President before him; but though that General
refused the Proposal, and was proof against all their Attacks of that kind,
saying, he would not split his Family upon that Rock against which the
Cromwell's had dashed, but would wave all Ambitious Projects of his own
Grandeur, that were indirect, and pursue only those that consisted with his
Countries good; and that they saw at last it was in vain to attempt the Union
of the stronger Factions at Home, either against Monk, or the King's
Restoration; they resolved to try what might be done Abroad to work them into a
Temper, and therefore to raise Jealousies in them from their Neighbors, they
did in March 1660. Defile several Battalions of Foot toward Calais, giving out
at the same time, that their Design was to Besiege Dunkirk in Conjunction with
the Spanish Forces; and that after the Place was taken by them, it was to be
delivered up to the Spaniards, pursuant to an Agreement made between them, that
the latter had consented to give up Cambray, and some other Places, to the
French in lieu of it; at which proceedings of theirs, the Queen Mother then in
France taking the Alarm, she briskly remonstrated unto them the unnatural part
they acted, considering the near Ties of Blood in her Person between the Royal
Families of France and England, and how dishonorable it was to oppose the
Restitution of a Prince, which they were bound to promote even by Arms, though he
had been no ways Allied to them: but she was answered, that there were many
Reasons of state which superceded all those Scruples; that for her part, she
might be assured, she should be as well provided for as otherwise; that it was
not safe for her Son to be brought in purely by his own Subjects; but that if
they both would have a little patience, they did not question but they had
taken such Methods so to embroil and weaken England, that there would be
quickly room enough for the French King to bring him in, in a much more
Glorious manner, so as that he might be Absolute Master of his Subjects, and
have his Royal Authority no more to depend upon the fickle and changeable
Temper of a Perfidious Nation, nor be in danger to receive any check from
Parliaments, that would sooner or latter prove Factious and Dangerous to his
State; that it was visible the Spaniards had a great hand in promoting such a
Revolution in England, and therefore they desired her to consider how
dishonorable it would be to the House of Bourbon to suffer it; and how
dangerous such a Conjunction of England and Spain (which would naturally
follow) against them would be, she her self might judge; and that therefore
since a little patience would Infallibly retrieve the whole Game to their
Interest, and much more to her Satisfaction, they could do no less than pursue
the Methods they had taken, and make both her and her Son happy, though it were
against their Wills; that she was much in the wrong to judge of Things by
present Appearances, that they were assured, however Matters might be concealed
from her, the Conditions proposed to the King her Son by his Subjects, were
little to her Satisfaction, when they imported no less, than that her two
younger Sons (of the Elder of whom she had conceived greatest Hopes) and her
self, must never set footing on English Ground, and that the King himself must
Marry a Protestant Heretic, and suffer no Roman Catholic to live in his
Dominions. But when they found all their Politics had failed them, and that
the King was restored in spite of them, according to his Hearts Content, they
afterward fell upon other Stratagems, put in due time in Execution to work
upon his Easy Nature, and to render his Power more serviceable than hurtful to
their Designs, though the King, (who was yet sensible of the Injuries done him)
upon his Arrival in England ordered Bourdeux to withdraw out of his Dominions;
this is the substance of what I find entered here, in reference to this
particular, and all I have now to Communicate, which, if I find it relish with
your Lordship, I shall not fail to lay hold of all Occasions to demonstrate how
much I am,

My Lord, Your Lordship's most Humble, etc.
Paris, Feb. 19. 1676. N. St.
LETTER III.
Of several Matches proposed to King Charles the Second, by the French Court,
with his Answers and Rejection of the same.

My Lord,
It Is not unknown to your Lordship, that one Topic in the French Politics has
been now for many Years, to bring their Neighbor Princes into their Interests,
by procuring them Wives; and the French Women have had an Excellent Faculty to
bring over their Husbands into the Gallican Noose, though apparently to the
hazard of themselves, and their own State; so that quite failing in their end
to obstruct the King's Restoration, they now attempted to Entrap him with a
Wife; I understand there were several French Matches proposed to him during his
Exile, and among others a great Lady, whose Name I cannot now remember, who had
like to have been afterward Married to the Prince of Conde, and whom the King
hotly Courted when in France; but because he was refused by her then, he in his
turn refused her when Restored; though in reality such a proffer on their part,
was no more than to sound his Disposition toward Marrying a French Woman in
general; for if he had consented to have taken this Lady to Wife, the French
Court would not have suffered it, because she was a Martial Lady, and of the
contrary Faction to them at Paris: A second was their then Madamoisell D'
Orleans, the French King's Aunt, which Match agreed very well both with her and
King Charles's Inclination; and the King seemed forward to press it; but it was
not so with the French Court, who by their Artifices put it by, as remembering
likewise her Martial Temper, and what she had done, when with her own Hands she
had fired off the Guns of the Bastile against the King's Party in the Wars of
Paris, and how hotly she abetted the Party that stood up against the King's
Legitimacy; for they looked upon her still with a Jealous Eye, as thinking her
yet full of Resentment, and that she would put our King in a Martial Mood,
cause him to renew the Old Pretensions to France, and to abet the Princes that
might have been disposed to renew the Dispute of the French King's
Illegitimacy, and to advance their own Title to that Crown; or at leastwise,
that she would put King Charles upon thwarting in all things, whatever might
promote the Grandeur of Lewis XIVth. Nay, so great was their Fear of that
Ladies Issue, by any Person whatsoever, that after they had Treacherously
shamed her into a Clandestine Match with the Count D' Lauzun, to hinder her
Matching with any greater Person; they likewise took Care she should have no
Issue, even by him, by keeping of him in Prison, and never suffering them to
come together again till they were both past Children: The third Person I find
proposed, and that in Earnest, was Cardinal Mazarine's Niece Hortensia, a Match
of which the French Court were very fond, and such as was every way agreeable
to their Gusto: the Cardinal, besides many other Sophistical Addresses to bring
the Business to bear, got the Hook baited with the Appearance of a great stock
of Beauty, besides the tender of a vast Sum of Money to boot: He took Care also
to have it rumoured abroad, that such a Match was not only in agitation, but in
a fair way to be accomplished, all which 'twas believed might have done the
Feat, but that it having been unluckily rumoured abroad, that she had paid her
first Fruits already to the French King, K. C. said, He would not be content
with her upon the second hand: However it were, the Reasons transmitted to the
French Court, why such an Advantageous Offer was rejected by our King, were,

1. Because her Uncle had so ungenerously opposed his Restoration, and used him
so Contemptuously at the Treaty of the Pyrenees.

2. Because that Alliance could be of no Advantage to him, but by a little
present Money, and would besides raise Jealousies in his People against him,
for which the Day was yet too early; so that seeing they found they could put
no French Lady upon him, they resolved to promote the Match with Portugal,
whereby, they were sure, the King would have no Issue: But that was not all,
for by this means, they were in hopes to render him destitute of any Powerful
Foreign Ally; and that the Duke of York being already Married to Chancellor
Hide's Daughter, and in Prospect of a fair Issue, both them Matches might
together lay a Foundation for New Discontents, weaken the Union between King
and People, and put the Younger Brother upon Aspiring Thoughts, in Prejudice to
the Elder. But because the foresaid Match with Portugal might not be thought to
be of their Contrivance, and for some self ends, they put this piece of
drudgery upon the Queen Mother, whom they managed so as to give her assured
Hopes, her second Son, who was her Darling, would by that means one Day ascend
the English Throne, and what might not she and all of them hope from him, who
had ever been much more open in Profession of, and Zealous for the Roman
Religion? etc. But great Care was taken to give it out betimes, that this
Journey of the Queen was only a Visit to her Son, now a King de facto, and in
all Royal State, and that she designed quickly to return and spend the
remainder of her Days in France, her Native Country; and at the same time how
highly she was offended at her other Son, the Duke of York's Marriage with the
Chancellor's Daughter, which about that Conjuncture came to be publicly known,
and by whom he had now a Child Born; but whether she had any Instructions upon
this Journey to break the Ice, and make Overtures to her Son about the Sale of
Dunkirk, I could never learn, and our Minutes are in a profound silence
concerning it; however I shall in my next give you all the Intimations that
ever came within the verge of my Knowledge upon this Head, and in the mean
time, am,

My Lord, Your Lordships most Humble Servant.
Paris, Feb. 25. 1676. N. St.
LETTER IV.
Of the Sale of Dunkirk to the French, and by what Methods effected.

My Lord,
THat Cardinal Richlieu had ^ong before laid a Foundation for the French
greatness, and even to nourish Thoughts of France's attaining in Time the
universal Monarchy, is notoriously known to all that are conversant in the
Histories of his Time; and that Cardinal Mazarine, who succeeded him as Primier
Minister of State, pursued his Steps, and made considerable Advances in the
Design before he Dyed, which was about the Time of the Negotiation for the Sale
of Dunkirk, is no less manifest; and that the Methods both the one and the
other pursued, was to set their Engines on work continually to embroil their
Neighbors, either in Intestine Jarrs, or in an open Invasion of one another
Territories, and then to invite themselves in to assist the weaker, that they
might run away with the Prey from both; but among all their Neighbor Nations,
the English were those they most dreaded, both out of Fear and Emulation of
their Military Strength and Glory, and whom consequently they made their utmost
Efforts to entangle in Civil Discords; and therefore it was that Richlieu took
Advantage of the unhappy Conjuncture in the first sowing the Seeds of
Discontent between King Charles I. and his Parliaments: And then by his
Incendiaries kindled such a flame in the Three Kingdoms, as terminated not only
in the Destruction of the King, but even of the Monarchy it self; so that the
Nation after having undergone a Succession of almost all the Forms of
Government, that have been in use among the Sons of Men run at last into the
very Dregs of all Government, even Anarchy it self; which Mazarine did as
stre^uosly endeavor to keep up amongst us, as his Predecessor Richlieu had
been forward to run us upon those dangerous Precipices that introduced it; but
when after all, the French Efforts to prevent our return to our Old and known
Form again, by the Kings Restoration had failed; it struck no small damp upon
the French Politicians, to see the Babel they had been so long Erecting, and
were now in a fair way to have laid on the Top-stone, in danger to be
overthrown at one Clap, and to have all their Hopes dashed to pieces; and
therefore they stood still for a Time to see what so mighty a Revolution in
England might produce, and what mighty things a King in the Vigor of his Years
(whom they had sufficiently provoked during his Exile) so high in the Love of
his Subjects, the ancient Emulators of the French, and the People now in the
most Martial Posture that ever they were in since England was a Nation, would
undertake; but finding all were Haleyon Da^s, and that then there was no
apparent Disposition in our Court to make any Incroachment on their Neighbors;
the French Ministers began to reassume fresh Hopes, and to consider what
Expedients might be proper for to promote their Designs, which now for some
time had lain Dormant; one Project was that of the Match mentioned by me to
your Lordship in my Last, which succeeding so well, and finding still that the
King was far enough from designing any War for the enlargment of his
Territories, they resolved to make an Essay, and see whether he was willing to
part with any thing that was already his own.

I do suppose your Lordship may have heard of Cardinal de Retz being in
disgrace at the French Court, of his being forced to flee the Kingdom, of his
being at London incognito some time after the Restoration; what he was
publicly accused for in France, was that he had favored the Adverse Party
about the Point of the Legitimacy, that he had invited Madamoisell d' Orleans
to aspire to a Match with our King, and Abetted the Pretensions of Rome against
those of the Court, about the then growing Difficulties concerning the Regale;
but what ever the Reasons were, they were never Published, nor suffered to be
so much as entered in the Minutes of other Secrets; but this is certain, that
our King interceded with the French King on his behalf, and that he was
admitted to return, and I have been assured, it was by the way of Dunkirk, and
was sent afterward Ambassador to Rome; but whether all this was a Juggle, to
carry on a Negotiation about Dunkirk, I will not positively affirm, but it
looks as much like a French Trick, as one Egg does another.

That the Spaniards pressed our King very early for the Restitution of Dunkirk,
is uncontroulably true, and made pretty large offers, and it is as true that
the King rejected their Proposals, which yet did not discourage the French
Emissaries, of whom they had by this Time many in England, as the Minutes show,
who having ingratiated themselves with the Chancellor, and other hungry
Courtiers made also their Overtures; and told the King withal, that Cromwell was
to have that Town only for a Temporary Caution, for so much Money due to him
for his Assistance against the Spaniards, and that therefore it was a Matter of
Right they insisted upon seeing they were now ready to lay down the Sum, with
more then Interest, nay, and they were so bold as to tell him farther, that if
he refused to give it for Money, they would endeavor to recover the same by a
War, and questioned not the Junction of the Hollanders with them, both by Sea
and Land in that Case; they being as unwilling as the French, that the English
should have footing so near them on the Continent, and in effect they made use
of the Dutch Faction, and some Jews their Emissaries in England, more then any
Body else to bring that Affair about; and because they would be sure to meet
with no Obstructions from the Spaniards, by renewing their Instances to the
King, and alleging a greater right to the Town then the French, they amused
them with a Design they had to restore it to them again, upon a reasonable
equivalent in Flanders, and gave it out that they had entered into a Treaty
already with them upon that Head; but whether it was so in Reality I cannot
tell, and this is all that I am able to inform your Lordship concerning our
parting with that Important Place; Only that the sum paid for it was two
Millions, and five hundred thousand Lirves, and so I remain

My Lord, Your Lordships most Humble Servant.
Paris, March 4. 1676. N. St.
LETTER V.
Overtures made to King Charles II. for the Sale of Tangier to the French, and
how prevented.

My Lord,
THe French having (as I have given your Lordship an Account in my Last) gained
their Point in the buying of Dunkirk, whereof the French Forces took Possession
about October in the Year, 1662. they paused a little to see how the English
would resent it before they would make any further Paces for the Promotion of
their Cause to our Disadvantage; but finding the Memory of the Anarchical
Times, together with the Nation's, according the Example of the Court, daily
degenerating from the Severity of Manners in Former Times, had in a manner laid
them fast asleep, and quite obliterated all Thoughts of Military Glory, so far
as if there had been a sudden Transmutation of the Genius of the People, they
resolved to make another Essay upon the easy temper of the King, and try
whether he would also part with Tangier unto them; but whether it were that the
King was sensible already of his Mistake in parting with Dunkirk, or that this
very Motion of theirs put him upon considering what he had done, and the great
Error he had committed in Policy thereby, it is certain he gave them an
absolute Denial; and that their Minutes speak, but say withal that to be
revenged of his Denial, and make him odious after their usual Manner; this
Court ordered it however to be reported as if he had been willing for it; and
further add, that the Kings real Answer was, that Tangier being his Queens
Dowry, to whom he had not long been Married; it would not at all suit with his
Honor to sell it, neither could he well part with it, unless he parted with
Her; that it was by Parliament annexed to the Imperial Crown of England, and so
could not be Sold without them; that if both He and his Parliament too might be
willing to sell it at another Time; yet to be sure, it was not proper to think
of it just then, when after so much Treasure and Blood spent upon it already,
it might if ever, prove of some use to the Nation, in the War then like to
begin with the Dutch: that he could not part with it to the French King so well
as to any other Christian Prince, nay not so well as even to the Moors
themselves, without giving a very just and therefore a dangerous Cause of
Jealousy to his People, especially in that Juncture, when by the Carriage of
the French he had great Cause to suspect, they were Jealous of his grandeur at
Sea; and would join with the Dutch against him: which refusal of his, I must
tell your Lordship, was indeed one of the secret Causes among others why they
soon after actually joined with that Nation, to diminish our Power, to sham
them, and weaken and undermine us both, as well as to hatch up a Navy of their
own; and since I am entered upon this Subject; your Lordship will pardon me, if
I proceed a little further, and acquaint you; that they did afterward renew
their Instances about the Sale of the said Place, with much more earnestness
then before, and that at a Time when their Interest was much stronger, and more
prevalent at our Court; and yet even then, though the Parliament had denied him
the supplies which he demanded extraordinary, as your Lordship well knows, to
be appropriated for the maintenance of Tangier, and that he was in great
streights for Money, he would not sell it to the French, nor restore it to
Portugal; but chose rather to demolish it, and abandon it to the Moors; why he
would not sell it to the French, I have already given the Reasons, but there
was perhaps another more prevalent Argument for it; viz. the strong Vote of the
House of Commons to that Purpose, which your Lordship knows better then I can
pretend to inform you; to which perhaps I may subjoyn another in due place, and
therefore now can only subscribe my self

My Lord, Your Lordships most Humble Servant.
Paris, October. 24. 1684. N. St.
LETTER VI.
Of the first Dutch War, begun in 1664,

My Lord,
I Have no Reason to doubt, but your Lordship knows most of the Particulars
relating to that unhappy War begun between England and Holland in the Year,
1665. but it may, it will not be unpleasing to recount what the French designs
might be in it, how they promoted it, and what Advantages they drew from it;
which I shall do very briefly; when they found our King did not lay hold of
those Advantages put into his Hands upon his Restoration to render himself
great at home and formidable abroad, and made not the least mien of a Martial,
Designing and Ambitious Humor, they made it their first business by their
Instrumen's at our Court, to hinder his closing with Spain, or any other in the
Interest of the House of Austria, by making up the Portugal Match, as I have
already hinted to your Lordship; next by gaining the Duke of York timely over
to their Devotion, and then by other Emissaries and Pentioners, whereof they
had good store, both in England and Holland, to stir up such Disputes between
the two Nations as might end in a War, and so divert the first Essays of the
Power of our new Monarch from themselves: In this how admirably they succeeded,
is well known, the Dutch on the one side being secretly incited and encouraged
to Insolences and Encroachments, and the English to as deep Resentments;
insomuch that a War was hotly urged against them by our Parliament it self; the
French Court in the mean time playing Bopeep with them both; for it does
manifestly appear by the hints that I have seen, that they promised Succor to
both Parties in Case of a Rupture, though it were really resolved to see us
fight first, and then succor the weakest, and so kill two Birds with one
Stone, that is, divert and weaken both our Naval Forces, and make use of one of
us to increase their own Naval Strength, till which War was very
inconsiderable; which they most effectually did, for they no sooner saw the
Balance incline to our side by the first great defeat given the Hollanders in
that War, but contrary to all the Assurances before given to the King, they not
only sided with the Enemy; but drew the Dane too into their Confederacy, though
they never did either of them any good by fighting for them at Sea, but only by
bribing one at that Time in the highest Favor in our Court; I need not Name
him, got a part of our Fleet, sent on a blind Errand after theirs, where 'twas
sure not to be found, while the Dutch and the rest of our Ships and Commanders,
were left to batter one another to pieces to make them sport; having gained
their Ends in this Point, they proceeded and gained also another of yet more
dangerous Consequence, and that was to get the unthinking Hogens to build them
most of the best Ships, they now possess, and with which they have since
scourged the Dutch both before Palermo and otherParts, and with which they have
pretended since to Match either them or us; this appears, my Lord, by the
Minutes of the Lists we have of their Navy, whereof some Copies were Printed,
but at present I cannot help your Lordship to one; but therein were expressed the
Dates and Places of the building of every Ship, whereof of near an 160 Men of
War of all sorts, near an 100 of them were built in the Ports of Holland, in
the Time of the said War; during which Time also they bought such quantities of
Gunpowder, Saltpeter, and all sorts of Warlike materials there, as so
strengthened them, and exhausted the other, who never dreamt they intended in a
little Time to carry the War to them, that it much facilitated the success they
had afterward in Invading that Country, that War ended with all the success to
their Designs they could desire, both by the Treacherous Compliance of Corrupt
Ministers, they had gained in both Nations, and the Discouragement the English
had received, by the perfidious falling off of the Bishop of Munster from us,
Junction of the Dane against us, and the Chatham disaster in having our Ships
burnt there; which they effected by procuring the Queen Mother to write a
Letter to her Son, that she was assured the Dutch would have no Fleet out that
Summer; I need not remonstrate to your Lordship our ill Conduct herein, I am
sure our Enemies have both blamed and ridiculed us sufficiently for it, though
it tended so manifestly to their Advantage, and was a Pig of their own Sow; and
let me tell your Lordship, they did never believe our King would so easily take
the bait till they saw the blow struck; and this, I can assure your Lordship,
so heightened their Hopes, and whetted them in the pursuit of their Ends upon
our Court and Kingdom, that they almost never left any Motion, they had made
for their turn, till it were Effected as much to their plenary Satisfaction, as
to the Kings Dishonor and the Nations Ruin; and from hence forward you shall
find them drive on their Designs upon us Jehu-like; the Particulars whereof I
shall not fail to transmit to your Lordship, as often as I can have access to
take them out with out Suspicion from the Minutes, where they are Deposited,
and shall therefore now only subscribe my self, as I am in all sincere Devotion,

My Lord, Your Lordships most Humble Servant.
Paris, March 29. 1676. N. St.
LETTER VII.
Of the Firing of the City of London, in 1666.

My Lord,
I Am fully satisfied by what I have both seen and heard at Paris and
elsewhere, that the Duke of York was in the Year 1666. brought quite over to
the French Interest; and I have heard strange Stories related concerning his
Conduct at the Time of that dreadful Conflagration of the City, looking upon it
Janus-like, with one Face seeming concerned for the lamentable Disaster, and
with the other rejoicing to see that noble Pile reduced to Ashes, and its
Citizens ruined; who had at all Times been the greatest Propugnators for
Liberty and Property, and opposers of that Religion which he now not only
secretly professed, but was even ready publicly to own; and rewarding those
Incendiaries at St. James, who then were suspected generally to be French Men,
as your Lordship well may remember; but by our Minutes it does appear they were
not such; but they were Persons, at least many of them, set on Work by French
Councils, and such as at that Time were of all Men least suspected; I mean
Jews, of which they had then several in pay, not only in England, but all over
Christendom; not only to give them Intelligence in which they are wondrous
Active, but likewise to promote and act the worse of mischiefs, as which they
make no baulk. By these Fires have been kindled, not only in England, but in
Germany, Poland and elsewhere, which the Germans imputed to Turkish Emissaries,
though they were Jews hired with French Money, the Turkish Policy not being so
refined in Mischief; these sorts of Jews put on the shape of what Christians
they pleased, and of this sort employed by France, there were and are still
several in England, the Names of one or two of which I think I shall be able to
give your Lordship in sometime, though they go by several, as Time and Occasion
does require, and so at present I remain

My Lord, Your Lordships most Humble Servant.
Paris, April 7. 1676. N. St.
LETTER VIII.
Of the French Irruption into Flanders in the Year, 1667.

My Lord,
THe Dutch War, I have in a former Letter mentioned to your Lordship, being
ended, by the Treaty at Breda, July 9th. 1667. the French gained all the Ends
they proposed by it; and more particularly (as to what I have before hinted)
that both our King and People were now glad to be quiet, that some
Disreputation was thereby cast in our Nation, but more on the King and
Government, which began to engender new Discontents and Factions amongst us,
which they took care to foment, that they might make use of them afterward, and
that they having lately obliged the Dutch, thought now they might venture to
extend their Limits in Flanders, and try what Fortune their Monarch would have
against Spain, being his first undertaking, since he took upon him the
Management of Affairs after Mazarines Death, wherefore new Pretensions were
advanced for the Queen of France; which though most learnedly and more then
sufficiently answered by that renowned Statesman the Baron d' Isola in his
Treatise, called, The Buckler of State and Justice, and which I think I have
seen in your Lordships Closet, yet it put no stop to the French Carreer, but on
they carried the War, and that with such rapid Success, that they not only
ravaged Artois, Hainault and other Parts of the Netherlands in a short time,
but also took Charleroy, Oudenard, Aeth, Courtray and Lisle, besides what was
done by them in the Franch County and Burgundy; but your Lordship is so well
versed in things of this kind, that I shall forbear further to trouble you, and
shall only tell you, that after the Spaniard had suffered great loss, and that
the Dutch being both obliged by Treaty, and alarmed at the too near
Encroachment of so Potent a Neighbor, assisted the Spaniard with some Forces,
which the Monsieur well observed, but for the Time dissembled it, though he
resolved both to remember and make use of it, when opportunity was put into his
Hands, one way or other to his Advantage; the Intervention of the Tripple
League did for the present put a Hook in his Nose, and so he claps up a Peace
with the Spaniard, in 1668. with a Design to break it as soon as ever his Hands
were let loose; and so I shall conclude this Letter with my humble Thanks to
your Lordship for my last re --: And hope I shall in my next be able to impart
somewhat that will be more entertaining, till when I shall and ever will be
ready

My Lord, To serve and Honor you.
Paris, April 11. 1676. N. St.
LETTER IX.
The Dutch alarmed at the French King's Irruption into Flanders, sent a Letter
to King Charles II. about it, a Copy of which Letter was transmitted to the
French Court.

My Lord,
IF the Dutch underhand assisting the Spaniard, as I have mentioned in my last,
set the French King upon Thoughts of Revenge, a perusal of the Contents of the
States Letter to our King upon the account of his Encroachments, whetted his
Fury to an high Degree; but all was smothered for the present, there being many
rubs that lay in his way that must first be removed; what the Contents of the
said Letter was, may be easily guessed at, but the sight of any true Copy of it
I could never get; the general rumor concerning it was, that our King should
send it as soon as he had read it to the French King; but the Minutes say, it
was only a Copy of it, that was transmitted into France, and that not by the
King but that it was Surreptitiously gotten from the Secretaries-Office and
sent to that Court; but that however they ordered their private Agents both in
Holland and England, to report that our King sent it, that they might provoke
the Hollanders to use such Carriage toward him, as might dispose him to join
with the French in a new War against them; which they had a Design to put him
upon in revenge of that Letter, and of the Succors the Dutch had sent the
Spaniards, though no more then they were obliged to do defensively, pursuant to
the Tenor of their Peace with Spain; of which War with the Preliminaries
tending to it, I shall not fail to transmit your Lordship an account -- and
such in many particulars, as I do not Question, but will be very grateful to
your Lordship,

Whose, Humble Servant I am.
Paris, April 18. 1676. N. St.
LETTER X.
A View of the State of the Reformed in France, from the beginning of Lewis the
Fourteenth's Reign, to the Year 1669.

My Lord,
THE Reformed in the Kingdom of France, since the King came himself to the
Administration of the Government, had rather been retrenched in their
Liberties, and declined in Power than otherwise, whereas while Mazarine was
Minister of State, he (notwithstanding the Queen Mother's virulancy against
them; whether it were to Cajole Cromwell and their then Governing Powers in
England, or out of his avertion to the Clergy in general, of whose Abilities as
well as Honesty he had no great Opinion) things went tolerably well with them;
but now that the French King found himself couped up with the Triple League,
and considering that any rigorous Procedures against the Protestants in his own
Dominions, would at this time be interpreted much to his disadvantage by those
of other Nations, and particularly, that there was no hopes to break the said
League, or to disunite it, especially the King of England, of whom he conceived
the greatest hopes, and had the greatest Eye upon, as being not only nearest,
but also most powerful of any of the rest; it was resolved to put forth an
ample Declaration in Favor of the Reformed, which revoked several unjust
Judgments given against them, and remedied many Important Difficulties and
Severities they labored under, whereof they had made their Complaints to the
King, and which gave them hopes that they should for the future be left to live
in Tranquillity and Peace. They knew well enough, unless this were done, there
was no very great likelihood to bring our King to their Bow, of whom the
Parliament had already entertained some Jealousies, and who would not fail to
be enraged, when they came to understand he had entered into an Alliance with a
King, who gave way to the Oppression of his Protestant Subjects: but this
specious pretense of the French Indulgence, might serve him very well to amuse
his Parliament, and at the same time to deceive himself; and the Protestant
Nations in general without, might very well believe the French proceedings
herein, and especially that part of it which related to the Reformed's future
Tranquillity, were real; when they themselves in France were fully persuaded of
it, and imagined that the Days of Henry IVth, were returned upon them again.
It Is certain there had been considerable Efforts made, since our King's entering
into the aforementioned Tripple Alliance, to have it further strengthened by the
Accession of other Protestant Confederates into it; and that there was a
certain Person whose Name was Marcilli, a Rocheller Born, and a Professor of
the Reformed Religion, that took indefatigable pains in it; the true Story of
this Man is very odd, and falling pat with the Design of this Letter, I shall
give as concise an Account of it as I can, not doubting of your Lordship's kind
Acceptance; this Person, I say, taking the Advantage of the Conjuncture of the
League between England and Holland, and very much doubting of the sincerity of
the Declaration made in Favor of the Reformed in France thereupon, made his
Application to several Protestant Princes about entering into the said Alliance,
and was no small Instrument to induce the King of Swedeland to come into it,
which gave occasion of its being called the Tripple League. He had been also at
our Court, and opened the King's Eyes, in relation to many things that had been
misrepresented to him, and wherein he had been imposed upon, either by the
French Agents, or the falsity of his own Ministers of State; but these
Addresses of Marcilli were not long concealed from the French Court, wherefore
they took Council, and dispatched away the Mar-Marquess De Ruvigni^ into
England, with Instructions to take off those Umbrages our King had taken, upon
the Conduct of the French Council toward him; the Marquess his Religion, being
a Protestant, as well as his Capacity, recommended him as the fittest Person to
assure the King of the sincerity of the French proceedings, and that the
Reformed should have all the Justice in the World done them; in short, the
Marquess did his Business so effectually at our Court, that though he were the
Reformed's Deputy-General, he had almost Bankrupt his Credit with all the
Churches, who did not a little resent his Complaisance upon that Head. Marcilli
having done, as he thought, his Business in England, was gone upon the same
Negotiation to the Swiss Cantons, not without Directions, as 'twas believed in
France, though dissembled for a time, from our King, to induce the Swiss to come
into the Alliance; whereof when Ruvigni had advertized the French Court, the
King gave Marshall Turenne, who yet made Profession of the Protestant
Religion, Orders to Seize him, if possible, and Kidnap him back into France;
the Marshall to disguise the Matter as much as might be, and to give as little
umbrage of any such Design as was possible, pitched upon Three Officers making
Profession of the same Religion with himself, to go into Switzerland to Seize
him; the sameness of Religion between Marcilli and them, gave them easy
familiarity with him; so that at last having got him into a place where he
could not be rescued, they hurried him into France, where he was Tried
forthwith and Condemned; the Man during his Imprisonment, showed all the
Constancy both of a Brave and Innocent Mind, and all the Application of the
Judges, and Rigor of the Questions put unto him, could never make him change
his Language, but he maintained his Innocence to the last, and the Secrets he
had been entrusted with by a great Prince, whom I have heard some of his very
Enemies blame for not interposing in his behalf, or afterward resenting of it
at all, when there were some things put to him in relation to that Princes
Person, that little suited with his Honor; even upon the public place of
Execution, just as the poor Man was broken upon the Wheel; and now, my Lord,
they had Murdered his Body, they went about also to Murder his Fame, by giving
out that they were forced to expedite his Execution, because that having found
a piece of Glass in the Prison, he cut off his Privy Parts therewith, as
thinking he might quickly bleed to Death, and so be his own Executioner; which
notwithstanding being soon observed by the Jailer, he gave the Officers notice
thereof, who put him to Death Two Hours after. And that France might seem to be
sincere at all Points in respect to the Liberty of her Reformed Subjects, out
came another Declaration in August 1669, inviting all of them that Sojourned
abroad, or were in the Service of Foreigners, back into their Native Country,
and particularly out of the United Provinces, where there were of them great
numbers, as Officers, Soldiers, Merchants, Seamen, etc. but though they were thus
liberal in their Promises to the Reformed, and made all the semblance of
Sincerity in the World hereupon, yet they never ceased underhand to tempt the
most Considerable Persons amongst them, by large Donatives and Hopes of
Preferment to come over to the Church of Rome, and what Success they had
therein will be the subject of another Letter; and so I am,

My Lord, Your Lordship's most Humble Servant.
Paris, May 23. 1676. N. St.
LETTER XI.
Of the Pervertion of the Prince of Tarent, Marshall Turenne, etc. to the
Romish Religion, about the Year 1669.

My Lord,
FRance, as I have informed your Lordship in my last, having invited her
Subjects of the Reformed Religion home out of all quarters, the Prince of
Tarent, who had been settled several Years in the United Provinces, and possessed
of great Employments, quitted their Service thereupon, and returned to his
Native Country, where he had not been long arrived, but he was Charmed into the
Popish Religion, and all his Children, (saving one Daughter, afterward Married
to the Prince of Oldenburg) following his Example; This they looked upon as a
good step, but what gave them a mighty accession of strength, as much as it was
a diminution of the Power of the Reformed, was their gaining of Marshall
Turenne to their Church, who, because so considerable a Person, and so famed
for a great Captain, I shall recount unto your Lordship all that ever I could
learn in relation to him upon this account. It Is true, the Marshall never did
appear to be a Person very Zealous for his Religion; but as he had from time to
time given some Proofs of his Constancy, it was attributed to the Coldness of
his Temper, which made him Calm enough in all things; but that Constancy that
appeared in him for a time, was attributed afterward to other Causes, and
primarily to the ascendency his Wife and Sisters had over him, his Lady being
Daughter to the Duke De la Force, and a Person of Exemplary Piety, keeping of
him steady in his Profession whilst she lived, and his Eldest Sister the
Marchioness De Duras, always encouraging of him to be constant; and so Zealous
she was, that she began to breed up one of her younger Sons, with a Design to
make him a Minister, but that Design not succeeding, and that Person going over
very Young into Engl. has been since, as your Lordship well knows, advanced to
Honor in the Kingdom. The youngest Sister the Duchess of Trimonill never
failed also of her Duty toward the Marshall in that kind. That the Marshal
had been often tempted to change his Religion, is manifest; Cardinal Mazarine
who had a great Opinion of him, made him many suggred Promises if he would come
over; when the Dauphine was Born, he had Intimations given him, that he might
one day be made his Governor, but that did not move him neither; the last
Effort that was made upon him, was by the King himself at the beginning of the
Campaign in Flanders, in the Year 1667. when he promised him a share in all his
Secrets, and higher degrees of Command, if so be he would Embrace the Communion
of the Church of Rome, but this had the same success upon him with the rest,
and the Marshall acted his part with so much sted fastness, and in so Noble a
manner, that the King took no Displeasure thereat; and for this the Church at
Charenton returned Public Thanks to God, who had inspired him with such
laudable Constancy, but without naming of him, but some time after that Peace
was concluded, when there was no more talk of him upon that Score, he entered
into the Roman Communion, and it was given out he did it voluntarily, and of
his own accord, and I could never learn by whose Instigation it was done, or
what were the true Reasons that brought him to it, but however it was, this
Change of his was attended with important Consequence, which did appear in due
time; and this is all I could remark or learn concerning this Illustrious
Person, only that he Abjured his Heresy (as they call it) in Notre-Dame, in
presence of the Archbishop of Paris; and so concludes,

My Lord, Your Lordship's most Humble Servant.
Paris; May 31. 1676. N. St.
LETTER XII.
Of a Book Published in France, proposing Methods for to Ruin the Reformed,
which had like to have spoiled the Court-Politicks, in pretending Favor unto
them at that time.

My Lord,
I Have in a former Letter, showed your Lordship the great Care the French
Court took, to have it believed, both at Home and Abroad, that their
Declaration in Favor of the Reformed was real, and like to be permanent, and
what Politic Ends they had therein; but a Book Entitled, the Policy of
France, came out not long after, to wit, in the Year 1669 that had like to have
spoiled all the fine Web they had spun; It was supposed to be written by the
Marquess De Chatelett, a Gentleman of Bretaign, and contained one entire
Chapter of Methods to Ruin the Reformed, and he was so Adventurous as to
Dedicate it to the King himself, and made him a Present of one of them; but his
Zeal was but coarsly Rewarded, for he was sent to the Bastile for his Pains,
and the Book suppressed; but because the Methods he proposed therein were such as
were very odd, and may be put in Execution in time, and that I cannot send your
Lordship one of the Books, I have taken out the Heads, and are as follows; he
proposed the Total Destruction of them as a necessary Work, and reserved it for
the present King, and whether he did really know, or was ignorant of the Court
Designs, he did certainly I believe fit his Politics to the Intentions of the
Court. He represented them full of Resentment for the loss of their Places of
Security, and of being always animated with Minds to Revolting, Confusion and
Anarchy, and constantly ready to make use of any Opportunity to Re-establish
themselves; He made them to be Enemies to the King's Prosperity, perpetual
Obstacles to his Designs, and always to be feared because of their Animosity,
and of the number of good Soldiers, over which they could make Chiefs, by
giving them Authority to Command them. He took upon him to show, that the
Protestants of Germany suffered themselves to be ruined without any Opposition,
and that they had too much need of the King's Protection, to Embroil themselves
with him: He said the same thing of England, Swedeland, Denmark, the United
Provinces, and of all the Protestants, whom he imagined to have been so linked
to the King by strong Chains of Interest, that they would not concern
themselves to hinder his Exterminating of the Reformed Religion in his own
Kingdom: He put a Malicious Interpretation upon the Reformed's taking up Arms
in the last Civil Wars; and he pretended to Divine, that had it not been that
the War had been so soon happily terminated, they would have formed Grand
Designs, made High Demands, and endeavored to set up their Party again) He
said, the Edict of Nants was revocable, as having been a thing extorted from
the then King; and admitting it might have been formerly granted for the
Benefit of the State, yet it might now be revoked for the very same reason: He
was far from being of their Opinion, who thought that the Reformed were useful
to the Church of Rome her self, because they obliged the Ecclesiastics to
Study, and lead Regular Lives; he said, that was a Trifling Argument, and
concluded, that the King had sufficient Grounds to seek out ways to put them
out of Condition to Hurt, or do any injury to his State. Having promised this,
he was not of the Judgment to be rid of them by way of Banishment, as the Moors
had been driven out of Spain; he looked upon that way of Treatment Inhumane,
and withal prejudicial to the State, but he proposed Fifteen Expedients to be
rid of them by little and little. The first of which was, to procure a more
familiar Intercourse between the Reformed and Catholics. Secondly; That they
should be Rewarded with Estates and Honors that would be Converted, and to
have a Fund settled for that end, which should never be alienated; that for the
exciting of their Ambition, and not suppress that Passion in them which might
serve as a Sting to their Conversion; He was of Opinion that they should be
permitted to Exercise the smaller Offices, But not to give them great Places,
but to the Catholics only, for to Allure the Reformed to a Change of their
Religion, in hopes to attain unto them. Thirdly, To Embroil the Affairs of
particular Persons, so as to make them attend the Council, and principally the
Gentlemen concerning all the Dependances of the Exercises of their Families.
Fourthly, To oblige them to Rebuild the Chapels they had Demolished or
Profaned, and that not by proceeding against them in general upon that Head,
but by Suing of particular Persons upon that Score, and to Recommend it to the
Care of each Bishop in his Diocese. Fifthly, To hinder the Deputy-General to
interpose therein, which he believed might be easily effected, because the
Hugonots could not form a Body in France, and that particular Cases ought not
to pass for public ones, and that the King would Administer Justice without
any Intervention; he would not have the Office of Deputy-General suppressed, but
reduce it only to a Name without any effect, and that no regard should be had
to the General Remonstrances of the Deputy. Sixthly, To order it so that none
of the Reformed should be suffered to dwell in Cities, or the Seigniories,
which did appertain to such as were of their Religion; and he would have it so
as they could never want specious pretenses to color that Innovation. 7thly,
To suppress by Death the Charges of Counselors among the Reformed. Eighthly,
To send Catholic Commiss^ries into the Synods, and to choose such Persons for
that end as understood Controversy, and knew how to foment any Differences
which might arise in the Assemblies; to allow no National Synods; and to
require Money of the Ministers for the King's Use, under pretense of Loan,
Tithes, or some other Imposition. Ninthly, To Commence some Lawsuits against
them for their Debts in common, and to cause some of their Churches to be Sold.
Tenthly, To Enjoin all the King's Subjects not to depart the Kingdom without
leave, for the Reformed would be comprehended under such a general Order.
Eleventhly, To prevent any Catholics by means of the Confessors, to put
themselves into the Service of the Hugonots. Twelfthly, To oblige them to
observe the Fasting Days, under pretense of State Policy, for the same reason
as they were obliged to keep Holidays. Thirteenthly, To endeavor to Marry the
Reformed into Roman Catholic Families, and to take Care that all the Children
proceeding from such Marriages, were brought up in the Roman Religion.
Fourteenthly, To hinder the Reformed to Sell their Estates in Land, for that
such sort of Estates being not to be carried away, it would oblige them to keep
within the Kingdom. And Lastly, he advised, That the University of Saumur
should be removed to some other more inconvenient place, for which he furnished
them with several pretenses; and he was of Opinion, that for lessening the
number of Ministers, that the Candidates before they were received, should be
obliged to go through a Course of Philosophy, or Study Divinity for Two Years;
that they should be Examined before no other Commissioners than such as the
King should name, and that none should be suffered to take the Function upon
them till they were twenty-seven Years of Age. I have troubled your Lordship
with a long Letter upon this ungrateful Subject, but I hope you will pardon me,
since I think it is not altogether Foreign to what I have some time since writ
to your Lordship, about the French Courts procedure in reference to the
Reformed, whom they made it their chief Business to Cajole into a profound
Severity, that they might have leisure to carry on their Villainous Designs more
securely; and therefore it was that this Book and the Author of it, run the
Fate I have already recounted to your Lordship, whom I shall always endeavor
to oblige to the utmost of my power; who am,

My Lord, Your Lordship's most Humble Servant.
Paris, July 8. 1676. N. St.
LETTER XIII.
Of the French Preparations for the War in the Year 1672 and how they
completed their Levies.

My Lord,
HAving in some measure traced the Methods the French Councils used to settle
their Affairs at Home, so as to receive no Molestation from Intestine Motions
when they should carry their Arms Abroad; they began now to set their
Instruments more closely to work in their Neighbor Nations, but more
especially in England and Holland, not only to amuse and play upon those that
were at the Realm of Government, but to feel the Pulse of, and tamper with all
the several Factions among the People, and to make Creatures among them, that
might manage them upon occasion, as might seem most for their purpose; while in
the mean time they made vast Preparations underhand for War, both by Sea and
Land, and the better to supply the Defects which seemed to be natural to their
Native Soldiers, caused Levies to be made for them little or great, in all the
European Nations, insomuch as by a List which I have seen, it did appear, they
had in all, of Strangers only, about an Hundred and Sixty Thousand Men, besides
Seamen, of whom they had likewise Debauched a considerable number from Holland,
England, Denmark and Swedeland. These mighty Preparations without any visible
Pretension, Alarmed all the Powers of Christendom; but the most, because of the
small Contests then in being, with the Pope about the Regale, and of some
Differences then depending about Lorrain and Alsatia, as your Lordship well
knows, imagined the Storm would break toward Italy, and part of Germany; till
the Preparations of the then Bishop of Munster, and the Admission of French
Garrisons into the Archbishopric of Cologn, and the Naval Preparations which
appeared last of all, filled them with Apprehensions somewhat different from
the first; among which neither England nor Holland were without some Fears,
both which they took Care to allay, as the Minutes show, by exasperating of
them afresh by Secret Agents and Emissaries, one against another; resolving
according as their Instruments should prevail on either to join with one
against the other: But which of the two they should Attack, was a long time the
Debate of the French Council, for one of them, it was resolved without
Contradiction, must be Invaded; it being impossible to make any Successful
Attempt upon the Empire, as long as those Two Countries maintained the Figure
and Power they did then, and in that untoward Situation for them too; England
was then in a very unprepared condition, having almost no Navy at Sea, and none
but the ordinary Forces at Land, whereas theirs were all ready and well
Disciplined and Commanded; and this unpreparedness of ours was a great
Incitement to most of the French Council, to put their King upon the Immediate
Invasion of England with his whole Force, having already fore-felt the
Hollanders, and found them, if not Inclinable to join with them in such a War,
yet content to sit still and be quiet; they moved it so hotly that they had
like to have carried it, which had they, England had run a very great risque at
that time of being Ruined; for said they, If we make sure of England first, we
shut a Back door fast against all Danger, and may then securely Attack the
Austrian Potentates, having first Trampled down the Hollanders in our way, of
whom, having made sure of the De Wits, (their then Chief Ministers) we shall
find an easy prey: But just as the Ambition of that Monarch was ready to take
Fire at those so specious Motives, Monsieur Le Tellier, since Chancellor and
Father to Monsieur Louvois, the Eldest and Ablest Statesman and Minister of
France interposed; the substance of whose Speech I shall take Care to transmit
to your Lordship in my next, who am,

My Lord, Your very Humble Servant.
Paris, August 23. 1676. N. St.
LETTER XIV.
Containing an Account of Mons. Le Tellier's Arguments to dissuade the French
King from the Invasion of England.

My Lord,
ACcording to my Engagement in my last, I shall now entertain your Lordship
with Mons. Le Tellier's Remonstrance, upon the Advice given the French King to
Invade England; He did acknowledge, that the Counsel proposed was in it self
very good, supposing there were a certainty of effecting it; but it was to be
considered, that it would prove of most pernicious Consequence in case the same
were Attempted without Success. That England was the Rock against which the
late formidable Power of Spain, had dashed in pieces its Aspiring Fortunes, and
that the like Expedition now by the House of Bourbon, would prove alike Fatal
to its Rising Power, unless they were Infallibly sure of their Blow; For to
meddle with England at all, unless they could absolutely Conquer it, would be
but to rouse a sleepy Lion, slur the Reputation of their Arms, and singe the
Wings of their growing Greatness, before they were fully fledged; That it was
impossible to make such a Conquest, but by Intestine Divisions or Surprise,
unless they were first Masters of its Outworks, the Low Countries; That for a
Surprise he thought it almost impracticable; and that though it was possible they
might ^ure the Hollanders to join with them, and England was then indeed
unprovided of Forces both by Sea and Land, yet there was no trusting to that,
because there were no Factions then, whose Designs were ripe enough to Favor
such an Enterprise: And that though they should prove so Successful in that
Advantageous Juncture, as to enter England, they could expect no greater
Advantage by it, than just to frighten the King and the Nation, and plunder
them of a little Wealth, and so be gone, making but a Tartarian Expedition of
it; Because the universal and strong Antipathy of the English People, both High
and Low, against the French Name and Domination, would be an Invincible
Obstacle to their settling there, and would quickly make that Island too hot for
them. That therefore merely to Attack and Pillage them, without being able to
reduce them totally, would but whet the Animosity of those Warlike Nations,
whose Courage had always been wont to be heightened by Disgraces, and was always
Victorious, when once fired with Indignation; That such an Enterprise would for
ever alienate the Heart of the then King, and the whole Royal Family, from the
French Interest, and make them by Inclination as well as Interest, not only
give way to, but passionately to abet and make most Advantageous use of the
Natural Animosity of their most Warlike Subjects against France; That it would
Unite the Peoples Hearts so firmly to their King, and create so much mutual
Confidence between them, that it would be impossible afterward to divide them,
and so raise the Power of that Monarchy to a pitch, from which it could not
choose but prove both formidable and fatal to them; That it would rouse up the
King, then almost Drowned in Voluptuousness and Sensual Delights, and make him
a Man both of War and Business against his Will, and cause him to enter into
such Alliances with the House of Austria, and other Powers, as must needs be of
Pernicious Consequences to the Designs of their great Bourbonian Hero; That
therefore it was better not to think of any such Attempt, England being like a
Flint, sooner broken by soft than hard Methods; That the King himself, and also
his Brother, were much French by Inclination at present, that the former was
very Indulgent to his Pleasure, that he was that way so Profuse and Prodigal,
that he would always be Necessitous of Money, which his Parliament beginning to
grow weary of giving him, it would ever long cause such strugglings between the
Courtiers and Patriots of the Country, as would give them ample Scope to
compass their Ends in England, by a more sure and less dangerous way than by a
War, which in all appearance would defeat all the Advantages they might
otherwise reap there by other Methods. That therefore the best way was to
endeavor to take Advantage of the King's Infirmities, to try whether there
were a Witty French Beauty, that could be Fortunate enough to gain on his
Affections, for that such an one would be a most Admirable Instrument for them;
That they should offer him Money, and feed his Extravagance that way, send
dexterous Persons well furnished with Golden Charms, to work on all the Leading
Men among all their Factions, and secretly to keep some Pensioners, both among
their Courtiers, Patriots and Churchmen, and blow up and foment new Divisions;
That they should send thither some very able Ambassador, and keep him there a
long time; That they should incite the Hollanders to a new War with the
English, and the English with them, and treat with and Promise Assistance to
the former, to the last Moment; but in Conclusion join with the latter, if it
were possible to persuade the English King to a War. And that on that pretense,
they might procure such numbers of English Forces, especially Foot, as might
not only amend the Defects of their own Soldiery, which still came very short
in good Infantry, but bring their own Native People by degrees, inferring daily
Examples of Strangers Bravery, to imitate their Courage and Firmness in
Set-Battels, and to get a Stock of good Infantry by Land, by drawing the
English to them against the Dutch, as they had already done of good Ships by
Sea, and Warlike Munitions, by joining before with the Dutch against the
English in the former Wars. Yet that they might so order things, that whatever
Stipulations were made with the King of England to his Advantage, to allure him
to such a War, should be eluded, and he only made a Tool of; That though it was
likely the Parliament of England, would upon any great Success of the French,
be for breaking of the War, and deny the King Money to continue it longer, yet
after they had made a sufficient Impression on the Netherlands, they might
prevail by their Golden Arguments upon the King, at least to continue Neuter,
and leave his Land Forces still in the French King's Service for some
considerable time; That this Juggling would in a little time raise Animosities
and Jealousies between the King and Court-party, and that of the Patriots; make
the latter to deny him Money, press hard upon his Prerogative, raise new
Pretensions about Liberty and Property, which if carefully fomented by
dexterous Agents, would give the King and People there work enough in mutual
Contests at Home, which would hinder them from acting any thing considerable
Abroad, keep the King always under a necessity of continuing their Pensioner,
for fear of becoming his Parliaments Underling; yet prop him up so as to
preserve him in a Capacity, still to be able to keep them in some sort under,
and hinder the daring English Senate, from attaining any more so much the
Sovereignty, as to Erect themselves into a Republic; He telling them from the
Famous Cardinal Richlieu's Authentic Observation, that an Absolute Monarch, or
a Republic in the British Dominions, would prove almost alike Fatal to
France; that therefore it was the best way to endeavor a Mean between this
Scylla and Charibdis, by keeping a Balance between King and Parliament, and
fomenting perpetual Contests between them, which was to be done by having
unknown Instruments to sow Jealousies among the Patriots and People against the
Court, and make them cross the latter; and at the same time make use of that
crosness as an Argument to persuade the King, that his Authority could be no
way safe without sticking to their Alliance, and feed him with Money both to
enable him to carry on his Business and Pleasure without a Parliament, and to
Animate him from time to time to Prorogue and Dissolve them upon occasion. And
when upon some Success of the King and Court -- party, they should begin to
make such steps toward Absolute Power, as might, if attained to, prove
dangerous to the French Interest, and Embolden our Monarch to slip his Neck out
of their Collar; then anew to stir up the Patriots and Popular Party against
him, and abandon him wholly to them, till he were forced to break them, by
returning to their Alliance again. That above all things they were not to
forget to make their best use of that mighty Engine called Religion, which though
powerful all the World over, yet was of more prodigious force among the English
People, than among any other in the habitable Earth: Now this Advice, my Lord,
as coming from so Old and Experienced a Statesman, and the Ablest Disciple who
had Viva Voce, heard the Documents and Precepts of the great Richlieu, that
Famous Architect of the French Grandeur, was assented to both as the Wisest and
Securest, and was afterward in every Punctilio put in Execution, as Time and
Conjunctures afforded occasion; whereof your Lordship may expect an account in
due time from him who is,

My Lord, Your Lordships most Humble Servant.
Paris, Sept. 17. 1676. N. St.
LETTER XV.
Of the Methods the French use in keeping Intelligence among their
Neighbour-Nations, etc.

My Lord,
I Cannot think but that your Lordship will be pleased to understand how the
French keep their Correspondence among, and make Tools of Men and Parties most
averse to them in their Neighbour-Nations, and whom no manner of Motives would
ever be prevalent enough to make Instrumental to promote an Interest so hateful
to them, did they but know who they wrought for, and it is, my Lord, in this
manner. Would they set the Conformists and Nonconformists peckeering at one
another? Thus they did it presently after the first Dutch War, in order to
prepare Factions to make way for the Designs which followed. They had diligent
Spies to inform them where Men of quaint Wits, brisk Tempers, Self-conceited,
but Atheistical in Principles, or at least of very loose Morals were to be
found, as likewise to take notice of those that were in reality most Able and
more Zealous, both of Conformists and others, in their several ways, than the
rest of their Brethren; Then the first, by some Persons that pretended to
admire their Wits, and that were French Pensioners, (though some of them did not
know it) were either by some present modicum of Money, Promise of Preferment,
or sometimes by the mere tickling Praises of the said qualified Persons, put
upon writing something that might check Religion, particularly that
Established; Then they knew the Crime would be laid at the Door of some
Nonconformists, and cause the Reforming Clergy to write bitterly and
reflectingly against them, and them again to justify themselves and
recriminate, till at length they engaged not only the Body of the Nation, but
even their August Representatives likewise in their Quarrels, and so from
Religious Contests produced State Factions, and in this all of them, though they
were of different Parties, were told they would please both their King,
Parliament and Country; For the Dissenters were told, that though for Policy's
sake the King did not publicly abet them, yet he was secretly disposed to
favor them, and such Writings, if well penned, would not displease, and might
procure them at last Ease in a Parliament, etc. And for the Conformists, they
were easily persuaded, that by Ridiculing the Dissenters, immoderately
extolling the Excellency of their own Ceremonies, and the Superlative extent of
the Prerogative, they could not fail to please neither. And thence, My Lord,
came that Legion of Books of that Nature, that came out in the Interval between
the Two Dutch Wars, and which made way for After-Divisions, of which I saw a
Catalogue, with the Books printed, and of what Service they were for the
Interest of the French Court; Some I have forgot, and some I remember, but
shall not name any, for fear of reflecting on any worthy Persons, who, I am
persuaded, did not know by what Instruments they were abetted on either side.
Then for keeping several Lords and Commons too in Pension to their Ends,
without their Knowledge, thus they did it; They had their Jews, and some other
Bankers at their Devotion, who would under an Obligation of great Secrecy, tell
them; that they were ordered to allow them so much Money, saying sometimes it
was from their own King, to do him some private Service, in or out of
Parliament, or from the Spanish, Imperial, or Dutch Ambassadors, under pretense
of serving their Interests, and their own Countries too, against Prerogative,
Oppression in Religion, etc. and oftentimes directly to oppose Popery, and the
French Interest, that by firing them on with too great vehemence to pursue
those Points, the French Court might more easily compass other Ends aimed at,
which they whom they thus incited did not so much as dream of; Thus while many
in our Parliaments were so fierce against Papists, Arbitrary Power, and the
French Interest, and cried out against all of the Court-party as French
Pensioners (though it is true, too many of them were so) as does appear; yet
little thought they, that they were likewise so themselves, and never imagined
the same French were Abettors of both Parties: And the better to cover this
underhand play, they drew off most of the Money they employed to this latter
sort, by the way of Genoa, Florence, Amsterdam, and Hamburg; that it might not
be discovered, it came Originally from France; Nay, my Lord, by the by, be
pleased to take notice that one main cause of the French King's Indignation
against Genua, though it be a very secret one, and known to few, was their
Bankers cackling, and discovering to the Agents of the House of Austria, the
Money privately sent and dispersed, and sent toward Poland, Hungary, Turkey,
and some other Parts not named, and has made them employ none ever since
almost, but what are openly or covertly Jews, who serve the French King with
great Fidelity for these Reasons.

1. He is in their Esteem the most Powerful in Christendom.

2. Because he Favors the Grand Turk, where they have so great a Commerce, and
are in such numbers.

3. Because he gives them a liberty by connivance, though not open Toleration.

4. Because he is so great an Enemy to the Austrian Family, who have been so
Cruel to them by the Inquisition, and by Banishing them not only out of the
Spanish Territories, but likewise out of the Emperor's Hereditary Countries.

5. And lastly, Because he seems to them to be of no Religion, but almost as
great a Scourge to the Christians in general, both Popish and others, as the
Turk, Tartar, or Barbarian; their Principles naturally leading them to admire
and revere any thing they think a Plague to Christians, whom they are taught to
Curse daily, even in their Solemn Prayers; and therefore England had need have
a Care of them in this Juncture.

But as for the Pensions they gave the Courtiers, they Industriously affected
the transmission of those Moneys from France, and had their Agents busy to
buzz it abroad, in order to render them odious to the People, and to incite the
Patriots the more violently against them; And though a great part of the Money
they allowed the King from time to time, were sometimes transmitted from the
abovementioned Places, and some from Venice, yet private notice was presently
given to their Agents in England and elsewhere, with positive Orders to inform
the World of the Truth of that Intrigue; unless it were some time when a
particular Critical Juncture might require a contrary Procedure. My Lord, this
is the Sum of what I could learn in respect to their Correspondence in England,
either from the Minutes or private Conversation, of which your Lordship is
sensible, I have as great an Opportunity as any other, and with which I shall
at present conclude, who am,

My Lord, Your Honor's most Humble Servant.
Paris, July 11. 1684. N. St.
LETTER XVI.
Of the French King's frequent Reviews of his Troops in 1670. and of the
umbrage taken in England thereupon, and of the Duke of Buckingham's Embassy
into France.

My Lord,
I Have formerly given your Lordship an Account of the great Levies in France,
and vast Preparations for War both by Sea and Land, what Care had been taken to
secure the Domestic Peace in the mean time, and what the Opinion of the French
Ministers of State were, in regard to what Country should be Invaded by them.
And I am now to acquaint your Lordship, that when their Military Preparations
were pretty forward, which was in the Year 1670. they began to make frequent
Reviews of their Troops, which to amuse, they continued till the end of the
next Year, in several Bodies toward as many different Frontiers, that their
Neighbor -- Nations being used to them, and seeing no Effects follow, might
think they were only done out of a Vanity to make Ostentation of the French
Power and Grandeur, to keep their Soldiers in Discipline, and find their
Nobility and Active Spirits Employment, who else might busy themselves for
want of Occupation in disturbing the State: The Artifice took, so that most of
their Neighbors, though now and then they were troubled with a Fit of
Thoughtfulness and Suspicion, begun to grow secure, and particularly the
Hollanders, who thought the French King so much in Jest, that they tau^tingly
called him, Le Roy des Reveues, till more extraordinary and more visible
Preparations and Movements, did by degrees begin to convince them of their
Error; for when they had thus finished their Reviews, they suddenly drew a
very considerable Army, composed of the Flower of all their Forces toward
Calais and Dunkirk, (the Dutch being in the mean time tampered with, as I am
apt to believe concerning the Invasion of England; but yet now full of
Jealousy at their Proceedings) and here it was the Council was held about the
Eligibility of employing their Force, the Debates whereof I have already given
your Lordship an Account. And as the Dutch were Jealous upon this approach, the
English were much more (as your Lordship may well remember) to see such a Power
brave England on the opposite Shore, and look with an Amorous Eye toward it;
and the more because of the unprepared Posture the Nation was then in; insomuch
that it was thought advisable, to dispatch an Embassy to sound the Intentions
of the French Monarch in regard to England; whereupon Choice was made of the
Duke of Buckingham, who admirably well maintained that Character, and the Glory
of Great Britain, on that Occasion; and demeaned himself with such an
Intrepidity of Mind and Conduct, and with such a Grandeur and Unconcernedness
at the Formidable Armed Powers he saw before his Eyes, that those who had been
Strangers to the then Condition of our Nation, would have thought he had been
sent from a Prince that was at the Head of twice as big an Army, as the French
King at that time showed the Duke: And that Conduct did not a little appall the
Presumption of that Ambitious King, and contributed much to the inclining of
him to acquiesce in Monsieur Le Tellier's Counsel; but then withal, making him
take notice of the Rare and more than ordinary Parts and Abilities of the said
Duke, it put him naturally upon concluding that it was well worth the while to
endeavor to gain such a Person over to his Interest, whose Influence might be
great, either in bringing his Prince to such a Compliance as he desired; or at
least in briguing for France against him, in case he proved inflexible: To this
end, such Complements were past upon the Duke, and such extraordinary Honors
done him, and Presents made him, as never no Ambassador before nor since hardly
ever received; insomuch as the Duke suffered himself to be Charmed, and ever
since favored the French Interest, either with or against his Prince, as
Occasion or Policy directed. In fine, he was told, that the French King indeed,
though he had great Temptations from Opportunity and Interest to Attack England,
yet such was his Respect and Inclination for our King, that he was more
disposed to employ his Forces against Holland; And that he might with the surer
Success undertake such an Expedition, his Majesty earnestly pressed the Duke to
do his utmost to Influence his Master to join his Naval Forces with him in that
War, by which means he might Revenge the Disgraces received in the last,
especially that of Chatham, as likewise the fresher Insolences of that Saucy
Republic, whose Vicinity and Power was so much the more dangerous to the
British Monarchs, than to any other Crowned Heads, as the Subjects of these
Nations were more prone to hanker after the Liberty Enjoyed by the Hollanders,
and to imitate their Successful Example; That by so doing, his Excellency would
do his own Prince very great Service, and have the Honor of Obliging a great
Monarch, who was as Generous in his Resentments, as Formidable in Power, etc.
The Duke returned Home well satisfied, and brought a pleasing Answer to our
King, and plied him warmly with the Proposition aforesaid, though at first he was
not much harkned too; but how, when and by whose means their Designs were
afterward Accomplished, your Lordship may expect to hear, when Convenience
serves, from,

My Lord, Your very Humble Servant.
Paris, Nov. 30. 1676. N. St.
LETTER XVII.
Of the Princess Henrietta Maria Duchess of Orleans's being sent Anno 1670.
from the French Court, to dispose the King to a second War with the Dutch, in
Conjunction with the French.

My Lord,
THe French Court having, as I told your Lordship in my Last, gained the Duke
of Buckingham entirely to their Interests, they began now to conceive some
hopes to bring our King to join with them against the States, at least wise
with his Naval Power, of which they had most need; and therefore to strike
while the Iron was hot; they deliberated of sending over an Ambassador of their
own into England to negotiate the Matter; but to color the Intrigue, as if
they had no Design of their own thereby, and to give no Matter of Jealousy to
their Neighbors, especially the United Provinces. It was agreed, it should be
a Female Embassadress the Kings fair Sister Henrietta Maria Duchess of
Orleans, and so give out at the same time, she went over purely on a visit to
her Royal Brothers, and that it was with some seeming Reluctance the French
King upon her earnest Application to him to that Purpose gave his Consent; But
she was furnished with such Proposals, which they knew well that sent her, none
could with equal safety and privacy Advance, nor none with equal Power and
Influence recommend; and to secure the whole Transaction from the very
Suspicions, as well as the Penetration of any not of their Cabal, and to make
it appear as a pure visit, and the effect of natural Affection and void of all
Intreague, her return was limited to so short a Time, and in so peremptory and
notorious a Manner, that it might induce the World to believe them too
Suspicious of the natural Inclinations, that Princes might still retain for her
Royal Brothers, and for the Weal of her and their Native Country, so
incompatible with the exorbitant grandeur of France, to entrust her with any of
the mysterious Arcana's of their Politics; and so might prevent all Jealousy
in England, at that critical Juncture of that interview, by showing so great an
Apprehension of it themselves: She was charged with the same Message partly,
and with some of the same Arguments, which they had endeavored to insinuate by
the Duke of Buckingham; but having an incomparable Advantage above him, or any
other Ambassador to back whatsoever she advanced with all the Charms that a
most accomplished and lovely Princes, and an only and most beloved Sister,
could be armed with; she who had Wit and Dexterity enough, to manage those
Privileges to the utmost Advantage, not only pressed the said Matter, and more
home and with infinitely more Freedom and Efficacy, but adventured to propose,
yet higher things and of a much more extended Consequence; For addressing her
Speech to the King (though not without intermixing some Expressions equally
affecting also to her Brother the Duke of York) she told his Majesty that as
she hoped neither of her Royal Brothers had any Reason to call in Question her
natural Affection to their Persons, and inseparable Inclination for whatsoever
did, or should at any Time appear to her to be conducing to their true
Interest, so she believed they had as little cause to doubt, but she could see
as far as another into the French Monarchs Heart, who loved her and admired her
to that Degree, though innocently, as gave no small Umbrage to Monsieur his
Brother, and her Husband; And that she did sincerely represent, both as his
most Christian Majesty's Sense, and her own, that the only way to secure to his
Majesty, and the present Royal Family of England, a stability in the Throne
they were lately Restored to, after so dismal an overthrow of the Monarchy, in
the Reign and Person of their unhappy Father, and to reinstate the Majesty of
the British Kings in its former Splendour and Security, enjoyed so long and
gloriously in Catholic Times, was by all Wise and Politic M^ans to labor to
introduce into these Kingdoms, the Catholic Religion, and to reassume by
Degrees absolute Power. ^or that the Church of England by woeful Experience had
been found too weak alone to defend the Crown, and that the Dissenters were so
stiffly Principled for a Commonwealth, that they would never leave till they
had once more overturned the Monarchy, unless his Majesty would timely provide
for his Security, by Methods ^o be propos^d to him by her, and the most
Christian King; who she knew had the atmost ten^erness for his Interest, as was
clear eno^^h by all Expressions of his real Inclinations, ^^nce they were
emancipated from the ^estraints, laid upon them under the Tutelag^ o^ a
Cardinal, who was a Master in pure Politics, and altogether unacquainted with
those nobler and more heroic Sentiments of Honor and Generosity, which are no
less natural and unextinguishable in a born Prince, then common Reason is in
the ^est of Mankind: The chief of which expedients were flattering of the
Church of England, and first persecuting by Act of Parliament the Protestant
Dissenters, and wheedling with them again by a Prerogative Lenitive, and so by
the not to be Questioned acceptance of the Suffering Protestants on the one
hand, and the no less assured Non-opposition of those of the established Church
on the other, as by an irresistible Charm to lay asleep that watchful Dragon,
that had so long kept the golden Apples of Contention between the King and
People, from the Ravishment of the most enterprizing Monarch; and break that
mischievous Devil, that had of late been so busy in asserting pretended
Liberties; and advancing the Sovereignty of old hateful Laws, above the more
Sacred Majesty of the Princes, the only rightful Legislators, whilst the Crown
as securely as unregardedly might seize, and seizing ^or all Perpetuity,
appropriate as to it sell the important Jewel of Dispensing Power, which would
fix and fasten the whole Chappelet of unbounded Sovereignty, by making us^ of
that Popular Relaxation, to indulge the Faction esteemed the most dangerous to
the Monarchy, and to decoy them into a favoring of those Encroachments upon
the Laws, and upon the Peoples Fundamental Right, and therein the Legislation,
who seemed of all Men the most deeply principled against them; And so in effect
to make those very Persons, the tools for the Erection of Absolute and
Despotick Sway, who otherwise could hardly be reconciled to the most Just, most
Legal, and most Moderate Royalty. So far were the measures to be observed at
home; and those which she and their Brother of France advised to be used
abroad, were

1. To endeavor by all possible means the Subversion of the Republic of
Holland, the perpetual Source of Rebellion in England.

2. In order, with so much the more Expedition, certainty and Safety to effect
the Reduction both of his own People, and of that ^nt^ward Neighboring Nest,
and receptacle of Plotters and Rebels; To resolve upon a firm and inviolable
adherence to the Interest of the most Christian King, who in that Case would no
way desert him, but vigorously and powerfully aid him, and carry him through
all Difficulties; But in Case, added she, his Majesty could not satisfy his
Conscience we^l enough, to attempt any such Change in Religion (as she just now
had mentioned) or notwithstanding all remonstrances to the contrary, should
continue over-perswaded of the two great Difficulty, or impracticableness of
such an enterprise, that however as a Protestant of the Church of England,
which was firm to Monarchy, if he desired to put himself into a Condition to
Protect, and that Reciprocally to Defend him and his Successors in time to
come; It would be absolutely necessary for him at least, to concur with his
most Christian Majesty in Subduing the Republic of Holland; That besides the
Advantage of such a Repartition of the Conquered Country, as he could
reasonably expect, he should find upon the reduction of it, that the
Commonwealth Faction in England, and her Two other Sister Kingdoms, would
dwindle away of it self, and so the King would not only become Absolute Master
of his People, but as his Christian Majesty would concert the Sharing of those
Provinces with his Brother of England, the Naval Power and Trade of Great
Britain would receive an incredible augmentation by the Destruction of a
State, that was her only Competitor at Sea, and for Commerce and Riches
promoted thereby; For that not only their Shipping and Seamen, together with
their Chief Seaports, and bent Sea provinces, all entire would be his
Majesty's, but also that all the most Wealthy and Substantial Merchants, and
Industrious and Ingenious Tradesmen and Artificers, even of the Provinces and
Parts that should fall to the Share of the most Christian King, would in all
appearance transplant themselves either into England or Ireland, as lying more
convenient for Trade, than their own Country, or at least into those Parts of
the Netherlands which should be reduced under the Power of the King of Great
Britain; To whose Domination, as approaching nearest the Sweetness and Freedom
of that they now were under, they would certainly more willingly submit their
Persons and Fortunes, than to that of the more Absolute one of the French
Monarch, for which they had entertained a Thousand Prejudices. In fine, she
most earnestly and affectionately besought him to take those Matters into his
most serious Consideration, and to return a speedy, and if it might any ways
be, a favorable Answer, that she might have the Happiness to return back the
Messenger of good News, and such News as might prove a Foundation of a lasting
Felicity to both the Illustrious Families, from which both his Majesty and her
self were descended. The King after a little silence, told her by way of Reply
to the things she had represented to him, That it was impossible for him to
doubt of the ardency and reality of the Affection of a Sister so Amiable, and
who had always expressed so much Tenderness for his Interest; That he as little
questioned, but that she had penetrated as far into the Interiors of his
Brother of France, as it was possible any one could into the Heart of a King,
and therefore upon her Representation of him chiefly, which he assured her
would induce him to give the more Credit to the Favorable Conjectures, he had
made of his Temper, during the little time he had the Honor to Converse with
him whilst in Exile, and to the general Character he had, since his Personal
Administration of Public Affairs, obtained in the World, of being a Prince of
great-Honour and Generosity, and thereupon passing by some former unhandsom and
unkind Treatments in his Court, as pure Effects and Influences of the
overruling Ascendant of the then Regnant Mazarine, and not of that Prince's
own Inclination; he should put much Confidence in the sincerity of the most
Christian King, and accordingly desired her to return his said Majesty, his
Royal and most Hearty Thanks for those obliging Expressions of Amity and
Affection, he had signified to him by her, and to assure him in his Name, he
should ever have his Friendship in high Esteem, and would go as great lengths
as in Prudence and Interest he could, to serve him, and to comply with his
Desires: But that the Matters proposed being of the highest Consequence, he
must beg his Excuse if he required more time to give him a positive and
satisfactory Answer thereto, than the short space limited for her stay in
England would permit; however, that he would with all convenient Expedition
give him a better Account; In the mean while, he should Request his most
Christian Brother by her, to do him the Justice to believe he was as sincerely
affectioned to his Person, as he could be to his, and should ever persist to be
as far as a King of Engl. could, his constant and most Obsequious Friend: The
like Complement, as far as it was agreeable to his Circumstances, was returned
by the Duke; After which the Princess renewing the Charge in the Business of
Religion, the King freely told her, That as to that Point, though he had
entertained very kind and favorable Thoughts of the Roman Religion, and its
Professors, for several Reasons he instanced, and did believe, that if it were
Re-established in his Dominions, the Monarchy would be safer and easier than it
could be under the present state of Protestancy, yet he was not so fully
satisfied in it, as to make it his own Religion; and that on the other side he
foresaw such unsurmountable Difficulties in attempting such a Re-establishment,
that he did not think any Policy, no, nor the whole Power of France, could he
Command it all entire, without any divertion from other Interested Neighbors,
(too extraordinary a Juncture to be probably expected) could be able to carry
him through them: To which, the Princess who saw well enough, as well by his
Looks and Actions as by his Expressions, that she had made more sensible
Impressions upon his Spirits, than he was willing to acknowledge; thinking she
had done enough for her part, and sufficiently broke the Ice, for those that
should be designed to push the Point further at more leisure, modestly replied;
That since that was his Majesty's Sense, in which he was fixed, she would wave
all farther Importunities on that Subject, and leave it wholly depending
between himself and God, whom she would continually pray to Inspire his Majesty
with Light enough to know, and Courage enough to embrace the Truth, in his
appointed time; But however, she should be glad to know his Majesty's
Sentiments as to the Design against Holland; adding, that she was confident, he
could not but think it was at least for his Interest, and seasible too: Yes,
Madam, answered the King, I am Convinced that if crowned with Success, it would
be enough for the Interest of this Monarchy, and of my People too; but yet as
practicable as it seems to be to you, it is likewise not without its
Difficulties, and those very great ones too; for the ill Success of my last War
with that Nation, the Dissatisfaction of my People thereupon, the Tripple
League in which I am lately engaged with Holland, the Inclination my Subjects
have for the Dutch, as being a Protestant Nation, and the Implacable Avertion
they have to the French, and their Jealousies of their Power, and of their
Religion, are mighty Obstacles in the way; However, if my Brother of France can
propose me any practicable Expedients to remove them, which I much doubt, I
will, as I have said, do what I can to comply with him in that Enterprise: And
so the Princess declaring her self well satisfied, with what had been said upon
the Subject of her Errand, they passed from the Businesses of State, to the
Divertisements of the Court, from which being obliged much sooner to break off
than they were willing, by the more swift than welcome approach of the time
Limited for her departure, with unconceivable Regret, and ill-presaging Tears,
she took her leave of her Royal Brothers; though little did she or they imagine
it to be her last Farewell, for soon after her return to France she died, not
without vehement Suspicion of being Poisoned; But that her Husband the Duke of
Orleance, had any just Cause given him further to foment his Jealousy of her
upon this Visit, (for he certainly was suspicious of her Conduct before any
mention of that Journey) and so pushed him on to the practice of undue means to
accelerate her Fate, has been a Matter of much Discourse both in England and
France, and continues to this Day a Mystery, which I will not nor cannot
pretend to determine, and so begging your Lordship's Pardon for this tedious
Epistle, I remain,

My Lord, Your Lordship's most Humble Servant.
Paris, Feb. 3. 1677. N. St.
LETTER XVIII.
Of Mrs. Carewell's coming into England in 1670. and introduced to be the
King's Miss.

My Lord,
IN one of my Letters to your Lordship, concerning Monsieur Le Tellier's
Sentiments, in regard to the Management of the Affairs of England to the
Advantage of the French, among other Expedients he proposed the sending over
some Choice Female, as might be capable to Charm a Prince, whose Heart was so
susceptible of an Amorous Flame as that of the King of England; In Conformity
to which Project, they made Choice of the Opportunity of the Princess's going
over to effect it, and therefore she upon her Arrival presented our King, her
Brother, with her Woman, known then by the Name of Madam Carewell, but much
better since by the Title of Duchess of Portsm: to serve the French King as a
Heifer afterward to Plow withal, as being such as was not carelessly or
fortuitously picked out from among the French Herd, but expressly singled out
for that purpose: And how well she acted her part in time coming will appear in
its proper place, so that if they failed in their Ends of furnishing the King
with a French Wife, they were resolved to make it up, by supplying of him with
a French Whore; and this being an Omission in my last, and having nothing of
greater Moment to write at present, to keep my Correspondence with your
Lordship, I have taken the Opportunity to testify unto you how ready I am,

My Lord, To Serve You.
Paris, Feb. 13. 1677. N. St.
LETTER. XIX.
The paces made by the Duke of Buckingham, and afterward by the Princess
Henrietta Maria Duchess of Orleans, toward bringing the King over to join
with the French against the Dutch, not fully succeeding according to
expectation, they resolve upon other methods: First by making sure of the Duke
of York, and then by inciting the Dutch to provoke the King to a War with them.

My Lord,
I have given your Lordship an account of the Princess Henrietta's Negotiation
in England, and of the Kings dilatory Answer, in regard to his Conjunction with
the French to make War upon the United Provinces, which put the French
Politicians somewhat to a Nonplus; but considering how well inclined the Duke
was to the Popish Religion, and how he had expressed his thoughts to the
Princess, the King being present, of the advantage and reasonableness of the
French Proposals, they made an Essay, to see what they could do that way, and
whether the great confidence he had with, and Influence over his Brother might
not induce him to accept of the offer. They found him pliable enough; but upon
Application, he did not find the King so, but much more disposed to live at
Rest and Pleasure, than to engage himself in so much Solicitude, as a War
would inevitably bring him to; And besides, he was much afraid to discontent
his People further, who were already so ill satisfied, with the ill Conduct and
Disasters that befell them in the last War, and whom he knew so wholly averse to
a new one, unless the Fresh Water-Gandy-Caps and Feathers especially were
dismissed, and the Conduct of it wholly left to the Old Tarpolians, who so
successfully asserted their Cause with those People in the Republican and
Oliverian times, the happiness of which the late ill Success had much enhaunsed
in their Eyes. Yet the French Agents continued pressing of him, and tampering
with his Ministers to compass their ends; urging all the specious Motives in
the World, and sparing neither present Advances of Money, nor the most
Magnificent Promises of future Acknowledgment; but finding still a great
Resistance to any such Overtures; they at length resolved to play their Game
another way, and employed their Emissaries in Holland, to stir up those People
to provoke the King's Resentments by all the ways that Artful Malice could
devise; they caused him to be represented to them as a mean Spirited Prince,
drowned in Pleasures, and by them Bankrupt; and that would put up any Affronts,
rather than be weaned from them a Moment. That slender courage he had, being
Cowed in the last War, as likewise were the Spirits of the proudest Merchants
and Seamen, his Subjects, under such an Unactive Prince; adding moreover, that
to their certain knowledge the Duke of York was now a Papist, though in hugger
mugger, and that the People had a strong suspicion of it, how clandestinely
soever carried, and had thereupon conceived such an implacable Jealousy
against the Duke therefore, and against the King himself on his account, that
they would never patiently brook the Command of the one, nor heartily assist or
fight for the other, in a War against a Protestant State; but break into
Factions, and rather abet them, then support so Unwarlike, so Unfortunate, and
what was worst of all, so Popishly affected a Prince: that therefore now was
the time to give that finishing stroke, to that so Great, so Glorious, and so
Advantageous a Work to their most Puissant and Renowned Republic, which they
had more than half done in the last War, under the favor of the most Powerful
Assistance of their great Master, Viz. to obtain for ever the dominion of the
Seas, so highly contended for by the English, and ingross the whole Trade of
both the Hemispheares to themselves; And that in so Glorious an Undertaking, As
the Great Monarch of France had, when in extremity, most opportunely and
successfully assisted them in the preceding War; So he was determined to do in
this, not with a few Auxilliary Troops and Ships as before, But with his whole
Force; being resolved of nothing less than to concur with their High and
Mightinesses for the Absolute Conquest of that Queen of Islands, that had so
long domineered over the Sea, and pretended to give Laws upon that Element,
which God and Nature had left as free as the Air it self. And that their High
and Mightinesses might enter into no Umbrage of his designing any Greatness to
himself, that might be prejudicial to them by such a Conquest; he was content
to share it with them, and that so Partially in their Favor, that he would
satisfy himself with the two Poorer Kingdoms of Scotland and Ireland; the
former for the sake of its Ancient Alliances with his Kingdom, and the latter
because of the Conformity of the Religion of its native Inhabitants, with that
of his own Subjects; leaving to them the Principal, which was England, where
all the Chief Trade, Riches and Power, both by Sea and Land of the British
Empire, was concentred together, with all its goodly dependances both in the
East and West Indies, with which he could not pretend to meddle; the success of
which Proposals I design shall be the subject of another Letter with the first
opportunity, From

My Lord Your Lordships most Humble Servant.
Paris Feb. 28. 1677. N. S.
LETTER XX.
The Dutch upon the foresaid Remonstrances made to them by the French King,
being induced to enter into a Treaty with him, were wheedled by the French
Ambassador to sign their part of it, and to send it to the French King for him
to sign it; but he pretending specious delays, sends it to the King of England,
using it for an Argument for his compliance with the Proposals he made to him
of entering into a War in Conjunction with him against the States: But ordering
his Ambassador withal to acquaint him, that in case of his Refusal, he must be
obliged to turn the Sham-League with the Dutch into a real one.

My Lord,
THE Specious Remonstrances, and mo^e Inviting Proposals made on the French
King's part to the Dutch, as mentioned in my last to your Lordship, so tickled
the Hogens, that they suffered themselves to be deluded into a close Treaty
with the French Court for that great Expedition; not at all thinking what Ruin
was designed themselves, and Division of their own Territories between the
French and English was then Modelling among the Monsieurs, as a further
tentative to induce our King to arm with France against Holland; and that the
very League the French pretended to be making with them, was but the master
Stratagem to procure that other Alliance, that without the unexpected and
timely interposition of Divine Providence had proved the Mene-Tekel of their
Flowrishing State, and turned that great Magazine of the Trade and Riches of
the Universe into a sorry bank of Lillies; accordingly they began first to
insult our King in his Person, by multitudes of most scandalous and
insupportable Pasquirades and Pictures, which the French Agents endeavoring to
make him resent as they deserved, and finding still that he declined to comply
with their desires; alleging again for Answer, the ill success of the last
War, caused chiefly by them, the averseness of his People to another War, etc.
And farther, his unwillingness only for Injuries that personally concerned
himself alone, to engage those Nations again in so bloody and destructive a
War, as after all could be of no very considerable advantage to either side, be
the event what it would. They proceeded then to tempt him further by offering a
larger proportion of those Provinces when Conquered; and besides, such an
assistance in Money, as should enable him to go through with the War, though his
Parliament should deny their Concurrence with him therein; and to make their
persuasions the more effectual, they did again warmly ply the Duke of York,
attacking of him on the blind side, Viz. his Religion, and telling him, that
though he were privately a Catholic, yet the People began to have a strong
suspicion of it, and would at long run come to know it, and would not fail then
to make such strong brigues against him, as that they would certainly put him
by the Succession; unless before such a Discovery were perfectly made, he could
induce his Brother to join his Arms with those of his Most Christian Majesty's,
for the Conquest of Holland; where were the Vitals that Administered Life and
Spirits to all those Factions he had to fear, and which after the Conquest of
that United many-headed Hydra, would soon be suppressed, ^ut could be by no other
way: and that then the introduction of the Roman Religion into these Kingdoms,
whenever he should succeed to them, would be easy, else impossible; that his
Most Christian Majesty was then provided with such formidable Forces, and had
laid the Empire into such a Sleep of Security, and so amused the other
Neighbor Princes, with such doubtful and contrary appearances; that before
they could awake, and rub off the dust they had thrown in their Eyes, they
might have done their work on the Hollanders, who least of all the rest
expected an Attack, and were therefore unprovided. The Duke forward enough
before, but now quite overcome by these pretenses, became their most earnest
Solicitor anew to the King; but though he neglected nothing in that case, that a
Prince of that great influence over his Brother could do, to bring him over to
consent to the Measures concerted between the French and him; He found him
still inflexible and averse to a War, not out of any disaffection to the Cause,
but out of a love to ease, and a Principle of Fear, as I have formerly hinted
to your Lordship: Upon which the French Council proceeded to their last Master
Stroke in this business, resolving in case they succeeded not therein, in spite
of all hazzards to take the opportunity of joining with Holland, to Invade and
Conquer England, if possible. To this end they had all along managed a close
Treaty with Holland, even while they were endeavoring one in England, by the
powerful Negotiation of their Friends the De Wits, and Lovestein Faction: So
then still the more to rouse up our King's Resentments, or to Force him, to
make appear to the World, that he had indeed none, neither for his own Royal
Dignity and Honor, nor for the Honor or Interest of his Relations and
Kingdoms, nay not so much as a sense of the preservation of any of them from
Dangers, though never so visible, so present, and so fatal to all and every of
them; they put the De Wits on all the efforts they could to keep down the most
Ancient and Illustrious Family of Nas^aw, under the specious pretenses of the
danger of the Liberty the Commonwealth might one day run from the suspicious
Greatness of that House, so well deserving of them; especially, if ever it were
so Fortunate, as to mount the Throne of Great Britain, their incompatible Rival
in Naval Power and Trade; and with whom, by reason of their near Relation to
that Crown, that House could not but by Inclination and Interest, have such a
Correspondence as must needs render it imprudent and unsafe in the States, to
admit the present Prince into the same Honors and important Charges in that
Juncture, which his Ancestors, in the Infancy of the Commonwealth had enjoyed
and exercised, so much to their Advantage; and accordingly what Steps were made
by those two Ministers, to keep the Prince of Orange from the Possession of the
Ancient Honors and Privileges of his House, is too well known to need
mention. Which Design being thus set on foot by those Ministers, the French
still the more eagerly to incite them to pursue their Point, insinuated to
them; That the only way to expect the full Accomplishment of their Desires in
the total Destruction of that Family, would be to cause a new War to be
declared against England, upon the plausible Pretenses and Encouragements
before mentioned; in which Juncture the People of Holland, who in the Prince
his Fathers time, had begun to conceive an Umbrage of that Family would be the
more easily brought to consent to what remained, to the utter Depriving and
Disinabling them to aspire to any Greatness that might be above their Pity: and
that by the potent and auspicious Assistance of the French Monarch in that War,
the States coming to overpower so gloriously their Rival in Trade, and to
acquire a Possession of so great a share of the British Dominions ^s was
projected between them, and as they would in all appearance under the Eavour of
that present Conjuncture, not fail to attain to; they the De Wits by procuring
the States so ^easonable and powerful an Assistance, and pushing them on to a
War that should end with so much Glory and Advantage to them, would quite
^ulipse the great Services and Merits of the Nassovian and Orangian Heroes, in
the earlier Years of the Republic; and give the said De Wits opportunity by
degrees to raise their own Family to the same, if not much greater Honors and
Privileges, then those that had been so long enjoyed by that illustrious
House; in which, adds they, you may be assured, that from time to time, you
shall never want the friendly Offices, and most efficacious Assistances of our
invincible Monarch, who is no less Constant, Generous, and Magnificent, in his
Resentments toward his Allies and Friends, then he is Formidable and
Inflexible in those toward his Enemies. In fine, they soothed these miserable
ambitious Ministers to that degree, and acted that Sham-Treaty with Holland, by
their means so to the Life, that the States not doubting but they were in
earnest, made all the forward Steps imaginable toward the Alliance proposed,
and began to Arm by Sea, not minding how careless a Posture they left all their
Places by Land, as dreaming of nothing from France but Friendship and
Assistance. And accordingly that Faction having with all the Heat and Diligence
imaginable, concerted and concluded a Treaty with the French Ambassador, he
like a sly Gamester, wheedled them to sign their part in it, and sent it
forthwith as privately to his Master; who, said he, would not fail immediately
to answer them with a Counter-Change; telling them, that by this means, they
should show a great deference to his Dignity, and the Figure he made in Europe,
and testify their great Confidence in him, then which nothing could be more
obliging to a Crowned Head, especially to him, who much more then any other
Prince, valued himself upon his Honor and Integrity: and besides, would
contribute much to the success of the great Enterprise they were jointly to go
upon; because by this means their common Design would be most dexterously
concealed from the English Court, whom his Master, said he, amused all this
while with a sham-Alliance, and hopes of making Peace with you for them, etc.
And so keeping them from Arming for their Defense, and so afterward be
executed with such a surprising Celerity on them, that they should sooner see
the Dutch Fleet on their Coasts, and the French Troops on their Land, then hear
of them. The Stratagem took, and the Instrument of the said Treaty was with all
expedition sent ready Signed by the said Faction, to the great Monsieur, who
promised speedily to answer the Ceremony on his side: And now the De Wits and
their Party were Cock-a-hoop, and were already in hopes, sharing their part in
the projected Spoil and Division of the English Monarchy; when the more
politic Monsieur having brought them into the Snare he had laid for them,
instead of sending back and Signing a Counter-change of the said League to
them, sent it secretly to his Ambassador in England, with Orders privately to
show it our King, that he might by that be convinced what advances, the People
he was so hard to be persuaded to wage War with, had made to attack him and his
Kingdoms, as they had already insulted his Person, Honor, and Relations. And
how affectionate his Master was to his Majesty, who was ready to depart from
all the Advantages he might prudentially hope to reap by such an Alliance, in
that disadvantagious Posture of the British. Affairs, and rather inclined to
join with his Majesty against those saucy Republicans, and sworn Enemies to all
Crowned Heads: Ordering him withal, to tell him, that the Obstinacy he
perceived in his Majesty, in refusing to vindicate his own, his Families, and
his Kingdom's Honor and Interest against them, had prevailed with him, to push
on a Treaty with them so far, as to get it, by Address, Signed by them
aforehand; that he might have wherewithal to give his Majesty an undeniable
Proof, both of their malicious and dangerous Intentions, and of his own sincere
Inclination to his Majesty; and delude them into a security, that might hinder
them from providing for any Defense by Land, against the Forces he had ready to
pour in upon them; in case his Majesty would please, while it was yet time, to
join with him. And further, to add, that for his part he had not Signed it yet,
but was ready to Sign one much rather with his Majesty, and would on that
condition so protract the time with delatory Answers and Excuses, that their
present Naval Preparations should be eluded, and they attacked, when they least
expected, and when his Majesty might have time enough to make sufficient
Provision, to second him therein by Sea, to both their certain and glorious
Advantage: And lastly, ordering the said Ambassador in the close to tell his
Majesty roundly, that though indeed he had carried on that sham League for the
Reasons aforesaid, viz. For the Interest of his British Majesty, as well as
his own, for the better conviction of him, of the Necessity, as well as
Convenience of joining with him, and lulling the Enemy into that security, that
was necessary to the Success of the Arms of both Crowns; yet if after all these
steps, his Majesty would still persist to be deaf to his own Interest, so
visibly and plainly made out to him; that truly his Master then would be forced
to decline those of his Majesty, take new Measures consonant to his own, and in
a word, turn the sham Alliance into a true one, by immediately Signing and
Counterchanging it; and at the same instant, joining with those Enemies against
him, without giving him time to make any tolerable Preparation, that might
enable him to weather their first Attempts; for that it was his Masters
undoubted Interest to keep great Forces on foot, and not to keep them idle: And
that therefore if the King of England would not join with him, to employ them
where he had most Inclination, and much Interest too, to employ them; he would
be forced by Interest against his Inclination, to employ them against him,
being resolved to employ them some where; and so the Ambassador concluded his
Harangue, as I shall conclude this Letter, having been tedious, I am afraid, to
your Lordship; and so remain,

My Lord, Your Lordships most humble Servant.
Paris, March 19. 1677. N. S.
LETTER XIX.
King Charles II. being at length brought over to a Compliance with the French
Intreagues, and to make War upon the Dutch; the French Council make all the
Alliances they can among the German Princes, etc. and where they could not
prevail, use their Endeavors to persuade to a Neutrality.

My Lord,
HAving in my last to your Lordship, set forth the successive Intrigues of
France, to bring our King into their Interest, and to come to a Rupture with
the Dutch States; their Artifices, especially the last (as how could it choose,
unless he had been indeed the Log, he has been resembled to) wrought so
effectually with him, that he then, without Reluctance, consented to the French
King's Overtures; and an Alliance was, though very privately, concluded on,
wherein were inserted Articles for a projected sharing of the States Dominions,
already Conquered by our Army, as we had been before by theirs; and now both
Courts concert Measures to continue the Amusement of the Enemy, and to gain
some other Neighbors into a Concurrence or Neutrality. The French King after
some Demur, to gain time, and to finish his Intrigue in England, had no sooner
concluded it, but after his usual way of Dissimulation, sent back the
Instrument of the Treaty with Holland to the States, but with such Additions
and Amendments, as he knew would take up time to debate, though couched in most
suggred Words, and backed with large Promises, of continuing and augmenting
Friendship: And having in the mean time gained the Elector of Cologn, the
Bishop of Munster, and some others on the Rhine, partly by Money, and partly by
deceitful Pretenses to join with them: They had also the vanity to attempt
(though the very Thoughts of such an Overture, were charged with insuperable
Difficulties) to delude the very Spaniard, if not into a Compliance, yet into a
Neutrality with them, while their Forces should be acting such Tragedies, as
were intended in their view, and not without passing through their Country,
they having such Creatures and Factions in Spain, as they much confided in; but
after all their Wheedles and Intrigues there, they found such strong Opposition
made by the Queen Mother, who was a great Enemy to France, as gave them little
grounds to hope for any great Success in that Negotiation; so that they began
to content themselves with what they thought they were sure of, viz. By gaining
of so much time, in keeping of Matters in suspense, both in the Spanish and
Imperial Councils, who were naturally slow enough in their Deliberations, as
might suffice them to accomplish their design upon Holland, before they could
be in a readiness to hinder the finishing Stroke; (If so be, they should
declare for the States against them, as was to be suspected they would) after
which secure of Success, they concluded they should be in a condition to
attack, rather then to expect the whole Austrian Force, though fortified with the
Succors of all the rest of Christendom: My Lord, I am not at present furnished
with the Topics they went upon, to bring the Spaniards to a Compliance in this
Matter; but I hope I shall be able to give your Lordship a good account of them
in my next, which shall be with the next convenience, but in the mean time, I
am,

My Lord, Your Honors, most humble Servant.
Paris, Apr. 15. 1677. N. S.
LETTER XXII.
Coleman being engaged in the French Interests, here follows the Topics he
went upon, to induce the Spaniards to a Neutrality in the War in 1672.

My Lord,
THat the French Ministers are Gens audax omnia perpeti, is very manifest, by
what I have written to your Lordship before; but to be so adventurous, as to
form Topics for the engaging those in the Spanish Interest, to favor their
Designs, by deluding that Nation to a Neutrality, seems to be a Master piece of
their Policy, as well as Audacity: Having therefore gained Mr. Coleman, whom
they judged of any other, the most proper Instrument to carry on such a Design,
they formed the following Topics for him, the better to help him to compass
it; and he was to urge closely.

1. That though his Britannick Majesty had been by the intolerable Insolences,
and base Outrages of the Dutch Nation, constrained and necessitated much
against his Inclinations, to depart from so much of the tripple League, as
concerned the Hollanders; yet he would not fail to retain still, his
Inclinations to promote as much as lay in him, the chief Intent and Purport of
it; which was in Substance, to hinder the French from aggrandizing themselves,
to the Diminution of their Neighbors; but more particularly to the Prejudice
of the Catholic King, during his Minority, provided he would stand Neuter.

2. That his Neutrality would be a firm Security to him, of what he yet possessed
in the Netherlands, by obviating, and taking clean away from the French, all
manner of pretenses to molest his Subjects.

3. That the destroying the Hollanders, who were base Rebels to him, (and whom
it was as much Scandalous as Pernicious, for any Crowned Head to suffer to
flourish and prosper in Wealth and Greatness, as they had but too manifestly
done, to the Diminution of their Neighbors, and much less to abet) would be
highly Beneficial, and of manifold Advantage to his Catholic Majesty. For that
the vast Trade of Amsterdam, and other great, populous, and flourishing Towns
in Holland, and the other Provinces, being ruined and depopulated; many of the
Inhabitants, at least all those of the Roman Catholic Religion or Persuasion,
a great many of the Deists, and other Adiaphorites, who were very indifferent
and careless, whether they frequented any public Worship at all, or no, but
chiefly, and above all other things, adored Trade and Gold, with which the
Dutch Territories swarmed above any other Nation, either on this, or the other
side of the Hemisphere, would, without all doubt, refugiate themselves, as
being nearest, and most commodious for them, in the Spanish Territories and
Provinces, especially Flanders; and would quickly multiply and increase in
them, not only People, but Trade and Riches, from whence, increase of Power and
Strength, both by Sea and Land, would be a necessary and infallible
Consequence: And that then, the now almost abandoned City of Antwerp, once the
most famous, and most flourishing City in Trade, of this part of Europe, should
have free liberty to lay open her Scheld again, now damm'd up by the
Hollanders; and recover her former Riches, Glory, and Strength, as would
necessarily all the other Spanish Cities, and trading Towns in that Country, in
a proportionable degree, which would be a means to make Spain herself become
much more Flourishing and Populous.

4. That the Crown of Spain would by this means, have her Hands quite rid of
the most troublesome, as well as dangerous Rival, in Trade and Conquest in the
East Indies, of any other Europian Nation whatsoever; in which respect, neither
England nor France, though trading Nations, as being Monarchies, had not been,
nor indeed could possibly be, or become so prejudicial to it: However, they
might, perhaps afterward, be fortified with new Accessions of Strength and
Power; as that one single Republic, which, though scarce of one age's Growth,
had yet already, to the Amazement, as well as Detriment of their Neighbor
Nations, and especially the Kingdom of Spain, and Territories belonging to it,
monopolized into her own Hands, the advantageous, and incredibly gainful Trades
to the great Kingdoms of China, Iapan, and many other Parts, both of the East
Indian and African Coasts, whither in former times, no other Nations in the
World, besides those of Spain and Portugal, had any manner of Access.

5. That the Power of that upstart Republic was already at that exorbitant
Greatness and Grandeur, that there was no possibility, either of humbling or
depressing it, and much less of a total Subversion of it, by any other in
Christendom, then the united Powers of the Kingdoms of England and France; and
yet things were brought to that pass, that if timely care were not taken, to
have the said Republic removed out of the way, or at least mortified to a very
great degree; it must of necessity, in a short time rise up, as Old Rome did,
to such a prodigious Strength, Power, Dominion, and Grandeur, that it would
give Law to all the Crowned Heads in this part of the World; and perhaps, at
last devour them, since it well appeared, and was conspicuous to all that did
not wilfully shut their Eyes, that by such little Blows as the Kingdom of
England alone was able to give them, in the late War, and Sea Engagements they
had with them, their Experience, numbers of Seamen, Power, Strength, and
Riches, were every day advanced and increased, after the Respite of a small
breathing time of Peace: And that consequently, if his Catholic Majesty, the
King of Spain, or rather the Queen Regent and Ministers, as also his Imperial
Majesty should suffer themselves to be so overruled by such a needless, as
well as unseasonable Jealousy, so far, as by their Interposition to obstruct
and hinder the now probable Downfall of that usurping, and encroaching
Republic, what could they expect and hope for in the Revolution of a few
Years, but to see those very People, whom, by their needless Solicitude, they
had saved from Destruction, be so adventurous, as to seize into their own
Hands, by way of Retaliation for their Kindness, their precious Mines of Gold
and Silver, in the Countries of Peru and Mexico; when it should be quite out of
the Power, either of the Kingdoms of England or France, or indeed both of them
together, should they find themselves so disposed, to prevent their inevitable
Loss, which would be not only a most pernicious Blow, but, as might very well
be feared, even a deadly one to the illustrious House of Austria, as well as a
very sensible one to all the other Princes and States of Christendom: And
therefore it could not but be a matter even of high Importance, and greatly for
the Interest and Benefit of his Catholic Majesty and his Subjects in general,
for him to resolve to remain and continue neuter, in this War that was to
commence shortly against the united Dutch Provinces, and to connive at, and
give way to the Success of the French and English Nations; since it was
evidently as necessary and requisite, for the Safety and Grandeur of the
Kingdom of Spain, ut deleatur is it a Carthago, as it was for that of England and
France; from whom a mutual Jealousy, which, as it ever was, could not but be
still continued, would sufficiently secure Spain to all future Ages, from
offering any such Violence, or making any such Attempts on their Golden, and
Silver West Indies, as would certainly, as well as unavoidably, be made in less
then half an Age upon them, by the Republic of Holland; If his Catholic
Majesty, the Emperor, and his other Allies, should stand so far in their own
Light, and become guilty of so much Imprudence, which could hardly be thought
of them, as to give any divertion unto, or otherwise interrupt the only Powers
in Christendom, that were able to prevent that Disaster, and render it quite of
none Effect.

6. That his Most Christian Majesty Lewis the XIVth of France had solemnly
engaged to his Britannick Majesty the King of England, that upon the Condition
of a Neutrality agreed by Spain, he was willing to relinquish all pretensions
to the remainder of the Spanish Netherlands, and all the other Dominions of
Spain, and to get that same Renunciation Signed and Ratified by the Dauphine
his Son, as well as by himself; and to leave no room for any future Jealousies,
even by the consent and approbation of the Three Estates of his Kingdom, whom
he would take care to Assemble for that very end and purpose, as also by the
Parliament of Paris; that so all occasions and pretenses of any future War
between the Two Crowns of France and Spain might be entirely and totally cut
off by this one Amicable and Advantageous Concession; nay, and that rather than
fail in this particular, his Most Christian Majesty would be brought to
re-deliver to the Catholic King, even all the Towns, Cities and Territories
taken from him by France in the last War, and keep strictly to the other, as
well as the Pyrenaean Treaty which was as much as the Spaniards could wish for
themselves or had upon any occasion insisted upon.

7. That the French King would be punctual to give such strict Orders to his
Troops and Armies, that in all their Marches through the Countries belonging to
the King of Spain, they should be so far from being injurious and burdensome to
the respective Inhabitants of them, that they should receive very great benefit
and advantage from them, by their exact and liberal paying for what ever they
had of them, and that he would afterward leave such a firm barrier on all sides
the Country, as should for ever secure them from all Apprehensions of
encroatchments from France or any other Neighboring Nation whatsoever; and
that by this means the Spanish Territories would remain very fertile, and be
filled with Money and all sorts of Rich Commodities, whilst the United
Provinces would be run down, and never be in a condition to molest or annoy
them more; and what advantage and security that would be to them, they
themselves could tell, and a remembrance of former experiences in that kind,
must needs corroborate and add strength to the same.

8. That there was no just cause of Jealousy to be entertained, or any great
Reason to fear the growing greatness of the Kingdom of France upon such an
occasion, for that the accession of strength, which by such means might in some
degree happen to her, would be much more than balanced by that which would
accur to England; by which his Britannick Majesty would become a much more
powerful Assistant to Spain and the Spanish Territories, against any Violations
of Treaties that might afterward upon any account whatsoever happen to be
offered by the French, then he could be at this juncture of time, even tho
joined with the Republic of Holland; and yet rid the Catholic King even at
the same time of such a dishonorable as well as dangerous Ally as Holland was
at present, and which would certainly prove within a small Revolution of Years
a destructive Enemy also, if they were not now in this favorable nick of time
obstructed and thoroughly prevented.

9. That the King of Swedland who was the other Crowned head that had engaged
himself in the Triple Alliance for the protection and security of the Spanish
Netherlands, was likewise of the same mind and disposition to remain Neuter in
the present case, unless he were provoked to join with the French and English;
But that however he would at the same time join and sincerely concur with his
Britannick Majesty for the guaranty of this desired and useful Neutrality with
France; that both Kings would be ready to enter into a League Offensive and
Defensive, with the Crown of Spain to assist the same with their full force and
whole power, against any manner of infractions that should happen to be made,
or fall out against this or any other former Treaty or Treaties on the part of
France whatsoever.

10. And Lastly, That the French King was ready and willing to accept their
guaranty and not only so, but freely to permit the Emperor of Germany and other
of the German Princes, that could be brought to stand Neuters, and were willing
to enter into the same, to be made Partners therein; that all the World as well
as the Council of Spain might be convinced, beyond all suspicions to the
contrary of his Most Christian Majesty's, as well as the King of England's
sincerity in that matter.

These, my Lord, were the instructions Mr. Coleman had, and the Topics he was
to go upon for the carrying on this pretty Design; but how far he put the same
in practice, that I could never learn; but he was not the only Engine they
employed for that purpose, they had their Agents in Spain it self, who did
their utmost to effect this Neutrality of which I may be able to give your
Lordship an account another time; In the mean while I am,

My Lord, Your Lordships most Humble and most Obedient Servant.
Paris July 24. 1677. N. S.
LETTER XXIII.
A farther Argument used at the Court of Spain by the French Agents to persuade
that Nation to a Neutrality.

My Lord,
TO the Topics used by Mr. Coleman and other French Emissaries, of which I
have given your Lorship an account already to persuade the Spaniards to a
Neutrality, they judged fit to superadd, another to be more particularly and
closely insisted upon at the Court of Spain it self, alleging that the ruin
of the Republic of Holland, was very necessary as upon other accounts, so more
especially in that thereby the King of England, who was so well inclined to the
Roman Catholic Religion, and only wanted an opportunity to declare for it, and
to have the Glory to Establish it in His Dominions, which had now for above an
Age and half groaned under the burden of a pestilent Heresy, would become so
much master of his Subjects, that he would be in a condition, without any
danger to himself and the Royal Family to introduce the same Roman Catholic
Religion into his Kingdoms again, which great and glorious, as well as
meritorious Work, the Catholic King and those who had the Administration of
his Dominions ought to have to heart above all other Interests and
Considerations whatsoever, especially since this would enable the Crown of
England to do Spain many good and friendly offices in the Court of Rome as well
as elsewhere, and be a means to balance the French Faction there, when they
should take upon them, as they frequently did, to oppose the Interests and
Advantages of the House of Austria, as Henry the VIIIth and other Kings of
England had formerly done before the Schism broke out, and their Kingdom came
to be overspread with Herisie; But you know, my Lord, the effect this and the
former bait and flourishes have had; for Spain after some short disimulation to
gain time declared for Holland, on whose fate they well foresaw that of their
Netherlands, and the whole Fortune of the House of Austria depended; in which
resolutions notwithstanding all the Artifices used to the contrary, they were
seconded by the Emperor, who then had his Arms loose, and by some other Princes
on that side, whom though they failed to hinder to enter into an Alliance for the
defense of Holland, yet they have met since with too much success in rendering
their Conjunction as little hurtful to them as might be, and of which I may in
time be able to give your Lordship the particulars, who am

My Lord, Your Humble Servant.
Paris Aug. 5. 1677. N. S.
LETTER XXIV.
Of the shutting up of the Exchequer by King Charles II in January 1671/2.

My Lord,
I Need make no repetition to your Lordship of what the French have done by
Foreign Alliances in Germany; by engaging our King to consent to the Second War
against the Dutch, and the Topics they went upon to persuade others whom they
had reason to fear would concern themselves in the Quarrel when they saw their
Neighbors House set on Fire, to a Neutrality in the case, and more
particularly the Spaniards of which, Transactions I have not long since sent
your Lordship the particulars; but what ever was done abroad by them for the
ruining of the Dutch Republic they were no less industrious in our Nation to
put the King (who God knows was but too susceptible of their Charms, upon such
methods as would Bankrupt his Reputation with his own Subjects, and so become
an entire dependant upon them for his support. Two things they had more
especially in view for the accomplishment hereof, the one was that he should
shut up the Exchequer under the pretense of the absolute necessity of it for
want of Money to bear up the port the Nation ought at that time to make in the
World when their Neighbors were in so formidable a Posture; but they knew well
enough and could not but foresee (as I find they have noted it) that he would
by such a surprising and unparallelled Act lose all his Credit for ever of
borrowing Money again, otherwise then on the Branches of his Revenue, or Acts
of Parliament; and would deter the Parliament from venturing to be so profuse
and liberal as they had formerly been to him any more for the time to come,
upon never so pressing occasions; at least without binding his hands, and
reserving to themselves the care of laying out as well as raising any Moneys to
be given to him; and what could the consequence thereof be, but that he must be
reduced either of being treated as an Underling or a Doge (which they took
especial care to infuse into his head) by his Parliaments; or which they aimed
at chiefly, to do the French King's drudgery, to have Money to maintain his
Pleasures, and keep up his Dignity and Authority against any attempts, which
the Jealousies caused by the faults he had too unwarily been ensnared into by
his false Friends on this side, might so strongly influence most Orders of Men
in one degree or other unto throughout his Kingdoms against it, and which he
might easily be induced to choose; prefering rather to be a Pensioner, and at
the beck of a Forreigner, then the courtesy of his own Subjects, who have
never refused to support him in what tended to his real Interest and Honor
upon any moderate prospect of security for it; but things did not end here. The
other design of theirs was not only in view but close at the heels of Granting
a Toleration of Religion by virtue of his Prerogative Royal, of which your
Lordship will hear more in my next, in the mean time I am,

My Lord Your very Humble Servant.
Paris Sept. 12. 1677. N. S.
LETTER XXV.
Of Liberty of Conscience granted by King Charles II in the Year 1671/2, how
and to what ends attained.

My Lord,
IT was not enough for this Court to engage the King to consent to a second War
with the Dutch, and shutting up the Exchequer purely to serve their Interest
and Designs, but they must put him upon another piece of State-Druggery, which
at the same time, I am well satisfied he was not of himself much averse to, and
that was the Declaration of Indulgence to tender Consciences, as they have been
pleased to cant it; they knew well enough what severe Laws were in force
against all those that dissented from the Public Church, and some of them
fresh enough in memory not to be so soon forgotten, and they knew full as well,
that both the Popish and Presbyterianly affected Persons as well as the
Prerogative and Republican Party who then began to revive, that were about the
King, would greedily promote it, or at leastwise some of all the mentioned
sorts, as a means whereby to attain to the ends aimed at by those differrent
Factions. these the Monsieurs took care to influence in their several ways so
as to spur up the King not to delay the granting of it; but whatever the
several Parties ends were in the obtaining of such a Grant, the intent of
France was chiefly to divide us, and so make sure of the other event of their
other Measures; for they concluded then, had the King gained that point without
dispute, and the People suffered that dispensing with the Laws to pass tamely
and without any interrogating about it, for an inherent Prerogative of the
English Crown; that he would be able to keep a firmer Alliance with them, and
assist them in all their Designs without control with his Arms, and that he
should at long-run be easily persuaded to receive Twenty or Thirty Thousand
Auxiliaries to secure his new acquired Authority, in that and other Usurpations
they intended to put him upon both in Civil and Religious Matters, in lieu of
the British Forces he should furnish the French King with; or if he should
happen to be so weak as to yield up that important piece of Royalty to the
Parliament; that still by such a diminution of Power he would in time by their
pressing more and more upon him, as they had contrived in that case they
should, be still necessitated in his extremity to have recourse to their help
against the popular Waves, which when their state Eolus's had blown enough to a
sufficient high Sea, they designed to assist him to assuage, for fear else of
giving place to the second Resurrection of that terrible Monster called a
Commonwealth, which they dreaded more then any thing that could have happened
in this Western World; the memory of what a terror that late Monster in our
Isles had been to them, as well as to the rest of their Neighbor Nations,
being yet too fresh to have been forgotten by them; thus did these State
Empericks drench us, and brought our Nation under such Convulsions, that
without the help of kind Heaven, must end in a total Dissolution, Sed futura
nes^imus. I am,

My Lord, Your Constant and Faithful Servant.
Paris December. 16. 1677. N. S.
LETTER. XXVI.
The Opinion of the French Court concerning the five Persons that made up the
Cabal in England in the Year, 1671/2.

My Lord,
THE Ministers of this Court are not only the most inquisitive Persons in the
World into the Affairs of other Courts, but even into the Persons that manage
them, whose Natures, Dispositions, Religion, Natural and Acquired Abilities, as
well as Respective Infirmities, they endeavor to sift out to the quick, that
so they may use them or shun them as they find occasion; and for this reason it
is that they make some Remarks upon them in their Minutes as well as upon the
Affairs transacted by them; And therefore since the Five Persons who made up
the Cabal in England a few years ago, and who your Lordship may remember were
the Dukes of Buckingham and Lauderdale, the Earls of Shaftsbury and Arlington,
and the Lord Treasurer Clifford, were very distinguishable for the Stations
they were in, the Offices they held and the Parts each of them acted in the
Government, I find this Character given of them: For the Duke of Buckingham as
he was the Kings Favorite, so he really deserved to be so, as being very
capable to be a Minister of State, if his application to business had been
answerable to his Talents, if his mind, which was furnished with excellent
Endowments had not been distracted with Libertinism which was in him to an
extreme degree, and by a love to his Pleasures, which made one of those Persons
in the World that was fittest for great and solid things, vain and frivolous.
Of the Duke of Lauderdale there is little or nothing said, but that he is a
great and quaint Politian, and no question but he has merited that Character at
their hand: Of my Lord Clifford they are as profuse in their Praises, as I
doubt they have been too of their Money, saying; he was a Person who wanted
nothing but a Theater, where Virtue and Reason had been much more in use than
it was in his Country in the Age wherein he lived, for to be superior to and
overtop the rest: My Lord of Arlinton they make to be a Person of a meaner
Capacity and more limited Genius than any of the Five, but say his Experiences
supply the Defect, and has acquired him especially a very great knowledge of
Foreign Affairs; last of all, they bring in Anthony Ashley Cooper the Renowned
Earl of Shaftsbury of whom they say; he was by far the fitter Person of any of
them to manage a great Enterprise, and so was as the Soul to all the rest,
being endued with a vast Capacity, clear Judgment, bold Nature, and subtle Wit,
equally firm and constant in all he undertook; a constant Friend but an
implacable Enemy, with many other Expressions, such as his not being terrified
neither with the greatness nor the multitude of the Crimes he judges necessary
for his own preservation, or the destruction of others, much to his Lordships
dishonor, which is a clear Argument he was not for their Interest, and for
which he is much beholding to them. Your Lordship will pardon the freedom I
take with You, and accept of the sincere endeavors to serve you of,

My Lord, Your Honors most Humble and most Obedient Servant.
Paris Jan. 12. 1678. N. S.
LETTER XXVII.
Of the Methods practiced by the French Ministers to corrupt our Ambassadors.

My Lord,
HAving given your Lordship some account of the opinion the French Court have
had of some of our Statesmen; it may be it will not be unacceptable to recount
to your honor in this place some of those ways they have taken here to corrupt
and pervert our Ambassadors; And I can boldly affirm that there has been hardly
any one Ambassador sent from our Court hither, since the Restoration whom they
have not endeavored to corrupt and to get into a private Intreague to traverse
not only what he was to Negotiate, but even something of what themselves pressed
on our Princes by their own private Agents, and on some of whom, I have named
one to your Lordship formerly, they have made very great impressions to our
Nations detriment; for matters of main Consequence, were treated of by private
Ministers or Messengers between both Kings, which were not as much as mentioned
to the Ambassadors sent in Public, who have been on our side sent only for
Parade, to Negotiate many times, things whereof the contrary had been most
commonly agreed upon especially in private, only to blind by that piece of
Formality the Eyes of our Subjects at home, and of our Neighbors abroad; or
else to treat about matters of mere Complement or of but ordinary concern; and
though what has been privately treated on between the Two Kings, or but only
proposed was of great Concern to be kept secret, and that for that very reason
they knew our Ambassadors were not made acquainted with it, yet such has been
their Malice and Treachery to our King and Country, as to discover to our
Ambassadors or Envoys and their Secretaries, such parts thereof as they have
thought, being once known to them, would be most proper and effectual to induce
our Ministers to enter into a particular Cabal with them for by-ends, and many
times to affirm things more invidious than ordinary to have been agreed upon
between both Courts, which were only proposed; which kind of Communication of
theirs had a very powerful influence by the curiosity that is natural to all
Mankind, to work upon our Ministers to entertain such a Correspondence with
them to the dishonor and detriment of their King and Country; for they have
told them sometimes, that not only the Points proposed by the Duchess of
Orleans, but other things of as bad and dangerous consequence for the Subjects
and Religion in England, were absolutely concluded on between both Crowns
unknown unto them; and that our King and Duke of York had taken such and such
Measures to put themselves into a Condition to do what they pleased, and that
the King their Master was willing to flatter them in such hopes and feed them
with a little Money to keep them from taking part with his Enemies; yet that
truly at the bottom he had no such Zeal for Religion nor for the Pope of Rome,
as he had not for the King of England's over great Power and Absoluteness in
Rule, being things which could not but be prejudicial and very incompatible
with his own greatness, and therefore he should not fail underhand to favor
the People of England in supporting their Liberties and Rights, and defending
their Religion, and confining the Kingly or Regal Power to its own due limits;
And therefore if they, Viz. our Envoys or Ministers would serve him in that
design, they might assure themselves they should be well gratified for their
Compliance; that there was no occasion to scruple it; since they knew well
enough that our Government was but a qualified Monarchy, wherein the Subject
owed rather more Allegiance to their Country than they did to their Prince; And
that since their King went about to deal so unfairly and injuriously with their
Country, as to enter into Leagues and Treaties, and that underhand with a
Foreign Prince, contrary to their true Interest, and deceived his Ambassadors
by transacting things different from, and opposite to what they had received in
their Instructions, and trusted not his own Ministers but only Foreigners with
his main Secrets of State; it could not be thought any great infidelity in them
to deceive such a Prince, and to enter into private Intreagues against such
Designs as were pernicious and destructive to their Country, and would be so to
the Prince himself, if not prevented in time, with a great deal more matter
still more invidious than that, to the same purpose.

Such Methods as these, My Lord, I find in the minutes of the Instructions
prescribed from time to time, to those who are employed to converse with our
English Ambassadors or Envoys, and after-notes do also remark they had success
enough with some of them, whom your Lordship may so well guess at, that I need
not name them. However this opinion they entertained of most of the English
whom they gained into Intrigue, except it were the Duke of Buckingham and one
or two more, that they served them with the same mind, with which they employed
them, for this was and is still an usual saying with them, We employed them not
for any love we have had to them, or any good we intended them, but only for
the Interest and Advantage of our own King, and the Dishonor and Disadvantage
of theirs. So they as we believe and have by experience found by most, served
us not for any love to our Interest, but to our Money, and with intent to make
what we intended for the disservice of their Country turn in the end for the
good and benefit of it, or at least to the Factions and Persuasions they
themselves were off; I could enlarge much more upon this Head but I have been
already tedious and therefore I must conclude and remain,

My Lord, Your Lordships most Devoted and Humble Servant.
Paris March 19. 1678. N. S.
LETTER XXVIII.
Of the French Resolutions, to elude any Advantage the English might receive by
the War.

My Lord,
HAving already given your Lordship an account how our King was brought into
the Alliance with France, and to engage in a second Dutch War; I shall now
proceed to set forth the insincerity of the French Friendship, and how little
Benefit our King was to reap thereby, in case of Success, and the Methods they
had to elude him. Though their chief Design was to destroy Holland, yet they
intended England should reap no Benefit thereby, but rather decrease and
truckle under them; for that they meant nothing less then the real Performance
to our King, of his Share in the projected Division of the Enemies Country, as
if it had been their Motto, Pereat Hollandus, nec non subsidat Anglus. And
therefore they so resolved to carry things on by Sea, as that they seemed to be
rather unconcerned Spectators, then Actors for us in any of the Engagements;
though your Lordship well knows, that afterward, when they were left alone with
the War, they could Fight well enough to Defeat the Dutch and Spanish Fleets in
the Mediterranean, and bereave that State of their famous Admiral de Ruyter,
which was more then ever we in all our Combats with him could effect; For as if
the French Dealing had been a Graft of old Punick Faith, they treated us more
like perfidious Africans, then generous Romans, giving not only private Orders
to the Commanders of their Naval Forces, which they should send us at Sea, to
avoid as much as was possible, any effectual Fighting for us, but only to
observe and learn what Improvements they could from us, both as to our manner
of Fighting, and the Situation of our Harbors; and in the main, to approve
themselves, not only as Ciphers, but as broken Reeds to us, who were in
expectation of great things from them; and this evidently appeared afterward by
their Conduct toward Captain Martel, who for falling in bravely with us
against the Dutch, was first soundly checked, and then disgracefully cashir'd
for his Honesty and Bravery: and as their Instructions by Sea, to their
Officers, was to play the Legerdemain with us in this manner; they gave the
like Instructions to their Land Commanders on the Holland side; and
particularly, though it had been concerted between both Courts, that whilst we
should attack Zealand, which was the Province allotted to our share; their
General in the Low Countries should divert all Relief from it, by a great and
sudden Irruption into their other Provinces, which in the Consternation they
then must needs be put to, he might most effectually do, yet not only their
Minutes, but the Event clearly showed it was the least of their Thoughts, we
should have a foot of Ground for our share on that side; for you may very well
remember, that when our Army was afterward actually Embarked for that
Enterprise, in which in all probability, had he done his part, they had
succeeded; yet in that critical Moment wherein he should have acted according
to the Lesson given him, he did upon some frivolous Pretenses neglect the same,
and so frustrated that Expedition, which obliged our Forces with no small
Confusion to return back, and Land without attempting any thing: It Is most
certain, My Lord, and by their Minutes it does appear, that they had concerted
before hand, that in case they met with any powerful Resistance by Land, that
then their Auxiliary Squadron at Sea, should act in earnest with us, and
vigorously second us in humbling the Enemy; but if they made any considerable
Conquest in the Dutch Territories, which, according as they had laid their
Measures, they supposed they could not fail of, then they were to observe the
Cautions since practiced by them; for that their Interest required no further,
then that we should with as much Damage to our selves, as might be without
Advantage to the Hollanders, divert and debilitate their Force; but to suffer
us to be absolute Masters of the Seas, or of but one Maritine place on the
Belgic Shore, was too great an Error in Policy for them to commit; but in
case there were an appearance, that our Fleet, notwithstanding their base
Prevarications should master that of the Dutch; and that at the same time their
Armies by Land made progress in the Conquest they thought themselves sure of,
that then they should by their Emissaries, both in our Court and Country sow
Jealousies, but more especially to propagate a strong Suspicion of the Duke's
having embraced the Roman Religion, which they were sure would work the same,
if not a greater Effect, then the public certain Knowledge of it could do; for
it would cause such Factions and Divisions therein, and such an Aversion to
that Prince, that he should be forced to yield up his Command into other hands,
and to alienate them from the Quarrel, that it would most effectually hinder
the English Success from passing the Bounds they intended them; and hence would
arise such a Disreputation to the King, and such a Dissatisfaction in the
People in general, as should conjure up such devilish Factions, as with all the
Art he had, he should never be able to lay quiet enough to leave him at liberty
to act any thing considerable against the French Interest; in case he should
attempt that way, to regain his Subjects Confidence and Esteem; and
consequently would deter him from the very Thoughts of disobliging such a
Friend, and quitting such Alliance, of so near, so present, and of so potent a
Protector, as the French King had made himself pass with our deluded Prince,
against the so much dreaded Practices of the Republicans, which those
Emissaries still took care, though covertly, to represent in the frightfulest
Colors, their most Romantic Inventions could supply them; and so, with my
humblest Respects to your Lordship, Concludes,

My Lord, Your Lordships most humble Servant.
Paris, March 31. 1678.
LETTER XXVIII.
Of the Success of the French Arms against the United Provinces, in the Year,
1672. Their further Resolves to Elude us, and their Wheedles to induce the
Amsterdamers to yield.

My Lord,
THE States being at length roused up out of their sleepy Security, and
beginning to dread, that notwithstanding all the French Wheedles and Delusions,
those vast Preparations by Land, and the lasie Movements of their Armies, boded
no good to them, did by their Ambassador at Paris, who was a Son of Hugo
Grotius, offer the French King all the Satisfaction imaginable; But that
haughty Monarch had concerted his Measures so well, and thought himself now so
sure of his Game, that all their Offers were laughed at. Your Lordship knows
well enough, what a bustle was made in England, by Summoning of the East India
Company to give an account of the Insults of the Dutch upon their Factories,
since the Peace at Breda, (who answered, and gave it under their Hands, that
they knew of none) and such other stuff as that was; yet the French King did
not think fit to trouble his Brains with any such Pretensions; but his chief
Motive to undertake this War was, that that State did eclipse his Glory, and
must be humbled, etc. And accordingly gave his Armies Orders to enter the Dutch
Territories. I need not recite to your Lordship, the Success he met with in his
Enterprise, and how like a Torrent he carried all before him; how Rhinburg,
Dossery, Deudek^m, Rees, Wesel, Emerick, Doesburg, Turesume, Nimeguen, Swoll,
Daventer, Grave, Arnheim, Skinenschon, Creveceer, fell quickly into his hands;
and Coventer to the Bishop of Munster, his Confederate; and the greedy Monsieur
now began with an amorous Eye to look upon Amsterdam, which he did not question
but to be speedily Master of, and it was the least of his Intension to allow
our King any Share or Part of the Repartition before concerted on between them;
And though it were privately suggested unto him, by a grave Minister that
attended him, that if he proceeded any further, he doubted his Conduct would be
contrary to his Interest, as tending, how much soever he doted on their
friendship, to alienate the King of England's Affections from them by degrees,
and convert the Confidence he had in their Sincerity, into utmost Detestation;
especially the main Charms, being by the Death of his principal Charmeress, his
late lovely and beloved Sister, in a manner dissolved; and though he should be
overawed by other Considerations, as to smother his Resentments; yet it would
so loudly awaken the Old Aversion of our Nation against them; that far from
being able to continue much longer in League with them, it would be impossible
for him, during such a Juncture, and under such Provocations, to contain his
irritated Subjects within the Bounds of a stupid Neutrality, or restrain their
Fury from recoiling upon himself and the Royal Family any other way, then by
letting of them loose upon the French; and suffering of them to wreak their
Revenge and long curbed Inclination, in an open and vigorous War on their old
Adversaries, to oblige them to regorge those delicate Morsels, of which they
had so perfidiously and unfairly defrauded them of their stipulated Share,
whilst their Allies and Confederates: Yet, My Lord, Excess of Prosperity, had
so blinded the French King, that like the Emperor Charles V. of Austria, when
he had taken Francis the first, then King of France, Prisoner at the Battle of
Pavia, he fancied they had all the World now in a String; and had partly
already provided, and partly concerted such excellent Salves against all
Inconveniences of that kind; that as secure, against all Contingencies, or the
jadish Tricks of Fortune, whom they imagined to be now fastened with too strong
and well-contrived-harness, to their triumphant Chariot, to kick against her
Drivers, much less break her Rains; they thought they might incontrouledly play
what Tricks they would with the English; though to flatter us with the hopes of
our Repartition, would be necessary yet for a time, as it would be easy, after
the Reduction of Amsterdam, and the entire Conquest of those Countries, both by
specious Arguments, to justify against our precarious Plea their intended
retention of the whole to themselves, and to back their Usurpations by force,
when once in Possession: As did the Lion in the Fable to the Beasts, who on the
plausible Condition of being allowed an equitable Share, had entered into a
Confederacy of hunting with his Brutish Majesty; but he, when all was done,
making himself to be Judge and Sharer, had, upon Alamode Pretenses, the Brutish
Conscience to take, and by force to keep all from them: And accordingly the
French, when they found that on their side Victory advanced not on Tortoise
Claws, but Eagles Wings, and saw themselves before either Neighbors or Allies
were aware, Masters of the best part of the Territories of that distressed
State, and with their Swords in their Hands, point almost to the Vitals of it:
As they were most surprisingly active, in taking all they could for themselves,
most liberal in allotting our Auxiliaries in their Armies, their full share in
the Fatigues of the War, most false to the Faith of our mutual League, by
declining in their turn, to second those Advances we were ready to make toward
the like Success; and in fine, most perfidiously busy in casting Rubs in our
way, as I have before hinted to your Lordship, to balk, and in planting those
Lights to misguide and shipwreck our Designs: So by their Conduct, as well as
Minutes, it did appear, that they intended not to stop there, but that after
those stupendous Progresses that favored their Beginnings: It was resolved by
them, to push on their Conquest to the utmost, without demurring upon any
Points or Scruples relating to us, even into those Parts belonging to our
Repartition; and especially to seize on Amsterdam it self, if possible, before
we could reflect on, and much less oppose so sudden an Exploit; which, Capture
alone, they, not without Reason thought, would be succeeded with a voluntary
Cession of all the remaining Places and Provinces, and with the Accession of
the most part of the Fleets, Merchants, and Colonies, of that potent Republic;
who would not fail to conceive, partly, for fear of losing otherwise their
whole Proprieties in the Moneys and Effects le^t by them, in that great
Magazine of both Hemisphears; and partly to enjoy the pretended Liberties and
Immunities, mighty Privileges, and other prodigious Advantages, with which
their Agents contrary to their League withus, had already privately tempted,
and had Instructions further, to allure those industrious and thriving People
with, to come over perfectly to them, and decline us: Against whom their
Emissaries employed so many Arts, to exasperate those People; That though both
Enemies, and the French much more formidable then we, to what by them, and all
freeborn People, was most Prizable, viz. Liberty, Property, and Religion, yet
the English was at that time, the more hated name of the two, to their depraved
Apprehension.

And as for our King, they reckoned him so enchanted with the Opinion, both of
the Necessity and Integrity of their Friendship to him, and so intent in that
confidence on his beloved Pleasures, with another She-Magitian of theirs newly
sent him for that purpose, tempered with the most intoxicating Venom, known to
Female Arts, that they never thought he could have any sense at liberty, to
mind what they did: and therefore knowing on the other side, there could arrive
no disturbance time enough from the Empire, to spoil their Game, it thundering
from thence yet, but a far off, they were moving with all greediness, their
Harpy-Talons, to seize ont his important Prey: And had without all doubt,
attained their purpose in the strange and pannick Terror, that at that time
seemed to disable the Hands, and lock up the Senses, of the otherwise
courageous and politic Inhabitants of that famous Emporium, had not Divine
Providence just in that Moment, by two most unlikely Accidents, but yet most
effectual Expedients interposed between them and Destruction, of which I may
give your Lordship some hints in my next; who am in the mean time,

My Lord, Your Honors, most humble Servant.
Paris, Apr. 29. 1678. N. S.
LETTER XXIX.
Of the Massacring the De Wits, the Revolution in Holland, and the Restitution
of the Prince of Orange to all the Authority of his Ancestors; with Offers made
him by the French King, of the Sovereignty of the United Provinces, and his
Rejection of them.

My Lord.
IN my last to your Lordship, I gave you some account of the Progress of the
French Army, in their Conquest of the United Provinces; the Resolutions they
had taken, both to elude the Crown of England of receiving any Benefit by the
War, to push on their own Conquests, and Wheedles to induce the City of
Amsterdam to yield to them: And I have more over hinted to your Lordship, that
there fell out two unexpected Accidents at that time, which put a full stop to
their Arms; The first whereof, I shall briefly run over to your Lordship; For
while the French Armies were ready to seize that important Place, and that
every individual Person was in that Consternation, that they only thought of
saving their own Families, without otherwise concerning themselves about the
Interest of their Country; nay, and that without staying for the French King's
sending a Summons for the Town to yield, a Council was held in the City,
whether they should not go out to meet him, to desire, he would be pleased to
take it into his Protection, as well as all the Inhabitants thereof; there was
very great Danger of their coming to this Resolution; when the Divine
Providence wonderfully appeared, by inspiring a courageous Citizen, though till
then, no very remarkable one neither, whose Name (and perhaps your Lordship
never heard it before) was Offe, and ought certainly to be consecrated to
Posterity, so as never to be left out of the Annals of Time; and who was
immediately seconded by another called Hassenaer, to stand up alone in the
dreadful Gap, and with a Voice like a Trumpet, to awaken his dispirited
Countrymen out of the Lethargy of black Despondency, with which the cowardly
Tyrant Fear had bound up both their Limbs and Intellectuals, and to excite
them, as the poor Geese formerly did the drowsy Romans, at least to make some
Defense for that Capital, and Capit^l of the Batavian Commonwealth, and not
rashly to deliver up that great Palladium, viz. The vast Bank of Riches
therein, on which seemed to depend the state of Europe, into the Hand of a
Prince, who wanted only Manacles from thence, to enfetter her; and whose
Courage to attack (said the same Citizen, and I have heard the Frenchmen
themselves mention his Name with many Elogiums) depended solely on the Fears,
which the Artifices of his treacherous Correspondents within their Walls, more
then the Noise of his Armies, had raised among them; and consequently on the
least show of Unity and Resolution among them, would sink with their Cause;
nay, continued he, rather then fall into the Hands of him, who (however his
Emissaries here have represented him slily to the contrary) will assuredly
prove a merciless Tyrant unto us, let us call in the Sea it self, whom we shall
find a much more merciful Element, to our assistance: And this, my Lord, being
seconded by the Dutch Mob, now astonished and confounded with the loss of their
Country by Land, and opposed by two the most potent Kings in the World by Sea;
they in a Rage, assassinated the two De Wits, as the Betrayers of their
Country, and Causers of that same Calamity, and then deposed the States, who
they looked upon to be of the Lovestein or De Wits Faction; and then restored
the Prince of Orange, now at Age, to the hereditary Authority and Command of
his Ancestors; which sudden and violent Proceedings, did more then stun the
French King; but after a little recovery, and finding that his Friends in
Amsterdam and other places yet unconquered, were dispossessed of all Authority,
and that now the Prince of Orange managed all the Affairs of the State with
Pensionary Fagel; he made an Essay, to catch the Prince in a Net, he with his
Council, had finely spun for him, by proposing to make him Sovereign of the
United Provinces, under his, and his Brother of England's Protection: I never
could learn who it was they employed to the Prince upon this occasion, and what
Arguments they induced to gain his Consent, though they may be easily guest at;
they being never entered into their Cabinet Minutes; and perhaps it was because
they met with such a Success upon the Prince, as they did not in the least
expect, whose Answer was, He would never betray a Trust reposed in him, nor
ever sell the Liberties of his Country, that his Ancestors had so long
defended, etc. I have not opportunity to go on in the Prosecution of this
Subject at present, but hope in my next, to make it up to your Lordships
content; and so remain,

My Lord, Your Honors most obedient Servant.
Paris, Nov. 3. 1678.
LETTER XXX.
Of the Embassy sent by King Charles II. upon the Advice of the Earl of
Shaftsbury, to Expostulate with the French King, and stop his further
Proceedings.

My Lord,
I Have in my last to your Lordship, taken notice of the Surprise and
Indignation the French King and his Council were put to, at the Revolution in
Amsterdam, and elsewhere in the United Provinces; and how much his
Correspondents had deceived him, in assuring him, that all was his own in that
wealthy City, and that there seemed but that one place to perfect and secure
the reunion of all the Belgic Provinces, that renouned part of the ancient
Gallia to his new French-Burbonian Empire (as he was advised by some to call
it) and now to see his victorious Chariot in its full speed, and almost at the
end of all its Career, receive a check by the resolution of one puny Burgher,
and withal that his Attempts upon the young Prince of Orange proved abortive;
however, considering he was Master of all the places round about, and no Power
then on the Continent, being in a posture to come to its Relief, and that though
the Prince of Orange were restored to the Command of his Ancestors, he had as
good almost to have been without, in the Posture his own, and the Affairs of
the State were then in; and confiding still in the Influence of those of his
Cabal within, who were Men of greater Estates and Eminence (though at present
laid aside) then that obscure Burgher, and those whom the Mob had advanced to
their Offices; and besides, that the little Vigor that seemed to be infused
into the drooping Spirits of the Citizens, by the foresaid Revolution and
Remonstrances, would quickly vanish, and be interpreted as a flash of
unseasonable and insignificant Rashness, at the sight of his formidable Troops,
and disappear like Smoke before the Sun, to whom his flatterers had taught him
to compare himself; it was resolved, the place should be reduced, if not
otherwise, by his Arms with all speed, to prevent any interveaning Accidents,
that might impede the mighty success: But seasonably came another Adventure,
that put a new Spoke in the Wheel. For, my Lord, while the French Court thought
themselves secure of all things on our side, as having in their Imagination,
not only lulled the King asleep, but the five Persons that made up the Cabal
that managed him (and in effect, there were four of them in their Interests)
the fifth Man, who was that renowned Statesman and true Patriot, the Earl of
Shaftsbury, then Lord Chancellor of England, whose sagacious Head could
penetrate deeper then the rest, and whose Eagle Eyes, the Splendour of those
Golden Pieces, streaming in such abundance from that French Phaeton, and which
had blinded so many others in the like Station, could not dazzle, used all his
Efforts to rouse up our King from the heavy slumber of Security, into which
French Sorcery had cast him; and highly to represent to him in their true
Light, the fatal Consequences to his Crown, Dignity and Interest, attending the
taking of that City, and the total Conquest of the Hollanders, though now his
Enemies, by any other, at least then English Hands, and above all, by the Arms
of France, and constrained him by the Cogency of his Reasons, and vigorous
Representations of a speedy and brisk Interposition, pressed home with an
Importunity, that would admit of no Evasion, nor allow any Repose, but
immediately to dispatch away an Embassy to divert the impending Stroke: But,
though my Lord, by his pressing Eloquence, gained his Point, in regard to the
Embassy in it self; yet your Lordship very well knows, that two of the three
Persons employed in it, viz. the Duke of Buckingham, and the Lord Arlington,
were deeply engaged in the French Interest, and seemed by their carriage at the
French Court then at Utretch, rather as if they had been sent to promote the
French Conquests, then any way to obstruct them; and because they knew my Lord
Hallifax was honest, they did all they could to oppose his appearing and acting
conjunctly with them, though included in the same Commission, in as ample a
manner as themselves, under pretense of his coming a day or two after them to
the Hague: And when they could no longer keep him from acting, went privately
to the French Camp, under sham-Pretences, and had Negotiations of their own on
foot: But though my Lord Hallifax's Vigilance, Constancy, and Resolutions, could
not balk theirs and the French King's Designs, yet it put them hard to it, and
they saw plainly, that it was the King's mind they should desist: However, the
French Court never forgot that noble Lord, the adviser of the Embassy; whereof
I shall not forget to give your Lordship account in due place; but do intend in
my next, to transmit the Substance of the Consultation held by the French King,
upon this unexpected Embassy; and so wishing your Honor all happiness, remain,

My Lord, your devoted Servant.
Paris, June 14. 1678. N. S.
LETTER XXXI.
An account of the Council held by the French King upon the Embasie from
England, with the resolves thereupon and methods proposed to elude it.

My Lord,
UPON so ticklish and unexpected an Occasion as was mentioned in my last, a
Council Extraordinary was held, wherein the major part after a serious and warm
Debate, were for their Kings pursuing his first Resolution, maugre all the
Considerations to the contrary, and to venture even a rupture with England, if
it could not be avoided otherwise, rather than quit so dainty a morsel, and
lose an opportunity never to be again retrieved of gaining a Post from whence
he might easily defy all the Force of Europe: But however to carry on things
the more fairly for his Reputation, and to accomplish if possible his design
without a present War with England, whose Friendship was as yet more convenient
than its Hate, they advised him to dispatch away immediately some acceptable
and able Minister to our Court, with store of Allamode Lenitives to that Sore,
and to return an Answer in the mean while to our Ambassadors full of specious
pretenses and promises of intended advantage to their Prince and Country by
that very expedition they were sent to diswade, and to tell them that his Most
Christian Majesty having reduced his and their Masters common Enemy so low as
they now saw them, and such a panick Terror having seized the People even of
the Capital City, that if it were made use of in time, must needs make the Town
an easy prey to him if he would advance toward it; and so in one Action put a
glorious and happy end to the War, to the inestimable advantage of the two
Kings, and the saving much Time, Blood and Treasure, being unwilling so
precious and irrecoverable an opportunity should be lost both for his Brother
and himself of subduing that Seven-headed Hydra of Faction and Rebellion, that
Republic so hateful and adverse to Kings by one lopping off with an
expeditious blow, for want of complying with so rare an offer of Providence; he
was resolved to follow the Call of Heaven and Victory; but withal did assure
them on the Word of a great King, and the Honor he so much valued himself
upon, that his Brother their Master had no reason to take umbrage, nor should
have cause to conceive any regret at that demarch of his; for that his reason
for attacking it was that his Arms were there ready to lay hold of the
opportunity and their Masters was not, and his intention in taking it, was only
to keep it for him till a convenient Garrison might be sent from England to
take Possession of it; when he would with all sincerity render it to him
undamaged, and without poling or peeling the Inhabitants whom he should always
consider as the Subjects of his Brother of England and Ally; And if that Answer
would not content them, than to Reply that what he designed was too necessary
and of too much importance for both Kings, and particularly for their Master,
that if he were not imposed upon, or were but rightly informed of his own
Interest in that Expedition, he would be so far from opposing it, that he would
rather encourage him to it; and therefore could give no other return to their
Instances, but desire them either to wait for an Answer to the Premises from
their Master or go home and report what he had Remonstrated, not doubting but
his Envoy whom he had sent to England since their coming, would by that time
they returned have so well satisfied his Majesty, that he would perfectly
acquiess in the Resolutions he had taken for both their Profits, return him
thanks for the same, and fully repose in the sincerity he had always found in
him: And therefore assuring himself as much of his Majesty's approbation of
what he designed upon his better information of it, he should without losing
any time push on his Advantage while he might; and as for the Envoy he sent for
England, they advised him he should be dispatched away immediately upon the
Councils rising, with the Instructions they should then concert before another
Audience were given to our Ambassadors, that he might have time to tell his
Tale first before any Letters or Advise could come from ours: Alas! said they,
this Embassage is none of the King of Great Britain' s doings, but a mere force
put upon him by the importunity of some Popular Grandees whom he dares not
displease for fear of the People; let Your Majesty but send a Sop to them to
take off their mouthing, and then ply the King with the usual Flatteries and
Protestations and the forementioned pretenses of promises seasoned with a
little Salt of Peru, and you need not doubt but his Credulity and Indigency is
great enough to swallow the Bait; And as for what he may fear from those
Popular Men, it may be suggested that the taking of that Town only will break
the neck of their Faction, and when it should be put into his hands, which if
he durst confide in a Prince whom he had reason to believe by the uncontestable
proofs he had given him just before the War of his inviolable Friendship for
him, should be as he promised, it would quiet all mutining Spirits again in a
moment; he is, Credulous enough, said they, to believe shams less artificial
and less alluring than these, and if after all, our Flatteries should not
prevail alone, our Menaces will; for though he be a little fearful of the
Resentments of his People for cleaving to us, he is more of us, for he fears
their Hate, yet durst not trust their Affection, whereas he durst not provoke
our Hate, but trust our Friendship as the only private fence, we have taught
him to think he has, against their Discontents; And therefore a final
threatening from your Majesty, telling him, if he knows not his own Interest,
your Majesty knows it, will hector him out of any stiffness, the fear of them
may put him upon against your designs at least: Though you cannot with his
Ambassadors here, you may by yours with him prolong the Contest long enough to
gain time sufficient to effect your Work; For those Inhabitants, soon growing
out of hopes of Succor from England as well as Germany; they will relapse into
a more violent Fit of despair than ever and yield. After whose acquisition it
will be easy for your Majesty to banter the English out of their pretenses, or
should they be so foolhardy as to assert them by Arms, it will be easy for
your Majesty to beat them off the seas, and make their Country the next Stage
of War, when Germany, Spain and Italy deprived once of the Low Country
passages, though never so concerned at the Spectacle, would not be able to help
them; And therefore your Majesty, continued they, need not be awed by any fear
of disobliging them for taking in what places by Arms or policy you can,
especially this on which so much depends the Conquest of the rest, which once
accomplished, when the English shall demand the share allowed them by the
Treaty, and by your Majesty's repeated Promises; what plausible banter will it
be to tell them, they have little reason to expect a share in the acquisition
of others, who when they might, have made none themselves, but rather have been
prejudicial to the Common Interest by their unseasonable and unreasonable
divisions, of and in which, etc. said they, we have sown such seeds as cannot
fail production; and in their great Council of Parliament, etc. That the true
purport of the Treaty was only Conditional, allotting each Party such and such
a share in the Countries projected to be Conquered, upon supposal that they
should attack and subdue each of them their respective proportion; and
therefore that it was ridiculous in them to pretend a claim, who had made no
Conquest, not so much as of any one place, and had been so far from landing on
the Enemy, that they had not done their duty at Sea. And in fine, added they,
to complete the Farce, how specious a Conclusion will it be, to assure them
however that your Most Christian Majesty to manifest to them how religiously
punctual you are to your promises, will take no advantage of their failures or
their Misfortunes, but provided they will give your Majesty a reasonable
consideration for the Expenses of Blood and Treasure you have been at in the
taking and keeping of them, for them in a tenable condition; you are ready to
order them Livery and Seizing of them according to the Letter of the Treaty and
your own repeated promises, for which pretended expenses, persued they still,
your Majesty may instruct your Ministers to demand such excessive Sums, as you
know they neither can nor will disburse. And as for their asserting their claim
by a War, after your seizing of Amsterdam that great Magazine of the dead
riches of Europe and both Indies, and of Warlike Provisions both by Sea and
Land, and the total reduction not only of that Potent Republic of which it was
the Head, but likewise of the living sources of Treasure both in the East and
West, by making their great Fleet, Merchants, Colonies, and Commerce all your
own, which cannot but clear your way to Guinea and Peru; What stomach, said
they, can the English after this have, by taking of their Outworks the
Low Countries, debarred from all assistance from Italy, Spain, and Germany, if
in their right senses to have recourse to Arms. Alas! what power to attempt any
thing but what will move your pity more then your indignation; nay rather what
greater Ambition will be left them than to Court your Majesty by an easy and
voluntary submission to receive them as Honorable Tributaries, thereby to
retain a shadow of their Ancient Government and Liberty, without incurring the
certain destiny, by an impotent and fruitless resistance, of being forcibly
reduced into a Province of your growing Empire; to which the Roman Eagle it
self abandoning the defenseless Towers of Austria, shatterred both by Eastern
and Western Hurricanes, for the better preserving and re-establishing its
Ancient State and Majesty, will then be glad to retire.

This may be your Majesty's method, continued they, to preserve Peace a while
with England, or stave off at least the War, till your present grand design be
accomplished; and these your Measures how to deal with them afterward, in case
they suffer you quietly to atchieve this important Conquest; But should we be
able by no Art to buoy up the King of Englands Spirits against the headstrong
opposition of the popular party about him; nor so much as to delay a Rupture,
nor to hinder that violent People from immediately declaring against us; yet
all considerations on all sides duly weighed and perpended, it will be much
greater and more certain advantage to your Majesty, and of much less dangerous
consequence to your Affairs in general to venture a War with them now about a
Town, which with all they can do, they cannot assist time enough to rescue from
you; and by whose acquisition against their wills you will not only be quit of
all their Pretentions, but gain power to crush them too at pleasure; than after
you have for fear of them quitted so great a Conquest, to have a War in a
little time after both with them and all the rest of Europe, not only without
those advantages, but with the greatest disadvantage imaginable, as without
setting on work an hundred expensive and troublesome Intriegues you now will
have no need off, your Majesty will certainly have then, notwithstanding all
pour compliance to them if you quit your present Design, For, said they,
suppose upon your proceeding to the Expedition in question, the English
declaring a sudden War against you should cause the Amsterdamers to assume
courage enough to repulse your Arms, how easy were it for your Majesty upon
advantageous Terms to clap up a sudden peace with those distressed People, and
by returning out of their Country to pacify all those powers now preparing
against you, and then with your whole Force to fall upon the English with which
perhaps too the Hollanders would easily be persuaded to join theirs, as glad to
see themselves delivered so unexpectedly, their old Enemies drawn so genteely
into the Snare, and so fair an occasion put into their hands to revenge
themselves on that Rival Nation for joining with us against them, with which it
will not be amiss however by your Envoy to threaten the English King; Nay and
how probable it is that the popular party in England would on that occasion
favor the Hollanders to keep down Absolute Power, and to preserve their
Religion against the aspiring Duke and Popery; all which they strongly feared
would have come in at once upon them after the ruin of that Protestant State?
At least, said they, how effectual may it be to let you Majesty's Envoy add
that threatening amongst the rest to the King of England. But Alas! continued
they, it is but a matter of mere Speculation never likely to come to pass; that
any thing the English can do at present should, as the posture of their Affairs
are now in, hinder your Majesty's taking that City, whose Richest and
Eminentest Citizens being already gained to your Party, the very terror of your
Majesty's Navy and the appearance of your Forces, will quickly open it unto
you; notwithstanding the weak opposition of a Party formed in a tumultary way
among a Mobile by a few particular, biggoted Citizens, who at the noise of your
Cannon would immediately turn to the other extreme and cry out, as loudly for a
surrender.

And as for the English, said they, our Emissaries have been so busy and so
successful at Amsterdam, that it can never be thought, what ever good Opinion
they may have of the People of England, that they can be induced to confide so
much in their King, whom they have so personally and so grossly affronted in all
that can be sensible to a Prince, and whom they know so much Frenchified, as to
think he can heartily intend them any good; or that they can expect any milder
terms of subjection under him, either in respect of Religion or Property, then
under your Majesty; Since they are daily, and by very good tokens assured that
he is privately advanced already toward Rome as far as the other, and waits
only the subvertion of their Republic to assume every whit as Despotical and
Tyrannical a Dominion over his Subjects in both respects as the French Monarch
had over his; or in fine, that they had so great an opinion of his Power in
that Posture of Affairs as to think him able to rescue them time enough, or
remove the French from them if he went really about it: And consequently that
in the great Consternation they then were in, and the little hopes they had of
the slow Forces of Germany; and the distrust they lay under both of their own
strength and of the Faith and Power of the English, together with the
Apprehension they were possessed with, of losing the great Riches they had there
by an obstinate resistance which they might secure by a timely composition;
they would undoubtedly submit upon the first Summons of his Majesty or any
famed General of his at the head of a considerable Body of Men, especially when
his Majesty should offer them such advantageous Conditions, as they advised him
to do, the more effectually to avert them from all thoughts or temptations to
close with England, and to propose to them: That matters of Religion and
Commerce should remain in the same state; As also the Privileges of their
Companies, Collonies, etc. That they should have the privileges of Natives, in
all the other Dominions of France, with many other Sugar-Plums; To the exact
performance of which it was not to be questioned but they would easily give
credit, since to that time his Honor was entire, and had no ways been stained
with any gross Infidelities, and that the Protestants, then enjoyed no small
Liberty in his Dominions. And when you shall be in the possession of the place,
all these specious promises need not hinder your Majesty, said they, from
seizing however as much of their Treasure as your Interest shall direct you to
take, nor from putting such other restraints upon them as you please, for which
they gave him such expedients as were thought proper and necessary for to elude
the advantageous and specious Conditions, by which their over-credulous
Inhabitants were to be wheedled out of their precious Liberties.

In the last place they laid before him the many and grand Inconveniences,
which by letting slip such an advantageous Juncture would unavoidably follows,
which they represented, as much more in number, and of vastlier greater
Consequence, than those that could possibly arrive from his pursuing it; For,
urged they, if your Majesty let go this Opportunity, It will not only be said
of you, as of the Great Hannabal, that you know how to get, but know not how to
prosecute a Victory, but the same Fate will likewise befall you; This despised
and almost oppressed Enemy will recover Strength and Courage, the Germans and
the House of Austria will come into its succor, you must quit your present
Conquests to oppose them, and your present Allies on the Continent will forsake
you; If you be beaten how disadvantageous and perhaps fatal must the event
needs be to you, and if you overcome, yet how far will you be from a complete
Conquest, or from making that advanced and assured progress toward the
erection of a new Empire; as you would do in the taking that one place, whose
Gates though they belong but to one City, would let you into the Possession of
the most valuable parts of the Earth, and furnish you with the nerves of War,
which thereby would be cut off from the rest of the World. I was not willing to
give your Lordship an account of this Consultation by piecemeals, and that has
made me so tedious, who am,

My Lord, Your Honor's to serve You.
Paris July 2. 1678. N. S.
LETTER XXXII.
Of the Confederacy entered into for the defense of Holland, of the Prince of
Orange's success against France, and of the Methods used by the French to
hinder the King of England to make Peace and join with the Dutch, by removing
my Lord Shaftsbury from being Chancellor, etc.

My Lord,
THere was hardly a Prince on the Earth worse served than our King and paid
more, no less than Three Ambassadors to make up the Embassy mentioned in my
last save one to your Lordship, and yet Two of the Three concurring with the
French designs to the ruin of Hollund first, and so consequently their own
Native Country next; so that the poor Hollanders, as your Lordship may well
remember, were forced to save their Country from the French (who pursuant to
the last advise were ready to devour it) by losing it in the Sea, in breaking
down the Dikes the last extremity and the only remedy they had left them; for
this gave them time to think of their Affairs, and this first brought the
Elector of Brandenburg, then the Emperor, and at last the King or Queen Regent
of Spain, as apprehensive of the common danger to all of them in general by the
French subduing the Dutch Provinces, to enter into a mutual League for their
defense; and by their Conjunction, The Prince of Orange who had all this time
struggled with the hardest destiny that could be, and lay neglected by his
Uncles as if they had no share either in his good or bad Fortunes, recovered
several of the Upland Towns in almost as little time as they had been taken by
the French, and like another Scipio having joined Montecucucli the Emperors
General in the dead of Winter, and so carrying the War out of his own Country
Besieged and took Bon, the Residence of the Elector of Cologn, and thereby did
cut off the Comunication between France and Holland; whereby the French were
necessitated not only to quit their Conquered Towns by heaps, but he also
opened a passage for the Imperial Forces to join the Dutch and Spanish; But
though neither the sense of his own true Interest, nor the Ties of Consanguinity
to the Prince of Orange could induce our King to come to the rescue of Holland,
which notwithstanding the Princes bravery and success was still but in a
pitiful plight, as having but newly recovered their drowned Country; yet the
French had an incurable Jealousy of him, the remembrance of the forementioned
interposition by his Embassy was still fresh in memory; And as that fell out
when they least expected any such thing, so they considered a Peace might be
struck up in as sudden and surprising a manner, and therefore they set all
their Engines on work to hinder it if possible, and in the first place knowing
that great Person who had the influence over the King to procure such an
Embassy, and might also by the same Arguments induce him to make a much hardier
step, and force him at last in spite of his own inclinations, or of French
Menaces, as well as of French Charms, not only to a Peace with Holland, but
even to a War against them; They therefore left nothing unessay'd, or stone
untur'd to get him to dispose of the Chancellor's place, though it was well known
the King himself upon a certain occasion had given his Testimony of his being
the wisest Subject he had in his Dominions, and seemed at that time to value
him accordingly: I cannot positively inform your Lordship, by which of their
Instruments it was done, for I never could find it was inserted in the Minutes;
but I have heard it generally discoursed at the French Court, that they
ploughed in this Affair with the Heifer they had formerly presented the King
withal, and that the Duke also whom they by their Emissaries iritated against
him, to whom they alleged that he had taken notice of his keeping off of late
from the Protestant Worship, and talked too liberally thereof, not without some
Expressions boding much danger to his Highness, and even levelled at putting
him by the Succession it self, gave an helping hand thereto.

But for all they had gained so considerable a point, as the removal of the
Chancellor, yet fearing still the worst, they never left off their former
apprehensions; And therefore their Ministers still continued with utmost
Application to pursue their Game, both by magnificent Promises and Offers of
Money, and some Menaces a la sourdene; but with instructions after all their
industry, if they could not succeed in obstructing the peace, yet not to fail
to elude it, which how well they succeeded in the first for a time, and when
that could not be warded off no longer, how much more fortunate success they
have had in the latter I shall endeavor to make your Lordship acquainted with
at another time, when I hope they may be no less grateful to your Honor's
gusto, from him who desires to approve himself to be,

My Lord, Your Obedient Servant
Paris October. 9. 1678.
LETTER XXXIII.
Of the Negotiating a Marriage between the Duke of York and the Princess of
Inspruck in Germany; How that Match came to be broke off; and how the French
gained their Point in Marrying the Princess of Modena to him.

My Lord,
THings continuing in the same posture I mentioned in my last to your Lordship,
between England and France, the latter having the full ascendency over our King
and Court, to keep them from the Peace with Holland, and to enter into a War in
Conjunction with the rest of the Confederates against them; and the Duke of
York happening to be a Widower, who was entirely, as they thought, in their
Interests at this time, which was the year 1673. there was an Intrigue started
up and carried on, that in all appearance was ^eady to break the Thread of all
their Contrivances, and irrecoverably to overturn all they had been so long and
with so much pains about; but another as lucky a hit interposed timely in their
Aid, which salved all their drooping Interest in our Court again sounder than
ever, though like the Beast in the Apocalypse, it seemed to have received its
deadly wound; For when a Negotiation was now not only set on foot, but in a
manner concluded, for Matching our Duke with a Princess of the Austrian Family,
an Alliance which would certainly have broke the neck of all Leagues with
France, and make England once more the Balance between those two mighty
Powers; I say, just when a Match was concluded with a Princess of the House of
Austria, and nothing seemed remaining to the accomplishing of it, but
celebrating the Espousals, and bringing over the Lady into England, to remain
the gage of a close and lasting Alliance, between the Royal Stem of England,
and that Illustrious and Potent House; and the Monsieur at biting his Nails for
spite to see his Interest there desperate and past retrieval; it most luckily
happened to him, that in that very interim the Empress died, and the Emperor
coming to want a Confort, and finding no other worthy his Choice, according to
the usu^l practice of the Austrian Families, whose Branches intermarry
frequently with one another, he retained the Lady for himself; and so defeating
our Prince of his Spouse, and putting of him in a new quest, gave the French an
opportunity to prosser him a Female, who they knew descended from a right
Intriguing Breed, and would be sure to do their Work thoroughly, and thereby not
only renew, but make sure against all Events that Alliance that has since
proved so pernicious to all Europe, and so vexatious to the one, as well as to
the other of our Princes: This Match they knew might be of great importance to
them, not only as to the promoting their Ambitious Ends in England, but in
Italy too; and if they could once ensnare the Duke into it, would as fixedly
tie him to their Interests, as it would infallibly lose him every where else,
and engage not only the Protestant Subjects of these Kingdoms, but even all the
other Powers of Christendom, as well of the Roman Communion as the Reformed, to
oppose his future Elevation, that so he might be wholly dependant upon them;
She being a Lady, not only Italian by Nation, but a Relation of the Pope, (and
in that Quality most odious to England) and also of the late Cardinal Mazarine;
and in a word, of a Prince Pensionary to the French, and an adopted Daughter of
France; which last Quality they honored her with, to render her completely
hateful to all the World, besides most liberally paying her Portion, Pentioning
the King, and greasing the Ministers to have the Parliament Prorogued, that in
the interim the Match might be huddled up with all the precipitation
imaginable, for fear upon the least delay, by contrary Solicitations from the
Austrians, or any other Potentates abroad, (or any black) and grumbling Clouds
at home, the unstable King might be over-persuaded or frighted from letting his
Brother go on with that destructive Alliance. These, my Lord, were their
Contrivances and Precautions upon this Subject; and they succeeded so well in
their Endeavors, that mauger any Reasons the King might have to the contrary,
or any Opposition made by some few then about him, that Match was concluded,
from which England may in a very great measure date the commencement of her
ensuing Grievances; and which, according to the Parliament's Prediction of it,
caused such terrible Earthquakes in the three Nations already, and God Almighty
alone knows what the dire Effects may be, and where things will terminate at
long run, though it may at the same time prove better than our fears. For after
it was once done, they cared not what Storms it produced amongst us; for if the
endeavors of an Alliance cemented with so charming a Female, unwearied in
enticements, could not allure, nor the sug^ed Professions of a constant Amity
and Protection, besides the powerful Spells of continual Supplies of Money,
engage sufficiently; yet they were confident the troubles it would cause, would
necessitate him for Self-preservation to keep close to their Interests, and to
be content perhaps for the preservation of the rest, to give them part of his
Estates, whenever it should succeed, and make them Executors of his Will; or at
least, at all Adventures, keep up such Divisions, as by the care they would
take to balance the respective Parties concerned in them, would both divert and
disable the Nation from exerting their Resentment against them to any great
purpose. These, my Lord, were the Improvements they proposed to make by this
Match, and herewith I shall conlude, who am,

My Lord, Your Lordship's very humble Servant.
Paris, Aug. 30. 1678.
LETTER XXXIV.
Of the Peace made between England and Holland, in February 1673/4. The Motives
to it, and the French Methods to elude it, by retaining the Irish still in
their Service, with our Courts connivence.

My Lord,
I Have formerly taken notice to your Lordship of the Methods and Precautions
the French used to keep our King from making a Peace with the Dutch-States; and
how they made it their business to dispossess all those, and particularly my
Lord Shaftsbury, of the King's Ear and Favor, who were concerned for His and
the Nation's Interest, by promoting such a Peace; but though they prevailed
therein, as well as in that of the Duke's Marriage with a Female of their own
choosing; yet my Lord, you know very well, they failed to stem the Tide that
broke in as a consequent upon that Vote of the Commons, October. 31. 1673. That
considering the Condition the Nation was then in, they would not take into
further consideration any Aids or Charges upon the Subject, except it did
appear the obstinacy of the Dutch should render it necessary, etc. For the
French Emissaries had taught the King and his Juncto their Lesson, to wit, to
give out that the Dutch were full of Sullenness and Obstinacy, and would come
to no honorable Terms, and therefore there was a necessity of further humbling
of them; but now the Court of England were as hasty to make up the Peace with
Holland, as e're they were to declare War against them, which was concluded by
the 9th of February, 1673/4 but though the Dutch came hereby to enjoy Peace
with us at Sea, yet they found the pernicious Effects of the Valor of the
English Troops which continued in the French Armies, and gained them several
Victories after that Peace; till upon the earnest and repeated Instances, both
of the Foreign Powers concerned, and of our own Parliament, some redress was
given to that Grievance, but never a total one; a Proclamation being obtained
for recalling our Forces from the French Service, which yet was construed not
to extend to the Irish Nation, who after that, by that foul connivence of our
King, not only continued there in Bodies as formerly, but drew over Recruits
from time to time, and were most highly cherished and caressed, as indeed were
the Irish Nation all along, with a sensible difference above the English and
Scotch, especially when a War was expected with us; they having a secret design
upon that Kingdom by one Method or other, ever since their first drawing our
King into League with them; which they did not obscurely intimate, when by way
of encouragement they would now and then say to the Irish Roman Officers among
them, as likewise to other qualified Gentlemen Travelers of that same Nation.
That the King their Master had an esteem of them above all other Nations, for
their Ant^quity, Generosity, and Invincible Con^^^ncy to their old Religion for
above a Century of Years after their Masters, the English had ab^ndoned it, and
that the Scots and the W^eish Britains, by the contagion of their Example, with
sufficient Derogation from their former unviolated Claims to Antiquity and
unconquered Liberty, had done the like; and would assure them from him. That
the time would come when he would show them marks of his Esteem, by conferring
the Hereditary Guard of his own, and his Successor's Persons on their Nation,
instead of the Scots, who were now departed from their Interests; and that as a
Catholic Prince, and the Guarantee of their Treaty with King Charles, when in
Banishment, for restoring to them their Estates whenever he should be restored,
he would see them righted, and would one day free them from the Tyranny of the
English Nation.

But notwithstanding all underhand Compliance of our Court with that of France,
as our Peace with Holland had already displeased them, This recalling of our
Troops, as partially executed as it was, quite put them out of humor; so that
though they durst not show their Resentments too far, for fear of increasing
the Evil they fretted at; yet they did what they could by allurements to
debauch, and by hard Usage, and all imaginable Discouragements, both to deter
as many as they could of our Soldiers from paying Obedience to the said
Proclamation, and to disable those who were fixedly bent to return, from being
serviceable to their King and Country. Among the rest, mighty Advantages were
offered to my Lord Douglas, afterward Earl of Dunbarton, to entice him to
stay; and some time after he was gone, upon hearing he had no Preferment under
his own King, by reason of the severity of our Laws against Men of his
Persuasion, there were very great Rewards proposed to those they thought had
any influence over him, to persuade him to return, and particularly to my self,
in case I could find any who could so far prevail over him; but all in vain;
yet most of the Irish remained to the last, and were very serviceable at the
brisk Action of Gyrone, and on some other Occasions; and after the fear of the
War with us was blown over by the Tempest raised among our selves, whilst we
blinded our Parliament and People by seeming to observe exactly the Articles of
Neutrality agreed upon between our King and them, they for a long time, and
even till now, have refused to receive any English and Scotch Officers and
Soldiers to their Service; though contrary to their Allegiance to their King and
Country, several of them, and some of them Romans of tried Affection, proffered
themselves, yet still as many Irish as presented themselves, were readily
entertained.

And thus, My Lord, Though these subtle Politicians missed of their first point
in hindering our Peace with Holland, they succeeded but too well in the second,
through our Court's weakness and base Prevarication, which was eluding it, by
corrupting our Neutrality, with such a partiality on their side, that it was an
Honeycomb to them, whilst it was but a Sponge of Gall and Vinegar to the
Confederates; but foreseeing that in time this juggling conduct of our King
would make all Europe murmur, and render his Friendship or Mediation suspicious
every where; That it would make him odious to his People, and blow into a Flame
those old jealousies that already began to rekindle, and afford ample matter
for the Emissaries of the Confederates to work upon in our Nations, and
consequently to actuate our People so violently to a League with the said
Allies against them, that it would be impossible for the King, with Safety, to
resist them; (for of his good Will to them, by this time they were pretty
confident) they therefore were careful to make a timely Provision against an
inconvenience so much dreaded by them, and to endeavor to make use of those
very Jealousies, Fears, and Animosities, whose Effects they apprehended,
against their Adversaries, by dexterously catching them up, like Fireworks
before they brake, and returning them back upon our selves; and this difficult
sort of Game they managed by several Stratagems, of which I have neither room
nor opportunity to advertise your Lordship at present, but must defer it to a
proper season, and remain, as I truly am,

My Lord, Your very humble Servant.
Paris, July 12. 1678. N. S.
LETTER XXXV.
Of the Marquess de Ruvigni, a French Protestant, his being sent Ambassador
into England; and what the Politics of France were therein.

My Lord,
I Do not question but your Lordship does remember the first time of the
Marquess de Ruvigny's being sent Envoy from this Court into England, which was
in the Year 1669. and which, I think, I have in one of my Letters hinted
already; That he was a Person very capable for such an Employment, none can
doubt that knew him; but that ever he was chosen by this Court purely for his
Capacity, is not to be admitted of. You know, my Lord, the Triple League stuck
then close in the French King's stomach, and that the danger Religion was in,
as well as Property, from the progress of the French Arms before in the
Netherlands, contributed very much to the cementing of such an Alliance, which
this Court were laboring tooth and nail to break to pieces, and more
especially to get the King of England out of it; and to that end, Monsieur
Ruvigny's Religion, he being a Protestant, highly recommended him: How well he
discharged his Commission then, I need not recount to your Lordship, the Event
has sufficiently discovered it to England, as well as to Holland's sorrow, and
to the no small regret of some of those of his own Religion and Fraternity in
France. It was much about Six years after, that the same Marquess was entrusted
with another Negotiation at the English Court, to no less pernicious an end
than the former, and I fear at long run with worse effects: They had, my Lord,
besides the Instruments I have formerly mentioned, for some time before this,
employed several of their own Hugonots in England, for the carrying their
Intrigues more effectually on among our Protestants, which Hugonots have been
the more forward to please and obey the Instructions of their Prince and his
Ministers, in that they have believed them very compatible with their own
particular Interests; wherefore they have done all they could to contribute to
the Elevation of the Presbyterian Government in our Nation, which, because the
same with their own, they have naturally had some desire to see established in
a Kingdom so able to protect them, and which had hitherto been the great
impediment to their extirpation in France. But to return from this Digression,
for which I beg your Lordship's pardon, to the Marquess de Ruvigny, his
Instructions were to endeavor to possess the Protestants in general in our
Nation, which were now, my Lord, full of fears of some Secret Designs a brewing
between the two Kings, in prejudice to their Religion and Civil Rights too,
that they needed not to be so much concerned at Appearances; that it was far
enough from the thoughts of his Master to make their King great to his Subjects
prejudice; and that he was not so zealous for the Roman Religion as they might
imagine, whereof he was to urge several instances and to endeavor to throw off
all the odium from him upon the Pope and the Court of Rome, and thereby make
them level all their Fears, Jealousies, and odious Reflections that way; to the
end, that by the Royal Church-Party, who had the King's ear, they might still
secure him further in their Interests, and have their helping-hand to carry on
those Points they aimed at that way, viz. the hindering the Princesses matching
with the Prince of Orange, and the Offensive Alliance so much feared then and
now with the Confederates, etc. But this was but one Party of the Protestants;
his Instructions also were to make a particular Interest among the Dissenters,
and such as inclined to them at the same time, that in case they were defeated
in the one, and saw no likelihood of staving off the other, they might have
them ready prepared to enter the lists against the former; and when War was
ready to be declared against France, to push them on, if possible, to raise a
Civil Combustion at home, and to insinuate into them; That the King, his
Master, was willing privately to assist them as his Predecessor had done theirs
in the late Civil Wars upon occasion, etc. in which sort of Negotiation the
Marquis was effectually enough seconded by his Countrymen- Hugonots then in
England, and particularly by a man of singular Parts and Learning, and
exceedingly well versed in Intriegue, named Monsieur -- but on the contrary, in
case they should have been able by the Royal Party to have been strong and
successful enough to gain the two said Points, and hinder both the Match and
the War, which was their business, and is still in part, to oppose; they had
Orders to have the same Dissenting Party still ready, when King Lewis, and his
Cousins of England, should have had that part of their ends of the Conforming
Party, to make use of them against them, if they would not humor them so far
as to suffer themselves to be carried quite back to Rome.

And because all our Protestants, however differently denominated, should take
no umbrage at any of this Court's Proceedings, they thought fit once more, to
let their Sun, as they so often term him, to cast some warm beams on the
Hugonot Party at home, and to entertain them awhile with some Cour^ly Smiles,
whereby they have designed to amuse our people, and at the same time make their
own Protestants to be their Instruments to carry on the Divisions of those,
who, while united, are their only Protectors; for hitherto, while they have had
War with the Confederates, and chiefly with Holland, and are in fear of one
with England, it being yet out of their power to destroy these people, they
have thought it their interest not to exasperate them, whereby they may be
tempted to run over to the Enemy; but rather for the present to court them, and
make them serviceable unto them, by working in the very Mines which in all
human probability are designed to blow them up withal; I will not intrude --
When Captain E -- returns, I should take it as a singular favor to receive a
line from your Lordship, and particularly your. Sentiments of our Home-affairs,
by him, whom I shall expect with utmost impatience, who am,

My Lord, Your Lordship's most Humble Servant.
Paris, July 20. 1678.
LETTER XXXVI.
Of Prince Lobkowitz's being disgraced by the Emperor for Corresponding with
the French about the Year 1674.

My Lord,
YOUR Lordship cannot be ignorant, that during this Intrieguing in England, and
Canvassing of Designs against our King and Kingdom, the War went on on this
side with various success; but I find England is not the only Country that has
been bubbled by the French Emissaries, and had its Secrets betrayed; I cannot
tell any one part of the Confederates that have been exempted; but Germany more
particularly has suffered in this kind variously, but in nothing so remarkably
as in the business of Prince Lobkowitz's being disgraced some time since by the
Emperor, and which has made so much noise in the World, that your Lordship
could not but hear of it: That he corresponded with this Court, there is
nothing more certain; though when the business was once winded, their
Emissaries thought it advisable to be the first Rumorers of it, but related
the same with Particulars so extraordinary, that were scarce credible, that
thereby they might turn the whole at length into a ridicule: But the way of
their Correspondence with the said Prince, and others in the Empire, was so
intricate to be fathomed, that it is no wonder the matter has been as it were
dubious in the World to this day; for little did the Counselors of State, and
other Princes and Grandees at the Court of Vienna think, that those very Jews
who sold them Jewels, Pearl, and other rich Movables, were wont at the same
time to bring and carry Letters to the forementioned Prince Lohkowitz, and
other vile Traitors to the Emperor and Empire; and though these sort of Vermin
have been banished the Emperor's Territories and Dominions, yet for filthy
Lucre-sake, to which they are addicted above any Nation or People under Heaven;
and to serve the French, whom above any other they value for the Reasons I have
formerly given your Lordship upon another occasion, They make no scruple of
assuming those Shapes which they outwardly would most seem to abhor, and whose
Principles they have disbeliev'd above these Sixteen hundred years, I mean
Christians, and to this day drive on the old trade.

But our private minutes relating to this Country, and which I have had the
opportunity lately a little to inspect, tell us positively, That at least two
of the Emperor's own Confessors of the Iesuitical Order, the much more
dangerous Traitors than any other could be, were guilty of the same Crime. The
next year after the Disgrace of this Prince, happened that memorable Success
the Emperor's Forces had upon the Rhine against the French; but it is no less
memorable after such a signal Victory against the Mareshal de Crequi, etc. that
Montecuculi, the Imperial General, should, after he had besieged Sabern, and
was in a fair way to carry the Place, so suddenly rise from before it, re-pass
the Rhine with his whole Army, and leave the French, after all, wholly in
possession of Alsatia, where he might easily have Wintered his whole Army: The
World were then, and have ever since been occasionally very busy about the
reason of this Action, which is very unaccountable to this very day; It was
whispered then, that Montecuculi was so far from offering to do this of
himself, that he had express orders from the Emperor, or at leastwise from
Vienna, to do it, and which he obeyed with a great deal of reluctance and
ill will; but little have the World thought that it was chiefly the influence
which Father la Chaise had over the Emperor's Confessor, that produced those
positive, though most noxious Orders; so far the Minutes mention that Affair,
and no farther. I would not have troubled your Lordship with these Foreign
Affairs, had I been supplied with any that was domestic; though, I hope, they
are not so unacceptable, but that you will freely pardon him who is desirous to
serve and honor you to the utmost of my power, and remain,

My Lord, Your humble Servant.
Paris, June 20. 1678. N. St.
LETTER XXXVII.
Of the French Ambassador's, the Marshall d'Estrades, and Monsieur Colbert's
Instructions, to attack Sir William Temple, and Pensioner Fagell, to engage the
Prince of Orange into the French Interests, and to promote the Peace.

My Lord,
THis Court have left no Stone unturned, neither in England nor Holland, in
order to the winning of the Prince of Orange over to their Interests; but they
have met with more constancy, in him than could be expected from a young Prince
of his years, which has plainly manifested him to be an Inheritor as well of
the Virtues, as of the Fortune of his great Ancestors; and when they found
there was nothing to be done with him directly by any of their own Emissaries,
they resolved to attack him in the most sensible part, by the Ministry of two
persons whom they knew he as much valued as any other on this side, and they
were the English Ambassador Sir William Temple, and Monsieur Fagell Pensionary
of Holland. Their Agents, in this hopeful business, were Monsieur Colbert, and
the Marshall d'Es^rades, their Plenipotentiaries for the Treaty of Nimeguen,
who quickly began their attack upon Sir William, according to the Instructions
I find they had given them.

I. To insinuate slily, what a value the French King their Master had for his
Person and Character; and that therefore during the course of the Negotiation
they were to enter upon, they had Orders to make their application to him; That
they knew how much he was in the confidence of the King his Master, and of his
chief Ministers, and therefore how filly qualified he was to put the
finishing-stroke to a Treaty he had had the greatest hand to set on foot, and
of which he must needs reap all the Glory; That he might reckon very much upon
the facility of the King their Master in that weighty Affair, but yet so far
still as to have a just regard had to the great Successes of his Arms during
the War.

II. They were to make a Mien of their being fully possessed of the States great
forwardness to strike up a Peace, which their Allies must comply with, though
they might for a time retard it; That therefore the only way they could see for
to give Europe Tranquillity, was for the Prince of Orange to interpose his
Authority, which was so great with all the Allies, that they were very well
satisfied in their willingness to agree to whatever terms he should be resolved
on, in proposing the Peace: That therefore in order to bring that grand affair
to an happy and sudden issue, it was their Opinion, there was no other or
better way for it, than for his Highness first privately to agree with France
upon the Conditions, and what each Party's Proposition should be; and when that
was once done, afterterwards, in the course of the Treaty, which was to be
supposed, could not spin out to any great length of time, then to draw all
matters by concert together to the scope agreed upon between them.

III. To seem very confident this Method would do; but that if it should so
happen that the unreasonable pretenses of the Allies should obstruct or delay a
General Peace, that then the Prince might make use of the usual Temper of the
States to bring it to a sudden issue, and make a separate Peace; that if the
Prince pursued this method, it would be in his power to do great things for
himself and his Family, for which they were to produce as many instances as
they could of parallel cases; And that as for what concerned the Prince's own
personal Advantages and Interests, the King their Master had given them full
power to assure him, That he might set down his own Conditions, and they should
be accepted.

IV. That though they had many others to, make these Overtures to his Highness,
some whereof they were also darkly to intimate, yet that they were to pursue
their Master's Orders, which was to apply themselves to none but to him, if he
thought fit to charge himself with it; That they were very sensible of the
Credit and Confidence he was in with his Highness, and how much deference he
had to his Judgment in what concerned the public Interests of the Allies at
that time, as well as his own; and that if he would effectually espouse that
Affai^, he might reckon upon what he pleased himself from the Generosity of the
King their Master, whose constant Character it was, never to let the least
Merit go unrewarded.

But if it should so fall out, that Sir William proved stiff in the matter, as
it seems he did by the sequel, they were to turh the same Batteries upon
Pensioner Fagel, with a variation of Phrase, and Complement agreeable to the
Person and Circumstances, and more especially to try what the force of the
French Pistols might effect that way; And if so be matters were carried so far
as that the Prince was found to give any ear to it, then he was to be rounded
briskly what mighty things the French King would do for him in relation to his
future Greatness both in England and Holland; That for his Principality of
Orange, he should have it restored to him again, or such a compensation nigher
Home, as he would reckon on himself; as also for his Lands in Burgundy, and any
other Losses, Damages, etc. Nay, they were ordered to offer him a very large
annual Pension, if he would have complied: But half these things were never
actually Proposed, because the said two Ministers, and the Prince himself more
than any, were as so many (...), for they would not so much (...) hearken to
the Voice of those dangerous Charmers; A rare Instance, My Lord, to withstand
such great Temptations, and not to be paralleled perhaps in any other young
Prince of our Age, as it was indeed also in the two Ministers, many of which
England, at this time, is not over-fruitful of; I wish it were, our Affairs
would have been in a better posture than I hear they are, and I dread much
worse to come. I pray God avert it, and preserve your Lordship from all
Dangers, which shall ever be upon the Heart of,

My Lord, Your Lordship's Most Humble and Most Obedient Servant.
Paris, October. 19. 1678.
LETTER XXXVIII.
A Summary of the French Methods to get the Dauphin made King of the Romans.

My Lord,
PErhaps since all the noise of the Western World, at this time is the Affairs
of Hungary, between the Turks and Imperialists, the particulars whereof I need
not trouble your Lordship with; it will not be amiss to look a little back, and
remark what influence this Court has had upon this War, and what Designs they
have long since hatched under the Covert, not only of this, but all the other
Broils they have engaged Germany in; I find by Patin's Letters so far back as
1671. that it was a matter then not questioned, but that there had been Designs
concerted to have the Dauphin created King of the Romans, which made me
endeavor after a more particular information in that Intriegue, which at last
I have found to be inserted in this manner, according to the distinct Heads
that follow.

I. All the Designs which they had concerted in the Wars between England and
Holland, for the weakening and destroying them, if possible, as I have already
given your Lordship a particular Account of, first terminated in that ultimate
end, Of advancing the Dauphin as beforementioned.

II. The former Wars against the Confederates was attempted for the same Ends
in a great measure, all their Designs against the Spanish Monarchy having a
tendency that way.

III. Their unspeakable Pretensions in the Palatinate, on the behalf of Madam,
the present Duchess of Orleans.

IV. All their open and secret Practices in Hungary, from Archduke Joseph's
being made King there; and by making Overtures to another King underhand, John
Sobieski by name, to oppose the Emperor therein, promising their utmost
Interest to get that Crown and Country conferred on him and his Posterity;
rightly judging, that if the Archduke were balked in Hungary, it was not
likely he should prevail in Germany.

5. They have now for the same end, their Emissaries in Turkey, being partly
Jews, and partly Jesuits, who incited the Turks to begin the War, and to push
it on even to the Capital of the Empire; and did at the same time, by other
Agents, both in Poland, and at Venice, all they could, that they might hinder
those Countries to come into the Confederacy against them, as thinking
themselves Cock-sure, that if Vienna had once been taken, the German Princes
would have been in such a Consternation, that as the only remedy, they would
have called in the French Power to oppose against such a dreadful inundation of
Infidels as would thence have followed; and for which they could have done no
less than to have declared the Dauphin King of the Romans, and have made the
French King Guardian and Protector in the interim, of the Emperor and Empire,
especially having the Electors of Cologne, Mentz, and Triers, either inclined
for, or overawed by them, and it being easy in that juncture to have forced
the rest: This, my Lord, is the substance of what I have found they have
projected upon this Subject from time to time, as the circumstances of Affairs
gave way and occasion and nothing more certain than that they have had it all
along in their view, to advance the Dauphin to that Dignity, which they have
hitherto failed in, and I hope ever shall. I did not think to have entered upon
this subject, which is also somewhat remote from the Affairs of our own
Country, but that the sight of the forementioned Author excited my curiosity,
and the fondness of the discovery made me also fond to communicate the same to
your Lordship, though perhaps no very grateful part, which yet I trust your
goodness will pardon, in him, who is,

My Lord, Your very humble, and obedient Servant.
Paris, Jan. 14. 1684. N. S.
LETTER XXXIX.
Of Don John of Austria's being hindered to take upon him the Administration of
the Spanish Affairs in the year 1676.

My Lord,
It Is not long since I have given your Lordship an account of the advances made
by this Court toward a Peace; but you know, since that, the War went on with
various successes; and perhaps your Lordship has heard of the Business of Don
John in Spain, How he was prevented from having the Administration of the
Affairs of that Country, by a Letter under the King of Spain's Hand, when he
was just going to embark for the relief of Messina; there was at that time an
expectation in the Confederates of mighty things to be performed by him to
their advantage, and the preventing him from a share in the Government, was
esteemed generally to be a French Trick, and so it was; but I believe the
Confederates were guilty of a grand mistake in their expectation of him; for
the French Memoirs say, Don John was perfectly their Creature, and that it was
the violent hatred of the Queen Mother of Spain, as well as a jealousy to have
her own Power invaded, that put him beside the Administration; That it was
through his means the Matching of the King of Spain with the Emperor's Daughter
was put by, and that with the Duke of Orleans's Daughter effected; and that he
was going to act mighty things for the French Interest, for which he had large
Promises made him of their powerful and effectual Assistance to obtain the
Crown of Spain for himself, after the Decease of the present King, upon
condition he should quit the Spanish Dominions in the Indies, Low Countries,
and Italy, to the Crown of France; for the performance of which, they had
sufficient Assurances from him.

I am further to observe to your Lordship from the said Minutes, That they have
attributed his Death to a Dose of Poison administered by the order and
particular prescription of the Queen Mother, and that out of a fear she had he
would one day Poison the King her Son; and because he had against her Will,
been the instrument to make the French Match. They further add, how true the
one or the other, I will not take upon me to determine, That the Queen Mother's
hatred to Don John was inveterate; that she had attempted once before to have
Stabbed him, and at another time to Pistol him: As for the forementioned Letter
from the King of Spain, to stop the Don's passage for Messina, they say it was
sent by the Instigation of the Duke de Medina Celi, then in the French Faction,
with an intent to make him miss that stroke, and secure him in their Interests,
by letting him know, that it was by their Intreague he was admitted to Court. I
could further enlarge upon this subject, did I judge it pertinent or agreeable
to your Lordship's humor, as I am afraid it is not; and therefore I remain,

My Lord, Your Lordship's most humble! and devoted Servant.
Paris, July 2, 1679. N. S.
LETTER XL.
Of General Instructions given to the French Agents in England, to carry on the
French Designs upon the Duke of York's Second Marriage.

My Lord,
Though the French Agents in England have had address enough to get the Match
with the Duke effected according to their Desires; yet foreseeing that even
this point could not elude the Peace between England and Holland, they
endeavored to make the best advantage they could, by making a Counterpoise of
it to the said Peace, and to a War we might afterward intend against them; as
having thereby linked the Duke faster to them than ever, and laid a sure
foundation for such Distractions, both in Church and State, as would give them
large opportunity, if not to compass all the Designs they had upon us, yet at
least to secure themselves from any great inconveniency from us; They were not
ignorant what good effects several previous Intreagues of theirs had to our
disadvantage; they saw plainly the second Dutch War had much more impoverished
us than the First; and the ill conduct of it much more sunk the King's
Reputation, besides the Divisions in the Fleet, and the Jealousies and Factions
in the Parliament, and among the People, about the Duke's Religion, produced
him great disgusts every day; That the shutting up of the Exchequer had ruined
his Credit; and his Majesty in proclaiming Liberty of Conscience by Virtue of
his own Prerogative, and his levity afterward in flinching from it so
unexpectedly, had so disobliged and wounded with Jealousy the Church of
England, and all Patriots in Parliament tender of their Privileges, who held
the Peoples Purse-strings on the one side, and so incensed with a fresh
Animosity the baffled Dissenters on the other; that being overwhelmed with
Debts, opposed by dangerous and powerful Factions, and yet Bankrupt both of
Money and Credit too; they fairly concluded he could have no other recourse but
to them; which odious remedy, they supposed, would but more and more heighten
the mutual Jealousies, and widen the Breaches, till they grew large enough for
them to enter by at long-run upon some part of the English Monarchy, so famous
hitherto for checking theirs above any other in Europe, since the Decadency of
the Western Empire, from rising to the like exorbitant greatness: And now this
more than Magical Dose, these Quacks in Policy had given us, began to work
every day more and more violently, and with Symptoms more visible, till almost
mortal Convulsions followed; The ablest Statesman we had at the Helm, the Earl
of Shaftsbury, was discarded for his vehemence in opposing the said so
pernicious Match, (of which I may give your Lordship an account another time)
and others of the same Sentiments discountenanced; which by the French Agency,
begat the Prorogation of the Parliament, dangerous Factions and pernicious
Fractions even among the most zealous Assertors of Monarchy, and best affected
Friends to the Royal Family; so that now imagining this Master-experiment of
theirs had made way for them to execute what Projects they pleased on our Court
and People for the future, to lose no advantage for want of Managers, they
began to put their Designs in form, which before lay somewhat perplexed and out
of order; to which end they sent over their Instructions to some Domestic
Agents, whom they had chosen and placed on purpose about the New Duchess, and
to their other assisting Ministers and Emissaries, as they thought in that
disposition of both Head (...) Body, of both Princes and People (...) could not
but succeed, and produce in due time, the full effects by their
Mischief-Brooding, and Ambitious Consultations: And their Instructions in
substance were as follows.

They were now to make actual use of the several Parties they had, as I have
hinted already, but as yet prepared to make Tools of; and to this purpose they
were to influence them partly by French Jesuited Instruments, partly by French
Hugonot Agents, and of our own Nation, their Instruments were to be.

I. Atheists and loose principled Men, who yet could act rarely well the
Zealots for that Religion or Cause which they were to Espouse.

II. Such Persons as they found to be conceited of their Parts, and of
Mercenary Spirits.

III. Hotspurs for Prerogative, and the Church of England.

IV. The fiercest Spirits of the other Factions.

V. Some Bigots of the Roman Communion that were English, and particularly
those that had been bred up, or had traveled in their Dominions, and were well
Jesuited.

VI. The leading Irish Papists in particular.

VII. Men, Ambitious of Greatness, or Idolizers of Money, and that chiefly in
Scotland.

VIII. Men disgustful or disabliged.

IX. Men of desperate Fortunes and lost Reputations.

Of all these they were with great confidence to employ and highly to oblige
and flatter some, while they were for their turn, and disoblige others, and
then when they had done with them, vice versa, to disoblige and cast off those
whom they had obliged and seemed to have trusted; and court, oblige, and
receive others who were before disobliged, knowing how to work their Ends by
those they disobliged as well as by those obliged; But yet none of these,
except some of the first sort, were to know the whole of their Designs, nor be
informed of any thing that looked black or villainous, or seemed too directly to
aim at the detriment or destruction of their Country or Religion, till such
time as they had a long trial of their Tempers, and found them fit for such
Attempts, or that they had got them first into such a Correspondence, which,
though in the ultimate intention was not malicious, but only an effect of zeal to
their several Parties, yet would, if discovered, be construed reasonable, and
so keep them under an hank to them; and then they were to put them on such
Barbarities and Villainies as they thought necessary for their purpose; which if
they then refused, their Business was to abandon them, and to employ such
Instruments as were as Bankrupt of Religion and Conscience as of Fortune, and
would be desperately determined to venture at any thing for Money; and by these
they were to be pretended to be detected as Traitors, and prosecuted as guilty
of the Designs which they have been only tempted to, and so were to serve all
People whom they once got within their Toil, as occasions and their Interests
did require. But I see I have already past over the just bounds of a Letter,
and shall therefore only subscribe my self,

My Lord, Your Lordship's most devoted Servant
Paris, May 5. 1681. N. S.
LETTER XLI.
Containing the Practices of the French Agents, for the amusement of Foreign
Catholics, while they carried on their Designs against England.

My Lord,
IT would be very strange to think, that the Ministers of this Court, who have
had a hand almost in every thing relating to our Nation, should not be
concerned in the affair of the Popish Plot; but it is so far otherwise, that
they have been the chief managers and starters of many things which have since
come to light; Nay, I am bold to say, That the very actions and intentions of
almost all the Instruments of the English Nation, and even of some of the
French themselves, were very wide, though villainous enough, from those of the
Machiavillian Offspring which set them on work. My Lord, you have heard of
Father St. Germain, and perhaps of Father Columbiere too, who succeeded him in
England; these were the Persons, who together with their other assisting
Emissaries, disposed of Things and Parties in our Nation to favor their
Designs in reference to the said Conspiracy, and whose Instructions from Father
La Chaise, were to take upon them to inform and press upon the Creatures of the
Pope, and Ministers and Creatures of other Princes of the Roman Communion, but
of a different Interest from their Master's the French King; That for their
parts, they were only actuated by a Zeal for the propagation of the Catholic
Religion, and the reunion in time of so famous a Monarchy to the Church by
gentle and peaceable ways and means, and chiefly for the Conversion of our two
Princes so nearly Related to their King in Blood, and for whom he had so much
Esteem and Affection; and that their Master being their nearest Neighbor, and
seated most conveniently to assist them on occasion, would with his Purse
promote all he could the quiet Conversion of all sorts of People, that could be
drawn in by the Godly Eloquence of their Missionaries, or by the more powerful
language of Pensions with some, and was heartily willing to supply our Princes
with what was needful, or might be so, to maintain themselves against any
Attempts that might be made against them, upon the jealousy or discovery of
any such design, and succor them by a sufficient Military Force too, in case
they were likely to be reduced to Extremity by an open Rebellion of their
stubborn and discontented Subjects on that account; without once pretending to
so idle and impracticable a design, as some of them whom they spoke to were
tutored to call it, as by that means to go about to make the Crown of England
seudatory to that of France, or to strengthen himself with the additional power
of England, with intent to encroach afterward upon the Rites and Prerogatives
of the Holy See, or give Umbrage to other Temporal Enemies of that Communion,
or to draw any other advantage to the French from the Alliance of the English
Princes, than to be able in the quality of Most Christian King, and first Son
of the Church, to promote the growth of the Holy Catholic Religion in their
Realms and Dominions, and make use of their Mediation and Friendship, to
balance in some measure the present force of so formidable a Confederacy, as
was lately formed against him. That it was a thing ridiculous to think, or once
as much as imagine, that whilst he was in actual War with so many considerable
Powers at that time, he could be so simple as to attempt England by force; or
if he were out of War with them, that he could as much as offer at so
considerable an Enterprise upon any pretense whatsoever, without allarming
them, or expecting to be opposed Vigorously by them, as well as by the other
Protestent Powers of Europe; or that he could be thought to be so rash as to
venture on such a difficult Expedition, whilst he foresaw so powerful an
Opposition.

But that indeed upon the happy conclusion of a general and lasting Peace among
the Catholic Princes, he would most willingly and readily join and concur in
any holy League with them, and contribute his full proportion of Forces with
theirs, to so glorious and laudable a Work, as would be the restoration of the
Kings of England to their pristine Power and Majesty, and the Holy See to its
former just Authority and Jurisdiction in these famous Islands; which for so
many former Ages had made so considerable and profitable a Province of the
Roman Church; and therefore they were to desire and press them, not to let any
particular Interests which they had against their Master in worldly and secular
Concerns, prevail with them to go about to mis-interpret or any ways obstruct
their Conversion of Souls, which could be of no manner of prejudice to them in
those other respects; but rather readily to concur with their Endeavors in so
pious and charitable a Work, wherein they ought wholly to lay aside all
distinction of Nations or Interests, and Cooperate as Members of one Body, and
Subjects of one universal Prince Christ Jesus, and his Vice-gerent-General the
Pope. With which Arguments and sly Suggestions, they were to wheedle all
Foreigners to at least a careless security and unconcernedness about the
Affairs of England, whilst they played their pranks to destroy both our
Religion and Government, and make us an Appennage of the Gallican Church and
Crown; which I pray God, I may never live to see, nor my Country feel; and
shall ever do so whilst I am, as I am resolved always to be,

My Lord, Your Lordship's Most Humble, and Most Devoted Servant.
Paris Mar. 11. 1682.
LETTER XLII.
The Arguments of the French Emisaries, for the Amusement of some of the Native
Papists of England, etc. That their designs in regard to the Popish Plot, might
not be prevented.

My Lord,
HOw far the Subject Matter of my last to your Lordship has relished your
Palate, I am altogether ignorant, but adventuring for once to presume its
having proved grateful, I have in this, as it were, subjoyned those
Instructions the French Agents have received for the amusement of the Native
Papists of England, in order to the carrying on of their Designs under the
covert of the Popish Plot, against our Native Country; To them therefore they
were to use in substance the same pretenses as to the other, but with some
further additions, as, That the King and the Duke of York, were both certainly
gained over to the Church of Rome; That the most Leading-Men of the Kingdom,
and the Men of most Power and Interest both among the Clergy and Gentry of the
Church of England, were Popishly inclined, and would without all doubt, come
galloping over tantivy to the Church of Rome, when it should be a proper time
for the King to declare himself upon that Head; as being well convinced, that
Monarchy and Prelacy had no other way to defend themselves against the restless
and violent practices and efforts of the Sectaries and Republicans, and others
their Adherents in the Kingdom, but by seasonably re-uniting with the Roman
Catholic Party, from their unjustifiable Separation and Schism, from whence
innumerable, incurable and endless Divisions, Distractions and Factions, had
proceeded. That for their comfort and support, it was now much otherwise than
in the late Civil Wars against King Charles I. That the present King of France
being in a condition to give their now Sovereign King Charles the Second, a
most powerful and numerons Assistance; and being a most Generous Prince, and
withal most cordially and well-affected to their King as well as to their
Cause; there was no manner of question to be made, but he would effectually do
it, without any by-ends of his own, as soon as a general Peace should give
leave, by which time things would be ripe in the Kingdom, to favor his good
Intentions to go on with the Conversion of our Nations; yea, and would take
care to provide a sufficient Body of Troops for the abetting of so hopeful a
Work, in case there should be any such need of Force, but that it was
reasonably to be supposed there would need none: For that by the help of safer
Methods and of Money, which that great and zealous Prince would not let them
want for so good a Work, the number of the Roman Catholics must needs be so
mightily increased in a few Years, that the King might venture to declare
himself in their favor; and then by the voluntary return of the Church of
England to Rome, their Mother Church, and by the very dread of the formidable
Power of Lewis the Great, who was known to be a sure and fast Friend to our two
Royal Brothers, the other dissenting Factions would be so overpowered with the
number of their Opponents, and so terrified at their Strength, that if it had
not the good effect to work them up into a compliance, it would at least into
such a tameness, that they would neither be able to hinder, nor have the
rashness to oppose what Changes and Innovations the King should afterward have
a mind to make in Church or State, and make them Triumphant in England. And
thus they were to lead them on till they had noosed them fast in a
Correspondence with them; but not a word was to be told them (till they had
first sounded them whether they were fit to hear it) of any design they had to
subject England, or enslave the rest of Europe to French Tyranny, or of the
Murder of King or Duke, or both, in case they found them not pliable enough to
their Instigations, or that their abominable Ends could be compassed no other
ways; to which, if they would not be compliant, they were then by those Tools
to have some of their Correspondence with them discovered, and have them
accused as if they had been really guilty of what they were only tempted to:
And so by this means all the considerable Men of them, besides some Rascals to
make Tools of, were to be drawn into a close Correspondence with France, and
beaten quite off from any application to Rome, or correspondence with the House
of Austria; sliely insinuating, that France was the only Power in Christendom
that could preserve or support them. But the full design they had upon the
Nation (as before hinted) was a Secret imparted but to a very few; nay, it was
not as much as communicated to the Jesuits of the two British Nations, but kept
almost to the last, as an Arcanum among such of them as were Native French,
except only two or three Irish Fathers, and some very few more of that same
Nation, whom they thought averse enough to the English Name and Nation, to be
heartily true and constant to any Foreign Interest and Power capable to support
and effectually to back them in the bloodiest and blackest Contrivances against
their detested Conquerors: for rather than fail, to such horrid Tragedies they
were determined by some means or other to proceed, if they could no otherwise
effect their wicked Purposes, and could have found a way to fix the Crime, as
they had projected, on some other Party and Nation. My Lord, I have been
tedious, but could not avoid it; I design without a Countermand to transmit to
Your Lordship in my next the applications made to the Protestant Party upon the
same Head; and in the mean time remain,

My Lord, Your Humble Servant.
Paris, Mar. 17. 1682. N. S.
LETTER XLIII.
Of the French Artifices to amuse the Protestants of the Church of England,
while they carried on their Designs.

My Lord,
PUrsuant to my Resolutions in the close of my last Letter, without I received
a Countermand from your Lordship, which I have not, I am to acquaint you, what
this Court's Maxims were, and what Methods they went upon, either to make the
Protestants of the Church of England, helpful to their Designs, or at least to
do them no disservice, and be no obstruction to them therein. To the Clergy
therefore and Gentry of the forementioned Church, whom they imagined there was
any likelihood to pervert, they were to allege most of the same things as
before, as Arguments to persuade and induce them to return to the Bosom of
their Church, and would argue much from the agreement in many things of both
Religons; and were Instructed, sometimes not only first to insinuate and then
affirm the King was actually Perverted; but were moreover impudently to assert,
That such and such Bishops, such and such Eminent Doctors, such and such Peers
of the Realm, and such and such remarkable Gentlemen, for Interests, Estates,
and exquisice Parts, etc. were to their knowledge, certainly and infallibly so
too, though at present but covertly; and, That a greater part of their Church
(whatever they might suggest with themselves to the contrary) than they were
aware of, or was easily indeed to be imagined, were of the same Sentiments; but
that they were under a restraint, and durst not declare themselves to be such,
for fear of the Mobile, and of the Presbyterians, other Sectaries and
Republican Parties, which like so many evil Spirits, presided over those Savage
kind of Animals, and stirred them as they pleased themselves, against their
Superiors.

But to those, My Lord, whom they found to be of the more inflexible sort, they
were instructed to make use of great Flatteries and Complements, and to
acquaint them, that they had a great deal of reason to love the Roman
Catholics, as the Roman Catholics had to do so by them; for that they had had
for a long time the same Common Enemies; had suffered much with them conjointly
for the same Royal Cause in the late Rebellions; that their Adversaries were
numerous enough to require their united Power and Strength against them; and
that their subtilty was no less to be dreaded by them, whose effects could not
be warded off without such a double Force; that there was much more danger to
the Church and State of England, and to the Monarchical Government, now from
the Sectaries, than from their Church; for it was plain to any one that was but
willing to see, That it was now no more the Roman Catholics Interest, since
they were out of all hopes of being the predominant Religion in the Kingdom, to
act against the Church or State of England, under whom they had such mild
Treatment, but much rather to join and fall in with them against the Sectaries
and Common-wealth's-men, under whom they could never expect any thing but
utmost Rigor and Cruelty; That it being impossible for them alone to support
and maintain themselves in England against so great a number of Sectaries, as
were with the greatest inveteracy imaginable animated against them, without the
Protection of the Church of England, and the Monarchy, though but by way of
Connivence; It was therefore so much their Concern and real Interest, to Pray
for and endeavor after the Prosperity of both Parties, though different in
Persuasion, that they had no reason to fear any thing from them, nor be alarmed
at the Conversions they had happened to make, which were so few and
inconsiderable, as never to be able to do them hurt, had it been so designed,
as it was not; That there was no danger neither from the French King's
Friendship or close Alliance with their King, it being the only Foreign
Security, as matters then stood, that he could have against the intriegues and
power of the United Provinces; who not only ruined their Commerce by Sea, but
were the only People that buoyed up and supported the Sectaries and Republican
Party, and harbored and abetted all Designs both against the Church and State
of England under the then Monarchy; it being their inseparable Interest in all
things to thwart the English, almost in every particular they valued themselves
upon in the present Establishment; Whereas, there was no exception to be made,
but that it was his Most Christian Majesty's undoubted Advantage and fixed
Interest to cultivate by all good Offices the said Friendship and Alliance, and
to avoid by all manner of means any Rupture or Mis-intelligence with England,
and to oppose above all things, the change of our Monarchy into a Republic.

In the last place, continued they, Whereas, there had been for some time
Reports spread not only of the Duke's, but the King himself's being of their
Persuasion, they were to give out to this sort of Men, that that was only a
suspicion, and, as they really believed, ill-grounded enough; for though they had
reason to wish them, and all Mankind else, of their Opinion in that case; yet
they had no such reason to think them so; but that the King's having showed
some favor to them upon the score of their Sufferings for, and Fidelity to his
Father and himself, and out of respect to the Most Christian King with whom he
was so closely Allied, for his better support and establishment against the
enemies of Monarchical Government, was the only grounds People had had for such
Rumors, which were industriously fomented only by the Authors of the former
Fears and Jealousies against his Father, in order to get an opportunity thereby
once more to destroy the Regal Government: And, that they made this noise
indeed against Popery, but levelled it only at Episcopal and Kingly Government,
not at such contemptible Adversaries as the Roman Catholics were at that time
of day. Then as for the Duke, they were to affirm, They thought and had reason
to believe, he was no more a Catholic than the King; but that being a Prince
of an high and inflexible Spirit, and Heir presumptive to the Royal Diadem,
disdained to be compelled by any Subjects, either to take an Oath, or give any
account of his Religion, only to gratify their Humors and Fancies; and chose
rather to forbear acting in any public Employment: But, that for their part,
as he had not yet declared against the Church of England, so he had as yet made
no profession of the Roman Catholic Religion as they knew of, but took care to
keep himself as much reserved toward them, as toward those of the Protestant
Persuasion.

By such sort of Sophisiry and cunning Artifices, thrse French Incendiaries
were instrumental to endeavor to Keep up the Stiff Church Party in a perpetual
Animosity against the Protestant Diss^nters and Dutch Party, as both of a
Party; and to stir up the Government to side still with the French Interest
against the power and growth of the one, and provide with severity against the
Practices of the other, in order to exasperate as much as possibly they could,
the Spirits of both Parties against the other, and widen the Breaches beyond
all possibility of restoring them again. Which how well they have already
effected, is but too well known, and no less sorely felt in the Bowels of the
Kingdom for me to take upon me to Descant upon; and therefore I shall forbear,
and only subscribe my self,

My Lord, Your Lordship's Most humble Servant to Command.
Paris, Mar. 28. 1682.
LETTER XLIV.
Of the French Intrigues to raise a good Opinion in the Protestant Dissenters
of England, of the French King's Proceedings, and to Calumniate their own King.

My Lord,
I Am come to the last Body of Men within the Kingdom, whom this Court, by such
like Engines as I formerly mentioned, has endeavored to manage for to serve
their own turn, to the Kingdom's disadvantage, and they are the Protestant
Dissenters; but they were necessitated, to give the less umbrage, to change
their shapes and form of expression to those of that Party whom they had the
design upon, and to whom they closely and warmly remonstrated; That they had no
occasion to be jealous of the Proceedings of France, and be animated so
fiercely against King Lewis, if they would but once consider, the great Liberty
and Privileges which their Protestant Brethren enjoyed in the French
Dominions; their former assisting the oppressed Protestant Dutch, and other
Protestant States, against the Bloody Inquisitors, and Unchristian Inquisition;
the severe Persecutions of the House of Austria, the frequent differences of
France with the Court of Rome, and the little power the Pope was allowed in the
Gallican Church, no more than what was Titular; and that if these things were
but duly weighed, it might be more than presumed, the present French King would
little concern himself, or any way intermeddle with Religious Contests in
England: But that whatever opinion they might have of that Neighboring King to
his disadvantage, which yet did but little affect or concern him, they had on
the contrary much occasion to look about them at home; and to that end, these
Emissaries were to promote, tooth and nail, the belief of the King and Duke's
being both Papists; but particularly to affirm, that the Duke was most
certainly of that Religion, and at the same time to discover assured Evidences
of it; as also of the Measures concerted to bring in both Popery and Arbitrary
Power, and really to detect some Measures, which themselves had as yet but only
projected, or at least but proposed, and that too but to the Duke only, as if
they had been fully consented to, and begun underhand to be put in practice;
And having once well impressed this, they were to exaggerate the greatness and
eminency of the danger, the more to alarm them; and slily to insinuate, that an
Accommodation was Transacting between the two Churches of Rome and England; and
a thousand other Artifices they used besides, to animate each Party against the
other, too tedious for your Lordship to read, or me to relate; neither need I
tell you how they traversed one another's designs, only I must Note, Sir Roger
L'Estrange, and almost all the Writers for that side, under a pretense of
serving the Church of England, and the Monarchy, and some also of the other
Party, though unknown to themselves, were and are still but the unhappy Tools
and Instruments of French Jesuits and Machiavillian Emissaries; who were the
main Conjurers, that by undiscovered Spells have raised up those Devils of
Discord, that under the Names of Whigs, Tories, and Trimmers, have so much
disturbed our Native Country, and the LORD knows where it will terminate. I
am glad to hear your Lordship has so well exerted the Caution and Prudence
inherent in your Family in these times of difficulty, and may it be so still,
which is the hearty desire of,

My Lord, Your Lordship's most Humble and most Obedient Servant.
Paris, April 8. 1682. N. S.
LETTER XLV.
Of the Duke of York's being drawn into a close Correspondence with the French
Court, with an Account of his Pension from thence.

My Lord,
I Cannot think your Lordship will so much admire, that the Duke should suffer
himself to engage into a close Correspondence with the French Court, yea, and
to enter into a separate Treaty with them, when other things more unlikely,
have been made evident enough so as not to be contradicted: I cannot tell at
present whether there be any other particulars of this same Treaty, than what
has come within my Cognizance; but so much as has, as I hope it will be
acceptable, I as freely communicate, and was in substance as follows.

First, The Duke was engaged to stick close to his Alliance with France,
declining all Treaties with those of the House of Austria, and even with the
Pope himself, without the French King's Privity and Approbation.

Secondly, To oppose to the utmost of his Power, the King his Brother, from
engaging in any War for the Confederates.

Thirdly, To join with him, the French King, in making a strong Effort to draw
in, if possible, the Prince of Orange to embrace a separate Interest from that
of the States of Holland; and if not, to come over to the Roman Religion, at
least to enter into a separate Treaty with the Kingdoms of France and England,
under a pretense of laying a sure foundation for his own future Greatness, and
establish it on both sides the Sea by the suppression of all Factions which now
disturbed his Uncle, and might afterward disturb him; and in case he proved
still obstinate, to second him in all Methods that might be used to hinder his
Succession to the Crown of England, by hindering any Match that might be
proposed between the Prince and the Princess Mary; and that he should for that
purpose keep off Matching either of his Two Daughters upon several pretenses to
gain time till a fit juncture might come, when Matches might be accomplished
for them both, with French Princes, or some other Princes in that Interest,
viz. the eldest to the Dauphin, and the younger to the Duke of Savoy, or a
Prince of the Houses of Conde or Conti, or to the Duke of Modena.

Fourthly, That the Duke should do his utmost to have the Government of his
Children himself, and to have them Tu^ored, if possible, in his own Religion;
and if they were obstinate, in case he should sail of other Issue, then they
would have had him to exclude them, and Adopt the Duke of Chartres for his
Heir, (but this was only proposed) and Intail the Crown thence forward to Heirs
Male only, and to have the Salique Law Established in England, as well as in
France; but and if he should not be powerful enough to hinder a Match with the
Prince of Orange, or some other Protestant Prince, (but of the former they were
most jealous,) then to concur with them to cut him off; but this point would
not be formally assented to neither.

But all Points proposed were on his part easily assented to; As doing his
utmost for the propagation of the Catholic Religion, pursuing Measures
concerted for dividing of Protestants, undermining of Parliaments, and putting
forward Arbitrary Counsels without reserve, and particularly to raise Arms in
Scotland and Ireland, and call in French Forces, in case the King should at any
time, by any Motives whatsoever, be influenced to act to the French King's
prejudice.

Lastly, The Duke was to take care, That no Popish Clergy or Layety should be
employed by him, but such as were in the French Interests, and trust his main
Secrets with none but such as were French-born Jesuits; on which Conditions he
was to have a considerable Annuity of Six hundred thousand Crowns, and
extraordinary Sums when necessary, and the circumstances of things did require
to carry on any of the forementioned Points, even to what he pleased himself to
demand.

So all things being thus concluded, he received in hand, Three hundred
thousand Crowns of his Annuity, and Six hundred thousand Crowns extraordinary;
and Jewish Bankers were accordingly employed to transmit the Money to him from
time to time; Besides all which, the French King's Confessor promised him a
private Contribution from the Clergy, and others under his influence, of six
hundred thousand Crowns more. But notwithstanding all these mighty promises,
and other more magnificent ones, That he should not want five or six Millions
of Livres at any time, to bring a design to perfection when once he had made a
progress; their Notes say, That private directions were given to feed him only
with such mean pittances as would but just enable him to keep himself up, and
persuade him still to go on, to perplex matters, or Broviller les Carts as
they term it, raise and exasperate Factions and Parties; but never to proceed
so far as totally to suppress any, lest he should make himself too much Master,
and by that means be able to set up for himself, without their further Aid and
Concurrence, or have any Money to spare and lay up for his own use, or to
employ in private Cabals against them.

The same Method they used. My Lord, with most of their other Pensioners among
the English Popish Party; but to all their other Instruments, they were most
liberal and punctual, till such time as they had no further use of them, and
had a mind to turn them off, and provoke them, as we have said, to use their
Talents on a contrary side. Pardon, I beseech, your Lordship, my prolixity, and
interpret it for a willingness to serve you, as it really is, in him, who is,

My Lord, Your most humble and most devoted Servant.
Paris, Jan. 28. 1680. N. S.
LETTER XLVI.
Of the Duchess of York's being gained entirely to the French Interests: With
an Account of the Proposals she assented to.

My Lord.
HAving gained the Duke over into their Interests, so far as to assent to the
performance almost of every Proposal to him on their part, as I have in my last
set forth at large to your Lordship; The next step was to bring in the
Duchess, his Consort, now into the same or worse Noose, who being an adopted
Daughter of France, and of the Feminine Gender, they found no hard Task to
effect; and after some Tampering, they at last prevailed so far as to persuade
her to discover to them from time to time, her Husband's greatest Secrets, and
would never let him rest, but be incessantly teazing him till she had extorted
all that was worth knowing or communication from him; not to fail to transmit
unto them an account from time to time of the Money the Duke received from
them, how he spent it; to use all the influence she had over him, to perform
with utmost exactness all the points of his Agreement with them; but more
particularly that part which related to the Duke's Daughters; and finally, to
second effectually the means which they should prescribe her at any time about
giving an Italian Fig to the King, either of the two Princesses, or all of
them, if it were though requisite, as the cause of Religion, her own main
Interest of securing the English Throne in the Succession of it to her Husband
and her own Issue, should necessarily require, without concerning the Duke her
Husband at all in the said Intrigue; In consideration of her compliance
wherein, she was likewise to have an Annuity assigned her, but the definite Sum
is not mentioned; and whether she had Sons or Daughters to live, she, as far as
lay in her power to promote it, was to assent to have them Matched to the most
apparent of the Royal Family of France, if there were any such for them; or
into such other Princely Families as were most suitable for them in the
Judgment of his Most Christian Majesty; who did oblige himself to take a
Paternal care of them, and would ever keep his Royal Word by the exactest
Performance. I do not question but these things are a Trouble to your Lordship;
though I am apt to persuade my self, you would not willingly be without the
perfectest Intelligence of them that you can get, wherein I have had the
Honor, and shall always think my self happy to serve you in any the least
degree, and am proud of the opportunity to subscribe my self once more

My Lord, Your Lordship's Most Humble and Most Obedient Servant.
Paris, Jan. 12. 1680.
LETTER XLVII.
Containing a general Account of Parties engaged in French Interests, and of
their Designs; but more particularly of one Kelly a Priest, etc.

My Lord,
YOur Lordship will not now wonder, when such as I have mentioned in some of my
late Letters, have plunged themselves so deeply in French Sudds, that others
should be so easily drawn into their Interests; I am to acquaint you therefore,
That this Court had, according to their Projection, gained the most
considerable Roman Catholics in the Three Kingdoms, by fair and specious
Pretenses, to comply even to every thing they desired of them; as thinking King
Lewis to be a most Generous Prince, that had no By-ends in it, but as he was
most able, was most willing to promote the propagation of that Religion, and
the reinstating their King in a condition to Protect them, out of a pure piece
of Honor and Zeal for the Catholic Faith, as they were wont to Word it; who
therefore most willingly entered into a Correspondence with his Agents and
Emissaries; and some of them took Pensions, but I cannot give your Lordship a
List of their Names at this juncture; but most of that Kidney acted freely, in
using all the endeavors they possibly could, to induce both King, Duke, etc.
to a compliance with them in all things they had instructions to move to them
and solicit for; as they had long done themselves in the points I have already
mentioned to your Lordship, and which I need not repeat: But though they
designed, if either one or both of the Royal Brothers should disoblige them too
much, especially the King, or that any juncture of things, or grand convenience
of theirs, should persuade, to proceed to some barbarous Extremity against the
Persons of one or both of them; yet they thought not good to trust any British
Papists with any thing so black, no not so much as their Jesuits, but took
particular heed to reserve th^se Mysteries to another Cabal, having provided
for that a Juncto of Foreigners and Irish for the taking off the King, if
things came to that extremity: And as for the Duke, they seemed not much afraid
of him, and therefore made no such exact provision, but they knew of some two
or three desperate Fanatics, whom they had in reserve for that purpose, and
they were of the Scotch Nation; but if the King alone was to be taken off, then
the Dutchess's Cabal in conjunction with that of Portsmouth, were to engage in
it; but if things came to that extremity, as that both Brothers were to be
removed, then Portsmouth's Gang was only to be employed, without the concern or
privity of the other. And this last Cabal of Portsmouth's was composed of
French and Irish Jesuits, and Jesuited Popish Bigots.

But among them there was a certain Priest named Kelly, who was a long time
Banker to the Cabal, and is still I believe, on this side the Water, and coming
to hear by the Correspondence he held with his Complotters in England, there
were some who scrupled such Undertakings; he went Over, saying, He would
procure enough to do either of the Works if occasion were. I had once a Bill
upon him for a Friend of mine, and then I remember he railed mightily against
both King and Duke, and said they were both Knaves, Fools and Cowards, for that
having forsaken the French Interest, they would be Ruined, and see all their
Kingdoms quickly in Flames; That it was an easy matter for the King of France
to do it; That it would very quickly be effected, and be a most laudable
Action; and would, he hoped, end in the total subjection of the Three Kingdoms
to the French King's Power, which he heartily wished for his poor Country's
sake, so tyrannized over by Heretics; with abundance more of such Stuff; but I
knew not then he was so deeply concerned as afterward, when I found his name
for an Undertaker in Portsmouth's Cabal; one Father Patrick also who used often
to go and come, and was wont to conceal his Intriguing under a peculiar
appearance, was another of the same Cabal, with two or three French Men, whose
Names I have not at present. Your Lordship will pardon this imperfect Account,
and judge favorably of his Endeavors, who desires nothing more than to
gratify your Expectation, who am,

My Lord, Your Honor's most Humble and Devoted Servant.
Paris, Jan. 19. 1680, N. S.
LETTER XLVIII.
Of the Private Treaty between King Charles the Second, and the French King.
Anno 1576

My Lord,
I Have already upon two several occasions observed to Your Lordship, how the
Duke and Duchess were drawn into private Correspondences with the French
Court, which when they had once happily effected, and by them and some others,
already in their Interests, (whereof I have mentioned soome) drawn in, many
more both Courtiers and others; they proceeded, being thus so considerably
reinforced, to hedge in the King himself; and it was high time, for they had
now a greater Jealousy than ever, of the Match with the Prince of Orange, though
he were not yet come over into England to that purpose; and so far they did
prevail, that he did oblige himself to do all he could to observe still a
partial Neutrality with them: Then they proposed his hindering the Match with
the Prince of Orange, unless he could be drawn into a separate Treaty with the
two Kings, and delay at all Matching of the Princesses till a general Peace,
and to reserve the Eldest for the Dauphin; though in the mean while they promised
the Duke of Bavaria the same advantage for his Daughter, the better to keep him
in a Neutrality with them during the then War with the Confederates, but never
intended it with the latter, if they could have effected it with our Princess;
But in that, the King told them, There might be difficulties insuperable, and
so could promise them nothing but his Endeavors, which by reason the
Parliament and People were much out of Humor, upon the Duke's late Match would
require much Money; because now for him to go about to cross them afresh, in
obstructing, or so much as delaying such a Match, the proposal whereof was
already so much known to his People, and found to be so much desired by them,
as the only remedy they imagined they had left them against the feared mischief
of the other, would hinder them perhaps from granting him such Supplies as he
might otherwise expect of them: unless his Most Christian Majesty obliged
himself to supply him with Money enough to need them not, or at least to buy
Votes, and to stop clamorous Mouths; but as for that Motion of theirs about
committing the Children to the Duke's Care and Tu^orage, though they were
seconded in it by the Duke himself with all the importunity imaginable, yet he
absolutely denied them; saying, They were his Children, or rather the Nation's,
and not the Duke's, especially now he had Matched so much against the Nation's
liking; and that could he have believed the People of England would have taken
so much Allarm at that Marriage, he should have taken care to have stopped it
in time; But that having let one Fault pass, to admit another much worse, was a
thing he doubted not but would cause such Earthquakes as he was resolved not to
run the risque of, therefore should not do it; so that Article was wholly laid
aside, and the Treaty concluded without, by which the French King was to pay
ours an Annuity of Twelve hundred thousand Crowns, whereof Six hundred thousand
in hand, besides a Donative of a like Sum at the same time for Extraordinaries,
and if any occasion should happen by crosness of Parliaments, Rebellion, or
otherwise, that should reasonably require so much, then he was promised to have
it augmented to twelve Millions of Livres whilst such Troubles should last,
though this latter part they never intended, but gave orders he should be treated
only with a Bit now and then, as was the Duke his Brother; only if a Civil War
should happen, they were to feed it on both sides, till it were fit to pour in
French Forces among them, etc. Yet I have observed, during my abode in this
Station, that there was a Fund of Twenty Millions of Livres designed for our
three Kingdoms, whereof sometimes they gave largely to the King and Duke his
Brother, and slenderly to the several Factions, only to keep them in heart; and
sometimes again largely to them, and little or none to the King and Duke, to
make the former Lusty, and Mettlesome to kick and keep the others Low, that
being in a crowing condition, they might comply with them. Of those Sums, there
has gone some years Four, sometimes Six, and sometimes Eight Millions to
Scotland and Ireland; but to the King and Duke, there never went more than than
I have mentioned, and that but the first Year neither; all the rest went to the
other Courtiers, and to the several Factions, who of late have had most of it.

In this Treaty, which was concluded by a private Agent, as were the others,
there was a Clause incerted, which gave the King leave, if too much pressed
upon, to pretend as if he would side with the Confederates against France, and
to get Money of them, as also of his Parliament on that account; but yet he was
by no means to Declare, but to get an Army and Revenue settled for some time,
such as was supposed to be the duration of the War, and then to use both the
one and the other to settle his Prerogative-Royal, and make himself Absolute,
etc. I cannot, My Lord, without some Reluctance, think of several Passages in
this Epistle, and particularly, that a King who above Twenty Years had had the
greatest opportunity of any of his Predecessors to make himself great both at
Home and abroad, should fall to so abject a State, as to become a French
Pensioner, which without the addition of any other Crime, is more than enough
eternally to blast the Memory of an English Monarch; but I know this Subject
can be ungrateful to no one alive more than to your Lordship; and therefore I
shall forbear further insisting upon it, and remain,

My Lord, Your Honor's to Serve and Obey.
Paris, Jan. 27. 1680. N. S.
LETTER XLIX.
Of King Charles II's Politick's upon his Entering into the forementioned
private League with France, as represented by the French Court.

My LORD,
IN my last, your Lordship had the substance of the Private League entered into
by our King, and this Court, it may not be now unworthy your curiosity to know
the Censure they have past upon him in relation to that head; they have said,
they understood well enough that what ever their Design might be in obtaining
such a point, that the King, and his Brother's too upon them, was to draw as
much Money out of them as they possibly could thereby, and yet not to venture
too far on any of those important and ticklish Points proposed, without very
large Sums, to secure every Step made forward, and that by advance too; for
that they both concluded that the best and only way to make the French stick
close to them was, to be always considerably beforehand with them, not without
reason, as they imagined, fearing, that if they were not still beforehand, when
they had engaged them in Difficulties, and saw them fast, they would leave them
in the lurch: As for the King, though they knew him to be no more a Papist than
he was a Politician, yet he was of the Opinion, if the Popish Religion could be
handsomely made predominant, it might suit better with the Monarchy; yet having
no Children to succeed him, that he was but careless in that point, and his
Brother only being concerned in that matter, he moved only as he was spurred on
by his importunity, the Temptation of Money, the Diffidence he had of his
People, and among others, the Fears he had either of having his days shortened,
or his Crown very much endangered by the Intrigues of his Brother, or the
French King; should he not keep fair and humor them both in some tolerable
measure, since he found himself so far entangled in their snares: For as for
his Nephew the Prince of Orange, that he had no aversion for him, but rather an
inclination through Nature and Policy, and therefore was of himself willing
enough the Match should go on; yet that he would have been glad, if the Prince
could have been drawn over to the French Interest, for that then he thought he
would have compassed many desirable Ends in one business, and made a very great
advance to have satisfied all parties in the greatest part of their several
Pretensions; because that then he supposed he could have satisfied the French
King, in bringing over a Prince to his Interest so very capable to serve him in
that juncture of time; that he would have satisfied also those of his own
Subjects, who were well affected to the English Monarchy, as he would have
likewise our Trading Companies, by marrying our Princess to a Prince of the
Protestant Religion, whom he by separating from the Interests of the States of
Holland, and drawing into a League with two great Kings, should have put into a
condition to depress that Republic, which was so ill a Neighbor to the
Monarchy, so much our rival in Trade, and so great a fomenter of the Schisms
and Factions in England; that thereby he should have laid grounds to hope, that
if ever he succeeded to those Crowns, he might be able to subject the Belgic
to the British Lions, and transfer the magazine of the Riches of the World from
the Netherlands into England; and that fie thought to have satisfied the Duke,
his Brother, in a great measure, by so satisfying his friend the French King,
and likewise by depressing a Republic so well situated and inclined to abet
his deadly Enemies, that in all appearance would way-lay his Succession to the
Throne, and thereby cutting off all occasion from that Malcontent party, that
continually sought occasion to stir up against him the old Devils of Fears and
Jealousies of Popery and Arbitrary Power. And that he thought to oblige the
Prince too, by putting him into a method to become a Sovereign in time. And
lastly, that he was persuaded, if the Prince complied with those Methods, the
Match could disoblige no body, but the States of Holland, and the sympathizing
Factions of the Sectaries in England, and the Republicans, whom he thought
inconsiderable; but that how desirous soever he was of such a Compliance with
France, as they desired, yet it was not in his inclination to break the Match,
for that he having in reality a much greater mind to the Alliance with the
Prince of Orange, than to that with the Dauphine, in which he did imagine he
foresaw unfurmountable Difficulties, and such as might endanger, if not
over-turn, his Throne, ruin his Brother, and the whole Royal Family, and at
last make Great Britain but a French Province; however that knowing the Temper
of the Duke, his Brother, and the vindicative humor of the French King, he was
willing to seem almost all complaisant, and temporize for a while, whereby he
might appease them, and at the same time get what Money could be drawn from
France, both for his own security and pleasure; and when he had done that, that
he knew wheeling about and concluding the Match, when they least thought of it,
or expected it would please his people again, though never so unsatisfied by the
delay. These, my Lord, are the Sentiments of this Court, concerning him; which,
if true, in all points, I conceive they are more beholding to him, than many
persons in England are willing to believe of him; but I shall leave it to your
Lordships profound Judgment, to revolve upon the particulars, and remain,

My LORD, Your Lordship's Most Humble and Devoted Servant
Paris, Feb. 1. 1680. N. S.
LETTER L.
Of the Duke of York's Politics upon his entering into a close Correspondence
with France, as the French Politicians represent them.

My LORD,
AS I have transmitted to your Lordship the exactest Particulars I could learn
concerning the King's entering into a private Treaty with France, and in my last
the Censure of this Court thereupon; I have also to the best of my remembrance
given you likewise an Account of the Duke's being drawn into a close
Correspondence with them some time before; but whether it were that the
Ministers on this side conceived such a Judgment of the King, as I have already
related, and such of the Duke, which I am just about to relate, I cannot
possitively determine; but thus it is they censure him, saying, That though he
was so much a Bigot in Religion that he was totally averse to the Aurangian
Alliance, unless it could be reconciled to those ends which he proposed to
himself thereby, and especially about Replanting both the Popish Religion and
Absolute Power in the three Kingdoms, and incline rather to the Match suggested
with the Dauphine, with an intent the more friendly to oblige his Most
Christian Majesty to assist him through all the difficulties he foresaw he had
to pass; yet he was not a little afraid, of the great Resistance he knew would
necessarily be made against such an Alliance, which many in England looked upon
as the most pernicious that ever could befall their Nation; being also of
himself not a little jealous, that if once such a Match between his Eldest
Daughter and the Dauphine were concluded, some sly practices might be carried
on by the French Court, against the Issue he should have by his now Duchess,
in favor of that his Daughter might probably have by the Dauphine; and
therefore that he was much more willing and desirous, if it might be compassed,
that a Match might in time convenient be concluded between his said Daughter
rather and his Dutchesses Brother, the Duke of Modena, or some Italian Prince,
of no power enough to be apprehended to entertain any such Designs; and that as
much French as she was before, his Duchess was now of the same Sentiments too,
being married, and in hopes of a numerous Issue by the Duke. These are all the
Particulars I have hitherto met with, in relation to the Duke and his
Dutchess's Sentiments, and with which I conclude, who am,

My LORD, Your Lordship's Most Humble and Devoted Servant.
Paris, Feb. 14. 1680. N. S.
LETTER LI.
Of Coleman's Intelligence, and private Correspondence with France, to the King
and Duke's Disadvantage; and his Motions and Pretenses for Money.

My LORD,
WHen I acquainted your Lordship with the Censure past by this Court upon the
King and Duke's Sentiments, in reference to their League and Correspondencies
with them, and especially the business of the Match, I could neither determine
whether it were purely their own Suggestions, collected from the Circumstances
and natural Positions of things as they then stood, which I was inclined to, or
to some secret Information from another hand, but now I find the latter to be
true; for whatever the King, Duke and Dutchesse's true Sentiments were, so they
were represented underhand by Coleman to the Juncto here, and by some other
selfended Confidents of theirs, of whom but more particularly of Mr. Coleman I
find it thus inserted in our Minutes: That being entered into a close and
separate Correspondence of his own with this Court, besides that known to their
Highnesses, whose Agent he was, he was therein to give them intelligence of all
that was transacted at White Hall, and St. James's, that possibly he could, but
more especially of the Comportment of the King and the Duke, as to the Points
agreed on between France and them; as also of the Disposition of all the
Factions in England, and of the foreign Ministers, etc. to obliege himself to
make Parties to cross his Master, the Duke, or the King, or both; in case
either, or both of them, should go about to deviate from the Measures
prescribed them by the French Court.

I find, my Lord, he was besides this a great Undertaker for Conversions, and
Proselyting Men to Rome, or rather France; and his Agreement with them was to
have allowed him as an Annuity the Sum of Twenty Thousand Crowns punctually
to be paid, and for Extraordinaries, as should be calculated, according to the
emergency of the Occasions: His Pretenses for Conversions were manifold, and
extravagant enough in the relation of them; and did slily at first insinuate,
and when he had once broken the Ice, warmly urged, that whereas the Duke had
very large Remittances made him upon the account of Conversions, wherein he was
an Undertaker; that it were more advisable, for the future, to entrust him with
a moderate Sum for that purpose, and thereby save themselves that deal which
they must have sent to the Duke upon that Account, if they should send any; and
so moved them, entirely to wave that point with him, for that he could do much
more in that nature, than the Duke could ever pretend to, because more
imperceptibly.

He promised them likewise for the gaining of Members of Parliament over to
their Interest, great and mighty things, and then discreetly insinuated those
things already spoken of, about the Designs of the King and Duke toward them,
and thereupon advised them to transmit unto them both only but moderate Sums,
and let him have but moderate ones, according to a private Man's fortune, and
he would take effectual care both to manage them, and do their business in
England more to purpose, than they would do without him.

He also added, That to give the King and Duke great Sums, would be no other
than to enable them to buy the Parliament's Votes for themselves, and not for
the Interest of France, and to get such store of Money of them, that they would
afterward take such measures as they themselves pleased, without any regard to
France, being sure to please the People at any time whenever they were minded
to go contrary to them; and much matter to the same purpose, with which I shall
no farther trouble your Lordship, but subscribe my self, as I unfeignedly am,
and ever shall be,

My LORD, Your most Obedient and Most Humble Servant.
Paris, Feb. 28. 1680. N. S.
LETTER LII.
The Duke of York moves the French Court for Money, according to the private
Agreement.

My LORD,
YOu have heard what a Spoke Mr. Coleman was pleased to put in the King and
even, the Duke, his dear Master's wheel, which they, poor Princes, knowing
nothing of, moved hard for the Sums promised by France: the Duke as supposing
his Credit the better, being the forwarder of the Two, and whose Pretenses
were, that he had been forced to lay out by advance, the greatest part of the
Money already paid to make Creatures for their mutual Interest, and future
advantage, all such Enterprises being much more chargable to begin, then to
carry on, and perfect; that when Correspondencies were begun they must be
carried on, and that still by advance, if any thing of service were expected,
or hoped for.

That he had a most difficult and uneasy Task to deal with the King, his
Brother's timorous and changeable Disposition, and was, and had been at a very
great Expense to greaze Favorites of more Kinds then one, that might influence
and persuade him to, and hinder others that might dissuade him from what they
in France did expect from him, or urged him to; as also to appease and quell
Enemies on all sides, which his late Match with their adopted Daughter, and
change in Religion had stirred up violently against him; and that to keep the
King, his Brother, steady in a favorable Neutrality in regard to France, and
yet at the same time either break off the Match quite with the Prince of
Orange, defer it so long as they desired, or negotiate a private Treaty with
that Prince in their favor, and to their advantage, with that power and good
effect desirable, required, as they might well imagine, more than ordinary
Sums of Money, and all ready, and in Specie too.

But that if besides his ordinary Allowance, according to the Agreement, which
he expected should be punctually paid him every six months, he could but have
a Sum of a Million of Crowns again seasonably advanced him for
Extraordinaries, before the time of the next prorogation of the Parliament were
expired; then he did believe he might bring matters so to bear, by such a
Reinforcement, so as to be able to gain Votes enough even in the Parliament it
self to carry it against all others, both in respect to the Neutrality, and to
the gaining their Consent for deferring any Foreign Alliance, by way of
Marriage of either of his Daughters, till a General Peace was concluded, and
work very much with the Prince of Orange too to comply with their desires, when
he should see the Parliament gave him no hopes otherwise of compassing his
Aims; or if not, yet at least he should be able hereby to keep himself still
strongest in the Privy Council, and in the Court, where nothing should be
transacted to their disadvantage.

That both his own Friends and theirs had been so very successful, and made
such wonderful progresses in Conversions of all sorts and Ranks of People, as
that of such and such Peers of the Realm (I will not say your Lordship was one
named among the rest) such and such Courtiers, and Members of Parliament, etc.
that such and such Bishops, Eminent Doctors in Divinity, and other dignified
Clergy, and such and such Gentlemen who were remarkable for Interest and
Estates, or Eminent for exquisite Parts, though they have learnt here since
there was nothing more false, were either already converted, and quite brought
over, or extraordinarily well inclined; and that there was no doubt to be made
of it, but by an augmentation of about four or five hundred thousand Crowns
more for the Cause and Interest of Religion, they might be able so to dispose
of the greater and more noted part of the Conforming Church of England, which
was the main of their Work, as to bring them over to their Religion; yea, and
even to declare for it, publicly too, as soon as they should be freed from the
Fears of the English Mobile, and of the Fanatical Sectaries, and see a General
Peace concluded, and the King himself declare for it, being backed with so
powerful a Prince as his Most Christian Majesty was; that however many of them
were already brought over to the French Interest against the Dutch, and many
more might be so, if timely Liberality were offered, with many other
Allegations, set off with Coleman's usual flourishes on the behalf of his
Master, though he had countermined all before, as I have already hinted: And
lastly, that he had once more attacked the King, his Brother, as to Religion,
and that with great hopes; and that if he could have but Money enough to carry
on the Point with the Church of England, he questioned not, but by that time a
General Peace were negotiated, his Majesty would be induced to declare too,
when besides, his support abroad from the Most Christian King, he should see
himself backed by almost all his Royalists, then numerous enough in the Nation,
and so great, yea, more than a probability of an Accommodation between the two
Churches of Rome and England, and his potent Brother of France then by the
Peace at full Liberty to lend him all needful Help. My Lord, you see here what
little Sincerity there was in all their mutual Proceedings: May the Reward be
suitable, is my unfeigned Wish; as it has been already to some. But -- I am,

My LORD, Your Lordship's Most Humble and Devoted Servant.
Paris, Mar. 9. 1680. N. S.
LETTER LIII.
Of King Charles II's urging the French Court for his Remittances, according to
the private League between them.

My LORD,
YOU have heard what pressing Instances His Highness has made for his
Remittances, according to Agreement; and what mighty Encouragements he has
given this Court of gaining their Ends, both in Court and Parliament: And now
it is fit the King should put in his Plea at last; which he did in this manner,
as their Minutes represent it.

That for his part, he had advanced rather more than less Money than he had
already received from them, for carrying on their Work; and that, not to
enumerate many Particulars, he would observe to them, that when he saw there
was no other Probability of obliging his dear Brother of France, in preserving
the Neutrality, so much desired by him, but by Proroguing of his Parliament,
which they knew well enough, was a tender Point: That yet not to be wanting to
his Brother's Interests, and his own Engagements, he had adventured so far, as
even twice to Prorogue them; and had withal expended most of his own Moneys, in
endeavoring, if possible, against the next Meeting, or Session of Parliament,
to make a Party, so as to be able, in a Parliamentary Way, to over-match his
Adversaries, and those of the Most Christian King, his Brother; and not only
that, but to be in a Condition to support himself, during their Recess, in the
Figure he ought, as King of England, to make, both at home, and abroad, for his
own Advantage, as well as that of the Most Christian King's; and so carry on
the Work of Mediation between him and the Confederates, as his Brother of
France would have; as likewise the desired Negotiations in Holland, to induce
the Prince of Orange, to a Compliance, etc.

That they could not but know he was much involved in Debts by the last War, in
Conjunction with them, against Holland, and other extraordinary Occasions, by
Troubles arising, and fomented chiefly by his adhering to his Brother of
France's Interest; and that he having Prorogued his Parliament upon his
Account, and thereby put himself under an absolute Necessity of being deprived
of the Legal Assistance of his People; it was but very reasonable and just they
should advance such a Sum as might enable him, not only further to gratify His
Most Christian Majesty's Desires, but also to satisfy in part his own
extraordinary Necessities, and recompense him for the Subsidies he missed of
thereby again and again from his own Subjects.

And Lastly, He demanded, at least, such a Re-inforcement as he had before
received at the Conclusion of the Treaty with France, and that by way of
Extraordinary, besides his Annuity punctually paid: And of this he expected an
exact Performance before the -- --, besides another Advance at the Beginning of
that Session; that so he might be able to make his Party good against all
Opposers at their next Meeting, or else Prorogue them, without fear of wanting
Money during their Recess: And did further insist, beside some other Proposals
not worth mentioning, upon his having Five or Six Millions of Livres allowed
him with all convenient Speed, toward the Payment of his Debts, and the
Retrieving of his lost Credit. The Success of which Remonstrances and
Proposals, both from the King and Duke, your Lordship may, perhaps, be informed
of another time, by

My LORD, Your Honor's Most humbly devoted Servant.
Paris, Mar. 16. 1680. N. S.
LETTER LIVE.
Giving an Account, how far the French complied with the King and Duke's
Remonstrances for Money; and how the same was resented by them.

My LORD,
YOur Lordship may refresh your Memory, by calling to mind what I have some
time since writ to you, concerning the King, and his Brother the Duke's
pressing of this Court for the Remittances agreed on, and what further
Additions they wanted, for Negotiating of Businesses then in Agitation, with
Coleman's Countermine to part of their Designs. I am now further to acquaint
your Honor, that the forementioned Importunities, together with those
Cautions of Coleman, produced this Effect, that they sent about half as much
Money as they had advanced at first to each of them; telling them at the same
time, that the Most Christian King's Convenience would not admit of a larger
Remise at present; neither could he do it with that Privacy he would, but by
his Jews at Geno^a; and therefore desired them to make what shift they could
with that Proportion, till the Event of the Parliament was seen, whether it
were Prorogued, or no.

But to the Duke they more particularly told, that if what was then remitted
would not serve turn, and that he wanted more, rather than baulk his Designs,
he might venture hardily on the Most Christian King's Word, to lay out of his
own Store; that he should certainly be re-paid again at the time mentioned,
with an Overplus: And that as for the Conversions he spoke of, they waved them;
and said, Father la Chaise and that Society had provided now a Fund for that
Work, without troubling them.

But to Coleman, not mentioning the Motion about Conversions, they only sent a
good Gratuity for the Prorogation before, and about the Sum of Twenty Thousand
Crowns Advance Extraordinary, in order to hire an House, and to do other
things, in order to the Corrupting of Parliament Men, etc. If he saw likelihood
of it, he was to have -- 000 Crowns more, for to try Events; if he succeeded,
he was promised -- 0000 besides; and for a Prorogation when judged necessary,
for so long as desired, another very considerable Sum, not particularly
mentioned.

How far any of the forementioned Persons did proceed, by way of Compliance
with this Court, I know no otherwise for the present than thus, (in general)
that they have noted the two Royal Brothers were a little disheartened to see
their Friends on this side so backward to supply them; but that however,
considering the Plausibility of the French Excuses, and their own pressing
Necessities, but more especially the King's, they not only took what was sent
them, but resolved also to proceed to oblige the Messiurs as much as they
could, to the end they might induce them by Performances to send them more. The
Effects of which dangerous Complaisance, to say no worse of it, the Nation has
but too much felt already; and God knows where it will terminate: I am sure,
your Lordship cannot but think it bodes ill; as does,

My LORD, Your very Humble, and most Obedient Servant.
Paris, June 4. 1680. N. S.
LETTER LV.
Of the Methods the Jesuits used to promote Conversions in England, and how
St. Germain attempted King Charles II. With his Answer, etc.

My LORD,
I Need not tell your Lordship that Father St. Germain, a Jesuit, and one
called out on purpose by the French King's Confessor, was the head Manager of
Conversions (as they called them) and of their other wicked Designs upon our
Country under the covert of that; and who having gained Coleman, now a fellow
Domestic, into a close Confidence and Compliance with him, soon found means to
procure several other fit Accomplices, among the most considerable Orders and
Parties of Men in the Kingdom, whether seated in, or resorting to the famous
Metropolis thereof; and the better to draw in the Men, they were very
industrious in plying the Women of Quality most fit for intreague, to declare
themselves for their Church, and under that pretense to make so many Partisans
for France as they could; whose Grandeur chiefly they had in view, as to the
best of my remembrance I have noted once and again to your Lordship: And not
that of the Pope of Rome, or his Religion, which was only to serve for a Covert
to the other, to the end their Practices might not be discovered, or
countermined by the other foreign Ministers of that Communion. And so good
success they had in those Jugling-proceedings, that it bred in them indeed too
much confidence of their going through with the rest of their Work with the
same ease, and so made them guilty of the weaknesses of an overhasty bragging
and betraying of the Secrets of their Measures, which in so jealous a Nation as
England is, for a Jesuit, and a French one too to do it, was a very great
Error in Policy; for St. Germain, and his Gang, having met with such success in
their work as they dreamed not of, they hence, after having made sure of the
Duke, took the confidence to attempt the King himself, and were, as they
imagined, heard very favorably by him, having been often told by him in
Complement, that he looked upon their Religion as the most politic, and that
they had really made him so much a Convert, as to think that the Protestant
Religion produced but ill Subjects, etc. But finding for all this that the
effect was not answerable to the hopeful and favorable encouragement, that he
could not be brought actually to declare for them, they oftentimes railed at
him in private in England, and when any of them came over hither occasionally,
the mildest Character they could give of him was, That he was a Prince that
looked upon all Religion as a politic Cheat, to keep the World in awe, etc.
but this was afterward; for before upon such Complements from the King, as
aforesaid, they were so over joy'd, that it did indeed make them indiscreet
upon it, so far as to make it almost their common and ordinary Discourse, not
only to those already fixed in their Opinion, and that were of a stayed and
reserved Temper, but even to new Converts, and baulling talkative Women; nay,
and inserted it in their Letters too, both Inland and Foreign, that they had
gained both Duke and King to their Religion; that they had fished in the
British Ocean with such wonderful success, that they fished now only for the
greater Fish of all, leaving the small Fry to come of themselves, having
already caught two Royal Fishes (the Dolphin and Tung) with many such like
Expressions; and it was very ordinary with them in Conferences of
Controversies, when they saw other Arguments have little effect, to urge the
Example of the King and Duke; two such wise Princes as they represented them,
who knew and understood perfectly well the Principles of the Reformed Religion,
and all the Arguments it was defensible by, and yet had in a manner yielded to
the invincible force of the Truth, which appeared on their side; and had, said
they, against their Temporal Interests, to the evident hazards of their Persons
and Dignities, to which they preferred the Welfare of their more precious
Souls, embraced the Roman Catholic Opinions. Yea, St. Germain proceeded so far
in this kind of vanity, that he was in a fair way to be ruined for ever; but I
have not leisure at this Juncture to observe to your Lordship the Passages and
Effects of that Conduct, but must refer it to my next, wherein I hope I shall
not fail you, who am

My LORD, Your ever obliged, and most obedient Servant.
Paris, July 17. 1680. N. S.
LETTER LVI.
St. Germain endeavoring to reclaim one Lusancy to the Church of Rome, whose
Communion he had forsaken, used King Charles II's Turning Papist as an
Argument; which the other discovering, forced St. Germain to flee into France,
where he was punished for his Indiscretion for a Time.

My LORD,
IT was not without some Difficulty that I have been able to perform the
Promisory Clause of my last Letter, in reference to Father St. Germain's
unseasonable Words concerning the King's Perversion to the Romish Church; who,
among others, more particularly repeated the said Brags to a young Friar, then
lately turned Protestant, in the Savoy, (as I learnt afterward;) and whom, for
what peculiar Reasons I could never come to know, he labored with more than
ordinary Application to reclaim back again from his pretended Heresy, and at
any rate to dispatch him back into France. That same young Friar went by the
Name of Lusancy; but St. Germain said, his true Name was Beau-Chateau; and, it
seems, had been St. Germain's Scholar formerly, when Regent in the College of
Clermont, in this City; and consequently, knowing more of St. Germain, than any
other Man, perhaps, in England. It may be, the Fear of some Inconveniency to
their Designs, by that Knowledge, and such Discourses as he might happen to
have thereupon, was one Reason of the said Father's so great eagerness to
remove him out of the way. In fine, How, de facto, and in truth, he managed the
Business with him, I cannot affirm; but certain it is, that Lusancy pretended,
that upon his deferring, as the other thought, a little too much his full
Compliance with his Desires, he offered him Violence; and, with several
Accomplices, threatened to stab or pistol him if he would not sign such a
Recantation as he presented, and go along with those he brought with him, in
order to his immediate Transportation: And that upon Complaint thereof to the
Parliament, then Sitting, by a noble Lord, to whom Lusancy applied himself, and
whom I need not name, I believe, to your Lordship, though perhaps you have
never heard this Story before, in its full length, and by the Discovery of some
other of their Practices, the said Lusancy forced St. Germain to flee; and was
the Cause of some Stir against Popish Priests and Emissaries at that time;
which were the Praeludium to what followed afterward, in the time of the late
Conspiracy imputed to the said Party. And no less certain it is on the other
side, that St. Germain's Imprudence and ill Conduct, both in that and other
things, was so defenseless and inexcusable, that he was a long time in some
Disgrace with the Duke and Duchess, with Father la Chaise, and the whole
Society of his Order; to whom he was forced, by a long and laborious Apology,
to vindicate himself as well as he could; particularly, about the unhappy
Affair of Lusancy, and his rash and inconsiderate Speeches of the King and Duke
of York, which he compiled with much Artifice and Eloquence; and made me cloth
it in the English Tongue, to the end he might satisfy his Friends of both
Nations of his Innocence of those foul Aspersions cast upon him, as he would
have it: Yet he could never so solidly refute what was so plainly objected
against him, but that still there remained Causes sufficient to suspect, that
the Assertions of such as accused him were not without some real Grounds. And
indeed, though they were glad to have the same pass for a plausible Defense
among Secular Persons, for their common Reputation, upon which that subtle
Society so much value and esteem themselves; yet within their own Cloisters
they were so little satisfied with his specious Pleas, that they mulcted him,
as they usually do their own Members upon failure of Conduct, by sending him to
and fro, and employing him in low and contemptible things, which only Juniors
used to perform; and were a long time before they admitted him to any
considerable Post again; though at last, after sufficient Mortification, upon
his uninterrupted and vehement Importunities, to be restored again once more to
their good Opinion; and repeated Promises to be more assiduous in their
Service, and careful of his Conduct for the future, and because he had been at
first with Coleman, the chief Author of the Duke's being drawn into a close and
separate Intrigue with the Court of France, by the Intervention of Father la
Chaise, and knew best of any the Secrets and Mystery of it, he was again
entrusted to manage the Continuation of that Correspondence, by the means of
Coleman, his old Friend's receiving all Letters from him, and transmitting all
those of Father la Chaise and his Creatures in France, to Coleman and his
Master, and others with whom they had any Intrigue in England; among whom was
one Lady Glascow, who received and dispersed most of the Letters which were not
enclosed in Coleman's Packet, and which were commonly numerous enough,
directed to her under six or seven several Names, changing every time, or every
other time at least, the Name, and the Direction. Of which Correspondence I
may, perhaps, be able to give your Lordship a fuller Account another time;
presuming this cannot but find Acceptance, though from so mean a Person as is,

My LORD, Your Lordship's Most Devoted and Humble Servant.
Paris, Sept. 2. 1680. N. S.
LETTER LVII.
Arguments used to the Duke of York, against Marrying his Daughter to the
Prince of Orange.

My LORD,
I Confess, I do not well remember when it was that I gave your Lordship an
Account of the Duke's being first drawn into a close Correspondence with
France; and I am as much to seek how and when the following Arguments were
urged upon him, no further than the Circumstance of the Subject does discover:
But Time may unravel all. However, this, I find, was urged first on him:

That it would be of equal Danger to His Royal Highness, if not more, to give
his Daughter to the Prince of Orange, than to let her be in the French
Disposal; and that his Brother, the King, would be involved in equal Trouble on
that Account, as on the other: For that if she were given to the Prince of
Orange, without first engaging him in the Interests of France, that thereby he
would have a double Claim to the Crown; that of Course the King, his Brother,
must be drawn into a War with France; and that by so doing, both the Royal
Brethren would lose for ever the French King's Friendship and Support in case
of Extremity, which they would infallibly be reduced to by such a War, or by
but making a Show of it; For if it went on, whether there were Cause, or no,
there would be Jealousies of the Duke's Corresponding with France; yea, and of
the King too: And that, after all, such a Match would be interpreted but for a
piece of Policy, only to hide from the People their Correspondence with France;
and would never cure their Jealousies, nor take off the Fears they had of a
Popish Succession by his new Duchess; but add Strength and Courage to them to
oppose Remedies against it. That thereupon, when they had the King once in a
War, they would not give him any Money to carry it on, unless they saw the
laying of it out, and had, in a manner, the Administration of the War in their
own Hands; in which His Highness would be but a Cipher, and would never be
trusted. That then, not content with that, it was not to be doubted, but that
the Exclusion of himself, and of his Heirs by the Second Bed, unless educated
in the Protestant Religion, would likewise be hotly urged in the next place, in
favor of a Protestant Prince so doubly Allied to the Crown of England, a
professed Enemy of France, and a Native of Holland, the Country, next their
own, so much adored by them. That such an Alliance would strengthen that
Faction, that was already but too strong. That such an Exclusion being pressed,
the King must either grant it, or deny it; if he granted it, as it was to be
feared he might, then was His Highness, and the Heirs of his Religion, lost
without Recovery; and then it would be out of the French King's Power, as well
as Inclination, to assist him, after having been so disobliged, against the
Power of England and Holland united; neither could he propose that Advantage to
himself, be it as it will: That if the King should resist the said Importunity
about Exclusion, that then he would expose himself to the Distractions of a
Civil War, which might end both in the Ruin of the Royal Family, and the
Monarchy it self; for that the Republicans would not fail to lift up their
Crests again in those Troubles: And that besides the Interest of the Prince of
Orange, the Duke of Monmouth, being already very popular, might be tempted by
so fair an Opportunity, to put in for a Pretender to the Succession; and that
it was not impossible that the King, if he saw him favored by the People,
might be tempted too to prefer the Interest of a Son, before that of a Brother;
and a Brother too, for whom he must be necessitated to undergo so much Vexation
and Trouble, and run so great a Risque to defend. That in the mean while,
England being in a War with France, that King, instead of helping him, must be
obliged, in his own Defense, to foment those Troubles, and abet his Enemies.
That perhaps he might think some of these Fears but imaginary; but that His
Highness might assure himself, they had better Intelligence than he in that
Case, and were very well satisfied that all the said Parties were ready
disposed, and had concerted all their Designs against him; and that they were
abetted by Men of the greatest power and Interest in the three Kingdoms; and
then, of what Power and Influence such plausible and popular Pretensions would
be among the People, when promoted and advanced by such Men, His Royal Highness
could not be ignorant of.

That therefore, all summed up, and duly compared, the Dangers attending the
Espousing his Daughter to the Prince of Orange were as great, if not
considerably greater, than those that would be incurred by giving her up to the
Disposal of the French King; for more could not be feared from that, than what
had been mentioned: Therefore they conjured him, as he tendered his own Good
and Safety, or that of his Posterity, or of his Brother, or, lastly, of the
hopeful Beginnings of the Catholic Religion in these Kingdoms, that he should
be persuaded, and also persuade his Brother, to take the Council of France,
both in the Disposal of the Princess, and other things relating thereto; for
that the Danger of adhering to the French King was no greater than that on the
other side, but that the Assistance on his side would be great and powerful, as
well as Cordial; whereas it never could be in the other Party's Power, much
less in their Interest or Inclination, to afford him any Succor in his
Troubles, but rather to add Oil to the Flame: And above all, never to be so
rash, as to suffer himself to be tempted to consent to a War against France,
for that the Factions would then have their Ends of him, as having a full
Opportunity put into their hands thereby to complete his Ruin without Control.
These were the Arguments used to His Royal Highness, against the March with the
Prince of Orange: And with which I shall at present conclude, who am,

My LORD, Your Lordship's Most Humble Servant.
Paris, Aug. 4. 1679. N. S.
LETTER LVIII.
Proposals made to the Duke of York, about consenting to have his Daughter, the
Lady Mary, privately Trapanned into France, etc.

My LORD,
I Gave in my last to your Lordship a Relation of the Remonstrances used to the
Duke, in general, against his consenting to have his Daughter married to the
Prince of Orange: I shall now endeavor to oblige your Lordship with some new
Proposals made to him upon that Head.

1. That the Duke should use all the Power and Interest he had with the King,
his Brother, to let his Daughter, the Lady Mary, take a Voyage into France, to
take the Waters of Bourbon; or else to consent she might be privily sent away
by the Duke, as against his Knowledge and Will; and that then they would get
her speedily married; which putting things past Retrieve, Matters might the
better, by good Management, be composed, and made up to all their Satisfactions.

2. That to this purpose the French King would send a most splendid Embassy
into England, of one of the chief Peers of his Realm, with a very numerous
Train of choice Nobility. But if the King consented publicly to that
Proposition, the Princess might go over in the said Ambassador's Company: Or if
he gave private Consent, she might be conveyed away, as in the first Article.

3. If the King should by no means consent to it, that then the Duke should
contrive a Way to get her seized and shipped off at the Ambassador's Departure,
without the King's Privity or Knowledge.

4. That if it were done by the King's Consent, the Sum of Five and twenty
Millions of Livres should be, without fail, remitted to him, at two Payments;
the first, as soon as the Princess should arrive in the Kingdom of France; and
the other, three Months after. And that the King and Duke in that Case should
seem highly concerned, and disposed to declare War against France on that
Account; and with the Money sent, raise Forces, as if it were for the War, and
call to the Parliament for Money to maintain it; which if they granted, to take
it, (there was no doubt of their Consent to that:) After which, the French King
was to send a very submissive Embassage to England, offering to make ample
Satisfaction for the Injury, and to strike up a Peace with Holland at any rate:
Upon which, our King was to take upon him to be appeased, and to pretend the
Dutch were in the fault that he did not make War.

5. That then, if there should happen any Motions for Exclusion, that His
Majesty might make use of the Money, and of the Forces raised as aforesaid, for
his own Security: And that if any Rebellion happened, he might be assured, the
French King would send him both Men and Money enough in case of Need.

6. That if it were done without the King's Consent, he, the Duke, should
pretend himself wholly ignorant of the Rape, and seem as much concerned as the
King for Satisfaction.

7. But that if the King should be so displeased with His Highness, as to side
with the adverse Party against him, after he had stood his Ground as long as he
could, and made as many Friends as was possible, that then he should privately
retire to Scotland or Ireland, and raise Arms there, where he should be
powerfully assisted, both with Men and Money, from the French King; who would
likewise use Means to raise Divisions among his Enemies, by several Methods
they had concerted; and suddenly discourage them all, by an unexpected Peace
with Holland; though there was but little Prospect that Things should come to
this Extremity.

8. That the Princess, still the better to appease the Heats in England,
should, upon her Marriage, have, in ample manner, a Protestant Chapel allowed
her; and that at the same time, the Protestants in the Kingdom of France should
be used with extraordinary Kindness and Favor for her sake, till a general
Peace, or other fi^ time to take off the Mask, were come.

9. That the better to take off the Edge of the English Fury to a War with
France, besides the Peace to be made between the French and the Dutch, a third
War was to be raised by the Hollanders, against England; and they put with
might and main upon new Encroachments and Insolences against the English.

10. That the better to cover all this, the Duke was not only to make a
Semblance, but really to go to the Protestant Church again, and to give out
with a full Cry, that he had been most maliciously traduced, and that he never
was reconciled to the Church of Rome; and that his Noncompliance in some things
lately put upon him, did only arise in that he conceived such things were not
to be imposed upon a Prince, as on a Subject.

I have had the Opportunity, my Lord, to see several other things, of lesser
Consequence, projected here, for the Management of this Affair to the Interest
of the French Court; with which I shall not trouble your Lordship, and remain,

My LORD, Your very humble Servant.
Paris, Aug. 13. 1679. N. S.
LETTER LIX.
Arguments used by the French Emissaries in England, to the Royal and Church of
England Party, against the matching of the Lady Mary with the Prince of Orange.

My LORD,
THe French Emissaries finding (notwithstanding the strong opposition made by
them to the matching of the Lady Mary with his Highness the Prince of Orange,
as I have some time since informed your Lordship,) that there was a very strong
Current in the Nation for that Alliance, and having informed their Principals
in the French Court therewith, they had fresh Instructions sent them, to gain,
if possible, the time desired by them, which was till a General Peace were
concluded, and to ply the Royalists, and high Members of the Church of England,
not only close upon that Head, but their Instructions were reduced to these
Branches.

1. They were to represent the Match as dishonorable, and too much reflecting
on the Honor of Crowned Heads, to match a Daughter in so fair a way to be
Heiress to three Crowns, to a Prince who was not only no Sovereign, but
descended of a Family which had distinguished it self chiefly by heading a
Rebellion against his lawful Prince, and who was himself but the chief Officer
of a Government so hateful to all Kings, as a Commonwealth, and that of one
founded by Rebellion too; that such an Alliance must needs be more particularly
dishonorable to the Royal Family of England, which had so lately and deeply
suffered by a Rebellion moved against it by their own People, chiefly out of an
Emulation to be like those Rebels; That indeed King Charles I. did match his
Daughter to the present Prince of Orange's Father; but it was because he was
involved in Troubles, and had not time or opportunity to dispose of her better,
and thought by that Match to please the people, appease the Faction animated
against him, and by such a protestant Match allay the Jealousies conceived of
his being popishly inclined, or having Leagued with popish Powers to their
prejudice; and lastly, obtain some Assistance from the States of Holland in his
Distress; and yet that after all his projection hereby, that Match was
condemned by most of his Friends, as highly Dishonorable, and of very ill
Example and Consequence, and is charged upon him as one of the great Errors of
his Reign, and therefore by no means to be reiterated by a new one of the same
kind.

2. They were to remonstrate, That the Prince of Orange was bred in
Presbyterian Principles, and to exaggerate, with all the terrible Circumstances
that could be supposed, the danger the Church of England and Episcopacy would
be in by the accession of such a Prince to the Crown; Presbyterians being no
less passionate Enemies to the Church of England than Papists, and being much
the more dangerous of the two, as being incomparably the more numerous; the
strange success they lately had in effecting so total a Subversion as they did
of the Episcopal Church in the last Reign under rebellious Leaders, being too
sensible a proof of both what they could, and what they would do again more
effectually and more irrecoverably, when headed by a lawful Superior, and
strengthened by the assistance of their Brethren in Holland: This, my Lord, is
the substance of the Instructions sent from hence to their Emissaries in
England, for the managing of the forementioned part, and with which I shall
conclude this Epistle, who am

My LORD, Your Honors to serve You.
Paris, Aug. 23. 1679. N. S.
LETTER LX.
Instructions given to the French Emissaries, whereby to manage the Dissenters
and Republican Party in England, in reference to the Prince of Orange's
matching with the Lady Mary.

My LORD,
I Have in my last given your Lordship an Account of the French Intrigues, in
managing the Royal and Church of England Party, in respect to the March with
the Prince of Orange; here follows their Instructions to their Agents, with the
Dissenters and Republican Party upon the same Head. To them they were to use
many of the Arguments used to those of Holland, of which hereafter; and make
them believe, if they could, that if the P. of Orange should come to the Crown
of England, notwithstanding his Humility now, he would fly higher at Absolute
Power than any before him, or that the present King, or his Brother, could;
that under an humble appearance he subtly hid an aspiring Mind, and that
having in many things encroached already upon the Power of the States General,
he would totally oppress them, and by that accession of Strength raise his
Authority in England to what pitch he pleased, and Adieu to all hopes of a
Commonwealth there, when that of Holland should be subject to his Scepter, and
Adieu to all expectation of making Presbytery the predominant Religion there;
for that it was almost incompatible with a moderate Monarchy, much less with
Absolute Power; and that whatever Principles the Prince had been bred in, as to
Religion, though he might like them well enough as a Member of a State, with
whose Constitutions they perfectly agreed; it was not to be doubted, that when
he came to be a Monarch, and so powerful an one too, as the United Provinces
thrown into the weight of three Crowns would make him, but he would, like most
Princes, make his Religion conform to the Model of his Politics, and when he
became a Monarch, and so great an one too, take up Monarchs principles, which
could be no other than Popish, or such as exceed them, if possible, in
malignity, viz. Those of the Tantivy Sons of the Church of England, none else
agreeing with despotick Rule; so that whatever hopes they might flatter
themselves with from such a Match, and the Prince's accession to the Throne;
they should find themselves so far disappointed, as not to have any reason left
them to expect as much as a Tolleration in Religion, and the Freedom of their
Consciences: Which with my humble Respects to your Lordship, is all I have to
Communicate at this time, who am in all lowly Observance,

My LORD, Your Honor's to Command.
Paris, Sept. 5. 1679. N. S. POSTSCRIPT.
My LORD,
SInce I had finished my Letter, I happening occasionally to run over some of
our Minutes, I thought fit to sub-join what I meet with there briefly inserted,
in order to the management of mere Politicians and Adiaphorites in Religion,
upon the account of the Prince's Match; and to them the forementioned
Emissaries were to suggest on the contrary, that the Prince though he should in
time by virtue of the said Match come to be King of England, yet that it could
not be thought but that still he would continue a Dutchman in all his
Inclinations, sacrifice our Commerce and Interest to those of that Nation; yea,
and perhaps part with the chief Prerogatives of the Crown to make the King of
England like a Doge of Venice, or Dutch Stadt-holder, etc. which though
sufficiently ridiculous I could not forbear noting to your Lordship, who am

My LORD, Yours, etc.



LETTER LXI.
The Arguments used in Holland by the French Emissaries to the Lovestein
Faction against the Prince of Orange's matching with the Lady Mary, etc.

My LORD,
IF it was any pleasure to your Lordship to peruse the Accounts I have already
given you, of the Stratagems of this Court to incite the Church of England and
Dissenting Parties against the Match with the Prince of Orange, as I am
desirous, and I hope not unwilling, to interpret your silence in that regard to
imply it; I cannot think it will be less to your Honor's satisfaction, to
understand how they managed the same Affair in Holland, where no less Subtilty
and Address was wanting than in England to divert a Match, that predicted no
good Omen to France, as they imagined; the Party in that Republic which their
Emissaries had Instructions to work upon, were the Lovestein Faction, to whom
nevertheless they were to address themselves very cautiously and covertly, and
first to insinuate to them, and by them to the State-Party.

That indeed it was true the Illustrious Princes of the House of Nassau had not
only been the first Founders, but also the great preservers of their
Commonwealth, and that it could not be denied but that the present Prince of
Orange had very much contributed to its late Recovery, after it had been
brought to the very brink of Destruction; and that they were fully convinced
that same Family must remain a necessary Bulwark to their Commonwealth, so
long as their Interests should continue inseperably intwisted with those of the
State; but if they should be so blinded as to consent, or but tacitly give way
to any Steps that might alter those of the Prince into any other Channel; that
same House might, in process of time, prove the fatal Cadency and Dissolution,
as it had been the happy Rise and Glory of that flourishing State. That the
implacability of the Spanish Royal Family against those that have once offended
them, and their bloody and unjust Proscription of the noble House of Orange,
had so firmly cemented the Interests of the Princes of that Family with those
of the States during the Wars with Spain, that there could not possibly any
Danger arise to them from that House, how much soever they were entrusted with
the Authority of the States, they being then best secured by the Greatness and
Power of that. Nay, and that after the Peace made between that Republic, and
the Crown of Spain, there could be no Danger from those Princes neither, so
long as they matched into inferior Princes Families, as those of Germany, etc.
which might add Strength, but never could Power enough to the Princes of Orange
to crush the State, or in the least divide from its true Interests. But that it
might be of the dangerousest Consequence, if any of them were suffered to match
into the Family of any Crowned Head, and especially of any near Neighbor to
the Republic; for that would be an effectual Means to fill their Heads with
aspiring Thoughts, and great Designs to Aggrandize themselves, and might afford
them Power enough to put them in Execution; a Temptation too strong for almost
any active spirited Prince to resist: And therefore such an one as this present
Prince ought by no means to be exposed to by any wise Statesmen, whose
Interest it was to keep him from it, and who had Cunning enough to put him by
it. That never any of His present Highness's Predecessors have been ever as
much as suspected of aspiring at any Power over the Commonwealth; but what
tended to its greater Security, and for the Elevation of the Majesty of the
Republic, without the least Glances of assuming any to themselves, unless it
were His Highness's Father; who, in all probability, was animated thereunto by
his matching with a Daughter of England: And that his Ambition might have
proved fatal to the Republic, beyond Retrieve, if his immature Death, and
other seasonable Providence, had not intervened. That the Influence of that
Match had proved very detrimental to that illustrious House, by stirring up
such a Jealousy in the States against them, as would not suffer them to admit
the present Prince, for a long time, to enjoy the Places of Honor, Authority
and Trust formerly so well maintained and officiated by his noble Ancestors:
And that, at the same time, it had proved as pernicious to the States
themselves, in creating and nourishing Factions among them, and Endeavors to
keep up the Republic upon a new Model, without Captain General, Stadtholder,
Admiral, etc. and to deprive themselves of the so necessary and Auspicious
Assistance and Conduct of that most Illustrious House; and thereby exposed even
almost to be made a Prey to the dangerous Ambition of the French Monarch.

And therefore now, when they had so newly re-enter'd into their true
Interests, and happily re-fixed all things on the old Foundation, by restoring
the present Prince to the Dignity of his Ancestors, and calling him to the Helm
of the Tempest-beaten State, and had by his Courage, Conduct and Interest
recovered the Commonwealth to a very hopeful Condition of Power and Prosperity
again, it would be no less than a Madness to venture the Ruin of all those fair
Hopes, by a second Match with England, when by the former they had been almost
all Shipwrack'd; and to suffer a Prince who was now wholly their own, to
espouse, in such a Marriage as was then in Agitation, a Foreign Interest; and
such as, in all probability, could not, in time, but interfere with theirs: And
therefore desired it might not be.

1. Because, though the Prince's Intentions should happen to continue never so
right and firm to the Interest of the Republic, yet this Match could not but
be still very detrimental both to him and them, by causing incurable
Jealousies, Factions and Animosities amongst them, without end; and which could
not but be of pernicious Consequence to them both.

2. That by reason of the little probability of the Duke of York's having any
Vivacious Male Issue, this would give the Prince such a near Prospect of the
British Crowns, that it could not but engage him, in that View, upon all
Occasions, to strain his Power and Interest in the United Provinces to the
utmost for the advantage of the English Nation, to the prejudice of the Dutch
increase of Power and Interest.

3. That if he ever came to be King of England, the Power he would thereby
obtain, added to that he had already in the United Provinces as Stadt-holder,
Captain General, etc. and to the great Influence he had among the Soldiery in
the States pay, would undoubtedly be a great temptation to him for to reduce
that State under the English Crown, and influence the others to assist him in
it; And that if he should have Issue by his Princess, as it was likely enough
he might, the danger under that Circumstance would be in a manner inevitable.

Its likely, my Lord, our Politicians here forsaw very great Difficulties would
arise in making any manner of Impressions upon the States against the Prince's
Match, for by the foresaid Remonstrances it does appear to me their
Master-battery was turned on that side; but though all their Politics have
failed them for the prevention of the Marriage, yet they have not failed to put
some of these Arguments fo^^ards, to render the Prince, and all his Proceedings
suspect to the States, and they have already bragged; that all the Constancy
his Highness is well known to be Master of, will find work enough to ver-come
the Jealousies entertained of him, (and which they are resolved never to be
wanting on their part to foment) and to make it believe that all he has acted
since his marriage has been to the aggrandizing of himself and his Authority,
and the Diminution of that of the Republic; I fear I have already too much
transgrest by my tediousness, and shall therefore only subscribe my self, as I
am in sincerity

My LORD, Your Lordships, Most humble Servant.
Paris, Sept. 20. 1679. N. S.
LETTER LXII.
Of the Solemn Embassy sent by the French King to King Charles II. in the Year
1677, in order to break off the Match with the Prince of Orange, etc.

My LORD,
PUrsuant to what I have already mentioned to your Lordship of the Designs
concerted between his Royal Highness, and the French King, about getting of the
Lady Mary, by a Stratagem, into France, if their other Measures about hindering
the Match were broken, was the late solemn Embassy sent over from hence into
England, whereof the Count d' Estree was the head, accompanied with the Duke de
Vendosme, the Archbishop of Rheims, one of our great Minister, the Marquess de
Louvois's Sons, and at least fifty Lords more of principal Note; and whose
public instructions, though they imported nothing more then a great Complement,
and some overtures about forbiding any recruits, to be sent over to our Land
Forces in the service of the Confederates; yet privately they were to endeavor
a French match, and if they saw they could not succeed therein, to concert
closer measures with the Duke, about putting in practice what he had before
consented to, about geting the Princess his daughter privately conveyed away,
in Company of this Ambassador into France; and perhaps your Lordship will not
be dissatisfied, if I recount what I have heard discoursed one day at this
Court, between our Commissioner and some other Courtiers concerning the
Embassy. Said one of them to theother, What needed so splendid and costly an
Embassy at this time of day to the King of England, when there is so little
hopes that he durst give his Consent to what we desire of him; if he were of
himself disposed thereto: Yes, says the other, 'Twill be well worth the Cost
let things go as they will upon this occasion, for it is a greater honor our
King now does to the King of England, than he has ever yet done to any other
Prince, or ever to the Emperor himself when at Peace with him; and such an
Honor cannot but work sensibly upon the heart of a Prince, who is so easily
wrought upon, and may work some good Effects for us in time, if not for the
present; And however, if the worst come to the worst, this extraordinary Honor
now done him by our Monarch, will make his Parliament and People so fully
persuaded that he has entered into an extraordinary Engagement with him, that
all he can say, or do, will never convince them of the contrary, or induce them
to trust him with Money to make War against France, for fear he should use it
against themselves; and not only so, but it would make him as suspected among
the Confederates, that none of them, from hence forward, would trust him,
either for an Assistant Allie, or Mediator, and so would render him of
insignificant force to thwart our Designs. But the King did for once Trick the
Trickers, by the care he had taken of the Princess, as I shall note elsewhere
to your Lordship, and by his sudden marrying her to his Highness the Prince of
Orange, so much to the surprise and disappointment of this Court, that I cannot
express it, and therefore must conclude, subscribing my self

My LORD, Your Lordship's most humble and most devoted Servant.
Paris, Dece. 7. 1679. N. S.
LETTER LXIII.
Of the Popish Plot, and Father Kelley's Menaces.

My LORD,
THE discourse about the Plot cannot be more in England than it is here, but the
Particulars of the prosecution of it, your Lordship must know much better than
I; I do not question, but there is Villainy enough at the bottom of it, but our
Ministers are as deep in the sudds as any other whatsoever, who by their
slights, and wicked practices, have drawn the English Papists into such
Combinations, as has put the Nation into such ferments, incurable Jealousies
and divisions, as has effectually diverted the English from hunting the French
in Flanders, by employing them to hunt the Papists, and Jesuits at home, as
they have been pleased to word it: My Lord, It may not perhaps be unpleasing to
give your Honor an account of some passages that happened between one Father
Kelley an Irish Priest, and my self in this City lately concerning the King,
etc. I know very well, that there were, and and perhaps may be still some of
that name in England, but this same has lived for some years at Paris, by St.
Jean de Greve; and though a Priest is a great Banker, paying most of the pensions
for secret service transmitted to the English Romanists, but chiefly to Irish
Papists in England and Ireland, and who by his discourse upon the late English
Fleet and Armies being ready, and the War likely to be declared against this
Kingdom, was pleased then to say somewhat in relation to this Conspiracy, that
I have little thought on till very lately, and that may give your Honor some
light into the designs of this Court; said he, the King of France will find
him (meaning our King) work enough by Divisions at home, and discovering, if
needs be, his and his Brothers intreagues in France, and does not care though he
expose all the Roman Catholics in the three Kingdoms, to a general and hot
persecution, so long as, like the Turkish Asaphi, they serve to blunt the
English Men's fury, and divert them from thwarting the designs of the potent
Catholic Kingdom of France, which would afterward set all right again, but
that he was in hopes by their hunting of Papists, they would never leave
hunting the King and his Brother too, if they proved refractory, till they had
brought them to take Sanctuary in a stricter Alliance with the French King than
ever, as their only Safeguard; and that it was in the French King's power to
spring up a Plot next day, to give the King of England Game enough for his life
time, for that the Mines and Trains were already laid, and that there needed
only putting fire to them, etc. I am very sorry I could not have obliged your
Lordship sooner with these passages, which yet I hope comes not too late, but
it may in some measure be grateful from

My LORD, Your Humble Servant.
Paris, Feb. 28. 1678. N. S.
LETTER LXIV.
Of the Duke of York's being Commanded to retire to Bruxells in the Year 1679,
and of the Promises made him by the King before his departure.

My LORD,
I Know not how Matters go in England, nor what the Sense of the people is in
general concern the Duke's retiring to Bruxells, but I can assure your
Lordship, they seem to be mightily allarmed here at it, though they put a good
mien upon it. Perhaps your Lordship may know much more of the Secret of this
Journey than I can inform you, but if what is transmitted hither by the Agents
of our Grand Minister be acceptable, they give us this account: That the Earl
of D -- was the person who advised the King to remove his Royal Highness from
his presence, and that his Reasons for it were, that the Parliament might have
no pretense for to complain of his Majesty, that he had not taken all the
Measures necessary for the Security of their Religion and Liberty; but they
tell us, how true, I leave it to your Lordships profound Judgment to determine,
that the Earl by the foresaid Advise did not so much consult the King and
Kingdoms true Interest, as he did to please the Parliament, with whom he was at
odds, because of the Money received to disband the Army, and the French
Alliance; finding now by Experience, that that Artifice of his in bringing the
Plot upon the stage in order to amuse them, had failed; They further inform us,
that the Duke was mightily surprised at the Message for his departure, and made
some difficulty to bring himself to resolve to obey it, but that at length
recollecting a better Temper, it gave his fast friends an Opportunity to advise
him; That though it were at that juncture necessary he should obey the King,
yet it was no less prudent that he should, in so doing, take all necessary
Precautions, not to abandon his Fortune to the discretion of his Enemies; that
they did not doubt but that the Duke of Monmouth would push hard, to get
himself declared Legitimate by the ensuing Parliament; That the business of the
Exclusion would be renewed, and that there was room enough to fear, least his
Retreat might be rather interpreted for the flight of a guilty Person, than for
the Obedience of a submissive Subject; that therefore it was expedient he
should get the King first to promise him that he would declare, and get it
Recorded too in the Courts of Justice, that he had never been Married to the
Duke of Monmouth's Mother; That he would by no means consent to the Exclusion
that was now likely to be pressed upon him; and lastly, that he should give him
express Order in writing to require his Retirement. All which, they say, he has
happily accomplished, the truth whereof time must determine, whereunto I leave
it, who am

My LORD, Your Humble Servant.
Paris, Apr. 6. 1679. N. S.
LETTER LXV.
Of the Noise of King Charles's Divorce from Queen Katherine.

My LORD,
THE business of the King's Divorce has made a mighty noise on this side, and I
cannot with any certainty inform your Lordship, which way this Court stands
affected; for I find, on the one hand, Instructions given to their Agents in
England to insinuate to the King, but yet very tenderly, what a piece of
Unjustice it would be so to disgrace an innocent harmless Princess, to whom he
had been lawfully married, and who had, with so much patience, bore the
Infirmities that attended him; and that the consequent of such a Divorce would
perhaps be worse than the Divorce it self, seeing a Brother would be baulked of
the just hopes he had, after his Majesty's death, of ascending the English
Throne, etc. But since, my Lord, having found the Parliament, and Privy
Council, disposed very much to favor such an Action, they gave their
Emissaries, of another stamp, directions to incite the King to it, and to
promise to find him out a Princess of this Courts recommendation and
procurement, in hopes, by that means, to set the two Brothers at variance, and
to raise new Factions and Disputes about Succession; and if they saw he would
not consent, yet they had their Creatures ready to whisper it in the Duke's ear
as a great secret, that if it were not for them, he would have consented
thereunto; but how far these Politics have been practiced, your Lordship can
observe much better than I at such a distance, who am

My LORD, Your ever obliged, and most humble Servant.
Paris, Mar. 2. 1680. N. S.
LETTER LXVI.
Of the Earl of Shaftsbury's being Calumniated by the French Agents to King
Charles II. in order to put him out from being President of the Council, and
from all Public Administration.

My LORD,
THE joy conceived by the Ministers of this Court, at the displacing of my Lord
of Shaftsbury from his great Office of President of the King's Council, and
consequently from all Administration of Public Affairs, is as open and
unexpressible as the Instruments and Causes of such a change are secret; but so
far as I have had any intelligence of this grand Affair, which I predict to be
no good Omen to our poor Country, I am free, and I hold my self in duty bound
to communicate to your Lordship; who perhaps will not much wonder at such a
change, when I tell you that the Emissaries of this Court, but more especially
the women kind, whom I need not Name, have incessantly as they have been taught
their Lessons, been buzzing the King in the Ears with such Calumnies and
Accusation, as here follow according as they are inserted here.

They were to lay hold on all opportunities, to render the said Noble Lord
obnoxious to the King, but yet to be very tender in their first attack, and
therefore frequently to say; That truly his President was a person of
incomparable Parts and Abilities in matters of State, and that to do him
Justice, he had done his Prince as important service as any of his Subjects;
That though he had in former times fallen in with the republican interest,
which was then predominant in the Nation; yet he had since showed so much Zeal
for the Monarchy, as might justly obliterate all former miscarriages; provided
still he proved constant in his Devoir, and gave no suspicion of his being
inclinable to reassume the principles, which he seemed once so entirely to
have forsaken; and when they had again and again made way by such insinuations
as these for more desperate Attacks; They urged his Majesty might call to mind
the time and occasion when, as well as of whom the Earl had once said, that
when a man is wanting to himself, he deserves that others should be so to him
also; and he might consider how false and dangerous a Maxim that was, when it
referred to a Prince or ones Country, to whom one is never allowed to be
wanting; That the Earl had been as good as his word, was already sufficiently
manifest, when he had discovered in Parliament the secret motives that had
engaged the King to grant Liberty of Conscience before the late War, as well as
his Alliance with France, and insinuated the designs his Majesty had to
retrench the liberty of Parliaments, which was indeed no more then to reduce
that Assembly within the bounds of their Duty; that his conduct ever since in
promoting the Test, etc. gave no small Umbrage that he meant more then a bare
exclusion of his Royal Highness from public Offices; That they could not be
positive that a change of Government was designed thereby, and a new essay for
the monstrous Metamorphosis of the Monarchy into a Republic once more; but
that surely, it looked that way; For if the thing were considered aright, the
King, 'twas true, was an Established Prince, and now long in possession, and in
whose person there could be no plausible pretense to induce the people to
abandon that form of Government; and for the Regal power it self, the time was
yet too short since a Company of Tyrants had plunged the State into Troubles,
for to propose an entire abolition of King's a second time, seeing those very
persons who went under the notion of Republicans, did not so much yet aim for
the most part at the change of the form of the Monarchical Government, as at
the diminution of the Authority; and hence it might be reasonably inferred,
that the Earl well foreseeing he could not proceed directly to that which he
aimed at, began cunningly to take a round which he judged would conduct him
with more safety to the same end: And that seeing no possibility of
dispossessing the King, he had formed a design to disinherit the person that
ought to succeed him, being assured that the best expedient to destroy the
regal Dignity, was to disturb the order of Succession; And that his Majesty
must needs foresee the dangers arising from the Counsels of so pernicious a
Man, whose authority in Court, Parliament and City was equally formidable as
his Policy.

I will not take upon me to determine what great services his Majesty has lost
by the discarding of this great Statesman, he may want it in time, and be
better persuaded then ever of the Character himself has given once of him upon
his resolution of a difficult Case, viz. That he had a Chancellor who knew more
Law than all his Judges, and more Divinity than all his Bishops; if these
particulars be not new to your Lordship, I desire to know it, that I may be
more cautious for the future in my Intelligence, wherein I always aim at
pleasing your Lordship,

Who am Your humble Servant.
Paris, Aug. 29th, 1681.
LETTER LXVII.
Of the Duke of York's being in France Twice, and Closetted by the French King.
His Rencounter with the French Ambassador Barillon. His Wives ill success in
France. Her Petition to the French King. Return without Relief, and her fatal
End.

My Lord,
HAD I been able to have given your Lordship some remarkable passages relating
to the Duke, and Mr. Coleman's History, in the time the great Affair of the
Popish Plot was in Vogue and Agitation, I do not doubt but I should have
performed a grateful part to you; yet I find something so singular and
diverting therein, that I cannot but flatter my self, it will still, in some
measure, prove agreeable. Mr. Coleman had, for a long time, managed the
Intrigues between the French and English Courts, and that your Lordship well
knows, for his Letters that were seized and published make it evident; and he
was one of the chief Instruments to draw his Master, the Duke of York, into so
close a Correspondence with them as he was engaged in, of which your Lordship
has heard before; and from the Year 1676, to near the time he was Arraigned and
Condemned for the Popish Plot; I am free to acquaint you, my Lord, That all his
Letters past through my hands, being first directed to a French Gentleman, who
took care to transmit them to me, with Orders to send them to Father St.
Germain, who managed all Affairs between him and Father La Choice, but I saw
the Contents of few or none of them, till lately I have found them among other
things of that kind in the Minutes of our French Secretary, and which is the
Reason your Lordship has not received this Account sooner, at which, I am sure,
you cannot but stand astonished, as I was my self, when I acquaint you, that I
find it entered here, that the Duke of York was, during this famous
Correspondence, two several times in France, and Closetted to boot, by his Most
Christian Majesty (which, by the way, unfolds the Mystery of the Proposals I
have formerly mentioned, about Trapanning the Princes into France) but it was
both times by Night, and the Works of Darkness, between One and Two of the
Clock in the Morning, trusty persons being ready posted to Introduce him: And
one time a Councellor of the Parliament of Paris to whom, Some of Coleman's
Letters were directed, happening accidentally to let fall an Expression,
intimating, That the Duke of York was come thither in Person, though it was
Voic'd up and down among the Courtiers it was Coleman; he received a very
severe Check for his unseasonable Inadvertence; and, as a farther punishment,
he had no more any Secrets communicated to him: for, the Letters from
thenceforward were distributed by another way. The first time the Duke was
Closetted, was a little before the second Dutch War, to concert Measures, how
he should he enabled to induce his Brother to give his Consent to it to promote
the French Designs thereby; as was likewise our Famous Admiral Sir Edward
Spragg, for the same purpose, not very long after the Duke. The second time was
a little before the Splendid and Extraordinary French Embassy was sent into
England, and wherein Measures were Concerted how to induce our King to give his
Consent to have the Princess Mary Married into France; and, in case that would
not do, how to Steal her, and send her away when they went off; but this
Intrigue coming to be privately discovered to the King, by one of the Duke's
great Confidents, he had the Cunning to dissemble the matter, and took no
manner of notice of it to the Duke his Brother, but gave secret Orders that a
strict Eye and a good Guard should be kept over the Princess, and would not
permit the Duke to have her abroad upon any Invitations, or other pretense
whatsoever, till the Ambassadors were quite gone; saying, It would administer
Jealousy to His People, if She should be permitted to stir abroad much, while
the French Sparks continued in England. And to prevent the like Plots upon her
for the future, and to please His People, who were now upon the fret, and, as
they would have it here out of Displeasure against such an Indirect and Rash
Procedure, which, had it taken effect, as he said, would have dashed him and
his Government in an Instant upon an inevitable Rock, he Married Her, as your
Lordship well remembers, to the Prince of Orange, to the great Regret and
Vexation of the French Court, and of the Duke too, who, from thenceforward has
not cared how almost he exposed the King his Brother, by engaging of Him in
continual Troubles for his sake, nor how closely he United with the French
Faction, who afterward wreakt their Revenge for some time upon the Duke
himself, but chiefly upon the King, by their Intrigues, in bringing the
following Popish Plot upon the Stage: Both the times the Duke was on this side,
the King knew not of, or at least they designed He should believe so, but
thought he was retired for Indisposion, yet both times he brought Remittances
for considerable Sums of Money; yet the French were highly displeased at him
for his failure in the aforesaid Match, and the subsequent Plot upon his
Daughter; so far, as that they Suspended his Pensions, as they likewise did
Coleman's, which made them both incline to Revolt to the Spanish Faction, and
moved the Duke to some seeming willingness to go over, and Command the English
Forces in Flanders, in the War then likely to be declared from England against
France; for which they were cruelly revenged upon Mr. Coleman, by contriving
his Ruin and Death; and against the Duke of York too, by the discovery of the
Popish Plot, in which they were highly Instrumental, and by employing the
Duchess of Portsmouth, and some other of their Creatures in our Court, which
were bigoted to their Interests, to promote the Bill of Exclusion, that so
that Prince might be brought under a necessity, as they thought, to return to,
and absolutely to rely upon them; for when, in those Troublesome Times, the Duke
was forced to retire to Bruxells, the French King was heard to say, That had he
followed his Counsel, and been constant to him, he should not have needed to
have retired to Bruxells, or to any other place but France. But however, I find
all was accommodated again afterward, and the Duke got closer in with them than
ever, when the Whigparty, as they called it, was quashed, and things were ripe
for another Plot, called. The Pr. -- one. But however, before that Breach we
have spoken of with the Duke and Coleman, they were resolved first to get some
Service out of them; for, finding, after the Alliance with Holland, that our
King was somewhat inclined to comply with His Parliaments and Peoples
Instances, well as those made to Him by the Confederate Ministers in Declaring
a War in conjunction with them against France, as appeared by His Speech to the
Parliament; But more by their Voting a Fleet of Ninety Capital Men of War, and
an Army of Nine and twenty thousand Land-soldiers for that purpose: of all
which it does appear, Coleman sent over hither a speedy Account; They then
presently Renewed their Pensions to him, and to the Duke for some time, with a
Solemn Promise of a considerable Sum by way of Gratuity besides, if they could
so far prevail, as to sow such Dissentions between the King and Parliament, as
might hinder those Preparations by being seconded by an Actual Declaration of
War, which they did effectually; for they had, by their Creatures, inspired
into the heads of the most Stirring and Active Members of the House, that the
Pretense of War against France, was only a Court-trick to get Money, and a
Standing Army to Enslave the Nation; and therefore it were not their best way
to trust the King with Money for that purpose, unless it were at certain
moderate Sums, and with such Limitations as might Secure them from any
Arbitrary Deligns, and from Intrigues with the French; and at the same time it
was Infused, with much Artifice, into the King's Head, That if he once ventured
on a War against France without an Unconditional Vote for sufficient supplies,
and that in very considerable Sums at once; as for example, of so much yearly
as long as the War lasted; that he was an undone and lost Man, and would, by
that false step, be infallibly unhinged; by which Artifices a Declaration of
War against France was so long protracted, till the Hollanders despairing of
any good from England, were necessitated to clap up a Separate Peace (which the
French, with all diligence, proposed to them) whilst the King and Parliament in
England were disputing the Case about Funds for the War. My Lord, I have been
necessitated to recapitulate some things here, which I remember I have Written
a Larger Account of to your Lordship, and that because I could not well
otherwise have brought in the succeeding part of Mr. Coleman's History, who, to
say nothing of the Duke, having effected the forementioned Divisions,
Jealousies and Disputes, claimed his Promised Reward of Monsieur Barillon, the
French Ambassador at London, having yet received but one Payment of it; but the
sly Monsieur finding his Business was so far done, that he was able to go on
with the rest himself without their assistance, put him off at first with Fair
Words, but Coleman still Renewing his Instances, Barillon began to slight his
Applications, and at last told him, in Downright Terms, he had no Orders to
Pay him any more Money; That he had Received enough for the Business he had
done; since there were other Instruments which he had there, who had done more,
and been much more Serviceable in it than himself; and, in a word, That his
Master, the French King, had no further occasion for the Service of such a
Saucy, Impertinent, and Inconsiderable Fellow as he was: Coleman was Netled to
the Quick at this Unexpected Treatment, which he conceived he had not deserved
at their hands; and therefore he replied again as warmly, saying, That for his
part he had neglected much greater Rewards then what he demanded of him, and
which was his Just Due, which he might have had from the Confederate Party; and
that now since he found he was so slighted, he should take care to let them see
they should find the miss of his Services, by what he would, and was resolved
to do for the other side, and that he questioned not but to bring the Duke his
Master to be quickly of his Mind: Barillon thereupon answered, That his Master
would be sure to find them such Employment in a short time, that they should
have no leisure to think of serving the Confederates, or hunting the French in
Flanders, having already such a pack of Hounds in a readiness, as would quickly
snap him, and hunt his Master too off his Legs, if he did but offer to depart
so much from his own Interest as to quit theirs.

After this mutual Huff, Coleman going to take his Leave of Monsieur Barillon,
the Frenchman retaining still a spice of French Civility, came to attend him to
the Gate, where, seeing Coleman's Coach standing right before it; Sir, said he,
briskly to him, What is the meaning of this, that your Coach stands right
before my Door, that is no place for a person of your mean station and quality.

That Is strange, Monsieur, Answered Coleman, I should be of meaner quality now,
then I used to be; there, you know well enough, it used to stand; But pray
where would you have it to stand then, continued he? Two or three doors off,
cried Barillon: So indeed, said Coleman, I used to place it, when I went to a
Bawdy House, but I did not take yours to be such till now, and so adieu. It was
but a few days after this rencounter, my Lord, that Coleman was seized for the
Popish Plot, at the news of which, the Discourse was at the French Secretaries,
that Coleman would certainly pay dear for having adventured to displease the
King their Master; for that they had persuaded the Conceited Fool to keep his
Papers all by him, which they flattered him, were Rare Compositions, and
Specimens of incomparable Wit and Parts, in which they said were things, not
only enough to hang him out of the way, but so to hamper the King and Duke too,
and involve them in such Troubles, that they would be glad to quit all their
thoughts of leaning toward the Confederates, and so return again to their
interests at last, as most expedient for them; and that they had employed such
Tools as would not fail to Discover all their Inttigues, and be in spite of
their Teeth, forced to acts of Repentance and sorrow for what they had done:
And in fine, when Coleman was Condemned, and the Duke would have interposed for
a Pardon for him, Monsieur Barillon opposed it Tooth and Nail, and said, He
ought to be Sacrificed upon that occasion, and that if he were not, the King
his Master would find means to have a worse Discovery made, than all that had
yet been made to appear out of his Papers or otherwise: After Coleman was
Hanged, his Wife reduced to a forlorn state, retired into France, and presented
a Petition to the French King to this effect.

That whereas her late Husband, besides his many other good and timous services
done to his most Christian Majesty, had upon his instances by his Minister at
London, hired an House in Deans-yard in Westminster, of a considerable Rent,
some time before that Session of Parliament wherein the matter of a War against
the Kingdom of France was to be debated and agitated, for the better
convenience of Treating some Members of Parliament, and some other Gentlemen
that had influence over them; That he had expended considerable Sums of Money
that way, as he had done in like manner among other useful instruments he had
in the Country as well as the City for promoting his Majesty's Service in
England, for which he had declined much greater Rewards from the Spanish,
Imperial, and Dutch Ministers, and other Agents, than he expected or desired
from him, whom he served more by inclination than Interest; and that he had had
the good Fortune happily to effect the great task imposed on him by his most
Christian Majesty's Commands, in dividing the King of England and his
Parliament, and breaking the neck of the intended War against France; that yet
for all that, when his work was accomplished, Monsieur Barillon had refused to
pay him his expenses, and never had given him one quarter of the Su^ he was to
have had for that Affair, and much less, the Expenses he had been at; And that
now at last he had lost his dear Life for serving his Majesty, by which sad
disaster, she and her Family being ruined, and reduced to misery and great
want; she therefore humbly besought his Majesty, if he would be pleased to do
nothing else for her, that he would order her the payment of her Husband's
Arrears, etc.

To which Petition, my Lord, this Court Replied, That Mr. Coleman, her Husband,
had had more Money from them than he deserved; That he had been a false,
inconstant Rascal, and had brought himself to that shameful end by his own
Folly and Knavery, having had the impudence to threaten his Majesty's
Ambassador, to turn Cat in Pan, etc. That his Majesty had nothing to say to
her, and would not give her one Farthing; which surly Answer so thunderstruck
the Poor Woman, that she returned over into England so enraged, and in such a
dreadful Fit of Despair, that she miserably cut her own Throat, at her Lodging
in London; which relation and Copy, of the Petition I had delivered me by an
English Priest, who was Coleman's Wife's Confessor, and which after I had
Transcribed it, I delivered to the English E -- to be sent to King Charles the
Ild. that he might see how his Brother's Creatures served him; but how he
represented it is beyond my knowledge to tell. I have been tedious and am
afraid troublesome to your Lordship by a long Epistle, but the Curiosities
whereof the various parts of it are Composed, will I hope be as powerful a
lenitiue against any Displeasure I may have incurred from your Lordship, as
they have been incitatives for me to write it, who am, My Lord,

Your most humble, and most obedient Servant.
Paris, Apr. ^. 1683. N. St.
LETTER LXVIII.
Of the Marquess de Louvois's being in England several times in King Charles
the II. Reign, and about what Business.

My Lord,
IN my last to your Lordship, I have given some intimations concerning the
Dukes being in France, and Closetted by the French King, and of Mr. Coleman's
Negotiations, and imbroylments with this Court, together with his Wifes
Calamitous life, and Tragical death, which I believe were wholly new to you;
And I cannot think but that of the Marquess de Louvois, our great Minister of
State here, his being again and again in England and Closetted there with the
King and Duke, must be equally strange and surprising to you; but tho it be a
secret, I verily believe, to all other persons on your side, except the two
forementioned persons; yet it is not so entirely such here, especially in our
Office: that he has been wanting sometimes, and hardly any of his Family knew
what was become of him, is most certain, and upon such occasions, it was
sometimes given out, he was indisposed in the Country; sometimes that he was
sent into Handers, Alsatia, etc. whether he afterward went actually with so
much expedition, tho he rode in a ^^tter, that his Journeys into ^^^land were
never perceived: I find two several occasions wherein he was Closetted.

1. About a year before the breaking out of the second Dutch War, when he was
sent particularly to help the King and his Brother to concert the Preparations
for, and manner of Carrying on that War.

2. To concert measures how to stave off the effects of the Popish Plot, by
remitting of Money to dissolve Parliaments, and by other methods, when they saw
they were carrying things farther then the French Interest required to have
them driven, but upon condition the two Brothers should not depart from their
Interests for the future; To complot measures how to ensnare the Protestant
Party, and especially the high Patriots in a Plot that should quite extinguish
the Popish one, and give the Duke of York opportunity to cut off all those who
stood in the way between him and the Crown, and between the Crown and absolute
Power; All which Closettings have been very short as well as private, and
performed with incredible diligence, and of which it is all I am able to inform
your Lordship, and with which I conclude, remaining,

My Lord, Your Lordships most humble Servant.
Paris, May 16. 1683. N. St.
LETTER LXIX.
Of that called the Presbyterian Plot.

My Lord,
I Was not a little transported with Joy to find your Lordship's Name was not
incerted in the List I have seen of Persons taken up for the Plot; I have had
the vanity to flatter my self, that some things that I have Writ lately to your
Honor concerning Monsieur Louvois's Negotiations in England, may inspire you
with a more than ordinary Caution upon such an occasion, wherein when it shall
lie with your Lordship's convenience to let me have a Line from you, I do not
desire so much to be satisfied, as what Rules I am to observe for my future
conduct, in respect to my Correspondence, since I have some reason to suspect
your Honor may be uneasy under the present Circumstance of things, and I have
heard, ^^settled too; I have little to say at present how far the Ministers of
this Court are engaged in starting of this Conspiracy, what I have formerly
Written concerning their Management of the several Factions in England, may
give your Lordship some view of their Designs; but what they generally say of
it, is, That it was now seasonable to set up a Protestant one, as a fresh game;
and since by their strong concurrence, when they saw it time, they had enabled
the King to stiff the other Popish one; and thereby diverted the current of
his Arms ready to fall upon them; it was necessary, having new Designs of
Conquests in view (and what can it be, but Luxemburg block't up by them last
year) to raise a new Disturbance in his Dominions, which could not be better
effected now, than by starting a Plot of another Stamp, which would not only
incapacitate the King to interpose, and put a stop to their career, but would
also be an effectual means to make the holding of Parliaments impracticable at
least for a time, and make him quite fast in a manner to their King's
Purse-strings, toward which they had by the other Plot made such considerable
Advances. I do presume your Lordship retains the same English Spirit you were
ever Master of, and are as constant, notwithstanding all the vicissitudes of
State, which have happened in your time, which is the Reason I retain still my
usual freedom, who am,

My Lord, Your humble Servant.
Paris, July 21. 1683. N. S.
LETTER LXX.
Of the Model of Ships sent by King Charles II. to the French King, etc.

My Lord,
I Do presume it is a matter no longer doubted of, that our King is fallen in
more than ever with the interests of this Court; the many Models and Draughts
of Ships which he has sent over hither, and some whereof I have seen at the
Marquess de Louvois, is a convincing proof of it, tho they are somewhat
desirous to give it another Term here, and say; His Britannick Majesty is well
known to be the only Prince in the World that understands Shipping the best,
and that only out of a little Vanity, to show his great Abilities in that way,
he sent diverse Models, not only into France, but else where also; tho the real
Cause, as I have heard it whispered, was his want of Jealousy, and withal to
Coaks as much Money out of them as he could; and in order to enhance the same,
he sent also Artists over as well as Models, for which, by the Account I have
seen, tho it seems to be somewhat imperfect, as to the particulars, he has
already received, at times, above 600000 Pounds Sterling, which is all the
particulars I could ever attain to in relation to this matter, that I know is
the most ungrateful to your Lordship to understand perhaps, of any thing that
has at any time dropped from my Pen, and therefore I am glad it is thus
contracted, as I am always of an opportunity to acknowledge how much I am,

My Lord, Your Lordship's most Humble Servant.
Paris, June 4. 1684. N. S.
LETTER LXXI.
The Conduct of the Court of France toward the Duke of York, during his abode
in Flanders and Scotland, etc.

My Lord,
YOUR Lordship will hardly believe the Treachery of the Ministers of this
Court, who since I have known them, would stick at no manner of Villainy to gain
their ends; and our unhappy Princes have from time to time given them but too
much opportunity to work their designs through their own sides; and this I have
already made to appear by several instances to your Lordship, and shall further
now by observing that notwithstanding his Royal Highnesses Compliance with them
in the business of Marrying his Daughter, so far as he could, and upon diverse
other occasions, as I have formerly hinted: Yet at that time when he was forced
to retire to Bruxels, they were very angry with him, and almost all the rest of
the English Papists, hecause so many of them had seemed Zealous to serve the
Spanish interest, under the Duke in Flanders; nay, and the French King himself
was heard to say, That had he followed his Counsel, and had been constant to
him, he should not have needed to retire to Bruxels, or to any other place, but
France, as I think I mentioned before to your Lordship. Tho they seemed
afterward to mollify somewhat toward him; yet they set their Emissaries on
work in England and Scotland, to deal with some persons, about whom they had
formerly got some Light in Monsieur Ruvigni's time, to get the Duke sent into
Scotland to make a Party there, while they privately engaged the Duchess of
Portsmouth and the Exclusioners in England, to do their utmost, both in Court
and Parliament, to get him Excluded from the Succession, in hopes, and with
this accursed view, that England having proceeded so far, as to put him by the
Succession; Scotland would declare for him, and so the two Kingdoms be rent in
sunder, and afflicted with a tedious War, wherein they had resolved to assist
the latter; and yet, my Lord, it is strange to think it, yet so it is that they
were not true to him even there; for they got it privately proposed to a
certain Noble Family in the Kingdom of Scotland, derived from Blood Royal, that
if they would put in a claim to the Scotch Crown, and throw off the Title of
the two Brothers, upon pretensions to be suggested to them, and that Scotland
would set up again for a Kingdom under a King of its own, and renew their
Ancient League with France, they should be Assisted effectually; and should
besides have the Lands of the Duchy of Chate^leraut, and the Honors and Lands
of Aub^ny, etc. with many other additions restored to them, and over and above
all this, a large Annual Pension, and all the old Privileges granted formerly
to the Sootch Nation renewed and considerably augmented; but tho, my Lord, that
Noble Family refused to hearken to these their Treacherous Invitations, yet
there cannot a greater instance scarce be given of their Villainous Designs than
this, which I could not but communicate to your Lordship upon this occasion,
who am,

My Lord, Your Humble Servant.
Paris Sept. 6. 1684. N. S.
LETTER LXXII.
Of King Charles II's. Resolution a little before his Death, to alter his
method of Government.

My Lord,
I Am very well satisfied your Lordship must know in a very great measure, the
present Resolutions of the King, in respect to his Future Government, when you
know so well by whose Agency he was at first Undeceived, and by whose Council
and Assistance he intends to proceed; but the Ministers here have too many
Agents still about him to remain long Ignorant of the Design, and are not a
little Alarmed to understand, his Majesty has resolved to restore all
Charters, to call a Parliament, and thereby to get a moderate Liberty settled
on Dissenters, and to have the Boundaries of Prerogative, Parliamentary
Privileges, and Popular Liberty so clearly settled and explained, that there
may arise no more Disputes about them between King and People for the Future;
and that it shall be made Treason after that, even in Parliament, once to move
any thing prejudicial to the King's declared and explained Prerogatives, or to
the Parliament and Peoples declared Privileges and Liberties; and that all
Officers Military and Civil, shall be equally Sworn to maintain the one as well
as the other; that the Duke, for the present, shall be Solicited to go for
Scotland, attended with such Persons as would take care to observe his Steps
narrowly; and that in his Absence the Princess Mary be Declared Heir
Presumptive to the Crown, and the Prince invited to Reside with her in England
till the King's Death, and the Duke totally Excluded, and confined to live at
Modena or Rome, and not in this Kingdom, or elsewhere; but to have all his
Revenues allowed him; and that if he prove Refractory, and refuse to Retire any
where else, but into France, that then he shall not only be deprived of his
Revenue, but be altogether confined in some Castle in England under a good
Guard, etc. I do not question, my Lord, but this matter is sufficiently
aggravated by the French Emissaries, and perhaps there may be something more in
it, than I am able to fathom; however it was my Duty to Transmit the same as I
find in represented, tho your Lordship may know much more truly the Fact, than,

My Lord, Your humble Servant
Paris Jan. 4. 1685. N. S.
LETTER LXXIII.
Of King Charles II's. Death.

My Lord,
YOur Lordship may expect I should acquaint you how much surpised I was at the
News of the King's Death; but the manner it was received here quite drowned my
Astonishment in that Kind, and so it would any true English Man, to see this
Court have the News of his Majesty's Death, or at least pretend to have it, and
give Orders for Mourning, before our English Envoy had any such Notice given;
so that when he came, according to Custom, to give them intimation of it, all
the Court was seen in Mourning before Night, and all persons of Note in this
City the next day; I Will leave your Lordship to Reflect upon the Transactions
and Circumstances of it, which tho comprehended in a few words, may afford a
larger Field for Thought, than any thing my mind can at present suggest unto
me, or my Intelligence reach unto, but it puts me in mind of somewhat (I think)
I have writ in my last to your Lordship, and so I suppose it may do your
Honor, if it has not already, but I am,

My Lord, Your humble Servant
Paris Feb. 22. 1635. N. S.
LETTER I.
Of King James (when Duke of York) his pervertion to the Popish Religion, how
and when it was done, etc.

My Lord,
YOUR Lordship cannot imagine how overjoyed both Court and Country are here,
upon the News of the King's going Publicly to the Roman Catholic Chapel,
upon His Assumption of the Crown; and many and various Discourses it has
occasioned concerning His first Embracing the Roman Faith; an Account whereof
may not perhaps be unpleasing to your Lordship: And therefore I shall endeavor
to gratify your Honor therein, to the utmost of my power; some have been of
opinion, that the Zeal, Example, and Exhortations of the Queen His Mother, to
whom He seemed always to pay the greatest Deference, had wrought this Change
early in him; and that the long Conversation he had had with those of the Roman
Communion in France, Flanders and other places, had fortified him in the same
Sentiments he had before imbibed, and which at last appeared in an open
Profession; but, however this has a very great appearance of truth, its utterly
denied here, and averred with great Elogium's upon him, that it happened to him
as it did to one of the Ancients, as Recorded in Holy Writ, that he should find
in the Gall of a Monster, that was about to devour him, that, wherewith to cure
him of his Blindness. For, that it was in Reading of the History of the
Reformation, written by a Protestant Author, that he came to see the Error
wherein his Birth had engaged him; that when he was obliged, when in Exile, to
leave the Kingdom of France, and to retire to Bruxels, and having leisure
enough to Read, he lighted there upon the History of the Reformation, written
by Dr. Heylin, which he Read with much Attention; and notwithstanding the many
strained pretenses (say they) which the Protestants made use of to color the
Schism of their Country, he clearly saw that their Separation, so plainly
contrary to the Maxim of Unity, which is the Foundation of the Church, was
nothing else but a mere effect of Humane Passions; that it was the Dissolute
Life, and Incontinency of King Henry the Eighth, the Ambition of the Duke of
Sommerset, the Policy of Queen Elizabeth, the Avarice of those that were
greedy to seize upon the Revenues of the Church, had been the Principal Causes
of that Change, wherein the Spirit of God had no concern; that upon reflecting
with himself. That God of old made use of Prophets of a most Holy Life, to be
the Guides of his People, and to Intimate his will unto them, in respect to
Religion; that upon the change of the Divine Dispensation, the Apostles
Inspired with Heavenly Virtue, and more like to Disimbodyed Angels, than Carnal
Men, Preached the Gospel; and that upon Disorders, and Irregularities, both
under the one, and the other Testament, They were not carnal persons,
Vindictive Souls, Ambitious Spirits, that had Preached Reformation; but Men
full of Moses's Spirit, or of Christ's, the only Channels worthy to receive the
Waters which run from his Living Sources; so as that there might be no room
left to render them suspected of Corruption or Falsity: he from thenceforward
became a Roman Catholic in his heart; That he had acquainted the King his
Brother with it soon after the Restoration, who highly Applauded him; but
engaged him to put that restraint upon himself, as to keep it secret: But, that
some years after, having, by his Conduct, given occasion to others to observe
his Steps more warily, and finding he was not Cordial to the Protestant
Religion and Interest; they say here, the Archbishop of Canterbury and two of
his Brethren Remonstrated the same to him; that he heard them with much
Patience, and did not decline to Confer with them; but that their Conferences
and Arguments, were so far from Staggering and Seducing of him, that they
Confirmed him the more in the Faith: And they say farther, That though it was
given out in England, That the late Duchess of York's Complaisance to the Duke
her Husband had wrought her Conversion to the Romish Church, in the Communion
of which she died: yet it was notoriously false; for that she was brought over
by a very remarkable event, next to a Miracle, by Reading the same Book that
had Converted the Duke: But I shall trouble your Lordship no more with a
Matter, which, I am sure, you cannot think of without trouble of Mind, and so I
remain,

My Lord, Your Honors to serve and Command.
Paris, March 2. 1685. N. S.
LETTER II.
Of the Duke of Monmouth's being in Holland; and King James's Design to seize
him there Miscarryed.

My Lord,
THE Misfortunes of the Duke of Monmouth in the King his Father's time are
beter known to your Lordship, then I can pretend to inform you; and that when
he was forced to quit England for his own safety, and that it came to be known
he was retired into Holland, the Duke and French Emissaries never left
Importuning the King to send to the States and Prince of Orange, to drive him
from thence; alleging continually, that there were very great Honors done
him by the States, and especially by the Prince of Orange, who had given his
Troops Orders to Salute him at their Reviews, whenever he came to see them,
designing thereby to make that Republic, and especially the Prince of Orange,
more and more obnoxious to the King: so that he gave at last Orders to His
Ambassador, Mr. Chudley, at the Hague, to forbid the English Troops in that
Service to show the Duke any Respects; Having gained this Point, and that they
might embroyl the King and Prince of Orange the more, Chudley was Instructed,
to make the Officers of the said Regiments acquainted with the afore-mentioned
Orders, without first giving the Prince notice thereof, under whose Command
they were, which they knew well enough the Prince could not but Resent, as he
did accordingly, Threatening Chudley for Interfereing with his Authority without
his leave; and this, upon the Embassador's Complaint to the King his Master,
and which was sufficiently Improved and Aggravated by the Duke and French
Agents about him, incensed him so against the Prince; that he dispatched
Letters to Chudley, forbidding him to see the Prince: and thus Matters stood
when the late King died; but the Brother succeeding, he set all his Engines on
work, how he might get the Duke of Monmouth into his Clutches Dead or Alive:
But the French Agents, my Lord, did not think that now their Interest, which,
in the late Reign, they would have given any Money to have effected; and
therefore by their Correspondents in Holland, they got the Duke secretly
Advertised of the Danger, who thereupon withdrew to Bruxels; I know, my Lord,
they gave it out that the Prince of Orange, by his Favorite Monsieur Bentink,
got the Duke made acquainted therewith, and that he gave him Money to go to
Bruxels (it was both Honorably and Charitably done of him, if it was so, to a
distressed Gentlemen) with an intent to make the King, his Father-in-law, more
irreconcilable to him, now he was King, then when Duke of York; though he was to
dissemble it for a time; and, upon his Accession to the Throne, to testify to
the Prince, the sincere desire he had to live with him, rather as a Father,
then an Ally and Neighboring King. I have had sufficient Experience, my Lord,
of your great Honor, Integrity, and good Affection, which makes me thus bold
in a matter so nice at this time, and so concludes,

My Lord, Your humble Servant.
Paris, March 17. 1685. N. St.
LETTER III.
Of King James's being Crowned by the Archbishop of Canterbury.

My Lord,
IT has been a matter of much discourse and reflection here, that our King
should be Crowned by the Archbishop of Canterbury, and not by one of the Roman
Communion; it was expected, that since he had begun so briskly and openly to
declare Himself for Rome, that he would not have stuck at being Inaugurated by
a Roman Bishop; I find by the return made hither upon this Subject, that his
inclinations were violent enough for the latter, but that the Reason of his
Noncompliance was, that having at his assumption of the Crown, declared to the
Council, and by them, to his People, That he would maintain the Church and
State of England, as by Law Established; and that the Ceremony of his
Coronation was such as the Laws of the Land did prescribe; The thought it was a
little two Early to begin, and that by so public an Act, which, to be sure,
would be interpreted not only as the most manifest Violation of the National
Constitution, but the Preludium to a despotick Power, which no man knew the end
of. I shall not trouble your Lordship with a Repetition of the Arguments used
here by the Gentlemen of the Roman Church, pro and con, upon the Lawfulness and
Unlawfulness of such a Compliance by a Catholic King to the Church of England,
which tho the Established one, they look upon to be false to the Truth, as
being matters which I suppose your Lordship cares not for, and therefore having
nothing further wherewith to entertain you that is worth Transmitting, I
conclude, subscribing my self,

My Lord, Your Honors most humble Servant.
Paris May 6. 1685. N. S.
LETTER IV.
Of the Duke of Monmouth and the Earl of Argyle's Invasions and Overthrows, and
of the Prince of Orange's offering to serve against the former, but his offer
was Maliciously Interpreted, and so Rejected.

My Lord,
THE Reason of my long silence to your Lordship, I hope, will not be
interpreted by you, as any forgetfulness, much less neglect of your Honors
Commands and Expectation; I am too sensible of the many Obligations that have
been heaped upon me from time to time, to be guilty of so Notorious a Crime;
but the want of somewhat that was Solid and Grateful to your Lordship, has been
one genuine. Cause that obstructed my Correspondence, to which I may add what
your self knows very well, the private Orders given in England to open all
Letters, whether Domestic or Foreign; and since I had for so long a time
continued to write to your Lordship, and that undiscovered, I was not willing
for want of a little prudent caution, and suspension in such a juncture, either
to expose your Lordship to any hazard, or thereby for ever to exclude my self
from any farther Correspondence with you, whom I so much Love and Honor; But
now, my Lord, understanding that the Storm is over in England, by the defeat
and death of the Duke, as we have had some days ago an Account from Scotland of
the like misfortune to have attended the Earl of Argyle. I have adventured to
Salute you with these Lines, and to tell my thoughts freely upon the matter. I
must confess, I never had any great opinion of either of the Expeditions,
because concerted by Men who had very different ends in what they did; the Duke
and some others for Monarchy, but the greatest part Republicans; and therefore
I do not wonder the whole has miscarried, especially when I can assure your
Lordship, both the one and the other were (though very privately) Abetted by
French Agents, to undertake such an Expedition: such a procedure may well be
wondered at, I confess, since there was apparently so little advantage like to
arise to the French Court therefrom; but besides their loving to fish always in
Troubled Waters, they have somewhat in them that is very like the Devil, who
loves to do Mischief, though with no benefit to himself. But whatever the World
may think hereof, those who are fled, that escaped from either Kingdom, after
the Defeat, are as kindly received here, as those who formerly fled from the
Popish Conspiracy; but yet they are daily sifted and examined by the Spies that
continually haunt them. I would gladly know? might I have the honor, your
Lordship's Sentiments of both Descents, and the Miscarriage of them: to be
plain with you, I own I have very different apprehensions of them, now they are
over, than I had at first; and the rather, because the Prince of Orange so much
resented it; though most Maliciously interpreted by the King, and his Popish
Council, whetted on by Gallican Agents. When the Prince had the first News of
the Duke's Landing in England, he acquainted Mr. Skeleton the King's Ambassador,
that the Duke of Monmouth, though he were a Person but of indifferent Parts,
yet he had a Warlike Genius, and had more Experience and Skill in the Art of
War, then most of them employed against him; That for his part, if the King his
Father-in-Law pleased, he would assist him, not only upon that occasion, with
his Troops, but with his Person also; and to that end was sending Mr. Bentinck
over to England, to know the King's pleasure. But Skeleton malevolent enough of
himself, and farther influenced with Malice against the Prince by French
Incendiaries, took care to inform the King before Bentinck came, that such
Assistance as was proposed by the Prince, was very dangerous, and much to the
same purpose; so that upon Mr. Bentinck's Motion, the King answered, That their
Common Interest required, that the Prince should stay in Holland; and gave such
further expressions of his Mind upon that occasion, that plainly discovered,
that such a Zeal in the Prince was esteemed unseasonable, and not free from
Suspicion. With which, and a grateful acknowledgment of all your Lordship's
Favors to me, and my Family, upon all occasions, I shall now conclude, and for
ever remain,

My Lord, Your Lordship's Most humble Servant.
Paris, August 24. 1685. N. S.
LETTER V.
Of the Methods proposed, and Arguments used to King James, for carrying on the
Dispensing power.

My Lord,
THAT the King intends to Assume a Power into His Hands of Dispensing with
Penal Laws against Recusants, I believe your Lordship may be sensible of by
this time, since it is manifest, that notwithstanding the Parliaments
Remonstrance to the contrary, he retains the Popish Officers still in his
Service; and that it is so far from being a Secret here, that I can oblige your
Lordship with some of those Methods and Arguments suggested to him, by the
Agency of this Court, to carry it onward, wherein it is more then whispered
here, he has fully acquiesced. It was thought advisable, considering the
violent Humor of the Nation against the admission of such Persons, either into
Military or Civil Offices, and that all the Cry was, That the King had not kept
his Word, but did thereby Infringe their Laws and Liberties, to bring the
matter into Westminster Hall, to have the Dispensing Power there Argued upon a
particular Case; but, to make sure of the Judges beforehand, to Favor such a
Procedure; the King was told, could he gain such a Point, his business were
done for ever; though, at the same time, it was his undoubted Prerogative to
dispense with Laws, being an Essential right, and an usage in England as
ancient as the Kingdom; that it was in being at all times, and in all Reigns,
that there were several Acts, wherein there had been Provision made for such a
Reservation to the King; that the Term of Nonobstante, which was so common, was
always a Dispensing with some Law; that the Commutation of Punishments are no
less a proof thereof; And how much more were Remissions, Pardons, the
Restoration of Criminals to their Goods again, etc? That there were Presidents
to be met with, wherein the King's of England had suspended the Effects of
Laws, not only by Dispensations, regarding particular and single persons, but
by a general Suspension, in regard to the whole Kingdom: That his Brother had
done so in cases of the Statute relating to Carriages, whereof there was not
the least complaint in Parliament: neither was it so much as once said, that he
had thereby exceeded the Just bounds of His Authority: That the same had been
done by Henry the Seventh, his Great Ancestor, and Solomon of England, in
respect to the Act that prohibited the Continuation of Sheriffs in their Office
above One Year, which, in Council, was declared null, and impracticable;
because that thereby the King was divested of of his Regal Power in disposing
his Subjects. I do not question, my Lord, but you will soon hear of the effects
of such Council, but whether to your satisfaction therein, I have as great
reason to doubt, as I have a desire to promote it, and ever shall, to the best
of my power, who am

My Lord, your very humble servant.
Paris, Nov. 13. 1685. N. S.
LETTER VI.
Of the Unjust Complaints of the French Clergy, against the Reformed in France.

My Lord,
THE Ruin of the Reformed in this Kingdom is as much precipitated, as that of a
Protestant Church is designed somewhere else, and which I believe your
Lordship, by this time, is pretty well persuaded of; and to this end the Popish
Clergy have accosted the King with a severe Remonstrance against them, the sum
whereof, for want of more entertaining News, I shall write to your Lordship at
this time: They began with the hardiest Lie they could have invented, saying,
That there was nothing included in their Complaint, but what was most
necessary, and could be most clearly jnstified and made good. Whereas it is
most evident, that every title of it tends to Destroy and Persecute, and is
grounded upon the most manifest Falsities in the World: then they begin to
charge the Reformed with Calumniating, and falsely Accuting the Catholics, that
they did not believe the Truths of the Faith, as they express it; whereas the
Protestant Divines here, have so far been complyant, as to testify from time
to time, that the Roman Church retained still those Truths that were Essential
to Christianity, In that she makes Profession to Believe in one God in three;
the Incarnation of the Son of God; the Redemption of Sinners by the Price of
his Blood; and diverse other Articles contained in the Ancient Creeds; then they
proceeded, saying, That the design of the Pastoral Advertisement in 1681, was
to oblige the Reformed to acknowledge, that their Separation was not grounded
but upon Suppositions and Jealousies, and they hugged themselves, that the many
Conversions which had been wrought since that time, have been almost all
procured by this consideration; which they call an Invincible Argument, that as
there could never have been any Just Cause of Separation, all those alleged
by the pretended Reformed, could never have any sollidity; That the Protestant
Ministers did their utmost to hinder the People to profit by that same
Advertisement, either by deterring of them from Reading of the same, or else by
giving false Explications thereof, as they were wont to do of the Holy
Scriptures, and Works of the Fathers: Adding farther, That the Exercise of the
Reformed Religion had been permitted by the King's Predecessors, provisionally
only, and by reasons which have no longer subsistence: that though the Clergy had
very good Reasons to urge it so as to require a Revocation of the Edicts which
contained this permission, yet that it was not their present design to insist
upon that Point: that it was now the only favor they prayed for, for to
repress the Calumnies of the Reformed against the Roman Church, which were not,
and which could not be allowed by any Edict, being an unhappy Liberty, which
the Ministers themselves might be ashamed of: that such a supposition and
Calumny were Crimes Condemned by all Laws both Humane and Divine, and that the
Reformed durst not maintain, that those excesses ought to be permitted, nor to
make their Complaints, if the King should forbid them to commit them.

Then they went to speak of the Method they had thought on, to make the King
acquainted with the truth of their Complaints: they drew up in Two Collumnes
the Doctrine of the Church of Rome, and that, which they said, the Reformed
imputed to them, to the end it might be easier for the King to compare them;
and said most Malignantly, That they had avoided the Relating of many thing;
which exceeded all the bounds of Modesty, and which St. Paul himself would not
have as much as named amon^ the Faithful, to the end they might create a
Suspicion, by these pretended Calumnies, of somewhat that was yet blacker then
what had appeared in the passages which they had recited. They protested, that
they would never have made any complaint of the Reformed, had the matters in
question referred only to the Persons of the Bishops; and that on the contrary,
they would have been content to be deprived of their Power, in order to
testify, by their Patience, and voluntary Forgetfulness of those Outrages that
were done them, that singular Charity which they retained for them; but that
they could not neglect the Honor of the Church, attacked by the Calumny of the
Ministers, nor the Conversion and Salvation of a great number of her Children,
which they retained in the Error of their false suppositions; wherefore they
concluded after all, that the King would be pleased to repress a Malignity that
was so contrary to the Principles of Christianity, as also to the Rules of
Natural Justice; and that consequently,

1. That he would renew the Prohibitions already made to the Reformed of using
Injurious and Opprobrious Terms, in speaking of the Articles and Mysteries of
the Roman Faith.

2. That he should forbid them to attribute to the Catholic Faith any other
Doctrine then that of its profession of Faith, nor any of those Errors which
they had had till then, the rashness to impute unto her.

You need not doubt, my Lord, of the Success of this Remonstrance, and of a
Declaration in time, Answering all the Points hereof to the full. There is room
enough for Reflecting upon the Courts Conduct herein, but I shall forbear that
part, leaving it entirely to your Lordship's known Wisdom and Judgment, and
crave leave both now and always, to profess how much I am, and desire to
approve my self to be,

My Lord, Your Honors to Serve and Obey.
Paris, Nov. 27. 1685. N. S.
LETTER VII.
Of the Declaration put out by the French King, upon the Remonstrance of the
Popish Clergy, against the Reformed, the Month of August, 1685.

My Lord,
I Have in my last to your Lordship, of ^uly the 27th, N. S. taken notice of
the Popish Clergy's Unjust complaint to the French King, against the Reformed
here; and now I shall, with presuming on your good Leave, give you some hints
upon the Declaration that was Published here some days ago in Conformity to the
said Remonstrance; to which the King condescended so far, that the Motives
thereof are almost drawn word for word from the Request it self; All sorts of
Persons are thereby strictly forbid to Preach and Write against the Faith, or
the Doctrine of the Romish Church, and to lay to the Catholics Charge those
Opinions which they allow not of, and not so much as to speak directly, nor
indirectly any manner of way whatsoever concerning the Catholic Religion;
enjoining the Reformed Ministers to Teach only in their Sermons the Tenets of
their own Religion, and Rules of Morality, without the intermixture of any
other matter whatever: But alas, the Mischief did not stop here, for all
persons are Prohibited to Print, Sell, or Lend any other Books concerning
Religion, besides such as contain the Profession of their Faith, their Prayers,
and ordinary Rules of their Discipline: It does moreover Order the Suppression
of all such Books as have been Written against the Catholic Religion, by those
of the pretended Reformed Religion, and strictly forbids either to Print or
Lend any such Books for the future; those Ministers and others of the Reformed,
that make default herein, are liable to great Fines, perpetual Banishment, and
the Confiscation of all their Goods, the Places where the Ministers should
Preach against the Articles of the Edict, to lose the Right they had, to
exercise the same function for ever; and the Printers and Booksellers in case
of their Offending in any kind, to forfeit Five Hundred Livres, and for ever to
lose the Freedom of keeping open Shops: And thus, My Lord, you see this Court
has shut up the Ministers Mouths in all matters of Controversy, and leave that
Liberty only to the Roman Catholic Divines, thereby preparing of them for an
assured Victory, and hereby, besides, That the Ministers, are reduced to be
silent, and not to concern themselves, as to the greatest part of the Articles
of the Confession of their Faith, which consists in the Rejection of the Tenets
of the Church of Rome, as false and contrary to the Doctrine of the Gospel;
that they might effectually preclude them from the Right they had to complain
of this unjust dealing, the King, by way of addition, in the Preface to his
Edict, to the Reasons which the Clergy's Petition had suggested to Him, has
incerted, That it was enough for the Ministers of a Religion, tolerated in the
Kingdom, to teach their own Tenets, without being carried into Disputes against
the Public and Prevailing Religion, which also is therein called the True One:
But one should think this Edict were as needless as many others, seeing there
are not now past twenty Reformed Churches in the Kingdom, where they have
Liberty to Preach; but there seems to be an hidden Design couched under it, and
it is justly to be feared, That after they have suppressed the Reformation in
all the Countries under the French Dominions, they have hereby made Provision,
That the Doctrine of Truth shall not be maintained in private Families, and
never have that means to rise up again out of its Ruins, by the Reading of such
Books as Teach it; wherefore they have taken care to prepare Reasons for the
Depriving the Reformed of Books of this Nature, and to Establish a kind of an
Inquisition over their works, which shall not concede to any one the Liberty
either to read them, or keep them by him. But of this, I shall be able to give
a fuller Account in my Next, and shall therefore defer it, and so I remain,

My Lord, Your Lordships most Humble Servant
Paris Sep. 2. 1685. N. S.
LETTER VIII.
Of the Suppression of Protestant Books in France.

My Lord,
I Have in the close of my last Letter to your Lordship, hinted somewhat
concerning the Suppression of Protestant Books in this Kingdom; I have since
seen a Catalogue which contained almost Five Hundred Authors, whose Works are
all Condemned. Some men in the World love to put the Cheat upon themselves, so
they here, to heighten the Number of such Books, have repeated some of them
more than once; but they have been also as careful to forget several others, as
the Works of the Learned Grotius, Vossius, and many more, whose Writings are
opposite to the Roman Church; but your Lordship, I believe, is no stranger to
the ^ly Practice of that Church on this head, and how the Members of it have,
of a long time, endeavored to persuade the World, That these Illustrious
Persons had re-entred into their Party; That they were willing to retain an
Honorable Remembrance of their Names, tho it be certain in the main, that the
greatest part of what they had Writ, was as remote from Truth, as the Authors
were from the Communion of their Church; That Grotius himself, who has carried
his Complaisance toward the Roman Church, much farther than any other, yet he
never ranged himself of her side by an open Profession, and did still retain
diverse sentiments that were very contrary to the Court of Rome also; but that
this Default might be Remedied by a Pious Fraud; and to the end, they may one
day persuade the simple and ignorant that all the Heresies that have sprung up
in these last Ages of the World, are as so many Tenets of the Calvinists; they
have not only joined the Lutheran and Arminian Books to them, but also those of
the Socinians, and the Works of Spinosa; And they have not, my Lord, contented
themselves to Condemn the Books which have been Written by the Reformed against
the Church of Rome, but they have also hemmed in Books that refer only to pure
Morality, and which Astonishes many here: the Theses also of Josua de le Place,
without excepting those written by him against the Socinians, and is a Book
that does not attack the Church of Rome in any one of her Tenets, and is only
designed for to prove the Divinity of our Savior, against the Sophistical
Arguments of that Sect; the Translation also of the History of the Council of
Trent, which Amelot de la Houssay, a Roman Catholic Author has put forth, is
comprehended in the Catalogue of Heretical Books; I cannot be positive to
affirm to your Lordship who had the chief hand in forming this Catalogue; it is
generally attributed to the Archbishop of this City; but they tell us further,
That because he would have appeared to have acted too much like a Patriarch in
obliging the rest of the Bishops to take this Rule of their Conduct from him,
he has by the intreagues of the Procurator General, brought his matters so to
bear, that the Parliament here have committed it to his care to make an
Estimate of those Books which ought to be suppressed; the Order was no sooner
Published, but the King's Officers, and the Civil Magistrates who were
commanded to have the same put in execution, have accordingly made a search for
those Books in all Booksellers Shops, and also in the Elders and Ministers
Houses.

The Archbishop, my Lord, has some Years ago made use of a very Efficacious
Method for to hinder the Publication of any Book that deserved to come into the
World; I believe, your Lordship, may have seen the Historical and Chronological
Tables of John Rou, who was a Person of great Learning, and whose Merit had
acquired unto him the Favor and Protection of several Persons of the Highest
Quality in the Kingdom of France; and which Tables he presented to the Duke of
Monthauzier; there is but a very slight mention in the Book, and that but by
the by, of any of the Principles of the Church of Rome, and those also which
she Esteems, and looks not upon to be of the highest consideration and
importance; but these slight touches, and the Honor which the Author had done
to some Ministers of the Reformed to Name them, among the illustrious Doctors
of their Age, raised the Indignation of all the Bigots in the Church against
him, and so they got his Copies and Tables, which to his great cost and Expense
he had got Engraven, Seized; and the poor Gentleman could not find an Ear open
to the offers he made to Correct and Amend those places which might give
Offense; and all the Solicitations and Friends he could make, could never
prevail so far as to get Justice done him; there are some Persons now who would
Redeem them for their own proper use; but tho it be nine or ten years ago since
the forementioned Transaction, they have not yet forgot the Noise it then made,
and they will by no means part with them; who knows but the Crafty Jesuits have
a mind to reserve them, to procure Honor to themselves by them, when they
think the ingenious Person that contrived them may be no more Remembered; for
it must without Vanity be owned, that they are composed with so much Art,
Judgment, Order and solid Learning, that there is no man but may glory to be
esteemed the Author of them.

This Search, my Lord, after the suppressed Books, has been already made in
several places, and not only some other Bishops, who have no manner of
dependence upon the Archbishop of this City; but other Parliaments, we hear,
have received the Catalogue, and put the Order of the Parliament here in
Execution; There are several of the Protestant Churches, which have very
considerable Libraries; but some of them already are Rifled under this pretense
by the Romanists; and it is not to be so much doubted as it is to be feared, the
rest will soon run the same hard Fate; This Search has also reached the Houses
of several particular Persons; whom they have been so severe upon, that they
have not so much as left them their Bibles, because the Catalogue has put the
Versions of the Bible made by Heretics, among the Number of Prohibited Books;
but surely these Translations, how faulty soever they may suppose them to be,
cannot justly be put among the Number of those Books, wherein the Church of
Rome was accused of holding Opinions which are not received by her, nor
consequently be comprehended among those whom the Edict ordered the Suppression
of: As for the Ministers they are used very variously, the greatest part have
not yet been molested upon the Account of their Books, for perhaps, as they
have already contrived to be rid of them by Banishing them out of the Kingdom;
they look upon it as a kind of Suppression of the Condemned Books, to suffer
them to carry them away along with them; but I am assured they have given
others of them much molestation in diverse parts of the Kingdom; some of whose
Books they have Seized, some Confiscated, and caused others to be Burnt; nay,
they have been so outrageous against many of them, as to disposess them of all
their Manuscripts and Sermons; I am sorry, I am forced to give your Lordship
this Relation of the Misery of the distressed Protestants of this Kingdom,
because I know it will Trouble you, and inspire you with a Noble, tho grievous
Sympathising of their condition; but I am afraid the worst is yet to come; I
pray God to divert it to whom I commend you and yours, and am

My Lord, Your Honors most Humble and Obedient Servant.
Paris, Sep. 12. 1685. N. S.
LETTER IX.
Of the Popes Nuncio opposing any New Form of Doctrine designed to be
introduced by the General Assembly at Paris, for the easier seduction of the
Reformed to comply with the Popish Church, and be United to her.

My Lord,
THIS Court is so taken up with Forming Methods and Projects to bring the
Reformed to a Compliance and Conformity to the Roman Church, that I do not find
they mind any Foreign Affair at present: I have seen several Formula's
conceived in very easy Terms, for the promoting of the Reunion, as it is
called by them; but, among others, this that follows, I thought very
remarkable, and whereby your Lordship may see the Latitude they assume to
themselves, for the promoting their Interest, though, no doubt, it is but a Bait
to catch some of those harmless Gudgeons; the words were these, I own and
confess the Catholic Apostolic and Roman Church, as it was in the time of the
Apostles; and I Renounce and Abjure all those Errors which have crept in ever
since. The Bishop of Meux has, to make the way still smoother, in his Preface
to the Second Edition of his Expostulation of the Catholic Doctrine, gone so
far, as to say, We do not serve Images, God forbid we should do so. And indeed,
there is some likelihood that the Clergy would have stretched their
Complaisance yet farther this way, had not an unexpected accident hindered it;
for, the Pope's Nuncio being informed, that the General Assembly, or rather the
Archbishop of this City, under the Covert of that Name, and by the Advice of
the Jesuits, were about to draw up, and form a Profession of Faith, more
adapted for the satisfaction of such of the Reformed, as became New Converts,
than that of the Roman Church, he bestirred himself, and interposed, in his
Master, the Pope's Name, and made several Remonstrances to the King, upon the
Authority which the French Clergy were about to assume to themselves, of
setting up other Forms of Doctrine, then that which the whole Catholic
Apostolic Church had received since the Council of Trent: You cannot imagine,
my Lord, how much this little unexpected Traverse from the old Dad disheartn'd
the Court; whether it were that it came from a Pope, whom the King did not care
for, or that they were afraid it might retard the Work of Conversion, is not
certain; but the result was (as I have been first informed, and since seen
somewhat verified by the consequence) that the Pope should be complied with,
and the rather because they were well satisfied with his inflexible temper; and
that as they believed, it would be dangerous to sow Division between the Clergy
of France and the Pope, at a time when they were laboring to reduce all
Frenchmen to the Unity of the Church; it would be more advisable for them, to
keep to the usual Profession of Faith: And now, my Lord, the Clergy give out,
every where, that they will not qualify any Points, but vaunt, that in reducing
the Reformed, they will not put out any one Taper that Adorns the Altars. I
shall not detain your Lordship at present with any farther account of a matter,
that suits not with your Gusto, though I know you have goodness enough to accept
my endeavors, though never so contemptible in themselves, and to pardon my
weakness, who am,

My Lord, Your Lordships very obedient servant.
Paris, Sept. 17. 1685.
LETTER X.
Of Popish Guardians imposed upon Protestant Children, and of Protestant
Physicians, Chyrurgeons, and Apothecaries being forbidden to follow their
Practice, with the pretended Reasons alleged for such a Prohibition.

My Lord,
WHatever underhand-brewing may be in England, in matters of Religion; they be
barefaced enough ^^re in carrying on their Designs for the Ruin of the
Reformed Churches, though still they retain some specious pretenses for what they
do; it is but lately that we have had a Declaration published, forbidding any to
take upon them the Office of Guardians to Children, whose Parents have died in
the Protestant Religion, excepting such as are Roman Catholics; and though that
part of the Edict that concedes this Privilege to the Reformed, is couched in
the most clear and express terms that could be conceived; yet the Declaration
takes no manner of notice of the said Article; nay, and the Expressions wherein
it has been conceived, are such as would bespeak, that such an usage has been
without foundation; but indeed, this is a method that the French Council has
for some time used, when they have been mindful to put out any Order in
prejudice to any of the Privileges granted in the Edict that are expressed so
clearly, as that no Cavils raised by them can render them dark and and absurd:
And, as they found it too difficult a Task to find Reasons forcible enough to
elude such formal Concessions, they made a show of being ignorant of them, and
they were willing to put forth such Orders that might only seem to Regulate
such New and Extraordinary Cases. But yet that they might have some colorable
pretenses for what they did herein, they charged the Guardians of the Reformed
Religion with Two Crimes; First, That they abused that Power which they had in
that quality over those in Pupillage to them, and hindered them to become
Catholics; Then that they Imbezell'd the Estates of such Minors, when they
became Converts against their Will, which was a great Obstacle to their
Preferment when they came of Age: These two things were spoken of, as if there
had been nothing in the World more certain and truer, and of which they had had
abundant experience; but they are of the number of such instances, that are
alike easy to be raised, as impossible by any proofs to maintain; and, any
ones Reason, my Lord, will give him, especially as to the last Article, that it
must be notoriously false; For can any one believe, that such Guardians, who
would adventure in a malicious way, to imbezill the Estate of their Pupils,
could go unpunished, in a Country, where their Religion and Power was so much
in the Wain; and surely he must be next to a Madman that would thus adventure
to play with the Zeal of the Parliaments of this Kingdom, animated by the
Recommendation of the Clergy, who are forward enough to make their Court into
them.

And if, my Lord, the Protestant Guardians are thus Injuriously used, the
Physicians of the same Persuasion have fared much worse, as being deprived by
another Declaration, of their Means of Living upon the most ridiculous
pretenses in the World; they alleging, that since those of the Reformed
Religion were already deprived of all Judicial Affairs, and the freedom to
exercise the Functions of Counselors at Law, it were to be feared the greatest
part of their young Men might fall to the Study of Physic; That, that would
considerably augment the number of Protestant Physicians, and that those of the
Roman Catholics must by that means as much decrease, and that hereafter that
would become very prejudicial to the Salvation of sick Catholics, in that the
Reformed would take no care to put their Patients in mind of Receiving the
Sacraments of the Church, when they found them reduced to such a condition, as
did require them: I know not, my Lord, but that there may be a Snake in the
Grass here, and that the Crafty Jesuits amuse the World with such Illusions,
and would buoy People up in a belief, that since they have taken ^^ch great
Precautions for futurity, it is the least of their thoughts to come to an entire
abolition of the Reformed's Privileges, and put Constraints upon their
Consciences in Religious, matters; I wish it may prove so, the event will
discover it.

When this hardship was put upon the Physicians, the Chyrurgeons and
Apothecaries every where began to look about them, and were terribly afraid
their turns would be next: they had just reason for it, my Lord, for not many
days were elapsed since the Publication of the former, but comes out an Order
of Council, Prohibiting all Chyrurgeons and Apothecaries who made Profession of
the Reformed Religion, to exercise their Art, neither by themselves, nor by the
Interposure of other Persons, directly or indirectly, nor consign their
Privileges to another, nor by any other way or means whatsoever: insinuating,
that the exercise of such Trades gave them easy admission into Men's Houses,
and by that means hindered the Conversion of other Religionaries. And thus, my
Lord, the Art of Physic, and those others dependant thereon, are looked upon
as the last Resourses of the Reformed Religion here; and this has Administered
occasion to some Persons to show their Wit, and to divert themselves with such
Frigid Pleasantries, saying, That the Reformed Religion was at the Point of
Death: that the Chyrurgeons and Apothecaries could do no more for her; and that
there was no doubt to be made, but that she should in time be abandoned by the
Physicians also. Your Lordship having expressed no Dissatisfaction with my
keeping up my Correspondence with you in things of this kind, for want of more
agreeable Matter for your Information, has enbolden'd me to accost you again in
this manner, and gives me farther Encouragement to be assiduous to get the most
certain Intelligence I can, as well as fresh opportunities to profess how much
I am desirous,

My Lord, to serve you whilst.
Paris, Sept. 20. 1685.
LETTER XI.
Of Iealousies raised in the Reformed in France, that there was a design formed
to Massacre them.

My Lord,
THings are now carried on in this Kingdom, with so high an hand against the
Reformed Churches, as to threaten an entire Destruction of them in a very short
time; It has been a matter debated and hesitated upon for a long time, whether
they should send their Dragoons amongst them, and make use of that Expedient,
since their Lives and Popish Arguments failed them to reduce them to Reunite
with the Romish Church; They were not without their fears, least when they
should send Armed Men in that manner, and to that end, to those parts of the
Country wherein the Protestants were in greatest Numbers, and to many Rich and
Populous Cities, where almost all the Inhabitants are of that Persuasion, they
might meet with, some unexpected Resistance, which might constrain them to
Abandon their Enterprise, or come to a down right Massacre. There is indeed a
Rumor whispered up and down That there has been secret Applications made to the
King, That considering the Resistance which the Reformed might make to his
Orders, and the little success which his Designs had already, and was like to
meet with, in preventing their Retreat out of the Kingdom; That it were a much
surer, more expeditious and better way for him to be rid of them by a Massacre;
Nay, my Lord, it is confidently said, and I have some Moral Assurance of it,
that the Orders were given, and the Letters drawn already, when a Prince of the
Blood coming to hear of such Barbarous Resolutions, had the Courage to
Remonstrate to the King the Evil, as well as the Dishonor of it, and goodness
enough not to leave importuning of him till the Orders were Revoked, and the
Letters suppressed. I cannot be so positive as I would in giving his Name to your
Lordship; some saying it was the Renowned Prince of Conde, but others attribute
it to his Nephew the Prince of Conti, both of them Persons of great Honor
always, and as likely either of them to concern themselves in that behalf, as
any in the Kingdom; but whatever stop may have been put to the Jesuitical Fury
hereby; I think they have begun to discharge it by their Dragoons, almost in as
Barbarous a manner, who have been already guilty of a Thousand Violences, and
the Almighty alone knows where it will Terminate I beg your Lordship's Pardon,
if I am any ways troublesome by such Relations, and beg leave to subscribe my
self,

My Lord, Your Lordships most Obedient Servant.
Paris, Sep. 24, 1685, N. S.
LETTER XII.
Of the Violences offered to, and the Stratagems used against the Reformed of
Bearn.

My Lord,
THE Protestant Churches in the Province of Bearn, had been several Years ago
under some sham pretenses or other, reduced to the Number of Five, and the
Parliament from time to time, have endeavored to render them of no use by the
Imprisonment and Silencing of their Ministers; but now there has been such a
prank played for Converting some of the Inhabitants to the Popish Church, as I
think hardly has ever been Practiced by any other People in the known World:
For the Intendant of the Province having made use of a Notorious Fellow to
carry on the Work, he deludes some of the People to go with him to a Tavern,
and there by his Artifice found the way to make them Drunk. Next Day when they
were come to themselves, he goes and tells them, That they had promised him
they would go to Mass, and that if they pretended to deny it, they would be
sure to be Treated as Apostates; That they had besides spoken ill of the
Government, and the Ministers, of Religion; and that the only way for them to
escape a severe Punishment, which they had made themselves liable to, was to
Conform to the Church of Rome: There was about Fifty of them that were catched
with this simple Wile; whereof the Intendant Vaunted so much, that he has Writ
to Court, that there is so General an inclination in the whole Province to
become Catholics, That the King has no more than to Testify his desire they
should do so, for him to see the whole Country Embrace the Roman Communion; And
so having obtained such farther Orders as he desired, he has caused an Assembly
of New Converts to meet together at Muslac, and has Ordered the Civil
Magistrates of the Neighboring Places to cause the Reformed of their
respective Parishes to come thither, under pretense of hearing a Sermon, which
the Bishop of Lescar was to Preach there: Now the Bishop, my Lord, as is well
known, is fitter for a Playhouse than a Pulpit, and a Sermon of his Preaching
was looked upon by all a thing so rare, as to excite the curiosity of the most
stupid in the World to go and hear him; wherefore abundance of Persons from all
parts presented themselves at the place appointed; But when they came there,
they could hear no other Sermon than the Declaration of the Intendant, to
acquaint them, That it was the King's Pleasure they should all turn Roman
Catholics; Those who refused to comply to this unexpected Command, were
Cudgelled into the Church, had the Doors made fast upon them, and with the same
Violence, were forced to keep silence, fall down upon their Knees, and to
receive from the good Bishop an Absolution of their Heresy; and thereupon were
told, That if they offered for the future to go and hear their own Minister,
they should be infallibly Punished for Apostates: such and a thousand the like
Violences they Practiced of late in that Province; as I have a faithful Account
thereof, too tedious to trouble your Lordship withal; but because your Lordship
may perhaps have heard a mighty Noise of a Design to Besiege Fontarabie by the
French: I shall in a very few words unfold that Mystery to you.

The Intendant, my Lord, having found that those, and the like sham-Tricks
above mentioned, did not answer his his End, but that the generality of the
People still stuck Tight to their Principles; found there was a necessity to
bring in Armed Men to constrain them to a Compliance. It was given out here,
That this Court was highly dissatisfied at that of Spain; that they durst
appear sensible of the Outrages done them on Flanders side; and so for
satisfaction, talked loud of nothing else than Besieging Fontaraby; saying at
the same time, That France would do nothing but what was Just, and therefore
they were not willing to begin a War on that side where the Barrier might be
broken (which was made by the late Peace) between their Conquests, and the
United Provinces; and in carrying their Arms toward the other side, could give
them no manner of Umbrage. In Conformity to this seeming Design, the-Troops
Defiled toward Bearn, but in stead of Advancing to Invest Fontarabie, they
have halted there ever since, and committed all the Insolences that the most
barbarous of Nations could e're be guilty of. But since I have entered upon the
Relation of the Misery of this Famous Province, I shall endeavor a little
further to trespass upon your Lordships Patience, and show what pretenses the
Clergy have raised to Justify the Rigorous Prosecution of the Bernois, before
others in the Kingdom; They have had the Artifice to Abolish the Remembrance of
the Conspiracy which their Predecessors had formed in this Principality against
their Lawful Sovereigns, and have had the Audaciousness to persuade the King,
that the Reformed Religion was never Established in that Province, but by the
Authority of Queen Jane, who would have her own Religion to be Uppermost; And
that as she had then Banished the Catholic Religion out of her Dominions by
Arms, in favor of that Doctrine whereon she her self Doted; the King who was
the Eldest Son of the Church, might very justly do the same thing for the
Exterminating of that Change in Religion there, which had been introduced by
Violence; and thus you see, my Lord, the Popish Clergy here leave nothing
unessay'd for the Advancement of their Designs, (I am afraid they are of the
same Kidney every where else) and they have got the knack (when there is
occasion) of making that a Crime in their Enemies, which is but the just
Punishment of their own; for by disguising the Truth of History, as they have
done herein, they have made that to pass in Queen Jane for an Usurpation over
the Liberties of her Subjects, and the freedom of their Consciences, which was
but a Lawful Revenge she had taken on the Perfidious Clergy of her Dominion,
who had formed against her, and the Princes her Children such a Conspiracy as
can hardly be paralelled, before the introduction of the Ignatian Order in^o
the World; however, right or wrong, they have gained their Point, and under
this false relation of so memorable an Event, they have made it to pass for a
constant Truth; That under a Queen of the Reformed Religion, that Religion
which she Authorized, was introduced by force in Bearn, and that consequently
there would be no room left to complain; that a Popish King in his Turn, made
use of Force to repress it. This was the ground pretended for beginning to put
Bearn under Military Execution; as if from what was formerly done for the just
Punishment of a Rebellious People, there were a just consequence to be drawn
for an unjust Oppression of the most Submissive and Obedient Subjects: But
having already Trespassed by an over tedious Letter, I shall not farther
aggravate it, but remain,

My Lord, Your Lordships most Humble and Devoted Servant.
Paris, Sep. 27. 1685. N. S.
LETTER XIII.
Of the Rejoycings in Pearn upon the Imaginary Success they had in Conversions.

My Lord,
IN my last to your Lordship, I remember I was somewhat tedious in my Narration
of the Sufferings of the Poor Protestants in the Principality of Bearn. It were
endless for me to recite the farther Particulars that have come to my knowledge
since; and therefore I shall wave it, and acquaint your Lordship, for want of a
better Subject, how much the Clergy have Triumphed in the Success they have
imagined, those Violences they have been guilty of toward those People, had to
bring them over to their Communion. They have not failed to Testify as much Joy
at it, as if there had been some Battle got, or some City taken from the Enemy:
But what was very Cruel and Terrible, was, That the poor Reformed were forced
to take part in these Rejoycings, of which their own Ruin was the Subject. It
would be too tedious to recount to your Lordship, the many Cruelties exercised
in this Country, and particularly at Pau, as a Preludium to this Force; But
after the Reduction of the foresaid place, they made a general Procession,
whereunto they dragged the New Converts, and withal Celebrated High Mass,
whereat the Parliament assisted in a Body: And then when that was over, Te Deum
was sung, the Guns Fired, and the Citizens who were commanded to stand to their
Arms, made several Discharges and Vollies of Shot; Then followed Illuminations
and Bonfires, and Fireworks were prepared at the Charge of the Public for the
same occasion: But how much soever this was a mock-shew, yet great care has
been taken to transmit such Relations to the Court, of all the particulars
relating to their Proceedings and Success, as are dressed with all the Art
Imaginable, with a design to persuade them, who are but two ready to believe
it, that all the People every where, have Reunited themselves to the Church,
with all the freedom and good will Imaginable; and because they were resolved
to make sure work of it, they have accompanied the same Relations with
Certificates, which they caused to be signed by the same means, as they have
procured their Conversions, as they are pleased to call them; and wherein those
who had suffered a thousand outrages and Violences, that cannot be named
without detestation and horror, were constrained to declare that the King's
Soldiers, who of themselves are well known to be as profligate wretches as any
in the World, had lived and demeaned themselves among them with all Modesty,
and had kept strictly within the bounds of their Orders, which yet, my Lord, is
a base Equivocation, for who knows what their Orders were; but what is more
pleasant yet then the rest is, that besides the forementioned Narrations and
Certificates; they have Transmitted hither also a Speech made to the Intendant
by Monsieur De V -- a Member of the Parliament of Pau, who was one of the chief
Instruments to induce the Church of that City to come to a compliance, and who
taking upon him to speak in the Name of the Rest, came to give him assurances
of their entire Submission: But I hear, My Lord, he is like to have but little
thanks for his pains, for the Council here are no ways pleased that he should
attribute the Conversion of that same Church, to the King's Puissance, and
thereby make too clear a Discovery of what they have no mind should be known by
any means, viz. That any of the Soldiery have been employed in this Expedition,
these were his words, which I take to be genuine, That there was need of the
same Force that had Subjugated both Seas, and also made the Spaniards humble,
to cause the Reformed to Reunite to the Church. Which Words being not to be
Explicated any other way, than by Force of Arms; and concerning which, the
Spaniards willingly acknowledge, That the Power was much more Formidable than
the Justice of them; the Council have Stomacked it, and the more it seems,
because the same Lawyer has foolishly and impertinently Attributed the best
part of that Conquest to the Intendant; Which Procedure did not concur, and
fall in right with the Court Maxims, who are wont to attribute to the King
alone, all the Glory that Redounds from all Events. I shall not Transgress, my
Lord, by any further Enlargment upon this Subject, hoping your kind
Interpretation of what I have here troubled your Honor withal, and that you
would be pleased to retain a Favorable Opinion of my Sincerity in all the
Parts of my Correspondence, and give me leave, still to Subscribe my self, as I
really am, and ever will be,

My Lord, Your Lordship's To Command.
Paris, Sept. 30. 1685. N. S.
LETTER XIV.
Of the Violences offered to the Barons of Mompeton, de Mauzac, de Vichase, and
de la Mothe.

My Lord,
HAVING not yet any better Entertainment for Your Lordship, then by pursuing
the same Subject I have of late dwelt upon, in the Course of my Correspondence;
I shall once more adventure upon a short Relation of what has lately come
within the Verge of my Intelligence, concerning the Barbarous Usage of the
Barons of Mompeton, de Mauzac, de Vichase, and de la Mothe; and the rather,
since, If I am not much mistaken, I have heard your Lordship formerly mention
some of their Names, and particularly, de Mompeton, as being of your
Acquaintance, when you Traveled in this Kingdom: These Gentlemen were Members
of the Church of Montauban, where lately the Dragoons are come; but it seems,
before they began to exercise their Fury upon the poor People, it was
Contriy'd, by the Prime Commanders, how they might entrap the forementioned
Honored Persons, as being of Great Authority among the rest of the People, and
capable to draw others to follow their Example; but yet observed to be of as
known Integrity, and of whom they were in despair to compass their Ends, unless
it were by Surprise; wherefore they had notice given them secretly, that in
order to prevent the Pillaging of their Houses, they ought to go and pay their
respects to the Marquess de Boufflers, who being a Person of Honor himself,
would not fail to use them as such; Whereupon the Baron of Muzac, having
presented himself first, at the House where the Marquess had taken up his
Lodgings; He was made to wait in the Anti chamber, till such time as the
Intendant and Bishop, (who had notice given him of the Design) were come
thither; when they came, they went into the Marquesses Chamber, by another
Door, and Concerted Methods with him, how they might get the Baron to become a
Roman Catholic: After they had pitched upon the Measures they were to go upon,
the Baron was ordered to come in; and after long Discourse used to him, for to
induce him to become a Voluntary Convert, the Bishop began to speak, and said,
There was no need of so much ado with that Gentleman; that there was no more to
be done, then to bring him down upon his knees, and he would too rights give
him Absolution of his Heresy. Whereupon, a parcel of Ruffians there at hand,
seized upon the Baron, foiled him, and brought him down upon his knees: This
Insolent and bold Carriage, the fear of the Danger, the Consternation it
brought him under, together with the Fall, so far prevailed upon his Spirits,
that he Swooned away; so as that those Miscreants, who brought him into that
dangerous condition, had much ado to recover him, and bring him to himself
again. There happened, it seems, to be a Knight of Malta in the place; who,
being a Man of great Honor; and finding that this way of Converting the World,
was a very odd and new way, and little agreeable to Christianity, he would have
taken him away out of their hands; but, so intent were these vile Sparks on
their Enterprise, that they would by no means give way to the Intercession of
the Knight, unless he would charge himself with being responsible for the
Baron's Conversion; But whatever the Gentleman did for the keeping of his Word
with them, toward bringing of the Baron to a Compliance, I am credibly
informed, he could not prevail; but that the Soldiers were those who got their
Ends on him; and, that having, by a Terrible Method, viz. By forcing him to
keep continually awake, without any intermediate Rest, they brought him at last
to Dote, and be beside himself, when they Extorted his Signing. This bad
success did not discourage the Convertors, as they were called; for the Baron
de Vichase entering a little after to pay the same Respects to the Marquess,
they would have used the same Violence to him; but though they got him down,
yet he bravely got up again upon his Legs, and clapped his Back against a Wall,
and his Hand to his Sword, and that with such a Resolution to defend himself,
in case he was Assaulted, that they chose rather to give him over, and push the
matter no further: The Baron de Mompeton was the last that came; who, though of
such advanced Age, as being near Seventy four years old, and of such Quality,
as being Lord of a very considerable Borough, in the Diocese of Montauban; yet
had no more respect, nor pity showed him then the rest: for they set upon him
in the same manner as they had done the rest: but happening fortunately to be
Booted and Sparred, his Spurs hindered them from throwing him down, and his firm
and stout Expressions stopped the Bishop's Mouth, and he escaped, though he was
taken afterward in his Flight out of the Kingdom, and Condemned, according to
the Rigorous Proceedings of this Court, to the Galleys: and though his Age and
Quality, besides the Great Solicitations made at Court, in Favor of him,
might render the matter very easy to be obtained; yet it was with much
difficulty that he was got to be exempted from that odious Condemnation, and
this was given out as an Extraordinary Mark of the King's Clemency: The Baron
de la Mothe avoided the Smart, by not appearing at the place for that time; but
he was punished soon after, by having his Two Fine Houses Destroyed: And
lately, through a tedious Misery of a Prison, they Extorted a Compliance from
him. I hope this will find your Lordship in Health, and free from such -- in
this Ticklish Time, which shall be the daily wishes of

My Lord, Your Lordships most humble and most devoted Servant whilst
Paris, Nov. 13. 1686. N. S.
LETTER XV.
Of the Revocation of the Edict of N^ntes, how Monsieur le Tellier the
Chancellor hastened it, and his own Death.

My Lord,
THE Parliament is not yet opened here: when there was no doubt made of it, but
that it was fully designed the Edict of Nantes would have been revoked; but
most People were astonished to see the Revocation come out before the said
time, and great inquiry made into the secret of this unexpected procedure; for
though the violences I have, in some of my former Letters to your Lordship,
given an account of were really such, if not worse than represented, yet they
were Christened with the Name of making Converts by fair means; and the Court
would make the World believe it to be so at all points. And to elude the poor
Reformed with the vain hopes that they should yet enjoy the benefit of the
Edict a long time: they had an Order put forth the 15th of September in favor
of them, in respect of Marriages, which they had, for a long time, before
solicited for in vain: But, it seems the Chancellor has been the means to
hasten it, as I am credibly informed: For finding himself burdened with years
and Infirmities, and fearing least he might be overtaken with Death before the
Fatal Blow were given; he did, at last, by fresh and repeated Instances
(alleging, he could not live to the time the Edict was designed to be
Nullified, and that he was not willing to die before he had put the Seal to the
Revocation of it) obtain his ends; But, my Lord, it is very observable, that he
had no sooner done it, by putting to the Seal, but that he neither would, nor
could Seal any other Order whatsoever; but Died here three days ago very
uneasy, though he Blasphemously said (when he had done it) the words of Old
Simeon, That after he had seen the Salvation of the Lord, he would go to his
Grave in peace. I do not question but your Lordship had heard before of the
Revocation of the Edict, but the Death of the Chancellor, and Circumstance of
it, I suppose you have not, and that is the occasion of my troubling you with
this Letter, which I shall conclude, with Suscribing my self,

My Lord, Your very humble Servant.
Paris, Nov. 2. 1685. N. S.
LETTER XIV.
Containing some Observations upon the French King's Edict in October. 1685. for
the revocation of the Edict of Nants, made in favor of the Reformed in the
Reign of Henry the Fourth.

My Lord,
I Have very lately given your Lordship an account of the Death of Monsieur le
Tellier, soon after the revocation of the Edict of Nants; I am apt to believe
your Lordship has not seen the said Revocation, and therefore, to keep my Hand
in ure, and for want of better matter to gratify your Honor's Expectations, I
shall descant a little upon the Particulars of it: After the Prefatory part of
it, it is asserted as a constant Truth, That the Edict of Nants was not given,
but with a Prospect to revoke it; That not only the King himself, since his
accession to the Throne, but even his Father and Grandfather Henry IV. had a
Design to bring the Reformed back to the Communion of the Roman Catholic
Church; and that civil and foreign Wars have been the only Cause that had
retarded the execution of that Design; That before the conclusion of the Truce
in 1684, Affairs were not brought to a fit disposition to bring it about, and
that till now they had been content to suppress the places of their Worship,
and to abolish some of their Privileges; and that in order to make way for the
accomplishing of this great Work, the King was the more easily brought to
conclude the said Truce: this being prefaced, the rest contains twelve
Articles, importing in general, That all Edicts made in favor of the Reformed
are null; That the Reformed Religion shall be no more exercised in the Kingdom;
That all the Ministers shall be hanish'd, yet with Promises, that if they
became Converts in a limited time, viz. in fifteen days, they and their Widows
after them should be provided for, etc. That no Reformed Schools shall be kept
in the Kingdom; That all Children, for the future, shall be brought up in the
Roman Catholic Religion; That those might return into the Kingdom in four
months who were out of it, else to have their Goods confiscate; That none, for
the future, shall dare to go out of the Kingdom, under Penalty of the Galleys,
etc. That such Declarations as have been made against those that relapsed,
shall be in force; but, last of all, it g^ants the Reformed liberty to remain
where they please, in the Kingdom; to continue their Trade, enjoy their Goods,
without any molestation or trouble, under pretense of their Religion; upon
condition notwithstanding that they shall not exercise the same, nor keep any
Assemblies under pretense of Prayers or any other Worship whatsoever. But how
specious soever this Article may seem, it is already apparent, that it is but a
mere Illusion, and that there is much Cruelty couched under it: It would
insinuate to us, that the King had no design to forbid domestic Worship, and
to enforce Men's Consciences, since this expression, Till such time as God shall
be pleased to enlighten them, has been added, as one fine spun Thread to the
rest of the Net: but the Court and Clergy have made it already appear, that
this was the least of their Thoughts, since they have actually caused the
Troops to march toward the Provinces that have not yet been ravaged; tho'at
the same time the chief Magistrate of this City has assembled the principal
Merchants here together, to confirm to them, by word of Mouth, what was
contained in the Edict, and to assure them, they had nothing to fear upon that
account. And this has had a very pernicious effect already, for it has sent
many home into their Houses again, who had taken measures to be gone, with
their Families, out of the Kingdom; for the most distrustful persons could not
persuade themselves, that so solemn a Promise could be made with an intention
to break it the next opportunity; but Experience has very quickly taught them,
that the Imprudence to return was to no other effect, than to receive the
Dragoons into their Houses; and now, when it is too late, they come to know,
that the Marquess de Chateauneuf had no other design, than to lay a Snare for
the credulous, by a base equivocating Phrase, and such as the Jesuits usually
have made use of in forming the Orders and Declarations concerning Religion,
which have passed through their Hands; and that by adding to those words, waiting
till the Lord shall be pleased to enlighten them, these same, as others; he
meant no other, than that the Dragoons, who had enlightened the first Converts,
should also be the Dispensers of the same Light to those who continued still
stiff and opinionative. But I shall, in my next, give your Lordship further
Information of this base and double-dealing, so much to the Dishonor of this
Court, and the Ministers of it, from whom, as in the Litany, -- I commend your
Lordship to the Divine Protection, and shall ever while I live do so, and
remain,

My Lord, Your Lordship's most devoted Servant.
Paris. Dec. 10. 168^. N S.
LETTER XV.
Of the Marquess of Louvois's Letter, authorizing the severe Prosecution of the
Reformed. As also an Order by him signed to the same purpose.

My Lord,
I Have made a kind of a Promise to your Lordship, when I writ last, to give
you some further explication of the double-dealing of this Court upon the
subject matter of the Edict of the Revocation, and particularly that Article
that seemed to contain so much in favor of the Reformed; and such, my Lord, it
was, that the very Romanists themselves thought fit to suspend the course of
their violent Proceedings against them upon it: And therefore Monsieur the Duke
de Noailles, who had received Orders for the Province of Languedoc, which that
Clause formerly mentioned seemed to revoke, had, upon the perusing of it,
recourse to the Delphian Oracle of this Country, for the solution of so great a
Difficulty; upon which the Marquess de Louvois, the Gallican Apollo, soon
disabused him, and returned to his Question this decisive Article: I doubt not,
but the quartering of a few Troopers more than ordinary upon those few of the
Gentry and Commoners, that still remain of the Reformed Religion, will quickly
undeceive them, and convince them of the Mistake they have been in concerning
the Edict, which Monsieur de Chateauneuf has drawn up; and His Majesty's
Pleasure is, That you would make an explication of the same very severely
against all those, who will be the last to make a profession of a Religion that
does not please him, and the exercise whereof he has thought fit to prohibit
through all his Dominions. But, my Lord, this is not the only Letter nor Order
to this purpose; for I have had the advantage to see some others to the
Officers of the Army and Intendants; importing, That for the further convincing
of the incredulous, it was declared, those Violences were ordered by the
Council; and, in short, the Marquess de Loavois was the principal Author of
these cruel Expedients: But, above all the rest, I have privately seen an Order
signed by him, wherein is expressed, That the Copy thereof should be sent to
the Marquess de Verac, and which ended with these remarkable words: It is His
Majesty's Will and Pleasure, that you make use of the utmost Rigor and
Severity against all those who are not willing to become of his Religion; And
those who will have the Vainglory to continue to the last of the number, must
be used and pressed upon to the utmost extremity. I Will leave it to your
Lordship's Wisdom and known Sagacity, to ruminate upon and judge of this
Legerdemain Procedure, and crave leave to acknowledge (though it be never out of
my mind) the many Favors you have been pleased to show upon all occasions to,

My Lord, Your Honor's, humble servant.
Paris, December. 14. 1685. n. st.
LETTER XVI.
Of an Order prohibiting the Reformed to frequent the Chapels or Houses of the
Ambassadors of Foreign Princes.

My Lord,
OUR Court here, it seems, have thought it a little too low to descend to
forbid the Reformed to frequent the Protestant Chapels of Foreign Ministers,
and therefore they have consigned that pi^ce of Drudgery unto the Civil
Magistrate of this City, who has done it in such terms as are as like to
another Equivocation I have already mentioned to your Lordship, that it cannot
otherwise be than a Pig of the same Sow; for the Order does not mention, That
those who were still of the Reformed Religion should not be present at any
Divine Worship in the Houses of Ambassadors, and of other Ministers of Foreign
Potentates; but it has a term of Expression that is very singular and pretty,
calling them those who say, they are still of the Reformed Religion; as if it
were now somewhat strange or criminal, after what has been mentioned in the
latter clause of the Edict of Revocation, whereof I have some time since taken
particular notice to your Lordship, to continue still of that Religion, to
which it has promised so little support, or use the freedom to say it: But
hereby it is plain, they are intent to cut off the only Resource and Consolation
they had left them under their hard Fortune, by enjoining 'em not to frequent
those Religious Exercises practiced in privileged and exempt Houses. And while
the Roman Catholics in all Protestant Countries have the Liberty publicly to
be present at their own way of Religious Worship, which is celebrated in the
Houses of all Popish Ambassadors, the unhappy Remnant of the French Protestants
are hereby utterly deprived of the little Convenience which they had, both
seldom and secretly, of presenting themselves at the Houses of Protestant
Ambassadors, there to pay their Devotions with some marks of Union. One should
think, my Lord, the Foreign Potentates should resent this; but, alas! that
Interest seems to be quite in the Wain, since our Native Country has left
holding the Scales, which I cannot less than deplore, tho it is out of my power
to redress: But, who knows what your Lordship -- I am,

My Lord, Yours in sincerest Affection and Sense of Duty.
Paris, Dec. 16. 1685. N. S.
LETTER XVII.
The Reformed in France are prohibited to entertain any other Servants than old
Catholics, etc.

My Lord,
THIS Kingdom swarms still, as it has done for some months backwards, with mere
Edicts and Declarations; and that chiefly about the poor distressed Reformed,
whom they think they can never depress low enough. It was in July last that
they were forbidden to take any Domestics into their Service that were of the
Roman Communion; and now they are ordered to take none but old Romanists to be
their domestic Servants; and the same Injunctions reach also the new Converts.
It Is a sad and melancholy Subject, I do confess, but were it of less
importance, one could not forbear laughing, to consider, that what was pitched
upon as highly useful and necessary, in the Month of July, for to obstruct the
pervertion of Catholics, could some five months after retard the Conversion of
such as might have been of the Reformed Way in the Service of persons of the
same Religion; as if in the Month of July, when almost half the Kingdom was
overrun with Dragoons, and who did every where commit the terriblest Ravages
imaginable, any one in his Wits could imagine that those of the Reformed
Religion should think upon the perverting of any of the Roman Catholics to
their Way; or that in the Month of December the handful of the Reformed, who
are accused by the King's Declaration to persevere still in their erroneous
Opinions, are in a condition to take into their Service all the rest of the
Reformed, who are brought to a state of serving other People to gain them an
honest Livelihood, and by this way to hinder the efficacious means, which the
King declares he does make use of for the reducing of this poor People to
Obedience. It Is impossible for me, my Lord, to decipher to you the daily
Hardships put upon these forlorn People, whose Miseries daily have an
appearance of further aggravation and increase, which, I know, must aggravate
your Sorrow, and therefore I shall forbear any further enlargements hereupon,
and content my self to profess how ready I am to give your Lordship all the
Satisfaction that lies in my power, and to continue,

My Lord, Your Honor's most humble Servant.
Paris, Jan. 16. 1686. N. S.
LETTER XVIII.
Of Alien Protestants, their Usage in France; and the Severities showed to the
Dutch Consul at Nants, and others.

My Lord,
YOUR Lordship may have been desirous to know all this while, that since the
French have been so cruel to their own Fellow Subjects and Natives, how
Strangers fare amongst them; and therefore I shall give your Honor my Thoughts
upon this matter, as far as any Particulars have come to my Knowledge. It Is not
long since that we have seen an Order here, giving Leave to all Protestant
Strangers to have free egress and regress into the Kingdom, with their Wives,
Children, Servants, and others of their Nation, at Will, and with the same
Freedom and Liberty which they enjoyed in times past; but they are strictly
charged to carry none of the King's Subjects out with them, without express
Leave under the Secretary of State's Hands, nor to exercise their own Religion,
whatever Religion they be of; which last words were ^^^dden in craftily by the
Jesuits, after that of Protestants, to the end they might enhance the
Divisions amongst them, from which the Missionaries drew their greatest
Arguments to entrap the simple and ignorant, and whereby they would tacitly
insinuate, That all the Sects which at this day dishonor the Christian
Religion, and which agree in any one thing with Protestanism, are so many
Protestant Sects: Though it is well known to the World, that all True Protestants
both shun and abhor their Communion. Such an Order was certainly, at this time,
highly necessary; for, though no Orders have been issued out for to hinder those
who would not become Romanists to enter the Kingdom, yet the Court was afraid
their rigorous Proceedings against their own Natives would deter others, as
thinking they could expect no better Treatment, nor more Safety in their
Persons and Estates in France than natural Frenchmen; but how little Benefit
many Alien Protestants have received hereby, is notoriously known in every part
of this Kingdom; and the Dutch Consul at Nants has sadly experienced the same;
though one should have thought his Quality was able to secure him against any
Violences to be offered him in that kind. It has been usual, my Lord, for
Foreigners, who have resided in this Kingdom, relying upon the Public Faith,
and flourishing by Commerce, to love to take care to preserve the Fruit of
their Toil and Pains in a Country where the Right of Inheritance took place
upon their taking Letters of Naturalization; wherefore many such are to be
found here this day, who never dreamt that they should be molested in their
Religion, and thereby run the hazard of losing their Estates also, as thinking
it to be a matter very conformable to the Rules of Justice and the Law of
Nature and of Nations, that they should be reduc^d to their primitive states,
as others, when the Kingdom thought fit to revoke the Edicts, under the
protection and duration whereof they had made these Advances; and alleging,
That they did not become Frenchmen, but conditionally, that they might enjoy
the Freedom of their Consciences; seeing without that they would never have
taken those Engagements: or if the Government thought not fit to observe them,
the least it could do, was to remit them to their former Liberty, and to give
them their Choice, either to enjoy the Privilege of their Letters, whereby
they were naturalized, by turning Roman Catholics, or to lose that Advantage,
and to be looked upon for the future as no other than Strangers, if they
persevered in their own Religion. But these Pleas, though full of Reason and
Equity, has little availed any of them, for they have been generally treated
with the same Rigor and Severity as the rest have been: And to this end there
are and have been forty s^ivelling Pretenses raised, to involve them in the
same Misery; if any of them have French Wives; if they have Children by them of
such an age, born in this Kingdom; or if they have a Father or Mother-in-law
living with them; this is enough to quarter the Dragoons upon them. In short,
my Lord, I cannot see how it can be safe for any Protestant to come and reside
in this Country, notwithstanding what is contained in the forementioned Order;
for though this Court might be punctual in the observance of it according to the
Letter, yet seeing it does positively forbid, that such Strangers should
exercise their Religion here, it brings but a small Remedy to the Evil they
have apprehended might arise by the Fear which might possess the Minds of
Foreigners from residing and trafficking amongst them, unless such Protestant
Alliens will be content (which cannot be generally thought of them) to live
without any Worship at all; for they must expect, if they do otherwise, though it
be their private Devotions only in their Families, to be liable to the Rigors
of the same Inquisition with the French Protestants themselves. I find they are
resolved here to carry all things with an high hand; I heartily wish it may be
no Pattern to our -- I remain,

My Lord, Your most humble and most devoted Servant.
Paris, June 2. 1686. N. S.
LETTER XIX.
Concerning the Ignorance of Popish Convents.

My Lord,
It Is scarce credible how ignorant the Popish Convents in this Country are of
all good Literature, especially the Women-kind, who have entertained such
monstrous Notions concerning the Principles of the Reformed Churches, that
without I had had it from incontestable Testimonies, I should not abuse your
Lordship, and hazard my Reputation with you so far, as to mention it to you. I
know not whether I have formerly given your Honor to understand, that it has
been a frequent Practice here to put young Maidens of the Protestant Faith into
Religious Houses, to be tutored there, in the Catholic Faith, and where they
have found the grossest Ignorance both of their Principles and Practices, as
ever would have entered into the Thoughts of rational Animals: They have looked
upon and entertained them as if they were such as had no Belief in JesusChrist;
and not only so, but as such as did not pray to God, but invoked Calvin or
Luther only; by others they were looked upon as Jews that had not been
circumcised, or did not eat any Swinesflesh. With a thousand such Chimera's and
Absurdities have the crafty Priests fill^d the Noddles of those simple Women,
who think all they say an Oracle. But though many distressed persons have been
extreme Sufferers, and felt the Effects of these Prejudices in a most rigorous
manner, yet we are not without Examples of others, who when by their Piety,
Innocence, and Knowledge they had disabused those who have the charge of them,
have been treated by them with much Tenderness and Humanity. I would not, my
Lord, have continued a Correspondence so little to your Honor's Information,
had I not lain under your Commands for my so doing, and that you have always
expressed your Satisfaction with my Endeavors to serve you, who am,

My Lord, Yours, in all humble Observance.
Paris, July 7. 16^6. N. S.
LETTER XX.
Of Marshall Schomberg, and the M. de Ruvigni's Retreat out of France; and of
the Favor showed to the Marquess du Quesne, with the Reasons thereof.

My Lord,
I Do not question but your Lordship had acquaintance with Marshall Schomberg,
when some Years ago in England; you may, perhaps, see him there again in a
short time, for he has with very great difficulty, notwithstanding his many
and signal Services for this Crown, obtained Leave to depart the Kingdom, but
under very hard Restrictions, the number of his Domestics being limited, and
the Vessel wherein he embarked viewed very narrowly: The Court before his
departure appointed him Portugal for his Retreat, that so that same Country,
where he has been known for so many Victories, might become unto him rather a
place of Exile, than Retreat. The Marquess de Ruvigni had always some measure
of the King's Favor, but that, together with all the Interest he has had with
his Ministers of State, were little enough to procure him Leave to retire with
his Family into England; but whether arrived there, your Lordship can tell much
better than I. As for the Marquess de Quesne, though fourscore Year old, and a
person that has deserved so much for his long and glorious Services, and under
whose Conduct the Naval Power of this Kingdom, heretofore so inconsiderable,
was become formidable to all the World; yet he has not been able to obtain
Leave to go finish his Days in a Protestant Country: But the Court have
complemented him seemingly with a great Favor, viz. to continue in this City,
with Assurance he shall not be molested upon the score of his Religion; but no
doubt but this Favor has proceeded more from Court-policy than any Good Will;
for they are, it is very likely, afraid, that had they granted him Leave to
depart the Kingdom, he might go and inform Strangers of the state of their
marine affairs, the Weakness and Defects whereof he knows, as well as he can
discover the Strength and Power of the same; and as for the Liberty of his
Conscience granted him, they found that also expedient, to hinder him to
practice his escape by one Artifice or other, if he were menaced with any
Constraint. I did not think once matters would have been brought to this pass
here; but when they are at the worst, there will be Hopes they will mend, as I
hope I shall in my Intelligence to your Lordship, who am,

My Lord, Devoted to serve you.
Paris, S^pt. 4. 1686. N. S.
LETTER XXI.
Of Monsieur Claude's Book, entitled, A Protestation, in the Name of the
Reformed; winked at in France, and King James made their Drudge to burn it in
England.

My Lord,
TO think that your Lordship has not seen and read Monsieur Claud's
Protestation in the Name of the Resormed, were to judge very disrespectfully
and diminitively of your Curiosity, and therefore for me to descant upon it,
cannot but be nauseous; but give me leave to observe to your Lordship the
different Procedure of the two Courts at this time, though its not doubted here,
and I hope in a short time to give you a further account of it; but that they
are entered into very close Measures and Designs together, which will appear in
due Place: Nothing can be heard on this Side but the loud and dreadful Cry, of
Constrain them all to come in, while our Emissaries, in conjunction with their
Popish Leyitical Brethren on your Side, are a preaching up a general Indulgence
to tender Consciences, and a Sovereign Duty, to grant equal Toleration to all
Opinions; and one would almost believe both are sincere. But, my Lord, the
Burning of the foresaid Book, which is an Abridgment of the History of the
Persecution, by our King's Order, under Pretense of its containing a Doctrine
contrary to the Authority of Kings, is an ill Proof of the latter; and an
half-sighted Man cannot but see, that maugre all the Inclination that seems to
be in the Court, toward granting Indulgence to others, their Designs must have
quite another Tendency; but I find this Court has got the Ascendency, for they
have cunningly enough judged it more profitable to dissemble the Injury they
conceive they have received by the foresaid Book, than to take a Public
Revenge, for fear lest all the World should come to read a Piece that was so
dangerous to them and obnoxious to their Interest; and when they well knew they
had formed a Tool to do that to their Hands, with less Envy to themselves and
more to::::: When ever they required it; I heartily beg your Lordships Pardon
for my Freedom with you, who am,

My Lord, Your very humble Servant.
Paris Nov. 6. 1686.
LETTER XXII.
Of the League made between King James II. and the French King, Lewis XIV.

My Lord,
I Have once hinted to your Lordship, That both Courts were entered into very
close Measures and Designs for to establish themselves to the Prejudice of
their Neighbors; as I should have been, and am very sorry to have disappointed
your Expectations, after such Intimations given you, I do now as much rejoice
that I have, though I may say, surreptitiously, got the Heads of the League
lately made between them; for it is here with our Minutes as with other things,
when they are fresh they are more choice and fond of them. And it was agreed in
general, That our King should join with the French King in a War against
Holland, both by Sea and Land, but in order to carry the same effectually on,
it was more particularly concerted.

I. That they shall both endeavor to draw the Prince of Orange to connive at
such a War, and to consent to the Abolition of the Penal Laws and Test against
the Roman Catholics, with specious Promises of making him Prince of Holland,
secure his Succession in England, and of many other great Proffers and
Advantages; but in case he proves stiff, to endeavor to make a total Conquest
of that Country, and share it between themselves, as was projected in the last
Dutch War: And whereof, to the best of my Remembrance, I have give your
Lordship a particular Relation; and then to find out some effectual Expedients
to put the Prince of Orange by too of his Succession in England.

II. That upon supposal that the Prince shall refuse to comply with them in
their projected Designs; that then the English and Scotch Forces shall be
recalled out of the Dutch Service, and be sent immediately into that of France,
to be employed for a Time in remoter Campaigns, toward Spain or Italy, and for
want of such Service, in Garrisons, for fear they shall turn Tail and revolt,
and so the Prince and the States of Holland shall be beforehand weakened, and
the French considerably strengthened.

III. That some thousands of the French choice Men, as of the King's Gentlemen
Musketeers, and others, shall insensibly be brought into Enland, if the King
finds his Occasions so require it, to be mixed with the English Troops, under
Pretense of learning the other a more perfect Discipline.

IV. That they shall both join their Forces at Sea, with all Strength possible.

V. That a good Body of French, English, Scotch and Irish Troops shall be put
on Board both the Fleets, that so a Mixture may be made in both, to the end it
may create less Jealousy; and that the rest of the English and other British
Troops, that can be conveniently spared from England, shall be employed in the
Land-Armies, against the Republic of Holland.

VI. That after the War be once declared, such French Refugees as will show
themselves willing to serve under the English Banner against Holland, shall
enjoy the Revenues which they had in France, though they shall not be suffered to
dwell there.

VII. That neither side shall desist from the War, till a total Conquest be
made of the said Country, which they think themselves sure enough of: And that
when Holland shall be subjected by their united Force, there will then be no
more Fear of any Opposition in England to prevent the King from raising
Arbitrary Power and the Roman Catholic Religion there to the same height as
it is in France, nor from concurring with the French King, till he shall obtain
the Empire for himself.

VIII. That the French King shall pay all the British Forces in Flanders and
elsewhere, and be content to defray half the Charges of the War, that our King
with his Pecuniary Assistance may be enabled to hold on the War with Vigor and
Constancy enough for to make a Conquest; but that afterward, for a Recompense,
he shall be obliged to assist France in any future War with thirty Capital
Ships, and twenty thousand Men, at half Charges born.

Your Lordship knows, much better to make a a Judgment of such a League than I
can pretend to, but I perceive the effect will be dreadful, not only to poor
Holland but to England too, without the neighboring Potentates be timemously
awakened to ward the Blow; and that such worthy Patriots as your self rowse up
and stand in the Gap: But I pretend not to dictate to your Lordship what every
generous English Man's Duty is to God and his Country upon such an occasion,
and so conclude with subscribing my self,

My Lord, Your very humble Servant
Paris, Jan. 24. 1687. S. N.
LETTER XXIII.
Of Methods to be practiced by King James for keeping up the Dispensing Power,
and and particularly about discarding the Militia of the Kingdom.

My Lord,
I Have upon another occasion hinted somewhat to your Lordship of those
Arguments urged to the King for the promoting of the Dispensing Power; and you
know very well, since it has been put in practice in Westminster Hall, in the
Case of Sir F. H. and how that matter terminated to the King's Satisfaction,
and further heightening of his Perogative Royal, and how the same was
established by the Concurrence of the Judges of the Land, if they may be so
called, who authorized the same: These Points being gained, another Matter and
that of an higher Consequence was agitated in the Cabinet Council, viz. to use
some means totally to discard the Militia of England, and in liew of them to
retain standing Troops in the Nation; and to throw a little Dust in the
People's Eyes, and amuse them so as that they might take little notice, or at
least not oppose those their Proceedings, it was advised to act these previous
things.

In order to Balance the great Power of the City of London, it was projected
to grant a Charter to that of Westminster, and that under the Pretense of its
being the Royal Residence of the Kings of England, and of the supreme Court of
Parliament, and therefore ought to be dignified with as ample Previledges as
any City in the King's Dominions, London it self not excepted; and to have a
Lord Mayor, Court of Aldermen, Sheriffs, and all other Officers necessary both
for the Support and Grandeur of it; that great Encouragement should be given to
rich Merchants, wealthy Tradesmen, etc. to dwell there, and to transport a
great part of their Trade thither, which would cause them to stick close to the
Court, and Interests thereof.

And had this same Project gone on, it was also projected to have a new
Stone Bridge, imitating that of London, but built much broader, and more
convenient, erected between the Palace-yard and the Horse-Ferry, and the King
seems very eager and forward to promote so useful a Work.

Then the Mews was to be ditched round, and great care taken, as well as
Expedition used to have it filled with Stabling and other Buildings, fit to
receive and lodge a good Body of Horse, and to be made a Citadel, under
Pretense that such Troops should not be Troublesome and a Burden to the said
City.

And when all this was accomplished, which was concerted to have been brought
about in a short Time, then the Militia of the Kingdom was to be new modelled,
two or three Times over, and the new Lords Lieutenants of Counties, and other
Officers chopp'd and changed to the Court's Mind, who should show themselves
willing to obey the Orders they were to follow, which were to this effect. That
the Militia should be ordered to meet in their several respective districts,
and there the Lord Lieutenants for the Time being were to acquaint them, That
since to serve in the Militia was but a trouble to them, as well as a Charge
and Burden to the Country, yet without any Use or Security to the Crown or
Kingdom, when all our Neighbor Nations were armed with Veteran Troops, the
King was advised and now thought fit to discharge them of the Trouble, and the
Country of the Charge of maintaining of them for the future; and so order them
to deliver up their Arms, to be distributed among regular Troops, that would be
more useful and serviceable. But before this was to be put in Execution, it
was, my Lord, resolved, a Toleration of Religion should be first granted, and
severe Orders given to the Soldiers for to pay their Quarters duly, demean
themselves quietly and orderly, and to abstain from any manner of Violence; and
all manner of Persons, as well Protestants, Dissenters from the Church of
England, as others of the Roman Communion, should be admitted into the Army,
either as Officers or Soldiers, and if any of the Churchmen should grumble
thereat, and begin to stomach it, it should be alleged, There was no Reason in
the World the King should be deprived of the Services of any of his Subjects
however denominated, as to their respective Religions, for the Carping of a few
Churchmen, who were more concerned for their own worldly Interests, and so
would have all Places of Profit confined to those of their own Stamp, than they
were for the real Interest of the Church. Then there were to be sufficient
Bodies of Soldiers to be placed all over England, to assist the Lords
Lieutenants to see all the forementioned Orders put quietly in Execution, and
ready to suppress any Tumult that might be occasioned thereby. This, my Lord,
was the Projection, I shall endeavor to give your Lordship, in my next, an
account of the Opposition made hereunto, as this and the rest have been lately
entered here in our Minutes, from Papers transmitted by the Resident of Modena
and Count Dada the Pope's Nuntio in England, to the Resident of that Name, and
Papal Nuncio in this Kingdom, and by them communicated to Monsieur Louvois;
till then I am and ever shall be,

My Lord, Your humble Servant.
Paris, Feb. 9. 1687. N. S.
LETTER XXIV.
Of the Opposition made by several Noblemen, and particularly by the Lord
Marquess of Powis, against discarding the Militia of the Kingdom.

My Lord,
It Is but a few Days since I sent to your Lordship the particular Resolutions
formed in the Cabinet Council, of discarding the Militia, and other Methods
that were to be pursued, as either previous to or subsequent of such a Design;
and now, I can assure your Lordship, That same Project was chiefly broken by
the Marquess of H. D -- of N. and some other Noble Persons and worthy Patriots;
but the Marquess of Powis had a greater Hand in it than any of them, as being
of greater Credit with the King, who represented how dangerous and in a Word
how impracticable such a Project was; For, said he, it will be impossible to
find such Lord Lieutenants in the Kingdom as will undertake to put the same in
Execution, nor no Officers that will obey, If they could find such; that such a
Practice would necessitate the King to call in a French Army, which would as
much inslave his Majesty to the French as his own People would be thereby
inthralled to him, and that he might assure himself the French Faction had no
other Intent in advising him to it. So that I find, my Lord, it was resolved to
let the Militia alone as it is, and go on to secure their Proceedings, by
stuffing the Army with a Mixture of Nations as well as Persuasions, and to chop
and change them so often, till at last they shall get Roman Catholics enough
in their Troops so as considerably to outnumber the Protestants there, without
calling in any Bodies of French. Which Resolution, as I find it did not fully
content this Court, so it has madded them to use Stratagems to counterpoise
it, by putting the King upon unseasonable and impolitick Artifices, and among
others, to model and pack Parliaments, whereof I shall be able in my next, I
think, to procure your Lordship the Projects laid before him, humbly hoping
you will take all in good part from one that has an English Heart, and will love
both his Country and your Lordship, whilst I am.

Paris Feb. 17. 1687. N. S.
LETTER XXV.
Propositions made to King James II. by the French Agents for modelling and
bridling of Parliaments.

My Lord,
I Find abundance of Projects offered to the King by the Agency of this Court
concerning modelling and bridling of English Parliaments; some were for putting
in Execution the Advises given formerly for that purpose to King I. I.
specified I think in Rushworth's Collections, to which I refer your Lordship,
but that Proposition was rejected, and others of more modern date urged upon
him, and particularly there were some who would have him procure a Parliament
by Oliver Cromwell's Methods, chiefly to be composed of the Officers of the
Army, with an Intermixture of some few others; and that being effected, he
might by them increase very much the Revenue of his Crown, by setting up again
the Court of Wards and the Right of Purveyance, and by obliging all such
Noblemen who were by their Tenures anciently obliged to furnish so many Horse
and Men, and other Necessaries, in the Wars either against France or Scotland,
to supply a full Equivalent toward Ships, Men, Artillery, Provisions, etc. for
a War with the Republic of Holland, or any other Enemy whatsoever; which they
would have called for the greater Amusement of the People, a restoring to the
Crown the Jewels which had been usurped from it; which that it might be further
secured, it was likewise advised, That a Star Chamber, with the same
Jurisdiction as in the King's Father's Time, should be set up again; as also an
High Commission, which last though a sort of Tribunal introduced into England,
since it had proved schismatical, and that the Kings thereof had been declared
Head of the Church, yet it might very well serve a present Turn, and give the
less Jealousy of his designing to introduce the Roman Catholic Religion among
them thereby; but that if he did not look upon that Expedient seasonable, and
that the rather because it had been abolished in Parliament as a Grievance to
the Subject; he had no reason to oppose the setting up of an Ecclesiastical
Commission, since the Parliament themselves had erected the same, though with a
more limited Power than the other in lieu of it; and since they had judged it
necessary for the repressing of the Insolences of the Churchmen, regulating
their Manners, and obliging them to discharge their respective Duties in their
several Stations, He being a Catholic King had more reason than any other to
make use of it; the last your Lordship has seen, they have gained, and though the
King has a great Stomach to that other, yet my Lord Powis's Party has yet
prevailed and affrightned him from venturing upon such things without he had
been able, as he found he was not, to have succeeded in pulling down the
Militia of Kingdom, or at least in getting such an Army which he could fully
rely upon, and that he has not yet got neither; but till then he could not
pretend to declare the Grand Charter void, as obtained by Force of Arms, and
since infringed and nullified by several Rebellions, but especially by that in
his Fathers time, on the Subjects side, and now rule by a Council only without
troubling himself with any thing more like unto a Parliament as his French
Friends Advised him to. your Lordship will excuse the Freedom I have now and
always used in my Correspondence, and accept of my humble duty who am and ever
intend to continue,

My Lord, Your Honors to Command.
Paris, April 7. 1687. N. S.
LETTER XXVI.
The substance of Pope Innocent XI. First Letter to the French King, about the
business of the Regale.

I Cannot think but it will be acceptable to your Lordship to understand what
the Contents of the Pope's Letters to the French King are, especially in such a
conjuncture as this is, and when I believe you cannot be furnished with a
genuine account by any other hand; after the prefatory part which is short and
concise and somewhat different from others of his Predecessors, he comes close
to the matter and says, that he could not but reflect with no small
Astonishment as well as great Grief and sadness of heart upon the late
unaccountable Conduct of so great a Prince, who would be thought to be and
called himself the first Son to the Catholic Church, and withal the most
Christian King against the holy See of Rome; that he should as much as pretend
to so much Zeal for Religion, and yet at the same time, to invade the known
rights of the Catholic Church; not only in the Kingdom of France, but even in
the City of Rome herself, by pretending to a pernicious Freedom of Quarters,
which all other Catholic Princes had freely and generously renounced as a
gross abuse.

That his Persecuting the Protestants in the Kingdom of France ought no ways to
privilege him to put affronts upon the holy See; it was very plain that was
not the way to reunite those people to the Church, when he himself was so ill a
Pattern, and showed them so bad an Example, by contemning and outraging that
same Authority, which he used Force and Violence to make them own; That he was
much in the wrong, and acted preposterously to Prosecute them for not believing
what he himself so Scandalously opposed; And that for himself at the bottom, he
was not of a Persecuting Spirit and Principle; but that he was fully convinced,
it was never Christ our Savior, nor any of his Apostles way, who themselves
never were nor ever used any Preachers with long Tails, Boots and Spurs, etc.
That such a practice had done most disgrace to and created, as well it might,
more implacable prejudice against the Roman Catholic Religion than any thing
else whatsoever, and so by Consequence had much more obstructed than advanced
the propagation of it: That it ought never to be used in any Kingdom already
infected with heresy, though it is true, it were a very good fence against its
creeping in where it had yet got no footing; That it would be a means to blast
all the blooming hopes of the Catholic Cause in the Kingdom of England, and
engender pernicious Jealousies and a most cruel Opposition in the English, a
stiff necked people and the most Jealous of their Religion and Liberties of any
Nation upon the Earth, against their King who was a true Son of the Church, and
break the Neck of all his designs for the Introducing of it into his Dominions:
And in a word, that he was so far from approving of it, that he every way
disliked it, and that it should not throw dust in his Eyes from inspecting into
and opposing of his encroachments upon the holy See, which he was resolved to
defend to the utmost extremity; and so concluded with a short admonition, and
with which concludes this Letter to your Lordship from him who is,

My Lord, Your most Devoted Servant.
Paris, June 3. 1687.
LETTER XXVII.
An account of Pope Innocent XI. Second Letter to the French King about
persecuting the French Protestants, etc.

My Lord,
SInce my last I have had the opportunity to take the Heads of another Letter
written soon after that I have already sent you, by the Pope to the French
King, and is to this purpose.

In the first place he takes upon him to refute the Answers and frivolous
Complaints of the French King, and then descends to ridicule his vain pretense
of Piety in persecuting the Protestants of his Kingdom for denying him
Obedience, while he was no less severe to the Bishops of Alet and Pamiers and
some other Ecclesiastics, and even to some poor Abesses and their Nuns for
paying that Obedience which was due to the papal Authority; that this ^id not
only look like it, but really was nothing less but building up the Church with
the Left Hand and at the same time pulling it down with the Right.

That he was well informed what writings came out in France against his
Authority, which he well knew, was that of the holy Apostolic See; what Theses
were there maintained, and what was done by his over awing the Assembly of the
Clergy of his Kingdom, how and what method, he had taken to vel the French
Jesuits against him, and employed Maimburg, to represent his supremacy as
precarious, Itineran and Ambulatory; and not fixed to the City of Rome herself,
but only to the Capital City of the most powerful Christian Prince in the
World for the time; that is, gallice to Paris in the present Age: that he well
understood not only this, but also the designs that were formed by him to erect
a new Religion which should Totally swallow up and de^our both Roman Catholics
and ^rotestants, and how far he purposed to imitate King Henry VIII. of England
who writ a Book for the Pope's supremacy, and not long after Burnt aed Beheaded
people for owning it; when also at the very same Time he persecuted the
Protestants for opposing other points.

That it very ill became and it was not the part of a Dutiful and Religious
Son ^s he pretended to be and would have the Wo^ld believe, to abuse his
supreme Pastor; to dispoil him not only of his Ancient rights, granted him by
his Pious Predecessors, but even of those very ones which he then enjoyed and
were derived by Universal consent and constant tradition of all good
Catholics, and of the rights of his just Sovereignity in the City of Rome
herself.

That however let him the French King do what he pleased, yet all that ever he
should or could do, should not make him abate the least jot or tittle of his
just pretensions about the Regale, nor the franchises of Quarters: but that he
was resolved to be Pope in France and Sovereign in Rome, from which no Force
should ever make him depart or flinch back the least degree, whatever Dangers
he were exposed unto: This great Constancy, My Lord, in the old Pontiff, has
not a little appalled the exorbitant Pride and Fury of this Court; however they
have put the best Fa^: they can upon it, and seem resolved to break through all
Opposition, and outbrave whatever shall be in their Way, and divert their
Resolution; and I am assured the French Ambassador Lavardin at Rome has
already, pursuant to his Orders from hence, highly menaced the old Dad, who in
a third Letter to the King has made answerable Reply, of which I am pretty
confident I shall in my next transmit to your Lordship the Particulars, but in
the mean time remain,

My Lord, Your Faithful Servant.
Paris, june 19. 1687. N. S.
LETTER XXVIII.
The Contents of Pope Innocent XI's third Letter to the French King, in answer
to that of h^^; wherein he shows his Folly and Mistake in his Pretentions and
Demands, and threatens the Censure of the Church against him, and shows the
Inconveniency and Danger of setting up a Patriarch in France, etc.

My Lord,
I Wish your Lordship as much Satisfaction in the perusal of this Letter, as I
have in keeping my Promise made to you in my last about the Pope's third
Letter; in getting Sight of the Minutes whereof, I have met with much greater
Difficulty than I expected, or was usual with me; I have already hinted
Monsieur Lavardin's Menaces made at Rome upon the subject matter of the former
Letter; and therefore the Pope begins his with answering those Menaces, that
imported that the King should affranchise France from the Roman See, nominate a
separate Patriarch there, ^and elect Bishops of his own without having any
Recourse to the Bishop of Rome, and in the mean while invade the Pope's
Territories with his Arms, and force the Franchises for his Ambassador; and
fiercely replying, That he is resolved, as in Conscience bound to do, to
transmit the Franchises and all other Rights of the Apostolic See to his
Successors as he found them.

That he would recognize or allow of no Bishops of the King's nominating, till
he had Satisfaction about the Regale; that if he would be so heady as to
proce^d ^o nominate a new Patriarch, it would make a greater combustion in his
Kingdom than he was aware of, to which his Persecution of the Protestants would
not a little contribute which he should find would be very unseasonable for
him, and would in all likelihood raise all Christendom against him, as well as
his own Subjects; that thereby he would make a wide Gap to let in an Inundation
of Heresies, which he pretends to keep out, and would teach the People after
they had once trampled on the Pope's Authority, to trample at last on that of
the Bishops and King's too, and even on their very Persons, as they had done in
England; and that when he had pulled down the mighty Dam of the Papal Power,
and let that raging Sea in, it would be out of his Power to stop it where and
when he would: wherefore he conjured him and his Clergy to consider seriously,
yea twice and thrice of that weighty Project, before they went to put it in
Execution, lest they might, when they found it too late, repent it, and in vain
attempt to recall the same.

That he must not think to fright him with the Noise of an Invasion; for that
though he would neither arm himself nor the rest of the Princes of Italy against
him, as he might do, but oppose only Prayers and Tears, yet if he desi^^ed not
from his pretended Regale and Franchises, he would excommunicate Lavardin his
Ambassador, and interdict his Kingdom, and and set it in such a Flame about his
Ears, as should make him glad to go tamely back again, and look after his own
Home; that after all, should he sack and Plunder Rome, captivate his Person,
and have all other Successes he could imagine, it would be a very inglorious
Expedition for Lewis the Great, the eldest Son of the Church, and such a
pretended Bigot for it, for to ravage its Territories and assault the supreme
Pastor of it with those Arms with which he was bound to defend it; and but a
small Triumph to so great a Conqueror to overpower and martyrise a poor,
helpless and unarmed old Man, as he was, for whom some of his Predecessors
would have been content to have become Martyrs themselves; and therefore
conjures him to think once more very seriously of it, and then to act as he
pleased, but withal assures him, That neither his Menaces nor his Arms shall
make him flinch an Hair's breadth from those his last Resolutions, wherein he
was fully resolved to persist to the last Drop of his Blood. Thus, my Lord, you
have the brave Resolution of a Roman Pontiff, who, though the Title and Dignity
of Christ's earthly Vicegerent be falsely ascribed to him, yet undoubtedly he is
possessed of a Soul above that of common Mortals, and whom I therefore honor
and esteem, as I have always done and ever shall your Lordship, who am,

My Lord, Your most humble Servant
Paris, June 28. 1687.
LETTER XXIX.
Of the Trial and Suspension of the Bishop of London, by virtue of the
Ecclesiastical Commission.

My Lord,
I Have once and again intimated to your Lordship some Methods that were
proposed to be prosecuted, in order to the setting up of the King's Dispensing
Power, and among other things, to the best of my remembrance, taken notice of
the Ecclesiastical Commission, with the Reasons urged to the King for making
use of it; and now you have seen the Effects of it upon my Lord of London, whom
some of them have said, They were resoved to be revenged on, for doing his Duty
in the House of Lords, by moving after the Lords had voted an Address of Thanks
to the King for his Speech to that Session after the death of the D. of
Monmouth, in his own and his Brethren's Name, That the House would take the
King's Speech into consideration and debate the same; but this way was not then
resolved on, but several others projected, which yet they found impracticable;
when the Commission was agreed to be erected, they had even then an Eye to the
Bishop, though no plausible Pretense for the Prosecution of him, and therefore
the said Commission lay dormant for some Months, till such time as they might
see the Effects of another Project to be put in Practice, which was, That some
Reglements made in the late King's Reign, in the Year 1662. importing, among
other things, The Clergy in their Sermons should not meddle with State Affairs,
nor enter upon any Question that concerned the Rights of the King's Subjects,
nor to treat of some Points in Divinity which formerly had created great
Troubles in the Kingdom, particularly those of Predestination and Free Will,
nor yet to mixed Invective Reproaches, Railleries and scandalous Expressions
with their Controversies, should be republished under a very strict Injunction
of all Parties concerned to the observance of them; and the least Transgression
in that kind to be punished with the utmost Severity; they did not question in
the mean while, but that in so ticklish a time, there might be some one or
other, especially in the Diocese of London, whom this Bird-lime might catch;
your Lordship knows how it fell out accordingly, in the Case of Doctor Sharp.

Though they were mighty jealous of the old Gentleman of Canterbury, that if he
were nominated in the Commission, and should chance to act, which was the least
of their Thoughts he should, he might rather thwart than promote their Designs,
yet being pretty confident he would not concern himself with it, they
adventured to put him in, not for his Authority but his Namesake only, for,
considered they, should we get the Bishop of London once into the Toil, he will
have no room to plead to the Jurisdiction of the Court seeing the same was
founded upon the concurrent, though in truth but nominal, Authority of his
Metropolitan, to whom he owed Canonical Obedience; these things your Lordship
may know much better than I, but I cannot forbear giving you any Hints of the
Court-Designs, which whether projected here or on your side, we have constant
Intelligence of in our:::: I am,

My Lord, Your Lordship's most humble and devoted Servant.
Paris, Aug. ^0. 1687. N. S.
LETTER XXX.
Of the Liberty of Conscience, first granted in Scotland, and then in England,
by King James II.

My Lord,
YOur Lordship may call to mind what I have before written to you concerning
Tolleration in Religion, as necessary to facilitate the King's Designs, and now
you see it has sprouted up in Scotland, and the Buddings of it are visible
enough in England; that the Parliament of the former as well as the latter
opposed the Dispensing Power is notoriously known, so that there was much less
Hopes they would have concurred to the Indulgence, a Point as necessary to be
gained every whit as the other; that the Scotch Nation were more modelled to
the King's Hand than the English, the King himself well knew; as having a
personal Share in it when high Commissioner in that Kingdom in his Brother's
Reign, and the French and English Jesuitical Faction knew this as well as he;
and therefore I am assured both of them concurred to have the Indulgence given
there first, and that also in so partial a manner in favor of those of the
King's Religion, that the rest have hardly any Share therein; which manifests
plainly the Design of the English Catholics whatever specious Pretense they
may otherwise use, is to bring the People of England also under the same, nay a
worse Yoke of Servitude, and to have their own Religion predominant quickly,
and in Time the only one in both Nations: And as for the third they are cock
sure of that already; but that of the French Emissaries is not so visible and
above Board; for they hope such partial Proceedings must at last incense the
People of both Kingdoms and that to so violent a degree, that the King must of
necessity have recourse to call in French Force to quell them: and then, my
Lord, when they have once got sure Footing, who can guess at their farther Aim;
however, they have not with all their Intrigues been able to prevail with the
King to use the same Partiality in England, who according to the Transmission
of their Intelligence hither seemed very much inclined to it, upon their urging
the Tractableness of the Scotch Council in the Matter, and what a great Pattern
they had set to them of England, whom they did not doubt but would abrogate the
Laws made against Roman Catholics, etc. in imitation of them; but a Roman
Catholic Lord, whom I have formerly named to your Lordship to have interposed
upon the like Occasion, thwarted them therein; he deserves well of his Country
in some respects, and I do not question but your Honor is of that mind; and so
shall I be, till I see more than I do now to incline me to the contrary, who am,

My Lord, Your Lordship's most humble and obedient Servant.
Paris, Sept. 5. 168^. N. S.
LETTER XXXI.
Of the French Projects to put King James upon desperate Measures in Ireland;
and their Ends therein.

My Lord,
YOur Lordship may remember how I have formerly given you the state of the
Ir^sh Soldiers in the Service of France, during the late King's Reign, and what
Encouragement they have had here from time to time, above any of the rest of
the British Nations, and the large Promises that were now and then made, That
they should be reinstated in their ancient Possessions in their native Country.
But this King has no sooner ascended the English Throne, but that they have as
readily returned into England and Ireland, as they were willing before, even
contrary to their Allegiance, to remain in the French Service; the Reason
whereof your Lordship must needs know, they having already devoured with their
Eyes the most valuable Preferments in England and Ireland (in the later whereof
they have got a Lieutenant of their own stamp) and more than all the Lands
which they have been debarred from by the Act of Settlement; having (as I can
assure your Lordship) a previous Promise from this Court, That the King will
use all imaginable endeavors to get his Brother of England to consent to
abolish it; and which has put the Irish so hotly upon renewing their
Importunities to the King against the said Act, that he has in a manner agreed
to those measures that are pursuant thereunto; in which motions the Irish were
ordered to be effectually seconded by the Emissaries of this Court, who at the
same time have encouraged the Irish privately with a Promise; That if after
all, the King would not give his full Consent, or durst not do them Right,
their Master was resolved to do it; provided they would choose him for their
Protector, which they might lawfully do, being at best but a conquered Nation,
against their Conquerors, for the recovery not only of their Native Rights in
that Land, but likewise of those afresh confirmed to them by the Treaty,
(whether pretended or real, I will not determine upon that Head) with the late
K. Charles II, of which the French King was Guarrantee, and therefore justly
might and ought to be called in as a Vindicator. And this, my Lord, is
confessed here, That they had formed so strong a Party among the Irish, that if
the King had not in some measure complied, or does not for the future, but
failed their Hopes by keeping it, as the Interest of his Kingdom, one should
think, naturally leads him, to that side of the Balance against France, and
maintaining the Act of Settlement, they had bid fair, as I have heard it more
than whispered here, for a general Revolt of the Irish Natives in their favor,
whom they had provided to succor on a sudden, without declaring War, or the
least Intimation beforehand of their Designs, to the King. But now having
prevailed with him to make such Advances as he has begun against the said
famous Act, which they have looked upon, as it were the Band of Peace, not only
to Ireland, but even to the Three Nations, and perhaps they are right enough in
their Judgment; they believe they have hereby put him on a Point that will
quickly bring him into Distress enough to need them; and, consequently, to the
necessity of taking his future measures from them, expecting henceforward a
more implicit Compliance than ever. Thus, my Lord, have they laid their
Foundation, the Success and Event, Time must determine: but from such
undermining Politicians, Good Lord, deliver England, etc. for the Dangers which
threaten both its Religion and Civil Liberty are very great, though, I hope, not
inevitable. Pardon the freedom in these Particulars of him who is, and ever
shall remain, ready to please your Lordship to the utmost of my power, and
cannot but subscribe himself,

My Lord, Your Honor's most humble and most obedient Servant.
Paris, Mar. 26. 1687.
LETTER XXXII.
Of K. James's Closetting several Persons; and the Arguments he was advised to
use to them to consent to the Abrogating of the Penal Laws and Test.

My Lord,
YOur Lordship, for ought I know, may know much better than I can inform you,
what Arguments the King has used to such as have been lately Closetted by him;
and if Fame be not a --, you are one of that number; for a List of them is not
yet come into our --; but I can transmit into your Hands what has been
concerted here in the nature of Instructions to the French Emissaries at
White Hall hereupon; they were to represent to the King, and he to the
closetted Gentlemen, That there were four Kings who had endeavored to bring
the Kingdom of England into an Uniformity in Religion, that so the People might
live in Amity one with another; and notwithstanding all the Expedients, though
seemingly very likely to take effect and succeed according to wish, which wise
Politicians had suggested from time to time; yet they had hitherto proved
abortive, and their Endeavors had been in vain: That therefore the only way
left for to settle Tranquillity in a State, so as to be no more to be disturbed
about Religion, was to grant every one the freedom fully to enjoy his own: That
such an Iudulgence of all Religions in Holland was as much a cause of the
flourishing of that State in Wealth and Greatness, and more than any other that
could be assigned; and to say that such a Liberty, though it might be compatible
enough with a Republic, was not yet with Monarchical Governments, was a gross
Mistake; and Experience showed it to be quite otherwise both in the Turkish
Empire, Kingdom of Persia, and elsewhere, where the Greek and Armenian
Christians have been tolerated in their Religion for many Ages, and yet have
been so far from being mutinous, or Disturbers of the respective States they
have lived under, that they are great Supporters of them, especially the
Armenians, who are almost the only Merchants they have in that mighty and
extensive Kingdom of Persia: That the Persecutions which our Nonconformists in
England have from time to time been under, had been the cause of the flight of
many good Subjects beyond the Seas, of whom our neighboring Nations drew great
and solid Advantages; and that those who have staid at home have, by reason of
the Pressures they have labored under, proud uneasy, and turned Malcontents;
and if they have not had Virtue and Constancy enough patiently to suffer under
their Misfortunes, they were always ready to favor Revolts and enter into
Factions, whereof they had seen fatal effects in the late Reigns, from which no
King could be able to secure his Person and his Subjects, but that uneasy and
turbulent Spirits would be always ready, under Pretense of Religion, which
they abused, to disturb and molest them. Which Reasons the King was to back
closely with large Promises of Favor, and if he found any obstinate, to mix
his Reasons and Promises with some Intimations of his Displeasure; and, upon an
absolute Refusal, to proceed to divest some of their Places under him. and to
allege for a Reason of his so doing, That it was not reasonable that they who
refused their Services should enjoy his Favors; and that if hereupon any
should be so audacious as to tell him, That this Practice of his was irregular
and contrary to the Freedom which the Laws of the Land allowed to them,
especially as Members of Parliament, whose Suffrages ought to be spontaneous
and free, they were to be put in mind, that they had forgot the Violences used
by King Henry VIII, upon the like occasions, and the methods so many other
Kings had put in practice, to engage their Parliaments to subscribe to their
Wills: that they might consider that two of the most famous Parliaments that
ever were in the Kingdom of England had authorized this Conduct, in the Reign
of Edward III, and King Richard II, when some of the Pope of Rome's Bulls were
contested, as being looked upon too much to entrench on the King's Prerogative;
that the Parliament prayed King Edward, and obliged Richard, almost against his
Will, to give their Consent, by particular Conferences with the Members, to
promise to use the utmost of their Power to maintain the King's Prerogative,
and the Rights of the Crown, against that See, etc. But if that after all, the
King should find, that neither Arguments, Promises, Threats, nor Examples would
do, he was advised to proceed in his Brother's Steps by ^uo Warranto, and so to
concert measures with those that presided over Elections for the regulating of
Corporations whereon they depended, though this was by far the more tedious way,
but yet there was one way to hasten it: for whereas new Charters, in his
Brother's time granted in lieu of the old ones, were many of them retarded,
because the Court-Officers insisted upon too much Money; the King now might give
positive Directions to such persons to dispatch them without such
Considerations, with a Promise to gratify them another way; and if he found
that would not do, then he was to cashier such Officers, and put others in
their room who would engage to do the business to effect. I am afraid, my Lord,
I have wearied you with an impertinent Letter; and therefore if an abrupt
conclusion will any way mend the matter, I remain,

My Lord, Your Lordship's most humble Servant.
Paris. Nov. 19. 1687. N. S.
LETTER XXXIII
Of my Lord Castlemain's being sent Ambassador to Rome by K. James; and of his
receiving the Pope's Nuncio in England.

My Lord,
THAT my Lord of Castlemain was sent Ambassador to Rome, has been transacted
wholly on your side of the Water; for besides that, this Court were then, and
are still, at variance with the Papal See: There is not the least Instruction
transmitted from hence (as far as I can find) either to England or Rome
concerning that matter; but perhaps he might receive them in transit^, and by
word of mouth, only from M. L. who failed not to see him: But as for Count
Dada, the Apostol^ck Nuncio, as they call him, they have showed some Concern
here that he should have an honorable Reception in England, and have ordered
it so as to get our King to dispense with that Ceremony which Henry VIII, and
even his Daughter Queen Mary, insisted upon, that he should wait like a Mumper
at a French Port till he had Leave granted him to enter into England; And that
the English Nation, who had not seen such a Vision for near an Age and a half,
might not be overterrified with it, the French Agents were instructed to
suggest unto those Lords and others whom they should think most susceptible of
their Sophistry; That since the King, as a Roman Catholic Prince, could do no
less than send an Ambassador to Rome to salute the Pope, though it were but for
form-sake, and that his said Ambassador had had such an extraordinary
Reception, and great Civilities showed him there; it were but very equitable
the King, in his turn, should show the like to his Nuncio, who was a Layman,
and in that quality came to congratulate his accession to the Throne, from his
Master; not so much as he sat in St. Peter's Chair, as he was a Temporal
Prince, to whose Ministers, as such, the Law of Nations required a just
Deference should be paid: That to send a solemn Embassy to the Great Turk, who
was a Mahumetan, and a sworn Enemy to all Christians, however denominated, was
never so much as boggled at by any Englishman or other Christian Nation
whatsoever, either in this or any preceding Age: That the Ambassadors of the
Emperor of Morocco had been lately received in England most honorably, and yet
their Master both a Mahametan and a Barbarian Prince, in whose Countries
Christians were treated more like Brute-Beasts than Men; and should they
disdain to concur with their Prince, to receive with some Ceremony, and if not
by way of a public and pompous Entry, yet privately in his Palace, a Minister
from him to whose Civilities many of our English Nobility and Gentry were
highly obliged in their Travels to Rome and Italy? But what Success they have
had in this petty Agency, your Lordship can tell much better than I at this
distance: but the Duke of Somerset is as highly exclaimed against here, for
refusing to perform the Ceremony of introducing the Nuncio, as the Duke of
Grafton is applauded for doing of it, who, I hope for all that, will never have
the Thanks of a House of Commons for it. I am,

My Lord, Your very obedient and humble Servant.
Paris, Nov. 2^. 1^87. N. S.
LETTER XXXIV.
The French Politics to embroyl England.

My Lord,
THE French Emissaries having gained severat Points, and particularly that
mentioned in my last, they have lately turned their Batteries another way: They
have been most of this while endeavoring to compass their Ends, by putting the
King, and those who have most influence over him, upon desperate courses,
whereof the most material I have, as Occasion has served, noted to your
Lordship. It will hardly be believed, that they would offer to propose any
Maxims to the Legal Party in England, that are really for their advantage; Did
not their Instructions make it appear to be so, tho they have proposed far
different Ends therein? I do not question but your Lordship has observed the
Uneasiness of the Nation under the present Proceedings of the King and
Court-party; but tho they have just cause of suspicion, I must assure your
Lordship the same has been and may still be aggravated by the Agents of this
Court, who teach them to infuse into the People, That the Protestant Religion
is in great danger; That the reduction of the Roman Catholics to the Bounds
established by the Law of the Land is highly necessary, and without the latter
be effected, it will be impossible for the former long to subsist; That it was
visible the Privileges of Parliament were inf^inged more than in any time of
their Ancestors: That Arbitrary Power was already acted, and without timely
prevention would get such rooting, that all the power of England could not
dethrone it; That there was not scarce one made a Nobleman since the Kings
accession to the Throne in the Three Kingdoms, but such as were P^p^sts; and,
That all Honors and Offices of Profit, either in Court or Camp, were shared
amongst such, whilst the Protestants lay neglected as useless persons, and such
as were deemed to have no Share nor Lot in the Government; That the person of
the King, it is true, was sacred, but at the same time it was not only
justifiable, but an incumbent Duty upon them, as Englishmen, as they would
answer it to God and their Country, timously to think of the Danger, and to
apply the Remedy; for without the removal of such Ministers as then managed the
State, it would be in vain to expect their Grievances could be redressed, and
their Religion and Liberties secured; and if they find themselves harken'd to,
and their Propositions approved, they have further Instructions to hint an
Association for one Expedient, etc. God Almighty knows what will become of poor
England amidst so many Designs upon her Religion and Liberty, both by foreign
and domestic Enemies, who continually prey upon her Vitals. I can but pray for
her, as I do and always shall for your Lordship, who am,

My Lord, Your most devoted Servant.
Paris Dec. 13. 1687.
LETTER XXXV.
King James (though already much disposed) put more out of Conceit with the
Prince of Orange, who is represented by the French Agents very illy to him.

My Lord,
I Have in my last suggested to you some of those Arguments the Emissaries of
this Court have and are to use to the Church of England-men, as they find
occasion and a disposition to receive them, for to put them upon violent
courses, to their own and Nation's destruction: But at the same time they have
entertained an incurable Jealousy of the Prince of Orange, and construe the
most just and generous Actions of a Prince who was always so, in the worst
sense imaginable, and, as such, represent them to the King, whom they cunningly
whistle in the Ear, saying; That he could not but know there were some persons
in the Nation who were not pleased with his way of proceeding, and therefore
would be sure to take all Opportunities to oppose him: That indeed now Monmouth
was cut off, they had no plausible Head to retire unto: That for the Prince of
Orange, though he had apparently omitted nothing since His Majesty's advancement
to the Throne for the maintaining of a fair correspondence with him, and been
very forward to pay all the Devoirs due from a Son to a Father-in-law,
affecting much Zeil for his Interest, and acting with his Ministers of State as
if himself were the Prime of them: Yet they desire him to consider the
thoughtful and designing Nature of the Prince, who, to be sure, was not wanting
to observe every pace made by the English, and to dispose of his own Affairs
and People accordingly: That His Majesty could not but remember the
Applications made to him formerly, in his Brother's Reign, from England, when
he was but Nephew to the King and himself; but now, that he was advanced by his
Marriage to a much nigher Degree to the Crown, could it be thought that he had
less Thoughts concerning it, or less Application made unto him on that behalf,
especially in so ticklish a time? That some persons of note's going over lately
into Holland, was no sign he was unconcerned at the English Affairs, or
unapplied to, but must needs give Umbrage, and more than a Suspicion that he
had already a strong Party within the Kingdom; and that indeed his Conduct
without was next to a demonstration of it, since he had done all that ever he
could to hinder His Majesty from all the Succors he could expect from abroad,
in case of any domestic Troubles; for though His Majesty was sure of France, and
had made a general Alliance with Spain, and might then be apt to believe that
the House of Austria would not oppose him, especially when the Catholic
Religion was the Dispute; yet it was manifest the Prince had bid fair for the
deoriving him of both those Supports, first by entering himself, and then by
causing the United Prov^nces to enter into the League at Ausburg against
France, to the end he might draw down upon that Monarchy the united Forces of
the Confederates, in case the French King should offer to attack the States
Territories, while he might make use of their Power both by Sea and Land, to
carry on his Designs against His Majesty and his Kingdoms: And then, that he
had rendered the House of Austria very suspicious of His Majesty, as being a
Prince contrary to their Designs, one in Interests, and closely engaged with
France in a secret Treaty, which would appear in due time. I can assure your
Lordship, that by the Returns which have been made hither, the King has been
but too susceptible of these Calumnies against the Prince, and, I fear, to his
prejudice, though I heartily wish it otherwise, who am,

My Lord, Your Lordship's most Humble and Obedient Servant.
Paris, Jan. 11. 1688.
LETTER XXXVI.
Of the Spaniards attempting to bring King James over to their Interest, but
failed.

My Lord,
HOwever the Emissaries of this Court have traduced the Noble Prince of Orange
to the King, yet they have in some sort given the Lie to themselves, when
notwithstanding all their Rhodomantade, about the Prince's engaging the House
of Austria against his Majesty, they have been so alarmed at the Proposals made
to him by the Spaniards, of a stricter Alliance, which they knew, if entered
into, must invalidate that made with them; the Emperor and King of Spain being
suspicious of the Alliance with France, had entered into a Confederacy with the
Princes of Germany at Ausburg, as I have hinted in my last; and that they might
make their Party as strong as they could, and having at the same time no clear
demonstration of our King's private Leaguing with France, they resolved to
leave nothing unessayed, either to know that it was really so, or, if not, to
engage the King in their Interest; the Marquess de Gastanaga, Govenour of
Flanders, and the Spanish Ambassador Don Pedro de Ronquillo were the Persons
employed by that illustrious House in that Affair; it is well known here that
the latter has omitted nothing that could be done to bring the King over,
urging to him the Honor and Interest of such an Alliance; that it was the only
Opportunity he had left to recover the good Opinion of his Subjects, who, he
must needs know himself, were somewhat alienated in their Affections from him,
with a great deal more to the same purpose; and he did at last proceed so far,
well knowing his blind -- as to engage, if his Majesty would enter into and be
cordial in such an Alliance, to order it so that his Parliament should
acquiesce with whatever he was then attempting to get established in respect of
Religion, which he could never effect by the Assistance and Agency of France,
their harsh Procedure against the Reformed there being too green and fresh in
Memory to be so soon forgotten by the English, who had besides a natural
Aversion to that Nation and their Politics; But, my Lord, all that Don
Ronquillo has done, was communicated to the French Emissaries, who presently
took the Scent, and being not willing to give the King space to demur upon the
Matter, lost no Time in remonstrating to him; That they who had told him, That
he ought to take that Opportunity to gain his Subjects, by entering into the
League of Ausburg, had not reflected upon the inconsequence that followed upon
such a Procedure; That that League now agitated was but the consequence of
another made at Magdenburg by the Protestants, in favor of the Hugonots; and
that it were against all good Reason and Sense, that a Prince who did his
utmost to procure a Liberty to Roman Catholics in England, should concur to
re-establish the most rigid of Protestants in France; besides, it would argue
no good Policy for him to forsake a solid Friend, such as the French King was,
to join himself to such Princes, who would no longer be useful to him, than
while they had need of him; since the Protestants had already begun to
overreach their Piety, so far as to draw them into Leagues formed against a
Catholic Prince, in favor of the Calvinists, whom he had driven out of his
Dominions; wherefore the King made answer to Don Ronquillo in general Terms;
That as he would faithfully preserve the Alliance made between him and his
Master, so the same Fidelity obliged him not to violate that Friendship which
was between him and the Most Christian King, his Kinsman, who was willing to
live at Peace with his Neighbors, and mantain the same as far as he could
between them. Thus, my Lord, this hopeful Overture was blasted, the Consequence
whereof I refer to him who knows all things, and to whose Protection I commend
your Lordship, who am,

My Lord, Your very obliged Servant to command.
Paris, Mar. 16. 1688 N. S.
LETTER XXXVII.
Arguments used to King James by the Lord Marquess of Powis, Pope's Nuntio,
etc. against a War with Holland.

My Lord,
THat the King, pursuant to his late Allyances with this Crown, designs a War,
in conjunction with the French Arms, against Holland, is no longer a Secret
here, whatever it may be in England; especially since Don Ronquillo's Artifices
to gain him over to the Austrian Interest, as I mentioned to your Lordship in
my my last, have failed, though he were briskly seconded therein by the Lord
Marquess of Powis, the Pope's Nuntio, and Emperor's Minister, whose Reasons or
rather Remonstrances to the King upon that Head, for want of better
Intelligence, I shall at present take notice of to your Lordship, as entered in
our Minutes, and which indeed were such that it is a wonder he should withstand
them, sed quem Deus --

1. They pressed it very home upon him, That such a War against the States of
Holland could not be attempted with any apparent Advantage to his Majesty,
without a junction with the French Power, which yet in all human Probability
would never enable him to conquer those Provinces, since both the Crown of
Spain and the Emperor, nay the Empire would be obliged to protect them; to war
with whom, especially with Spain, whose Trade, as he well knew was most
beneficial to England of any in the World, would be attended with such manifest
Disadvantage, as all the Power of France, were that King a faithful Ally, would
never be able to make the Nation amends for; and that supposing he should be
able to conquer the said Republic, by the Assistance of the French Arms, yet
to conquer it by French Force would necessarily but make himself, as well as
that Nation a Tributary and Underling of France.

2. That in all likelihood a War with Holland, and against the House of
Austria, would disgust his Subjects, and set them all against him, yea and
perhaps move some hot Spirits to form Designs to dispossess him of his Throne;
or at least, so far to make Opposition as to knock on the Head all his fine
Projects for the Advancement of his own Religion in England, and engaging of
his very Catholic Subjects against him.

3. That if his Majesty intended the re-establishment of the Catholic Faith in
England, it was to be considered, that the same was a Work of Time, and
required great Moderation, but that they were sure the hot and furious Methods
of France and the Jesuits would never effect it.

4. That to them, for the effectual bringing about of the said Work, there
seemed a kind of necessity, that he should stay till the Discords between the
Catholic Princes were so far appeased as to be without Danger of breaking out
in a long Time, for that all their Concurrence would be found to be little
enough to enable him to accomplish his Ends therein.

5. That if he should choose rather to enter into a strict Alliance with the
House of Austria against the French, he would thereby render himself secure of
his People's Hearts and Affections, of the Dutch Naval Force to strengthen him
at Sea, as occasion required; and of all the other Allies Forces, to divert the
French Armies by Land: And that if he should lose upon that account, as 'twas
likely, any Remittances from France, they assured him the Pope would allow him
a much better Pension to countervail it; and that being engaged against France,
his People would be so intent against the French, and upon that War, so
agreeable to their Inclination, that they would not be so very jealous of, and
so prying into the Advances he should make in the Change of Religion at Home;
and that if by that means, than which nothing could be thought on more
feasible, he could not settle that Religion, he might at least secure it, and
make Matters easy to those of his own Persuasion.

6. That if his Majesty persisted to make War against Holland, which would
inevitably draw on one with the House of Austria, if his Arms did not prevail
so far as to come to an entire Conquest, he was certainly ruined, and all the
Catholics in the three Kingdoms along with him, without resource, and would
perish unpitied, and without any Hopes or possibility of Succor from any
Catholic Princes but the French King alone; and that if on the contrary, as it
was the most unlikely thing in the World, he should prevail to a Conquest over
Holland, and his own Country, that yet thereby he should, under the color of
an imaginary establishment of the Catholic Religion in the British Kingdoms,
but settle an irreligious Tyrant over all Christendom, worse to the Catholic
Religion and Christianity in general than any Heretic in the World, nay than
the very Turk himself, and who would insolently trample upon the Pope's as well
as his Fellow Princes Power, and set up a new Empire and a new Religion of a
third sort neither Catholic nor Protestant, but such as suited with his own
ambitious Designs; as the Steps he had already made that way did sufficiently
declare: And so instead of resettling the Roman Catholic Religion where it had
lost Ground, and in the Soil of Great Britain, which would prove but a
Quick-Sand to it, he would destroy it all over Europe, where it was now
established in terra Firma, etc.

I Will leave it to the Decision of your Lordship's Judgment, whether these or the
French Remonstrances carried most of Reason, Probability and Truth in them, as
I ever shall all that comes from,

My Lord, Your Honors most humble and obedient Servant.
Paris, Apr. 30. 1688.
LETTER XXXVIII.
Of the Differences continued between the Pope and the French King, and of King
James sending am Ambassador to Rome, to reconcile them.

My Lord,
I Have already transmitted to your Lordship the Contents of his Holiness's
Letters to the French King, about the Regale and Franchises; but there seems
now to be a Disposition in these two high stomach'd Princes to come to an
accommodation, and the Conjuncture of Time lies so to the Heart of this Court,
that I am apt to believe they will precipitate an Agreement; however, because
their forwardness therein might be disguised as much as French Policy could
effect, they have by their Agents insinuated to our King; That an Embassy to
Rome from him about accommodating of the foresaid Differences must be very
grateful to his Holiness, who paid more deference to his Majesty, and would
further regard his Mediation than any Prince in Christendom; and that though the
French Court stood very stiff upon their Rights, yet it was not to be doubted,
but as they had so high a Valuation for his Friendship at all Times and
Occasions, so he might be confident that in so critical a Juncture of Time,
they would not be so purblind as not to see wherein their true Interest
consisted; It was no sooner, my Lord, proposed to the King, but accepted by
him, and my Lord Howard is already arrived in this Kingdom, in his Way to
Italy, as the King's Ambassador extraordinary on this Errand; but
notwithstanding this Court has so far prevailed by their Artifices in England
to procure the Kings Mediation, yet an Accident, if it may be called so, has
lately happened at Rome, which may perhaps blast all the blooming Hopes
entertained from this mighty Negotiation. For Monsieur Lavardin, Ambassador
from this King at Rome, receiving Information that some of the Pope's Marshals
were got within his Quarters, he ordered his Men to seize them, and commit them
to safe Custody; the Cardinal de Estree has endeavored to alleviate the
matter, and mollify his Holiness Resentments, saying; That certain Persons,
who were no great Friends to France, had set them at Work, with a design to
irritate Matters yet further between the two Courts; that he might be pleased
to consider, that in the Posture Affairs then stood, that is, after his
Holiness had accepted the Mediation of the King of England, it would look ill
to admit any Innovation; but the Cardinal was asked, Whether the King of France
was Sovereign in the City of Rome? And supposing he had been really so, was
there any Justice to arrest People as they passed along the Streets, that had a
Design to make no manner of Attempts upon any? That it was never yet known in
any Country, or heard of in the World of any Law that condemned a Man upon a
bare Suspicion; but supposing that were true, as it was not, yet it was most
certain that the Punishment was reserved to the Sovereign and not to an
Ambassador; who whatever Latitude he would have allowed to his Authority, could
not pretend to any more than to be independent in his own Person; that as for
his Domestics, if they pretended to the same Exemption with himself, it was no
farther allowable than they demeaned themselves Regularly, as they ought to do;
for if they did otherwise, they were subject to the ordinary Jurisdiction of
the Place they were in; That there were a Thousand Examples for it, though
there had been some Ambassadors who had endeavored to extend the Privilege of
their Domestics so far, as to maintain that they ought to be affranchised.
That this pretended right of Sovereignty by Ambassadors was so far from beng
true, that they had not as much as Power to punish their own Servants, for
there could not be any one Example produced that any Ambassador has intruded so
far as to condemn any Person whatsoever to Death, though there have been many who
have justly merited such Punishment; That it was true, they had sometimes
reclaimed them when fallen into the Hands of ordinary Justice, but that at the
same time it had always depended upon that of the Sovereign to concede that
Favor to them, or refuse them according as they were more or less just. These
things being granted, which could not be otherwise, for they carried their own
Light with them, how could it be justified that a bare Ambassador should dare
to arrest not only his own Servants, but the Officers of a Sovereign Prince,
and that even in his Capital City, and to heighten the Extravagance of such an
Action, even in the very Sight of him.

Thus, my Lord, has the Old Gentleman resented the Injury, and I am afraid our
King will have but little Joy of his Embassy, and in this Particular come short
of his Grandfather's Motto of Beati Pacifici; however, his Zeal here for the
Good of the Roman Catholic Church is highly applauded, but whether it be a
Zeal without Knowledge, I Will leave to your Lordship to determine, and think my
self happy in any Opportunity to serve you, who am,

My Lord, Your very humble Servant
Paris, July 2. 1688. S. N.
LETTER XXXIX.
Of the Seven Bishops being committed to the Tower of London; and the French
Intrigues to embroyl that matter.

My Lord,
THE Commitment of the Bishops to the Tower, and the Birth of the Priuce of
Wales, are things so agreeable to the Gusto of this Court, that they are
overjoyed at it, about the former of which this Court has been very busy: I
will not positively say the Presbyterians had the first hand in it, though they
have taken care to enter it into our Minutes so; and that they being willing to
make some advantage of the Contests of the Court, got it suggested to the King
by the means of the Romanists, That in order to engage the Parliament to
establish Liberty of Conscience, it was necessary the Bishops should be ordered
to enjoin the reading the King's Declaration in their respective Diocesses:
That the matter could not be scrupled by them, since the publication of the
King's Orders had been at all times an Usage in England, as well as in other
Countries. But however this matter was first started, my Lord, I will not take
upon me to determine, but it was carried on by strange Instruments; for as soon
as ever the Bishops had refused to read the Declaration, and addressed themselves
to the King upon that account, with their Reasons for noncomplyance; the
Jesuits about him, egged briskly on by such as are entirely at this Court's
Devotion, represented to him the great Affront offered to his Authority and the
Regal Dignity itself by such a Refusal; and how if he suffered the same to go
impunedly, it might open a Gap for it to be trampled upon without reserve, and
who could tell where it would terminate? That since he had already in all other
points carried the Rights of Sovereignty to a great height, surely it was not
now time to dissemble and wink at an Adventure that put such narrow Bounds to
his Regal Authority: That there was therefore an absolute necessity to call
them to a severe account for such an audacious Act; That they might be tried by
virtue of the Ecclesiastical Commission, and with as much Justice everywhit
suspended as the Bp of London was; and what would be a mighty Advantageous
Consequent thereon, was, that the Privation of the Episcopal Authority would
advance the Regal Authority to such a pitch, as to be held in veneration by all
the People. You know, my Lord, the Success these Remonstrances have had, but
the variation of the Bishops Trial is disavowed by this Court, and the cause of
their being brought into Westminster Hall attributed to the Chancellor's
swaying the King, and for which some have gnashed their Teeth at him. Upon the
Acquitment of the Bishops, the English Jesuits were horribly spighted; and the
French Emissaries laughed in their Sleeves; and that they might embroyl the
Nation more, had Orders to ins^uate into any whom they thought fit for their
purpose, That the Regal Authority had that Property in it, that it oftentimes
subsisted more in Imagination than Effect: That if the People did but once know
their own Strength, they would find it an easy matter to shake off the Yoke,
which certain Puissances imposed upon them, and with a great deal more, but in
general Terms to the same purpose, with which I shall not at present trouble
your Lordship; But they have at the same time spirited up the Jesuitical
Court-Faction to importune the King, without any Intermission to review the
Bishop's Cause, and bring them on to another Trial; alleging to him, That such
a Failure would undoubtedly add a Triumph to the People, whereof they had
already given but too clear Signs, and considerably augment the audaciousness
of his Enemies, who were more in number than he could imagine; and that in
short the only way to put both the one and the other to a profound Silence, was
by not flinching from that Resoluteness and Constancy which he had made to
appear since the beginning of his Reign, for if he once began to flag therein,
it would be quickly seen, he would proportionably sink in Reputation; That
therefore great Care should be taken to retrieve this again, since, without
that were done, he must necessarily fall into a greater Contempt with his
People than he was aware of, and from whence many Inconveniences would arise,
which some of them could be as little foreseen as it would be hard to prevent
them; That therefore, as the Case stood, it were much more advisable for him
to run the Risque of another Trial, wherein if he succeeded, his Sovereign
Authority would be not only maintained and kept entire, but the greatest
Opportunity put into his Hands to extend the Bounds of it as far as he pleased;
but if it should happen otherwise, and that the Bishops should be acquitted a
second Time (which as they designed to concert Matters) was not very likely;
the Case would then be but the same, and no other than now, and as much to be
feared from the one as from the other; but, it seems, the King was so
dispirited with the ill Success of the first Trial that they found him entirely
averse to venture on another; and therefore being not able to divert him from
his Resolution of giving over that Game as lost, they made it their Business to
give out; That the King was not minded the Bishops should have been cast, that
he had therefore given way that such a Jury should be returned, and their Cause
to be solicited by all their Friends, as was a clear Demonstration that he had
used all these Methods to deliver them from the Difficulties wherein they had
plunged themselves, with this Design and Hopes; that the Sense of his Goodness
might reclaim them back to their Duty, and that for the future they might set a
Pattern to others not to swerve therefrom; but I do not find by the Returns
made hither of these Expedients that they have met with any tolerable Success;
your Lordship may know much better than I, how this Affair is relished in the
whole, and what is likely to be the Consequence, and so I Will leave it to your
Determination, and remain,

My Lord, Your Lordships most humble Servant.
Paris, Aug. 8. 1688. N. S.
LETTER XL.
Of the Prince of Wales's Birth, with the Sense of the French Court upon it.

My Lord,
I have upon another occasion hinted to your Lordship what Appearance of Joy
there was at this Court for the Birth of the Prince of Wales; but they are now
not a little mortified at the Pasquils put forth in England and Holland to
render his Birth suspected and the whole to be only a piece of Court
Legerdemain to carry on the Catholic Cause; As for the later, the designs
carried on against the King and his Adherents as they are now no Secret to the
World, so it is no wonder such Pamphlets are connived at; Then for England, its
an Argument the Reigns of Government are of late much slackened, and that the
Regal Authority is much in the Wain, when the King and the Courts Honor, is
touched in so sensible a Part, and yet that no Redress can be made thereof, nor
efficacious Remedy applied thereto; but I must tell you, my Lord, That though
this Court has not so much reason to be concerned as that in England in this
Point, yet such things dare not be much more than whispered here, because that
upon the first broching of his being a supposititious Prince, there has been a
very strict Charge given that none durst presume to speak of him otherwise than
of a real Prince, neither dare the Courtiers even in private so much as
emancipate themselves to speak otherwise, lest they should thereby, besides
transgressing the present Orders, give also a Jealousy to old Lewis himself,
that they designed obliquely to revive the old Disputes formerly raised about
his own Legitimacy; but this I have heard them privately say; That could they
have gotten away one of our Princesses (as I have formerly mentioned to your
Lordship) to be married here, and had had thereby another French Heir to put
in, they believed the Prince of Wales would not be long-lived; But these
things, my Lord, are ticklish things to meddle with at such a Juncture of Time.
I pray God to keep your Lordship from all Harm, and to increase the Honors of
your Family, and that I shall ever do, whirst

My Lord, I am, etc.
Paris, Sept. 12. 1688. S. N.
LETTER XLI.
Of the Prince of Conde's Feasting of Monsieur the Dauphine.

My Lord,
THat the Dauphine commands the King's Armies upon the Rhine, I do not question
but your Lordship has heard ere now, about which Affair this Court seem at this
Juncture to be wholly taken up, ^o as that I have nothing of moment worth
sending to your Honor: But before Monsegnior's Departure, the Prince of Conde
has been pleased to regale him and all his Retinue, and that in a most
sumptuous and magnificent manner at Chantilli; where several Ladies had also a
Share in that Divertisement; the Prince, upon this occasion, distinguished
himself in a very extraordinary manner; he presented himself before the
Dauphine a great way in the Forest, where there were Illuminations, and
received him in the Habit of the old Heathen God Pan, accompanied with a
curious Train, all in Disguise like himself; some like Shepherds and
Shepherdesses, others representing Satyrs, leaping and dancing at the Sound of
Hautboys, Bag-pipes and such like Musical Instruments; the Dauphine being in
this manner conducted to the House, which cannot be said to be superb and
stately, unless it be for the Gardens and Waterworks about it, he was himself
feasted with a magnificent Supper and several other Tables were set for his
Court; where he continued for Five Days, and was regaled in the same Plenty as
at first, and from thence returned highly satisfied to Versailles; I must
confess, my Lord, I could not forbear giving you this short account of the
Entertainment, tho'it be ridiculous enough, especially in the Antic Preludium
to it; but I know your Lordship has Goodness enough not only to pardon me, but
to take in good part whatever comes from,

My Lord, Your Lordship's most obedient Servant.
Paris, Sept. 16. 1688. N. S.
LETTER XLII.
Of King James ordering Mass to be said on Board his Fleet, and of his going on
Board himself to engage the Officers to turn Roman Catholics.

My Lord,
WHatsoever this Court is a doing, in reference to the English Affairs at this
Time, there is little or no Appearance of it; but they seem to be much
concerned at the Disappointment our King has met with, in not prevailing with
the Officers of his Navy Royal to become Catholics; for me to make a Relation
of that Transaction to your Lordship, I fear may be but Crambe bis Cocta, but
your Honor being now remote from the Court at your Country Habitation, and
that I believe we have here a truer account of that Affair transmitted to us by
the Agents of this Court, perhaps your Lordship will not think your Time ill
spent in perusing of it. Its seems the Commissioners which the King has sent to
the several Counties of the Kingdom to dispose Men's Minds to a Willingness to
take off the Penal Laws and Test, having generally found a grand Aversion in
the People to that Matter, the King was so incensed at the Report they made of
it, and the invincible Stubbornness of the Nation, that he convened his Cabinet
Council, and with them resolved to cashier all such out of his Service as would
not fall in with his Designs; But that all things might be opportunely
executed, it was agreed he should make himself sure first of his Fleet and his
Army, without whose Assistance they saw it was in vain to effect so sudden a
Change at once; wherefore he gave Orders that Mass should be said on Board his
Ships; but there was such Opposition made thereunto both by the Officers and
Seamen, that the Priests, who went thither for that end, were forced to hide
themselves for fear of being thrown over Board, which they had been like to
have undergone, had it not been that the Principal Officers, who maintained
still the Respect that was due to the King's Commands, had done their utmost to
hinder it. But when the matter came to be represented to the King, his Fury was
raised to an high degree, though he had for the Time the Artifice to dissemble
his Resentment; wherefore he resolved to try whether his Royal Presence might
not operate more than his Orders, and therefore he went on Board the Fleet
himself, and having commanded all the Officers to bring him their Commissions,
he there asked them, Whether they were not resolved to change their Religion
and embrace his, who had bestowed their Offices upon them, in Expectation that
they would do whatever he commanded them? They were surprised at the
Complement, and expected no such thing, nevertheless, being resolved not to be
frightened either with Menaces nor be gained by Flatteries, they generally
answered; That how devoted soever they were to his Majesty's Service and their
own Fortune, yet they could not be enduced to any thing against their
Consciences. To which the King replied, That what he required of them could by
no means be Prejudicial to them, whatever their Ministers might tell them to
the contrary; that there was more of Opinion than Reason in the Religion which
they professed; that they should take the Pains to reflect duly thereon, for
which yet he would grant them but the Space of 48 Hours.

But though most of them did believe from Words so positive by the King, they
should certainly be casheered, yet they resolved to split upon that Rock rather
than alter, whatever came of it. The King, in the mean Time, who had trusty
Spies in all the Ships, having learnt their Resolutions, for all his eagerness
in the matter, did not think it advisable to push on Things over far at that
time; wherefore he ordered they should be told, when he sent them back their
Commissions, That the 48 Hours which he had alloted, being not sufficient for
the determining of an Affair of so great Importance, he was pleased to allow
them some further time to think of it, but that they would please him to
conform themselves to his Will on that occasion; but in the mean time though the
Politics of this Court have been much used in England, yet herein they have
been laid aside, and there is an essential Difference between the one and the
other, for in the Choice which our King makes of Officers, he had rather they
should have Service than Profit; whereas in France they will have both the one
and the other if they can, and for want of which, Profit is always preferred
before Service. I Will not censure such an Attempt, but I am ashamed we should be
laughed at both here and in other Countries for our Politics, and your
Lordship knows as well as any Man living, that when wise and experienced
Statesmen have sat at the Helm, they never would suffer the Regal Authority to
be put upon such an Hazard, well knowing the least Resistance made thereunto is
a Triumph to the People, but speramus meliora, I am,

My Lord, Your Lordships to Command.
Paris, Sept. 25. 1688. N. S.
LETTER XLIII.
Of the Count d'Avaux acquainting the French King with the Prince of Orange's
Preparations against England.

My Lord,
THe Ambassador of this Court Monsieur the Count d'Avaux at the Hague, has
transmitted a positive account hither of the great Preparations made in Holland
for some grand Expedition, especially by Sea; intimating that the Prince of
Orange seems to have other Designs in his View than those of a vigilant
Statholder, for the maintaining the Dutch Fleets and Armies in a good Posture,
now other neighbor Nations are in Arms. You know, my Lord, Mr. Skeleton is now
Envoy in this Country from England, as he was some time ago in Holland; who
while he was there, whether really or maliciously I will not determine, was
pleased to transmit an account to the King of the Prince's holding
Correspondence and carrying on some Intrigues with his Subjects to his
Prejudice; he had some Relations in the Princesses Family, by whose means he
had an Opportunity to inspect into some Letters, from which he took upon him to
pick out as much as gave him to understand, that there were some Matters
agitated underhand that tended to the King's detriment, but as far as I could
learn, the King gave little h^^d to his Informations; But what the Count
d'Avaux has given his Master an account of has been esteemed worthy of
Consideration, and added here some Reputation to Mr. Skelton's Agency, whatever
it may do in England; and I am assured, my Lord, from such Authority as I dare
rely upon, that the French King has pressed his Brother of England, to give that
Heed to it which it deserves, and to take seasonable Precautions to defend his
Dominions from a powerful Invasion wherewith they are threatened. My Lord, I
desire to know with the next Convenience whether I may be free to continue my
Correspondence with your Lordship, especially if I find Matters of this Nature
transacted; for I would not for any thing in the World bring your Lordship into
the least Praemunire, but in all things study to serve you with exactest
Diligence and humblest observance, which I shall always strive to do, who am,

My Lord, Your Lordship's most humble Servant.
Paris, October. 6. 1688. N. S.
LETTER XLIV.
Of the means whereby Mr. Skeleton came to know of the Designs in Holland
against King James, and of his acquainting the King his Master therewith.

My Lord,
MY last imported some Intimations to your Lordship of Mr. Skeleton when the
King's Envoy at the Hague, his discovering some secret Correspondence
negotiated between England and Holland, as he judged, to his Master's
disadvantage; I have also noted how the King had been advertised of it from
this Court, where Mr Skeleton is now in the same Quality, as at the Hague, and
who, I can further assure your Lordship, has made a further Progress to
unriddle the Intrigue since his Arrival, by the means of one whose Name is
Budeus de Verace, a Protestant of Geneva; who having been some time since
Captain of the Guards to the Prince of Orange, and having had the Misfortune to
kill a Man in a Duel, was casheered by him; Mr. Skeleton being then at the
Hague, and acquainted with the said Verace, found a way to reconcile him to his
Master by the Recommendation of my Lord Clarendon, who having brought up his
Son, my Lord Cornbury, at Geneva, was under great Obligations to Verace for the
good Offices he had done him, and care taken of him; this Genevese being thus
re-established in the Favor of the Prince, his Master, had it seems a greater
Share of it than before, as he had also in the Secrets of Monsieur B -- his
Favorite; however it was, it should seem by the sequel, that he was now by his
second Introduction to Favor, become quite of Mr. Skelton's Interest, who was
the Instrument to reconcile him; For not long since he has taken occasion to be
dissatisfied with the Service he engaged in, and withdrawn, and being, as was
given out, but whether so in reality or no, upon his return to his native City
of Geneva, he took occasion to write a Letter to Mr. Skeleton, now in this City,
That the Noise about the Armamont in Holland was so far from being a false
thing, or otherwise to be conceived, that it was a Matter of the highest
Importance, and did no less than concern the Safety of the Crown of his Master,
the King of England, and that it was highly necessary he should be made
acquainted with a Son-in-Law, whom he knew not. This he desired Mr. Skeleton to
communicate to the King with all speed; but he was not willing to make any
further Discovery of his Secret to any other save to the King himself in
Person; if the King were so pleased as to send him Orders by Mr. Skeleton to
come and attend upon him. Upon the receipt of which Letter from the said
Genevese, Mr. Skeleton has writ Five or Six Letters to the King in a very
pressing, lively and urgent manner, but what effect they have had upon him, may
be the Subject of another Letter, and perhaps of my next, if my intelligence
fail me not, in the mean time I am and shall be,

My Lord, Your Lordship's most humble and devoted Servant.
Paris, Aug. 14. 1688. N. S.
LETTER XLV.
Of the Slights used to make King James negligent to provide against the
Invasion from Holland.

My Lord,
I Do not find Mr. Skelton's Instances have had any great Effects upon the King
toward quickening his Pace to ward off the Blow that seems to be preparing to
be given him; And I have something more than a Suspicion, That it is the Desire
of this Court, the Kingdom should be invaded, and that the Agents of it have
been extraordinary busy to countermine whatever Advices have been given the
King for taking a timely Precaution to defend himself, so that there is, my
Lord, in this Case a Wheel within a Wheel, and whatever open Professions of
Kindness is showed him from hence by a timous Premonition of his Danger, there
is as great Care seriously to thwart all by contrary Counsels; And among other
things, it has been eagerly urged to him, That the Prince of Orange continues
to carry himself toward him with such a Conduct, as could not leave the least
room to entertain any Suspicion of him, and could it be thought that a Prince
who had showed his Devoirs to him, so far as to make his Complements as other
Princes had done upon the Birth of his Son, the Prince of Wales, and caused the
Name of his new Brother-in-Law to be added to those of the Princes of the
Family, for whom they prayed in his Chapel, should be unsincere, or have the
least Design to molest him or his Kingdoms by Arms, especially since Van
Citters, the States Ambassador, had particularly assured him, That what
Preparations were made in Holland did not regard England, but had given him to
understand, That France had a great deal more Reason to be alarmed than he: But
after all, whatever were intended by such Preparations, which they were well
assure were much greater in Fame than in Reality; his Majesty's Affairs were in
so good a Posture that he had no Reason to fear any Enterprises whatsoever;
That he had a Land Army, a Fleet and such good Magazines as were sufficient to
render the Efforts of almost all the complicated Powers of Europe ineffectual,
though such a Conjunction was as little to be expected as that his most Christian
Majesty would abandon him; who, if he saw occasion, as there was now but little
likelihood, would no fail to support him with all the Power of France both by
Sea, Land etc. I will not be further Troublesome to your Lordship, but remain,

My Lord, Your humble Servant.
Paris, Aug. ^8. 1688.
LETTER XLVI.
My Lord S -- charged by some of the French Faction with Infidelity to his
Master King James.

My Lord,
IF your Lordship should ask me, What the real Designs of this Court are in
reference to England, in such a conjuncture; they seem to have other Sentiments
now of the Invasion than they had a few days ago, when they were secretly
promoting the same Might and Main, as I have intimated not long since to your
Lordship, with a View to engage us in a Civil War, and thereby bring the King
under a Necessity of calling in such a French Power to his Assistance as he
should never be able to force out again; But now they seem to be quite against
it, upon the opposition made by a great Minister of State to their Offer both
of Men and Ships upon this occasion, of whom they talk strange things here, and
say, that in regard to the King, however he has insinuated and winded himself
into his Favor more than any they could recommend or propose, he must be an
Enemy reconciled only in a way of Policy and Necessity, that he had in former
Parliaments pushed on the Bill for his Exclusion with greater eagerness and
warmth than any other; That he had never attempted to recover his Favor, but
when he had a Prospect to injure him thereby; that he is a Man intent to follow
the prevailing Side, but that he had always, in case of any Change, a safe
Retreat to the other side, that whilst he adhered to the Factions in
Parliament, against the Royal Family and Interest, he had strict Correspondence
with one of King Charles's L --, who found a way to reconcile him to his
Majesty, and by his Mediation to the Duke of York; That being now come to be
Prime Minister of State to the King, and almost the only one he had since his
Elevation to his Brother's Throne, he had served him with Zeal, while there was
a Prospect of Prosperity to attend him, but that he has now no sooner
perceived that there is a Party formed against him, but that he has showed
himself ready to enter into a Correspondence with his Enemies, against him;
That the Countess of S -- writing to the Princess of Orange, That their Uncle
H. S. a Man deeply engaged in that Interest, was gone into Holland to attend
the Prince, was no small Proof of her Husband's being engaged in the same
Interests; That there could be no other Construction made of the Violence done
to the King his Master, by his engaging of him, notwithstanding all his
Aversion to it, to advance Father Petre against his own Inclination, maugre the
Opposition made by the Queen to it, and in spite of the most essential Laws of
the Order he was of, to be one of his Privy Council; That the King thereby, in
satisfying of him, did on that occasion lose that Right which one should think
he had to dispose of his own Subjects; That nothing else could be inferred from
this Lord's Procedure and Carriage in the imbroiled Affair of the Bishops,
which he brought on into the Council, and which he yet favored underhand;
That it cannot otherwise choose but that the Contempt which this Minister has
affected of all the Informations given the King his Master of the Designs of
the Prince of Orange his Son-in-Law and of the Dutch against him, whereby he
has in a great measure diverted him from using the means necessary to resist
any Attempts made upon him, or impressions on his Dominions, must proceed from
an ill Principle and Dissatisfaction to his Interests. I hope your Lordship
will not take this Freedom ill at my Hands, which is nothing else but the Sense
of this Court upon the present Occasion, and with which I shall now conclude,
who am,

My Lord, Your Lordship's most humble Servant.
Paris, Oct. 28. 1688.
LETTER XLVII.
My Lord S -- excused by others of the French Faction, as to his Conduct in
respect to the Prince of Orange's Design againg King James and his Adherents.

My Lord,
THe Censure of this Court upon the late Conduct of a noble Peer and Prime
Minister in England, as mentioned in my last to your Lordship, is not so
universal, but that there are diverse others who have entertained a quite
contrary Opinion of him, and say, That it is far enough from being an
infallible Rule, that a reconciled Enemy can never become a sincere Friend;
That it is possible a Man may reserve unto himself a place of Refuge and
Retreat among a contrary Party, and yet be far enough from falling in with its
Interests; That the Suspicions of him are without any manifest Ground, since
there is not the least Appearance that he has personally linked himself with
his Master's Enemies, or held any Correspondence with them that tends to the
betraying of him; That what his Lady had done with the Princess of Orange, though
it might be liable to Suspicions in such a Conjuncture, is no sufficient Proof
or Reason that the same Crime should be attributed to the Earl her Husband;
That Col. S -- though his near Relation, might yet deceive him, and make him
believe that his Passage into Holland, was to no other end than for the Benefit
of his Health, and a Journey to drink the Waters of the Spaw; That to say he
turned Roman Catholic that he might the better serve the Protestant Interest,
was so ridiculous in it self as to need no Consutation; That as for the
Business of Father Petre, the Earl did nothing but what every wise Statesman
would have done, viz. to seek out one on whom might be discharged the Envy of
such things as should displease the People in the Court-Conduct, and so escape
it himself; That as for any Enterprise by the Prince of Orange and the
Hollanders against so potent a King as his Master, who was encompassed with so
great an Army, it might appear to be so extraordinary and strange a thing to
him, that he might believe it his Duty to neglect such Advices as things
unlikely, and not far from ridiculous; And that now at length he finds himself
obliged to believe them to be real, those same Forces which the King his Master
has on foot, might make him opinionative to reject the Succors offered him
from hence, which he looks upon to be as well dangerous as unnecessary, but
which if the Censures is most agreeable to Truth, I Will leave to your Lordship's
Determination, and remain,

My Lord, Your very obliged Servant.
Paris, Oct. 31.
LETTER XLVIII.
Arguments used by the French Agents to gain King James's Consent to receive
French Succors into England, and Answered by my Lord S --.

My Lord,
YOur Lordship cannot but know of the Business of Cardinal Furstenburg about
the Electorate of Cologn, and how he is supported by this King, whose Arms are
advanced that way: It may be you have seen Monsieur Bonrepos also at London,
whose Instructions were to offer to the King, in his Master's Name; That
however his Forces are already advanced toward the Upper Rhine, and ready to
enter upon Action, yet finding the danger His Majesty was like to be in from
Holland, he was willing to prefer his Interests who was his Friend, before his
own; And that if he found the King demur upon the matter, he was to tell him,
That His Majesty ought to consider the thing, not as it was in itself, but in
the present circumstances of it; That it might be justly feared his work was
not to oppose only the Armies of others, but that he should be well assured
that those very Armies with which he designed to resist his Enemies, did not
hold Intelligence with them, and concur against him in the same Designs; That
the chief Officers that commanded his Army were faithful to him to such a
degree, as to be Proof against being corrupted, which could not be said of the
other parts of the State, who were wall known to be corrupted, which his Army,
if they did not already, must shortly know; from whence he was to infer, that
if the same Corruption should unfortunately happen to creep into the Army, as
well as elsewhere, the King, in refusing foreign Succors (which in conjunction
with those who should prove faithful Subjects to him, would make at least a
Party) would leave himself exposed without any defense to all the Forces of his
Enemies. My Lord, you cannot imagine how highly dissatisfied this Court is at
the rejection of their Aid, and that my Lord S -- 's remonstrating to the King,
That the introducing a foreign Army into his Dominions that were
Romd^-Catholicks, and especially Frenchmen, would wound his Re^^tation very
deep, and quite alienate the Nations Affections from him, and be a confession
of all the Rumors which had been seatter'd abroad of a private League made
between him and France, for oppressing both the Liberty and Religion of his
Country, And besides, the King had Forces enough of his own, and to spare, for
the resisting of all the Efforts of Holland; That his Fleet alone was able to
stop them, and that let it be as it would, his Land Army could not fail of
being Conquerors over them, being both much more numerous, and withal better
disciplined; had entirely fixed him in the said Resolution. I do not question
but this Court will do the Earl all the Disservice they can, for spoiling so
brave an opportunity of their getting ^ooting with their Troops in England;
however he has served his Country, and deserves well of it, whatever his Fate
may be. I am,

My Lord, Yours in all humble Observance
Paris, Nov. 2. 1688. N. S.
LETTER XLIX.
Of Mr. Skelton's Negotiations in France, with the Reasons of his being
recoeli'd and committed Prisoner to the Tower of London.

My Lord,
I Cannot conceive but they are as much in the dark with you about Mr.
Skelton's Imprisonment in the Tower upon his arrival in England, as they are
concerned for it here. I have already given your Lordship an account of some of
his Negotiations both in Holland and at this Court, and with your Honor's
leave shall endeavor a little further to unriddle this Mystery of his
Imprisonment: When all the Arguments of this Court used by Monsieur Bonrepos to
induce the King to admit of some French Troops into his Country, under pretense
of assisting him against the Prince of Orange, were obviated by my Lord S -- 's
Remonstrances and Assiduities, you cannot conceive the concernedness that
appeared here at the grand Disappointment; Mr. Skeleton was almost oppressed
with Enquirers into the reason of such a Procedure, (not knowing well then from
what Quiver the Arrow was taken that shot down the Goliath of all their Hopes of
once nestling in England) who examined, interrogated him, and almost laid it to
his charge, that their Advice was not followed: But having at length found it
to be otherwise, they resolved to put him upon another Expedient, mentioned
first by himself, to serve his Master, as they said, though nothing is more
certain than that it is their own Interest they designed mainly thereby: For
one day, after Monsieur de Croissy had pressed him hard still to solicit his
Master to accept of the Troops and Ships offered him by France, and that Mr.
Skeleton answered, That it was in vain, he having Orders to meddle no further in
that matter, and therefore durst not move in it. He also added, That yet he was
of Opinion, that if his most Christian Majesty would order his Ambassador to
acquaint the States General what share he took in the Affairs of the King his
Master, and to threaten to attack them, in case they undertook any thing
against him, he did believe that would quickly put a stop to the intended
Invasion, and spoil the Measures the Prince of Orange had concerted thereupon,
without giving the English occasion to complain their King had called in
Foreigners into their Country: That this would be an effectual means to keep
part of the King's Enemies on this side the Sea, and they might have leisure
enough to break off the Cabals which the other formed at home against him. This
Discourse made Monsieur de Croissy hasten to acquaint the King with it, who
liked it so well, that he immediately dispatched away a Courier to Monsieur the
Count d'Avaux his Ambassador at the Hague, with Orders to declare to the United
Provinces, That they could not attack the King of England, who was so intimate
a Confederate with him, but that he must be obliged to succor him with all the
Assistance he could. The States having paused a little for an Answer to this
Memorial, and presently upon it being encountered with another from the
Marquess de Albeville, the English, Ambassador there; they answered the latter,
They were long since convinced of the League between the two Kings; That they
had armed in Imitation of other Princes, etc. which being interpreted here,
that the States were resolved to go on with the Invasion; It raised the
Expectations of this Court, that the tender of their Troops would be still,
accepted of by the King: But the vigilance and sagacity of my Lord S --
disjointed also this Project, and ended in the Recalling and Imprisonment of
Mr. Skeleton, for moving in an Affair for which he had no Orders. And this also,
my Lord, has stopped Verace the Genevese, whom I have formerly mentioned to
your Lordship, who is come to Paris, from proceeding on his Journey for London,
as supposing it to no purpose to give such Informations as would not be
regarded; and he is now, I hear, about returning back to his own Country. I
hope things are well with your Lordship in these times of difficulty; had it
been otherwise I do suppose I should have heard it, that I might have stopped
my Intelligence; and that all may continue to be well with you, is the
unfeigned Desire of,

My Lord, Your Lordships most obedient Servant.
Paris, Nov. 8. 1688. N. S.
LETTER L.
Of the Prince of Orange's landing in England, and Success, with King James's
Speech to his Chief Officers.

My Lord,
Though the French Arms this year have had mighty success on the Rhine, yet the
landing of the Prince of Orange in England, without any opposition, and the
success he has met with since his arrival, together with the desection of some
Horse to him under my Lord Cornbury, (though they say here but a very small
number) has damped all their Rejoycings; And indeed, if we may judge of their
Hearts by their Looks, we may see plainly that they have given over not only
their own Game on that side of the Water for lost, but that they look upon that
of the Kings so too, almost beyond all hopes of recovery; but yet that they may
make some semblance of Zeal still for his Service, their Creatures have advised
him to call together his chief Officers, and to tell them; That he had given
Orders for the calling together of a Free Parliament, as soon as a more settled
time would give him room to hope for such: That he had resolved to provide for
the Security of the Religion, Liberties, and Privileges of his Subjects, as far
as they themselves could desire or wish for; Could there any more he expected
from him, he was ready to grant it? but desired, if after all this there was
any one dissatisfied, that they might declare it: That he was ready to give
unto such as thought not fit to tarry with him, Pasports to go to the Prince of
Orange, and that he would freely pardon them their shameful Treason. This
Speech, and the effects it has had, your Lordship may know much better than I;
but it is now talked here, that it has met with so little success, that most of
those persons whom the King had convened as aforesaid, have formed a close
Conspiracy against him, and to cut their way short, resolved to seize his
Person; and that my Lord C -- being pitched upon to execute the Design, he
dexterously engaged the King to go to view the Vanguard of his Army, which was
that part of it which was posted nearest the Enemy; That the King was ready to
take Coach and ride thither, when his Nose falling to bleed on a sudden,
obliged him to stay for that time, and put off the review till another
opportunity; But before that day was over, he had good Information given him,
that there was a Design formed to seize him, and that measures were concerted
to have him carried away to Exeter; and that my Lord C -- upon that, with some
others, withdrew to the Prince of Orange, as did the King to London. I would
not have troubled your Lordship at this time, but that I know you expect I
should give you the Sentiments of this side upon our affairs, and what part
they take therein: Which with my humblest Duty to your Honor, is all I have at
present to impart to you, who am,

My Lord, Yours to serve and obey.
Paris, Dec. 4. 1688. N. S.
LETTER LI.
Of the Queen and Prince of Wales's going over into France.

My Lord,
THE King's Affairs are looked upon here to be lost beyond all human relief,
and the Prince of Orange is now as much dreaded, as they heretofore made a
semblance of despising and neglecting of him; tho, in reality, there were ever
since I have known this place, secret Fears of his great Constancy, Policy and
Courage hanging upon this Court, and all the Hopes they have now left, and the
only Twig to hang by, is his Petite Highness, who after great difficulties is
with his Mother arrived here, and of which some of their Attendance give a
lamentable relation; That upon my Lord Dartmouth's refusal to let the young
Gentleman cross the Seas, he was carried back to London, whither the King was
also come from Salisbury, who with the Count de L^uzune, who presented himself
at Court the ^^st of the last Month, concerted measures for the escape of the
Queen and her Son: Signior Riva an Italian, and one of the Queens Servants, and
Monsieur de Labadie, another of the King's, Persons of approved Fidelity, were
entrusted to provide all things necessary for their embarking, and for their
Journey from White Hall to the place where the Ship lay: They say, it was not
without very great danger of being stopped and discovered, that the Queen and
the Child got out of the Court, at a time when every thing was suspected, and
when the Infants crying might have been a means to have broken all the best
measures in the World. They were put into a strange Disguise, and so made their
escape by the way of unfrequented Stairs and Places, crossed the River of Thames,
and took the Road which leads from London to Gravesend, where Monsieur de
Labadie had stopped a Vessel for to transport them into France; and all the
while the Child did not as much as once cry: They were in danger several times
of being seized by Sentinels, and a concourse of People, who suspected all whom
they did not know, to be fugitive Papists, and looked upon their escape as a
Prey that ran away from them. While they were on the Thames, they were
encountered with Wind, Rain, the fluctuating of the Waves, in the horror of a
Night so dark, that they could not see one another: The Queen on the other side
of the River waited for a Coach, near the Walls of a Church, which was
harnessed in a neighboring Inn, being all the while exposed to the Rain, which
continued with great violence; But the Curiosity of a man who came out of the
Inn with a Candle in his hand, put her into a great fear, lest she should be
known, for the person advanced directly toward the place where she stood, when
Seignior Riva, who perceived him, immediately followed and encountered him
briskly, so as that both of them fell into the Dirt, by which Di^^^sion the
Queen escaped undiscovered, and the man thinking that what befell him was the
effect of Chance, they both began to excuse the matter, which proceeded no
further. When the Coach was got ready they rid away with all speed, and came to
the Ship, where Labady's Wife (who had some Acquaintance with the Captain)
appearing first, did so amuse him with a Story, That the Queen was an Italian
Lady, returning with her Family into her own Country, till the Queen was got
safe on Board, and lodged in the Cabin appointed for her, together with the
Nurse that carried the Infant; The Marquess and Marchioness of Powis, the
Counts of Dalmon and Montecuculli with other Persons of her Retinue, did imbark
at the same time with the Irish Captains, sent on purpose by the King to have
an Eye over the Commander of the Vessel, in case they found him any way
refractory and deficient in his Duty; But of this, they say, there happened to
be no occasion, for the Ship being under sail, they had an easy Passage, and
landed at Calais on the 11th of this instant: She designed to have staid there
for the King her Husband, who, according as they had concerted Matters between
them before their parting, was to follow her the next Day, but not finding the
King come, she went for Bologn, where two Friars, and an an Officer that have
made their Escape out of England, informed her of the Misfortune which befell
her Husband at Feversham, and which your Lordship can tell much better than I.
From Bologn she journey'd to Montrevil and from thence to S. Germains; where
she and her Son have had honorable Reception of the King, and where King James
is hourly expected. This, my Lord, is the Relation they give here of their
Flight, and dangerous Escape, which they count little less than a Miracle, and
a preserving both of the Queen and her Son to a much better Fortune. But though
this Court put a very good Mien upon the Matter, and talk high, yet it is at
the same time very discernable that they are not a little mortified at the
strangeness of the Prince of Orange's Success, and the suddenness of the
Revolution. Which, with my humble Respects, is all I have to communicate at
this Time, who am,

My Lord, Your Lordships most devoted Servant.
Paris, Jan. 2. 1689. N. S. POSTSCRIPT.
My Lord, just as I am a closing of this Letter, I am informed the King is also
arrived at S. Germains, and has met with no less Honors from King Lewis than
if he were possessed of his Dominions and subjects Affections, in as ample a
degree as ever he has or could be.

My Lord, I am, etc.



LETTER LII.
Of the Prince of Orange's Arrival at London

My Lord,
THis Place is very barren of News, though there is something, I am satisfied, a
brewing, which will appear in Time, and all that is novel and extraordinary
seems to have been tranplanted to the British I sles from whence we hear, That
the Prince of Orange, who, they say, is always intent, and ever was to improve
favorable Conjunctures, has taken Advantage of these Movements to make his
Entry into London, where it is confessed, but with much Regret, he has been
received with great Demonstrations of Joy and public Applause (but they say it
is nothing but what is usually done to Newcomers) having been felicitated upon
the Success of his Enterprise, and thanked for the Zeal which he had testified
for the good of the English Nation. It Is also reported, That the Nobility have
met together, and prayed him to take the Administration of the Government upon
him, till the Estates of the Kingdom can be called together, which is dreaded
here by both Courts: I can assure your Lordship, there have been Instructions
issued out from hence already to their Agents at London (where they have a
great Number, though under various Disguises) for to countermine what ever
Projects may be on foot for the establishing a Settlement in England, and of
which I shall endeavor to transmit to your Lorship the Particulars. I am,

My Lord, Your very humble Servant
Paris, Jan. 27. 1689. S. N.
LETTER LIII.
Instructions given to the French Emissaries, to infuse into some English Peers
upon the Subject Matter of King James's Deserting of the Crown, in Favor of
his Interest.

My Lord,
ITs not doubted here but that there will be strong Efforts made for the
Advancing of the Prince of Orange to the English Throne, and by the Returns
made of Members to serve upon the present Occasion in the Lower House, it is
concluded that their Procedures will be much in favor of his Interest, and
consequently to the Disadvantage of this Court, and therefore they have taken
care to give them a Bone to pick, though I know not well what it is for the
present; But of the House of Lords they have entertained a more favorable
Opinion; but foreseeing that whatever is agitated among the Commons is also
likely to creep into a Debate among the Lords, and that the King's Resigion,
his Evil Administration, his Retreat out of the Kingdom, and the Compact
between him and his People may be called in question; They have by way of
Precaution given Instructions to their Emissaries slily to infuse into any such
Peers as they judge susceptible of such Insinuations (but I cannot think your
Lordship of that Number) That it was true, the King's Religion had been a very
main Cause to bring those Misfortunes upon himself and the Nation which they
labored under, but hereby it could not be thought that should be as much as
once debated for a sufficient Ground to exclude him from his Throne; That this
would appear strange in the Sight of all Nations, that a Popish Prince was
incapable to sway a Scepter, when even in England it self there had been no
less than Forty Roman Catholic Kings, who had governed England, from King
Egbert to Queen Elizabeth; That it was but the other Day that all the Kingdom
had by Addresses on purpose disavowed that Maxim; That the two Universities
had condemned the same for an Error, and that the Parliament in One thousand
six hundred and eighty five, did believe it to be a thing so pernicious and
destructive to a State, that they were minded to brand with Infamy all those
who would have excluded the Duke of York from the Succession; That all the
Nation having acknowledged this Prince at a Time when he made open Profession
of the Popish Religion, it would be a ridiculous inconsequence to pretend that
that same Religion was an Hindrance to his reigning as King of England; and
that as for any previous Compact that might be alleged by ill disposed Men to
have been between King and People, i^ was a pernicious chimerical Notion, often
condemned as a Gap opened to seditious Practices for the imbroiling of the
State; That surely that Retreat could not be called a Desertion in the King,
full of Discontent, and finding himself abandoned by his Subjects to the Mercy
of a Foreign Nation, especially seeing the Royal Character the bore, did but
expose him to the Insults of the People, and his Person into the Hands of a
Prince that imposed Laws upon him, seized him in his own Dominions, and gave
him Umbrages that ought to presage greater Dangers unto him; That the Offers he
had again and again made to the Nation, and even to the Prince of Orange, who
protected it, to treat with them amicably, to leave nothing undone for the
redressing of their Grievances, could not but be adjudged Reparations
sufficient for those Faults that were imputed to him; That the Letter he had
writ, left behind him at Feversham, and ordered to be printed, with several
other Letters which he had actually writ to diverse Persons, asserting his
Authority and Claim; And that the Protestations, which no doubt he would make
against any Acts of the Assembly to meet, if any such should happen in
disfavour of him, which could hardly be credited, and the Measures which he had
taken, and whereof they heard enough every Day, and would doubtless more and
more daily, for the Recovery of his Dominions, were evident Demonstrations that
he had not renounced them; And that if they were deserted by him, it was
because his Person was in no Security there, and not the Throne, which he still
looked upon as a Property appertaining to him alone; That he was not the first
and only King, even of England, that had made this Step; That Ethelrede in the
Time of the Saxon Kings retired into Normandy, and that among the Royal Stem of
the Plantagenets, Edward IV. past over into Flanders without King Henry VI. his
Competiter his believing that he had thereby acquired a new Title to the Crown;
That as to the present conjuncture the King found himself in, the Condition of
Kings would be very hard, if they of all Mankind were the only Persons who were
not allowed the Favor to shun a Danger they were exposed to, and which could
not be avoided but by fleeing from it, and that surely it was a Man's Prudence
when he saw his House on Fire beyond a possibility of extinguishing it, to save
his own Life, and attend an Opportunity to rebuild it again, since he could not
save it from burning. What Successes, my Lord, these Remonstrances have met
with, or may still, it may be your Lordship can tell; But I can tell you, if
this fails, there is another Mine to spring, whereon they rely very much, and
on which they intend to work with utmost Diligence; but I pray God to keep my
poor Country from falling again into their Shares, from which it now is in so
fair a way of being delivered, and to inspire your Lordship and other worthy
Patriots sit such a juncture with a proportionable Zeal for the good of it, and
so I rest.

My Lord, Your Lordship's most Humble Servant.
Paris, Feb. 5. 1689. S. N.
LETTER LIVE.
Upon the Throne's being declared Vacant by the Convention, the French
Emissaries were to endeavor to embroil the Nation about the Form of Government
to be established among them.

My Lord,
I Know not how it is in England, but Men's Wits here have played so liberally
upon the Word Abdication, started in your Convention, and such Railery and
Bu^tle made about it as can scarce be believed by any without he were an Eye
and Ear-Witness of it; and believing at the same time they would never make any
thing of it but that the Precautions they had taken to manage the Upper House,
would fully answer their Expectations, the Grimaces they have since made upon
their receiving certain Advices, That the Throne has been declared Vacant, are
not so surprising, for one is a natural Consequence of the other, as they are
sudden and ridiculous; Though they are not yet quite out of Hopes, for their
Emissaries have received previous Instructions, That in case their
Remonstrances to the Lords, as mentioned in my last, would not do, that then
they should chiefly turn their Batteries upon the Members of the Lower House,
by infusing Notions into some of one sort of Government as the best, To others
another, to gain Time thereby; and concert mutual Iealousies between the
Parties, which would not fail of making the Prince weary of such endless
Wranglings, and so make him either assume the Government by virtue of his own
Power and Authority; Or else seeing no Hopes of any Settlement, and that the
Factions were so strong as not to be quelled, and so obstinate as not to be
reconciled, to retire home, and leave them in a far worse State than he found
them. The Republican Party, which they knew to be but very few, They are to ply
warmly with the Fitness of the Opportunity to set up a Free State once again,
that perhaps the Prince of Orange would be better pleased with it, provided he
were made Stadtholder as he was in Holland, and greatly promote it, if he saw
once a tendency in any considerable Members that way; that a Regency which was
like to be proposed upon the declaring the Throne Vacant, could not be thought
to be so agreeable to him; who knew well enough the public Evils that were
annexed to such an Office, but that if it should so happen that the major part
should carry it, that the Regal Dignity and Office should be continued and that
in the Person of another than King James, and that by natural Consequence it
must be offered to the Prince of Orange, yet surely they could not be so far
wanting to themselves as not to stickle that he might receive the Crown under
such a Title as might come as nigh that Form of a Republic as might be, and
lay a sure Foundation for the Introduction of it, when things were riper, at
another Turn of Government, which under such Circumstances could not choose but
quickly happen; And what could they better do, than to get the Kingdom declared
Elective, which as it was a Debasing and Diminution of Hereditary Succession,
so it was a great Step toward the erecting of a Popular Government once more,
which the Treachery and Hypocrisy of one at the Head of it had destroyed in
the present Age, when it was in a fair way of giving Laws to all the Neighbor
Nations round it. They have been further instructed, That if they found any
disposed to favor the Title of Conquest, so far to promote it as might in some
Measure give Check to the other Factions, but by no means to overballance them.
But that these Practices may have as little Success as those mentioned in my
last to your Lordship, is the earnest Desire and Hope of,

My Lord, Yours Lordship's most humble Servant.
Paris, Feb. 15. 1689. N. S.
LETTER LV.
Of the Prince and Princess of Orange being Proclaimed King and Queen of
England, etc.

My Lord,
THis Court is Thunderstruck that all their Counter-Plots and Designs have
been rendered so ineffectual in England, where heretofore they seldom used to
miss their Mark, and that they come to be assured by repeated Advices that the
Prince and Princess of Orange are declared King and Queen of England, etc. and
what adds greatly to the Mortification is, the Circumstances of it, both as to
the Title whereby they are declared and the People of England's previous
a^^erting their Native Rights and Legal Privileges so vigorously and thereby
casting such an Odium upon the late Government, as can hardly be obliterated
and forgotten in this Age; And now they begin to think what may not they fear
from a Prince who has been so much injured by them, had always the Honesty, as
well as Courage and Constancy to oppose their Encroachments; and now by this
mighty Ac^^ssion of Power has means enough to put a Check upon their exorbitant
Greatness, and perhaps force them to disgorge what they have been devouring of
their Neighbors for many Years past; which I heartily long to see effected,
and wish King William and his Royal Consort may be happier than Augustus and
better than Trajanus, and that your Lordship may flourish under them, whom I
shall ever love and Honor, though I cannot at present serve, because of the
Difficulty of Safe Conveyance to your Hands; and therefore till I can settle a
sure and safe Correspondence, upon this Change of Government, with your
Lordship, I remain,

My Lord, Your very humble Servant.
Paris, Feb. 27. 1689. N. S.
FINIS.

