Rev. 2.2. Thou have tried them, which say, they are Apostles, and are not, and
have found them Liars.

Rev. 3.9. Behold, I will make them of the Synagogue of Satan, (which say, they
are Jews, and are not, but do lie;) behold, I will make them to come and
worship before thy feet, and to know, that I have loved thee.

Rev. 18.4, 5, 6. And I heard another Voice from Heaven, saying, Come out of
her my People, that ye be not Partakers of her sins, and that ye receive not of
her Plagues; for her sins have reached unto Heaven, and God has remembered her
Iniquities. Reward her, even as she rewarded you, and double unto her double,
according to her Works; in the Cup which she has filled, fill to her double.

THE Presbyterian and Independent VISIBLE CHURCHES IN New England And
elsewhere, Brought to the Test, and examined according to the Doctrine of the
holy Scriptures, in their Doctrine, Ministry, Worship, Constitution, Government,
Sacraments, and Sabbath Day.

More particulary directed to those in New England, and more generally to those
in Old-England, Scotland, Ireland, etc.

WITH A Call and Warning from the Lord to the People of Boston and New England,
to Repent; etc. And two Letters to the Preachers in Boston; and an Answer to
the gross Abuses, Lies and Slanders of Increase Mather and Nath. Morton, etc.

By GEORGE KEITH.

LONDON: Printed for Thomas Northcott, in George-Yard in Lombard Street, 1691.

A Friendly EPISTLE To these PEOPLE called Presbyterians and Independents.
FRIENDS,
IN true Love and good Will I have writ the following Treatise unto you, hoping
it may find entertainment with some among you, to give it the Reading, and
seriously to consider what you read; and my earnest Exhortation and Advice is
unto you, that in all your reading, whether in this or any other Book, ye turn
your minds to that Light of Christ within you, wherewith he has enlightened
you, and all Men, as the holy Scriptures declare; and that ye may believe in
Christ, the Light, and Life, in you, who is the Wisdom and Power of God, and
who was in all the holy Prophets and Apostles, and whose Spirit that was in
them that gave forth the holy Scriptures, both of the Old and New Testament;
and the same Spirit only does, and only can give to all Readers of the holy
Scripture, a true and right understanding of them, and of all other Books, that
treat of Doctrins and Matters of Religion, whether they have proceeded from a
measure of the same holy Spirit: And if ye believe in Christ the Light, the
Life, the Wisdom and Power of God in you, and join your Minds to his inward
divine Illumination, He will anoint the Eyes of your Understanding, with his
Spiritual Eye Salve, and then your Eyes shall be opened to see and understand
what ye read; and through your faith in him he will also open and circumcise
your inward Ears, and cause you still more and more to be acquainted with his
living Voice and Words in you, all which are Spirit and Life; and this will
give you a spiritual savor and taste, whereby ye shall be able to try and
judge of things that differ, whether Men, or Books, whether Spirits, or
Doctrins, what are of God, and what are not of him; for although the Scriptures
are the best outward Test or Touchstone, or Rule whereby to try all Doctrins of
Men, or Books, yet it is the holy Spirit of Christ, and his Light inwardly
shining and enlightening the dark Hearts and Understandings of Men, that gives
them ability rightly to understand the Scriptures, otherwise the Scriptures are
as a sealed Book, both to the learned and unlearned: For though the Jews had
the Scriptures of the Old Testament, which prophesied of Christ, and of the
Time and Manner of his Coming, and how he was to suffer Death for the sins of
Men, and to rise again and ascend into Glory, yet none of them had that
Understanding, but such only as were turned to his divine Illumination in their
Hearts, and were acquainted with his holy Spirit, Light and Life in them. And
the like grave and wholesome advice I recommend unto you, which a certain Ancient
Christian gave unto Justin Martyr, before his Conversion to the Christian
Faith, to wit, That he should diligently read and search the holy Scriptures,
which should give him more Content than all Heathen Authors; but withal, that
he should mind the Gate, the LIGHT, by which only he could enter into the true
Understanding and Knowledge of them. The which Passage the said Justin relates
in his Works, and John Fox has it also in his Martyrology taken out of him.
And though in this Treatise I have affirmed and sufficiently demonstrated, that
your Visible Churches are no true Churches of Christ, yet I do not say nor
conclude, that none of you belong to Christ's true Church in any true regard:
But on the contrary, I have that true Charity, Faith and Hope concerning a
Remnant among you, who have in the least measure true Hungerings and Thirstings
after Righteousness, and a great inward longing and panting of Heart and Soul
after the Lord Jesus Christ, to know him and enjoy him, more nearly than by all
hearsay or report of him, and whose Souls are sick of Love for him, and feel
your need and want of him, as the sick that need the Physician, that ye do
indeed, even all such of you, belong to Christ, and are the real Members of his
Body, which is his Church; for where any living Desire is after Christ, and
where any true sense or feeling of the want and great need of him is raised in
any Soul, there is somewhat of the Life of Christ in that Soul, and there is
Christ himself present, who has begot it, and that Soul is in some Measure a
living Member of Christ, and to such it will be glad Tidings, to hear that
Christ is so near unto it, as really to be within it, even really and livingly
present; and where the least true measure of Sincerity, Tenderness, Meekness,
Gentleness, Humility, Uprightness of Heart and Soul has place in any, there is
Christ present in that Soul, who has already begun his good Work in the same,
and the beginning of his Work is to quicken and make alive the Soul unto him.
And every Soul that is thus quickened and made alive unto him, as it does hold
fast this Beginning, and does continue still hungering and thirsting after Him,
to know, and enjoy, and receive of his Fullness more plentifully, does really
belong to him, and is in a state of Salvation even so far; and as it here
abides, it is impossible that it can perish. But yet tho such belong to
Christ, and to his Church, it does not follow, that the visible Church, which
they are outwardly, and by some outward Form or Practice joined unto, is the
true Church of Christ; for they themselves distinguish of the Church Visible
and Invisible, and do affirm, That Hypocrites are Members of their Visible
Church, but that only the true Saints and Children of God, belong to the
invisible Church. And again, tho such who have true Desires, and true living
Breathings raised in them after the Lord, may be said, as such, to belong to
him, and be of his Sheep, yet they are still but as scattered and driven from
the true Fold, and as wandering, for most part, upon the barren Mountains, and
the dry and desolate Hills, seeking the living among the dead, until they come
to be gathered into the True and Living Way of God, and of Christ, so as to
know, and be acquainted with the Lord, and his inward Leadings, Rule and
Government in them, and to be able to distinguish his Voice, and inward
appearance in them, from that of a stranger, and to worship him in Spirit and
in Truth, and serve him in the newness of the Spirit, and in pure Holy Fear and
Love, as Sons and Children in his House: And this State ye are generally
strangers unto, and therefore tho some of you may be allowed in true Charity,
to be the Sheep of Christ, yet ye are but scattered until ye are returned unto
Christ, the Shepherd and Bishop of your Souls, and know him revealed in you, to
lead, rule and guide you, and feed you with the living Bread, and give you the
living Water to drink, which he himself is, inwardly revealed, and that ye be
turned away from all false Teachers and Shepherds, which is the earnest
breathing and cry of my Soul unto God for you.

G.K.

Heads or Principles OF Christian DOCTRINE.
CHAP. I. Concerning the Holy Scriptures.
1. THe Holy Scriptures of the old and new Testament being generally and
worthily acknowledged by all Christians, to be writ by Divine Inspiration,
without any mixture of Error, are a sufficient outward Rule and Standard,
whereby to examine and try all Doctrins of men.

2. They contain a full and entire Declaration of all Christian Doctrine; and
therefore whatever Doctrins or Principles of Christian Religion men presume to
teach, which they cannot prove and demonstrate from the Holy Scriptures, they
lay no obligation upon any to believe them.

3. The Scriptures are only sufficiently and savingly believed and understood
by the inward Illumination and Revelation of the Holy Spirit, which is the same
in kind to that which God gave to the Saints of Old.

4. Although they contain a full and sufficient Declaration of all Christian
Doctrine, yet they do not contain the whole Mind, Will and Counsel of God, as
some say they do. Because there are many things, wherein God does reveal of his
Counsel to his Children, which are not in Scripture either expressly, or
consequentially, altogether necessary to their Peace and Comfort; as to
instance in some particulars:

First, It is a part of the counsel of God, for a Christian to know his inward
Calling, and whether he be indeed one of God's called and chosen Ones; whether
in favor with God, and justified and sanctified? And though the Scripture does
give infallible Signs and Marks of such an estate, yet no Scripture, nor
Scripture-consequence can infallibly assure any man that he has these marks;
but it is the spirit of God that only can and does give them this assurance,
Romans 8.16. 2 dly, All true Preachers and Ministers of Christ ought to know the
mind and will of God, whether they be called of God to the Work of the
Ministry, which Call is an inward Call, that is altogether necessary to their
faithful discharge of so great a Work; but this they cannot know simply by the
Scripture. 3 dly, Every true Christian should know his inward Call, to Pray, or
give Thanks, or perform any Religious Duty or Service unto God, as David said,
When thou said, Seek my Face; my Heart answered, thy Face, O Lord I will
seek; hide not thy Face from me, Psalm. 27.8. Again, 4 thly, It is commonly
granted, that it is a Duty belonging to every Christian, to enquire the Mind
and Counsel of God in every weighty matter and concern of our Life; as if we be
visited with any great Affliction inward or outward, to enquire with Job, Show
me, O Lord, why thou contendest with me. And as Rebecca, when the Twins
strugled in her Womb, enquired at the Lord, and said, Why am I thus? And the
Lord answered her. Also in the case of Marriage, every true Christian man and
woman, ought to enquire and wait for God's counsel, with whom to be joined in
Marriage, that they may know indeed the Lord's joining of them, and that they
marry in the Lord: But this cannot be known by any Scripture, or consequence
from Scripture, but the Spirit of the Lord must reveal it, even the same that
led Abraham's Servant to take a Wise to his Son Isaac. And every Christian
should know the will and counsel of God in his outward Vocation, that it is of
God, and so abide therein, as the Scripture says, Let every man abide in the
Calling wherein he is called of God. And as the Servants of God in days past,
in traveling and sojourning from place to place, received the counsel of God,
so do these now that wait for it in uprightness of Heart, as really as holy men
did of old; and as Philip received the Word of God, which he could not find in
the Scripture, either expressly or consequentially, when the Spirit said unto
him, Join thy self to this Chariot, when he was sent to preach Christ to the
Eunuch; and as Peter was sent to Cornelius, and Ananias to Saul, and many other
the like instances; and as James declares, Men ought not to be rash or hasty
to say, to day, or to morrow we will go into such a City, etc. for that ye
ought to say, If the Lord will, James 4.13, 15. Now how can a man know what the
Lord wills in such a case, unless it be given him by the Spirit of the Lord
inwardly, to feel either a Command or Permission to do such a thing? For
whereas too many make the outward passages of Providence their rule, as to say,
If Sickness, or some outward Impediment hinder not; they constitute that to be
the Will of God: And whereas many remove from one place to another, and Divine
Providence does not hinder them, and yet in that removal they have not had
God's approbation, and it has not had a blessing to follow it, but on the
contrary; for leaving their place, they have been exposed to sad Temptations,
and have fallen under them. And lastly, there are many precious living
Soliloquies and Intercourses betwixt the Lord and the Souls of his dear
Children, while he answers the returns of their Prayers in living Testimonies,
and words of his Holy Spirit; which though they are agreeable to Scripture, yet
are not express Scripture words, but are the real Words and Dictates of the
Holy Ghost, speaking Peace and Consolation to them, beyond all utterance or
demonstration of Speech, and wonderfully quickening and strengthening them in the
inward man, as we find in the Psalms, and in the Song of Solomon, and other
places of holy Scripture; for by the living Word of God, as they come freshly
and newly, or immediately from the mouth or spirit of God, the Souls of God's
Children are quickened and kept alive, as Christ said, The words that he did
speak unto his Disciples were Spirit and Life; and man lives not by Bread
alone, but by every Word that proceeds out of the Mouth of God. And David
waited for the coming of the Word of God to quicken him, to wit, that God might
speak unto him; and he said, I will hear what the Lord will speak, for he will
speak Peace to his Saints, and to his People. So here is God's Promise to all
his Saints and People to speak Peace unto them; and as he promised to his
Israel in Hosea, Chap. 14. I will allure or persuade her, and bring her into
the Wilderness, or a solitary place, and there I will speak comfortably unto
her, or (as the Hebrew has it) I will speak to her Heart. And this is an
inward Speech: And the Scripture Promises, when God is pleased by his Spirit to
apply them to the Souls of his Children, is as real and proper an inward Voice
and Speaking of God unto them, as he spoke to the Prophets of old.

5. And therefore the Scripture does not contain either all the Word, or Words
of God, as some say, but many thousands of Words of God have been livingly
spoke and uttered by the Spirit of God, to the inward Ears of his dear
Children, since the writing of the Scripture, and daily are and will be to the
end of the World. And as it was said in the Apostles days, the Word of the Lord
grew and multiplied, Acts 12.24 and 19, 20. so ever since the Apostles and
writing of the Scriptures, the Word of God has grown and multiplied, and still
shall and must to the end of the World; and yet no new Doctrine or Gospel to be
Preached, but the same which the Prophets, and Christ and the Apostles have
already Preached.

6. And as Christ and the Apostles expounded the Scriptures of the old
Testament by divine Inspiration and Revelation of the same Spirit; without
propounding any new Doctrine or object of Faith unto People; so why may it not
be so now? yea, it is so, that some at this day by the same Spirit, do expound
and open places of Scripture both of the old and new Testament, and yet bring
no new Doctrine: And it is a far better way to have such Preachers and
Expounders, who open and expound the Scriptures by the Inspiration and
Revelation of the Holy Spirit, as the Apostles did, than for men to presume to
open and expound them without all new Revelation or Inspiration, and who
plainly confess, They neither Preach nor Write by any Infallible Spirit. And
such men's Exposition, who declare they have no infallible Spirit, can neither
be the word or words of God, which are infallible, but only the fallible word
and words of man, and human Imaginations.

7. And as for the term [Word] the Greek of it being (...) I find it variously
used and translated in the new Testament, as first, to signify Christ, Joh.
1.1. 2dly, to signify Treatise, Acts 1.1. 3dly, Communication, Mat. 3.7.
4thly, Utterance, 1 Cor. 1.5. and 2 Cor. 8.7. and Ephesians. 6.19. and Col. 4.3.
5thly, Word of Talk or Discourse, 1 These. 1.5. 6thly, Reason, 2 Pet. 3.15. and
Acts 18.14. 7thly, Preaching or Doctrine, 1 Cor. 1.18. 8thly, Account or
Business, as to have to do, Heb. 4.13. and 9thly, the Hebrew word in the old
Testament is translated, Order, Psalm. 110.4. 10thly, Matter, Psalm. 45.1.
11thly, Speech, Psalm. 19.2. and 12thly, the same Greek word is used by Paul to
signify, the empty and dead preaching of false Teachers, 1 Cor. 4.19. And
therefore whether the Scriptures may be called or are called the Word in
Scripture, rarely or improperly, is not the proper state of the Question; for
it cannot be denied, and is not denied, but that rarely and improperly, the
word is used to signify Scripture or Scripture Words, either written or
spoken; and sometimes the words of evil men are rendered by the same Greek word
in Scripture, as Ephesians. 4.29. and 2 Timothy 2.^7. But the true state of the
Question is, Wheth^r first, the Scripture does contain all the Word or Words of
God? And this I justly deny, for the reasons already given; and indeed as the
Word and Words of God are compared in Scripture ( Deuteronomy. 32.2.) to the Dew and
Rain that falls upon the dry ground to refresh it, and make it fruitful) and
the drops of the Dew and Rain are so many that they cannot be numbered) which
God has been pleased to speak to the Souls of his People, and still does, so
nor can the Words of God be numbered by Men; and therefore they are of a greater
extent than all these set down in Scripture, which may be numbered; and also
they are compared in Scripture to Bread that is eaten, as Jeremiah said, cap.
15.16. Thy words were found, and I did eat them; and as none can number the
small grains of flower that make up a Cake of Loaf of Bread, so none can number
the words of God. Secondly, Whether the Scriptures only, as they are outwardly
written, or spoken by the mouths of natural Men, or heard by the outward ears,
or conceived only by the bare natural thoughts and understanding, be properly,
and without all figure, the Word or Words of God? I say, nay; for the words of
God are spiritual, and of an inward nature, as God himself is; for the words of
God are first, and properly, spoke to the mind and spirit of man, and the
outward words, whether spoke or writ, are but the signs of them, as all outward
words are but the signs of the inward thoughts of the mind, which are the words
of the mind or heart of man within it self. Thirdly, Whether he who only
talks Scripture words, and has not the true sense of them, does truly and
properly speak the Word of God? And whether he that only hears them from
man, and has not received the true sense of them, has properly heard the
Word of God? I say, Nay; for it is not the bare Letter, without the sense,
that is the Word of God properly understood. Nevertheless, the Letter of the
Scripture in a figurative sense may be called the Word, as the Map of England
is called England, Moses his Books are called Moses, and Isaiah his Book is
called his Vision, and John his Book is called his Revelation.

CHAP. II. Concerning new divine Revelations and Inspirations.
1. THe places of Scripture, which they commonly bring against all new divine
Revelations and Inspirations of the Spirit of God, prove no such thing, as will
easily appear to any that are impartial and unbyassed in their understanding,
if they will but read and consider them, which places are these following, as
they are alleged and quoted by them called the Assembly of Divines at
Westminster, in their Confession of Faith, cap. 1. sect. 1. Prove. 22.19, 20,
21. Isa. 8.9, 10. which places, if they prove now, that all new Revelation is
ceased, they do as much prove, that it ceased in the days of Christ and the
Apostles, yea, in the days of the Prophets that did succed them. Is it not
admirable blindness that these men did not see how impertinent these Citations
are? And as for all the places of the new Testament cited by them, as Luke 3.4.
Romans 15.4. Mat. 4.4, 7, 10. 2 Timothy 3.15. Heb. 1.1, 2. 2 Pet. 1.19. they do no
more prove what these intend than the former; for by their own confession,
divine Revelation and Inspiration continued after all these places of Scripture
were writ, for diverse entire Books of Scripture were writ after them here
alleged: And if they say, that all new Revelation did cease, as soon as all
these Books of Scripture were in being, then they must also affirm, that all
new Revelation did cease to diverse of the Apostles, long before they deceased,
because diverse of them, and particularly John survived after he wrote his Book
of the Revelation.

2. It is most readily granted, that God in his infinite Wisdom and Goodness
was pleased, that there should be Oracles and Testimonies of his Truth and
Gospel committed to writing, according to which the Doctrins and Words of Men,
however so holy, that should come in after ages, should be tried and examined;
for the Spirits of the Prophets are subject to the Prophets; but this does not
prove in any wise, all ceasing of Prophecy, or Divine Revelation, or
Inspiration by the same Spirit. The Apostles Doctrine and Preaching was tried by
the Noble Bereans, whether it was according to the Scriptures of the old
Testament; but it does not therefore follow, that the Apostle Paul did not
preach by divine Revelation and Inspiration. And both Christ and the Apostles
proved their Doctrine generally out of the Scriptures of the Prophets; but that
does not argue that they did not Preach by new divine Revelation.

3. But for the further clearing of the matter, we are to distinguish betwixt
new Revelation of new Doctrine, and new Revelation of ancient Doctrine. The
Apostles had a new Revelation, yet not of any new Doctrine, but the very same
that Christ and the Prophets preached before them, and all agreed in the same
Doctrine for Substance, and yet had their own peculiar Visions and Revelations,
which were new to them, to wit, new, though not in kind or specie, yet in
particular or individual unto them. And so it is, as to us, we plead not for
any new Revelation of any new Doctrine, Faith or Gospel, differing from what
Christ, and the Prophets, and Apostles have taught before us, and is largely
and fully declared in the holy Scriptures; but for a new Revelation of the same
Doctrine, Faith and Gospel which was revealed unto them: For as the Faith of the
Prophets and Apostles is not enough to us, but we must also have the like
precious Faith with them, 1 John 1.2. and we must see with our spiritual Eyes,
and hear with our spiritual Ears, and handle with our spiritual handling the
Word of Life, as they did, so it must be newly revealed to us, and in us.

4. And if all new divine Revelation and Inspiration be ceased, then all
spiritual seeing and hearing is ceased, and neither God nor Christ is, or has
been heard or seen spiritually, as the Saints did see and hear formerly, nay,
not in the least degree, and all inward spiritual Sensation and feeling is
gone, and all use or exercise of spiritual Series, which is sad tidings to poor
Souls. But if any grant that there is any true and real spiritual hearing,
seeing, tasting, and other spiritual Sensations of God, and divine things, they
must also grant true divine Revalation the same in kind and nature with what
the Saints had of old; for what is the proper object of the inward hearing, and
seeing, and tasting, and feeling; Is it not God and Christ? As David invited
others saying, O taste and see that God is good. And as the Spouse said in the
Song, I sat down under his Shadow with great delight, and his Fruit was sweet
unto my taste; his, Left Hand is under my Head, and his Right hand does embrace
me; he has brought me to his banqueting House, etc. and again, The King has
brought me into his Wine-Cellar. And can these sweet and heavenly Experiences
be witnessed without divine Revelation, or Inspiration?

And whereas some say, It is Revelation by the Word and Spirit going along
together, but not by the Spirit alone without the Word.

I Answer, granting it to be so in a true sense; for the Prophets and Apostles
had both the Word and the Spirit going along together in their divine
Revelations, according to Isa. 50.21. and that did not hinder them to be real
and proper in their kind. But that God has limited and confined himself so, as
never to give any inward enjoynment of himself to the Souls of his dear
Children, by any inward sense, sight or hearing, but what is conveyed unto them
always by means of Scripture words, is a most extravagant presumption to
affirm, without all Scripture proof; for besides that, the Soul may hear God
speaking other words to it inwardly, than express Scripture words, though not
contrary or disagreeing; it often falls out, that the inward and spiritual
seeing, tasting and feeling may be enjoyed and witnessed, without all words
composed of Letters or Syllables, even in a deep inward stillness and
quietness, according to these words, Be still, and know that I am God. And as
the outward seeing, tasting, smelling and feeling may be used without the
present use of the outward hearing, so may the inward and spiritual seeing,
tasting, smelling and feeling be used at times and seasons, without the inward
and spiritual hearing of any Words formally composed of Letters and Syllables,
or Scripture words, or so much as inwardly thought or conceived, which Men of
spiritual Experience, who have their spiritual Senses cannot but readily grant.
We find by common experience, that Words fall short to give us a sufficient and
satisfactory knowledge of outward and natural things; and therefore we desire
rather to see, taste and handle them, than to hear the best or most true report
of them. We love rather to see a pleasant Country, than to hear of it only; and
every good Child loves to see his Parents, rather than to hear a report, or
talk of them; so every loving Wife loves rather to see her Husband, and hear
himself, and be embraced by him, than to hear others tell of him: And the
loving Subject is more glad to see his Prince, or King, of whom he has
received so many Favors, and to hear himself, than to hear others tell of him;
and thus it is with every Soul, that truly loves God, they much rather desire
to hear himself, and see him, than to hear others tell of him, as one well
said, It is little to see Christ in a Book, but to see him, and hear him, and
feel his most lovely Embraces, as his Children have witnessed, that is very
precious. It is not the report, or discourse of Bread, however so true and
large, that can satisfy an hungry man, or the report of good Drink that can
satisfy a thirsty Man; but to taste and eat of Bread, that only satisfies him
that is hungry, and to taste and drink of Water, Beer, Wine, or any other
refreshing Liquor, only satisfies the thirsty Man: And so to eat of Christ,
and feed upon him who is the Soul's proper food and nourishment, does, and only
can satisfy and content the hungry Soul, as Christ said, John 6.57. He that
eats me, shall live by me. And Christ is not only the Soul's Meat, but its
Drink also; and therefore David said, As the Heart pants after the
Water-Brook, so pants my Soul after thee, O God; my Soul thirsts for God,
for the living God, Psalm. 42.1, 2. And surely, this so near and inward
enjoyment of God and Christ cannot be without an inward and intimate, or
immediate Revelation of him. And if words fall short to give to men a
sufficient and satisfactory knowledge of natural and outward things, how much
more then to give a sufficient and satisfactory knowledge of God and Chirst, and
Divine things, as his Love, his Life, his Peace, and that inward Comfort and
Consolation that is in his presence? For the Scripture says, 1 Cor. 2.9, 10.
Ear has not heard, nor Eye has not seen, nor has the Heart of man conceived
the good things that God has prepared for them that love him, and wait for
him: Where we see all words fall short to discover these things; But God has
revealed them to us (said Paul) by his Spirit. And this God did promise as a
general privilege to all his People, of all Nations, even to bring them to his
holy Mountain, and to destroy the face of the Covering spread over them, and
make unto them a Feast of fat things, full of Marrow, and of Wines upon the
Lees well refined: And what is this but the enjoyment of himself, seen and
tasted by them? And do not all true Believers eat the same spiritual Bread, and
drink the same spiritual Drink, the Rock that followed Israel of old? which
Rock was Christ? And surely this is beyond all Words or Declaration, and
according to this the joy of God's People is called a Joy unspeakable, even
such as words cannot express; and the Peace of God is said to pass
Understanding, and the love of Christ, that it passes Knowledge, because no
Words, either spoken or conceived by men, can give the knowledge of these so
great and divine and profound Mysteries, but only the Spirit of God, that
searches the deep things of God, can discover them. Again, we find by common
experience, that all outward teaching of men, presuppose certain Principles of
knowledge of natural things, which they profess to teach, which Principles are
partly known (without men's teaching) by the outward sense of them, and partly
by inward Notions of Knowledge, innate in the minds of men; and therefore it
were altogether in vain, for a Master of Architecture or Navigation, to teach a
man these Arts, who is altogether blind, and senseless, and stupid, and has
not any inward clearness of his natural judgment; and even so it is, as to
spiritural and divine things, all outward teaching of them does pre-suppose
some Principles of Knowledge of these very things, and some inward divine and
spiritual Sense of them, or at least some inward ground and capacity, whereby
that divine Sense may be excited in them. And therefore when Paul Preached to
the Athenians, that professed themselves ignorant of God, he Preached him, Acts
17.16, 27, 28. near unto them, yea, so near, as the Stock or Root of a Tree is
unto the Bud or offspring that grows upon it; and this he proved from some
of their own Poets, who said of men, that they are God's offspring; and he
told them plainly the way to seek him, and find him, was by feeling him; so
that he joyneth these three together, to wit, seeking, feeling and finding; for
as a man in a dark Room, or having his Eyes shut, being persuaded that the
thing he desires to have, is at hand, or near to him, does grope, and feel
after it, and by feeling, does within a little time find it; even thus did Paul
teach these ignorant Athenians how they might find God, and how all men,
however so ignorant, have a time or opportunity given them to find him, God
having determined the times before-appointed, and bounds of Habitation, wherein
they may find him: And so from this inward Ground, or Principle of Knowledge in
these Athenians, which they had before Paul Preached unto them, as a wise
Master Builder or Teacher, he proceeds to Preach Christ, and the
Resurrection, and eternal Judgment unto them, as a good Master or Teacher of
natural Science begins with the first Principles of Knowledge, not to teach
them, but presupposing them, and only calling the minds of the Scholars to
remember, or take notice of them, and then from these Principles he proceeds
to teach them the mysteries of the Science.

5. But whereas many who deny all new Revelations of the Spirit, yet grant the
necessity of the inward Illumination of the Spirit of God, To give the saving
Knowledge and Understanding of God and divine things, as these who gave forth
the Westminster Confession of Faith, being an Assembly made up of Presbyterian
and Independent Teachers, met at Westminster about forty Years ago; see Cap.
1. Sect. ^. Surely, if these men had been rightly acquainted with the inward
Illumination of the Spirit of God, they would never have writ or given forth
such Nonsense and Contradiction in the face of the World, as to grant the
necessity of inward Illumination, and at the same time, yea, in the same
Section or Paragraph, and within a Line or two, to deny all new Revelation; for
indeed inward Illumination is Revelation, and inward Revelation is
Illumination, the thing is one, though the Names be distinct, as often the same
thing is expressed by variety of Names; and the places of Scripture they bring
to prove, the necessity of the inward illumination of the Spirit, do prove the
inward Revelation of the Spirit, both which are one, as John 6.45. and 1 Cor.
2.9, 10, 11, 12. It is written in the Prophets, They shall all be taught of
God; every man therefore that has heard and learned of the Father, comes unto
me. And that other place in 1 Corinthians. 2.9, 10, 11, 12. As it is written, Eye
has not seen, nor Ear heard, neither have entered into the Heart of man, the
things which God has prepared for them that love him: But God has revealed
them to us by his Spirit; for the Spirit searches all things, even the deep
things of God. For what man knows the things of a man, save the Spirit of a
man which is in him? Even so the things of God knows no man, but the Spirit
of God. Now we have received not the Spirit of the World, but the Spirit which
is of God, whereby we know the things that are freely given us of God. There
cannot be brought out of the whole Scripture more suitable places, to prove the
necessity of divine Revelation than these are, the one plainly implying it, the
other plainly expressing it. For to be taught of God, to hear and learn of the
Father, as the Prophets and Apostles did, what is it, but to be taught by
divine inward Revelation? Or if they will say Nay, then the Prophets and
Apostles were not taught of God, by the same Argument. And whereas they bring
Paul's words, saying, God has revealed them to us, to wit, these deep things
of God, to prove the inward Illumination of the Spirit of God to all Saints, as
well as to Paul; the same proves divine Revelation, as it is expressly so
called by Paul in this very place; for they must needs grant, that the divine
Illumination which Paul had, was Revelation, properly so called, and what he
had he holds it forth, as common in kind to all Saints and Believers. And as
for the word Revelation, as signifying an inward operation of the holy Spirit
in the Heart and Understanding, we find it to be a phrase more frequently used
in Scripture, than the word Illumination, or Illuminated, or Enlightened, or to
Enlighten; yea, I find the word Illuminated out once used in all the English
Translation of the whole Bible, but Revelation frequently is used in our
English Translation, and reveal, revealed; see Isa. 40.5. and 53.1. and 56.1.
Jer. 33.6. Mat. 11.27, 25. Luke 10.21, 22. Romans 8.18. 1 Cor. 2 10. Gal.
1.16.3.23. Phil. 3.15. Ephesians. 1.17. Beside many other places. So that it is
very strange, why these Faith-makers at Westminster should have such a grudge
and prejudice at all new Revelation, a Word so frequently used in Scripture,
and yet pretend so great kindness to new inward Illumination, which is the
same; for it passes their skill, or any Man's else, to divide or separate the
one from the other.

6. But the great knack, nicety or mystery of this distinction lies in this,
that inward Illumination is only Revelation, subjective or effective; and in
that sense, some of that sort of Men, say, They own the necessity of inward
Revelation, and hold it to be all one with Illumination. But they deny all
inward objective Illumination, or Revelation, that is to say, any inward
Revelation of any inward object, inwardly proposed to the Eye or Ear, or other
inward spiritual Sense and Faculty of the Soul, the alone object of the Souls
whole kowledge, faith, fruition, enjoyment of God, and communion with him,
being the Scriptures, or God, Christ and divine things not in themselves seen,
or enjoyed, but as they are to be seen and known, or revealed in the words of
Scripture: Hence they who use this distinction, say, the inward Light, or
Illumination of the Spirit, being only effective, or subjective, but not
objective, i^ medium incognitum assentiendi, or principium incognitum
cognoscendi, that is to say, an unknown Principle, or mean of knowing and
assenting, which may be illustrated by this similitude, that there is an inward
vigor of Life, and natural Spirits, that are necessary to enable the outward
Eye to see outward things and Objects; but that inward vigor of natural Life
and Spirits, is not the object of the Eye, nor seen by it; or otherwise some
may, or do understand by subjective inward Revelation, or Revelation on the
part of the subject, the Soul's inward knowledge, or perception, as in the
outward sight of things of this World there is the vision of the Eye, or its
sight and perception, and the Object seen, and perceived by the Eye: Also, in
hearing, there is the hearing, or perception of the Ear, and the thing heard,
be it Voice, or sound of Man, Beast or Bird, or musical Instrument. And thus,
according unto these Men's Doctrine, the alone adequate formal Object of all
faith, knowledge, fruition, enjoyment, sight and sense of the Souls of the most
excellent Saints, either now living, or that have lived in all Ages past since
the Apostles lived, is the Scripture-words. But this is all merely begged, and
taken for granted, without all proof, and altogether contradictory to the
experience of all the true Saints of God, who have an inward sight, knowledge
and enjoyment of God, far surpassing all Words or Writings; And thus, according
to these Men's Doctrine, all the knowledge or sight that the Saints have of God
in this Life, is but as one that sees England in a Map: but never saw the Land
it self; or as an hungry Man, hears and reads good words of Meat, but
neither sees, nor tastes it; and as a Woman hears of a Husband she is
married unto, or sees his Picture on a Table, or on Paper, or reads a Book
that describes his Beauty and Personage, but is never admitted to see him, or
hear himself, nor to touch, handle or embrace him; all which are sad tidings to
Souls that love God and Christ; but the best is, they are utterly false, and
the experience of the Saints abundantly prove them to be false; and such dark
ignorant blind Doctrine, proves sufficiently what dark ignorant blind Men these
have been, or are, who have published their own shame and folly to the face of
the World, and as blind and ignorant are these Teachers, who have since
received and published the same blind Doctrine. But if the inward Light, or
Illumination be altogether an unknown Principle to him that has it, having no
Evidence, or Light, or Demonstration of its own, whereby to discover it, how
shall any Man be sure, or know surely that he has any inward divine Light or
Illumination; for no Scripture can tell him that he has it, or that he has
the Works of one that is divinely illuminated. One would think the bear naming,
or mentioning such Doctrine, is enough to refute it, as to say, God and Christ
is, and can only be known by words, or report and hearsay, whereas the
Scripture says, Ear has not heard, nor Eye seen, what these things are, which
God has prepared for his Children: And yet all Scripture words the Ear does
hear, and the Eye does see,

7. But to come to the Conclusion of the matter, it is to be noticed, or
considred that there is a Doctrinal and sensible knowledge of God, or
discursive and intuitive; as for the doctrinal and discursive knowledge of God,
it is granted, that it cannot be without words, either of Scripture, or some
other words given by the same Spirit; and also it is granted, that Scripture
words, in God's ordinary way, are necessary to give to Men the said doctrinal
knowledge of God and Christ, and many deep and mysterious things of the
Christian Faith and Religion; but this does not prove the ceasing of new divine
Revelation, but rather indeed establishes it; for the Prophets and Apostles,
who had divine Revelation, were profited, taught and edified by their
Fellow-Prophets and Apostles; and especially the latter Prophets, were much
helped by the Words and Writings of the foregoing Prophets, as Daniel
confessed, he understood by Books, to wit, by Jeremiah his Prophecy, the number
of the years of the Captivity, Dan. 9.2. And Christ opened the understanding of
the Apostles, to understand the Scriptures of the Old Testament, what they did
declare of him; and Paul freely confesses, that the Scriptures of the Prophets
were writ for his Learning, as well as of other Men, and yet he had great
plenty of divine Revelation, beyond what many of them had; and David said, he
had more knowledge than his Teachers, and yet no doubt profited by them, and
especially by the Prophet Samuel, and others that lived with him, and before
him. Next, as to the sensible and intuitive knowledge of God, it can be, and
often is without all Words, either outwardly heard, or inwardly conceived, I mean
words consisting of Letters or Syllables, such as are not the things, but signs
of things, even as we have a sensible and intuitive knowledge of a Land, by
seeing it, and eating the Fruit of it, and drinking the good Wine or Milk of
it, though we are not hearing or reading of it, nor thinking of any words that
ever we read or heard of it. And so, often the Souls of God's people enjoy a
sweet sight, taste, and repast of him in a deep inward quiet and stillness of
mind, having no words of any sort, that can be expressed in Letters or
Syllables, so much as in their present thoughts or remembrance; and this is the
most excellent degree of Knowledge, and as far excels and transcendeth the
other sort, as the sight taste and feeling of a thing does the report or
hearsay of it. It is also acknowledged, that often it pleases God, to join of
his Life to Scripture words, as Promises, Prophecies, or any others, as we
hear, read, or meditate on them, and make them as Conduits, Pipes or Cisterns,
or as Cups and Flaggons, to convey the divine Influences of his Life, and
living Spirit of Life, and love to our Souls, but then they hinder not our
Revelation, to be real, and true, and proper Revelation, as well objective, as
subjective; for as in drinking of outward Wine in a Glass, or Cup, we not only
see the Glass or Cup, that reveals the Wine, but also the Wine it self, and
the Wine is the most desirable, and pleasant and acceptable object of both our
sight and taste, and feeling, so that we regard the Glass or Cup little or
nothing for it self, but for its use and service to us; and if there be no
Wine, or other refreshing Liquor in the Cup, we care not to use it, it has no
taste unto us, nor service, but as the Wine is in it: And thus it is with the
living Soul, that thirsts after the living God, and to drink of his Spirit,
that quickens and refreshes the Soul, when it sees or perceives any divine
Virtue or Life (as God is pleased, when, how, or by whom to join of the same to
it) in Scripture words, either preached, read, or meditated, it is very glad,
and most gladly makes use of them, and gives God thanks for his great mercy;
but without Life be joined unto them, it is no more wisdom, nor discretion to
use them, than for a Man to put an empty Flaggon or Cup to his Mouth to drink
at it.

8. But if they say, There is no sensible or intuitive knowledge of God in this
Life, at least since the Apostles days; as indeed it is most, yea, altogether
most agreeable to their Doctrine, who say, All new Revelation of the Spirit is
ceased; then I say unto them, they are miserable Comforters, yea, miserable and
sad Gospellers to poor Sion; they bring not glad, but sad tidings; they cannot
say, Behold, O Sion, thy King comes unto thee; they cannot say, Taste, and see
that God is good; they cannot say, The Life was manifested, and we have seen
it, and declare it unto you, that ye may have fellowship with us; they cannot
declare the great kindness and love that Christ the Soul's Husband and
Bridegroom has to his Bride, but rather, their Doctrine preaches him to be
most unkind, and unnatural, never to let his Bride see him once all her Life,
here in this World, nor yet once to hear himself, or taste, or touch, or handle
him, or be embraced by him. They preach altogether an absent Christ, as some of
them say, Christ is not really and properly in his People, or if present, a
Christ altogether either dumb or silent, that being so near to the Soul, as to
be in it, never speaks one word in it, and always hides his Face, and never
gives to the Soul one glance or shine of his Countenance. But if they be
ashamed of this Doctrine, which yet is the very purport of it, who deny all
inward new Revelation, and new Visitations of the Lord's love unto the Souls of
his People, then let them be ashamed to preach, teach, or write, that there is
no new Revelation of God and Christ, nor no immediate or inward teaching, no
inward and immediate calling, or sending to the Ministry; and let them be
ashamed to own themselves to be the Successors of the ancient Protestants, who
did acknowledge immediate Teaching, and calling unto the Ministry, and the
Spirit of Prophecy; and some of them had it, as George Wishard, and others,
whose Prophecies Fox in his Book of Martyrs has recorded.

9. And whereas these Faith-publishers at Westminster, one while deny all new
Revelation, another while seem only to deny extraordinary Revelation, as they
term it, cap. 18. section 3. is another piece of Nonsense, or Contradiction;
for if all new Revelation be ceased, as they expressly affirm, cap. 1. sect. 1.
and 6. then there is neither ordinary nor extraordinary Revelation remaining,
according unto their Doctrine. But the distinction of ordinary and extraordinary
Revelation, may in a true sense, be well admitted by them who believe, that
divine inward Revelation is not ceased; for among the Prophets, Numb. 12.6, 7,
8. Moses's Revelation far exceeded the Revelation of the other Prophets, as is
clear from Scripture, and in that respect was extraordinary: And we now plead
for new divine Revelation, we mean not extraordinary, beyond what God was
pleased to give to his Saints and Children, in an ordinary and usual way, from
the beginning of the World, more or less, nor do we compare our Revelations
with either the Prophets or Apostles, by way of equality, either in degree, or
in all the various manners and ways which they had then: But we say, in that
one way and manner, which was by God's inward appearance, and speaking in their
Hearts, in the divine Seed and Birth, we do plead for divine Revelation, as the
ordinary and common allowance and privilege of all God's Saints and People,
and not only to Saints, but to Men and Women, in order to their becoming
Saints, they need God and Christ inwardly to speak unto them; for it is the
inward Voice and Speaking of Christ, that quickneth the dead Souls of Men,
according to the words of Christ, The Dead shall hear the Voice of the Son of
God, and they that hear shall live, John 5.25.

CHAP. III. Of the Supreme Judge and Rule of Controversies, of Religion.
IT has been already acknowledged in the first Chapter, that the holy
Scriptures are a sufficient outward Rule and Standard, whereby to try all
Doctrins of Men, however so holy or wise they may be, or however much endued
with the holy Spirit, because the Spirit of the Prophets is subject to the
Prophets; and as the holy Spirit of Truth is one, so the words of it do all
agree, in all the true Prophets, Apostles, Evangelists, Pastors and Teachers;
and as is already said, the Noble Bereans were commended in Scripture, for
searching the Scriptures to see and examine, whether the Apostles Doctrine was
according to the Doctrine of the ancient Prophets that wrote the Old Testament;
and until the Apostles Doctrine was generally received, they did appeal to the
Scriptures of the Old Testament, for a proof of their Doctrine, although that
was not their only proof; for they had a greater proof than that outward was,
even the inward Witness and Testimony of the holy Ghost, that made both them,
and their Doctrine manifest in the Hearts and Consciences of their Hearers,
whose Hearts God was pleased to open.

2. And therefore in respect of any outward Rule and Standard, the Scripture is
sufficient, and to be preferred in all respects to any other latter Writings,
or Testimonies, or Records whatsoever; first, because writ from a greater
measure and depth of divine Wisdom; for though the Spirit be one, yet it has
diversity of Gifts and Operations, and Administrations; and all Men divinely
inspired, had not the same clearness of divine Knowledge, Numb. 12.6, 7, 8.
Moses exceeded the Prophets generally, David and Solomon exceeded many of them;
and Isaiah and Jeremiah exceeded others of them; and among the Prophets some
were as Fathers, some as Sons; hence we read in Scripture, that God is the
Father of Lights, and of these Lights, as to us, some are higher, and some
lower, which some mystic Writers, both among Jews and Christians, have taken
notice of, out of the Scripture it self; hence they say, Moses drank at the
Fountain, Samuel, David, Solomon, and some others, drank at the Streams; and
others of an inferior degree, at the Pond or Cistern: And they further say,
Moses had his Revelations from Binah, Abraham from Gedulah, a step lower; Isaac
from Geburah, yet lower; Jacob from Tipheret, yet lower, but partaking of both,
signified by his dwelling in Tents, betwixt the Tents of Abraham and Isaac;
David sometimes from Tipheret, and sometimes from Nezah and Hod; hence we read
some of the Inscriptions of his Psalms to Nezah; and sometimes from Mulcuth;
and they say that the ordinary Prophets had their Revelations from these two
divine Measures, Nezah and Hod, called Exodus 38.8. The Looking-Glasses of the
Lords Hosts that Assemble at the door of the Tabernacle, (see the Heb. text)
But Moses had liberty to go into the heavenly Tabernacle it self, and so had
some others. And that God did make himself more known to Moses, than to
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, is clear from these words of his to Moses at the
Bush, I appeared to Abraham, Isaac and Jacob by the Name of God Almighty, but
by my Name Jehovah, was I not known to them, Exodus 6.3. And concerning this
distinction of divine Gifts and Illuminations, Paul declares, saying, To one
is given the Word of Wisdom, to another the Word of Knowledge, to another
Faith, all by the same Spirit. Hence we read in the Proverbs, Wisdom,
Understandang and Knowledge distinguished, Wisdom builds the House,
Understanding establishes it, and Knowledge fills the Chambers with all
precious and pleasant Riches, Prove. 24.3, 4. Therefore Wisdom is a degree above
Understanding, and Understanding a degree above Knowledge, all which divine
Measures are set in order, as the parts of a Tree, with Root, Branches and
Tops, or as the Members of a Man's Body, by way of Allegory and Analogy,
Cochmah, Binah and Daath, belonging to the Head, Gedulah, Geburah to the right
and left Hand and Arm, Tipheret to the Body, Nesah, Hod and Jesod to the Thighs
and Legs, etc. and Mulcuth lowest of all; all which make up, by way only of
allegory and analogy the Parts and Members of the Son of Man, or heavenly Adam,
as both Ezekiel and John saw him upon his Throne. The English Names of these
Hebrew words, all which are found in Scripture, in their true order, are these
following, Cochmah, i e. Wisdom, Binah, i. e. Understanding or Prudence, Daath,
i. e. Knowledge, (see 1 Chronicles. 29.11) Gedulah, i. e. Magnificence, Geburah, i.
e. Power, Tipheret, i. e. Beauty, Nesah and Hod, i. e. Victory and Glory,
Jesod, i. e. Foundation, and Mulcuth, i. e. the Kingdom. And secondly and most
especially, we give the Pre-eminence to the Scriptures beyond all latter
Writers, because we are well assured that the Scriptures throughout are pure,
without all mixture of Error or Mistake; and this is generally granted by all
Christians, that the Scriptures are really so, being duly and rightly
translated, but we are not assured that any man's or men's Writings since, are
altogether pure and free of all mixture of Error and human Weakness, until they
be duly examined and found to agree to the holy Scriptures, and to the inward
testimony of the holy Spirit; for although whatever the Spirit of God inwardly
reveals, is infallible and pure from all mixture of Error, and whatever any
man says or writes, as he has received it from that, his Testimony is pure,
and without mixture; yet we are not assured that any man or men are in that
state of Perfection, that they may not by human frality, in some measure or
way, more or less, decline or depart from the pure and infallible Teachings of
the Spirit of God; for as it is possible they may purely and chastely keep unto
them, so for want of due watchfulness and holy care, they may more or less
depart from them, and so there may be a mixture of Truth and Error, both in
their Understandings and Words; and therefore they are not to be taken on
trust, but both their Doctrine in all things is to be tried by the Scripture,
and their Spirit by the Spirit of Truth, as every one is able, according to
what he has received. All which does not hinder but that the Spirit of God in
our day both teaches and leads infallibly, although the Disciples and
professed Followers of it at times, by weakness, may be liable to mistakes.

3. And as concerning that phrase or expression that some use, That the Spirit
of God speaking in the Scriptures, is the supreme Judge of all Controversies of
Religion, although it is no Scripture phrase, nor proper, but figurative, as
when a man is said to speak in his Books or Writings; yet in a figurative sense
it might be allowed, if they did not confine all the speaking of the spirit of
God to his only and alone speaking in the Scriptures, so as that the Spirit
speaks not at all, as they would have it, in the Souls and Hearts of Men, as
he used to do in the Prophets and Apostles. And because they have a wrong sense
of it, and that it is not proper, but figurative, it is better not to use it.
And in the room of it, I say, the Spirit of God speaking in some measure in the
Heart of every true Believer and Spiritual man, opening and expounding the
Scripture unto him, in the due and diligent use of reading, hearing, and
meditation of Scripture words, or any other means of God's appointing for our
Institution, and especially in the frequent use of fervent and earnest Prayer,
praying earnestly with David, who was richly endued with divine Revelation,
Open my Eyes, that I may see the wonderful things of thy Law; and most
especially in our being found in the way of Righteousness, and faithful
Obedience, to what is already revealed unto us; for as we are found here, we
have good warrant to expect that where any doubt, or Controversy in Doctrine,
or in the meaning of a place of Scripture does arise, that God's holy Spirit,
whom Christ has promised to his Disciples, to teach them all things, and to
lead them into all Truth, will indeed judge and decide the matter in question,
in their Hearts, by his secret Light, and Teaching or Revelation. And let it be
noted, that I say, it is not the Spirit abstractly considered from the
Scriptures, or our due use of them, or the duty that God requires of us, but
it is the holy Spirit opening, or expounding the Scriptures unto us, in
reading, hearing, meditation, prayer, waiting, and obedience to what we already
know, that it is the Judge of all Controversy in matter of Doctrine.

4. Next, as to the Rule, as the Scripture is the best and only external or
outward Rule and Standard, it is worthily preferred to all other outward
Records and Testimonies; yet because we both believe the Scriptures not simply
for their own Testimony, but for the inward Witness and Testimony of the
Spirit, and also because we can only understand the Scriptures but by the said
inward Witness and Testimony of the holy Spirit; therefore the inward Witness
of the spirit, or the spirit inwardly witnessing both to the truth, and true
sense of Scripture, is the greatest and primary Rule, as John plainly
testified, saying, If we receive the Testimony of Men, the Testimony or Witness
of God is greater; and he that believes has the Witness in himself, and has
set to his Seal that God is true. And therefore Paul recommended his Doctrine to
the Witness of the Spirit in the Hearts and Consciences of the Hearers, and
told the Thessalonians, 1 Thessalonians. 1.5. that his Gospel came unto them not in
word only, but in Power, and in the holy Ghost, and in much assurance: And he
told the Corinthians, that their Faith was to stand in the Power of God; and
therefore not in the bare words that he preached, for he did not preach
himself, nor his Words, but Christ to be the Foundation of their Faith.

CHAP. IV.
Concerning ministerial Gifts and Qualifications, and the Call to the Ministry;
the nature and manner of true Preaching, and Praying, and Singing, and the true
Gospel-Maintenance to the Ministry.

1. BEcause of the near and close connection and dependence, that the things
mentioned in the Title of this Chapter, have with the truth of what is
delivered in the preceding Chapters, therefore I do see it meet to treat of
them in this place. The common Doctrine and Opinion of these, who deny all new
Revelation of the holy Spirit, is, that natural and acquired Parts of
Letter-learning, without divine inward Revelation or Inspiration, is sufficient
to qualify a man to be a Minister of the Gospel, and is necessary to his esse
or being of a Minister, and Grace or true Piety and Holiness, is only
accidental, and does but only contribute to his been esse, or making him the
better. By Letter-learning, they do not only mean human Arts and Sciences, and
the knowledge of Greek, Hebrew and Latin, but especially a Letter-knowledge of
the Scripture, without any saving Grace, or illumination of the Spirit, as
being essential to a Minister: And indeed they say agreeable enough to their
own Doctrine; for if all new Revelation of the Spirit is ceased, what is left
behind to qualify a Man to be a Minister, but only natural and acquired parts
of Letter-learning? Nor can they with any Reason, affirm, according to their
Doctrine, that true Piety and Holiness is essential to a Minister, otherwise no
Man is a Minister without it, and then it does follow, that no Man can
infallibly be known whether he be a real Minister, yea or nay; for if divine
inward Revelation be ceased, then all infallible discerning of Men's Spirits,
and spiritual estates is ceased, and no Man can know another infallibly,
whether he be a Saint or Hypocrite; for they grant that a Hypocrite may have
all the outward of a true Christian, as the Pharisees that made clean the
outside, but their inward was full of Rottenness and Uncleanness. And if a Man
cannot be known to be a true Minister, according to their Doctrine, the People
are in a woeful case, as concerning that they call their Sacraments, and
especially that called the Supper, which they say cannot be administered but by
a true and real Minister; and if any that is not a true Minister, should
presume to do any such thing, as to Bless, or Consecrate, and set apart the
Bread and Wine from common use, it would be no Sacrament at all, as some, or
most of them affirm.

2. Now that divine Revelation and Inspiration, is necessary to the Being or
Essential Constitution of a Minister of Christ, is evident from the Doctrine
already delivered; because it is necessary to the being or essential
Constitution of every true Christian. No man is, or can be a true Christian
without inward divine Revelation or Inspiration, and therefore without the
same, no man can be a true Christian, or Gospel-Minister, for that which is
absolutely necessary to constitute a true Christian, or Believer, is absolutely
necessary to constitute a true Christian Minister, otherwise it might be said,
a man may be a true Christian Minister, and yet no true Christian. But every
true Minister of Christ, as he ought to be a true Christian, so he ought to be
more than an ordinary Christian, so as to exceed or excel them, both in
Spiritual Knowledge, and other spiritual Gifts, even as in natural teaching,
the Master or Teacher should exceed the Scholar; for if Divine Inward
Revelation, and Inspiration, together with other spiritual Gifts, are the
common privilege of all true Christians, in some degree, more or less,
according to their several growth and capacity, much more are they to be found
in the true Ministers of Christ, who are both to feed the Babes with Milk, and
the strong Men with Meat, and to be, Romans 2.19, 20. the guide of the Blind, a
Light of them which are in Darkness, and Instructors of the Foolish, and
Teachers of Babes, and also who can speak Wisdom among them that are perfect;
according to which Christ said to his Apostles, Ye are the Light of the World,
and the Salt of the Earth.

3. But more particularly, it is apparent from the Scripture, that there is a
peculiar Ministerial Gift or Gifts, that God gives to all his true Ministers,
to fit or qualify them for that great Work, whereby to make them able
Ministers of the New Testament, not of the Letter, but of the Spirit; the which
Gifts are the Purchase of Christ, and the Fruits and Effects of his Death,
Resurrection and Ascension, as is clear from Ephesians. 4.8, 11, 12. When he
ascended on high, he led Captivity captive, and gave Gifts unto men, and he
gave some Apostles, and some Prophets, and some Evangelists, Pastors and
Teachers. Where although it may be granted, that some of these are extraordinary,
as namely, Apostles, and some ordinary, yet all are given to the Church by
Christ, as the Fruit and Effect of his Purchase; and that therefore all
ordinary Ministers, who are indeed true Ministers of Christ, are endued with
some measure of Spiritual Gifts, in more or less, according to the good
pleasure of God. And as concerning the spiritual peculiar gifts of the holy
Spirit (besides these that were common to all, such as Faith, Love, Hope,
Knowledge, Meekness, Temperance, Patience, Brotherly-kindness, Charity) the
Scripture does expressly mention them in diverse places, 1 Cor. 12.8. To one is
given by the Spirit, the Word, i. e. Speech or utterance of Wisdom, to another
the Word of Knowledge (that is, some degree inferior) to another Faith, that
is, some peculiar degree of Faith, for some peculiar Service, besides the Faith
common to all Believers; and all these are ordinary, and have still remained in
the true Church; but together with these in the Apostles days, there were
extraordinary Gifts; which God may give, or withold, as he pleases; as not
being essential to a true Minister of Christ; such were Gifts of Miracles,
Gifts of Healing, Gifts of Tongues, and the like. And as concerning
Prophesying, it was either extraordinary, or ordinary; extraordinary was a
foretelling of particular things to come, as was that of Agabus, his
foretelling that Paul should be bound at Jerusalem; ordinary, was the ordinary
and usual manner of Preaching by the Inspiration and motion of the holy Ghost,
in Doctrine, Exhortation, Correction, etc. Moreover concerning this diversity of
spiritual Gifts, Paul says, Romans 12.6. Having then Gifts, differing according
to the Grace that is given to us, whether Prophecy, let us prophecy according
to the proportion of Faith; or Ministry, let us wait on our Ministry, or he
that teaches, on teaching, or he that exhorts, on exhortation. And likewise
Peter, concerning these spiritual Gifts, says, 1 Pet. 4.10, 11. As every Man
has received the Gift, even so minister the same one to another, as good
Stewards of the manifold Grace of God. If any Man speak, let him speak as the
Oracles of God: If any Man minister, let him do it as of the Ability (or
virtue) which God gives, that God in all things may be glorified through Jesus
Christ. And as touching spiritual Gifts, that were not common to all
Christians, but peculiar to some, Paul exhorted the believing Corinthians,
saying, 1 Cor. 14.1. Desire spiritual Gifts, but rather that ye may prophecy.
And he declares what that prophesying was, verse 3. He that prophesies
speaks unto Men, to Edification, and Exhortation, and Comfort. And verse. 5.
Greater is he that prophesies, than he that speaks with Tongues, except he
interpret, that the Church may receive edifying. And concerning the great power
and virtue of Prophesying, he said further, verse. 24, 25. If all Prophecy, and
there come in one that believes not, or unlearned, he is convinced of all, he
is judged of all: And thus are the secrets of his Heart made manifest, and so
falling upon the Person, to wit, (that did Prophecy) for so the Words may be
better translated) he will worship God, and report that God is in you of a
truth.

4. Now in the true Church, and among the true Believers, there was a spiritual
discerning or judgment that they had, whereby they did know who had these
spiritual Gifts, and who had them not, who spoke, and preached by the Spirit,
and who did pray and sing by the Spirit, and who did not, and who not only had
the Words, but the Power, and who had only the Words, and had not the Power;
and these were false Apostles, and false Teachers, and Hypocrites, that had
good Words, which they did take or receive from other Men, but had not that
good Power and Spirit that was in the true Ministers of Christ, and because
they had not that good Power, their Ministry and Words were dead, dry and
barren; and such the Scripture compares to Clouds without Rain, and Wells or
Cisterns without Water; and of such Paul said, he would know not the Speech of
them which are puffed up, but the Power, 1 Cor. 4.19. The which spiritual
discerning or judgment, as it was in some measure given in common to all true
Believers, as the sense of Taste is given in common to Beasts and Mankind,
whereby to relish things sweet or bitter, and Meats and Drinks, that have the
true Nourishing Virtue in them, so it was given in some greater measure to some
than to others, according to their growth, experience, and exercise or use of
their spiritual senses, even as both among Men and Beasts, some do far excel
others in the sagacity of the Taste of outward things, and so in the Smell of
things, as Flowers, Spices, etc. and according to this spiritual discerning and
judgment, Paul said to the Corinthians, 1 Cor. 14, 29. etc. Let the Prophets
speak two or three, and let the other judge: If any thing be revealed to
another that sits by, let the first hold his peace; for ye may all prophecy
one by one, that all may learn, and all may be comforted, and the Spirits of
the Prophets are subject to the Prophets: For God is not the Author of
Confusion, but of Peace, as in all the Churches of the Saints. So, we see here
was good Order, where in one Meeting two or three might speak one after
another, or more, if they had any motion of the Spirit so to do, and in that
case, the first speaker was to give place to him: But nothing of this is to be
found among these Churches who deny all inward new Revelation of the Spirit,
but one Man must take up all the time, and preach over the People one Year,
after another, and the people ever learning, and yet never able to come to the
knowledge of the Truth, as was the manner of false Teachers in days past, who
had the Form of Godliness, but denied the Power thereof, who were to be turned
from, 2 Timothy 3.5, 6, 7. And concerning the trying and knowing of Spirits, as
well as Doctrins, the Apostle John writ in his General Epistle, 1 John 2.1.
Believe not every Spirit, but try the Spirits, whether they are of God. Now
this ability to try Spirits, is greater than barely to try whether a Man's
Doctrine be true or false; for it is possible a Man may Preach for an hour, or
more, words of Doctrine that may be true, and yet his Spirit not be of God. And
that which gave them this Ability, to try all Spirits, as well as Doctrins, was
the Unction, or anointing from the holy One which they had received, 1 John
2.20, But ye have an Unction, from the holy 'One, and ye know all things. And
verse. 26, 27. These things have I written unto you, concerning them that seduce
you, i. e. seek to seduce you) But the anointing which ye have received of him,
abides in you, and ye need not that any Man teach you, but as the same
Anointing teaches you of all things, etc.

5. But because it is taken for granted, and laid down for a Fundamental among
Presbyterians and Independent Teachers, as well as many others, That all inward
divine Revelation and Inspiration, such as Believers had in the time of the
Apostles, is ceased, therefore they lay no claim to any of these spiritual
Gifts, and plainly confess they have them not, and also that they have no
Infallible discerning or knowledge what Men are truly gracious, and holy, and
living Members of Christ's Body, and what not. And therefore when these and
other places of Scripture are brought, that declare how true Ministers of
Christ had spiritual Gifts of Ministration, some in a lesser degree, and some
in a greater, they allege, all these Gifts are now ceased; and the reason they
give, is, because all inward divine Revelation and Inspiration, such as the
Saints formerly had, is altogether ceased. Whereas if they did grant, that
inward divine Revelation did continue, they would also readily grant, that
these spiritual Gifts of Ministry did continue, and a spiritual discerning and
ability, whereby to know Infallibly who were indeed endued with the Spirit of
God, and who did preach and pray by the Spirit, or sing by the Spirit, and who
not. And the like concerning the Ministerial Call, if they did grant, that
divine inward Revelation and Inspiration did continue in the Church, as the
common Privilege of all true and sound Believers, as being given to all and
every one of them, to lead them into all Truth, they would readily enough
grant, that Ministers had an inward Call to preach, and exercise other
Ministerial Services and Performances, as these Ministers did of old. So that
indeed this their Doctrine, That inward divine Revelation is ceased in the
Church, and in Believers, is the foundation of many other false and pernicious
Doctrins, yea, almost of all the false and erroneous Doctrins they have among
them. And since it is so, that they have no Belief of having the Spirit of God
inwardly inspiring them, and revealing in them the things of God, and inwardly
teaching them the Mysteries of the Kingdom, What is their Ministry, or Church
or Ordinances? All made things of Man's making, and inventing, and setting up; a
Man-made Church, Man-made Ministry, Man-made Ordinances, and a Man-made
Worship. And though they say, they hope they have the Spirit, and seem at times
to lay great stress and weight upon it, and the need of it, not only to
believe, but to do all good and acceptable Works and Performances, yet their
blind Doctrine and Unbelief, that all inward divine Revelation is ceased, does
so blind and darken them, generally, and make them so spiritually stupid,
senseless and benumbed, that they plainly confess, They have no infallible
assurance, or infallible knowledge that they have the Spirit of God, or any of
these gracius Motions and Operations of the holy Spirit. For according to their
blind Doctrine and Faith, all the motions and operations of the Spirit are only
effective, but none of them objective, and any Illumination that they have is
only effective, and not objective, that is to say, is no immediate object of
their knowledge, or feeling, or spiritual perception, the Spirit only works in
them, so to speak, as fire or heat works in Stone, or Iron, or Wood, but the
Stone, Iron or Wood has not any inward sense or perception of it; for if they
did grant, true spiritual sense and spiritual feeling or perception, they would
grant infallible knowledge of these things, even as our outward senses, when
sound and duly qualified, and within due circumstances, give us an infallible
knowledge of outward things; for is not every sensible Child infallibly sure
that it both sees its Mother, and feels her, when the Mother is handling the
Child, and feeding it? And does not the Suckling on the breast surely know the
Milk that it sucketh, and can well distinguish the breast that has Milk in it,
from that which is dry and empty? But as the Epistle to the Hebrews says,
Things made, (to wit, the things of Man's making, without the Spirit and Power
of God inwardly revealed) are all to be removed, Heb. 12.26, 27. Yet once more
I shake not the Earth only, but also Heaven. And this word yet once more,
signifies, the removing of these things, that may be shaken, as of things that
are made, that those things which cannot be shaken may remain. Let them
consider this, who seem to themselves to have a Church Constitution, Ministry,
Discipline, Worship, far above others, as Heaven is above Earth, as the
Presbyterian Church thinks she is above the Episcopal, the Independent Church
thinks she is above the Presbyterian, the Baptists think themselves above both,
and yet all these, as well as others, are open and declared Enemies to the holy
Spirit, his inward Revelation and Inspiration, by which alone the true Church
is a living Church, and the Ministry a living Ministry, and every true Member a
living Member, and all truly Religions, Duties and Services are living. But
made things of Man's making, are all dead things, and therefore must all be
shaken and removed, not the made Earth only, but the made Heavens also, of Man's
making, made Faiths, made Worships, made Ministers, made Covenants, all things
of Men's making without the Spirit and Power of God inwardly revealed, must all
be removed, and every plant that is not of the heavenly Fathers planting, must
be plucked up. But if any of them say, Our Churches, our Ministry, our Faith,
our Worship, our Covenant is not so, for we have the spirit of God assisting
us, and working together with us. This answer is but a mere presumption or
Conjecture, seeing they deny all inward Revelation and Inspiration of the
Spirit, which gave the Believers and Saints in former ages, an infallible
kowledge and assurance that they had the Spirit of God; for the Spirit that
they claim unto, as they say, does only work in them effectively, but not by
way of object; it is altogether an unknown mean or principle of operation, it
has no proper light, or evidence, or demonstration of its own, such as the
Spirit that was in the Apostles is no infallible spirit, that they have, but
fallible, and therefore their Faith is fallible, their Knowledge fallible,
their Hope fallible, and every thing in them fallible, dubious, conjectural and
uncertain, and they only think that they have the Spirit of God, and a
spiritual knowledge of things; and when asked, they dare not say, their thought
has any infallible assurance in it; as all true assurance is Infallible; yea,
some of them are so dark, ignorant and blind, that to me in my hearing, have
affirmed, That the Apostle Paul was not infallibly sure that he had the Spirit
of God, bringing Paul's words, 1 Cor. 7.40. I think also, that I have the
Spirit of God. But according to his blind argument, the holy Ghost is not
infallibly sure, for the same Greek word is applied to the holy Ghost, Acts
15.28. It seemed good to the holy Ghost; but this is blasphemous to think or
affirm, and I see not how they can clear their Doctrine of Blasphemy, to say,
That they have the Spirit of God, and yet to affirm, That they have no
Infallible Spirit: The plain English of which is, that the Spirit of God and
God himself is fallible.

6. But the great cause and reason, why all true Ministers and Preachers of the
Gospel should not only be truly godly and holy Men, but also should be endued
with some more than ordinary power of the holy Spirit, and communications
thereof, not common to all Christians, at least in degree, though one spirit in
all, is, That the Ministry of every true Minister of Christ, is a Ministration
of Grace, of Spirit, of Life and Power, which does emanate or flow forth from
or through the Minister or Preacher, as living Waters that emanate and flow
from a living spring or fountain, which reach and flow into the hearts and
inward parts of the Hearers, such as are sensible, and whose hearts God is
pleased to open to receive them, and sometimes to the opening and making alive
the dead souls and hearts of many hearers, whereby not only many that are
spiritually dead, are made alive, but the living are made more living, and
livingly refreshed and strengthened; and though this can hardly, or not at all
be received by many, yet thousands can witness it from living experience, that
they have felt streams of divine Life, Power and Virtue to spring and flow
forth, from the Spirit of Christ, in faithful Preachers, into their souls and
inward parts, to their exceeding refreshing, and strengthening in the inward
Man; and the Scriptures abundantly confirm it, that so it was in the primitive
times, the Ministers of Christ, were the Ministers of the Spirit and Power of
God, and the outward and audible Words that reached the outward Ears, were only
as a Conduit of Conveyance, to convey and transmit that heavenly Virtue that
flowed through them; and therefore the Ministers of God are called in Scripture
flames of Fire, and their Words and Preaching have a divine and spiritual Fire,
and Heat in them, that exceedingly warm and melt the cold and congealed Hearts
of many Hearers, and that Fire is a living Fire, or Power of Life to quicken
them. And this was it that made the two Disciples, going to Emaus, say, How did
not our Hearts burn within us, while he spoke to us by the way, and opened the
Scriptures unto us? And when Christ preached to the People, it is said, he
spoke with Authority, that is, Power, and not as the Scribes; and so did the
Apostles, as Paul declared, That his Preaching was in Demonstration of the
Spirit, and of Power. And Christ and the holy Spirit spoke in him to the
People, when he preached; and so did it in all the other Apostles and Ministers
of Christ, and the Hearers, who had and knew Christ in their own hearts, had a
Proof sufficient that Christ spoke in Paul, by what they felt of that spiritual
Virtue and Power that did flow forth through him in his Ministry. And according
to this, Peter exhorted, That he who ministers, should minister of the Power
that God gives, as good Stewards of the manifold Grace of God: So they
ministered not only Words, but Grace, and Power, and Life to the hearers. And
thus there is a communication of the Grace, and Graces of God, not only betwixt
Ministers and Hearers, but among all the Faithful, who are as one living Body,
but many Members, and every Member a living Member, and ministering Life one to
another, as it is in the natural Body; and this is that Communion of the Saints
that the Scripture testifies, that they had together in the Spirit, which did
knit their Hearts together in Love, unto all Riches of the full assurance of
Understanding, Col. 2.2. And with such living instruments, that are spiritually
made alive unto God, does God work, to make their Ministry effectual and
fruitful, to convert and beget Souls unto God, and when begotten, to nourish
and feed them with the sincere Milk of the Word, which Milk is not the outward
Words, but the Life that is in the Words: For as in the outward, God does not
work with a dead Man, to beget outward and natural Children, but with the
living; so it is with Men spiritually living, with whom God works, to beget
Sons and Daughters spiritually unto God, where God only properly and
principally is the Father, and Men but Instruments with, and by whom he
works; and in order to this spiritual begetting of Sons and Daughters unto
God, by the Ministry of faithful Preachers, God gives unto them a spiritual
and divine Seed, which they convey in their words into the Hearts and Souls of
their Hearers, according to 1 Cor. 9.10. He that ministers Seed to the Sower.
And Isa. 55.10. That it may give Seed to the Sower. So that there is a divine
and spiritual Seed in the Words and Preaching of a true Minister of Christ; for
the words are living Words, and are not his, but the words of Christ, and of
the holy Spirit that speaks in him. But he that speaks Words, as suppose
Scripture-words, and not by the Spirit of Christ speaking in him, there is no
divine Seed in the Words, there is the form or body of the Words, but there is
no Soul or Life in them, as he speaks them. And these Men are like that Harlot
which took hold of Joseph's garment, but himself she could not enjoy: So many
get the outward form of the words of Truth, but the Spirit of Truth they have
not, and who have it not, cannot minister it: And therefore Paul imputes all
the good Fruit and Success of his Ministry not to himself, but to the Grace of
God that was with him, and in him, 1 Cor. 15.10. How then can a graceless Man
have any fruit or success in his Ministry, seeing all fruit and success
belongs not to the Man, however so well furnished with natural or acquired
parts, but to the Grace of God? It is Grace, Grace, that makes a Man's
Preaching effectual to the Hearers, and that Grace is in the Minister, and
works both in him, and with him in the Hearts of the Hearers, where God is
pleased to concur, and give the blessing and increase; and thus the Grace of
God is like a good Seed and Plant, that not only brings forth Fruit in that
little spot of Earth, where it was first planted, but spreads abroad, and
fills many other parts and places with it, and has new Roots and Seeds
continually increasing and multiplying.

7. And as concerning the Call to the Ministry, It is worthy of great
observation, how they are pinched and narrowed to give any colorable account
of their Call, who deny all inward and immediate calling to the Ministry, and
especially such of them, who say, The Church of Rome is no true Church, but a
Harlot, and the Pope is Antichrist; as the Westminster Cenfession of Faith does
expressly call him, cap. 25. sect. 6. and yet the Presbyterian Ministers
generally derive their Call from him; and I have heard diverse of them expressly
affirm it, being questioned about their Call, whether immediate or mediate?
they have answered mediate, from the Apostles; and then being urged to show the
Line of Succession, through which that mediate Call is conveyed unto them, they
have plainly said, The Popes of Rome, as one lately, a Preacher in New England
said, before some Hundreds of People, That their Call to Preach, was by the
Popes of Rome; and so according to their own Doctrine, by Antichrist. Surely
these men do not believe that Christ is in them, either to call, or furnish
them in their Ministry, who must go so far as Rome to bring it, and from him
too whom they call Antichrist. But they think Rome, and the Pope however much
distant from them, is much nearer than Christ and Heaven, from whom the true
Ministers have their Call.

8. And as all true Preaching ought to be by the Inspiration and moving of the
Spirit of God, so all true Praying and Singing, both in private and in public;
for still that is it which the Scripture enjoyneth, Ephesians. 6.18. to Pray always
with the Spirit, or in the Spirit; and no man can say that Jesus is the Lord,
either in Preaching or Praying, but by the holy Ghost. And I charge them to
produce one Instance, where Praying without the Spirit is commanded any where
in Scripture, or was ever practiced by any of the Saints, without the
Inspiration of the Spirit. Do they not grant, that all the Prayers recorded in
Scripture, did proceed from divine Inspiration and Revelation? And if their
Prayers do not, they are quite of a Bastard kind; for the true Worshippers
Worship the Father in Spirit and in Truth, and the Father seeks such to
Worship him, and none else. And whereas some say, Then men who neglect Prayer,
are excusable, because they have not the Spirit to move them to Prayer. I
answer; Not, they are not in the least excusable, for as he that owes a sum of
Money to his Prince, though he has not wherewith to pay his Debt, is still
Debtor, and yet must not pay with false Coin, but true; so he, who has not the
Spirit's assistance and help to Pray, is still obliged to Pray, but not without
the Spirit; and that he has not the Spirit's help at all seasonable and
requisite times for Prayer, it is his own default, who has resisted the
Spirit, and provoked him to withdraw his necessary assistance from him; for
the Spirit of the Lord is ready to give his seasonable help to all men, to help
them both in Prayer, and Thanksgiving, and all other commanded Duties and
Performances. And as for Singing on a Book, and with artificial Music, and
notes or tones, it is no part of Gospel Worship, being no where either
commanded, or practiced in the New Testament. And it is strange, that these men
should be against Praying on a Book, and yet Sing on a Book, for if the one be
not Spiritual, the other is not.

9. There are others, such as these called Independents and Baptists, who deny
all immediate Call to the Ministry, and yet betake themselves to as poor and
shiftless evasion about their Call, as the former. They say, They have the Call
of the Church. But still the question is, Whence had the Church her Power,
either immediately or mediately? And then the former difficulty returns: for
they cannot say, their Church has been visible from the Apostles days; and
besides, the Church is posterior to the Ministry, for by true Preachers and
Ministers, people come to be converted, and so to be made fit Members of a
Church, and therefore the Ministers, by whom their Church was first raised, or
gathered, cannot have their Call from the same, for that were to put the Effect
before the Cause; or to say, the Church called the Ministers, and the Ministers
called the Church, is to run into a Circle; as to say, the Egg brings forth
the Hen, and the Hen brings for the Egg, to wit, first of all, which is
impossible.

10. And as concerning true Gospel-Maintenance to the Ministry; any Maintenance
that may be necessary, to any that are poor, and have not of their own,
according to the Scripture, it ought to be free and voluntary, without force of
human Law and compulsion; for the Scripture says, He that Preaches the
Gospel, should Live by the Gospel. It does not say, by human Laws, and
straining of men's Goods and Cattle, as the Preachers both of Old and
New England have done; and they ought to rely upon the gracious Care and
Providence of God, that never suffered his Ministers to want: for when Christ
sent forth his Disciples without Bag or Scrip, at their return they said, they
wanted nothing. Secondly, there should be no bargaining in the case betwixt the
Minister and the People, for that is altogether mercenary, and proves them to
be Hirelings, and the Servants of Men, who have so hired them. Thirdly, they
should receive only to supply their present Necessities, and labor with their
Hands, as honest Paul did, that he might make the Gospel of Christ without
charge, who would not abuse his Power in the Gospel, 1 Cor. 9.18. and 2 Cor.
11.9. I was chargeable to no Man. And 1 These. 2.9. Because we would not be
chargeable, and 2 These. 3.8. For why may not Ministers, when they do not
Preach, or otherwise labor in the ministerial Work, work with their Hands to
supply their Necessities, to live honestly and worthily, as many Preachers at
this day (as well as formerly) do, both Work and Preach by turns, and as they
have freely received, so they give freely; and these no Man can charge them,
that they have made their Gospel chargeable, as the Preachers both of Old and
New England have done, who have put the People to great charge of many Thousand
Pounds yearly, and yet the People is not profited under them; and they have by
force taken, or caused to be taken, from many who did not hear them, nor own
them to be Ministers of Christ, for which they have no president either in the
Old or New Testament.

11. And whereas they who plead, That true Piety is not essential to a
Gospel-Minister: First, bring Judas for a president, to which it is easily
answered; first, that it is said, Judas fell from his Ministry by
Transgression, and therefore some time he stood; and it is more than ever they
can prove, that Judas never had any measure of true Piety or Sanctification,
when Christ did first send him forth; for although he might have covetous and
evil Inclinations, that does not argue that he had nothing of true
Sanctification, according to their own Doctrine, who affirm, That a Man may have
true Sanctification, and yet have not only strong evil Inclinations, but very
evil Practices. But 2 dly, when Judas was called, the pure Gospel dispensation
had not taken place, and did not until Christ rose from the Dead, and gave the
holy Ghost. Next they say, Christ told the People, that the Pharisees sat in
Moses Chair, and he did not forbid them, but rather encouraged them to hear
them, saying, Do what they say, but do not as they do. To this it is answered,
The Pharisees and Scribes teaching belonged to the Law; and so they pass from
the true state of the Question, which is, whether Ministers of the Gospel need
not true Holiness to make them true Ministers? 3 dly. They object Paul's words
concerning some that preached Christ not sincerely, and yet he said, Christ was
preached, and therein he rejoiced. To which I answer, that does not justify
their Preaching, but it holds forth the great Power and Wisdom of God, that
causes all things to work together for his own Glory, and the good of his, as
when by Persecutions, and Reproaches, and Slanders, and false Accusations, and
contending against the Truth, the Truth does the more spread and flourish, as
has often been known, and therein God's Servants have rejoiced; yet this does
not justify these Persecutors, Liars, and false Accusers.

CHAP. V.
Concerning God, his Decrees, and Election and Reprobation, and the general
state of Mankind by means of Adam's fall, and the Way of Restoration by Christ.

1. IT has been a common thing among both Presbyterian and Independent
Teachers, in Old and New England, to accuse the honest People, called in
derision Quakers, of being guilty of Blasphemy against God and Christ, and the
holy Ghost, for no other cause, but that they express their Faith of the great
Mystery of the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost, in Scripture words, and
have not freedom to use the words of Man's wisdom, and that come only from the
Spirit of Man, and have not proceeded from the Spirit of God, whereby to
express and declare their Faith of so great and glorious Mystery: And by means
of this so great Accusation, and others as false and injurious, they prevailed
with the Magistrates of New England, to cause to be put to Death three dear and
precious Menservants of the Lord, and one dear and precious Maidservant of
the Lord, beside many other cruel Sufferings inflicted upon others, for which
great Cruelty and Barbarity, the Hand of the Lord has been manifestly
stretched out against them, in manifest Judgments and Plagues, that diverse
among them have since acknowledged. And therefore let all Men know, to whose
Hands this may come, that the People called Quakers, never denied, but on the
contrary, faithfully believed, and do still faithfully believe whatever is
recorded in the holy Scriptures, of that great Mystery, to wit, that God is
one, and that the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost is that one only, true
and living God, the Creator and Upholder of all, and Lord and King of all
visible and invisible things, and that the Father is begotten of none, the Son
is begotten of the Father, from everlasting, and before all Time; and the holy
Ghost has proceeded from the Father, and from the Son, from Everlasting, and
before all Time; and that the Son is God manifest in Flesh, who came in the
Flesh, in the fullness of time, as the Scripture declares; and that the Lord
Jesus Christ whom the Apostles preached, that dyed for our Sins, and rose again
for our Justification, and is ascended and gone into Heaven, is that alone Son
of God, and the only begotten of the Father, in whom the fullness of the
Godhead dwells bodily, and the Lord Jesus Christ in the entire and perfect
nature of Man, consisting of Soul and Body, is gone into Heaven, and is in
Heaven; and that his Body that was crucified, and buried, did not see
Corruption, but was raised on the third day, and after forty days did ascend,
and was glorified, according to which glorious Body of the Lord Jesus Christ,
we believe that at the Resurrection of the Dead our Bodies shall be changed,
and be made like, or conform. Acts 1.11. and that the same Jesus, who is
ascended, and was taken up into Heaven, shall so come in like manner as they
did see him go into Heaven.

2. And as concerning God, we believe, that he is a Spirit, infinite,
unchangeable and incomprehensible, omniscient, omnipotent and omnipresent,
infinitely wise, holy, powerful, good, merciful and gracious, just and
righteous, that he is Light and Love; and whatever the Scripture does declare
of him, we faithfully believe; although this Name of him, to wit, Light, the
Faith-publishers at Westminster have altogether omitted in their Confession,
whether heedlesly or designedly, that I leave; but it seems they knew little
of him, if any thing at all, by that Name; and yet it was the Message that the
Apostles heard from him, and declared unto Men, that God is Light, and that he
is in the Light, to wit, in Christ, who is the Light of Men; and that if we
walk in the Light, as he is in the Light, we have fellowship one with another,
and the Blood of his Son Jesus Christ cleanses us from all Sin, 1 John 1.5, 6,
7. And indeed it suits most with their Doctrine, that all inward divine
Revelation is ceased, either to conceal, or deny that God is Light, as to us,
and in us, or in any of his Saints, or that Christ is Light to and in his
Saints; for the nature of the Light, yea, of all true Light, is to reveal, and
make it self manifest by it self, as well as other things; and this description
the Apostle Paul gives of it, Ephesians. 5.13. Whatever makes manifest, is Light,
according to the English Translation; or as it may be as well translated, the
Light is that which makes manifest every thing, to wit, both it self, and all
other things: And this description of Light belongs only to God and Christ,
and the holy Spirit, in the full extent of it; for no created Light, visible or
invisible, can manifest or reveal all things, the outward Light of the Sun can
only manifest some outward things, but not all, it cannot let us see what is
under the Earth, or in the bottom of the Seas, but God can, and does search all
Deeps, and can reveal or make manifest every thing, however so hid; and
therefore the Name Light does more properly belong to God, the Father of
Lights, and to Christ, and to the holy Ghost, than to any created Light,
visible or invisible; and yet a public Preacher in New England, in the Town of
Hampton, before some Hundreds of People, most of them his common Hearers, did
affirm, That God was not properly Light, but only by a Figure borrowed from the
outward Light of the Sun: And to say, God was Light, and Christ was Light, was
the fundamental Error of the Quakers. And though some of his Brethren have
blamed his Rashness, yet it cannot be denied, but he said that which was most
consequential and agreeable to his Brethren's Doctrine, and the Westminster
Confession of Faith, which the Church of New England has espoused to be her
Confession of Faith also; for if God do not at all reveal himself immediately,
or any other things, he is not Light at all unto his Saints now on Earth; as we
may well say, if the outward Sun should withdraw his Beams altogether from the
Eyes of Men, or that some dark body should be interposed always betwixt the
Sun's Light and Men's Eyes, the Sun should not be Light unto Men; for it is the
nature and property of all Light, to reveal it self immediately to every one,
or else not at all, and always to be its own Messenger, and to discover, teach
and direct Men by its own Light and Evidence, and not by any other thing. For
to say, the Sun does not lighten us immediately, when it gives us its
Illumination, is a great Contradiction that the Assertion carries to it self;
for whatever means or mediums the Sun's light passes through to our Eyes, as
the Air, Glass, and the Tunicles of our Eyes, or suppose some Lattise or thin
vail, or clothing, yet its still immediate; or if it be reflected from a
Looking-glass, or any other Object, yet the Light it self coming to our sight
through all these means, or mediums, and not stopping or staying by the way,
nor employing some other Messenger in its room, to carry the tidings of it to
us, it is still immediate, and the Light has a self-evidence, whereby to make
it self known, without any other help or instrument, whereby to make it known.
And thus God is Light, and thus not only the Saints knew God to be Light, but
also diverse of the Gentiles, who had not the Scriptures, knew God to be Light;
as Plotinus, who said, As we see and know the Sun by his own Light: so we see
and know God by his own Light: And Pythagoras and Plato declared God to be
Light; and it was one of Pythagora's rules, Let none presume to speak or teach
of God, without his Light, wherein he saw further and better into the true
Mystery of Preaching and Teaching, than these blind Faith makers at
Westminster, and New England Preachers, who have espoused that blind and dark
thing called their Confession of Faith. And Plato taught, That God created the
Soul of Man in a Region of divine Light, and then it conversed with the true
substance of Light, and of every other thing; but by its Sin, it was thrust
down into a Cave, or Dungeon, where it only conversed with Shadows and Figures,
or Images of things, which are the things of this outward and perishing World.
And this does well agree with the Scripture, that says, God drove out the Man
from the Garden: And thus the mind of Man losing the inward enjoyment of God,
the true Light, did join it self to the perishing things of this World, where
it can find no true Rest, for they are but Figures and Shadows; and the
Scripture calls this World a Fashion or Figure, and Scheme, 1 Cor. 7.31. And
why is Christ called the true Light, and the true Bread in Scripture, and the
Truth, but to signify unto us, that he is indeed more truly and properly, and
satisfyingly the Soul's true Light and Food, than the outward Light and Bread
is unto the Body, or outward Man? And therefore in comparison of God, all
created things of Heaven and Earth, are said to be nothing, and less than
nothing, and the Nations are as nothing, and less than nothing before him, Isa.
40.17. And therefore as the Name Being, and Good does most properly belong to
him, as Christ said, There is none good, but God So the names Light, Life and
Love, do most properly belong to him, though it is most readily granted, that
he does infinitely surpass and excel all that Men can either speak, or think of
him, and that he has a Name that none knows, but he himself; but since it
has pleased God to call himself by the Name Light, speaking unto Men in the
Language of the Sons of Men; I say, in the language of Men, the Name Light does
most properly, and without all Figure, belong to God and Christ, and this the
Saints in Light well knew; but they who know not the Light, and believe not in
it, it is no wonder that they think that God or Christ is Light only by a
Figure or Metaphor, from the outward Light: For indeed the Animal or natural
Man, that only follows his natural Thoughts and Apprehensions, does not know
God, but by Figures and Shadows: And though I plead for the immediate
Revelation of God and Christ in the Hearts and Spirits of his Saints, who is
their Light and Life, yet the means are owned and acknowledged in their place,
as good Men are Means, good Books, and especially the Scriptures are means
whereby to transmit the Light of God and Christ unto us, as he is pleased to
make use of them, and not otherwise; even as the Air, or Glass of the Window,
cannot convey any light of the Sun unto us but when the Sun shines; for when
the Sun withdraws, and hides his Face, the Air and the Glass has no Light
to convey unto us: And thus it is as to all Men, and Books, and Means, they can
convey no Light to us, but what, how, and when God, the Father of Lights, is
pleased to send forth through them unto us; and this David well knew, when he
prayed, saying, O send, forth thy Light, and thy Truth, to lead me and guide me
to thy holy Hill, and lift up the Light of thy Countenance upon us, Psalm. 43.3.
Psalm. 4.6. And as it pleases God often, to transmit the Beams of his divine
Light, Life and Love into our Souls, through Means and Instruments, as good
Men, and good Books, and especially in reading or meditating in the Scriptures,
and also good Angels, who are ministering Spirits, and do minister to the Heirs
of Salvation, so many times it pleases him to bring them into a solitude, or
solitary place, Hos. 2.14. and there to speak unto them, and reveal himself, to
the unspeakable satisfaction of their Souls, without all means whatsoever, save
only that great, and always most necessary and desirable Mean, the Lord Jesus
Christ, in and through whom the Father does always speak, and reveal his Glory
to his dear Children, even as Christ declared, saying, No Man knows the
Father, but the Son, and he to whom the Son reveals him. For none of all the
Prophets or Apostles did know, or converse with God, but as the Son did reveal
him, who is that most lovely and aimable skreen, clothing or vail, through
which the Glory of the Father shines forth into our Souls, meekly, and gently,
and yet most sweetly, according as every one is able to receive.

3. And they who deny all inward divine Revelation of God in his Saints, ever
since the Apostles days, and would wholly exclude the Saints from all inward
enjoyment of God and Christ, in their own immediate Light, Glory and
Brightness, may be justly charged with Blasphemy against the great love and
kindness of God to his People: And such of the Priests of New England, who have
blasphemously called the Light of God in his People, A stinking Vapor from
Hell; and do blaspheme against the Light of God and Christ in all Men, in a Day
of Visitation, that is given to lead and bring them unto God, a mere human and
natural Light, corrupt and dark, as some of them have called it, and as they
generally esteem of it. And yet for this their Blasphemy, we would not have the
Magistrate to hang them, or any way to punish them, but our desire, and Prayer
unto God is for them, if it be his good will, that such of them, who have not
outlived the Day of Visiation, may find Mercy to repent, and believe, and
acknowledge the Truth they have so long gain-sayed. And whereas these
Faith-publishers at Westminster in Old-England, and at Cambridge and Boston in
New England, do say in their Confession, cap. 26. sect 3. This Communion which
the Saints have with Christ, does not make them in any wise partakers of the
Substance of his Godhead, and that to affirm it is impious, and blasphemous.
It deserves our serious consideration, and to examine where the Impiety and
Blasphemy lies, whether at their door who deny it, or theirs who affirm it?
Even that the Saints are partakers of the Substance of his Godhead. And first,
as to their Proof from Scripture, they cite Col. 1.18, 19. And he is the Head
of the Body, the Church, who is the beginning, the firstborn from the Dead,
that in all things he might have the pre-eminence; for it pleased the Father,
that in him should all fullness dwell. But this place of Scripture says not
that the Saints are not partakers of the Substance of the Godhead of Christ,
but the contrary may be proved from this very place, which calls him, the
Head of the Body, the Church. For as it is the same Substance of Life, that is
in the Head, and in the Body, and every Member of it: So it is the same divine
Life and Spirit, that is in Christ, the Head, and all his Members, and that
Spirit is the holy Spirit, and that Life is the Word, and the Word and the
Spirit are one Substance and Being with God, as the same Confession says, cap.
2. sect. 3. And that the Saints are partakers of the divine Nature, and of the
holy Ghost, the Scripture expressly declares it, 2 Pet. 1.4. and Heb. 6.4. So
that it is marvelous blindness, or inadvertency in these Men, so to contradict
the express Scripture testimony: And for the Word Substance, with respect to
the inward enjoyment of God and Christ, the Scripture has it expressly in
several places, Prove. 8.21. That I may cause those that love me to inherit
Substance; and I will fill their Treasures. And Heb. 10.34. Knowing that in
your selves (for so the Greek does bear it) ye have in Heaven a better, and
more enduring Substance. For as they had it in Heaven, so they had an earnest
of it on Earth, in their Hearts; and that all fullness dwells in Christ, does
not prove that his Saints enjoy none of that fullness, but on the contrary. Out
of her Fullness, as said John, we have all received, and Grace for Grace, John
1.16. And not only the Saints receive Gifts and Graces from Christ, but they
receive him, and the Father in him, and with him, to live and dwell in them,
according to John 17.23. I in them, and thou in me. And yet this does not infer
that the Saints are equal with Christ, that they have the same Spirit and Life
with him, and through him, and by and from him, as it does not prove that the
Foot is equal with the Head, because the same Soul or Spirit that is in the
Head, is in the Foot; and the same Life that is in the Root of a Tree, is in
the Branches; and as Christ said, I am the Vine, ye are the Branches. And if
the Saints do no wise partake of the Substance of the Godhead of Christ, I ask
them, what do they partake of him? Do they partake only of the Substance of his
Manhood without the Godhead, or of neither? If the first, then the Manhood of
Christ, as they partake of it, is without the Godhead, which is Blasphemy
indeed; or if the second, that is to say, the Saints do neither partake of the
Substance of his Godhead, nor of the Substance of his Manhood, then they
partake nothing of Christ at all substantially, according to their Doctrine. O
miserable Teachers! What then do they partake of him, if nothing Substantially?
Of his Accidents, as they commonly say, All Graces are nothing but Accidents.
Then here is a new sort of Doctrine of Transubstantiation, as these of Rome say,
The consecrated Wafer or Cake, has the Accidents of Bread in it, as the
color, taste and smell of Bread, but nothing of the Substance of Bread is
there. So say these Faithmakers, The Saints that did see, smell, taste and feel
of Christ in ancient times, that which they did spiritually see, smell, taste
and feel with their Souls and Hearts, is only Accidents, and no Substance. This
is more strange than that other, that there is no Substance of Bread in the
Cake, but only the Accidents. But why was not your reverend Brother, as ye
called him, John Owen, taxed with Blasphemy, for affirming, That the holy Ghost
does well in Believers really (and as he worded it personally) together with
his Graces. And Samuel Rutherfold, a great Presbyterian, who said in one of his
Printed Epistles, He will have none of the Graces of Christ without himself,
and if the Graces did come unto him without Christ, he would send them away the
Gate (or way) they came. And as for the other Scriptures they cite, they prove
indeed that the Lord Jesus Christ is but one, and there is none else, nor is
any man, or men, or Angels equal to him, which we most cordially believe; but
they say, not in the least, nor by any just consequence, can it be gathered,
that the Saints do not partake substantially of God. And to show the great
inequality betwixt Christ and the Saints, not only in the measure and degree
but in the manner or kind of partaking of the holy Spirit, which is one
Substance with God. Christ, the Son, has God, and the holy Spirit, without any
middle, or mediator betw^^t the Father and him, but the Saints only have, and
enjoy the Father, and the holy Spirit, through Christ the Mediator, and
together with him, and in him: And this I hope will satisfy all sober and
impartial Men, to clear the Doctrine of the Quakers, that it is according to
Scripture.

4. Next, as concerning the Decrees of God, these Faith-publishers say, That
God has unchangeably ordained whatsoever comes to pass, yet so as neither is
God the Author of Sin, nor is Violence offered to the will of the Creatures:
Whereby it plainly appears, they hold that God has ordained and decreed all
manner of Sins and Blasphemies, Adulteries, Thefts, Robberies, Homicides,
Regicides, etc. which is abominable and blasphemous Doctrine, with a witness.
They need not blame the Ranters, seeing they are so fully one with them in
Doctrine; for that is one of the worst Doctrins that the Ranters have, That God
does all, and has unchangeably ordained and decreed all things, both good and
bad; for certainly whatever God has ordained and decreed to come to pass, he
is the doer of it, for he executes (that is, brings to pass) all his own
Decrees, as they confess in their large Catechism, Ans. to Quest. 14. and that
they say, yet so, as God is not the Author of Sin; they say it indeed, and so
many of the worst sort of Ranters, but how they clear their Doctrine of so
unavoidable consequence, they have not told the World, nor ever can they
sufficiently clear it. And for the Scriptures they bring, as especially Ephesians.
1.11. That God works all things after the counsel of his own Will; here is
nothing mentioned of the sins of Men and Devils: It is plain both from Reason,
and Scripture, that by all things must needs be understood all his own Works,
and not the Sins of Men and Devils, which he is not the Author of; as when we
say, every wise Man does all things by Wisdom, and wise Counsel; none is so
foolish as to put this gloss upon it. that he does all foolish things. It is an
approved Maxim and Rule, Verba sunt intelligenda, secundum subjectam materiam,
i. e. Words are to be understood according to the subject matter. It is
worthily granted and acknowledged, that God works all good things, all Virtue
and Goodness is of him, all good Thoughts, Words and Works, etc. But all Sin is
of the Devil, and evil Men; as John said, Whosoever commits Sin, is of the
Devil, and the Lust of the Flesh, the Lust of the Eye, and the Pride of Life,
is all of the Devil, and not of the Father. And as Christ said, The Devil when
he speaks a Lie, he speaks of his own. It is also granted, that when any
commit Sin, the power whereby they act, is of God; but when they Sin, they
abuse that Power; and also whatever Sin comes to pass, is not without God's
permission, and that is not a bare permission, but a most holy and wise
ordering, and bounding of it to his own Glory. And as to Acts 2.23. a main
place, that Ranters, and Presbyterian and Independent Teachers abuse and wrest,
(as they do other Scriptures, to their own Destruction, if they repent not) it
gives them no strength at all. For it says, Him (to wit, Christ) being
delivered by the determinate Counsel and Fore-knowledg of God, ye have taken,
etc. So we see, that he was delivered, or exposed unto them by the determinate
Counsel of God, but that they did kill him by the determinate Counsel of God,
the Scripture says not. For to deliver is one thing, and to slay is another.
Our worthy Friends that were put to Death at Boston in New England, they
delivered up their Lives freely into the Hands of these Murderers, and so did
many of the Martyrs, not accepting deliverance; and yet they did not kill
themselves, as these bloody Persecutors use to allege. And that its said, God
hardneth whom he will. His hardening, is not the making their Hearts hard, with
infusing any evil Spirit into them, but that he justly with-draws his good
Spirit from them, for great Sins formerly committed, and so leaves them to
harden their own Hearts. As it is said, That Pharaoh hardened his Heart. And
thus do many sober and judicious Protestants understand the Words.

5. Again, as concerning Election and Reprobation, first, as to the Election
and Predestination of the Saints unto eternal Glory, and Happiness, whatever
the Scripture says of it, or of any other Doctrine, we do readily believe and
acknowledge it, as, That God has chosen the Saints in Christ Jesus before the
foundation of the World, that they should be holy and unblamable before him in
Love, Ephesians. 1.4. and Romans 8.29. For whom he did foreknow, he also did
predestinate, to be conform to the Image of his Son, etc. and whom he did
predestinate, them he called, and whom he called, them he justified. And what
Christ said to the Disciples, Ye have not chosen me, but I have chosen you, and
appointed you, to bring forth fruit, and that your fruit should remain, Joh.
15.16. and 1 John 4.10. Herein is Love, not that we loved God, but that he
loved us, and sent his Son to be the Propitiation for our sins; and verse. 19.
We love him, because he first loved us. A most sweet and comfortable Testimony,
as all the other. But we no where find in all the Scripture, that God has
Reprobated any part of Mankind, before the foundation of the World; nor is it
said, that Men hate God, because he first hated them; and because God hated
them, he made them, on purpose to damn or destroy them, and decreed and
ordained them to sin, that he might take occasion thereby to damn them. No such
thing at all is found in the holy Scriptures, nor can be gathered from them by
any just consequence; for although it be allowed, that Gods purpose and holy
Will concerning them that finally perish, is from before the foundation of the
World (for there is no new Will or Purpose in God, the Thoughts and Counsels of
his heart being from everlasting, as himself is) yet that Will of God regards
and considers them that shall finally perish, not simply as men, nor yet
simply as sinners, either for Adam's sin, or other sins that they have formerly
committed, before that great sin of final Unbelief and Impenitency, but it does
regard and consider them, as having a day of Visitation, and a Call to Repent,
and a tender of Grace, Love and Mercy from God the Father, and the Lord Jesus
Christ, and as having resisted and rejected the same, and hardening their hearts
against it, and that finally, until the Day of their Visitation be over,
whereby they declare themselves unworthy of eternal Life, and that they are
none of Christ's Sheep, but Goats, to be put at the left Hand; and if any say,
If these Men were not Elected before the Foundation of the World, it will
follow that they were Reprobated before it. I answer; it does not follow; for
Elected and Reprobated are not contradictory terms, being both positive, and
Election signifies a Preference of some before others, but that does not argue
a total Reprobation of others, when God did elect some. But at the End of the
World, and in the Conclusion it is granted, that all who are not elected, are
but Reprobates, to wit, when all God's elect Seed every where, are gathered
out, selected and separated from others, as so many Grains of pure Gold from
all the Dross, Tin and Lead that they have been mingled with for a time, here
in this World, that then nothing will remain but that which is Reprobate, and
which the Scripture calls reprobate Silver, the pure being wholly separated
and selected from the impure, the Gold and Silver from the Dross, the Wheat
from the Tares, the Sheep from the Goats, and the good Fish from the bad, and
the Children of the Kingdom, from the Children of the wicked One; he who has
Ears to hear, let him hear, and the wise in heart let them understand, for unto
them it is given, but unto others, as Christ said, in Parables, that seeing
they may not see, and hearing that they may not hear, nor understand. And also
it is readily granted, that there is a special and peculiar, and singularly
gracious Care and Providence of God, toward all that shall be saved from the
beginning of the world to the end, and the number of them is most infallibly
known unto God, and every one of that number shall certainly be saved, and none
of them shall finally perish, but in the proper season and time shall be
graciously visited, called, converted, justified, sanctified, and last of all
glorified, and this without any Violence done to their rational Faculties or
Free Will; for God does well know how to gain and prevail upon the
Understanding, and Will, and Inclinations of his People, by such gentle, and
yet prevalent and overcoming Persuasions and Allurements, and Motions of his
holy Spirit of Grace, of Light and Life, as shall infallibly gather them unto
himself. And it is also granted, that as God has provided that Grace, whereby
some shall certainly be saved, so by the same all are put under a capacity or
possibility of Salvation: And therefore that any are not saved in this World,
is not because of any want, or defect in the sufficiency, or efficacy in the
Grace in its own Nature; but because of them, whom God in his infinite Justice
and Counsel permits finally to resist it, even as in the Parable of the Sower,
the Seed was one and the same in all the four Grounds, but the Grounds differed
one from another, and that one Ground was good, was of God, but that others
were bad, was of themselves; and the word Election does properly enough
signify, selection, seperating and setting a part or refining, as when Gold or
Silver is separated in the Furnace from the Dross. And this separation has had
its various degrees and progress, from first to last, as when Gold or Silver is
purified or purged in the sire seven times, and then in the seventh time, it
has no mixture, but is all pure, or as when Liquor is poured from Vessel to
Vessel several times, or as Wheat is winnowed again and again, until all the
Chaff be separated. And in this sense we find the word Election used in
Scripture diverse times. Isa. 14.1. For the Lord will have mercy on Jacob, and
will yet choose Israel. And Isa. 49.7. And he shall choose thee. And Zach. 1.17.
And the Lord shall yet comfort Zion, and shall yet choose Jerusalem. And Zach.
2.12. He shall choose Jerusalem again. And Isa. 48.10. I have chosen thee in the
Furnace of Affliction. And in this sense of the Word, as it signifies a
selecting or separating the pure from the impure, Election does go before
Reprobation, and is not Co-evous with it. But whether that Election in Christ
before the Foundation of the world, does in some sort signify a selection or
setting apart in Christ the Head, who was before the Foundation of the world,
and is said to be the Lamb slain from the Foundation of the World, as some
mystic Writers affirm, it is not my present business to determine, neither is
it necessary at this present occasion.

6. But the place of Scripture which they mainly abuse and wrest, to prove this
reprobate Doctrine of theirs, of an absolute Reprobation of the greatest part of
mankind, even before they are born, and that not only Babes and Sucklings on
the Mothers Breasts, but in the Womb are absolute Reprobates and cast-aways,
and that some, yea, many Infants die in a state of Reprobation, and perish
eternally (only for Adams sin imputed unto them (as they say, without any
knowledge or eonsent of theirs) and corrupt Nature derived into them) and that
all such Reprobates never had, or ever shall have any opportunity of saving
Grace, whereby it was possible to them at any time to be saved. The place of
Scripture, I say, they mainly abuse and wrest, to favor this evil and
pernicious Doctrine, is that in Romans 9.11, 12, 13. But for the opening and
vindicating of this place of Scripture, let it be considered, that here is only
a preference mentioned of Jacob before Esau, how that the Elder shall serve the
Younger, but this says nothing of Esau his being absolutely reprobated. The
great design of the Apostle Paul, being to show that God had chosen the Line of
Jacob before the Line of Esau, and given unto that Line and Posterity of Jacob,
a Preference and Dignity over the Line and Posterity of Esau, and that the
reason of this Preference was not any Works that they had done, but for some
other cause hid in the secret counsel of God; and this Preference did appear,
first, in choosing the Line and Posterity of Jacob, to be his Church in that
peculiar Dispensation of the Mosaical Law, and giving them many Prophets, and
other excellent Men, to be raised up among them, and honoring them with many
great and signal Appearances, Signs and Wonders; whereas the Posterity of Esau
was not so highly favored, and yet they had a divine Dispensation among them,
which did suffice unto that present time and state. Secondly, in that God did
choose the Line of Jacob, and his Posterity, out of whom Christ should be born
after the Flesh, and also the Apostles, and that out of Jacob the Gospel should
go forth and be preached to all the World. 3dly. That the Nation that should
come of Esau should really become Servants, and Tributaries to the Nation of
Israel; and this was fulfilled in David's time, and was also a Figure of
another thing to be spiritually fulfilled. And therefore this Election does not
infer any Reprobation of Esau, or his Posterity, as to their eternal estate, no
more than when David said, 1 Chronicles. 28.4, 5. The Lord God of Israel chose me
before all the house of my Father, for he has chosen Judah to be the Ruler,
and of the house of Judah, the House of my Father, and of the Sons of my
Father, he liked me to make me King over all Israel; and of all my Sons, he
has chosen Solomon my Son. So here are diverse Elections; first, Judah out of
all the Tribes; secondly, the Family of Jesse, out of the Tribe of Judah;
thirdly, David out of all the Sons of Jesse; and fourthly, Solomon out of all
the Sons of David, and yet no absolute Reprobation of any that were not so
chosen, as to their eternal state. And because many of the People of Israel
were proud, because of this choice and preference that God made of their
Nation, above the Nation of Esau, so as to make them a Church to himself, when
the Nation of Esau was not so favored, for Reasons best known unto God, and
for that cause did conclude, that they were always to remain a People
singularly favored of him above all other People, from first to last. To beat
down this vain Conceit of theirs, Paul tells them, first, that they are not
all Israel, which are of Israel. Secondly, that as God did prefer, and make
choice of the Nation of Israel, to be a gathered People and Church unto him,
before the Nation of Esau, and that without any regard to their Works, or to
the Works of their Fathers, but for some other hid Cause and Reason in the
depth of Gods secret Counsel; so God could as freely, yea, and would prefer the
poor Gentiles, who were no People, to be a People unto him, and a
Gospel Church, to become true Believers in the Lord Jesus Christ, when in the
mean time the bulk and body of the Nation of Israel should be rejected, and
cast off, at least for some time, from having any such dignity and favor (a
Remnant only being reserved, according to the Election of Grace, Romans 11.5.)
and this Paul proves at large, from Verse 25. of that 9th. Chapter, to Verse
33. and does further prosecute it in the two following Chapters. Verse 25. etc.
As he says also in O see, I will call them my People, which are not my People,
and her beloved, which was not beloved. And verse 30. What shall we say then?
that the Gentiles which followed not after Righteousness, have attained to
Righteousness, even the Righteousness of Faith; but Israel, which followed
after the Law of Righteousness, has not attained to the Law of Righteousness,
because they sought it not by Faith, etc. So, we see how Paul makes the
Parallel, that as God once preferred, or chused Jacob's Nation, before the
Nation of Esau, so again he preferred and chused the Gentiles (that had no good
Works to recommend them, and to move God to make that choice) out of his free
Mercy, before the People of Israel; and of these Gentiles, no doubt, many of
them did belong to the Posterity of Esau, and also of Ishmael, yea, of Cain;
for there is an express Promise made to the Remnant of Edom, and of all the
Heathen, upon whom his Name is or shall be called, Amos 9.12. And it is but a
Remnant also of Israel that is saved, until the fullness of the Gentiles come
in, and then all Israel (to wit, the true Israel, which is not all who are of
Israel after the Flesh) shall be saved; see Romans 9.27. and 11.5.25, 26. And
lastly, it is to be again considered, that what God spoke unto Rebecca, before
the Children were born, not having done Good or Evil, did not so much regard
the singular Persons of Jacob and Esau, as their Posterities, as is clear from
Genesis 25.23. And the Lord said unto her, Two Nations are in thy Womb, and two
manner of People shall be separated from thy Bowels; and the one People shall
be stronger than the other People, and the Elder shall serve the Younger. So we
see here, the words are said of the Nations of Jacob and Esau, and not the
Persons of them; for we read not any where that ever Esau in Person served
Jacob, but only in his Posterity, as was fulfilled in David's time, when the
Edomites became Tributaries to the People of Israel: Nor was it said before the
Children were born, Jacob have I loved, and Esau have I hated, as it is
commonly alleged, but many hundred Years after he was deceased. And if it had
been so said, it could not prove an absolute rejection either of Esau, or his
Posterity, as to their eternal state; for God is said in Scripture to hate all
Evildoers, and yet many Evildoers repent, and obtain Salvation, and therefore
Hatred does not signify absolute and final hatred, either in God or Men: For
it is said, Jacob loved Rachel, and hated Leah; that is, he loved Rachel more:
And Christ said, He that hates not Father, and Mother for my cause, is not
worthy of me; that is, he that loves me not more than Father and Mother. And
therefore to conclude, this whole passage in Romans 9.11, 12. does not prove the
absolute Reprobation of either Esau, or of his Posterity, because many of
Esau's posterity had a Promise of Salvation, as is already proved from Amos 9.
And if Esau had been an absolute Reprobate, the Scripture would never have
said, that Isaac by Faith blessed Jacob and Esau concerning things to come,
Heb. 9.20. And that Faith was the Substance of things hoped for, and had a
regard to the spiritual Blessing of Esau, and of his Posterity; for though
Jacob got the first Blessing, yet Esau got the second, and their two Blessings
did not differ in Substance, but in some weighty Circumstances of order and
time; and Isaac prophesied in Esau's Blessing, that he should have the fatness
of the Earth, and dew of Heaven (the same but the order inverted with Jacob's
blessing) and that in process of time he should be a free People, to wit, in
Gospel days, signified by these words, Genesis 27.40. And it shall come to pass,
when thou shall have Dominion, to wit, in Christ, in Gospel days, in thy
Posterity, that thou shall break his Yoke from off thy Neck. And so we find
that diverse ( Mark 3.8.) Idumeans, that were of Esau, followed Jesus; and
Jacob's putting on Esau's goodly Raiment, signified how in Gospel days, the
true Believers of Jacob, and Esau, should become one Body of a Gospel Church,
and in this Body they of Esau should be as Hands, but the Voice is Jacob's,
that is, the Word of God, in the preaching of the Gospel, should be sounded out
of Jacob's Line, to wit, from the Prophets and Apostles, who were of Jacob. And
there is no ground from Scripture, that Esau, as to his Person, was not saved;
yea, Luther, and Moller, and Oecolampadius, all famous Protestants in their
day, judge rather that he was saved; and the whole passage of Jacob and Esau,
beside, that it has its historical fulfilling, is a Figure of two inward Seeds
and Births, none of which are reprobated, but the other preferred. But if some
allege Heb. 12.17. to prove that absolutely Esau was rejected, and did perish,
because its said, He found no place of Repentance, though he sought it
carefully with Tears. I answer, that does not prove his final rejection, but
only that he could not be heard to have that first Blessing recalled, which was
already given to Jacob.

6. Where now shall these Men find any place in Scripture to prove, that there
are any reprobate Infants? Or that any Infants dying in Infancy go to Hell, and
perish eternally, only for Adam's Sin, although that Sin was forgiven to Adam,
and Thousands more equally guilty, by their own confession? If they shall
allege, as some do, that place in 1 Cor. 7.14. For the unbelieving Husband is
sanctified by the Wife (viz. that believes) and the unbelieving Wife is
sanctified by the Husband, else were your Children unclean, but now are they
holy. Yet this cannot prove their Intention: for they dare not confidently say,
that all Infants of believing Parents are elected, otherwise they must say,
that Esau was elected, both whose Parents were Bellevers. Although some in
Church Covenant have gloried, that none of their Children, while Infants, were
Reprobates, because they were in covenant, and yet at that same time pleading
that Esau was a Reprobate in his Mother's Belly, forgetting that both Esau's
Parents were more holy than they. And if any further urge, If there be no
reprobate Infants, that then all Infants are sanctified and holy, both the
Children of unbelieving Parents, as well as of Believers. I answer; it does not
follow by any necessary consequence, although to admit of that Consequence, is
much more tolerable, than to say, that any Infants perish eternally, only for
Adam's Sin. And as for the general state of Infants, and how they are
particularly disposed of immediately after Death, who die in Infancy, seems a
great depth, and is a great mystery, and is best known unto the Lord: For it is
generally granted, that God has his way to reach to Infants, and deal with
them, both in the Womb, and upon the Mothers Breasts; and therefore let us
leave secret things unto God, until he reveal them, and be satisfied with what
he has revealed. Now this is plainly revealed, and declared in the Scriptures,
that the Condemnation is not simply that Adam sinned, or his Posterity in, and
with him, but that Light is come into the World, and Men love Darkness more
than Light: And as by the offense of one, to wit, the first Adam, Judgment is
come upon all to Condemnation; even so by the Righteousness on one, to wit,
Christ the second Adam, the free Gift is come upon all to Justification of
Life. And though Men generally are by Nature, Children of Wrath (if it should be
granted or allowed, that by Nature, signifies their natural condition, as they
are born into the World) yet by the great Mercy, Grace and favor of God, they
all have an opportunity or possibility to be converted, and become the Children
of God. And what that Holiness or Cleanness is, that the Children of one, or
both the believing Parents have, is a great Mystery, I am sure to many who have
that Scripture place often in their Mouths, and greatly glory in it, that they
are in Church Covenant, and therefore they are holy, and their Children; also
some call it federal or Covenant Holiness, but what is it they know not,
whether it be any real thing, or principle of Holiness, lodged or placed in
their Children, more than in the Children of others that are not in their
Church Covenant, they dare not affirm; for many, yea, very many Children of
professed Christians of all sorts, when they grow up to Youth, are as unholy,
and sometimes worse, as the Children of Unbelievers. But that Children
generally either of Believers, or Unbelievers, are actually sanctified from the
Womb, or in the Womb, cannot be proved from Scripture, or any Observation that
we can make. It is recorded as a rare and great thing, that John the Baptist
was sanctified from the Mother's Womb, and the like of Jeremiah, and so perhaps
may be gathered of Moses, or some others, but these rare and singular Examples,
rather prove, that Children are not in general, actually and de facto holy from
the Womb; and therefore that Holiness of Children, mentioned 1 Cor. 7. must
only signify some more near capacity in them, than in others, to become
actually holy in time to come, and that not of all Children after the Flesh,
but the Children of Promise, as Paul distinguishes these two sorts of Children
of the same Parents, Romans 9.8. But who are the Children of the Flesh, and who
are the Children of the Promise? Though it be well known unto God from the
beginning, yet commonly it is not known unto Men, until they discover
themselves by their Works and Fruits.

7. As concerning the general state of Mankind by means of Adams fall, what the
Scripture says of it, is readily believed and granted, and it is safest in all
things, to keep to Scripture words, especially in all cases and matters that
are in Controversy. For the Scripture is a rich Treasury or Storehouse,
sufficient to afford us Words whereby to express our Faith in all matters of
Christian Doctrine; and it is not safe to leave the Scripture-words, and go to
words of Man's wisdom, and thereby to declare our Faith of Christian Doctrine.
Now the Scripture says That in Adam all die, 1 Cor. 15.22 and Romans 5.12. That
by one Man Sin entered into the World, and death by Sin, and so death passed
upon all Men; for that all have sinned: And that Christ has died for all Men,
proves that all Men were dead, as Paul argues the case. And David, though he
was the Son of a good Father, yet bewailed the state wherein he was conceived
and born, Psalm. 51.5. Behold I was shapen in Iniquity, and in Sin did my Mother
conceive me. And that under Moses Law, an Offering was to be offered up for the
Mother and the Child, ( Levit. 12.4, 5, 6.) when it was Born, and that the
Mother should be unclean so many days after the Birth of the Child, does
certainly signify a Seed, or Principle of Sin and Corruption, to be conveyed
from the Parents to the Children, in the ordinary way of Generation, and that
the menstruous Humor was held in Scripture to be such a filthy and unclean
thing, which is called, The Fountain of her Blood, Levit. 20.18. has the same
signification; also, the Circumcision of Children on the eighth day. And its
said in Job 25.4. How can Man be justified with God, or how can he be clean,
that is born of a Woman? To wit, in the ordinary way of Generation. And here
the natural state of Man is declared, before his spiritual Regeneration in
Christ Jesus: And though that was said by Bildad, one of Job's Friends, yet it
is confirmed by Job himself, Chap. 14.4. Who can bring a clean thing out of an
unclean? not one. But this Seed, or Principle of Sin and Corruption, is not
charged or imputed unto Men, until they join and consent unto it, and actually
obey it, as is clear from Romans 5.13. For until the Law, Sin was in the World,
but Sin is not imputed when there is no Law. Now, when is it that there is no
Law, but in the time of Infancy, wherein Children are not capable of any Law,
or of doing Good or Evil, any more than when in the Womb? For until Children
begin to have the use and exercise of their reasonable understanding, so as to
know the Right hand from the Left (according to Jonah 4.11.) they cannot be
understood to be under the Law. But to say, that any Infants are eternally
damned for that first Sin, and without any actual Sin, or Transgression of
theirs committed in their own Body, is expressly contrary to Scripture, that
says, The Soul that sins shall die; and every one shall receive according
to the Deeds done in the Body, good or evil; and he that sows to the Flesh,
shall reap Corruption, as he that sows to the Spirit shall reap Incorruption,
and Life eternal. And therefore none shall finally perish, or be lost, for that
first Sin, according to Scripture, but for their actual Disobedience here in
this World, and their final Unbelief and Impenitency. For as concerning the
Judgment and Punishment of the first Sin, it was immediately inflicted after
the Fall, to wit, the Death of all in Adam. But Christ the second Adam, by his
death, for all that died in Adam, does give unto all his free Gift, that comes
upon all unto Justification of Life; and thus the Plaster is as broad as the
Sore, and the Medicine as universal as the Disease; and it is not simply the
Sin or Disease, but the refusing and rejecting the Medicine and Physician, that
is the cause of any Man's final destruction. And how, or in what manner Adam's
Children and Posterity were concerned in that first Sin, whether only by
Imputation, as some say, or by real Participation, as others say, the Wise in
heart may easily judge: Let it suffice at present, to say, that Adam's
Children, being his Branches, and he their Root, they do really partake with
him both in the defilement, and also in the promised Seed, in order to their
Restoration; for when God said to Adam, In the Day thou eatest thereof, thou
shall surely die; his Children and Posterity were included. So when God said, I
will put enmity between thee (to wit; the Serpent) and the Woman, and between
thy Seed and her Seed, it shall bruise thy Head, and thou shall bruise his
Heel: Their Children and Posterity are equally included; for Adam, after his
Fall, being restored and made an holy Root, as is generally acknowledged, as
Paul declares, If the Root be Holy, so are the Branches; and if the first
Fruit be holy, the Lump is also holy. And as God promised unto Noah, and to his
Sons, Genesis 9.8. And behold I establish my Covenant with you, and with your Seed
after you. His Branches are holy with him, to wit, not actually, but by having
a Seed, or Principle of Holiness put in them, derived from Christ the second
Adam, who is that promised Seed, whereby they are made capable of becoming
Holy, by improving the same; and this is that federal Holiness which all the
Children of Adam and Noah have, that is, all mankind, which is more increased
or diminished (but not totally abolished in any) as the immediate Parents are
found more or less actually holy; for the more that any sin, that noble Seed
and Principle of Holiness both in them, and in their Children, is the more
clouded and veiled, every Sin that a Man commits, until it be purged and
done away, being a vail over that noble Seed. And God renewed the promise to
Abraham, to make him the Father of all Nations and Families of the Earth, and
that in him they all should be blessed, and in his Seed; not that this should
be fulfilled by his being their Father, according to the Flesh, or in the way
of carnal Generation; but through Christ, who is the Seed of Abraham, by whom
the Blessing and Grace of God was to come upon all. ( Romans 4.16, 17.) and in
this respect Abraham is called the Father of us all, as it is written, I have
made thee a Father of many Nations, before him whom he believed, God quickening
the Dead, and calling the things which were not, as though they were; to wit,
the Dead in Adam, are all in due time quickened by Christ, the promised Seed of
Abraham, that they may all become the Children of Abraham, through Faith in
Christ Jesus; for by virtue of Christ's Death, and the Promise made to Adam,
Noah and Abraham, these three general Fathers, all Adam's Posterity, are holy
in a Scripture sense, not actually, but in capacity to become actually Holy,
through the holy Seed given unto them, and put into them, as they come to close
and join with it in true Faith and Obedience: And this does well answer to
Peter's Vision, whereby all manner of four footed Beasts of the Earth, and wild
Beasts, and creeping things, and Fowls of the Air, which God had cleansed, all
Nations of Adam are understood, Acts 10.12, 13, 14, 15.

CHAP. VI.
More particularly and largely concerning the way of Restoration by Jesus
Christ, his dying for all, and giving unto all sufficiency of Grace, and means
of Salvation, whereby they may be saved.

ACcording to the Testimony of the holy Scriptures, Jesus Christ is the Savior
of all Men, but especially of them that believe 1 Timothy 4.10. and he is called
the Savior of the World, John 4.42. and the Savior of the Body, Ephesians. 5.23.
and that he has dyed for all Men, is the express Testimony of the holy
Scriptures in diverse places, 2 Cor. 5.14, 15. For the love of Christ
constrains us, because we thus judge, that if one dyed for all, then were all
dead; and that he dyed for all, that they which live, should not henceforth
live unto themselves, but unto him which died for them, 1 Timothy 2.4, 5, 6. God
will have all Men to be saved, and to come unto the knowledge of the Truth; for
there is one God, and one Mediator between God and Men, the Man Christ Jesus,
who gave himself a Ransom for all, to be testified in due time, Heb. 2.9. That
he by the Grace of God should taste death for every Man, 1 John 2.2. He is the
Propitiation for our sins, and not for ours only, but for the sins of the whole
World. But it is commonly alleged by the Adversaries of Truth, that by All in
these places is understood, not all particulars, but some of all sorts, or all
the elect. To this I answer; the word All must needs be as full and universal,
with respect to Christ's death, and the benefit of it, as it is with respect to
Adam's fall, because the Scripture makes a plain parallel betwixt all that die
in Adam, and all that Christ died for, as in that forecited place, 2 Cor.
5.14. If one dyed for all, then all were dead: Now if All only signify Some,
in the first part of the verse, the sense must run thus, If one dyed for some
or a few, then all were dead: This quite makes void the Apostles inference;
for if Christ only dyed for some, then only some were dead, and not all. Again,
in Romans 5.18. the parallel is very plain, As by the offense of one, Judgment is
come upon all, unto Condemnation, even so by the Righteousness of one, the free
Gift is come upon all, unto Justification of Life; not that all are actually
justified, but the free gift is come upon them, that they may be justified; and
so it is, that the two sides or parts of Parallels are of equal extent. Beside
that, the word (All) in Scripture does most commonly signify all particulars;
and therefore to restrict it, in respect of Gods Grace and Mercy through
Christ, savours of a narrow Spirit, and this narrowness of Spirit in
Presbyterians and Independents is a great evil in them, and makes them so
peevish, uncharitable and cruel.

2. And whereas they object against Christ his dying for all Men, because he
said, he did not pray for the World, and therefore he did not die for the
World, John 17.9. I pray for them, I pray not for the World. It may be very
well granted, that he dyed not for the World which he does not pray for: But
what World is that? It is not any part of Mankind, as they are considered, when
first born into the World, and having had a time to live in the World, and a
day of visitation, wherein they might have repented, and have been converted
unto God; but as having finally rejected the great Mercy and Grace of Christ,
after many tenders and offers of it, until that the Lord has wholly left
striving with him, by his Spirit in their hearts, and then they become
Reprobates, and that World whereof Christ spoke when he said, he prayed not for
the World. And therefore it ought to be well noted and considered, that when it
is said, Christ dyed for the sins of the World, it is only with respect to sins
past, or any other sins that Men may commit before the precise time and period
of Gods leaving them, and ceasing any more to strive with them, when they are
become perfected, so to speak in sin and evil, and are as the ripe Tares, fit
for burning, having nothing remaining in them of any tenderness, simplicity or
sincerity, or true Love to God or Man; no grain of Goodness or Virtue, nay, not
the least Seed, but are wholly become as Dross, after all the precious Metal,
to the least grain, is extracted or separated from it; for such, I say, Christ
has neither dyed nor prayed. And thus it may be with many, and is with many
before they die; and concerning these, John declared, saying, There is a sin
unto Death, I do not say that he shall pray for it, 1 John 5.16. and this is
that sin of final Unbelief and obstinate Impenitency, wherein men may be
permitted to live, some considerable time, before they die. And this is no
Contradiction, nor Inconsistency, but serves greatly to clear the
understanding of this weighty matter, how Christ has dyed for all Men, within
a day or time of Grace, and yet has dyed for none of these Men, after they
have wilfully neglected that day of Grace, and resisted the Spirit of Grace,
until he did altogether leave and forsake them. And also it is to be
considered, that though Christ has dyed for all Men, within a day or time of
Grace and Mercy, beyond which time they have not the benefit of his death, and
there remains no more Sacrifice for Sin unto them; yet he has not died with
the same equal intention and degree of Love, Kindness and Good Will, for them
who finally perish, as for them who are saved; nor are the gracious Providence
of God, and his dealings both inwardly and outwardly after the same way and
manner toward all: And therefore all who shall be saved at the end of the
World, have very great and unspeakable cause to praise God, for his more
abundant Mercy, Grace and Love toward them in Christ Jesus, and that he, and
not they, did make them to differ from others; and yet none that perish, can
have any just cause to complain against God; for when that that is sufficient
is given to them, they have no cause to complain. But all who are saved, God is
pleased at one time or another, that suiteth with his infinite Wisdom and good
pleasure, so to draw, persuade, move and incline them to come unto him, and
when come, so to preserve them with him, and in him, or if at any time he
suffer them to depart, infallibly to reclaim them, before the end, that they
shall certainly be saved; and this the Lord can well do, so as to put a
difference betwixt Cattle and Cattle, or Men and Men, without their
observation, and so as neither to give unto the one any occasion of
Presumption, nor unto the other, of Despair, and without giving any greater
measure of inward Grace, (although he may and often does give a greater measure
to one than to another; for he is free to give of his own, as he pleases) but
only by suitable Providence and Dispensations, and means of his own choosing;
the one may be taken, and the other left, the one gained and saved, and the
other not, the inward Grace being the same, both in kind and degree, in some
that are saved, and in some that are not, as the Parable of the Pounds and
Marks plainly declare, every Servant had his Pound or Mark, which is an equal
sum, and some improved it, and some not. And of this more abundant Love of God
toward Paul, he himself takes special notice, with great Thanksgiving unto
God, 1 Timothy 1.14, 16. And the Grace of our Lord was exceeding abundant, with
Faith and Love, which is in Christ Jesus -- Howbeit, for this cause I obtained
mercy, that in me first Jesus Christ might show forth all Long-suffering, for a
pattern to them; which should hereafter believe on him to Life everlasting. And
the like notice he takes of the great Love of God toward the believing
Ephesians and Thessalonians, for his choosing them, and so for all other
Believers of all other Churches and People, that God had chosen them from the
beginning; and for this, he said, he labored, and endured all things, even for
the sake of the Elect, that they might be saved, 2 Timothy 2.10. And as it is the
great work and end of all faithful Ministers, to gather Gods elect, every where
scattered, so of the Angels, Mat. 24.31. and so also of Christ Jesus according
to John 6.39. cap. 10.27, 28, 29. Isa. 43.5, 6, 7, 8. Romans 11.7. And thus we
find a great difference betwixt some that were invited to come to the Supper,
who when they refused, were no more called, but sentence passed against them,
that they should not taste of the Supper, and others that were compelled to
come in, Luke 14.23, 24. not by using any violent Compulsion, but by infallible
Persuasions and Motions of his Spirit of Love and Grace, that shall infallibly
prevail with them. Nor does this give to any Man the least occasion either to
presume or despair, as by saying, Either I am elected, or not; if not elected,
I cannot be saved, for that does not follow; and yet it is most true, that
either a Man shall be saved, or he shall not, being contradictory Propositions,
whereof the one is always true, and the other not. But this does not infer,
that he who shall not be saved, could not be saved. And seeing no Man certainly
knows, that he shall not, before he discover it by his final Impenitency,
therefore it is the wisdom of every Man to improve, with all diligence, that
inward Grace, and all outward means and helps afforded him, the which if he do,
according to his ability, he shall infallibly be saved. And though it is most
true, that there is a certain number elected in Christ Jesus, the elect Head
and Foundation, and corner Stone, living and precious, that is infallibly known
unto God, which make up a complete, entire and perfect Body; yet seeing none
knows that great Mystery, who is in any danger to abuse it, it is great folly
for any Man to presume, that he is safe, or upon a bare supposition, which can
infer no positive conclusion, to resolve to be in any respect negligent: And he
that by the Grace of God, does know both his calling and election, that
knowledge has its proper tendency to make him the more diligent, to abound in
all due Obedience and Thankfulness, which is the only way to retain the
knowledge of it, after it is once obtained: And the said abovementioned
Dilemma is as idle and foolish, as who would argue, I shall live for a Month or
Year to come, or I shall not; if I shall not, I need take no care to save my
life, seeing I shall die; If I shall, I need take no care, for without taking
care I shall live; for seeing both these parts of the Argument are but
Hypothetical, they can infer no positive Conclusion. But as to a Man's
Salvation, the only safe and sure way of arguing is this, If I use the Grace
and Means that God has given me, I shall infallibly be saved; and if I do not
use them, I have no ground to expect that I shall, and therefore let me with
all diligence that is possible make use of them. But the Doctrine of absolute
Reprobation, that makes Salvation, or the effectual use of the means
absolutely impossible to many thousands, yea, as they say, to the greatest part
of Mankind, is a most woeful and miserable Discouragement unto People.

3. The Lord Jesus Christ, by means of his Death, has procured unto all Men,
both Jews, and Gentiles, as the fruit and effect of his death, an inward
Principle of divine Grace, Light, Life and Power, that is the free Gift of God
unto them, in the hearts of all Men, together with subordinate and concurring
outward Means and Helps, more or less, but sufficient unto all Men, whereby
they may be saved one time or another, before the end of the World; and the
ordinary outward means of Salvation is the preaching of the Gospel of our Lord
Jesus Christ, even Jesus of Nazareth, that was crucified for our Sins, and rose
again for our Justification, by qualified Men; or failing of them, by reading,
or hearing read the holy Scriptures, by which, after a sort, the Prophets and
Apostles preach unto all men; or failing of these outward means, God supplying
them by his inward Teachings and Revelations in men's hearts, and some other
secret ways and manners of his divine Providence, Dealings and Dispensations
unknown to most Men: For the proof of the first part, see Romans 5.18. Therefore
as by the offense of one, Judgment came upon all Men, to Condemnation; even so
by the Righteousness of one, the free Gift is come upon all men unto
Justification of Life: the which Righteousness of one, is the active and
passive Obedience of our Lord Jesus Christ, by which the free Gift is come upon
all. The which free Gift is called Grace, and the Gift of Righteousness, and is
expressed in this Chapter by four sundry Greek Words in the Greek Text, as
Charis, Charisma, Dorea Dorema, all very significant; see further John 1.9. He
was that true Light that lights every Man that comes into the World. And he
is called, The Light of Men, John 1.4. and John 8.12. I am the Light of the
World, he that follows me shall not walk in Darkness, but shall have the
Light of Life. And Tit. 2.11, 12. For the Grace of God that brings Salvation
has appeared unto all Men, teaching us to deny Ungodliness, etc. And Verse 13.
Looking for that blessed Hope, and the glorious appearing of that great God,
and our Savior Jesus Christ. Ephesians. 3.6. That the Gentiles should be fellow.
Heirs, and of the same Body, and partakers of his Promise in Christ, by the
Gospel. Col. 1.26, 27. The Mystery which has been hid from Ages and
Generations, but now is made manifest to his Saints, to whom God would make
known what is the Riches of the Glory of this Mystery in the Gentiles, which is
Christ in you, the Hope of Glory. And Romans 10.8. The Word is nigh thee, in thy
Mouth, and in thy Heart; and that is the Word of Faith which we preach. And
verse 6, 7. He understands it of Christ, which Moses preached in the People
of Israel, Deuteronomy. 30.14. And because this great Mystery, which was in the
Gentiles, was much hid in the time of the Law, and in all Ages of the world,
until Christ came in the Flesh both in Jews and Gentiles, as Paul called it,
The Mystery hid from Ages and Generations; therefore the Psalmist, Psalm. 67.2.
prays, saying, That thy Way may be known upon Earth, thy saving Health ( or
thy Jesus, Hebr) in all Nations. For he saw that it was in them, but as it were
hid, and veiled, according to the weakness and darkness of that Dispensation;
and therefore he prayed unto God, that it might be made known; and therefore as
the grace or gift of Christ is in all Men, so he, who is the Fountain and Root
of it, from whom his grace cannot be separate, is in all men, to save them,
within a Day of Visitation, or Salvation; for Christ is in all men but
Reprobates, according to 2 Cor. 13.6. And none are Reprobates, until Christ
have left them, and given them up to final Impenitency and hardness of Heart.
And for a proof of the second part, see 1 Cor. 1.21. For after that, in the
Wisdom of God, the World by Wisdom knew not God; it pleased God by the
foolishness of Preaching to save them that believe: See further, Verse 22, 23,
24, 25. and Romans 16.26. John 20.31.

4. And because of this universal Grace and love of God to all Men, and that
Christ is freely given of the Father to be a Savior unto all Men; therefore
Christ has commanded that his Gospel should be preached unto all Nations,
without exception of any; and did also prophecy and foretell, that the Gospel
of the Kingdom should be preached in all the World, for a Witness unto all
Nations, before the end of the World; and because he, who cannot lie, has said
it, we are bound to believe, it shall be fulfilled, that so all mankind may be
accountable to the Man Christ Jesus, at the Day of Judgment, either to be
rewarded, or punished by him, as they shall be found having obeyed, or
disobeyed his glorious Gospel, that has been preached unto them, both inwardly
and outwardly unto many, if not unto all, but inwardly, to be sure unto all.

5. This divine Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, in the Hearts of all men, has
had its various Dispensations and Manifestations, according to the several Ages
of the world, and the several States and Conditions of men in it, both among
Jews, Gentiles and Christians; and especially both in the Gentiles, and in the
body of the Jews and People of Israel (excepting the Prophets, and others
peculiarly favored of God) the Principle it self was but little made known, or
revealed, in respect of the great worth of it, and the great Virtue, Power and
Glory that was in it, God in his infinite Wisdom reserving the more full
Discovery and Revelation of it to the time after Christ his coming in the
Flesh, and Death, Resurrection, and Ascension; yet so much was discovered of
it, and so much good Fruit it brought forth, in the true Lovers and Improvers
of it, as by means whereof, they were accepted of God in that day through
Christ Jesus.

6. Whoever were perfectly justified, and saved in any Place or Family of the
World, or Nation, People, or Faculty, they were saved only and alone by the
Lord Jesus Christ of Nazareth, even the Man Christ Jesus, who dyed for them,
and rose again; for there is no other Name given under Heaven, whereby Men can
be saved, but by that Name, to wit, by the Lord Jesus Christ of Nazareth, who
was crucified and raised again, Acts 4.10, 11, 12. But here some will readily
object, How could any of the Gentiles be justified or saved by the Man Christ
Jesus, and by virtue of his Death and Resurrection, who never heard of him, and
never had the Mystery of it revealed unto them, and consequently had not Faith
in Christ crucified, and risen again? And upon this Head the Adversaries of
Truth, both Presbyterian, Independent and Baptist Teachers, have taken great
occasion, to cry out against the People, called in scorn Quakers, that their
Religion is only Paganism, and not Christianity, because they say, that
Heathens or Pagans can be saved by their giving Obedience to the Light within
them, without having Christ crucified, and raised again, outwardly preached
unto them. But these Adversaries of Truth little consider what Hypocrites they
discover themselves to be, in this very Charge, when they make that a Crime in
others, which they judge no Crime in themselves; for they themselves hold, That
there are not only elect Infants, dying in Infancy, who are regenerated, and
saved by Christ through the Spirit, who works when, where, and how he
pleases; but other elect Persons, regenerated and saved by Christ, who are
incapable of being outwardly called by the Word; citing Luke 18.15, 16. John
3.3, 5. John 3.8. John 5.8. see Cap. 10. Sect. 3. of the
Westminster-Confession, owned by the New England Churches, and printed by them
at Boston. And what they say of Infants, and other elect Persons, who are
incapable of being outwardly called by the Word, that they are regenerated, and
saved by Christ through the Spirit, who works when, where, and how he
pleases; the same, these called Quakers say, concerning the honest and
faithful Gentiles, who were obedient to the Light of Christ in them, and were
not outwardly called by the Word, or by outward Preaching; yea, and were
incapable of being outwardly called, when living in such remote Places and Ages
of the world, where the outward Preaching never came within their reach. For as
a deaf Man is incapable of hearing a man's Voice, so is a man that has his
Hearing (to wit, the faculty or sense of Hearing) incapable of hearing the
Voice of a man, that is at a greater distance than his hearing can reach it.
And seeing they plainly confess, that there are such elect Persons in the
world, not only Infants, but these come to age, who are Regenerated, and saved
by Christ through the Spirit, who works when, where, and how he pleases, as
their Words are, (and the Words are true, and a good use can be made of them
against themselves, who have confessed them) then let them forever be ashamed
to cry out any more against the honest People, called Quakers, for saying,
these honest Gentiles, who have not heard of Christ outwardly preached unto
them, belonging to God's Election, are saved by Christ, and regenerated through
the Spirit of Christ. And if the Spirit work when, where, and how he pleases,
to wit, both in Infants, and persons at Age, who are not outwardly called by
the Word, or incapable of being so called, then let them recall and condemn
their false Doctrine, that says, God has committed his Counsel wholly to
Writing; and the former ways of God's revealing his Will unto his People are
now ceased, and there is no new Revelation: As they have expressly, and without
any reserve or exception, affirmed, cap. 1. sect. 1. and sect. 6. For if God
has committed his Counsel wholly to Writing, then nothing of his Counsel is
extant, where that Writing is not extant. And if all divine Revelation be
ceased, then neither Infants, nor other Persons, who are incapable of being
outwardly called by the Word, have any divine Revelation, or inward Call by the
Spirit: Or if Infants, and other Persons belonging to God's Election, be
inwardly called, and renewed by the Spirit, then God has not committed his
Counsel wholly to Writing, nor are all the ways of God's revealing his Will to
men ceased: for by their own Confession, it is revealed to all elect Persons,
who are incapable of being outwardly called by the Word, the Spirit working in
them, when, where, and how he pleases.

7. But whether any are, or can be saved or justified, without the express
Knowledge and Faith of Christ crucified, and risen again, is one Question; and
whether without all outward hearing of Christ crucified, outwardly Preached
unto them, is another Question: For without all outward preaching of Men, the
mystery of Christ crucified can be revealed, and preached inwardly to Men by
the Spirit of God, and by the same Spirit, Faith can be wrought in them by that
inward hearing, as these Men confess. And though it may seem hard and
difficult, to prove that all honest Gentiles, who did by Nature (to wit, by the
Principle of the divine Nature implanted into the true Nature of Men) the
things contained in the Law, had that express Knowledge and Faith of Christ
crucified, and raised again; yet it is more hard and difficult unto them, who
affirm they had it not, to prove it, seeing the Spirit, who works when, and
where, and how he pleases, might reveal it unto them; and that they grant, the
Spirit does work in all elect Persons, who are not outwardly called by the
Word, and does regenerate and save them by Christ. And to the further clearing
of this matter we are to consider, that the Work of Salvation is not a thing
that is commonly done in an instant, but has its gradual Steps, its beginning,
progress and finishing, even as Faith it self has; for as at the first instant
of a Man's sincere believing, he is en^^ed into a state of Salvation, so as his
Faith grows, his Salvation does gradually increase and grow with it, the
which Salvation is not only a Salvation from Wrath to come, or from Hell fire
and torment, but is a Salvation from Sin, and from under the Power of Darkness,
and from all Ignorance, and Error, and Darkness of Understanding, and a through
renewing into the Image of God, and bringing Man into Conformity unto the Image
of the Son of God, the heavenly and second Adam: And the true knowledge of
Christ, and of God the Father, being a part of the Image of God, that is to be
renewed in them that are to be saved, according to Col. 3.10. And have put on
the new Man, which is renewed in Knowledge, after the Image of him that created
him. Therefore it does necessarily follow, that perfect Salvation, in the full
extent of it, cannot be had without the full and perfect knowledge of Christ,
the which full and perfect knowledge of Christ, is to know him, both as he is
that eternal Word, and Son of God, the only begotten of the Father, who was
with the Father before the World was, by whom all things were made, and as he
is God manifest in the Flesh, justified in the Spirit, etc. to wit, Christ
crucified and raised, which Paul calls the great Mystery of Godliness: And
that both Salvation and Faith is gradual, and has its steps and progress,
beginning, growth and perfection, is very clear, both from the Scriptures
Testimony, and the Saints experience* for Paul writing to the believing
Philippians, exhorted them to work out their Salvation with Fear and Trembling,
2 Philip. 12. So, though they were entered into a state of Salvation, through
Faith in Christ, yet it was not perfected in them, but was to be further
wrought out; and to encourage them in this great Work, he told them, It was God
which works in them, both to will and to do of his own good pleasure. And
Paul encouraged the believing Romans, and also himself, saying, Now is our
Salvation nearer than when we believed, Romans 13.11. And the perfect Salvation
of Souls is called the end of Faith, 1 Pet. 1.9. And verse 10. Of which
Salvation the Prophets have enquired, and searched diligently, who prophesied
of the Grace that should come unto you. Verse 11. Searching what, or what
manner of time the Spirit of Christ, which was in them did signify, when it
testified beforehand the Sufferings of Christ, and the Glory that should
follow. And Verse 13. Wherefore gird up the Loins of your Mind, be sober, and
hope to the end, for the Grace that is to be brought unto you in the Revelation
of Jesus Christ (so the Greek has, viz. Enapokalepsei) And Philip. 1.6. Being
confident of this very thing, that he which has begun a good Work in you, will
perform it unto the Day of Jesus Christ. And as the Work of the outward
Creation, is distinguished into six Days, and that a Day of Sabbath, or Rest,
which is the perfection: So the Work of the inward Creation, which is the
creating Men anew in Christ Jesus, by way of Analogy, may be said to have its
six Days, and then the spiritual Sabbath, or Rest, according to Heb. 4.9. There
remains therefore a Sabbath to the People of God. And verse 11. For he that
is entered into his Rest, has ceased from his own Works, as God did from his.
And Verse 11. Let us labor therefore to enter into that Rest, etc. Where its
plain, the Writer does hint at the said Analogy. Now though it ought to be
granted, that the Knowledge and Faith of Christ crucified and raised again,
does belong to the finishing and perfecting of the Saints Salvation, yet it is
most clear and plain from Scripture, that it does not universally belong to the
beginning of it. For we can prove most clearly from Scripture, that the good
work of God, even the Work of Salvation was begun in them, who had not that
Knowledge and Faith of Christ crucified; as first, to instance in Nathaniel, of
whom Christ gave a noble Testimony, Behold an Israelite indeed, in whom is no
Guile, John 1.47. And yet at that time he had not Faith in Jesus of Nazareth,
as being come in the Flesh, but reasoned or questioned, saying, Can any good
thing come out of Nazareth? Philip says unto him, Come and see, etc. Next, to
instance in the Disciples of Christ, who for sometime, after they had followed
him, and that Peter had confessed to him, that he was the Son of God, and that
Christ had told him, his Father had revealed it to him; yet the mystery of his
Death and Resurrection was for all that hid from him, and the rest of them: For
this, see Mark 9.31. For he taught his Disciples, and said unto them, the Son
of Man is delivered into the Hands of Men, and they shall kill him, and after
that he is killed, he shall rise the third Day. And verse 32. But they
understood not that saying, and were afraid to ask him. See again, Luke 9.43.
But that instance of Cornelius is a most manifest and clear demonstration of
this Truth: For this Cornelius was a Gentile, and uncircumcised, and therefore
no Proselite of the Covenant to be sure; and though some allege, that he was a
Proselite of the Gate (according to that distinction that was among the Jews of
a two fold sort of Proselites, one of the Covenant, that received Circumcision
and the Law, another of the Gate, that did not receive Circumcision) yet this
is but barely alleged without all proof. But if he was a Proselite of the
Gate, it is certain at that time, when the Angel was sent unto him, he had no
express Knowledge, nor Faith of Christ crucified, for that was the thing, which
Peter was sent to preach unto him, by hearing of which he was to receive the
holy Ghost, and be saved; for the Angel told him, that Peter should speak Words
to him, by which he and all his House should be saved; see Acts 11.14. Now
although at that time, when the Angel appeared unto him, Cornelius had no
Knowledge nor Faith of Christ crucified, yet he was in a good estate; and well
were it for many called Christians, that they were in as good estate as he then
was in: When the Angel appeared to him, he told him, that his Prayers, and his
Alms were come up for a memorial before God, Acts 10.4. And it is said of him,
verse 2. He was a devout Man, and one that feared God, with all his House,
which gave much Alms to the People, and prayed unto God always. And with respect
to this, Peter began his Preaching, saying, Acts 10.34, 35. Of a truth, I
perceive that God is no respecter of Persons, but in every Nation he that
fears him, and works Righteousness, is accepted of him. Now who dare be so
bold to say, Cornelius at this time had no real and true beginning of
Salvation, or of saving Grace and Faith, before Peter did preach Christ
crucified and raised again unto him? For although Cornelius had not at that
time Faith in Christ crucified, yet he had (without all question) Faith in God,
and in the Word of God that was in his Heart, and that Word was Christ in him,
though the Mystery of Christ was not fully revealed unto him at that time, and
in that state he was accepted of God, and yet not for his Works sake, but for
Christ. And therefore, Men may have a beginning of true Faith, and of a true
Work of Salvation begun in them, when the Mystery of Christ crucified, and
raised again, is not revealed unto them. For that Mystery (being so great as it
is) was not in that Day, to wit, before Christ came and suffered in the Flesh,
preached, as one of the first and most necessary things to be first known and
believed, as without the Faith and Knowledge of which no Man could be in any
degree blessed, otherwise, when Christ began to Preach, he would have preached
it as one of the first things; and when he sent his Disciples to preach the
Gospel, before he suffered Death, he would have given them an express
Commission to preach it to all People, how he was to be crucified, and raised
again the third day, but the Mystery of it at that time they knew not, and
therefore could not preach it then: Nor did he preach it himself, when he began
his Ministry, nor for a considerable time afterward^ until the time drew near
that he was to suffer. In all that excellent Sermon of his on the Mount, not
one Title or Word does he mention of his Death and Resurrection expressly, but
he taught the Law and the Prophets, and expounded the Spirituality of the Law,
in its extent, far beyond the reach and conception which the People had of it
at that time, and withal dropped some Evangelical Precepts unto them, and
taught them the right way of Prayers, Fasting and Alms, and pronounced them
blessed, that hungered and thirsted after Righteousness, and were poor in
Spirit, that were Merciful, that were Meek, and Peacemakers, and that mourned,
etc. and suffered for Righteousness sake. And therefore it may be very safely
concluded, that the express Knowledge and Faith of Christ crucified, is not of
absolute and indispensible necessity (especially where it has not been
preached, nor revealed) unto the beginning of a Man's Salvation, although it is
really of absolute and indispensible necessity unto the finishing and
perfecting of it, because, as has been already said, our inward renewing unto
God, when perfected, in us, is a renewing us perfectly, and not in part only,
into the Image of God; and a part of that perfect Image, is the perfect
Knowledge of God, and of Jesus Christ, whom to know is Life Eternal; and that
perfect Knowledge requires men to know him, as he came in the Flesh, and died,
and rose again, which is that great Mystery of Godliness, as Paul called it, 1 Timothy 3.16. But if these Men, who own that said Confession of Faith, enquire,
whether all these honest Gentiles that lived in the world, or do now live in
the world, who have not had Christ crucified, outwardly preached unto them, but
were diligent to frame their Lives, according to the Light that was in them,
died in a state of Salvation? I say, yea, they did; and this I may the rather
say, according to their own Doctrine. For what if they had not the perfect
Knowledge and Faith of Christ crucified, when they lived? Yet they might have
it at their Death, to wit, in the passing through the Valley of the shadow of
Death, according to Psalm. 23.4. Even when they are not able to demonstrate unto
the Living, what is then revealed unto them? And as it is in Job 33.22, 23, 24.
When a Man's Soul draws near unto the Grave, and his Life to the Destroyers,
there may be a Messenger with him, an Interpreter, one of a Thousand, to show
unto Man his Vprightness, then he is gracious unto him, and says, Deliver him
from going down to the Pit; I have found a Ransom, or Atonement; see the Hebr.
or Margin of the English Bible. Or if I should say, they receive this perfect
Knowledge of Christ after Death, it is according to your Doctrine, who say, The
Souls of the Righteous ( generally or universally) after Death (note, after
Death) being then made perfect in Holiness, are received into the highest
Heavens, etc. These are the express Words of your Catechism, cap. 32. sect. 1.
But when, and how, or at what precise time these honest Gentiles, who used
their greatest diligence to frame their Lives according to the Light that is in
them, and yet have not had the Death, and Resurrection of Christ outwardly
preached unto them, when they then lived in the World, is not my present
business to determine: It does suffice, that I have demonstrated from
Scripture, that Men have been in a state of Salvation, and acceptance with God,
who have not had the mystery of Christ, his Death and Resurrection, made known
unto them; and surely, these Men continuing faithful to what they had received,
when they died, could not perish. For it is impossible that any Man, who has
the Work of Salvation really begun in him, though but as a Child in Knowledge,
that holds fast the beginning of his Confidence firm unto the end, can
perish, Heb. 3.14.

8. And as concerning the diversity of the Dispensations of the divine Grace
given unto Men, in the several Ages and Places of the world, according to the
several States and Capacities of Men in the World, the Scriptures testimony is
very plain and clear, which declares both of the manifold Grace, and manifold
Wisdom of God, 1 Pet. 4.10. Ephesians. 3. And Ephesians. 1.10. Paul mentions the
Dispensation of the fullness of time, as being the greatest, wi^h respect to the
foregoing Dispensations, before that fullness of time came; and they may be
distinguished, as Paul does distinguish them very plainly into three, to wit,
Diversity of Operations, but one God; and Diversity of Administrations, but one
Lord; and Diversity of Gifts, but one Spirit, 1 Cor. 12.4, 5, 6. The operations
belonging to the Law, as inwardly dispensed, the Administrations to the
Prophets, and to Christ's coming in the Flesh, and to the Apostles, their
Preaching, both before and after Christ was crucified, and rose again, and
afterward the Gifts to the holy Spirit, as they were the effect, and fruit of
the Apostles Preaching, and the end of it: And according to the Scripture, the
first is that divine Dispensation proper to Men, as Children, in the Knowledge
of God, and in Virtue; the second, to that which is proper to Men, as in Youth,
or middle Age; the third as proper to Men of full, or ripe Age. And each of
these Dispensations may be said to have their proper and peculiar inward
Baptism, or spiritual Washing; the first being the Baptism of the Father; the
second being the Baptism both of the Father, and of the Son; the third being
the Baptism of the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost, which Christ commanded
his Disciples to administer, after he rose from the dead, and gave the holy
Ghost, Matthew. 28.19. which is not to be so understood, as if the three, to wit,
the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost, did not work together in all these
three Dispensations; for certainly they did; but because in the first
Dispensation, God only was known as Creator, and Father of all mankind; in the
second, both the Father and the Son were known* and in the third, the Father,
the Son, and the holy Ghost are known, and the Mystery of the three, and of the
more abundant divine Grace that accompanies this Knowledge, largely opened and
revealed. And though I say the first belonged to the Law, as inwardly
dispensed, yet that very Dispensation of the Law was not merely Legal, but had
Grace and Mercy mixed with it: For no Dispensation, without the Grace and Mercy
of God, could have been in any respect serviceable unto Men; therefore the Law,
both as outwardly and inwardly administered, had always some measure of divine
Grace mixed with it; and therefore in the second Commandment, the substance of
all the Ten Commandments, being commonly acknowledged to have been delivered by
God himself to the Gentiles, who had not the written Law, God did reveal
himself to be a gracious and merciful God, visiting the Iniquities of the
Fathers upon the Children, unto the third and fourth Generation, but showing
Mercy to Thousands of them that love him, and keep his Commandments. And as I
have already proved from the express Testimony of the holy Scripture, by the
Obedience of one, to wit, the Lord Jesus, who dyed for all, the free Gift and
Grace of God is come upon all unto Justification of Life, Romans 5.18. And Christ
himself is the Mystery hid in the Gentiles, being that Word of Faith which
Moses preached in the Jews, and Paul in the Romans, Chap. 10.

9. And since it is so, that Christ is really that Light that does lighten the
Gentiles, and is Light in them, who have not heard him outwardly preached unto
them, it is no less than real Blasphemy (though pardonable upon Repentance) to
say, as the Presbyterian and Independent Teachers of both Old and New England
have said in their Confession of Faith, That the Light in men, (which they
call, the Light of Nature) that does so far manifest the Goodness, Wisdom and
Power of God, as to leave men inexcusable, yet is not sufficient to give that
Knowledge of God, which is necessary unto Salvation; as they expressly affirm
cap. 1. sect. 1. And cap. 10. sect. 4. they say expressly, Men not professing
the Christian Religion (to wit, the Faith of Christ's Death and Resurrection)
cannot be saved, be they never so diligent to frame their Lives according to
the Light that is in them; Which here again they call the Light of Nature. And
as for the expression, the Light of Nature, it may be safely enough owned (in a
true Scripture sense) though not in the sense of them, who do so call it. For
as Christ is called the Light of men in Scripture, ( John 1.4. In him was Life,
and the Life was the Light of men) so he may be very well called the Light of
Nature, to wit, lightning the dark Nature of man; and not only so, but
quickening and sanctifying Nature in all men, who join thereunto, and the Word
of God in the Heart, James calls it, Ton Emphuton Logon, the innate Word, i.
e. put into the Nature of men, which is able to save their Souls. But the
Presbyterian and Independent Teachers of Old and New England, by the Light of
Nature, mean only that it is some natural Faculty of man's Soul, as to say, his
natural Understanding, or his natural Mind and Conscience: And according to
them, there is no other Light, or Principle of Knowledge or Virtue in man,
generally and universally, nay, not in any who profess not the Christian
Religion, though ever so diligent to frame their Lives according to the Light
that is in them, as they expressly affirm; and yet in manifest Contradiction to
their own Doctrine, they have confessed, That Persons elected, are saved by
Christ, and regenerated through the Spirit, who are incapable of being
outwardly called by the Word, cap. 10. sect. 3.

10. But that Light that is in men generally (within their day of visitation)
is not any natural Faculty of man's Soul, as to say his natural Understanding
or Conscience is manifest; 1 st because they do confess, that Man by his fall
is become dead in Sin, and wholly defiled in all the Faculties and Parts of
Soul and Body; and indeed so he is, and his Understanding is so darkened
naturally, that he is called Darkness; and therefore he has not any Light that
is left in him, as some call it the Relics of Light left in him since the
Fall; for if he did fall wholly, then no Light was left in him, nor Virtue, nor
Goodness, as they confess, cap. 9. sect. 3. that Man is altogether averse from
good. 2 dly, they confess, That all Sin is a Transgression of the righteous Law
of God, cap. 6. sect. 6. And therefore the Gentiles, who have not the Law
outwardly delivered unto them, seeing they are Sinners, do transgress against
the righteous Law of God; now where is this righteous Law, but in their Hearts?
And this righteous Law cannot be any natural Faculty of fallen Man, which they
confess is wholly defiled and corrupted, and unholy, and unrighteous. 3 dly,
they confess, That it is sufficient to leave men unexcusable, sect. 1. cap. 1.
And therefore it is also sufficient to make men excusable, who are diligent to
frame their Life according to it; and to say the contrary, is to contradict the
very instinct of common Justice that God has put into men's Hearts. 4 thly, the
Scripture says, that some of the Gentiles their Thoughts did excuse them in
well doing, as it did accuse them in evil doing, Romans 2.15. 5 thly, The Apostle
Paul does plainly distinguish it from the Conscience, Romans 2.15. the true
Translation being, Their Conscience co-witnessing or bearing a joint Witness
with that righteous Law or Principle. 6 thly, He calls it the Truth, and that
which may be known of God, which God has showed unto them, which gave them the
Knowledge of God, and showed them the goodness of God that leads to
Repentance; and also gave them to know the Judgment of God, and revealed the
Wrath of God from Heaven against them: And because that many of them, who knew
God, did not glorify him as God, nor were thankful, therefore God gave them
over to a reprobate mind; and therefore they were not Reprobates from the
beginning, far less from all Eternity, as these men alledg. And therefore any
Light or Illumination that these Gentiles had in them, or that any men have in
them, is a new Gift and Grace of God, and gracious Visitation of God unto them,
as the Apostle calls it, Romans 5.18. Moreover, that God himself does inwardly
speak to men generally in their Hearts, both in good men and bad, and is their
Teacher, and does warn them, yea, and fore-warn them of Evil and Wrath to come,
and does reprove and convince them of Sin, is the Testimony of the holy
Scripture in many places; see Psalm. 94.10. Psalm. 50.1, 16, to 22. Amos 4.13.
Micah 6.8. Prove. 8.1, 2, 3, 4. Job 28.28. Chap. 24.13. and 21.14. And it is a
place greatly worth noticing, Luke 12.20. God said unto him, Thou Fool, this
Night thy Soul shall be required of thee. And where did God say thus to him,
but in his Heart? And therefore it has been the way of God, and ever will be
to speak to men in their Hearts, to call them, and warn, and fore-warn them of
evil and danger, and to persuade and incline them to that which is good: And
they who deny this, as they belie God, and say, It is not the Lord that
speaks, and calls to men in their Hearts; so they do a great injury and
wrong unto men, who instead of turning them to God's Teachings in their Hearts,
turn them away from them; and they do ill deserve so great Wages of the People,
so to turn away the Ears of the People from God's inward teachings in their
Hearts, and from the Word of his Grace, which is able to save their Souls. And
to conclude, although the dispensations of the divine Grace be various, and may
be variously distinguished into a more or less number, yet God and Christ, and
the holy Spirit are one, and the one Author of all these various Dispensations;
and who-ever is faithful unto God in any of them, is accepted in Christ, and
for Christ's sake, and not otherwise. And though the last, which is the pure
and perfect Christian and Gospel Dispensation, is far more excellent, and far
surpassing either that among the Gentiles, who had not the outward Law, or that
among the Jews and People of Israel, who had the outward Law, and the Prophets,
yet every one of them had their Glory in their day, and that inward divine
Dispensation that is now among the Gentiles, who have not Christ as yet
outwardly preached unto them, has its Glory and great Service and Blessing to
them who are faithful to God in it; and such who continue faithful therein to
the end, shall never perish; and though it be not purely and thoroughly
Christian and Evangelical, but rather more Legal, yet it is also partly
Christian and Evangelical, and the pure Gospel Dispensation is hid within it,
as a Wheel within a Wheel, or as the most holy place was hid within the outer
Court, and there, to wit, in that first Dispensation, Christ, as it were, lies
as in swaddling Clothes: and though the Jews do not know him as he is there,
yet such as the Wise men from the East, do both know and honor him, as the
King of the Jews, yea, as King and Lord, both of Heaven and Earth, who is in
all, and through all, and over all, blessed forever, Amen.

CHAP. VII.
Concerning Justification, and the Nature of true Faith, whether Assurance is
of the Nature of it.

1. WHen the Scripture says, God justifies the Ungodly, Romans 4.5. It is not
to be understood that he does justify them in their Ungodliness, but from it;
as the like manner of Speech is used, Acts 13.39. And by him all that believe,
are justified from all things, from which ye could not be justified by the Law
of Moses. For seeing, according to the Law of God, He that justifies the
Wicked is an Abomination to the Lord, Prove. 17.15. God himself can do no such
thing, as to justify a wicked or ungodly man in his Ungodliness.

2. As it is only the true believer, who has Faith in Christ Jesus, whom God
justifies; so it is only he who is truly sanctified, and regenerated or born
again of the Spirit of God, whom God does justify, who are called the Seed of
Israel, Isa. 45.25. In the Lord shall all the Seed of Israel be justified, and
shall glory. For as a Rich Man, when he dies, by his Will or Testament,
leaves his Goods or Riches not to Strangers, but to his own Kindred, as his
Brethern, or Children, and to his Wife; so our Lord Jesus Christ has left by
his Will and Testament, when he dyed, his Spiritual Goods, to wit, Remission of
Sin, Justification, Adoption, and Eternal Life, only to his true spiritual
Kindred, to wit, his Brethren, who are born from Above, and spiritually related
unto him, who are the true Children of God, by spiritual Regeneration, and
renewing of the holy Ghost, and who are his true Church, and Body, and of his
Flesh and Bones, according to Ephesians. 5.30.

3. And therefore not only Faith, but true inward Sanctification, and a through
inward renewing into the Image of God, and Conformity of the whole man, unto
the Image of the Son of God, is a Condition and Qualification necessarily
required, in order unto men's being perfectly justified in the sight of God; and
as no man is justified, but who is sanctified, so no man is any more, or
further justified than he is sanctified.

4. According unto which, God does justify men, not only by Faith in Christ,
but by a real inward Righteousness or Holiness, which he does beget in them by
his holy Spirit, and not only Faith, but Love, Hope, true Righteousness, and
Holiness, Meekness, Temperance and Humility, and all other Evangelical Virtues,
and Fruits of the holy Spirit, are the Instruments and Means whereby men obtain
free Justification through Christ Jesus, and whereby they are enabled, and
fitted or qualified to apply Christ Jesus, and his Righteousness unto them, so
as to have the same imputed unto them, and made theirs, to wit, Christ, and all
his spiritual Blessings, Gifts and Benefits, and his Death, and Sufferings, and
Obedience, with all the blessed Effects and Fruits of it. For as a Line that is
straight cannot be applied unto another Line that is crooked, but unto a Line
that is straight; so cannot the Lord Jesus Christ, who is the Righteousness of
God, be applied unto men for Justification, unless these men be made righteous,
as he is in likeness, or conformity unto him, although not equal unto him: And
therefore John did seasonably give the warning and caution, foreseeing that
many would claim to be righteous, or justified, when they were not really doers
or workers of Righteousness, 1 John 3.7. Little Children, let no man deceive
you; he that does Righteousness, is righteous, even as he is righteous. And the
same John said, Rev. 22.14. Blessed are they that do his Commandments, that
they may have right to the Tree of Life, etc. Which is equivalent to their
being justified, seeing Justification does include in its Nature, a Right, or
Interest in Christ, who is that Tree of Life.

5. It is therefore a gross Error, and a false and Antichristian Doctrine, in
these Faith-publishers at Westminster, espoused by the Presbyterians and
Independent Teachers in New England, That God does justify men, not by
infusing Righteousness into them, but by pardoning their Sins, and accepting
them as righteous, etc. cap. 11. sect. 1, 2. And also, that, they say, Faith
receiving and resting on Christ, and his Righteousness, is the alone Instrument
of Justification, is another great Error. For as Faith may well be compared to
one Hand of the Soul, whereby it receives and embraces the Lord Jesus Christ;
so Love, which is an inward Evangelical Grace and Virtue, that is shed abroad
or infused into the Soul, by the holy Ghost, may be compared to another Hand
and Arm, whereby it does receive and embrace him. And all the inward
Evangelical divine Virtues and Graces that are wrought and begot in the Soul,
by the holy Spirit of Christ, are, so to speak, as a whole entire Body,
consisting of many Members, whereby the Soul does embrace and cleave unto the
Lord Jesus Christ; and thus a perfect Union comes to be witnessed betwixt the
faithful Soul, and the Lord Jesus Christ, when it is joined unto him, receives
him, and cleaves unto him, not by one single Grace or Virtue, called Faith,
but by all other divine Graces and Virtues, which make up a whole entire Body,
having many Members and Joints, whereby the Soul cleaves to him, as one
straight Line is joined to another, or as one straight Body to another, not in
part only, but in all parts. And thus also does the Lord Jesus Christ embrace
the whole Soul in all its spiritual and divine Powers and Virtues, that he has
freely conferred upon it: And hence it is, that true Believers are said to put
on the Lord Jesus Christ, as a man puts on a Garment. Now he that puts on
a complete or entire Garment, every part of his Body cleaves to it; even so
the Soul that puts on Christ, cleaves to him by all its spiritual Members,
which are the divine Evangelical Virtues, wrought in it by the holy Spirit of
Christ, even as the Sins and evil Lusts are called the Members on Earth, Col.
3.5.

6. But though real inward Holiness and Righteousness, as well as Faith, be the
Instruments, whereby men are justified, yet they are not the Foundation and
Ground of Justification, but the Lord Jesus Christ alone, even Jesus of
Nazareth, who dyed for our Sins, without the Gates of Jerusalem, and rose again
in his entire and perfect Obedience and Righteousness, is the alone and only
Foundation and ground of Justification, on which the Souls of all the Faithful
are to rest for Justification, and Remission of all Sin; and therefore no man
is to rest or rely upon the best Works, or Righteousness, or Obedience, that
he does or can do, even when helped to perform the same, by the help of the
holy Spirit: For this were to put good Works in the room of Christ, which ought
not to be; for no Works of Righteousness or Holiness done by us, even by the
help of the holy Spirit, is the Foundation of the Saints Faith, or
Justification, but Christ alone, and the free Love, Mercy, Grace and Favor of
God the Father revealed in him, and by him, through the holy Spirit. For seeing
all men generally have sinned, no man's best Obedience for Sin formerly
committed, can be a Ransom unto God, but Christ alone is the Ransom, even he
who was Crucified, and rose again, (1 Pet. 3.18.) The Just having suffered for
the Unjust, that he might bring us unto God. And as no man can redeem the Soul
of his Brother, so, nor can he redeem his own Soul; For the Redemption of the
Soul is precious, and cease forever, Psalm. 49.8. viz. to be the Work of man,
but it is only and alone the Work of him, who is both God and Man, according to
verse 15. But God will redeem my Soul from the Power of the Grave, for he shall
receive me, Selah. See further these other Scriptures, Ephesians. 1.7. Col. 1.14.
Heb. 9.12, 15. Gal. 3.13. 1 Pet. 1.18. Rev. 5.9. Mat. 20.28. 1 Timothy 2.6. Job.
33.23, 24.

7. And seeing Remission and Pardon of Sin for Christ's sake, is a part or
branch of Justification, as these Faith-publishers do acknowledge, and that
repentance is of such necessity, that none may expect pardon without it, as
they confess, cap. 15. sect. 3. Is it not very manifest, by their own
Confession (though in plain contradiction to their own Doctrine) that Repentance
is a necessary Instrument and Condition whereby to obtain Justification. And
indeed the Scripture lays equal weight upon Repentance and Conversion, as it
does upon Faith, in order to obtain Remission or Pardon of Sins, Acts 3.19.
Repent ye therefore, and be converted, that your Sins may be blotted out. Acts
26.18. To turn them from Darkness unto Light, and from the Power of Satan unto
God, that they may receive Forgiveness of Sins, etc. And when the Scripture
says, Titus 3.5. Not by Works of Righteousness, which we have done, but
according to his Mercy he saved us. It is clear, that Works before, or without
true Faith are understood, and not the inward Work of Sanctification, as is
clear from the following Words, by the washing of Regeneration, and renewing of
the holy Ghost. And if the real inward Work of Sanctification and Obedience had
not been necessary to Salvation, the Scripture would not have said, Work out
your Salvation with Fear and Trembling: And if ye through the Spirit do
mortify the Deeds of the Body, ye shall live. And therefore when Paul does so
earnestly plead that men are not justified by the Works of the Law, it is
evident, he does only exclude these legal Performances and Observations that
the Jews rested in, who had not Faith in Christ. And that no Works, however so
good or holy, being performed by men, ought to be rested in, as a Foundation or
ground of Justification, for that were to exclude Christ, and make his Death of
no effect. And again, when James does plead so earnestly, that men are
justified by Works, and not by Faith only, giving an instance in Abraham and
Rahab, he only places Faith and Works together ( viz. such Works as accompany
true Faith, and work together with it) as necessary Instruments and Conditions,
whereby to obtain Justification, but not to be the Foundation thereof.

8. And whereas Paul generally so much uses that manner of Speech, of
Justification by Faith, it is manifest that by Faith, he does not mean only
that single Virtue called Faith, but as by way of Synecdoche, the most eminent,
or noted part, is put for the whole, as when in Scripture as well as in common
Speech, the Head of a man is put for the whole man, Ezekiel. 33.4. Ezekiel. 17.9.
Even so by Faith, the Apostle in these places does mean the whole complex or
systeme, or entire Body of the Evangelical Virtues and Graces, whereof Faith is
as it were the Head, and is first in order of Nature, at least, in respect of
the other; and sometimes also by Faith he understands, the whole Evangelical
Dispensation and Doctrine, as especially in that noted place, Gal. 3.23. But
before FAITH came, we were kept under the Law, etc. And verse 5. But after that
FAITH is come, etc. Where certainly Paul does not mean only that single Virtue,
called Faith, but the whole Evangelical Dispensation, with all the spiritual
Gifts and Graces of it. And again, Gal. 3.2. Received ye the Spirit by the
Works of the Law, or by the hearing of Faith? which has the same
signification. And thus in common Speech among Christians, and Christian
Writers, the Christian Faith does signify the whole Christian Religion and
Obedience; and so Unbelief in Scripture is put for all other Sin that Men
generally are under, before they believe, as Romans 11.32.

9. True Faith in Christ Jesus, (on whom alone the Soul rests, as on the true
Foundation for Justification, and all other divine and spiritual gifts and
blessings) is not only a believing in him, as he is the Word, which was in the
beginning with God, and is God, by whom all things were made, and which was in
all the Prophets, and faithful and holy Men in all Ages, but as the same Word
did take Flesh, and was God manifest in the Flesh, justified in the Spirit,
etc. 1 Timothy 3.16. which Paul called, The great Mystery of Godlinss, to wit,
Christ crucified, and risen again, made of a Woman, made under the Law, the Son
of God, that did come in the likeness of sinful Flesh, made like unto us in all
things, Sin excepted; who being in the form of God, and thought it no Robbery
to be equal with God, humbled himself, and took upon him the form of a Servant;
and was found in the true Form and Nature of a Man, the Seed of Abraham and
David, conceived by the holy Ghost, and born of the Virgin Mary, at Bethlem, in
the Land of Judah. And thus the true Faith does not divide Christ, but
receives him, and joyneth the Soul unto him entirely, to wit, the whole and
entire Christ, both as he did come outwardly in the Flesh, and as he did, and
does inwardly come in the Spirit; and as the said true Faith does not divide
him, so nor does it divide his Offices, but takes or receives him in all his
Offices, as King, Priest and Prophet, Shepherd, Physician, Husband, etc. And as
he is called ( Jerm. 23.6.) The Lord our Righteousness, in Scripture; so as
none can have him to be their Righteousness and Justification, but who have him
to be their Lord, King and Ruler in them, and their Sanctification, Wisdom and
Redemption. And thus every truly believing Soul, is as the true Mother of the
Child, who would not have the Child divided; but she who was not the true
Mother of the Child, she would have the Child divided; a true Figure of all
false Christians, who would have Christ divided, and say, They believe in
Christ without them, but do not believe and receive Christ within them, as God
the Father does inwardly reveal him; or as Ranters, and other high Notionists,
who pretend to believe in Christ, as he is the Word and Light in them, but
slight and blaspheme against Christ that was crucified without them. Whereas
the true Believer does both believe in Christ, and receive Christ, as he came
in the Flesh, and was crucified for our Sins, and rose and ascended into
Heaven, and is now in Heaven glorified, in the entire and perfect Nature of
man, in Soul and Body, appearing in the presence of God for us, our Advocate
with the Father, and also does believe in him, and receive him spiritually, to
live and dwell in his Heart, as he is the Lord that Spirit, and the second
Adam, or heavenly Man, the quickening Spirit, who is the true spiritual Meat and
Drink to every believing Soul, even as Christ said, I am the true Bread of
Life, he that eats me, shall live by me.

10. And this true Faith, in the least true measure of it, as it is an act or
exercise, has assurance in it, of the Love and Mercy of God revealed in Christ
Jesus; and true infallible Assurance is of the very Nature and Being of true
Faith, as it is exercised on Christ, its true and proper Object and Foundation,
and upon the Love and Mercy of God the Father revealed in Christ; hence Paul
said, That his Gospel came unto these to whom he preached, not in Speech only,
but in Power, and in the holy Ghost, and in much Assurance, or as the Greek
has it, much full Assurance, 1 These. 1.5. And he said further, his Preaching
was in the Demonstration of the Spirit, and of Power, 1 Cor. 2.4, 5. That their
Faith ought not to be in the Wisdom of Man, but in the Power of God: And this
was sure footing, and had assurance in it, as the building on the sure Rock.
But they who deny all inward new Revelation of the Spirit, its no wonder they
deny that Faith has Assurance in the Being and Nature of it. But without
divine inward Revelation, which begets Assurance, there is no true Faith,
but only Opinion, or Conjecture, seeing there is no midst betwixt Assurance and
Opinion, or Conjecture; and therefore these Faith-Publishers, have denied the
true Faith of God's Elect, when they say, It may be without Assuranee, and that
infallible Assurance does not belong so to the essence of Faith, but that a
true Believer may wait long, and Conflict with many Difficulties, before he be
partaker of it; see Chap. 18. Sect. 3. And it is yet as strange, that they
affirm, That a Man without divine new Revelation (which here they call
Extraordinary, although in their first Chapter, they have denied all new divine
Revelation, even since the Apostles) can be infallibly assured, that he is in
favor with God; the which Assurance they seem to ground upon the inward
Evidences of the Graces of God, and the Testimony of the Spirit of Adoption,
witnessing with our Spirits that we are the Children of God. But whether this
be not a manifest Contradiction, one while to assert the necessity of the
inward Evidence of Grace, and the Testimony of the Spirit witnessing with our
Spirits, that we are the Children of God; and another while, yea, with the same
Breath, to deny all inward Revelation of the Spirit; and to say, the Spirit
works only effectively, and not objectively, and therefore is only medium
incognitum assentiendi, to wit, an unknown Principle of assenting, let the wise
in heart consider and judge. For seeing no place of Scripture, tells us, that
we have these infallible marks of God's Children, and yet the Spirit does tell,
or witness it, to or together with our Spirits; this certainly is a novum
effatum, or new Truth, or saying, no where either expressly or consequentially
contained in the Scripture; or if they say it is contained in Scripture, at
least consequentially, to wit, that J.D. or J.C. has the infallible marks of a
Child of God, let him produce it, or any for him, which they shall never be
able to do. It is wonderful, that these Men have such inveterate Prejudice
against divine inward Revelation, that rather than assent to so blessed and
comfortable Doctrine, they will run into the most palpable Nonsense and
Contradiction. And when they start from the Testimony of the Spirit, as
implying divine inward Revelation, they run at last to the Testimony of a Man's
own Heart and Conscience, not well considering that the bare Testimony of a
Man's Heart and Conscience cannot infallibly assure him, or if it could, it is
no divine Testimony, but only human, and therefore no true object of divine
Faith.

11. But as the least true measure of Faith, as it is lively acted or
excercised upon Christ inwardly revealed, has an infallible Assurance in it;
so this Assurance does only reach to the present state of Faithfulness, as it
is continued in, until it please God to reveal to the Soul, that it shall be
preserved faithful to the last, which so high degree of Assurance, many true
Believers have not attained unto, God reserving that to such as he counts
worthy to reveal the same. But the first degree of Assurance, to wit, whereby
the Soul is infallibly assured, that for the present, it is in the way and
state of Salvation; and as it abides, and continues to walk in that living
Way and Path it has begun in, it shall be eternally saved, is a very blessed
and comfortable degree, and such as for which every Soul that has it, has
great cause to praise God. Nor does this degree of Assurance hinder, but that
the Enemy of the Soul's peace may raise up Clouds and Fogs of doubting and
unbelief, which may for some time obscure that Assurance, if the Soul be not
duly watchful, and diligent to retain the same.

CHAP. VIII.
Whether true beginnings of Sanctification can be fallen from totally? And
whether it is true, that no Man by any Grace of God given him, or to be given
him in this Life, can perfectly keep the Commandments of God, but does daily
break them, in Thought, Word and Deed?

1. THat real and true beginnings of Faith, and Sanctification, or true and
real Righteousness may be fallen from, is clear from many Testimonies of the
holy Scripture, especially Heb. 6.4, 5, 6, 7, 8. Where, first, is described the
state of some, who do fall away, what it was before they so do; as 1 st. that
they were enlightened, so as to have tasted of the heavenly Gift; 2 dly. to have
been made partakers of the holy Ghost; 3 dly. to have tasted the good Word of
God, and the Powers of the World to come; and surely, all this could not be
without some real beginning of true Sanctification. Secondly, the state of such
is described, when, or after they do so fall away, that they crucify to
themselves the Son of God afresh, and put him to an open shame; and also the
great danger they are in; so that it is impossible to renew them again unto
Repentance: But how far this Impossibility does extend, whether to a simple
Impossibility, or only in some respect, is not the present business to
determine, and to the same purpose the Author writes, Heb. 10.26, 27, 28.
Thirdly, The Apostle Paul in his Epistle to the Romans, Chap. 11. does not only
affirm, that many Jews and People of Israel, who were the natural Branches,
were broken off from the Root (which Root is Christ) by unbelief, but warns
the believing Gentiles, of their great danger, also to be cut off, if they did
not keep in holy fear and watchfulness, see Verse 20.21, 22. Fourthly, The
Apostles, Peter and Jude set before the Christians, the fearful Examples of the
fallen Angels, and of the old World, and also of the People of Israel, who were
saved out of Egypt, to be a warning and caution unto them, lest they should
fall after the same manner. Now the fall of the Angels, was a total falling
away, and so was that of Israel in the Wilderness, who though they did eat that
spiritual Meat and drink that spiritual Drink, to wit, the Rock that followed
them, and that Rock was Christ, as Paul expressly declared, 1 Cor. 10. yet were
overthrown in the Wilderness for their Idolatry, Fornication, and other great
Sins, they were destroyed of the Destroyer; so that in that day, God did swear
against them, they should not enter into his Rest; see 2 Pet. 2. throughout,
compared with Jude, and 1 Cor. 10. throughout. Fifthly, The Parable of the Seed
that was sown in the stony and thorny Ground, that sprang up, and afterward
whithered, did signify (as Christ expressly did expound it) some that believed
for a time, and afterward did fall away. And this Faith was not altogether a
false Faith, otherwise it had not been blameworthy in them, to have left it,
or cast it away; for it is rather commendable, than reproveable, to cast away
what is false and hypocritical, and not real: Nor does it argue, that their
Faith was not true or real, that it sprang up in the stony and thorny Ground.
For many that are real and sincere Believers, at their first believing, feel
their Hearts to be both stony and thorny Ground, and yet with diligence and
labor, through the Power and Grace of God, come to get their Hearts in process
of time, so changed and renewed, that they become good Ground, and bring forth
good Fruit to the end: So the more stony and thorny that the Heart is, the more
labor is to be used to make it good, which by the Grace of God may well be
done. Sixthly, The Parable of the ten Virgins, five whereof were foolish, has
the same signification, for these five foolish Virgins had some Oil in their
Lamps, but not being wise to get enough, they spent what they had, and so their
Lamps went out; for though they had Oil in their Lamps (otherwise their Lamps
could not have gone out) yet they had not in their Vessels, as the wise Virgins
had, and so when they were called at midnight, to meet the Bridegroom, they
had no Oil at all, neither in their Lamps, or Vessels; see Mat. 25. from Verse
1. to 12. Seventhly, It is expressly said, Ezekiel. 18.24. and 26, 27. When a
righteous Man turns away from his Righteousness, and commits Iniquity, he
shall die. And again, when the wicked Man turns away from his Wickedness, and
does that which is lawful and right, he shall live. And Eighthly, The example
of David is a most clear Instance, who fell from his Integrity, by these two
great and capital Sins of Adultery and Murder, and brought Death upon him; and
had not God renewed him again by Repentance, and restored him, he had dyed in
his Sins, and perished; and this fall of his was total, though not final,
because God restored him before he dyed. But to say, as these Faith-publishers
say and affirm, That no Men once sanctified in the least measure, can fall
totally from their Sanctification, though committing Murder and Adultery, as
was the case of David (see Cap. 17. Sect. 1. and Cap. 11.5. of their
Confession) nor from their Justification, is not only a most false and
pernicious Doctrine, but a most wonderful piece of Confusion. For if he that is
both Murderer and Adulterer in the very act, and remaining in that or these
Sins, without Repentance for some time, are really Saints, and justified; then
who may be said not to be Saints? Or what difference is there betwixt the
Saints, and no Saints, betwixt the godly and the wicked, good men and evil men?
If a man that is both Murderer and Adulterer, be a real Saint, and a justified
man, then the worst of men may generally believe they are true and real Saints,
and ye cannot convince them of the contrary? For by what means can they be
convinced thereof? Tell them of their Sins, Lying, Stealing, Drunkenness,
Swearing, Murder and Adultery, none of all this, according to this wicked
Doctrine, does prove them to be no Saints, or that they have not true Faith; and
therefore if they die in these gross Sins, they must go to Heaven immediately;
because they shall die in Faith, they shall die sanctified and justified men;
than which I know no greater Confusion, and daubing with untempered Mortar, and
sewing Pillows under Peoples Arm-holes, like the false Teachers of Old, and
prophesying smooth things unto People in their Sins, and flattering them, yea,
imboldning and encouraging them to Sin: And no doubt, many are woefully
imboldned and encouraged to run into Sin, and excess of Sin by such poisonous
Doctrine, that these false Teachers feed them with, that is like sweet Poison,
that though it be sweet to the Flesh, yet it kills the Soul: Does not the
Scripture say, The Soul that sins shall die, and the Wages of Sin is death?
And as every Sin does in some measure kill the Soul, so great Sins, such as
Murder and Adultery, than which we can hardly suppose any greater (unless that
unpardonable Sin of Blasphemy against the holy Ghost) do wholly kill and
destroy the Soul, insomuch that if any such Soul ever be saved, it must be by a
new Creation, and renewing; and of this David was well sensible, when, after
God was pleased spiritually to visit and awaken him again, he prayed unto God,
saying, Create in me a clean Heart, O God, and renew a right Spirit within me,
Psalm. 51.10. And thus according to these false Teachers, there is no mortal
Sin, that any Soul once quickened in the least degree, can commit; and the same
Sin that is mortal in the unbeliever, is not mortal in him that once was a
believer, as Murder, Adultery, yea, Incest, or worse, is no mortal Sin, in one,
and yet is a mortal Sin in the other. Does not this loose the reins to all
sorts of Wickedness, and make God a respecter of Persons, and Faith a sort of
Proof, that though men, once having Faith, commit the worst sort of Sins, as
Murder, Adultery, Incest, Rapine, yet their Faith is a sort of proof unto them,
that none of these Sins does or can kill them? They are still Saints for all
this, and justified in the sight of God; and if Saints, then good enough to be
your Church Members, yea, Members of the Independent or Congregational Church.
Why? what does hinder, but they are as real and lawful Members of the Church as
any others? And if Murderers and Adulterers, while such, are still Saints, and
qualified to be your Church Members, it is no wonder that your Church be large,
and have a great number of Members. It is no great difficulty to be a Member of
that Church, when a Murderer, an Adulterer can be a Member of it. Is this your
pretense to Reformation? And why, ye estimate your Church more holy than the
Church of Rome? But is not your Church and Doctrine in this respect much more
unholy? For the Church of Rome says, All gross, or great Sins, as Fornication,
Adultery, Murder, and the like, are really mortal Sins, in all that commit
them, without respect of Persons; and whoever commit such Sins are fallen from
their state in Grace. And so says the Scripture, 1 Cor. 6.9, 10. Be not
deceived, neither Fornicators, nor Idolaters, nor Adulterers, etc. shall
inherit the Kingdom of God. The which Kingdom of God is a state of Grace, as
well as of Glory. And here we see the Apostle Paul makes no distinction
betwixt one that has formerly believed, and one that has not believed, but
without distinction, or respect of Persons, he concludes in general against
them all, that while such, they cannot inherit the Kingdom of God. But
according to this Westminster and New England Confession of Faith, Fornicators,
and Murderers, and Adulterers, that have at any time once believed, do still
inherit the Kingdom of God, to wit, a state of Grace, which is, in a true
sense, the Kingdom of God, and is frequently so called in Scripture. And thus
it does most evidently appear, that their Doctrine in this particular is
Antichristian, and contrary to the Doctrine of the holy Scriptures. And to say,
that Murder or Adultery in him that has once truly believed, is not a mortal,
or killing Sin, but is a mortal Sin in him that has not believed, is not only
to make God a respecter of Persons in the worst sense, but to extenuate the Sin
in the Believer, and to aggravate it in the Unbeliever, contrary to the
Scriptures Testimony, which does aggravate any Sin, that Men having once
believed, fall into, more than in unbelievers, as is clear from 2 Pet. 2.20, 21.

2. And as for the Scriptures, they bring in their said Confession, to prove
their false Doctrine, let them be impartially examined, and they will be found
to prove no such thing; some of them being expressly conditional, as that in 2
Pet. 1.10. For if ye do these things, ye shall never fall. Here it is only
promised conditionally, but not absolutely, that they shall not fall, to wit,
if they give all diligence to add to their Faith Virtue, etc. Verse 5. And this
serves them not only from falling totally, but from falling indefinitly or
universally, so as not at all to fall; for he says not, Ye shall not fall
totally, But, Ye shall not fall. And there are many other Scriptures, that
though they do not expressly mention the Condition, yet do Imply it, and are to
be expounded by other Scriptures that do express it.

3. It is readily and willingly granted, that there is a state in Holiness, or
Sanctification, that may be attained and grown up into, wherein men cannot fall
away totally from a state of Grace; but as they cannot fall away totally, so
they cannot commit any gross or great Sin, which in the Scripture phrase, is
commonly called Sin, to wit, a heinous Sin, or Crime, which John calls, A Sin
unto Death, 1 John 5.16, 17. And here he distinguishes betwixt a Sin unto
Death, and a Sin that is not unto Death, viz. that does not totally slay the
Soul's Life, but wounds it, and kills only in part, as some small wandering
or evagation of mind, or giving way (through slackning the Watch) unto a vain
Thought, for some small time; something of Anger, or Passion, upon some sudden
occasion; something of glorying in Sufferings, or Services, or Knowledge, or in
spiritual Seize; something of too forward and hasty Zeal, and diverse like
sudden Motions, that a gracious and godly Soul may be tried and afflicted with,
that are as Thorns in the Flesh-and do wound and afflict the Soul, but are not
suffered to proceed so far, as to carry it forth into any secret or open gross
Crime, either inwardly in the Heart, or outwardly in Word or Deed. Hence both
in the Old and New Testament, we find diverse kinds and degrees of Sin, more or
less heinous, and these expressed by diverse both Hebrew and Greek Words: The
more heinous are called, Iniquities, Ungodliness, Impiety, Unrighteousness,
Perverseness, Rebellion; and others of an inferior Nature, are called,
Trespasses, Debts, Omissions, Faults, etc. Now the least kind or degree of Sin
does weaken and wound, yea, kill in part the Soul's spiritual Life, as when in
the natural Body some Member is mortally wounded, and killed, and yet the whole
Person is not slain thereby; but all gross Sins, such as Fornication, Adultery,
Murder, Theft, Robbery, etc. make havoc, waste and destroy the Soul's Life,
and kill the whole man, whom, notwithstanding, God in his infinite mercy may
and does, at times, restore. For we read of no Sin unpardonable, but that of
Blasphemy against the Holy Ghost, and doing despite to the Spirit of Grace. And
such who are come to this noble degree and state of Sanctification, are
described, Psalm. 119.2, 3. Blessed are they that keep his Testimonies, and that
seek him with the whole Heart, they also do no Iniquity, they walk in his ways.
And such have their Calling and Election made sure unto them; such are not
merely or barely Servants, nor Sons of the Bondwoman, but Sons of the
Freewoman, and thoroughly renewed and born of God, who does not commit Sin, for
his Seed remains in them, 1 John 3.9. And he cannot sin, because he is born
of God. For indeed to him that is born of God, Sin is contrary to his new
Nature, as much as Holiness or Righteousness is contrary to the Devil's Nature,
or as one contrary thing can be to another, as it is contrary to a Fish to live
on dry Land, or for a Sheep or Dove to live in the bottom of the Seas. But
whoever commit any gross thing, as Fornication, Murder, Adultery, Theft,
Robbery, Perjury; etc. never arrived to this pure and perfect state of Sonship,
were but Servants, and not purely and perfectly Sons; and yet the state of the
Servant is a true and good state in its place, and as faithfully improved,
leads on infallibly to the state of pure and perfect Sonship; and such who
have attained to this pure and perfect state of Sonship, can say with Paul,
Gal. 4.31. So then Brethren, we are not Children of the Bondwoman, but of the
Free. And with John, 1 John 2.19. They (to wit, such who were not true Sons,
but at best only Servants) went out from us, but they were not of us, etc. To
wit, Sons and Children of the Freewoman, or the Children of the New Covenant,
they were only of Hagar, that signifies the Law, or first Covenant. And to
conclude, the Righteousness and Holiness of the first Covenant, may be totally
fallen from, such as was that of the Angels, who fell, and Adam the first man,
he fell totally, and so may they who are not further advanced, than to bear the
Image of him, the earthly Adam; but the Righteousness and Holiness of the New
Covenant, (such as they attain unto, who are thoroughly born of God, and are
made Overcomers and Conquerors, yea, more than Conquerors, as the Scripture
phraseth it, and are made conform to the Image of Christ, the second Adam, the
Lord from Heaven, heavenly) cannot be fallen from, or lost; such having
overcome, are made Pillars in the House of God, so as no more to go out, Rev.
3.12. And to this state only do all these places of Scripture relate, that hold
forth and imply a sure and absolute stedfastness in Holiness and Righteousness.
But who are thus far advanced, and who are not, although infallible Signs and
Marks of distinction may be given of these two so differing states, God only
infallibly knows, and they to whom he does reveal it: For it is God that must
make known by the inward Revelation of his holy Spirit, who has these marks,
otherwise men may presume to have them, when they have them not. And of these
infallible Signs and Marks, some of them are to love God with the whole Heart,
to love him purely and perfectly, to love him for himself, and to desire to
enjoy him, as he is a God of Holiness, Purity and Righteousness, more than for
Gifts, or Comforts, or Rewards, that are of an inferior Nature; to hate and
fear Sin, more than all punishment for Sin; to have no inward inclination, or
desire to revenge Injuries, but most willingly and heartily to forgive and bear
them; to love Enemies, from the very inward ground and bottom of the Heart, and
always to render good for evil, and blessing for cursing. Now he that is in the
state of a mere Servant, or Son of the Bondwoman, may endeavor to practice
all these things in Word and Deed, as outwardly, and may have many inward
wrestlings, and endeavors inwardly to bring his Heart to the inward Conformity
of this most holy and spiritual Law; but until he be more inwardly changed and
renewed, and born again by a second inward Birth, he comes not up in Heart and
Soul to this inward Purity, but feels a secret defect within him, of this so
perfect Righteousness, that is wholly Evangelical.

4. Next as to that other Question mentioned in the Title of this Chapter, viz.
Whether it is true, That no man by any Grace of God given him in this Life
(which includes all Grace given at present, or to be given at any time
hereafter in this Life) can perfectly keep the Commandments of God, but does
daily break them, in Thought, Word and Deed. The Faith publishers of
Westminster and New England do positively and expressly affirm it, in answer to
Question 149. larger Catech. and Cap. 16. Sect. 5. they farther say, That the
best Works of the Saints, which proceed from the Spirit of God, as they are
wrought by them, are defiled. The which Assertions have seemed so gross to
diverse of their Church Members, that they could not believe, that their
Catechism and Confession of faith said any such thing, until I have got the
Book, and both read and caused them to read the same in their said Catechism
and Confession with their own Eyes, and then they were amazed and ashamed; and
indeed it is an astonishing Doctrine, especially to say, That the good Works of
God's holy Spirit are defiled in or by the Saints. It is such a Chimera, or
Contradiction, as to say, one and the same thing can have the perfect shape of
a man, in all his parts and Members, without any defect or redundancy, as to
say, a perfect Man, and yet also have the shape of a Dog, Ass or Hog, at the
same instant. For they say, As it is the Work of God, it is perfect; and as it
is the work of Man, it is imperfect and Sin, and that totally. For they do not
mean, that one part of the work is God's, and that is perfect, and another part
is Man's, and that is imperfect; but that the whole work, as it is God's, is
perfect, and as it is Man's, even the same whole work is defiled and imperfect,
yea, Sin: What greater piece of Nonsense and Contradiction can be imagined? as
who would say, the Snow is perfectly white in one sense, and yet black in
another sense, or the Fire is hot in one sense, but cold in another? And
another as great an absurdity they have affirmed, That these defiled and sinful
works of the Saints, God does accept them, looking upon them in his Son, though
in God's sight, they are defiled and reproveable. Is not this to represent God
(to speak with reverence) as looking with a deceiveable Eye, as one that looks
upon an Object, through a Green or Red Glass, it seems Green or Red, although
it be not really so? and is it not to make Christ a mere Cloak to Sin, or blind
to hide it from God's all-seeing Eye, or if not to hide it, yet for God to
accept that for good and holy, which is not really so, and so to give a false
judgment, and to call evil good, which God abhors? And is not this
Antimonian like, who say, God sees no Sin in them, though they Lie, Swear
falsely, drink, drunk, steal, whore, etc.? yea, Ranter like, for they say, God
sees no Sin in them, because he looks upon them in Christ. But surely, in
whomsoever Sin is, God and Christ sees it, and cannot accept it, and Christ
himself judges and condemns all Sin. And as for their alleged Proofs from
Scripture, they are merely wrested and abused, as the impartial Reader may
perceive, with small Examination. The first place they cite in their larger
Catechism, answ. to Quest. 149. is James 3.2. For in many things we offend all.
But to this I answer, 1 st. He does not say, in all things, as these
Faith-makers say, That all the best Works of the Saints are defiled, and they
sin in them all. 2 dly, He does not say, We shall, and must always offend, and
can do no otherwise by any Grace of God, so long as we live. 3 dly, It is to be
considered, that the Apostle James writes this Epistle in general to the twelve
Tribes, who were not generally come to a state of Perfection, and of such it
may be said, they offend in many things, to wit, such as are weak in Faith; and
though he use the first Person of the plural Number, saying, We, this does not
prove that he does understand himself, more than when he says, Verse 9,
Therewith (to wit, the Tongue) curse we Men. For James, to be sure, was no such
Man, both to bless and curse with the same Tongue or Mouth; for thus he
expostulates with them, My Brethren, these things ought not so to be; Does a
Fountain send forth at the same place sweet Water and bitter? The next place
they cite, is John 15.5. For without me ye can do nothing. This proves indeed,
that no Man without the Grace of Christ can do any good; but it proves not,
that by the Grace of God he cannot do that which is good. Surely Paul was not
of these Men's Faith, who said, He was able through him that strengthened him,
viz. Christ to do all things. The next place they cite, is Ecclesiastes 7.20.
There is no Man that does good, and sins not. To this it is answered; first,
The Translation does as well bear it in the potential Mood, and may not Sin;
the Hebrew Word being in the Future, which is at times put for the potential
Mood, as Psalm. 22.17. the Word in the Hebrew is (...) the Future: Secondly, It
is readily granted, that there is a time or state wherein Men generally do sin,
until a state of Perfection be attained, which was not generally attained in
the time of the Law, or Old Testament, for the Law made nothing perfect, and it
is said to be weak, although no doubt, there were some excellent and perfect
Men in that time, but they did not attain to that Perfection by the Law, but by
Faith in Christ. Another place they cite, is Genesis 6.5. And God saw that the
Wickedness of Man was great in the Earth, and that every Imagination of the
Thoughts of his Heart was only evil continually. Answer, This is very
impertinently here alleged, for it speaks only of that Generation of Men in
the Old World, that were so exceedingly degenerated, that God was provoked to
drown them with the deluge of Waters. But this does not prove that it is so
with the Saints; yea, Noah is expressly excepted, Verse 8. But Noah found Grace
in the Eyes of the Lord. And verse. 9. Noah was a just Man, and perfect in his
Generation; and Noah walked with God. Another place they cite, Romans 3.9. Answ.
This place is as impertinently alleged as the former; for it is plain, that
Paul there describes the condition of Men, both Jews and Gentiles, as they are
generally under the Law, and before they have Faith in Christ, as is clear from
Verse 19. Now we know, that what things soever the Law says, it says to them
who are under the Law. But no where can it be found in Scripture, that there
are none of these who are under Grace, that are righteous Men, and made free
from Sin; but the contrary is manifest, which expressly testifies of many
righteous and perfect Men, in their Generation, both before and after Christ
came in the Flesh, who pleased God, and were Men of good Hearts, and good
Lives, and especially Enoch is recorded, to have walked with God by Faith, of
whom nothing blame worthy is mentioned in any one particular. And Christ
speaking of good men, says, A good Tree cannot bring forth evil Fruit; and a
good Man out of the good Treasure of his Heart brings forth good things. But
to apply these words, Romans 3.9. and the following words, to the Saints
generally, as these Faith publishers do, suits more with Ranters than sober
Christians; see and well consider the words, from Verse 10. to Verse 19. There
is none Righteous, no, not one; there is none that understands, there is none
that seeks after God; they are gone out of the way, they are together become
unprofitable; there is none that does good, no, not one: Their Throat is an
open Sepulcher, with their Tongues they have used Deceit; the poison of Asps is
under their Lips, whose Mouth is full of Cursing and Bitterness; their Feet are
swift to shed Blood, Destruction and Misery are in their ways, and the way of
Peace they have not known: there is no Fear of God before their Eyes. O ye
Presbyterian and Independent. Teachers of New England and Old! How are ye not
ashamed to apply these words to all God's true Saints? Yea, to the best that
ever lived in the best state; and to bring them as a proof against the
possibility of the Saints perfection in this Life: For if these Words do hold
forth the best condition of the Saints, that ever they were in upon Earth, ye
may as well say, all Men, yea, the worst of Men are Saints, or the Saints are
the worst of Men, and there is no difference of Men at all, but all are equally
wicked, equally ungodly, unholy, unrighteous, which is indeed the plain and
express Language of Ranters, Libertines, Atheists, some of whom to the wounding
and loathing of my Soul, I have heard so affirm: But we cannot grant unto you,
that any of God's Saints are in that state and condition described by Paul in
that place, Romans 3. from verse 9. to verse 19, and 20. which Words he cites
out of some of the Psalms of David, describing the state of Men, as they are in
the fallen state, and before the new Birth and spiritual Regeneration in
Christ. But thus to confound these so differing states, is to confound Heaven
and Earth, yea, rather Heaven and Hell, and to soppose a concord betwixt Light
and Darkness, God and Belial, Christ and Antichrist. But let it be known unto
you, we can allow none of God's true Saints to be such as are there described
by Paul, Romans 3. from verse 9. to 19. But it does too much suit and quadrate
with many of your supposed New England Saints, who have most bitterly and
falsely accused God's Servants, called in scorn Quakers, and most cruelly
whipped, imprisoned and robed many of them, and hanged some of them. It may be
well enough said of them indeed, Their Throat is an open Sepulcher; with their
Tongues they have used Deceit; the poison of Asps is under their Lips, whose
Mouth is full of Cursing and Bitterness; their Feet are swift to shed Blood,
destruction and misery are in their ways, etc. Take this home to you, and blame
not me for the Application, seeing ye make it your selves, and judge it to be
your own condition.

5. And that the said Doctrine, viz. The best of the Saints by the greatest
Grace of God given in this Life, cannot perfectly keep the Commandments of God,
but does daily break them in Thought, Word and Deed, and cannot be free from
Sin for term of Life, but must sin so long as they live, and are only set free
from sinning after Death, as they expressly word it, in answer to Quest. 89.
larger Catechism, is not only warranted by any place of Scripture, but is most
expressly contrary to Scripture in many places, and is quite opposite to the
very Nature of the New Covenant and Gospel Dispensation, and highly injurious
to the Lord Jesus Christ, tending to make void, and of none effect, the very
end of his coming, and to frustrate his exceeding rich Grace; and also, it is
most woefully injurious to Men's Souls, not only discouraging Men to press after
Perfection in Holiness, and Freedom from Sin, but tending to encourage them in
sloth and neglect, to live and die in their Sins, and yet for all this be
Saints, and immediately go to Heaven, although they both live and die in their
Sins. And first, That the said Doctrine is expressly contrary to Scripture, see
Romans 6.18. Being then made free from Sin, ye became the Servants of
Righteousness. And Chap. 8.2, 3, 4, 5. and Verse 9. and Chap. 6.6, 7, 8. John
8.32, 33, 34, 35, 36. Ephesians. 4.13. Coloss. 1.28. Heb. 7.19. Next, God did
promise in the New Covenant, That he would pour clean Water upon his People,
and they should be clean from all their Filthiness ( Ezekiel. 36.25, etc.) and he
would write his Law in their Hearts, ( Jer. 31.33.) and put his Spirit in their
inward parts, and give them a Heart of Flesh, and a new Heart, and a new
Spirit, and put his Fear in their Hearts, that they shall not depart from him.
And surely all this does plainly hold forth a freedom from a total sinning, and
that daily in Thought Word and Deed. Thirdly, The very end of Christ's coming
was to save his People from their Sins, and not in their Sins, to put an end to
Sin, and to finish Transgression, and bring in everlasting Righteousness, (
Dan. 9.24.) and to do or effect that which the Law could not do, viz. to
destroy Sin, and him who has the power of Death, to wit, the Devil, that the
Righteousness of the Law might be fulfilled in us, who walk not after the
Flesh, but after the Spirit, Romans 8.4. And the Lord said unto Paul, 2 Cor.
12.9. My Grace is sufficient for thee. But if it cannot preserve any Soul, one
day, or hour, or moment, from sinning actually in Thought, Word and Deed, it
cannot be understood to be sufficient; and Paul said, Where Sin did abound,
Grace has much more abounded, and he was able through Christ that strengthened
him, to do all things: And Christ said, his Yoke was easy, and his Burden was
light: And John said, His Commandments are not grievous. But according to these
Faith-publishers, Christ's Yoke is so heavy, that none can bear it; for what is
it to bear his Yoke, but to keep his Commandments? And if they cannot be
fulfilled by Men, and yet many Thousands cast into Hellfire for not fulfilling
them, they are very grievous, which God forbid we should think. And to say,
that God requires perfect Obedience from any part of Mankind, and yet gives
them no Ability to perform it, and punish them with Hellfire, for not doing
that which is utterly and absolutely impossible for them do, does woefully
reflect upon the Justice of God, and rendereth him not only severe and hard,
but most Cruel and Tyrannical, worse than Pharaoh, to the poor Israelites, who
required of them the tale of Brick, but gave them no Straw, and yet punished
them for not performing their Task. And lastly, It is woefully injurious to Men,
to discourage them to press after Perfection, or a perfect freedom from Sin, to
tell them, They cannot attain to it while they live. As if a Physician should
tell his Patient, For all the Physic I give thee, thou must still remain
diseased, and never be healed, till Death heal thee. Or as if one should say to
a Traveller, that is going to such a City, Thou shall never reach to it whilst
thou live in this World. Would not this greatly discourage them? And also it
does greatly encourage People to live in sloth, and neglect to tell them, That
though they live and die in their Sins, they shall be saved, if they have at
any time once in all their Life believed in Christ Jesus, that Faith will save
them, though they live and die in their Sins. But we find that Christ
forewarned People, That if they died in their Sins, they should not come
whither he did go, John 8.21. And it was a fearful threatening that God
denounced against that People, Isa. 22.14. Surely this Iniquity shall not be
purged from you, till ye die, says the Lord God of Hosts. But this false
Doctrine of your Teachers tells you, It is no matter, though ye die in your
Sins, yet ye shall immediately after Death go into Heaven, if ye have once
believed. And the Scripture says, Where the Tree falls, there it shall be,
whether toward the South, or toward the North, Eccles. 11.3. But according to
this evil and corrupt Doctrine, though the Tree falls North, it shall lie
South. It is a fearful thing to teach or believe such Doctrine in a matter of so
great moment, so to smooth and daub with untempered Mortar, and to flatter
People, to tell them, They not only may, but must live and die in their Sins,
and yet immediately after Death, they shall go into Heaven, if once they have
believed, their Faith secureth them, though they sin daily in Thought, Word and
Deed, and break all God's holy Commandments every day, and that there be no
Health, nor Soundness in them. And indeed it is the great love that People have
to Sin and Iniquity, that makes them plead so earnestly for it; for if they
were weary of Sin, and did hate it, as a most cruel Tyrant, they would be glad
to hear of a possibility of deliverance from Sin here in this World. And they
that plead so much for Sin, to live and die in it, they plead for the Devil's
Kingdom, and are his Servants and Ministers in that respect, and not the
Servants and Ministers of Christ.

6. But to clear the Doctrine of Perfection, as it is believed and preached by
the People called Quakers, take these following considerations, (1st.) It is
not an absolute Perfection that we plead for, as attainable in this Life, as
many of you have falsely accused us, and particularly Nath. Morton, in his
New England Memorial, page 157. as in many other things he does most falsely
charge that People in his said Book; for we say, That the highest degree of
Perfection attainable in this Life ought not to be sit down and rested in by
any, but there ought to be a continual progress, by the best, in Holiness, and
in conformity to the Image of the Son of God, until the very last moment of
their Life; for Christ himself, who was free from all sin, yet was perfected
further, as he was Man, and did grow both in Grace and Stature; and Adam in the
innocent state, was still to have increased in Virtue and Goodness, and then he
would not have fallen, as he did. (2 dly.) This perfection or freedom from Sin,
and Possibility by the Grace of God, to keep his Commandments, we do not say it
is attained by every one, at their first Conversion or entrance into the true
Faith; but on the contrary, we say, many true Believers, and who have a true
measure of sincerity toward God, are yet short of that state of a sinless
Perfection; and that it is not attained, but by great diligence, and wrestling
against sin, through the ability of the Grace of God, and much watching and
praying, and using all the means appointed of God, both inwardly and outwardly,
to attain to that blessed Conquest and Victory over sin. (3 dly.) The most
perfect in this Life, have need to watch and pray, that they enter not into
Temptation; for as Adam, in Innocence, and in the Garden, did sin, and by his
sin lost his Innocence, so may Men that are inwardly come to this state, if
they be not duly watchful, sin against the Lord; therefore it is not the
impossibility of sinning in all respects, that we plead for, but the
possibility of not sinning, and that by the Grace of God, and not otherwise.
Although some may arrive to that state in Holiness, in conformity to the second
Adam, that they neither sin, nor can sin, in that sense as the Scripture does
intend it, 1 John 3.19. which does at least hold forth, that such who are
attained to this noble degree of Holiness, they cannot commit any gross sin
(although in some things, not for want of love, but not having a full and
perfect Knowledge in all things, they may a little fall short, as a most loving
Child, not perfectly understanding the Fathers mind in all things, may do a
thing amiss, and yet without breach of true Love to his Father, and therefore
his Father does not charge it upon him as a crime; and the like example may be
of a most loving Wife, to her Husband, who retains her chaste and perfect
Love to her Husband, and yet may do some things not according to his mind; for
as the Scripture says, Love is the fulfilling of the Law; and he that fails
not in his Love, and transgresses not against the Law of Love, though in some
case he may fall short in understanding, God does not impute it to be a crime
unto him. (4 thly) It is not temptations or motions unto sin, that may arise
either from the Devil, or the World without them, or from the natural and
mortal part in them, that we plead a freedom from; for it is readily granted
that such Temptations may and do follow the best Men, and therefore they ought
to watch against them, and resist them, the which if they do, and that they no
wise join and consent to Temptation, it is not sin unto them, according to that
saying of an Ancient, Non nocet sensus, si desu Consensus, i. e. the sense of
the Temptation does not hurt, if the consent be not given unto it. (5 thly.)
The Seed or Principle of Evil, though it remain in the mortal, or natural part,
and at times move to evil Thoughts and Desires, etc. yet not being in any wife
joined nor consented unto, neither outwardly in Word or Deed, nor inwardly in
the least Thought or Desire, or delight and love of the Heart yielded unto, nor
obeyed, is not imputed to be Sin unto Men, who do not join to it, nor obey it,
even as the Seed and Principle of God's Grace, of Truth, Holiness, and
Righteousness, that is in the Hearts of wicked Men, and often moves in them to
turn and convert them unto God from the evil of their ways, yet not being
consented, or yielded unto, nor obeyed by them, it is not in that case their
Righteousness, nor does it make them in any respect righteous, unless they join
and yield unto it, in true Obedience. (6thly.) It is not the same degree and
stature of Perfection, that God requires of every one, but according to that
measure and degree of Grace and Light that God has imparted to every one, to
some more, to others less, but to every one sufficient to the present time and
state. For he that was faithful in the improving his two Talents to make them
four, was accepted, although he made them not ten, as he that was faithful in
his five, and made them ten, and they were both proportionally rewarded; hence
we read of good and holy Men, who are said to be perfect in their Generation,
according to the Light and Grace that God gave them, in their Day and Age. And
the high Priest that had on his Breast the Vrim and Thummim, that signifies
Lights and Perfections, was a Type of Christ, our great and only high Priest,
who has the Vrim, that is Lights, and the Thummim, that is Perfections, and
distributeth of these Lights and Perfections variously toward his Saints and
Children, but to all sufficiently. And so the degree of Perfection, and perfect
Obedience ought to answer to the degree of Light and Grace that God gives
through Christ unto every one, and he who is faithful in that degree, though he
has not the same equal degree and measure that another has, is perfect in
that respect; and the Child in the Child's state is perfect, being faithful to
the Grace and Light that is given him; and if he die in that state, he is safe,
and cannot perish, as well as he that is a Man in Christ, and is come up to the
spiritual stature and growth of a spiritual Man. So that Faithfulness in the
Work and Service of God, is that which does render a Man perfect in the sight
of God, according to the ability of Light and Grace received, whether in the
state of a Child, Young Man, or Elder in Christ. And thus I have gone through
all the twelve particulars, which I charged on the four Teachers, whether
Presbyterian or Independent, at Boston, and have given them not only my
Assertions, but my Arguments against their false and pernicious Doctrins, that
do not feed, but starve and kill the Souls of them that believe and receive
them.

CHAP. IX.
Of the Constitution and Government of their visible Church, who are called
Presbyterians and Independents, or gathered Churches.

1. THe visible Church they define to be, or to consist of all those throughout
the World, that profess the true Religion, together with their Children; see
Confession, Cap. 25. Sect. 2. where it does plainly appear, that they require
no other qualification, to constitute or make the Members of their visible
Church, but a Profession of the true Religion: So that nothing of true Piety or
Holiness, nothing of the Spirit of God, nothing of an inward Possession of
Christ, or his Life, and Power, or Grace, or heavenly Presence and Appearance,
is requisite to constitute any Members of their visible Church; and thus though
all the Members of their visible Church were gross and notorious Hypocrites,
and mere empty Formalists, having only a Form of Godliness, without the Power
of it, they are sufficiently qualified to be their Church Members; yea,
notoriously slanderous Persons, notoriously Liars, Deceivers, Drunkards,
Adulterers, Thieves, Murderers, are qualified Members of their Church; for all
these and the worst of Men may profess the true Religion. It is strange, that
Independents so called, require no more, but to profess the true Religion, to
make People Members of their Church! Why did they formerly separate, and set up
Churches apart, not only from the Popish and Episcopal, but from the
Presbyterian Churches, so called, if a Profession of the true Religion be
enough, to qualify Persons to be Church Members of their Church? Do not those
profess the true Religion as well as these called Independents? Yea, Do not the
Presbyterians profess the same Religion in all parts, with these called
Independents, and differ nothing from them, but in some small Circumstances of
Discipline, Government, and the like?

2. We find no such Church in all the Scripture, owned to be a Church of God,
or Christ, that the outward Form or Profession of true Religion does make a
Church of God or Christ. But on the contrary, these who have the Form of
Godliness, but have not the Power of it, and deny the Power, the Scripture
bids, turn away from them: For of this sort are they which creep into Houses,
etc. see 2 Timothy 3.5, 6. And consequently these can be no true Church of Christ.
And as for the distinction of the Church, visible and invisible, it may be
owned in a sense, but not in that sense given by them, as if to profess the
true Religion was sufficient to make a People to be a true visible Church of
Christ. For the invisible Church, and the visible, do not differ in Substance
or Nature, but in some circumstances of Time, Places, and outward Actions. And
it may be well allowed, that a Company, or Assembly of truly holy Men and
Women, meeting together at certain Times and Places, that are known to People
among whom they dwell, and calling together upon the Name of the Lord, and
teaching, and instructing, and edifying one another, every one using his
spiritual Gift of Ministration, whether in Praying or Prophesying, to the
Edification of the whole, may be called a visible Church, insomuch that they
appear in external or outward and bodily Works and Actions that are visible.
But as the Body without Life or Spirit is dead, and cannot properly be called a
Man, so a Church or Assembly of People, only professing the true Religion (but
having nothing of the true Life and Spirit of Christ, and whose outward and
bodily Services and Works have no inward and spiritual Virtue and Life in them,
which is that Salt that makes them savoury, and does recommend them unto God,
so that he savoureth a sweet savor in them) cannot be truly and justly
accounted a true Church of Christ: For we no where find in Scripture any
Society, or company of People called the Church of Christ, who had nothing but
the Profession of the true Religion; and although Hypocrites, and mere
Formalists did outwardly at times mingle or mix with sincere Christians, and
did assume the same outward Profession with them in former Ages, as such were
among the Churches of Corinth and Gulatia, etc. Yet these Hypocrites and mere
Formalists, who had only the Form, but had nothing of the Power and Life of
true Religion, were no part of the true Church, no more than Chaff or Tares,
that are mixed with Wheat, are any part of the Wheat, or Dross that is mixed
with Silver, is any part of the Silver, or old Leaven that is mixed with the
new Dough, is any part of it. And therefore it ought to be the work of all the
true Members of the true Church, to purge out the old Leaven, and to be a
separate People from all these that have only a Form and Profession of
Religion, but have nothing of the Power of it.

3. The Church of Christ is called his Body, frequently in Scripture, and every
Member thereof is called a Member of Christ, and his Body is a living Body, and
every Member a living Member; and that which makes both the whole Body, and
every Member thereof living, is Christ Jesus the Life, living and indwelling in
every Member, and together with Christ, both the Father and the holy Spirit do
dwell in every Member of the true Church, even as Christ promised it should be,
John 14.23. If a Man love me, he will keep my Words, and my Father will love
him, and We will come unto him, and make our abode with him. And this WE, is
the Father, the Son, and the holy Spirit, who are three, and one, indwelling in
every true Member of the Church of Christ; and according to this, Paul said to
the believing Corinthians, Know ye not, that your Bodies are the Temples of the
holy Ghost, which dwells in you. And the holy Ghost which dwelt in them,
together with the Father and the Son, did work every good Work in them, and
move them in all holy and religious Services and Performances, whether to
Preach, Pray, or give Thanks, or to meditate and wait upon the Lord in silence:
And they knew by the inward Teaching and Revelation of God's holy Spirit, the
proper and fit times, when to speak, and when to be silent, when to preach, and
when to pray, and when to begin, and when to make an end; they had no
Hourglass to measure out the Time unto them, nor an outward Bell hanging in a
Steeple, to call them together, but the Gospel-Bell did ring and sound in their
Hearts, and this gathered them together in a living way and manner; and of this
the outward Bells, ( Ex. 28 34, 35) that did hang at the High-Priest's Garment,
with the Pomegranats, were Types: And this is the living Word, even Christ
whose inward Voice and Call in the Soul and Heart, gives a joyful sound to
that Ear which is opened to hear it; and of such it is written, Blessed are
they that know the joyful sound, they shall walk, O Lord, in the Light of thy
Countenance, Psalm 89.15.

4. Moreover the true Church, and every Member thereof, is said to be of
Christ's Flesh, and of his Bones, and they two are one Flesh, Ephesians. 5.30, 31.
And they are one Spirit, 1 Cor. 6.17. For Christ he is both the Head and Life
of the Church, which is his Body, from whom the whole Body fitly joined
together, and compacted by that which every Joint supplyeth, according to the
effectual working (the Greek has it, Energia) in the measure of every part,
makes increase of the Body, unto the edifying of it self in Love, Ephesians. 4.16.
And that which thus knitteth all the Members both unto Christ, the Head, and
one unto another, is the Spirit, and the Unity of the Spirit is the Bond of
Peace; for by one Spirit they are all baptized into one Body, and do all drink
into one Spirit: And this is the true gathering of a Church, or Churches of
Christ, that is far beyond all Profession of true Religion, or outward Signs,
or Ceremonies, as that of water Baptism, which Presbyterians and others use to
Initiate or enter People into their Church, or outward Covenants, and Contracts
or Bonds, which these called Independents use to initiate or enter People into
their Church, all which outward things are but Men's Inventions, as they are now
used, whereby to gather, and make up Churches: And all this is but Man's
gathering and work, made Things, Likenesses and graven Images of heavenly
things, which the Lord has forbidden, saying, Thou shall not make to thy self
any graven Image, nor the likeness of any thing in Heaven above, etc. Exodus 20.
For whatever Men make, or set up, whether it be Church, Ordinance, or Service,
without the Spirit and Power of God, inwardly moving, assisting, teaching,
leading, guiding and ordering them so to do, is but Man's work, a thing of
Man's making; and all such made Things, made Faiths, made Churches, made
Worships, made Ordinances, without the Spirit and Power of God inwardly
revealed, are to be abolished, shaken and removed, and the Voice of God will do
it, whose Voice of Old did shake Mount Sinai, and the Lord has said, Yet once
more I shake not the Earth only, but the Heavens also. And this Voice of the
Lord uttered from Heaven, has both shaken, abolished, and removed many things
of Men's making already, and in the Lords due time, will remove them all; and
every Plant that is not of the Father's planting, he will pluck it up and throw
it away. And this is a warning unto you, O ye Churches and People of
New England, although Babylon like, ye sit as a Queen, or have at least so sat
some few Years ago, and did say in your Heart, ye shall see no Widdowhood, and
have preached it as Doctrine, that the sounding of God's Voice from Heaven, is
althogeter ceased in these days: Let this be told unto you, it has not ceased
to sound, but still does, and shall, and the sound of it shall not only shake,
but utterly remove, undo, and destroy all your Babylonish buildings: And this
the Lord will do, not by Might, nor Power ( viz. of man) but by his own Spirit;
and the time hastneth, and blessed shall he be who receives warning, and
hearkneth unto the counsel of the Lord; he who has Ears to hear, let him hear.

5. And the true Church is in God the Father, and in the Lord Jesus Christ, 1
These. 1.1. And it is built upon Christ, that sure Foundation, and Rock of Ages,
whom Peter confessed unto, which Flesh and Blood has not revealed unto him,
but the Father in Heaven: And upon this Rock so confessed, and so known and
understood, which Flesh and Blood has not revealed, but the Father in Heaven,
is the true Church built. And this is more than a Profession of the true
Religion: For it is not every one that professes the true Religion, to whom
the Father in Heaven has revealed the Lord Jesus Christ, as he did unto Peter,
and as he does unto every true and faithful Believer, and Confessor of Christ.
And the true Church that is built on this Rock, and every Member thereof, they
are not only hearers and professors of the Words and Doctrine of Christ, but
they are doers of them: But they who do not, although they both hear and say,
they are foolish Builders, and build upon the Sand; and such are all these
visible Churches, who have no other thing to qualify them, but to profess the
true Religion. Now, to profess the true Religion, carries a twofold sense,
one is, that the Religion which People profess, they call, or profess it to be
the true Religion; and in this sense, every one that professes any Religion at
all (if he be in earnest) professes the true Religion; that is, he esteems
or professes his Religion to be such. The other sense is, that the Religion
that is professed, is indeed the true Religion, and is not only so called, or
professed: And according to this sense, your visible Churches, whether
Presbyterian or Independent, are no true Churches: For the Religion ye profess,
is not the true Religion of Christ Jesus, which he, and the Prophets, the
Evangelists, and Apostles did teach, as I have already proved in many weighty
particulars, yea, in Fundamentals, and in the very Foundation it self, which is
Christ Jesus, on which the true Church is built, and every Member thereof. But
ye who say, All inward divine Revelation of Christ is ceased; ye build not on
Christ, but on a mere Hearsay, and Historical report of him: For how can ye
build on him, when ye have no belief that Christ is nearer unto you, than in
some remote place beyond the Skies? Can the Walls of the House be built on a
Foundation that is altogether remote from it? Must not the House and the
Foundation be immediately joined together? And must not this Foundation be
seen, and felt by every Member? And is not this incomparably more than the best
Profession of true Religion? O ye blind Leaders of the Blind! How does my Soul
pity you, and the poor People more especially, who are led by you, and whom ye
are still seeking to lead, until both ye and they fall into the Ditch; and ye
ill deserve your Wages, and the many Hundreds, yea, Thousands of Pounds, that
poor People pay Yearly unto you, and work sore and hard to feed you, and cloth
you, and your Wives and Children, to Luxury and Wantonness, many of you, while
in the mean time, under color and pretense of feeding the Souls of the People,
ye famish and starve, yea, poison and kill them with your false Doctrine, as I
have, through God's assistance sufficiently made appear, and I hope yet more to
make appear, as I have occasion given unto me.

6. And Christ Jesus, the living, elect, precious Cornerstone, the sure
Foundation is laid in Zion, and that Zion is not only the heavenly Zion above,
but the Church and People of God on Earth; and Christ Jesus is one both in
Heaven without us, and also within us, even the Man Christ Jesus, the same that
took hold of the Seed of Abraham, and is the Son of Abraham and David,
according unto that Seed, and he is exalted in heavenly Glory in that same Seed
and Nature, in the whole and entire and perfect Nature of Man, in Soul and
Body, having put off nothing that he had upon Earth; but these Weaknesses and
Infirmities which he did take on him for our sake, even Jesus of Nazareth, he
who was crucified for our Sins, and rose again for our Justification, who was
dead, and is alive, and lives for evermore; and he who by true Faith is joined
to the Spirit of Christ, by the same he is joined both to Christ in him, and
also to Christ in Heaven, and also to all the Saints in Heaven, and the
innumerable company of Angels, and Spirits of just men made perfect, and also
unto the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ; and both God and Christ are
not only in remote places, and Heavens without us, but also in us, and in all
his Saints, as he has said, Jer. 23.23, 24. Am I a God at Hand, says the
Lord, and not a God afar off? Do not I fill Heaven and Earth? Says the Lord.

7. And as to the Government, and Governors, or Rulers of your visible
Churches, both Presbyterian and Independent, it is of the same Nature with your
visible Churches, the only qualification of them being an outward profession of
Christian Religion, and an outward Call (which ye are all at a loss, where to
begin it, as I have already proved, Cap. 4.) accompanied with some natural or
acquired Gifts and Abilities of Letter-learning, reaching no further than the
Letter of the Scripture at best, and often, or for most part not that; for ye
preach not the Letter in the form of sound words of Scripture, but have so
mingled it with your Glosses, and wrested Senses and Meanings, and Words of
men's wisdom and intentions, that it is but little of the very Letter ye
preach. But if ye did preach the Letter, and have not that infallible and
unerring Spirit of Christ, which was in the true Ministers of Christ in former
Ages, and is now in his true Ministers in this Age, ye are but at best
Ministers of the Letter, and not Ministers of the Spirit, and therefore not
Ministers of the New Testament. And what is the use and end of your Government
but to keep poor People in Bondage under you, and your false Doctrine? And if
they do not believe it, but witness against it, then ye cast them out of your
Synagogues, and yet then will force Maintenance from them, as many of you have
done. And when ye had Power with the Magistrates to instigate and stir them up
to persecute honest Dissenters, to Whip, Stock, Imprison, spoil Goods, cut off
Ears, and also to put to Death (for testifying against your false Doctrins)
from your false and fallible Spirit, I say, both false and fallible: For seeing
ye do not profess to be taught, led and guided by the infallible Spirit of
Christ, which was in the Prophets and Apostles, and in all true Christians, if
ye have not this Spirit, your Spirit is not only fallible, but false, to wit,
the Spirit of this World; For there are but two Spirits that do teach, lead and
guide all men on Earth, the one is, that unerring, true and infallible Spirit
of Christ, which leads all God's true Children, and the other the Spirit of
this World, which is the very Devil himself, the God of this World, that
leads all Unbelievers and Ungodly Persons in the World; and this Spirit is
not only fallible, but false, continually leading into Error, as the Spirit of
Truth leads into all Truth.

8. And how are ye not ashamed to cite (see Confess. cap. 30. sect. 1.) Isa.
9.6, 7, Acts 20.17. Matthew. 28.18. for your Government, and Governors and Elders
of your Churches? Because it is said, Isa. 9.6, 7. The Government is upon his
Shoulders; to wit, Christ Jesus? Does it therefore follow it is upon yours? Or
can any be Governors or Rulers in the Church under him without he himself, and
his holy Spirit, Power and Life, which has the heavenly Authority in it, be
known inwardly revealed, which ye deny? Was not the Government in the Apostles
days altogether derived from the Power and Spirit of Christ in them? but yours
is quite another thing; by your own Confession, ye have not that infallible
Spirit, nor the inward Revelation of it. And if ye derive it from the Letter,
so may any body else, as well as ye, and say, because they have the Letter,
they are Rulers and Governors of Churches. And as to these Elders, mentioned
Acts 20.17. They were such whom the holy Ghost had made Overseers, as is
expressly affirmed of them, Verse 28. But this ye cannot in truth say, who deny
all pretense to inward divine Revelation, which they had. Nor does Matthew.
28.18. make any thing at all for you, but against you: Christ said to the
Apostles, All Power in Heaven and in Earth is given unto me; go ye therefore
and teach all Nations. But when said he so unto you? Or when gave he you such
Commission? Or suppose ye had such Commission, surely ye are very unfaithful
unto it, who creep each of you into a House or Town, and there only pretend to
teach a few that come to hear you. So did not the Apostles, but traveled from
place to place, and from one Nation, City and Country to another, and had no
certain dewlling place by virtue of their said Commission; but so do not ye,
but commonly keep to one place, unless a fatter Benefice, or more yearly
Sallary and Hire invite you to another. Will nothing serve your turn but the
same Commission, which Christ gave the Apostles? And if ye have the same
Commission, are not ye also Apostles? A charge which some of you have laid to
us. But why do ye not mind the other part of the Commission, and apply that
unto you? Acts 1.4, 8. And being assembled with them, he commanded, that they
should not depart from Jerusalem, but wait for the Promise of the Father, which
(he says) ye have heard of me, Verse 8. But ye shall receive Power after that
the Holy Ghost is come upon you, and ye shall be Witnesses unto me, both in
Jerusalem, and in all Judea, and in Samaria, and unto the uttermost part of the
Earth? And though some of you in New England, have made some show of Preaching
to the Indians, and to have converted them, and got great sums of Money out of
Old England on that account. Alas! to what have ye converted them? Is it not
very manifest, they are generally nothing better than when they were called
Heathens, but are for most part rather worse? Which of them all have ye turned
from Darkness to Light, and from the Power of Satan to God, and to know God and
Christ by his Power and Spirit, to rule in them? Nay, alas! ye know it not in
your selves, and preach against it, and therefore ye are not like to be
Instruments to bring others to know it. And if ye say, Ye are the Successors of
the Apostles, and therefore the same Call, which he gave unto them, he does
give unto you. Ye must first prove and demonstrate it, that ye succeed them in
the same Spirit, Power, Light and Life, and in the same Holiness and
Righteousness of Life, as well as in Profession, before ye ought to be
believed; but the contrary in all these respects is manifest. Nor can ye show
your Line of Succession, but from the Church of Rome, and her Popes and
Bishops, which ye have called Antichrist, in your Confession of Faith, Cap. 25.
Sect. 6. as is formerly observed in Cap. 4.

9. And as concerning the visibility of the true Church, as it has been
granted, that the true Church is often visible, and does visibly appear in the
Face of the World, as a City set upon an Hill, and does make a visible and
outward Profession of her Faith in Christ Jesus, and love to him, both in good
Words, and good Works, yet it is not any thing merely outward and visible, that
does infallibly prove or demonstrate her to be the true Church, or can make her
known to People: But it is the same inward Light, Spirit and Power of God
inwardly revealed, that does make known both Christ the Head, and the true
Church, which is his Body, and every true Member thereof: And without the Light
and Spirit of Christ inwardly shining, and revealing, both Christ and his
Church is unknown unto Men, but by the same is well known, even as Christ said
unto his Disciples, John 15.18. If the World hate you, ye know that it hated me
before it hated you. Now, whence is it that the World both hates Christ, and
his Church? Because it knows them not. And Paul said, 2 Cor. 6.9. As unknown,
and yet well known; to wit, well known to the Children of the Light, who dwell
in the Light, and see and judge of things, and Men in the Light; but to them
who are in Darkness, and are Darkness, unknown, and therefore hated and
persecuted by them.

CHAP. X. Of their two Sacraments, called BAPTISM and the SVPPER.
1. AS for the term, or word Sacrament, it is no where to be found in all the
English Translation of the Bible received among Protestants, nor is there any
Word either in the Hebrew, or Greek, that does properly answer unto it, unless
they will translate the Greek Word that signifies Mystery, to signify a
Sacrament, as the old Latin has it in Ephesians. 5.32. Hoc est magnum Sacramentum,
i. e. This is a great Sacrament; for which our English Translation reads more
properly, this is a great Mystery. But if Sacrament signify Mystery, then
there must be as many Sacraments as Mysteries; and Faith it self is a Sacrament
at that rate, and true Preaching and Prayer, and every other Religious matter
and thing, all which are holy Mysteries. And they who say, there are two
Sacraments have borrowed these two out of the seven, professed by the Church of
Rome, having cast off, and rejected five of the seven, for which the said
Church does accuse these latter Churches of Sacrilege, and spiritual Robbery,
to abolish and take away five of the seven Sacraments, or rather indeed the
sixth also, seeing they believe it only to be but a Figure, to wit, that called
the Eucharist: And to say the truth, they have not one whit more probability,
but rather less, for the two Sacraments that they have reserved, than for the
other five that they have rejected: And they have no cause to accuse the People
called Quakers, of Sacrilege, for denying these two, until they clear
themselves of Sacrilege for denying five, and give better grounds for
reserving these two, than as yet they have given.

2. And as for Infants Baptism, and sprinkling a Child of eight days, or more
or less, on the Forehead, and call it Baptism, it has no footing in all the
Scripture, neither of Precept nor Practice, as will easily appear, by
considering the places of Scripture they cite for it. And first, for Sprinkling
on the Forehead, instead of Dipping, they cite Heb. 9.10. to 22. But this
Sprinkling was not of Water, but of Blood; and we do not read that it was only
on the Forehead; and the Cups and Vessels that were sprinkled with Blood or
Water, were sprinkled all over, and not in one single place. And why did John
baptize Christ by dipping into Water, and others that he baptized, if
sprinkling on the Forehead was sufficient in that day? Next, as to the
baptizing of Infants, they cite for it, Genesis 17.9. Where God commanded Abraham
that every Man child of his Posterity should be Circumcised, and therefore
every Infant of one, or both the believing Parents are to be sprinkled with
Water. But this Consequence is merely begged, but nothing proved. For the
first, we find an express command to Abraham: For the second, we find neither
Command nor Practice in all the Scripture, nor was the practice of baptizing
Infants in use, for an hundred of Years, and more, after the Apostles days,
among Professors of Christianity. And let it be granted, that Infants have a
right to the Grace signified by Water Baptism, it does not therefore follow,
that the Figure or Sign belongs unto them, because they have also a right to
Christ's Body and Blood, and yet they confess, the Supper is not to be
administered unto them. The next place they cite, is Coloss. 2.11, 12. where
Circumcision and Baptism are joined together, but neither the Circumcision, nor
the Baptism there mentioned, is outward, as is clear, especially of
Circumcision, that is said, to be made without Hands; and therefore it is not
the outward of the Flesh, but the inward of the Heart; and so is also the
Baptism there mentioned, verse 12. Buried with him in Baptism, wherein also you
are risen with him, through the Faith of the operation of God. Ye see here is
nothing of outward Water: Nor are all they who are baptized with outward Water,
either buried with Christ, or risen with him, but many still alive in old Adam,
and that too generally. The next place they cite, is Matthew. 28.19. But this
says nothing of Water, and if it were granted that Water Baptism is
understood, as it neither is, nor ought to be granted, yet it will not prove
that Infants should be any more baptized than taught, seeing teaching and
baptizing are joined together. Another place they cite, is Luke 18.15, 16.
where Christ bids to suffer little Children to come unto him, and forbid
them not, and that he blessed them, and laid his hands upon them, we read in
Scripture; but that he baptized them either with dipping or sprinkling, we read
not, but on the contrary it is expressly said, That Jesus himself baptized none,
to wit, with Water, see Joh. 4.2. Their last place they cite, is Romans 11.16. If
the Root be holy, so are the Branches; but this does not prove that Infants are
more to be baptized, than to have that called the Supper administered unto them:
And these Branches mentioned by Paul in that place, Romans 11.16. were really the
unbelieving Jews, that because of their Unbelief were broken off at that time,
yet the Root being holy, to wit, Abraham, and the promised Seed, Paul had hope
of their conversion, as many as did belong to God's election, as he expresses
it, verse 28. and these were not the immediate Children of Abraham, but forty
Generations after Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob; and therefore this Scripture
says as much for the aged unbelieving Children of unbelieving Parents, if they
have descended from any of their Forefathers, upwards of forty Generations,
that were Believers; and if up to forty, why not up to sixty, and further? Yea,
to Noah, who is the common Father of all Men, with whom God established his
Covenant, and with his Seed after him, until the end of the World, that all his
Seed through Christ, might receive the benefit of the same, unless they do
wilfully reject it; of which I have said something already in Chap. 6.

3. And as for Water Baptism in general, we say, it did only properly belong to
John's Ministry and Dispensation, and is expressly contradistinguished from the
Baptism of Christ, both by John, and also by Christ himself; for John did
baptize with Water unto Repentance, but Christ who comes after John, and was
before him, who is more worthy than John, he baptizeth with fire, and with the
Holy Ghost; and no doubt there was a spiritual blessing and Grace conveyed unto
People, by John's Baptism, while it stood in force; for God never ordained any
outward thing, but as it was rightly done, in its day and season, it had some
spiritual blessing accompanying it, as all the Sacrifices and Services of the
Law: And if any were raised up by the Lord, as John was, and could prove, and
instruct their being sent to baptize with Water, as he was, these to whom they
should be sent, ought gladly to receive it; but to do it by bare imitation, or
a mere pretended Call, which they cannot prove to be either mediate or
immediate, is great presumption, yea, superstition; and to call that a Command
of God, which he has given them no command to practice, is to set up the
Precepts of Men in the room of God's Commandments, as the Pharisees did of old,
and is a taking of his Name in vain, for which he will not hold them guiltless.
And they can never prove, by all their art and skill, that Water Baptism is
commanded by Christ, Mat. 28.18, 19. for all God's commands and precepts,
especially of public institution, relating to the Church, are express, in so
many express Words, and are not left to be gathered by uncertain and doubtful
Consequences. When God sent John to baptize with Water, Water was expressed;
but in the Apostles Commission to baptize, no mention is made of Water, nor no
words of Institution commanded to be used, but the command is, Go, teach and
baptize all Nations into the Name of the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost.
And the Name of either the Father, or the Son, or the Holy Ghost, is most
frequently, if not always used in Scripture, to signify Power and Life, as the
Name of the Lord is a strong Tower: Thy Name is as Ointment poured forth, etc.
And whereas they object, first, That the Apostles could not baptize with the
spiritual Baptism. I answer, yea; they could Instrumentally and Ministerially,
as well as they could convert, and beget Sons and Daughters unto God; for they
were Ministers of the Spirit, and did minister of the Spirit, both in
Preaching, and Prayer, and laying on of Hands, although God only was the
principal worker and Author. Next, they object, That Peter and Paul, and some
others, baptized some with Water, and that Christ was baptized with Water. But
none of these prove what they intend, for Christ was baptized by John, and also
he was circumcised according to the Law, and Paul circumcised Timothy; and the
Apostles generally in that day thought fit both to use, and tolerate the use of
Water Baptism, that belonged to John, and diverse other things of the Law, which
by permission, for a time, and not by any Gospel standing Commission; otherwise
Paul would never have said, he was not sent to baptize, but to preach the
Gospel; nor would he have thanked God that he had baptized so few: For it were
strange to think that Paul would thank God, that he did not so fully obey a
Gospel precept. In short, if these who are so zealous for Water Baptism, were
cordially zealous, for the inward and spiritual Baptism, they might be the more
born with, as Men bear with Children, that use Likenesses and Figures of
things, that suit most with the age and state of Children, and Charity might be
allowed them in that case, to be as Children or Babes in Christ, if they did
hunger and thirst after Righteousness, and did wait for the inward appearance
and coming of Christ's Kingdom, and the Revelation of it in their Hearts, as
some such there may be. But these, who altogether are for the outward Baptism
and Supper, and deny wholly the inward and spiritual Baptism and Supper of
Christ, which is only known and received by the holy Spirit's inward
Revelation, no Charity can be allowed unto them, to judge them true Christians
in any degree, not so much as Babes, but altogether, for the time, Hypocrites
and Formalists.

4. Next, concerning the Supper: We grant that Christ had an outward Supper
with his Disciples, when he did eat the Pascal Lamb with them; and this was a
real Supper, and not like that which ye now use, that is neither substantial
Supper nor Dinner, being only a little crumb of Bread, scarce so big as a Nut,
and a spoonful of Wine, or two, which has little outward Substance, and no
inward and spiritual Signification unto you, as ye use it, while ye altogether
deny, that the Saints are partakers of the substance of Christ, or that Christ
really and substantially dwells in his Saints; and while ye also deny all
inward Revelation of him in these latter Ages, Your Supper is a mere shadow,
and none of Christ's Supper, nor of his Institution. For when Christ did sup
with his Disciples, in the Night wherein he was betrayed, he began with the
Cup, and blessed, or gave thanks, and said, Take this, and divide it among your
selves. And next he took Bread, and blessed, or gave thanks, and brake it, and
gave unto them, saying, This is my Body, this do in Remembrance of me: Likewise
after Supper he took the Cup, saying, This Cup is the New Testament in my
Blood, drink ye all of it, Luke 22.14. to 20. So we see, he used the Cup twice,
and began and ended with it, but so do not ye; and though ye seem greatly to
blame the Church of Rome, for not giving the Cup to the People, but only the
Bread, and charge them with mutilating, or dismembring the Institution; if so,
do not ye the same in part? Seeing ye use the Cup but once, and Christ used it
twice, and began with it, but so do not ye. And seeing ye say Ye have not that
infallible Spirit that Christ had, and gave to the Apostles; and that we find
you wholly ignorant of Christ's Body, and that ye have no discerning of it, nor
no taste and savor of his Flesh, which is Meat indeed, nor of his Blood, which
is Drink indeed, and know not the inward and spiritual supping with Christ, we
cannot believe, nor acknowledge, that ye Presbyterian and Independent Teachers,
have any power to bless either the Bread, or the Cup, as Christ did, or to
minister, or give of his Body and Blood to any People, which true Ministers of
Christ have done, and do at this day, to my certain knowledge and joy, and to
the certain knowledge and joy of many thousands with me, and that often in the
use of outward eating and drinking, being sanctified and blessed by the Word of
God and Prayer, as we have sat down together, whether many or a few, we have
truly witnessed the fulfilling of that saying, Luke 24.35. And they told what
things were done in the way, and how he was known of them in breaking of Bread.
And as it is, Verse 30, 31. And it came to pass, as he sat at Meat with them,
he took Bread, and blessed it, and brake, and gave to them, and their Eyes were
opened, (Note, even as Jonathan's Eyes were opened, or lightened, when he did
eat the Honey; and as Isaac blessed Jacob when he did eat what he had prepared
of savoury Meat for him; and as the Angel blessed Abraham, when he did eat of
the Calf, and the Cakes that were set before him; and as Melchizedeck blessed
Abraham, when he brought him Bread and Wine; and diverse other the like
examples) and they knew him, etc. Even so can many say at this day, to God's
praise, in the outward Eating and Drinking together, as they have sat
together, and waited in true silence, until God has been pleased to move some
one or other of his faithful Servants and Ministers of his Word of Life, and of
his Flesh and Blood, which is spiritual, to pray unto the Lord, or give Thanks,
their outward eating and drinking has been so blessed unto them, that at one
and the same time they have eat both the outward Bread with the bodily Mouth,
and the inward Bread, which is spiritual, with the inward and spiritual Mouth;
and they have also drunk outwardly the outward Cup, and inwardly the inward and
spiritual: And so at the same time, they have fed at a twofold Table, and have
been both inwardly and outwardly refreshed, nourished and strengthened; and this
also oftentimes, in the use only of inward Prayer and Thanksgiving, as well as
of both inward and outward; and yet we neither do, nor can limit the spiritual
and inward eating of Christ's Body, and drinking of his Blood, to any outward
eating or drinking whatsoever. As neither did the ancient Christians, who said,
That all true Believers eat Christ's Flesh, and drink his Blood, daily and
hourly; and so we believe. And no doubt, Christ did really give his Body and
Blood unto his Disciples at that time, and it was not a bare Figure or Sign
that he gave them, but in the use of the Bread and Wine, he gave them at the
same time, an inward enjoyment of him. And all this we own, and are very glad
of such occasions, when we have them, to sit together, and eat and drink both
outwardly and inwardly, enjoying a twofold Table and Supper at one time, and
finding the Lord himself spiritually present, and blessing both unto us, and
enabling us to receive both his Spiritual and Temporal Blessings, with Prayer
and Thanksgiving: And such breaking of Bread we own, from House to House, even
outwardly as well as inwardly, with singleness and gladness of Heart, as the
Primitive Christians did of Old, sometimes in a lesser Number, and sometimes in
a greater: For at that Supper above mentioned, Luke 24.30. there were only
present these two Disciples, besides Christ himself; so that it is not the
number, whether greater or small, that is essential. And also we do believe,
and say, that it is our Duty, not only in these more solemn Eatings and
Drinkings, to remember the Lord's death, and what he has done, and suffered
for us, when we thus eat and drink together, perhaps many belonging to diverse
Families, but also in all our other Eatings and Drinkings, and at all other
times, as it does please the Lord to enable us; and every true Christian has
the Lord's Death, Resurrection, and his great Love, and what he has done and
suffered for us, printed as in Capital Letters, upon his very Heart and Soul,
and writ as a living Epistle, with the Spirit of the living God, upon fleshly
Tables; and that this ought to be done, not only to his more abundant inward
and spiritual coming unto us, but to be perpetuated, and continued by all true
Christians, to the end of the World, and the last coming of Christ. And now
tell me, wherein we are behind you? or wherein we fall short of you? or what
excellency, worth, or value has your Supper above, and beyond ours? But on the
contrary, has not ours the advantage every way? Seeing we have more
frequently, both the outward and inward eating and drinking together, than ye
have the outward; and alas, the many lean and dead Souls among you, void of
inward and spiritual discerning, taste or savor, too manifestly demonstrate,
ye are generally strangers to the Supper of the Lord. And we also acknowledge
the outward eating and drinking, is but a figure of the inward, and therefore
ought not to be rested in; but the Substance that is invisible and eternal,
ought to be minded, and sought after above all. And though we are not for
holding up, or preaching of Figures merely institute, for to signify and
represent a thing to come, as were these under the Law; yet such a Figure as is
natural, and necessarily to be used by us all, as eating and drinking, we may
not reject: For the outward eating and drinking is a natural and necessary
Figure of the inward, even as the whole outward World is a Figure of the inward
and spiritual, as Paul does expressly call it, 1 Cor. 7.31. see the ^reek.

5. And concerning that ye call your Christian-Sabbath, which ye say is the
first Day of the Week; and ye do positively affirm in your Confession, That the
Sabbath was changed from the last Day of the Week, from the Resurrection of
Christ, unto the first day of the Week, and so to continue unto the end of the
World; see Confess. cap. 21. sect. 7. But ye bring no sober proof for any such
change, and the Scriptures ye cite say no such thing, as Genesis 2.2, 3. Rev.
1.10. Exodus 20.8, 10. Matthew. 5.17. That place in Genesis 2.2, 3. says nothing of
the first Day, but of the seventh Day: And what that seventh Day is, ye cannot
demonstrate. And as to the next Scripture, Rev. 1.10. where John says, He was
in the Spirit on the Lord's Day. Although it is more than ye can prove from
Scripture, that the first Day of the Week is that Lord's Day; yet taking it for
granted, it does not therefore follow that it was appointed to be the Christian
Sabbath: But it might be so called, because Christ rose upon that day, and
honored that day solemnly, not only with his rising upon it, but appearing at
sundry times on that day to his Disciples, betwixt his Resurrection and
Ascension* And that the Christians did usually and more solemnly meet on that
day for public and religious Worship, in honor of our Savior, than on other
days, we readily grant; and so also do we, according to the Example of the
ancient Christians. And all true Christians should employ more of their time in
religious Works and Services, both in private and in public, than the Jews
did, and ought not to fall short of them, but exceed them. And that beside
other times set apart for the worship of God, both in public and in private,
it is commendable in Christians to set apart the first day of the Week from
common and ordinary labor, not only for an ease to their Servants and Cattle,
but also that they may with the more freedom, and cheerful readiness attend
upon the Lord, and his Service, without all encumbrance. For experience does
prove it, that even bodily Rest from toil and labor, does contribute to the
ease of the Mind, and is a help, being duly used, to disburthen it from diverse
weights. For if the Body be overcharged with labor, it is a hurt and clog
unto the Mind in diverse respects? But all this does not prove, that the first
day of the Week was appointed for a Sabbath, and put in the room of the seventh
day of the Week, enjoined to the Jews, and People of Israel; for that outward
Sabbath that was enjoined unto them, was a Sign and Figure, as all other
outward Sabbaths which they had, were, as of Weeks, Months, Years, as well as
of Days. And when the pure Gospel and Christian Dispensation did take place,
all these figurative and shadowy Sabbaths were changed to the Substance, and
that Substance or Body is Christ, according to Coloss. 2.17. But to say, the
Jewish Sabbath is changed into the first day of the Week, is to put the first
day of the Week in the room of the Lord Jesus Christ, which is a great
dishonor unto him; for he is the End and Perfection of the Law, and of all the
shadowy and figurative Ordinances thereof: And as the outward Temple that the
Jews had, is not to be changed into another outward Temple, but Christ is the
true Temple of the Christians, wherein they meet, so he is their Sabbath, and
not any outward day. Next, as to Exodus 20.8, 10. it says nothing of the first
day of the Week, nor of one day of seven: All this is but Man's invention. But
it mentions the seventh day, wherein the Lord rested from all his Works, and
that Rest signifies the perfection or finishing of them; although as it is
said, Heb. 4. the Works were finished from the Foundation of the World; and
therefore that seventh day does signify Christ Jesus, the first and the last,
who is the alone true Rest and Sabbath of all the Faithful, as he invited,
saying, Mat. 11.28. Come unto me all ye that labor, and are heavy laden, and I
will give you Rest. And concerning this spiritual and divine Sabbath, or
Sabbatism, it is said in Heb. 4.9, 10. Therefore there does remain a Rest unto
the People of God: for he that is entered into his Rest, he also has ceased
from his own Works, as God did from his; let us labor therefore to enter into
that Rest, etc. And Verse 3. We which have believed, do enter into Rest. By all
which it does plainly appear, that the New Testament understands the
Christian Sabbath, not of any outward Day, but of Christ, which the outward
Sabbaths of the Jews did by way of Allegory signify and hold forth. And
lastly, as to Matthew. 5.17. where Christ says, he came not to destroy the Law,
but to fulfill it; It is not to be understood that he came to keep up, and
perpetuate the Types and Figures of the Law, but to put an end to them, and in
the room and place thereof to fulfill all the Righteousness, Equity and Justice,
that they did signify or hold forth, which is as the Kernal: Otherwise ye
might argue, as much for upholding the outward Circumcision, as the outward
Sabbath; and that outward Sabbath was not the first day, but the seventh day.
And whereas some plead, that the 4th Commandment is altogether Moral, as well
as the other nine that were given forth immediately by the Mouth of the Lord
unto the People, and writ by his Finger on the Tables of Stone; and therefore
is perpetual, and never to be abrogated. If all this be granted, it does not
prove that the first day of the Week is there commanded, as these called
Presbyterians and Independents would have it. Nor can they who plead for the
keeping of the seventh day of the Week for the Sabbath, prove that the said
fourth Commandment did enjoin to the Jews the keeping of any outward or natural
seventh day of the Week; for their keeping the outward seventh day of the Week
was enjoined to them among the other Ceremonial Laws and Precepts, as is clear
from Exodus 16.23. and Chap. 31.13, 14. where it is called a Sign, to wit, of
that spiritual, moral and perpetual Sabbath. And therefore if it be granted,
that the fourth Commandment is altogether moral and perpetual, it does not
follow that the seventh day therein mentioned, is any outward day, or that it
enjoyneth any outward day (for it can all be spiritually understood very well)
as the tenth Commandment, Thou shall not covet, does not enjoin any outward
thing, but reaches to the Heart, and inward part, only, and is altogether
Spiritual. And as the last Commandment of the second Table is altogether
spiritual, so why may it not be said that the last Commandment of the first
Table is altogether spiritual? And even the mystic Writers among the Jews do
acknowledge, that not only the seventh day mentioned in the fourth Commandment,
but all the six days signify spiritual Days and Mysteries, as well as the
seventh; of which I shall not particularly enlarge at present.

A Call and Warning from the Lord to the People of Boston, and New England, to
Repent, etc.
THE Burden of the Word of the Lord that came unto me on the twenty first day
of the fourth Month, 1688. in the Town of Boston in New England, to declare it
unto Boston its Inhabitants, and to the Inhabitants of New England, who have
been, or are concerned in opposing, and hardening their Hearts against the
inward appearance of God, and of his Son Christ Jesus, in the Hearts of his
Servants, and in the Living Testimonies they have born unto you, to call you to
believe in the Light of his Son Christ Jesus, who has enlightened you all, and
every one of you, and to turn you from Darkness to Light, and from the Power of
Satan unto God. Oh! Repent, Repent for your great Sins, and Transgressions of
all sorts, that ye have committed against the Lord, and against his holy and
divine Light and Gift in all your Hearts, and especially Repent of your great
Hypocrisy, all Teachers and People of Boston, and New England every where, who
call your selves Christians, and have a Name to live, but are dead, who draw
near unto God with your Mouths, and honor him with your Lips, but have removed
your Hearts far away from him, and who have the Name of Christ often in your
Mouths, and think to cover you with his imputed Righteousness, while ye are
ignorant of his Life, and holy Power and Spirit, and divine Nature in your
Hearts, and while ye are daily crucifying the Lord of Glory afresh, and putting
him to open shame, and treading under Foot the Blood of the Covenant, as the
holy Scripture declares concerning some that professed Christ Jesus in former
Ages. And this is the state of many of you, yea, of the generality of you, both
Teachers and People of Boston, and New England, of all sorts, a few Names
excepted, whom the Lord does honor, and they shall walk with him in White,
although ye have sought to dishonor them. And this I have seen from the Lord
in that pure Light of his that makes all things manifest, and before which all
things are naked and bare, which Light ye generally despise, and reject, and
blaspheme, calling it, A mere natural Light, and insufficient to lead unto God;
and the Children of it ye have hated, reproached, and mocked with cruel
Mockings, whereby ye have sufficiently declared your selves to be born after
the Flesh, and not after the Spirit. Oh ye Blasphemers against God, and his
Temple (which is his Light) and them that dwell therein! Repent, repent of your
Blasphemies, and hard Speeches, and hard Thoughts against Gods inward
appearance, by his holy Word, Light and Spirit in all your Hearts: And Repent
of all your Pride, Vanity, Folly, Excess in Meats, Drinks, and Apparel, who
though ye profess your selves to be more pure, and more purely reformed, than
other Churches, so called, yet in the sight of God ye are nothing better, but
many of you worse; and the Sin of Sodom; which was Pride, and Excess, and
fullness of Bread, is the Sin of many of you, especially of the richer sort. Oh,
unthankful Nation! Do ye thus requite the Lord, who are Jesurun like, that
since ye waxed fat, have kicked against the Lord, and are gone from that
Tenderness, Sobriety, and Simplicity that was among you, and your Fathers
sometime ago: Oh! how quickly have ye degenerated, and departed from the Lord,
of whom ye have made, and still are making a great Profession! The anger of the
Lord is ready to break out against you yet more than formerly, unless ye
Repent: And though his Hand has been manifestly stretched out against you, in
manifest Judgments, and especially in Blastings and unfruitful Seasons, and
other Judgments, and Plagues, and Strokes upon you, yet ye have not seen nor
regarded it, many of you, yea, most of you; but ye are like unto them,
concerning whom the Prophet Isaiah testified, saying, Lord, when thy Hand is
lifted up, they will not see; but they shall see, and be ashamed for their Envy
at the People. And this is the Word of the Lord unto you, all Teachers, and
People of all sorts, of Boston and New England, all such of you who are
Unbelievers, and have not Faith in the Light of God and Christ within you, but
place all your Confidence, Faith and Reliance upon the imputed Righteousness of
Christ without you, and what he did, and suffered for you unto Justification,
while in the mean time ye know not Christ within you, and so are in the state
of Reprobation, or rejection, as such; and while ye there remain, opposing
Christ without, to Christ within, professing to own him without, but denying
him within, and the Revelation of him within in men's Hearts, and crucifying him
by your daily great Sins and Iniquities of all sorts. But is Christ divided? Or
can any have a right and sincere Faith in Christ, as he came and suffered Death
in the Flesh, and rose again and ascended into Glory, unless they believe in
him, and own and witness him revealed in them, their King, Priest and Prophet,
Lord, Judge, and Lawgiver, their Head and Foundation laid in them, Christ in
them the hope of Glory? And all who sincerely own him within them, have the
benefit and comfort of his Death, and Sufferings, and Righteousness, that he
accomplished without them, when he came in the Flesh, and none others; and this
is unto you all the Word of the Lord, whether ye will hear, or forbear. And oh!
Repent, Repent of all your Self-Righteousness, and Self-willings, and
Self-runnings and actings of all sorts, in that ye call your Duties and
Performances, wherein ye are daily exercising your selves, without the Lord's
holy Spirit, and Power, and Life inwardly revealed, to which ye are Strangers,
and many of you wilfully ignorant, hating and refusing to be informed or
instructed, even many or most of you. And all ye who have made light of the
cruel Sufferings of the Lord's Servants, called in derision Quakers, and some
of whom have been put to Death at Boston, by a most unrighteous and inhuman
Law, wherein they who either made or executed the same, have showed themselves
more inhuman, Read and well consider Ezekiel 9.3.4. 1 Cor. 5.2.
cruel and barbarous than many, or most of all sorts of mankind. Oh! mourn
before the Lord for this great Sin, and for shedding the Blood of the
Innoccent, wherewith your Land is still defiled, and the Iniquity of it is not
yet done away, nor shall, nor indeed can, but by deep Repentance, Mourning and
Contrition of Soul, and Godly Sorrow, and unfeigned Repentance, and turning
unto the Lord; and let it not be an excuse unto you, that many of you were not
the actors in that great Sin, but ye have not mourned for it before the Lord,
many, yea, most of you, and therefore it lies upon you: and this is the Word
of the Lord unto you.

G.K.
A Copy of this was set up in the most public place, in the Town of Boston,
the 21 st of the 4 th Month, 1688.
Boston, the 12th of the 5th Month, 1688.
To James Allen, Joshua Moody, Samuel Willard, Cotton Mather, Preachers in the
Town of Boston in New England.
Friends and Neighbors;
I being well assured, both by the Spirit of God in my Heart, and the Testimony
of the holy Scriptures, that the Doctrine ye preach to the People is false, and
pernicious to the Souls of People in many things, do earnestly desire and
entreat you, and every one of you, the Preachers in the Town of Boston, to give
me a fair and public hearing, or meeting with you, either in one of your
public Meeting Houses, or in any other convenient place, where all who are
desirous to come may have liberty, and let the time be as soon as may, as
either to day in the Afternoon, or to morrow in the Fore-noon, but rather than
fail, if ye will give me any assurance to have a meeting with you, I will
attend your leisure for two or three days to come, providing once this day you
send me your positive answer; and if ye give me a meeting with you, I profer in
true love and good will, by the divine assistance, to show and inform you, that
ye teach and preach unto the People, many false and unsound Principles
(contrary to the Doctrine of Christ, sufficiently declared in the holy
Scriptures) your Doctrine being according to the Catechism and Confession of
Faith of the Church of Boston and New England, which I have diligently
examined, and find it to be the same, with that published by the assembly of
Presbyterians and Independents at Westminster in Old England, about forty Years
ago, excepting some few small things, wherein some of you may differ in Church
Government and Discipline, and if ye cannot receive my Information, I profer to
debate these things fairly with you, which I call false Doctrine, and to
vindicate our Principles, who in scorn are called Quakers, whom ye have falsely
charged, for which some of our worthy Friends have suffered death at Boston,
and let the Scriptures Testimony be the only external Rule, Test and
Touchstone of our said debate. And the particular things I charge on you, as
being false Doctrine, and contrary to the Doctrine of the holy Scripture (beside
many others that I could mention) are these following:

1. That God has committed his Counsel wholly to Writing, even since the
Apostles days, the former ways of God's revealing his mind to his People being
ceased.

2. That God has foreordained whatever comes to pass.

3. That God has not afforded, or provided sufficiency of Grace and means of
Salvation unto all mankind, whereby they may be saved.

4. That there are reprobate Infants, that die in Infancy, and perish
eternally, only for Adam 's Sin imputed unto them, and derived into them.

5. That the Light that is in every Man, that convinces them of their Sins,
and calls them to leave and forsake them, is only natural, and no ways
sufficient to enable any Man to do any work acceptable unto God.

6. That Christ has not dyed for all Men.

7. That Justification is only by Christ's Righteousness, without us, imputed
unto us, and received by Faith alone, and not by any Righteousness of God or
Christ infused into us, or wrought in us.

8. That beginnings of true Sanctification cannot be fallen from totally.

9. That no Man in this Life, by any Grace of God given him, or to be given
him, can perfectly keep the Commandments of God, but does daily break them in
Thought, Word and Deed.

10. That no Man ever since the Apostles days are assisted by any infallible
Spirit, to Preach, Pray or Write; and that to speak and pray by the moving of
the holy Ghost, as the Prophets and holy Men witnessed of Old, is ceased.

11. That human and outward learning, without the saving Grace of God, and the
holy Spirits inward Revelation and Inspiration, is sufficient to qualify a Man
to be a Preacher of the Gospel.

12. That the Scriptures ought to be believed only for their own outward
Evidence and Testimony, and not for the inward Evidence and Testimony of the
holy Spirit in Men's Hearts.

I expect your Answer some time this day, and remain your Friend, G.K.

Having received a Blasphemous and Heretical Paper, subscribed by one George
Keith, our answer to it and him is,
IF he desires Conference, to instruct us, let him give us his Arguments in
writing, as well his Assertions: If to inform himself, let him write his
Doubts: If to cavil and disturb the Peace of our Churches (which we have cause
to suspect) we have neither list nor leisure to attend his Motions: If he would
have a Public Audience, let him Print: If a private Discourse, though he may
know where we dwell, yet we forget not what the Apostle John says, Ephesians. 2.10.

July the 12th, 1688. James Allen, Joshua Moody, Samuel Willard, Cotton Mather.

To James Allen, Joshua Moody, Samuel Willard, Cotton Mather, called Preachers,
in Boston.
I Received yours, wherein ye give no satisfactory nor reasonable answer to my
fair proposal; ye call my Letter unto you, A blasphemous and heretical Paper:
But wherein it does contain either Heresy or Blasphemy, ye have not mentioned,
far less demonstrated: I pity your Ignorance, and I perceive ye are in the same
darkness and blindness of Mind that the Jews were in, who accused the Lord
Jesus Christ of Blasphemy; and if he were now among you in the Flesh, he would
meet with the same entertainment from you; for the measure of the same Spirit
of Truth, which is in his Servants (that dwelt in him in all fullness) ye
blaspheme against. But it is well ye have not the Magistrates Sword now at
command, which your Brethren sometime ago had, and made a woeful and miserable
use of it, to turn it against the Innocent. And now that ye have no Carnal
weapons to fight with, we can find no Spiritual weapons that ye have: But by
silly and frivolou Excuses ye seek to lurk and hide in Corners, when ye are
fairly, and justly required to appear in open Field, to defend your false
Doctrine. To whom shall I liken or compare you, but to Night-birds, and Beasts
of prey, as they are described, Psalm. 104.20, 21, 22. Thou make Darkness, and
it is Night, wherein all the Beasts of the Forest do creep forth, the young
Lions roar after their Prey, etc. The Sun arises, they gather themselves
together, and lay them down in their Dens. For now that your Sun of Persecution
is gone down, and the Sun of Peace is arisen, ye have no courage to appear in
the open and fair Field, to defend your evil Cause, only in your Dens, and
Houses into which ye have crept, where the honest People called Quakers, have
not occasion to hear you; ye speak Evil of things ye know not, and lie and rail
against the Truth. And that ye (and not we the People called in scorn Quakers)
are Blasphemers, I have not only charged, but demonstrated in sundry
particulars, in this Treatise. And yet because I judge ye do so in ignorance, I
believe it is pardonable, and if ye sincerely Repent of it, it shall be
forgiven you. But why are ye afraid of the Light, to appear in public, to try
your Spiritual strength and weapons, when your Carnal are gone. Is not that
Scripture fulfilled upon you, Job 24* 16, 17. In the dark they dig through
Houses, which they had marked for themselves in the day time, they know not the
Light; for the Morning is to them, even as the Shadow of Death; if one know
them, they are in the terrors of the shadow of Death. I do say it in
uprightness, I writ not this, boastingly, or glorying in my strength, as of
self, my alone glorying is in the Lord, and in his Truth, which is the
strongest of all, that God in his infinite Mercy has made known unto me, and
the Truth in the Mouth or Pen of the youngest Child, is too strong for all the
Goliahs among you. Remember that memorable passage of the Barley-Cake, that
tumbled into the Host of Midian, as it was represented to one in a Dream, which
was the occasion of Gideon's taking courage to go out against the Midianites,
who was prospered with great success, though he and his Men were but a small
company, Judge 7. And also remember, how at the sounding of the Rams Horns, the
Walls of Jericho fell down flat to the Ground. Men of an evil Conscience are
commonly afraid. Or if ye fear your People, lest if any public Dispute should
be, they might be in danger to change their mind: Is it not the most effectual
way to rescue your Sheep, if they be in danger, suppose we be Wolves (as we
thank God we are none) to appear openly, and in a manly way against us, and not
to suffer the Wolves to hunt the Shepherds, for that were a strange thing; but
that if ye be Shepherds, ye hunt the Wolves and seek them out every way, and by
all means, and be glad of every occasion to find them? And is your Preaching to
the People so little effectual that many Years teaching them, is not sufficient
to save them from the danger of two or three Hours fair debating of things? If
your People were built on the Rock, ye needed not fear that they would be so
soon shaken. In your very short Letter, ye have very many idle and frivolous
Suppositions. If this, and If that; so that in six Lines or seven, ye have five
needless Suppositions, and labor as Men in a Sweat, or at least seem so to do,
to find out the design or intention of my Writing unto you, the which is plain,
without any enquiry; for I told you very plainly, the end of my writing, was to
inform you, That ye preach unto the People many false and unsound Principles,
pernicious to the Souls of People. And if ye could not receive my Information,
I proffered to debate these things fairly with you. And though I neither had,
nor have the least mind to Cavil, yet I most assuredly believe, that the Peace
of your Churches is not the true Peace of Christ, but that both ye and they are
set down in a false peace and rest. And therefore he, who at the command of
Christ Jesus, and by the motion of his eternal Spirit, does proclaim a holy
War, and sounds an alarm in your Ears, that Christ himself is come, and more
abundantly coming to take away your false Peace, and to send a spiritual Sword
and Fire unto you, is really your best Friend, and such a Friend I am unto you,
whether ye will hear or forbear. For I came not unto you in my own will, but a
necessity from the Lord, by his living Motion in my Heart, and his living Word,
that was, and is as a Sword and a Fire, did lie upon me to clear my self among
you. And seeing your Churches are no true Churches of Christ, as I have
sufficiently demonstrated in this Treatise, their peace is no true peace, and
therefore must and will be broken, and the sooner it be broken, the better it
will prove to many poor Souls among you, in order to their being gathered unto
the Lord. And whereas ye say in your Letter, If he would have a public
Audience, let him Print: Ye see how I have complied with your Proposal, yet not
in your will, but in the will of the Lord, who has laid it upon me, and has
assisted me in this undertaking, to write this Treatise, and direct it more
particularly unto you, and more generally to all the Presbyterian and
Independent Teachers and People, both in New England, or elsewhere, to whose
Hands by divine Providence it shall come. And I require this reasonable demand
of you, that seeing ye have said, Let him Print, that after it is come unto
you, ye would seriously read it, and if it please God by it, as an Instrument
to convince you, through his eternal Spirit, give God the Glory, and confess to
the Truth: But if otherwise, that still ye think ye have Truth on your side,
then appear in Print openly to defend your Cause, not with Railing and Lies,
but solid Arguments, if ye can produce them. And if in some places I seem to
have appeared sharp unto you, or your Brethren, in this undertaking, I would
have you to consider, that on a due examination, my Arguments and Reasons are
full as sharp as my Charges or Conclusions; and sharp Premises can well allow
to have sharp Conclusions. And what Sharpness or Tartness, or seeming Severity
I have used, true love and compassion to Souls, as well as zeal to God's Glory
has constrained it. Sweet Potions of Physic are not always the most safe. The
true Prophets of God were generally led and moved of God, to reprove sharply
the false Prophets of Old. And Christ, and the Apostles, and other true
Teachers, did sharply reprove false Teachers in that day; and there is the same
cause now, and the same Spirit of Truth, and true Zeal now that moves in God's
true Servants in measure in this day. The precious Souls of many Thousands lie
at stake, and therefore there ought to be plain dealing, and no daubing with
untempered Mortar, or sowing Pillows under Armholes. I know the wrath of Man
does not work the Righteousness of God, and I have labored to keep free from
that human Passion: and whether I have kept clear and free of it, I can, and do
freely submit to the Judgment of the spiritual Man, who has a spiritual
discerning, and is able to judge; but to the carnal Man's Judgment I have no
reason to submit. And as I freely submit my Spirit to be tried, so the Doctrine
to him that is able, and above all, I appeal to the holy Scripture, as the best
outward Test and Touchstone, and to the inward opening of the holy Spirit, in
all that are sensible of it, without which ye cannot but err, not knowing the
Scriptures, nor the Power of God. Ye decline my coming privately to your
Houses, citing for your Warrant, John 2. verse 10. but I had no such design;
however, ye miserably misapply that place of Scripture, as ye are wont to do
many more. For ye take it for granted, that I bring another Doctrine, than the
Doctrine of Christ and the Apostles, which I altogether deny. Secondly, what
John did write, was to a private Woman, and therefore does not quadrate to you,
who reckon your selves public Men, and Rulers as well as Teachers and Pastors
in the Church; and I do not find any command or practice in all the Scripture
for you to decline a fair Dispute with Men, suppose Heretics or false
Teachers, unless ye have first dealt with them, in order to convince them: And
even ye ought not to reject an Heretic, till after the first and second
Admonition, according to Scripture, but ye never as yet gave me your first: And
he who is an Heretic, is self condemned, which I bless God, I am not; and ye
pretend not to that spiritual discerning, whereby ye can know me to be such. It
is not always one, nor diverse Errors or Mistakes in Judgment, that makes Men
worthy of that odious Name of Heretic. The Apostle John, and all the other
Apostles had the infallible Spirit of Truth, and that gave them a discerning
infallibly to judge both Doctrins and Spirits; but this ye neither have, nor
lay claim to: And yet we find that the Apostles did not shun to discourse and
debate with Men of ill Principles, as occasion and season required. And Christ
also did unweariedly reason with Opposers of all sorts, Jews, Pharisees,
Sadducees, etc. And Paul disputed daily in the School of Cyrannus, with them
that opposed, and with Epicureans and Libertines, and others at Athens, and
went into the Jews Synagogues, and reasoned with them; and did not excuse
themselves with your silly Evasion, that these Men were false Teachers, and
therefore ought not to be disputed with. The Scripture commands, that in
Meekness we should instruct them that oppose themselves, if God peradventure
may give them Repentance. And though this is not the work of all private
Christians, who have not a public Gift of teaching, and are not called to that
Work, yet this is no defense unto you, who pretend to be public Teachers. And
if it be so, that false Teachers are on no account to be received into Houses,
ye little consider how this Weapon may ere long be turned against your selves:
For my hope is, that in due time, many People, both in Boston and New England,
shall have their Eyes opened by the Spirit of the Lord, which ye blaspheme, to
see your sort to be these false Teachers, who bring not the Doctrine of Christ
and the Apostles, and the Houses ye Preach in, not being your Houses, but the
Houses of the People, they shall not any more receive you into them, and this
warrantably enough, according to your own words. But seeing ye are so unwilling
that any called a Quaker, should come into your Houses, why should ye receive
their Goods? To wit, their Kettles, Pewter, Household Stuff, Corn and Cattle, as
some, yea, many of your Brethren have done, and used them as your own, though
unjustly taken away from the true Owners, because they would not give you
Maintenance. A rare and unparalled practice, no where to be traced in all the
Scripture, nay, not by false Prophets and Teachers, in like manner as ye have
done. And when our honest Friends have expostulated with you, Why ye crave
Wages of them, who do not hear you; ye have often told them, The Door is open,
and have invited them to come; yea, and some have been fined for not coming to
your Houses, some call Churches; but now, by your words, no Quaker (because, as
ye suppose, he brings not the true Doctrine) is to be received into your
Houses; and if this be not a contradiction, and a piece of Confusion, like most
of your work, let the impartial judge. And your citing places of Scripture so
frequently, contrary to the very intention and end of them, as I have
sufficiently proved in this Treatise, I know not to what other thing I can
better compare it, than to Turkish Pirates at Sea, who hang out an English Flag
or Colors, on purpose to deceive the unwary Mariners. And as I look upon you,
the four Preachers at Boston, abovenamed, to be more particularly concerned in
this Treatise, so I do not except any others, either in New England or any
where else, who hold the same Principles with you, but I do reckon them
obliged, either to confess to the Truth, upon real conviction; or if otherwise,
to produce their Reasons against that which we believe to be the Truth. I
remain your real Well-wisher and Friend,

The 21 st of the 7 th Month, 1688. G. K.

Postscript.
YE shall find the twelve particular Doctrins which I charged upon you and your
Brethren, to be false, proved to be so in distinct Heads, as follows; the
first, tenth, eleventh and twelfth Articles, in Cap. 1, 2, 3, 4. of this
Treatise; The second and fourth, Cap. 5. The third, fifth and sixth, Cap. 6.
The seventh in Cap. 7. The eighth and ninth, in Cap. 8. And the 9th Cap.
treats of your Visible Church, and Church Government; and the 10th of your
Sacraments and Sabbath Day. There are many other things in your said Confession
and Catechism, contrary to the Truth and Doctrine of the holy Scriptures, which
I have passed by at present, but these I have here examined, and proved to be
contrary to the holy Scriptures, being the principal, and some of them
Fundamental, I did find my mind most concerned in; the which being overturned,
the other Errors that are built upon them shall fall with them.

A brief Answer to some gross Abuses, Lies and Slanders, published some Years
ago, by Increase Mather, late Teacher of a Church at Boston in New England, in
his Book, called, An Essay for the recording of Illustrious Providence, etc.
and by Nath. Morton, in his Book, called, New-England's Memorial.
THe said Increase Mather, in the eleventh Chapter of his Book, called, An
Essay, etc. relates a long Story of three mad Quakers, called, Thomas Cases
Crew, one of them being a Man called Denham, and two Women, who went down to
South-hold, and they met with Samuel Banks of Fairfield, the most blasphemous
Villain, as they call him, that ever was known in these parts, and some other
Inhabitants of that Town on Long Island, where they fell a Dancing and Singing
after their Diabolical manner; and how at that time they proselyted one, called
Thomas Harris (belonging to Boston) to be of their way, and how after some
short time, the said Harris was found dead by the Seaside, with three Holes
like Stabs in his Throat, and no Tongue in his Head. And two other Stories he
subjoyneth, concerning these of the same Crew, or Company, called the Singing
and Dancing Quakers; the last has in it a Relation, how the said Jonathan
Denham (alias Singleterry) and one Mary Rosse, did many frentick and Diabolical
Tricks; and among others, that he sacrificed a Dog at Plymouth-Colony in
New England. And all these Stories he does relate, on purpose to abuse that
honest and sober People, called Quakers, without making any distinction, nor
giving the least Information to the World, how that the Body of People called
Quakers, do not in the least own these ungodly and wicked People, mentioned by
him, called Thomas Cases Crew, nor any others of that sort, but have all along
declared against them, and showed the greatest dislike and abhorrency of their
Spirit and ways, that is possible, and all their mad and frentick Tricks and
Freaks of Singing and Dancing, or any others of all kinds: And the People
called Quakers have suffered more Abuses and Insolences, by that ungodly and
wicked Crew of Thomas Case, and others of that Spirit, than any other People in
these Countries, whereof many sober People that do not profess themselves to be
Quakers, can bear Witness both in Long Island, and in Road-Island, and also at
Newer-sinks in East-Jersey, how for many Years they have molested them,
frequently at their Meetings, and more especially at our Friends general
Meetings at Oyster-Bay, and Rhoad-Island, and diverse other places. And when the
said Jonathan Denham, and Mary Rosse were whipped by the order of the Magistrates
of Plymouth, there were some of the honest People called Quakers, present, who
openly declared before the People, That the Quakers did not at all own them to
be of their Society; and did declare their loathing and abhorrency of their
Practices, and that they could not own them to be sufferers for Christ's sake:
And though they assume to themselves the Name of Quakers, and call themselves
the new Quakers, yet that will not follow, that they are of the Society of that
sober and honest People: For it is not the Name or Profession, that is the
sign, or mark of distinction owned by that People, who own none to be of their
Society or Fellowship, unless they walk in the Truth, as well as profess it;
and the Truth leads into all Sobriety and Gravity in all things, but into none
of these mad Gestures, and ungodly Singings and Dancings, under the pretense of
Raptures of Heavenly Joy. For although we own Singing with the holy Spirit, and
with understanding and discretion, and giving Thanks unto God, according to the
Scriptures, and the example of the Primitive Christians, yet the Singing of
such ungodly Persons we never did, nor can own; and we believe that Weeping and
Howling, and bitter Mourning is more proper for them. And for Dancing, it was
never a thing owned by that People, nor is at this day; only Thomas Case and
his Crew lately, or of late Years, have run into that, and other mad Practices,
by Satan's Instigation, nor does that Crew or Company of Thomas Case, nor
himself agree in professed Principles, with the People called Quakers, unless
it be in some general things, common to all sorts: For they are plain Ranters
and Libertines, and upon due search and examination, their chief Principle does
agree with the Presbyterian and Independent Confession of Faith, rather than
with the Quakers. For these ranting Crew of Case's followers, and himself, do
say, That whatever they do, they are constrained to do it, and cannot do
otherwise. And is not this the same that your Confession of Faith says, That
God has foreordained infallibly, and unchangably whatever comes to pass,
without making any distinction? And this Increase Mather has exactly followed,
and imitated the practice and example of the ancient, malicious and persecuting
Heathens, who, when any unlucky thing happened to be said or done, by any
called Christians, although they were no Christians, but only assumed the Name
on purpose to deceive, these malicious Heathens did throw it all upon the
Christians, without making any distinction. And the like concerning these
Rusticks, that rose up in War against their lawful Princes in Germany, and the
mad Crew that followed John of Leiden; The Adversaries of Truth did impute all
this as the proper effect of the Reformation. And thus also in Old England, the
ungodly Sayings and Practices of Ranters and Libertines* have been odiously
cast upon the People called Quakers; whereas it is well known that the People
called Quakers, have always with great zeal, opposed the Ranters and
Libertines, both in their Principles and Practices, and have showed their Zeal
against them, both in Disputing and Printing against them, more than any People
have done; and have been a great occasion and means of suppressing that evil
spirit in them, so that little of it has for many years openly appeared in Old
England; and the same Ranting Spirit is greatly decaying of late years, in
these American parts, and we hope ere long it shall be quite gone. And let the
impartial judge, whether it can be any other thing but Malice, as well as
Rashness (as he has showed his rashness and folly in some other passages of
his Life, if not Malice, that has occasioned him for some time past to
abscond, and depart from the place, where he preached at Boston) in this
Increase Mather, to charge the Crimes of the Guilty upon the Innocent, without
distinction, when it is notoriously known, both in New England, and in all
other places, where the People called Quakers live, that they never did own any
of these People, from the first instant, that they appeared in any of these
Practices. And seeing ye of the Presbyterian and Independent Churches of
New England, cannot but acknowledge, that too many unlucky and unchristian
Practices have fallen out, and have been committed by your Church Members, as
Whoredom, Drunkenness, and and the like, etc. Yet if when upon your first
discovery of these things, ye have disowned them, and sufficiently cleared your
selves of them, we are more Men, and more reasonable than to charge these
things upon you: And when Judas betrayed Christ his Lord and Master, though he
was one of the twelve, and numbered among them, should therefore this great
Crime of Judas be cast upon the eleven that were Innocent? Or when David
committed these two great Sins of Murder and Adultery, should this be cast upon
the faithful People of God in that day, who were in Society formerly with him?
Or should the Crime of the incestuous Person at Corinth, because of him, be
cast upon all other Christians? If this be not equal, (as all sober Men will
say, it is not equal) it is no more equal, but abominably unjust, to throw the
Crimes of Thomas Case, or his Crew, upon the honest People called Quakers, of
whose Society and Spirit they are not. And the said Increase Mather may with
the same Impudence, charge all the abominable Heresies of the Manichees,
Nicolaitans, Ebionites, and all others upon the Christians, because all went
under that general Name of Christians in these days. And these of Case's Crew,
they call themselves Christians, and so does Increase Mather, does it therefore
follow, that their Crimes on that only account should be charged upon him? Let
him see how he can answer to these things, or any of his Brethren, or Kindred
for him, in his absence. It wants to be inserted in his Book, that what has
befallen him of late, is a remarkable Judgment of God upon him, for his
Injustice to the Quakers, and his unjust charging the Innocent with the Crimes
of the Guilty. Nor is his last Story, concerning one Robert Churchman, living
at Balsham in Cambridge-Shire in Old England, related by H. Moor, of any more
weight or validity, to discredit the Religion or Profession of the People
called Quakers, than the former. Why? the said Churchman had only some
inclination to be a Quaker, (but we do not find in all the Relation, that ever
he was a professed Quaker, and owned by that People) and some Whimsies, or
Fancies did take him in the Head for some time, that he supposed he was
inspired with the Spirit of God, and that the Spirit of God did speak in him;
And at last, it appeared that it was not really so, but that the Man was under
some mistake, or delusion, or suppose a real possession of the Devil, or was
mad: What can all this say in the least, to discredit the Quaker's Religion, or
Principle? Have there not been mad People, and whimsical, both of the
Presbyterian and Independent Churches? Yea, does not Increase Mather relate
how, that Ann Cole of Hartford in New England, that was esteemed a godly and
gracious Woman, and I suppose a Member of some Independent Church, or
Presbyterian, otherwise it is not like he would have so commended her, that she
was really bodily possessed with the Devil (see his fifth Chapter) but this
does not infer, that either the Presbyterian, or Independent Profession of
Religion, by Increase Mather his own Judgment, is of the Devil; Yea, and some
belonging to their Churches in New England, have very lately been convicted of
Witchcraft at Boston. It cannot be denied, but that Madness, and melancholy
Whimsies and Fancies, may befall some of all Professions, called Christians,
the causes of which are best known unto the Lord. But it is altogether unmanly,
and inhuman, as well as Unchristian, to charge these things upon the whole
Profession. We have always asserted it, that it is one thing to profess to be
led by the Spirit of God, and another thing to be really and in deed led by it.
We are not ignorant how many have both said and done very bad things, under a
pretense of being led by the Spirit of God, and of having the Spirit to be
their Rule; and yet this is no Argument against the leading and rule of the
Spirit of God, no more than it is an Argument against the Scripture, that many
have done bad things, and pretended they have had the Scripture to be their
Rule in what they did; as in the late Wars in Old England and Scotland, when
they rose up against the lawful Authority, wherein many both Presbyterians and
Independents were concerned, they all did pretend they had the Scripture to be
their Rule in what they did; and yet surely, the Scripture was no Rule nor
warrant unto them in these bad Practices. The leadings of the true Spirit of
God are known, both by the first Motions, and also by the Effects and Fruits
that follow after; and that is to deny all Ungodliness and Unrighteousness, and
to live Soberly, and Godly, and Righteously in this present World, and to
follow, and be found in doing whatsoever things are true, honest, just, pure,
virtuous, and praise worthy, and of good Report among these who have a
spiritual Ability to judge of things that differ, as too many have not. And we
are well assured, that the Spirit of God never teaches, nor leads any to
think, say, or do what is contrary to the declared Will of God in the holy
Scriptures, nor to that holy and righteous Law, that is writ by the Finger of
God upon the Hearts of Men universally, which is the substance of the Decalogue
that God writ upon the two Tables of Stone. And we readily grant, that whoever
pretend to follow the Spirit of God, to be their inward Guide and Rule, should
be very cautious and wary, lest the evil Spirit that does, and can transform
himself into many Likenesses, but always short of the Truth; step in and
deceive. But there is a most safe and sure way for every one, to be sure, that
they are not deceived, and shall never be, in any matter of moment, and that is
for every one to be faithful unto God in these moral Duties, or any other
things which they know infallibly, and are generally agreed upon by all
Christians, to be good things, for such have the Promise of God, that they
shall be preserved from being deceived. And whereas the said Increase Mather
has writ so many remarkable Judgments of God, that have come upon notorious
Offenders, on purpose to record them in Print; and that he says, Cap. 11. We
may not judge of Men merely by outward Accidents, which befall them in this
World, etc. And some Lines after, he says, Nevertheless a Judgment may be so
circumstanced, as that the displeasure of Heaven is plainly written upon it in
legible Characters: And in this he says true, but he should have added, that
such Men who can read the same, must not be blind, but have the true Eye opened
in them, otherwise they will make a wrong Construction of these things. There
wants to be inserted, or added to his Book the many signal and manifest
Judgments of God, that came upon the People of New England in general, and upon
diverse particular Persons, the main actors, for that horrible Persecution they
raised against that honest People called Quakers, and putting to death four of
the Lord's Servants, for which the Name of these Actors and Abettors, are a
stink over many places of the World: And of these Judgments in general, the
blasting of their Wheat generally ever since they put our worthy Friends to
Death at Boston; and the Indian Wars that soon after followed, whereby many
English were destroyed; And after that, but of late Years, a dreadful
Visitation of the Smallpox, called by some the Black Pock, that cut off very
many, both at Boston, and elsewhere, of which they were forewarned by a Woman
that came from Barbados, and went into some of their Meetings, with her Face
all made black, for a Sign of what was coming upon them, she being one of these
People called Quakers, and owned by them in that very Testimony, which she
declared, she was moved by the Lord to come from Barbados to bear among them,
her Name being Margaret Brewster; to which may be added, the taking away their
Charter, and Power (which they so grossly abused, in turning the Sword against
the Innocent) one cause of which was their persecuting the Quakers unto Death;
and the manifest Judgments of God that came upon diverse particular Persons,
notorious Persecutors of that innocent People, are very observable, as Major
Adarton, who joined in passing sentence of Death against some of these Servants
of the Lord who suffered Death at Boston, who not long after was killed with a
Cow; and that Horton, Preacher at Boston, a great Persecutor, who dyed
suddenly, as he was walking in his House after Sermon, and Captain Davenport,
another great Persecutor, who was killed with Lightning. And though the said
Increase Mather does relate the sudden Deaths of both these men, he altogether
omitteth these great Circumstances, of their being great Persecutors; the which
ommission, whether it was wilfully in him, or not, I shall not determine. But
it is the more memorable, that the said Major Adarton, being warned
beforehand, of the Judgment of God, he made light of it, as I was informed by
some in New England, who had the Relation of it, from some that did so warn
him, being of that persecuted People. And also it is very memorable, how one of
these persecuted Servants of the Lord, called Quakers, did plainly foretell,
that the House of Governor Indicot, a greater Persecutor, should be left
desolate, and become a Dunghill; as did accordingly come to pass; and has been
observed by diverse, to have been a real Prophecy, divine Justice and Providence
did so bring it about. There are many other Instances and Examples might be
mentioned, some of which I refer to George Bishop his Book, called, New England
Judged, to be there read and considered. I shall only add one passage more,
which I was informed of, and had it writ from some of the People of Barnstable,
how that from an honest-man, a Quaker, in the Town of Barnstable, were taken
four Cows, with some Calves, the Quaker's name being Ralph Jones, who is yet
alive; and these Cattle were taken away by the Preacher of that Town, his
Son-in-law, who had married his Daughter, and returned to the Priest as a part
of his Wages. The Priest sent to Ralph Jones, to tell him, He might have two of
his Cows returned to him, if he would send for them: But he never sent, and so
the said Priest used them, and disposed of them as his own, killed one of the
Calves, and sent a part of it to his Daughter, that lay in Childbed; she no
sooner did eat a little of the Calf, but fell into a great trouble, and cried,
Return home the Man's Cows, I hear a great noise of them; and so dyed in that
trouble. The Priest alleged the Quakers had bewitched his Daughter, although
it cannot be proved, that ever they had any business with her. But to what evil
Construction will not Malice and Hypocrisy, and Covetousness bend a thing?
Some time after the said Preacher killed some of these Cows, to be eat in his
House, saying, He would try if the Quakers could bewitch him; and not long
after he dyed, even before the Flesh of these Cows were all eat. The passage is
so fresh in that Town, that it is acknowledged by diverse of the Neighbors to
be true: And as great havoc was made upon this honest Man, and upon many in
Sandwich, a neighboring Town, and in many other places, so much more might
have been expected, had not their Violence been restrained by the King's
granting an Indulgence to all tender Consciences.

Next, as to Nath. Morton, in his Book, called New-England's Memorial, page
157. he charge the Quakers with corrupt and damnable Doctrine in the following
particulars. 1. That the holy Scriptures were not for the enlightening of Man,
nor a settled and permanent Rule of Life. The which charge is false; for we have
granted, that the Scriptures are a Rule of Life, and so we do still, and the
best outward Rule that can be found: but we say, they are not the only Rule,
nor, being compared with the inward Rule of God's holy Spirit, are they above
it, but inferior and under it, and ought only to be used in Subordination to
it. And if the Scripture were the only Rule, as our Adversaries say, then all
poor Heathens should have no Rule, nor Law, and consequently no Sin, nor
Judgment, which is false. And we deny not, but the Scriptures are a means of
our enlightening, as God the Father of Lights, is pleased to cause his Light to
shine unto us in our Hearts, in the serious and faithful hearing, reading and
meditating on the Scriptures, etc. but not otherwise, even as the Air, or
Windows of a House, are means of letting in the Sun's light to us; but if the
Sun shine not, neither the Air nor Window can give us light. 2. That they
denied the Manhood of the Lord Jesus Christ, and affirmed, that as Man he is
not in Heaven. This is a notorious false Charge, which they can never prove:
And in this Treatise in several places, I have given a large Testimony to the
Man Christ Jesus in Heaven; and how he is the Object and Foundation of the
Christians Faith, as the Mystery of his coming in the Flesh, Death and
Sufferings, etc. is inwardly opened, revealed and applied by the holy Spirit in
Men's Hearts. 3. That they deny the Resurrection of the Dead. This is also a
most false charge, which they can never prove: But because we deny their Carnal
Conceptions of the Resurrection, and hold us to Scripture-words, which is most
safe, therefore they have so belyed us. And for the more satisfaction of the
Reader, I refer him to a little Book called, The Principles of Truth, published
by some noted Men of the Quakers, in which Book it is expressly affirmed, That
we (to wit, the Quakers) believe, that the same Body which is laid down, shall
be raised up at the Resurrection of the Dead, as much as a natural Body, can be
the same with a spiritual Body, on an earthly Body can be the same with a
heavenly Body, according to the Scriptures Testimony; it is sown natural, but
raised spiritual, and the Glory of the Heavenly is one, and the Glory of the
Earthly is another. And this may satisfy any sober enquirer: And Paul writing
concerning the Resurrection of the Dead, says, That is not first which is
Spiritual, but that which is Natural, (or Animal) and afterward that which is
Spiritual, 1 Cor. 15.46. and verse. 49. As we have born the Image of the
Earthly, we shall also bear the Image of the Hevenly: He that reads, let him
understand. 4. That an absolute Perfection in Holiness, or Grace is attainable
in this Life. 5. That they placed their Justification upon their Patience, and
Sufferings for their Opinions, and on their righteous Life; both which are
grossly false Charges, and the contrary of which I have showed in this Treatise
at length in their proper places. 6. They allowed not, nor practiced any civil
Respect to Magistrates, Parents, etc. This also is grossly false, there are
diverse other ways sufficient whereby to show both our Civil and Christian
Respect to Magistrates and Parents, etc. (without either doffing the Hat, or
cringing) and that both in Words and Gestures. There are only two other things
which he charge, that we grant to be true, but deny them to be either
damnable, or corrupt Doctrine, but affirm them to be truly Christian; one is,
That all Men ought to attend to the Light within them, to be the Rule of their
Lives and Actions. But if this be corrupt and damnable Doctrine, he accuses his
own Brethren, who in their Confession of Faith, say, That there are many Sins
that Men commit against the Law or Light of Nature, as they call it, which are
the more heinous. And surely that is a Light within them, and is even so far a
Rule of Life, containing, as is commonly acknowledged the Substance of the ten
Commandments; see their answer to Quest. 151. larger Catechism. But we do not
say, That that general Illumination that is in all men, many of whom have not
the Scriptures, is a Rule to oblige them to believe and receive these great
Mysteries of Christianity, declared in the Scriptures, which they who have not
the Scriptures, have not revealed unto them. The other is, That we deny the use
of Oaths: But this is no corrupt, but truly Christian Doctrine, which says,
Swear not at all, Mat. 5.34.

It is a marvelous thing, that these Men have no other ways to oppugn the
Quakers, but by gross (...) Lies, and false Calumnies, and (...) Abuses, like
unto the ways that ever the (...) sort of the Adversaries of Truth have used
against the true Witnesses of it. It had been more Manly, and seemingly
Christian, for Increase Mather and Nath. Morton, or any others of their Sect or
Society, fairly to have stated the Quakers Principles, and then to have gone
and refuted them by the best or strongest Arguments they could find: But this
none of them have done, nor did I ever see to this day any one Writer, that did
write against the Quakers, that did fairly state their Principles, but
miserably belyed, and abused them, either by affirming things to be their
Principles, which were not, or by so unfairly representing and wresting the
Words of our honest Friends, by their Addings and Diminishings, that they could
not at all acknowledge them as such; All which is a manifest Evidence of the
weakness and badness of their Cause, as well as of that evil Conscience that is
in them, when they use such unlawful ways and means to defend themselves, or to
oppugn others.


