Help in time of Need, from the God of Help.
TO THE People of the (so called) Church of Scotland, especially the once more
zealous and professing, who have so shamefully degenerated and declined from
that which their Fathers the Primitive Protestants attained unto; yea, and from
what they have but of late themselves, so zealously asserted and maintained to
be the cause and work of God, which now they have generally shrunk from, the
most part actively complying and concuring to the building up again and healing
of old Babylon, that, even by themselves so called, and running into the excess
of riot with the profane world, (like the Dog returning to the vomit, and the
Sow to the puddle, after the being once washed) others being lying by, and
cowardly bowing under, and giving up themselves to a detestable neutralitie,
which they in express terms vowed against to the most high God, not daring to
bear a testimony by their sufferings (plentiful occasion being given) for that,
they, when having power made others suffer, who would not concur with them; and
all of them (almost) joining together, as a common enemy against the work and
glorious appearance of God, brought and more abundantly bringing forth, among
his people called in derision Quakers, by the Ismaels of this Generation, who
mock at, and persecute the true Heirs of the promise, as ever it has so been
from the foundation of the World.

Being certain particulars very weighty, and of great concernment for them to
consider seriously, for their Souls good, directed unto them, by a true lover
of their welfare and prosperity both temporal and eternal, a mourner over them
in this time of their great calamity and distress, who has often poured forth
his soul before God on their behalf, that they might be saved, one of their
brethren according to the flesh, and a true Protestant and friend to the good
Old Cause against Babylon in whatsoever appearance.

Writ by George Keith Prisoner for the Truth in Aberdein in the latter end of
the year 1664.

Isa. 51 18, 19, 20.23. There is none to guide her among all the Sons whom she
has brought f^rth, neith^r is there any that takes her by the hand of all the
sons that she has brought up, etc.


Ezekiel. 10 4. Will thou judge them, son of man, will thou judge them, etc. See
the whole C^^p^e th^^ughout.


Jer 5.10. Go ye ^p upon her walls and destroy, but make not a full end, take
awa^ her Battlements, for they are not the Lords, etc.


Jer. 6.15 Were they shamed when they had committed abomination? etc.


Revel. 19.6, 7, 8 Hallelujah, for the Lord God omnipotent re^gneth, etc


The Contents or heads of the particulars are as followerh.
1. A Lamentation over, and an expostulation with the People of Scotland for
their so gainstanding and opposing the appearance of God among the Lords people
called in derision Quakers; and for their foul defection and Apostasy from what
the Primitive Protestants and reformers were, (whose successors they boast
themselves to be) yea and from what they have been but of late days themselves.

2. A Demostration of the Apostasy and defection of the (so called) Church of
Scotland, from what their Fathers, the Primitive Protestants, and Reformers
were in Principles, to the number of 14. or 16. and in many practices also,
wherein their Apostasy also and defection from what they have been themselves,
but in late days in several particulars is hinted at, and there vile relapse
into Popery (out of which they were never cleanly extricate) is discovered, and
their treachery laid open in the matter of their Covenant which they cried up
as the glory of their Nation, and the concernment and interest of Jesus Christ,
which now they have trampled under feet as the mire in the street, and think
shame of it as if it had been a Whores brate.

3. True and righteous judgment from the God of judgment seperating the
precious from the vile, concerning the late proceedings of the People of
Scotland in the matter of their reformation from, and their covenanting against
Prelacy, with the corruptions, and Popish superstitions accompanying it; as
also concerning their Church Constitution, Ministry, Worship and Government set
up (...) them after the pulling down of the former, and discr^ing it* as
A^tichristian, wherein lik^wise the Lords controversy with them in laying them
by, and suffering this day to come over them is showed in which their building
is also laid in the dust, and its the will of the Lord, that it never be again
rebuilt.

4. The blessed, long looked for day of God broke up among us the Lords people
called Quakers, with a declaration of the Lords loving kindness to us, and what
he has done for our Souls in causing the light of his countenance to shine on
us.

And a brief description of our Church, Ministry, Word, Worship, order and
Government.

And a Proclamation of the foresaid day of the Lord to the People of Scotland
in judgment and mercy.

With a loving Exhortation unto them, and dear and tender counsel concerning
what the Lord requires of them in order to a perfect, and through reformation
which they have often assayed, but never as yet come at.

Also a few words to such who expect the breaking up of the day of God, and yet
deny it, broke up among us.

Writ in the fear and love of the Lord, and in bowels of love and compassion,
to the people of my native Country.

A Word of Exhortation by way of Preface to the following Purposes, from a
Lover of the true interest of those to whom they are directed.
HOw is it, that ye do not yet discern this time? how long will ye shut out
the discoverers of it, and so provoke the Lord to shut you further out from
beholding them; O fear, fear to be found any more in that guiltiness, which (if
persisted in) may make you to be shut out for ever: And let none so look on
themselves as to suppose they are past this hazard, if so be they yet continue,
neglecting, opposing, and persecuting, or approving of them who persecute the
growing light of this day, as its come, and coming forth with power and great
glory. Truly Friends, think what ye will, this is the thing (I say not the
only) but the maine and chief thing that's in the quarrel betwixt God and you,
your keeping up of Men's Traditions in place of the true institutions of Christ,
while he now so comes forth to vindicate and restore them, your so adhearing
to, and preferring of the oldness of the Letter to the newness of the Spirit,
that had its glory, but not comparable to this which excels, think not that
this case and state of things, as then it was in the Primitive days ended with
those, that were then so zealous for, and loath to part with, the Law and
outward Ministration thereof, in the Letter: Nay Friends, consider seriously of
it in the fear of the Lord, lay by your passion and prejudice, for it concerns
you near, consider of it in soberness, and ye shall truly find it your very
case at this day, as then it was theirs, that same spirit for the outward, in
opposition to the inward Ministration acting now as then, and heightened in its
actings now, more then ever. O who^ shall that be dead to you, or ye to it,
wherein ye have been (...) long held from beholding the Glory of the Lord, as
it comes forth in the work of this day? And how contrary to, and inconsistant
with it, that work was, which (by might and power) ye were leading on, though
ye had attained, what ye so proposed in the furthest, and highest extent of
that uniformity, which ye so endeavored to have imposed upon all; are ye not
yet sensible of your mistakes and snares in these matters, so as to be made
willing to glorify God, (as some of you have, it may be ingeniously gratified
men) with a humble confession of your over-reachings? and other guiltiness
brought upon your selves, and the people of these Nations. Truly Friends,
however this may relish with you, yet ye will find ye are called to it, even
to own your shame, for so setting up your posts and thresholds by his, that so
ye may come to have the true form of the house and fashion thereof shown unto
you: Are ye not sensible, that as unwise Sons ye have stayed too, too long in
the place of the breaking forth of Children? do ye not yet perceive how that
the Bridegroom is really departed, and the Children, the Children of the
Bridechamber called to mourning; So will it be before the enjoyments of Christ
as the Bridegroom or first Husband be parted with, yet this must ye come to
know, and condescend unto, that so ye may be married to another, even to him
raised from the dead: Thy dead men shall live (says the Prophet) together with
my dead body shall they arise: the Dead and the Living body consider, for
there is much in it, and very much that concerns you nearly to look to: for, as
their mistake who crucified him, was their not discerning his living body, (for
if they had but so known him they would not have crucified the Lord of Glory)
so a mistake in the other persisted in, brings under no less hazard, then being
given up to crucify him over again, eating and drinking of the damnation
spoken of (1 Cor. 11.) is where this discerning of the Lords body is not
rightly made, the dead and crucified body, from the living body, the living
soul as its first, from the quickening Spirit, which follows after, the letter
and out ward teachings so much cried up, with all the fruits, and effects of
the one, (though a very blessed and comfortable enjoyment in its place and
kind, yet being but that which made nothing perfect, its now no less necessary
to be parted with, then at that time it was, else the comforter as the blessed
effect of the other cannot come, nor can he be supposed so to become, where his
immediate teachings are so slighted and cried out against.

Many times has it been in my heart thus to have spoken some few words unto
you, (as these) who I dearly love in the Lord, and to whom I stand by many
bonds obliged, if in any service I could be useful, but being somewhat
sensible, what I had to do in my own particular case, and not altogether
unacquainted with the deceit of the busy enemy who in this day lies so near,
ready to draw out the mind, to vent its own imaginations, and to speak of the
things of God, without his warrant. I have hitherto withholden in expectation
of a more fit opportunity, and a clearer warrant to go about it, which upon the
perusal of these ensuing Papers was very clearly given to me: And indeed the
subject spoken to, and the truths asserted in them, had been some years ago
much on my heart, and seriously enquired after, and that this search and
enquiry was of the Lord attended with a blessing to me, I can very clearly
testify; and finding the same things for the most part so sweetly, and with
such a spirit of meekness offered unto you; I find it only my duty at present
to be concuring in my Testimony, as agreeing fully with what in them is said,
as most fit and necessary to be seriously minded by you. Dear Friends, it is
high time for you to awake and consider what ye are doing, there is another
thing to be brought forth in this day then ye have yet conceived of* And your
guiltiness for opposing it, is greater then ye are yet aware of, nor will your
apparent zeal for God, and his ordinances, which has with some of you hitherto
layen very near your hearts (this I do think it has been and that yet it may
be in a measure with some of you, where singleness of heart in any measure yet
remains) serve the turn, if ye so persist in the way of provocation. Consider
if something of the same snare and tentation be not on you, as was on them who
so zealously contended for Moses, and the Prophets, the same was their plea,
and upon the same grounds did they go on, to the rejecting and crucifying of
Christ, as ye (some of you ignorantly and others more perversely) are in the
way to do at this day; bear with my freedom, for truly I can say it, there is
no bitterness nor passion at my heart, while thus I use it, but the deep sense
of the dreadful hazard ye are running, has drawn it from me, that if so in the
will of the Lord ye may return to your first love, and so embrace the guide of
your youth again; the missing and departing from whom, has always been the
cause of our Fathers the first Protestants their short comings and mistakes of
the work of God, as well as of ours, that they were not in every thing come to
own their true guide, though in some things they did it, and according to the
simplicity that was in them, they were sweetly ordered by him, and accepted of
him. And thus was it with them and so has it been with many, who succeeded
them; and was it not so of late among us also? yea, eminently so it was, both
in Scotland, England, and Ireland; mainly in this our great sin and guiltiness
(as the foundation of all our mistakes and failings) its aggravated exceedingly
beyond and above what was theirs, that the discovery of this duty of waiting to
find the immediate direction of our guide in every thing as absolutely
necessary (and at the very time when more fully and universally then ever
formerly it was bestowed) being more clearly come, and coming forth then to
them in that day it was, yet now more then ever, (which is dreadful to think
of) is it both disowned and persecuted even by them whom I well knew to have
sometimes sweetly enjoyed the blessed effects of the spirits immediate
teachings in themselves, and so to have been instrumental to the great
advantage of others, such wonderful and astonishing effects does the deep and
fiery trials of this day bring forth, when every work of man is to be consumed,
the Gold and precious stones (not built on the true foundation) as well as the
Wood, Hay and stuble, that which is born of the flesh is but flesh, even that
which is begotten, but through the knowledge of Christ after the flesh must be
left behind, and parted with, else the Comforter cannot come that the fruitful
field may become a wilderness, and the wilderness and solitary place a fruitful
field; that so the Lord alone may be exalted in this day, and all flesh lie low
as grass before him: Let therefore the dread and terror of the Lord seize upon
all, especially the professing people of this Generation, that they may no more
transgress in this thing of despising or neglecting, the immediate teachings of
his Spirit: This key of knowledge which the Lawyers have taken away, this
little stone which must fill the whole earth, dreadful is the judgment that is
to be met with by such (whatever they be) who shall be found any more refusing
to receive Jesus Christ thus coming to his Kingdom in their hearts* and what
then shall become of such who shall be found rebelling against the true Light,
so as to mock and persecute it?

Dear Friends, as ye love your peace and safety beware of this, for it borders
too near upon that guiltiness that will not be forgiven: What needs you so to
be afraid at the coming of Christ to his Kingdom, that so his will may be done
in Earth as it is in Heaven? has it not been the matter of your Prayers many a
day, and do ye well to be angry, when its so gloriously coming to pass? O! how
ill does this become you, and how ill does he take it at your hands, were it
not more becoming you (with him who so long since wished for it,) and rejoiced
thereat) to desire that all the Lords people were Prophets? this would not have
wronged, nor deminished any thing from his Ministry then, who was so eminent,
nor will it now do from the true Ministers of Christ; those who make but a
trade of preaching, thereby to win their living, as other tradesmen do, it is
no marvel to see them very angry at the approaching glory of this day, if every
one is to have the Spirit, and be permitted to speak publicly, what shall
become then of our Ministry, say they, and how shall we live? And though there
be some, yea, I conceive it may be granted, there be many among you, who upon
this account do not own these men, nor this their plea for their pretended
Ministry; but it may be really, think in your hearts that if there were no
other thing in it, ye could with Moses wish for, and rejoice thereat, even
that all the Lords people were Prophets, and that it is a Gospel Ministry, and
maintenance that ye stand for, and no other, and this being an institution of
Christ, which now you perceive so to be struck at by the Quakers, ye may not
so part with it. But Friends consider seriously of this matter, and it will not
be found so, either on your part, or on theirs, whom with the world in scorn
ye call Quakers; for we do really own both a Gospel Ministry, and a suitable
maintenance according to the Scriptures, and ye do neither own the one, nor
the other, but in words only; for though ye seem to disown those men who seek
after the Ministry, and the standing of it, mainly upon the account of their
hyre; yet consider it seriously if upon the matter ye do not the very same
thing with them, and harden them in their guiltiness, and the people in their
prejudice against us while ye so both by your profession and practice,
justify and imposed, and forced maintenance, which is so well known to be
contrary to the Gospel, and condemned also by your Predecessors, and many
others of the Martyrs and servants of God, among our selves, and elsewhere. And
again consider, however ye pretend to be for a Gospel Ministry; it is not so,
no, ye are downright opposers, and persecuters of it; and alas that I should
have such cause so to speak it. Can ye produce any institution of Christ, for
justifying such a Ministry, which other ways ye cannot maintain, but as
through a line of succession from the gre^^ enemy of Christ, descended upon
you, and for keeping up of which a door must be set open, even for the ungodly
to enter; for its plainly so affirmed by many of greatest note amongst you,
that Grace belongs only to the well being, and not to the being of such a
Ministry, and ministerial qualifications, as are by you required; see Durhame
on the Revelation concerning Ministerial qualifications page 199. and where it
is thus, A door set open for an ungodly man to enter (if he be furnished with
gifts of humane Learning) and closely shut upon another; however he may be
known to be eminently pious and well furnished with spiritual knowledge and
gifts of the Holy Ghost, is this your Gospel Ministry? and yet thus it is
according to the acts and appointments of your supposed, most pure and
incorrupt Assemblies that has been of late; so far are ye in this also become
contrary to your Predecessors who both by their practice and profession
affirmed that every faithful man and woman was a Priest, this is fully
testified too, both by Knox his Chronicle, and Spotswood in his History of the
(so called) Kirk of Scotland, second book, page 60. and 61. are ye not ashamed
therefore any longer to own such a Ministry? O Friends, come come down and lie
in the dust, for greatly has the Lord been thus provoked by you, and
lamentable is the case of the people of these Nations, who are perishing in
their sins, because of such a Ministry, such leaders of the people so causing
them to err. And if it be here required what is that Ministry, and what are the
qualifications thereof, which the Quakers require. To this I need say but
little, the Author of the ensuing Papers having fully and faithfully spoken to
it, and diverse other particulars, whose Testimony if not made use of will one
day bear witness against you, as well against the multitude of time servers
(who go along with every thing making no question for conscience sake (as the
Apostle speaks in another case) as of others who are under some sort of
suffering at present though in part, for a true Testimony, given in some
particulars, yet even in this, no ways answerable, nor suitable to what is
required in this day, and all of you in your several interests and capacities,
as ye stand related to the (so called) Kirk of Scotland, and pretended work of
Reformation, are very much called, seriously to mind what is therein said unto
you, and if in soberness ye well consider of it, the thing intended may very
clearly appear, that hitherto ye have been laboring but in the fire, as to
the producing any work of Reformation which God allows of; yea, and going
rather backwards, from what was once attained to loosing, and plainly
contradicting the true and honest principles of your worthy Predecessors, which
one thing rightly considered may evidently demonstrate to you, that your work
has not been nor is of God. The presence of God having been very eminently
with the Author of these Papers in his enquiry after these things, this his
service may be very useful for you, and will be so found, and acknowledged by
those, whose eyes shall be opened to behold, how the Lord comes forth in this
day of his power to try every work of man, and by the foolish things of the
World to confound the wise. And to what is there said as to that particular,
annent the qualifications of a true Minister, I shall only add these few words,
that which so was necessary from the beginning, that which we have heard and
seen, and handled with our hands of the word of Life, even the power and
presence of the Lord, in his people do we (whom in scorn ye call Quakers)
declare unto you, as the only essential qualification of a true Minister of
Christ.

And if this be it ye are so afraid of, that through the increase of this,
the spirit of Prophecy, the true Church and Ministers of Christ, shall suffer
loss, your fear upon this account is groundless, for these must stand, and only
in that way must they prosper, so as that the gates of Hell shall never prevail
against them, but if your fear be for the fall of that supposed Church, which
they the hirelings I mean, and ye so contend for both among your selves, and
with others, which is truly Antichristian and no better, then undoubtedly your
fear is coming upon you, and for preventing of it (as ye may suppose) it is no
marvel that ye so fall in with them for the defense of Rome, and her Ministry,
or else as some who have been, and yet are famous among you, have both spoke
and written, that ye must not only lose your Church and ministry, but your
Baptism, and the Bible, which the witness of God in your Consciences, cannot
but tell you, how much ye did sometime detest and abhor so to say, or think
until of late through the growing light of this day, in these and in many
other truths of the like nature, your skirts are so discovered, and your heels
made bare, and your way so hedged up of the Lord that ye cannot escape, either
to own Rome as your mother Church, and so to return to her again, or fully to
part with and come out of her for ever, and thence not to bring with you a
stone of hers, either for a foundation to Zion, or for a corner; nay, she must
not be healed any more (which ye have been for a long time so endeavoring)
but destroyed for ever, Ier. 51.9.26. and the time draws near, and yet thereby
neither the Church, nor Ministers of Christ, nor the true Baptism, nor the
holy Scriptures of truth, nor any other of his true Ordinances shall thereby
s^ffer loss, but great and glorious advantage to them who wait for it.

And because there be some, with whom I have had sweet fellowship in the Lord,
who its very like, would have expected some other thing from me, then such
sharp and peremptory expressions, and conclusions against them, and the way of
the (so called) Kirk of Scotland in which I was bred with them, and had my
beginning in the way of Godliness; I know very well, as things now stands with
you, ye may think so, of what I have said, as also that it may be, ye would
rather have expected some account of the grounds, moving me to, and the
advantages that I either looked for, or have found by such a thing: Now to
speak shortly a word to this, I trust for it, yea, I am not without hope in it,
that the day is coming (and frequently have I sought it of the Lord on your
behalf) when ye shall so come to see the truth of what I say, and the necessity
that (on your account) was on me for it, as that ye shall willingly
acknowledge, that it was the greatest evidence of my dear and tender love in
the Lord to you, which next to his glory led me to it, and that otherwise I
should have been wanting of the expression of that true and sincere love which
still I have unto you, as to the advantages I have found, which might be also
offered, as the reasons whereby I was moved of the Lord, to make that so
strange a change as ye account it, in owning these despised people called
Quakers: I need say but little, if what is in this and the following Papers be
well considered of, and I know it is my place to lie low in the fear of the
Lord, and to speak but little as to advantages, or any progress that I have
made; and I acknowledge no man has more matter so to do, yet in this case I
may not be silent, but must in the fear of the Lord, give this my Testimony to
the precious people, and the truths of God asserted by them, that they do
truly and really, both profess and practice the new and living way in which
holiness (by mortification and subduing a body of sin and death is attained,
and have indeed come to the discovery of these things, even the life and power,
which throughout the dark night of Apostasy has lain much hid, and has been
but very little felt, or known; yet such is the goodness of God to that
precious people, count of them, and call them what ye will, the true power and
life of holiness is more truly known to them, and eminently holden forth by
them, then by any people else that have come forth since the Apostles days,
and a greater measure do they yet wait for, and as they are faithful, it will
be multiplied on them; for the presence of the Lord is with them, and all their
opposers must fall before them. Dear Friends consider then, how far ye have
been mistaken concerning them, and with groundless jealousies carried on with
prejudice against them, as grossly erroneous, blasphemers and the like; Nay,
nay, friends, it is not so, and upon search ye shall find it far otherwise,
let your informers who many of them sinfully take things on report without
trial, and others who for maintaining of your own interests have made lies
their refuge, let such say what they will, they are, and will be found a
blessed people, who as instruments in the Lords hands may be called the
repairers of the breach, and the restorers of the paths to dwell in; they own
dearly, and rejoice in the use of the holy Scriptures, and desire to live up to
the practice of all the truths of God declared in them. Beware then what ye
say or think of them, and that ye approve not in the least their persecuters.
And if as yet ye cannot receive what they offer, yet beware to reject it, or
to judge of it, because ye cannot as yet close with it; the time may come when
ye shall both see and receive it: If the work they are about be of God, (as
undoubtedly it is, then it must prosper; beware therefore to be found any more
in opposing of it, least ye also be found fighters against God. As for me, I
am but a child, and as one of yesterday, yet through Grace, I am what I am; and
as I own that state wherein I was, when I walked with you, for truly I can say
there was a measure of singleness and sincerity within me in it, and therefore
I may not disown it, nor any, while they so continue there, if they be not
wilfully opposing further discovery; yet this I verily know, and can truly say,
I then was, and now am called of the Lord to go further forgeting the things
that are behind, to press forward for the prise of the high calling of God in
Christ Jesus, and this is that I aim at, and which thorough the help of my God,
in this way so much by you so slighted and despised; as I keep faithful to what
I know of it, I have more hope of attaining then ever.

Now that I may come to a close, I have but a few words more to say to such of
those to whom these Papers are directed, who are gone beyond Sea, if at any
time this shall come to their hands, which is to desire them in the fear of the
Lord, to consider seriously what is therein said unto them in particular, and
if without prejudice in soberness they wait for it, I am hopeful, it shall be
said unto them, how came ye here? and what do you here, seeking to uphold that
which I am pulling down, and to bear down that which I am setting up? this is
not your work, return from whence ye came, and it shall be shown unto you.
Dear Friends, (for so are ye to me) whither ye will hear or forbear, yet know
of a truth I speak not unto you without a warrant.

Written in the 11 th Month in the year 1664. Alex. Iaffray.

A Lamentation over, and an Expostulation with the People of Scotland, for
their so gain-standing and opposing the appearance of God among the Lord's
People, called in derision Quakers; And for their foul Defection and Apostasy
from what the primitive Protestants and Reformers were, (whose successors they
boast themselves to be) yea and from what they have been but of late days
themselves.
OH, oh, people of Scotland! great is my sorrow of heart for you; and when I
consider your state and condition, many times my soul mourns, and pangs take
hold of me, as of a woman in travel, and I cannot cease, but take up a
lamentation over you, if possibly any of you hereby may be reached and awakened
out of the deep slumber of security, whereinto ye have fallen, to consider your
ways and turn unto the Lord, from whom ye have deeply revolted, and against
whom ye are fighting in this day; and his appearance ye are calluminating,
blaspheming and opposing, as witnesses too manifestly your savage and cruel
dealings with the Lord's people, whom he has framed for himself, and who do
and shall show forth his praise to the ends of the earth. Oh, oh, your cruel
mockings, your hard speeches, your inhumane usage of them, one way and another,
is noticed and marked before him; yea, it is writ as with a pen of iron and a
point of a Diamond, and the least grain weight of their sufferings by him is
regarded, and he will be avenged of their enemies, and repay them double; yea,
great is the indignation and wrath of the Lord against you; verily I have felt
it, yea, I have seen it (and many others with me) burning like a very Sea of
fire and brimstone, ready to break out upon you, as certainly it will do, and
sweep you away to the bottomless pit, if ye do not prevent it by speedy and
unfeigned repentance. Alas unthankful People, do ye so requite the Lord? is
this the fruit ye bring forth to him, after he gave you deliverance from your
enemies, and peace and rest round about? remember and call to mind the rock
from whence ye were hewed out of, and the pit from whence ye were dug, and
consider your poor, low and despicable condition, and your forefathers estate,
in the day of your and their nativity, when the Lord first visited you in
Egypt, the da^kness of Popery I mean, and gave unto your fathers a little
Goshen, where they had light, when the Egyptians (such as remained Papists)
were choked with the thick darkness; and after when the Lord called them forth
out of Egypt, and they begun to remove, having a red Sea before them, Pharaoh
(Antichrist in the Pope) and his accomplices behind, and mountains on every side,
yet the Lord was with them, and did fight on their behalf, and they saw great
wonders in Egypt and in the Wilderness, but with many of them God was not well
pleased, for they tempted him exceedingly, whereby the Lord was provoked to
swear against them, that such should not enter into his Rest: and Oh, how have
ye their posterity, lusted in your hearts to return into Egypt, because of the
onyons, and garlic, and fleshpots thereof, and others of you would not go
forwards at the command of the Lord, but ye would sit down in the Land which
God never appointed for your rest, for it was but the wilderness, and ye made
to your selves of it a resting and dwelling place, where ye thought to have
planted Orchards and Vineyards, and to have eaten of the fruit thereof, whereby
it came to pass, that ye loathed the Manna from Heaven, and the Lord became
wroth, and ceased to rain of it any more down upon you; and ye did eat of the
fruit of your own doings, and your Vineyards which ye planted, brought ye forth
abominable fruit, whereby your souls were distasted, and many of you became to
be past feeling of God; and the Manna from Heaven became such a mystery unto
you, as it is at this day, that ye own such a thing delusion and blasphemy; and
the cloud by day, and the firy-piller by night, which the Lord gave to your
fathers to lead them, have you turned your backs upon, and shut your eyes, that
ye might not see, and the Lord was provoked to remove it from you, and it
ceased to appear, and your foolish hearts were so darkened, that ye denied
altogether such a thing, and at this day ye call it a fancy, viz. the
Revelation of God's Spirit. Oh, oh, how are ye degenerated into a strange
Plant, who were a noble Vine, a right seed! how have ye turned from that which
was the rock that followed your fathers, was their stay, was their Manna, was
their Leader and Guide, their Moses? but have ye not said with them, who
typically d^d represent your estate, As for this Moses, we know not what is
become of him, let us take our jewels and earrings of gold, and make it into a
god, that may go up before us into the Land; and now after your long and sore
travel in the Wilderness, wherein ye have abode many years, going backward and
forwards, wandering up and down, having lost the sight of the cloud which
pointed you the way, and forgotten that rock which followed and accompanied
your fathers, out of which living waters flowed to their refreshment (which
rock was Christ) and after many of your carcasses have fallen, because of
unbelief, and more are yet to fall. It has pleased the Lord to raise up to us,
among your selves, that Prophet whereof Moses wrote, and his Word we have heard
sounded forth (which is near even in our hearts) saying to us by the powerful
breath of his Spirit, Arise, arise, this is not your rest, it is polluted, it
will destroy you with a sore destruction; and the voice was so powerful, that
it has quickened us, who were dead with you while we were living, and the
firy-piller has appeared to us, glory to God for his gift, and shines forth
with beams of glory; and the Lord has opened the windows of Heaven, and rained
down on us the Manna from Heaven, which is the food of Angels, and not like the
Manna which the Jews did eat and died, but that which feeds us unto life
everlasting; and the rock, even the eternal rock and salvation of Gods people
is revealed unto us, out of which springs pure living water from the fountain
of life; and Joshua, which is Jesus, is given us for a head to lead us into the
Land of Promise, an entrance into which many witness at this day, and others
are in the way, and have got a fore-taste of the Vine-grapes of the Land, and
has sounded forth a good report concerning the same, and many has believed
the report, and tried the truth thereof, and found it to be true, even some of
your selves, who were as you, whose eyes the Lord out of his infinite mercy
has opened, and they have found a place of repentance for all their hard
speeches and enmity against the people of the Lord (in the time of their
ignorance) and his work and appearance, and have become ashamed and confounded
therefore* and I know assuredly it shall be so with others, who for the present
(through the ignorance that is in them) may be persecuting the Saints of God;
but alas, alas, how dangerous and deplorable is the condition of the most part
of you, for the time, with whom our testimony can have no room, nor find place
in you; and the good Land, whereof we report, has no more credit with you, then
if it were a cunningly devised Fable, even the Kingdom of God and of his
Christ, in the Revelation of his eternal Light, Life, Power, and Spirit in our
hearts, which fills us with joy unspeakable, and full of glory, and satisfies
the desires of our souls; so that we have true content in the enjoyment of our
God, and have all and abound, possessing him in whose favor is life, and at
whose right hand are pleasures for ever more; the streams thereof, your thick
walled prisons, and bolted gates, within which ye shut us up, cannot hinder
from flowing into our souls, and for the pretiousness and excellency of his
dear and sweet love, which he has caused, and does cause us to feel shed
abroad in our hearts, are we made willing patiently and contentedly to go
through all the reproach and opposition we can meet with from you, if possibly
we be made instrumental to reach some of you, that thereby ye may be saved with
us, and induced to walk in the Light of the Lord with us, which has appeared
and shined forth in its glory, and (as Solomon said) Truly it is a sweet and a
pleasant thing to behold the light. O how sweet is it, how pleasing, how
refreshing, how healing, how comforting, how sure a Guide; what assurance and
satisfaction it gives to the soul, none knows but such as are come to perceive
it in their own hearts: this, this was it discovered unto your fathers the many
gross abominations and superstitions of Popery, so that they came to loath and
abhor them; this led them forth out of Egypt, this discovered unto them Babylon
the mother of fornications, and the cup wherewith she had bewitched them; so
that they had no rest till they vomited up so much of the same as they
perceived to be poisonous. And oh, had you their posterity kept chaste to the
leadings of the Lord by his Light, which was near unto you, as well as unto
them, even the light of Christ, which enlightens every man that comes into the
world, and shines in darkness, though the darkness cannot comprehend it; had
you (I say) kept chaste thereto, and given it the pre-eminence above all, how
unspeakable had your happiness been at this day, and now is your misery the
greater, that ye have adulterated therefrom, and become so impudent and
shameless as to deny it for a leader, or to give it the pre-eminence, for have
ye not set the letter of the Scriptures above it, and made them unto your
selves a golden Calf to be a Guide, Leader and Rule unto you, whereas if ye had
given them the proper place, setting them under the Light and Spirit of Jesus
Christ, from which they came, and to which they point, it being their own
testimony, that they are not that light, but were given and sent forth to bear
witness of the light, that all in the light (not in them) might believe: I say,
had you given to them their proper place, they had been as jewels and earrings
of gold unto you, and useful in their room, whereas, through your abuse of
them, and setting their testimony above the inward and immediate testimony of
Jesus, which is the spirit of Prophecy ( Rev. 19.10) they are become your
snare, and a sealed book unto you, that ye cannot read nor understand their
interpretation, because ye have gone from the key (the Light and Spirit of
Christ) which would have opened them unto you, and now they are parables unto
you, and dark sayings, though you call them plain; but plain indeed a^e they,
and easy to be understood by the children and Babes of Light; and because ye
have so gone a whoring from that which would have proved a sovereign remedy and
antidote against the ways and wiles of the Devil, and Babilons cup of
fornications, therefore the light being a holy, pure and chaste thing, has been
provoked much to withdraw, and (...) have cause to be afraid, lest it eternally
depart from you, and you be shut up in blackness of darkness, who has so
forsaken and undervalued your own mercy, and misprized the gift of God unto
you, given you to profit withal, and which only can open your eyes, and give
you the knowledge of the glory of God, which is life eternal; and you being
wandered from the light, which is the first principle and key to open up the
oracles and mysteries of God's Kingdom; you have come to read the Scriptures
with a false eye, and have understood them, (yea and used them) as weapons to
fight against the appearance of Christ in his people at this day, as the Jews
did against the same Lord Jesus Christ in his appearance according to the flesh
at Jerusalem, they disputed against him from the Scriptures, whereas they
testified of him; but the vail was upon their eyes, and they had lost the key
(which was the light and Spirit of Christ that gave them forth) which their
Teachers had taken from them, as your Teachers have done from you. Oh, let this
be a Lamentation for ever, that of the rock that begot you, ye are become so
unmindful and turned against that which was the very life, marrow and substance
of your reformation, and you having lost the same, what remains but a dead
carcass, or rather an image of a reformed Church, (...) with a wrong spirit,
which is the life of the W^^re, Beast, and false Prophet, who are all for the
Pit. And O^ how have ye betrayed your own cause, and given it a way into the
hand, of your enemies, as appears by your arguments ye make use of against us,
the very self same the Papists took against your Fathers, did they not upbraid
them with innovations, and the novelty of their Religion, being but of a few
years and days standing; did not they upbraid them with the fewness of their
number? did they not upbraid them with their ignorance, calling them idiots and
unlearned, as indeed they were to Humane Learning many of them; but they were
taught of God, which was far better; did they not nickname them, calling them
after such base and contemptible names, whereby to render them odious unto the
people? did they not raise up many false slanders and reports against them? did
they not persecute them with fire and faggot, imprisonment and spoiling of
their Goods, which they took joyfully; and did they not question them as the
Jews did Christ and his Disciples, and as ye do us concerning the authority
who gave them a command to preach and reform; and had your Fathers any recourse
to make, but unto that which could well bear them thorough, as it does us to
day, viz. the immediate call of Gods Spirit in their hearts; and have ye not
so used us, have ye not nicknamed us, and raised many false reports
concerning us, and greedily sucked in the fame of them from others who invented
them: Oh how strange have we been and are to you at this day, have ye not
refused us, the name of Christians, which ye will not scruple to give to
drunkards, cursers, whoremongers, murderers, profane and abominable persons
among your selves, whom ye own as your Church members, have ye not called us
worse then the very vilest of men, even then Turks or Pagans; saying, we are
unworthy to live, and have ye not given it forth that our design is to
overthrow and root out of the world the Christ an Religion, and that we strike
at the very foundamentals thereof: Oh that we should be so mistaken by you, if
your Predecessors were live in the body, many of them we could* willingly
appeal unto and next under God, set them to judge betwixt you and us, in this
matter, and we are sure they would not have so mistaken us, as ye have done;
for (although they had not come to see things as they are at this day seen, and
were far short of the knowledge God has now given to his people, being as it
were the morning dawning, or twy-light unto them) so that they had not
discovered the bottom of all Babilons treasures, nor got rid of the many
inventions and traditions of men, yet a measure of truth many of them received
from the Lord, and were gathered in a measure to walk in the Light, and life
thereof, (and had confidence in the Lord to seal their Testimony with their
blood against the Man of sin) and they being in a measure of truth themselves
could not but have known us, for all the children of light, and who are begot
of the living word of truth, which gives a discerning to know one another in
the truth, and in the light and spirit, which first begot them, and this is the
true rule of knowing one another, and who come hither can dearly own and have
uni^n with others as brethren, though differing from them in some things, if
they can feel them in the living word and spirit of truth in which their life
stands, and their fellowship and communion with God, and one with another; and
it is not the many opinions agreed upon that is the bond of peace, but the unity
of the spirit; now ye having wandered from the Word of truth, and light and
spirit of Christ, which gives and preserves in the discerning and feeling one
another, as members of one body, yet retaining somewhat of the form of truth
and some of their opinions, ye could not but mistake and oppose us, as your
greatest enemies, and your fathers enemies also, in whose succession ye so much
boast, though we be much nearer them then your selves, both in principles and
practices (excepting some things they had not got rid of some of Babylons wa^es
and baggage, which they brought away with them, I mean some Popish opinions,
cust^ms, and traditions which in that day passed for the matters of God, but
now they are seen in the light, which has broke up in a greater measure to
have Antichrists superscription upon them, and Babylon the Whores
superscription, which we coming to disce^n could not but give her what was
hers; now it has been so always* that such who have got into the form of
truth, and not into the power spirit and life thereof, has most persecuted
these who had come thereunto, witness the Professors among the Jews, with their
Priests, Teachers, Doctors and Rabies, who were the greatest enemies to Christ
and his Disciples. Oh how shall I bemone and bewail you people of Scotland, who
have been and are in your own apprehensions exalted unto the Heavens, and
looked upon your selves, and were so reputed by others, as the choicest Nation
in the World for the purity of the Gospel, and Gospel Worship, and Ordinances:
Oh how are ye fallen, and become a hissing and reproach to all round about
you, and the enemy has gotten this advantage over you, saying, ah so would we
have it, this is the day we looked for, and it is come, is this the royal and
magnificent City which gave her self forth to be the praise of the whole earth,
and a dread and terror to her enemies round about, let our eye look upon her,
for she is become defiled, she is become as one of us; how is the stately City
fallen! how is her glory defaced! how is her bulwarks and walls broken down,
who boasted in the strength of them, as if the gates of Hell could never have
prevailed against her: Oh how have ye given occasion to the enemy to revile
and reproach you, and the living truth of the living God, by and through you
has suffered also, and the name of God has been exceedingly dishonored, and
blasphemed, and many has been tempted in their hearts by your miscarriage to
think all Religion a mockery and delusion: And Oh how have ye quite lost and
fallen from that simplicity and honesty that was in your forefathers, and in
some of your selves also in the time of your infancy and poverty, but now ye
are grown up, and become wise and rich, lacking nothing but having all; Oh were
not your thoughts of your Reformation such as nothing could have been added
thereto, but as if the topstone had been put thereupon, and the frame and
building had become entire; but alas, alas, what shall I compare you to, but
even to Laodicea, whose thoughts where such of her self, and yet she was poor
and miserable, and naked, and wanted the eye salve, which is the light which
ye also want, and you are become lukewarm, neither hot nor cold, and are near
to be spewed out, as many of you are already; Oh how is your Gold turned into
brass, and your silver become dross, and your wine become water; how are your
Nazarites that were white as snow, and pure as wool become black as Charcoal;
how is your Glory turned into shame, your strength into weakness, your zeal
into a cold neutrality, concerning the cause and work of God, but in so far as
ye are persecuting his witnesses, only because they are more righteous then
your selves, and there is scarce one to be found among you all to day, bearing
a suitable testimony for God, according to your own very principles, and ye have
not the hearts to suffer for that which ye formerly caused others to suffer for
by you, who would not go along with you in that which ye called the cause of
God, and the interest and concernment of Jesus Christ. Oh, how has this day
discovered you! how are ye stripped, and your nakedness laid open? how are ye
become an hundred fold more vile then other Nations, who never had such a
Profession of God and of his Truth, as you have made. Oh, oh, how are my bowels
troubled for you!

19 th. of the 10 th. Month 1664. George Keath.

A Demonstration of the Apostasy and defection of the (so called) Church of
Scotland, from what their Fathers, the Primitive Protestants, and Reformers
were in Principles, to the number of 14. or 16. and in many practices also,
wherein their Apostasy also and defection from what they have been themselves,
but of late days in several particulars is hinted at, and there vile relapse
into Popery (out of which they were never cleanly extricate) is discovered, and
their treachery laid open in the matter of their Covenant which they cried up
as the glory of their Nation, and the concernment and interest of Jesus Christ,
which now they have trampled under feet as the mire in the street, and think
shame of it as if it had been awhores brat.
IN love and compassion to your souls, if happily any of you may be convinced,
and in the will and commandment of God, who has laid it upon me, to show unto
you your abominations; if thereby his Witness in your consciences may be
reached, and ye brought to some sense of the evil of your ways, that you may
repent and find mercy of him; and not out of any evil will (the searcher of
hearts knows) I bear to any of you, I shall proceed to demonstrate the Apostasy
of your Church and Nation* Priests and People, from what the primitive
Protestants and first Reformers were, whose successors ye boast your selves to
be, that ye may cease your glorying in the flesh, and may know the Land of your
nativity and descent, which is but from Hagar; and though ye call your selves
the children of Abraham, yet ye have not his faith, but your father is an
Hittit, and your mother an Am^rit, which was the challenge of the Lord even
against them who descended from Abraham, and were according to their profession
the choicest people in world for Religion, but they were gone from Abraham's
faith, and the Spirit and Principle which guided him, which was Christ the
Light; for Abraham saw his day and rejoiced in it; for before Abraham was, he
was; and so are you generally gone from the spirit and life of your Fathers,
which was the kernel, and have kept the husk and shell as the Jews did, who put
Christ to death, as you have done, and are doing; and I can instance to you
some of your Fathers, who were honest and faithful servants to God in their
day, who saw your Apostasy and defection coming; namely, John Knox, George
Wishard and John Welshe (as appears by this man's Epistle with several other
that is extant this day) who by the spirit of Prophecy foretold, that Christ
should be again crucified in Scotland, as he has been and is amongst you, as
he was among and in us also, till it pleased the Lord to raise us up together
with him; and the Son of Righteousness has arisen upon us, with healing under
his wings, and we witness the Son of God come, and we have been made to look
upon him, and mourn because of our piercing of him, and he has comforted us
after all our sorrows, and brought us to walk in the light of his countenance,
and begotten us unto a living hope by his Resurrection from the dead, and such
need no verbal demonstration of your Apostasy, seeing the same in the light, as
it were engraven upon your foreheads in great letters, so that he who runs
may read, who have an eye or sense to perceive; and that ye are so unsensible
your selves, it argues a very great deadness, that has overflown you: but
because many cannot read in the Spirit your defection and Apostasy, as neither
can ye your selves, therefore I shall make a visible demonstration of it unto
you, which ye cannot shun, though ye would never so fain, (for the witness
shall arise in your consciences, which ye shall not be able to hold down, and
justify my declaration) from drawing a parallel betwixt your forefathers
principles and practices, and yours; so will all who have the least measure of
ingenuity and true understanding, see how ye have gone from them, and quite
lost the true Protestant cause, for which the Lord first raised them up, and
how ye have healed the wound of the beast, which your fathers gave it.

Let all who have any measure of simplicity among you, and desires to know the
perfect way of God, seriously consider, that for which the Lord raised up his
witnesses in all ages against Antichrist, and mystery Babylon, who still gave
her self forth for the Spouse of Christ, but was indeed a Harlot, and deceived
the Inhabitants of the earth by her mask, getting many of the outward forms and
words of the Saints, the sheeps clothing, but inwardly adulterated from the
life and Spirit of Jesus Christ, the only foundation of the true Church; and
was not the ground of the Dragons, Whores, Beasts, false Prophets quarrel
against the Martyrs and witnesses of Christ principally this? that they held
the testimony of Jesus which is the spirit of Prophecy ( Rev. 19.10.) and bear
witness against the Whore, who had the form retained without the power, yea
denied the power of godliness, denied the teachings and leadings of the Spirit
of Christ, and the Revelation of him in the hearts of the children of men?
(this is the Antichrist who denies Christ the Son come thus in the revelation
of himself in the heart; for that coming of Christ in his bodily appearance at
Jerusalem, Antichrist will not, does not deny it, being he knows it will never
harm his Kingdom; so to confess him come, providing Christ his Kingdom be not
set up in the heart.) now was there not such a dispensation in the earth, were
there not a people in the Apostles days, who witnessed Christ come again in
spirit, according to his promise? who said, If any keep my commands, I and my
Father will come and dwell with him, And again, I go away, but I will not leave
you comfortless, I will come again unto you ( John 17.) And after the
Resurrection and Ascension of Christ, were they not endued with the Spirit from
on high, and filled with the holy Ghost? did they not live in the Spirit, walk
after the Spirit? did it not give the knowledge of the mysteries of God's
Kingdom unto them? did not the Spirit of Wisdom and Revelation open the eyes of
their understanding, to know the love of Christ, which passes knowledge? and
while they kept here, did they not remain a pure chaste Church unto Christ? and
while the eye was kept open and single by the revelation of the Spirit of
Truth, could the Dragon, or Whore, or Antichrist prevail over them? could the
many traditions or inventions get place, as the Ordinances of Christ, had they
kept to the evidence and demonstration of the Spirit of God? Now was not the
principal Defection and Apostasy from this, even the pure chaste Light, Life and
Spirit of Christ revealing God, and the things of this Kingdom unto them? and
when people wandered from this, there the inventions took place, and Babylons
cup was drunk, for the vail came over, whereby the true discerning was lost,
and a wrong eye opened, which could not but judge amiss of the things of God,
and of his People, and wrest and abuse the Scriptures. Now ye who say, That
there was indeed such a dispensation, but now it has ceased, and is never any
more to take footing in the earth, do ye not hereby demonstrate your selves to
be of the whorish Church? for has not this been her plea all along this dark
night of Apostasy, that the Revelation, Teachings, and leadings of the Spirit
of Chirst is ceased? therefore another Head was set up in the Church then
Christ Jesus, and the Pope and his Council was made Judge to determine all
controversies of Religion, and no man was to look at an infallible Judge, (the
spirit of Truth within him) and are ye not become as bad, who openly affirm,
that ye are not led by the infallible Spirit, and consequently not by the
Spirit of God; and your Church Confession of Faith says, The former way of
God's revealing himself by Prophecy and immediate Revelation, is ceased; and
God has committed his counsel wholly into writing (or to the Scriptures) and
nothing is to be added thereto by any new revelation of the Spirit. And oh, how
fa^ are ye in this point degenerated and apostatized from the primitive
Protestants and Reformers, who not only affirmed, that there was immediate
Revelations from God, and that the Spirit of Prophecy was not ceased, but
witnessed the same in themselves, and foretold many things of consequence by
the spirit of Prophecy, which came to pass: did not John Knox, and George
Wishard prophecy exceeding clearly? of whom it was said, That from the day he
entered upon his Ministry, t^ his death, there never came a storm upon the
Church, but he foresaw the end of it; as may be seen in the Book of the
Reformation of the Church of Scotland; and many others did prophecy, as ye may
read in Fox's Book of Martyrs: and was not this the main and only pillar of the
Protestant cause against the Papists, who should be the Judge of Controversies,
and the interpreter of Scriptures? The Pope and his Council, with the Fathers,
said, The Papists; no said the Protestants, but the Spirit of God. And I read
in the forecited Book of Martyrs, how when some who were burnt for their
testimony to the Truth, in Queen Mary's days, were called before the Popish
Clergy, and Bishops who disputed with them; and when the controversy arose
concerning such points or Scriptures, the Popish party alleged the
determination of the Church; but the Martyrs pleaded for the determination of
the Spirit of God: and when it was queried, if such had the Spirit of God, and
it was answered, Yea, (and one brought that Scripture for his assertion, who is
Antichrist, but he that denies that Christ is come in the flesh) the people
partly flouted thereat, and laughed them to scorn, as ye do us at this day,
because we affirm that we have the Spirit of God, and that Christ is come, and
his life made manifest in our mortal flesh as says the Apostle Paul: And that
which sounds very harsh in your ears at this day, and is mocked at by you, yea,
accounted delusion and blasphemy, viz. Enthusiasm, or the Inspiration of God,
and the motion of his Spirit; was a thing usually known, professed, and
possessed also by them, as may be read at large in the aforesaid books, and
they said faith was the Inspiration of Gods Spirit, (and so it is, and I deny
that there is any true faith, but that which comes as really and immediately
from the inspiration of the Spirit, as ever Paul, or Peter, or any of the
Apostles and Prophets witnessed the same, whom ye your selves acknowledge to
have been inspired, and were they now living ye would hiss at them as ye do
at us; calling them Inthusiasts: and Oh what a time are we fallen in, that the
inspiration of the Spirit of God which is the very breath of life into the
souls of the Lords people, should be scorned, and such as witness such a
blessed and glorious dispensation, nicknamed Fanatics and mad men, even by
them who have pretended so highly to be the reformed Church, and at such a time
wherein the day of God is broke up in such clearness in the midst of them, yet
they know it not.

2. Your forefathers the primitive Protestants and Reformers, who saw a little
further into mystery Babylon then others that went before them; for the day
brake up gradually, and there succeeded a people who saw over these, who
compiled, or rather Englished the Service Book, and they disowned it, as they
did also all other set forms of Prayer, and cried them down as dead lifeless
things, and they were for a worship in Spirit: thus is was, but even of very
late days, in Queen Elizabeth and King James the sixth, and such were
nicknamed by their enemies Puritans; and they affirmed that the Spirit of the
Lord was only to teach them to pray and worship, and not any Book or Man
whatsoever; and were not set forms of Prayer cried down also in Scotland, as
lifeless barren things (and the Service Book denied) and now have ye not again
licked up that vomit, and through your Cities men set up (mostly also
scandalous in their conversations) at such hours of the day or night to read a
set form of Prayer? and is there any material difference betwixt this and the
Service Book? And have not your brethren in England taken it up again? and when
it is offered to you to read, will ye not also do the like? there is no question
of it, but most of you will, and worse also, when ye are put to the trial; and
oh, what a mystery is it to you, praying and singing in the Spirit! are ye not
become so impudent, as to mock this also, as I have often witnessed my self, when
your Church Members has been so shameless as to cry in the very streets at us,
when passing by, When came the Spirit last upon you, give us a Prayer from the
Spirit? And do ye not flatly deny praying and worshipping in Spirit, who deny
Enthusiasm, which is to say, being interpreted (for it is a Greek word) the
inspiration of the Spirit of God, which is the only flame that kindles up holy
(...) in the soul after God? and you who can prate and talk unto God without a
Book in your Pulpits, and chief places of the Synagogues, and elsewhere (in
your own wills and times, and in the wills and times of others) from a
rhetorical strain, as if ye were complementing some great Prince, your prayers
are as life' ess and spiritless, as those said of the Mass Book; and were ye
come truly to the spirit of prayer, ye would know a bridle to your tongues
(without which your Religion is but vain) and that the Spirit of God, which
blows as well, when and where it lists, is also as far from being limited
to set times as to set forms; and we read not in the whole Scripture, that the
Lord has appointed any set times of prayer under the Gospel, to his people at
all, whose great and most important work, is to wait the movings of the Spirit
of Life from God at all times, whether to pray or give thanks, or to any other
spiritual exercise; and blessed are they who come hither, for they shall know
that it is not in vain to wait upon the Lord; for we have waited patiently upon
him, and have witnessed, and do witness the pourings forth of the spirit of
Prayer and praise, supplications and thanksgivings (filling our hearts and
souls night and day) to the God of our life; and true prayer is the gift of
God, which comes not at all in man's will or time, and therefore the season is
to be waited for, which God has kept in his own hand, and has the key of the
heart to open it when he pleases, and the key into the house of prayer, where
is the throne of grace, without access to which, in the drawings of the
Spirit-of life, man has no acceptance with God, nor his service or worship;
all is but idolatry and abomination, only such who come to God, through the
Mediator and Intercessor, Christ the Life, feeling the living drawings thereof
in the particular, are accepted of him, and made joyful in the house of prayer;
and has it not been the regret of some among you (and may be yet when ye are
in a sober mood) that the spirit of prayer is much lost, and a dry
complementing of God come in the room thereof?

3. Were not your forefathers, the primitive Protestants and Reformers, a
separated people? did not they disown the Popish Assemblies, and their
preaching and worship as idolatry, and forsake it? and did not those called
Puritans, both in England and Scotland, separate themselves from the other
party, who stuck to the Service Book, and other superstitions? and did not the
sober people in Scotland, in the former times of Prelacy, separate from the
Prelatical Assemblies and their Conformists? did they not meet apart, and
talked together of the work of God on their own hearts, and worshipped God in
Spirit, and his blessing and presence was among them, while they kept cha^t to
him, and mixed not with Idolaters? Now, have ye not apostatized herein also,
and mixed your selves in with the profane rabble of the world, as bad and worse
then Papists, Turks, Pagans, which has provoked the Lord to withdraw from
among you, and ye can pray and sing, and communicate with such? Is not this
Babylon indeed, which is to say, Confusion? and is not our separation from you
also, as justifiable as the separation of your fathers from Papists, being we
have found you to be of the same spirit, and mostly of the same principles and
practices with them, and generally, as wicked, loose, scandalous, profane and
covetous, and abounding with all manner of iniquity as they? and are not all
such Idolaters (is not thee) vetous man an Idolater, whereas covetousness is
idolatry, as says the Scripture?) and are not all Idolaters to be denied, as
to any fellowship with them in worship? and your fathers did not plead such
dirty st^ff (as you the Professors) have learned now to do (to shun the Cross)
for keeping the Popish and Prelatical party, their Assemblies and Service Book
worship, alleging, That they sit in Moses chair, and therefore are to be
heard, and we may like their good, and leave their evil. Such reasons prevailed
not with your fathers (nor ought they, for the Christians come not at all to
the Scribes and Pharisees, who sit in Moses chair, but meet apart, unless to
bear a testimony against them; and bad men with all their good words, can never
edify a soul in faith or true knowledge, which is life eternal; all they can
do, is to edify in the notion, and feed the wrong part and spirit, which
delights in the notion of truth, and is satisfied in the notional knowledge,
out of the life; and the finest, truest words out of a bad man's mouth, can
never reach the seed of God, either to the raising of it up, or refreshing it,
but on the contrary, burdens and kills, as said the Apostle of the false
Apostles, who had the letter, and were Ministers of it, out of the Spirit and
Power; and the letter (says he) kills, and so we have found it in our
experience; but these abovementioned arguments have prevailed with you; so
that ye are herein also apostatized from them.

4. Your forefathers denied the Church of Rome to be a true Church, and her
Priests, and Teachers, and Bishops, and Popes to be the true Ministers of
Christ, but called them Antichristian, and her the Whore of Babylon, and the
Pope Antichrist; from which testimony, you their posterity generally have
shrunk, saying, that the Popish Roman Church is a true Church (though corrupt)
which doctrine is generally maintained by you, and I have heard it asserted by
those of no small profession, and it has been preached in public, and that
their Ministers are true Ministers, though corrupt: And you say, if a Popish
Priest should baptize a child, it holds good, and is a true Baptism; and this
ye are driven to maintain by the hairs of the head (so to speak) when ye are
arraigned, both by the Papists on the one hand, and by us on the other,
concerning the rise of your Ministry, and the call of your first Reformers to
preach the Gospel; for ye are drawn to a pitiful Dilemma, or Alternative,
which is to confess, that either your first Protestant Reformers and Preachers
were lawfully called by the Popish Priests and Bishops, to their Ministry, and
consequently, that these Popish men were true Ministers of Christ, or else to
grant they were called immediately of God; and ye find it most safe to uphold
your Kingdom, to yield to the former, though against the hair, rather then to
confess the latter; and a third shift cannot be invented, and ye should be
constrained to give away the main pillar of your cause against us, and howgh
your selves, and suffer the root upon which the National Ministry grows, to be
struck at by your own consent; for your main plea against our ministry and
Ministers is, Who sent you? have ye the call of the Church? how can ye preach
unless ye be called? Our answer is, we are called of God, immediately by his
Spirit, as was Isaiah, Amos, Paul, and many other servants of the Lord, who
never had a call from man; and all that men can do in this point, is to
approve, consent to, have union with such as are called of God to the work of
the Ministry, which we dearly own, and refuse not to be tried by such as have a
spirit of discerning, and the approbation of such is accepted by us. Now ye
reply to us after this manner, Immediate calls are now ceased.

5. And this is another weighty point, wherein ye have apostatized from your
fathers the primitive Protestants, whose answer was the self-same with ours to
the Papists (who asked them concerning their call to the Ministry) that they
were called and moved thereto by God; and it was one of the points of Dittay
against that faithful Martyr of Jesus Christ, George Wishard, one of your
fathers, whom the Papists burnt for his testimony) that he had taken up the
Ministry in his own head, and at his own hand, and was not called to it; which
may be seen in the forecited Book, called the History of the reformation in
Scotland, which Book ye generally own, and it shall be a witness against you;
and your forefathers were far from that poor shift you their posterity run
your selves upon, that they were called of the popish Priests and Bishops; for
neither were the most part of them called by such, nor any other creature, and
such as were called by them, disowned their call, and denied them to be the
true Ministers, or their Church (though corrupt) a true Church, as ye now
generally maintain: And in the by I would ask you one question; if the popish
Church be a true Church (though corrupt) as ye affirm, why have ye separated
from it? and how can ye justify your separation therefrom? for it is another
principle of yours, That a Church holding the fundamentals (which make it (say
ye) a true Church) though there be many corruptions therein, is not to be
separated from. And this principle ye have taken up to justify your compliance
with Prelacy, and this late Church-model and frame, which ye formerly vomited
up, and not only quit it (and the poor Bishops could not be permitted to live
among you, for after you pulled them out of their places, ye banished them) but
vowed to God against the same. And now it stood somewhat against your stomachs
to receive it among you again, and honor such men, as ye accounted unworthy of
a foot of ground in the Nation, and excommunicated then, till ye fell upon this
pill, whereby ye got it digested, viz. The Episcopal party is a true Church,
and therefore we ought not to separate from them because of their corruptions;
and shuning one inconvenience, have ye not fallen upon another far greater, and
quite given away your cause into the hands of the Papists? for what can you
answer them who query you, why ye separated from them, being a true Church,
though corrupt, as ye call it? and I believe, if Popery were urged upon you,
even the blackest of it all (and ye have too much of it else) this pill of
yours would help the most part of you to digest it also.

6. And your fathers, the primitive Protestants, denied that a wicked man could
be a true Minister of the Gospel; as may be read at large in Fox's Book of
Martyrs; No man living in mortal sin could be a Minister of the Gospel, was
their common assertion; and it was one of the points of Dittay against John
Husse, for which he was burned, because he affirmed a wicked man no Minister;
and have ye not shamefully shrunk from them herein, who maintain it, that grace
is not absolutely necessary for the being of a Minister, and that wicked men
may be Ministers, and ye would prove it from Judas being an Apostle: Now Judas
fell from his Ministry (as says the Scripture) in selling his Master Christ,
which generally your Ministers have done; and have they not thereby fallen from
their Ministry, supposing, but not granting, they had once been true Ministers?
and is it not exceeding ignorance, and stupidity to affirm, that a wicked man,
who knows not Christ, nor the things of his Kingdom (as says the Apostle, the
natural man understands not the things of God) can be a preacher of Christ and
his Kingdom? is it not as great a riddle, as who would say, a blind man can
give a true description of light, or colors, or Pilot a Ship, show the right
way to a passenger? yea, and much more; how can they preach unless they
believe? We believe, therefore have we spoken, says Paul.

7. Your fathers, the primitive Protestants and Reformers, affirmed, That any
good man might be, yea, was a Priest and Minister; which also was the assertion
particularly of George Wishard, and it was one point of his Dittay, and I read
it in the History of the Reformation of the Church of Scotland, a petition put
up to the Queen by the first Reformers; That when in the (so called) Parish-
Kirk; obscure places of Scripture were read, any qualified man might have
liberty to speak and open the Scripture for the edification of the people; and
it was appointed so to be afterward, as is evident by the Books of Policy and
Discipline, framed and presented to the Council, Anno 1560. which thing by you
is called disorder and confusion; and it was an usual practice among them,
without distinction of Clergyman or Layely, when they met together, to speak
of the things of God, and of his work on their hearts, every one according to
his gift; and these who spoke were not distinguished from these who heard, by
the name of Master, and stepping up into a Pulpit, and by getting the hands of
so many laid upon them, or by a black Gown, or Canonical coat: And John Husse,
an eminent Instrument of the Reformation, and Preacher in Germany, did wear a
gray coat, which he gave to his friend some days before his death, as Fox's
Book of Martyrs relates. And ye that are so much against Women-preachers, some
of you may remember upon a day when ye met together apart, men and women, and
spoke of the operation of God on your hearts, without the distinction of Sex,
and women allowed dearly, to exhort, pray or speak, of God's dealings with
their souls; and now ye would bring Paul's words against women's speaking in the
Church, or rather against Christ the man his speaking in them, being ignorant
what women Paul meant, when he wrote, that he permitted not the women to speak
in the Church: now are not two or three, or half a dozen of men and women
fearing God, gathered in his Name? a true Church; or are not two or three godly
women met together, a Church, though a man be not among them? and may they not
exhort one another, and pray and give thanks together? and is not that speaking
in the Church? and the Scripture speaks of a Church in one family; and if a
woman (or rather the man Christ speaking in the woman) may speak in the
audience of six or twelve, why not in the audience of six or twelve hundred?
and the woman having experience of God's work on her heart, and who has felt
the love of God shed abroad in her soul, is she not fitter to speak of those
things then a hundred men, who are ignorant thereof. So foolish are ye become
in your reasonings; and there are many living yet in the Nation, who remember
of women who have spoke so feelingly, so lively, and experimentally of the
Lord's work upon their hearts, that many eminent Preachers and Ministers, so
accounted, have thought shame to open their mouth in their presence.

8. Your Fathers, the primitive Protestants and Reformers, made not Latin,
Greek and Hebrew, and Aristotle's Logic and Philosophy, with other humane
Learning, and the passing of so many years course at the College, and that you
call School Divinity, the qualifications of a Minister of Christ; many, yea the
most of them, never was at College, nor had the opportunity of any to go unto,
unless to a Popish; nor had they any of these Languages or curious Arts, but
were honest, plain, simple men, such as ye now call Rusticks and Tradesmen,
many of them, and yet they passed among your Fathers for Ministers: but if
these men were alive now, ye would cry, Away with them non-sensical fellows?
what can they say, they are not learned? should ignorant men preach? should
Wives, Shoo-makers, Plow-men, Herds-men, be Ministers of Christ? should they
incroach upon our sacred Function? should not they hold them with their
Callings? So say ye against many of us, who are not Book-learned, and are
Tradesmen; and this same was the very plea of the Papists against your
forefathers, being Ministers. See how ye have borrowed their weapons, whereby
they fought against them, whose successors ye boast your selves to be; but as
these Popish arguments were too weak against them, so are they against us: for
our answer to you is, though we be not taught with humane Learning, nor have
the Languages many of us, wherein the Scriptures were writ, yet we are taught
of God, and that is better; we have been with Jesus, and have been made
eyewitnesses of his Majesty; and ye are worse then the Jews who crucified
Christ; for when they admired, that Peter being an unlearned man did preach,
yet this caused their admiration to cease, they took notice that he had been
with Jesus, as we have been; and some of us can truly say (whereof I am one) we
have learned more in one hours company with Jesus, then we did in seven years
from the Gamaliels and Rabbis among you, at whose feet we have so long sitten;
and we are come to the Spirit of God, that gave forth the Scriptures, and gives
us their meaning and sense, though we have not the Languages, and which all the
Languages of the world cannot afford to us; and though many of us know not to
preach in the excellency of man's wisdom (and some of us who could, yet have
renounced it) and dare not use such a way, lest the Cross of Christ should be
of none effect, yet we can speak, and have spoken, in the evidence and
demonstration of the Spirit, the words which the holy Ghost teaches us; and he
has made us able Ministers of the new Testament, not of the letter which
kills, but of the Spirit, which gives life; and God has blessed our Ministry,
so that many unto whom we have ministered, have been quickened and brought into
the fellowship of the Gospel with us; and such a Ministry had Paul, which he
learned not of man, and yet had Book-learning enough; and such a Ministry God
has raised up in this day, which is the free gift of God, to which I bear my
testimony, and a part of which I have received* and now is that Promise
fulfilled, and fulfilling in many hundreds, I will make a new Covenant with
them, and they shall be all taught of me, from the least to the greatest, and I
will write my Law in their hearts, (in a Language which is neither Hebrew nor
Greek, but such as he that is born of the Spirit can only understand) and I
will put my fear in their inward parts. And now our hearts are come to delight
in the fear of God, which teaches us the hidden mysterious wisdom, which none
of the Princes or Rabbis of this world knows; and by the Word and Law of God
writ in our hearts, we are made wiser then our Teachers; and when this
dispensation shall fill the earth, as it is doing, what shall then become of
the Scribe? what shall become of the Senator? what shall become of the Doctor,
and Rabby, and Disputer of this World, who spoke to us in a Language, that
neither they themselves nor we could understand? but now says the Lord, as
Isa. 33.19. Thou shall not see a fierce people, a people of deep speech, that
thou cannot perceive; of a stammering tongue, that thou can not understand.
Glory to God, the pure Language is known, which was before Babylon was, wherein
the many Languages came in, and the tongues of the sons of men were confounded,
so that they could not know nor understand one another. And now ye who talk of
the trial of the Ministry, have ye not lost the touchstone of trial, which was
among the primitive Christians, and was lost, but is found again among us, even
the spirit of discerning, whereby we feel the true Minister in the power, and
discern him from the false; so that his fairest, yea soundest words that he
has stolen from the Saints, cannot deceive us; and this was Paul's rule to try
them who boasted to be the true Ministers, and were not; I will know, said he,
not the words of them that are puffed up, but the power; here was a deeper
search then into the best of words, into the power, what power they spoke from;
if from the Dragons power, and the ravening Wolves power within them (which may
stand with the finest words, which a^e the sheeps clothing, wherewith that
power decks it self to deceive, and so to devour the ignorant) or if from the
Lamb's power, the power and Spirit of Christ, and from grace in the heart. Oh,
is not that a parable unto you? we cannot judge the heart, say ye, nor know the
spirit within man, which manifests you to be strangers unto the anointing
whereby spirits can be tried, and to the spiritual man which judges all
things; and though sometimes ye would give it forth to the people, that ye are
not against the teachings of God's Spirit (to you the Teachers I speak) yet ye
plainly deny it, both in word and practice; and ye have no other means to
uphold your selves, whereby to purchase your Hires, and your Dignities and
Honor, which comes from below, but to keep poor people in ignorance, from the
teachings of God; therefore ye cry out so much against the Light, calling it
delusion, and bididng people beware of it; for if any people were come to the
Light in their particulars, they would turn their back upon you, and deny you
your Hires* and then your Kitchins would not smoke so as now, nor would ye be
so gorgious and sumptuous in your gaudy Apparel, nor your Wives either, which
is a shame for to see, and the grief of many sober people, to think upon your
pride and vanity, the cry whereof has come up before God to his throne, and ye
may read your doom, Isa. 3.24, 25, 26. and were it not that ye deny the
teachings of God's Spirit, why pass ye so many years course at Schools to learn
from men, what ye may say to the People? and why buy ye so many books, and have
your book-dayes; and take no employment but your books, except when some few
hours in the first day of the week ye talk to people what ye have gathered and
collected together out of old Authors, or then what some of you, which are
better Artists, have molded together by the forge of your own imaginations,
and natural understandings, or when ye were (and that very sparingly too) some
little time, in that you call your Catechizing and Visitations of Families; and
the bad fruit of all this, shows its much lost labor; and ye could be better
employed in holding a Plow, or digging in a field, or any other honest
occupation, then to be deluding poor people, whom ye are ever learning, and yet
ye are never able to bring them to the knowledge of the Truth; and the gross
palpable ignorance of your Parishioners all abroad the Nation, with their
wicked lives, shows they are evil master-stead, and that ye are not taught of
God your selves, else your teachings would have better effect; and why will ye
not suffer such who are not book-learned, nor passed their course at your
Colleges to learn the trade of it, to preach the Gospel? were ye for the
teachings of God's Spirit, would ye limit him to use only bookish Clergymen
for the Ministry, when the Spirit of the Lord instructs a man, though he could
not read a letter? is he not well learned? is he not an able Minister, who has
his ability given him of God, though man has not taught him, and yet ye
cannot? away with this; and why persecute ye such who are taught of God? and ye
dare not say, but their practice answers their profession, and that they are
better taught then your disciples are, though they come not at you to learn;
and what means the form and manner of your Sermons, when ye will take a
sentence of Scripture, or common head, as it is called, and branch it out, as
Aristotle's or Ronius Logic has taught you? and it is one main piece of trial
to youngmen, coming forth to the Ministry, to make a Logical Analysis (as it is
called) upon such a piece of Scripture as is allotted unto him; and he is
counted a brave Preacher, who can handle his Text in such a Scholastic method,
and an honest plain man who is not acquainted with your School-method, nor
topical places (such as Aristotle an Heathen has taught you, out of which, as
so many (...) ye gather together your points of Doctrine, Observations,
Reasons, Motives, Means, Uses, Applications, Amplifications) I say an honest,
simple, plain man, who is not acquainted with such trifles, but can speak
feelingly of the work of God on his heart, should he come and speak among
people, ye will laugh him to scorn, and say of him, he has neither rhyme nor
reason, he speaks confusedly and nonsense, he has no method, he is not worth
the hearing; and yet by such foolishness of preaching, many hundreds at this
day are converted unto God; for the power of God has accompanied such poor
foolish men's Ministry; and the Lord has made them true Pastors, to feed the
people with knowledge and understanding, and they have been instrumental to
bring people to Jesus Christ, the great Bishop and Shepherd of their souls,
whereas ye have nothing to feed the people with but wind and airy notions, and
at best, words of truth ye have stolen out of the Scripture, which spoke out of
a man's mouth, not declaring in, nor the power of God accompanying the words,
are but a killing letter; and let any sober spiritual minded man, in the least
measure, judge if such things abovementioned, which are made the
qualifications of a Minister, and usually practiced by them, smells of man's
wisdom, or of the evidence and demonstration of the Spirit, or if any of the
Apostles or Prophets used such things, who were taught of God.

9. Your fathers, the primitive Protestants were against Tithes, and that
Ministers should have temporal possessions (as an Hire for their preaching) so
said John Wicklife; and they had not their hundreds and thousands allorted to
maintain them, far less would they force people against their wills to give
them maintenance, and poynd them, or put them to horn, and imprison them, as ye
will do. And your fathers did bear a notable testimony against the greediness
and covetousness of the then Priests, as we do against you, for which ye so
hate us, and stir up the Magistrate against us, as the Priests did against your
fathers, and they could not suffer any man to reprove them for their
covetousness: And I read of a poor man, in the History of the Reformation in
Scotland, who but through his sleep, said, The Devil take the Priests, for they
are a greedy pack, and the poor man was pursued for his life, and made to burn
his Bill; and though we were silent, would not the stones rise up and witness
against your covetuousness? and do not the poorest idiots in the Land see it?
and is it not a Proverb among the people, the Kirk is greedy? Oh, what a
dishonor have ye brought upon the Name and Truth of Christ! And were it not
for a livelihood, and worldly honor and respect, would so many betake them to
such a work? and does not your gain from your quarter, which you so punctually
exact, (and they that will not put into your mouths, ye prepare war against
them) and your removing from one Parish to another, where ye can have a fatter
stipend, manifestly prove, ye are moved thereto, rather from a principle of
covetousness, then from any desire of doing good to the souls of the people?
and how came many of you to be Teachers? was it not the design of your Fathers
and Relations, who saw it a ready way for them to put you in a livelihood, and
sent you to Schools to learn the Calling; as ever the Shoo-maker, or other
Tradesmen past his Apprentiship, and then becomes free to use the Trade? the
thing is well known, and I speak it with regret; and have not many of your
selves sometime a day entreated the Lord, that he would send a purge, and put
away out of his house such buyers and sellers? and now the Lord is come to make
the purge, and who of you can abide the day of his coming? the purge goes so
deep, its like to scourge you all out at doors, and e're ye be put out, ye
will rather hold in who are in, and seek to uphold one another, but ye shall
all fall together. And whereas ye plead, that he who preaches the Gospel,
should live of the Gospel; so say I, but I certainly know, if the Magistrate
would but take away his force whereby he compells the people to put into your
mouths, and if your selves would forbear your cursing, and excommunicating
them, (all which is rigid law and far from Gospel) your Gospel could never
maintain you, and many of you would be let starve.

10. Your Fathers the Primitive Protestants professed themselves against
Traditions, and all whatsoever that had not a warrant in the word of God, in
the matter of his worship; John Knox said that every thing though not contrary,
yet if besides the word of God in his worship, was to be denied, and yet this
day has discovered several things, which they kept, to have been but the
traditions and inventions of men, but they knew not so much, and professed
themselves against all traditions whatsoever, and what was not warranted of
God; and now have ye not shrunk from them herein, and taken up many things,
they did cast from them as traditions; and you say, the light of Nature or
humane reason and prudence, may supply what is wanting in Scripture, to teach
men at least some Circumstances in the worship of God, for order and decency,
which is the Doctrine of your Church confession of Faith: Oh have ye not thus
shouldered Christ off his Throne, if he by his spirit is to direct men as to
the substance of Worship, will he be wanting in the lesser to teach the
Circumstances also, and the order and decency; does not all true order and
decency, come from the Lords Spirit, who is the God of Order? and is this to do
in Faith, to follow the direction of the light of Nature, which is stark blind
in the things of God, and humane reason and prudence cannot step one right step
herein? and have not hundreds of the Popish supperstitions crept in, under this
mask of order and decency? and is not this the Prelates plea at this day, for
his service book and Organs, and Surplice, and Altars, and sign of the Cross;
lo, how have ye given away your cause in this also.

11. And your Fathers the Primitive Protestants, were against all observations
of days, and called them supperstitious who observed them; and your Ministers
preaches up the observation of such days (namely that called Christ's Birthday)
which within these three or four years they preached down, which breeds no
small admiration to poor people, as if they had changed their God; but I know
well generally they have kept to their God all along very constantly, among all
their changes, being such (the Apostle mentions) generally, whose God is their
belly, and this master they have served, and do serve very faithfully, making
every change answer its design. And though ye lay such stress upon the
observation of the first day of the week for a Sabbath, yet one of your Fathers
( Calvin) denied the observation of that or any other day, since the coming of
Christ, to be commanded of God, (and so many hundreds of Protestants) and is it
not a great abomination, which may make the very Sun to blush, whose day ye
call it, to profess to keep a day holy unto God, wherein ye ought not to think
your own thoughts, nor speak your own words, nor take your own pleasures, and
yet spend it so as ye do in gluttony and drunkenness, sporting, and gaming,
buying and selling, worldly communication, quarreling and fighting, and will
not the Minister, who in the Pulpit has been telling you, ye should not speak
your own words in that day; but so soon as he comes forth falls as fresh to the
worldly discourse, as any other; which I have often observed to the grief of my
heart as many others have done.

12. And your Fathers the Primitive Protestants, were against Prelates, and
Lording Bishops: It Is true in Queen Mary's days in England, there were some
Bishops, who did bear a measure of testimony against Popery, according to the
knowledge of that day, and sealed it with their blood, and the Lord had regard
unto them according to their faithfulness, to what they saw; but such who came
after saw further into mystery Babylon, and it was discovered unto them by the
light, and they discerned Prelacy to be a limb of Antichrist, and so called it,
and but of late days, it was covenanted to God against; Again, and again, and
did ye not your selves vow to God against the same: So that herein ye have not
only apostatized from your Fathers, but from what ye were of late your selves.
Oh what is become of all your zeal now, for that Covenant, which ye accounted
the glory of your Nation; have not many of you trampled it under foot, as a
dunghill, (which once was a Crown unto you) and ye think shame of it, as it
had been a whores brat; and you who were very forward in causing others, to
suffer for their not concurring with you, have not the confidence to suffer for
it your selves. Oh were there a willingness in you to bear your testimony by
sufferings, (which has been as weighty and useful a testimony as any) as ye
have formerly done by actings, ye would not want a fair opportunity for the
same, did ye keep but faithful to the same very principles ye owned, in
disowning the worship and constitution of the (so called) Church now set up,
which ye vowed against; and did ye stick to your liberty, ye ought to have
met together to worship God, according to your knowledge, ye would not want I
say a fair opportunity to give a notable testimony by suffering for your cause
(in disowning such men ye covenanted against) it is little worth if it be not
worth the suffering for, were it not the loss not only of means and liberty
outward, but of life it self if put to it; and who would have believed it
within these few years, that such an occasion coming, as now has come, it
being enacted by Law, that all who should be found meeting together to worship
God any where else, but in the Prelatical assemblies and their Conformists, and
such who join issue with them, should be put in Prisons throughout the whole
Land; I say who would have believed that the Prisons should have been so empty,
would it not rather have been concluded, that such a time coming, the Prisons
would not have contained the thousand part of them, and yet they are all empty
for them, and I know not amongst all the thousands of you (Ministers or people)
that vowed to God against that filthy thing set up in the Land, any of you all
bearing a suitable testimony by sufferings according to your own very
Principles, or have ye not all fled, before pursued, or if some began to set
their faces to the battle, yet they could not stand the brunt of it, but
shamefully yielded and shrunk from their testimony by sufferings, and now the
Lord has raised up a people (even whom ye call in derision Quakers) who fear
the living God, and tremble at his Word, but fear not what man can do unto
them, among your selves, but not of your selves, who has received courage from
the Lord, to bear their testimony by sufferings, and yet though they had power,
could not find in their hearts, nor durst they to cause their persecutors to
suffer, or lift up Sword or spear, or any carnal weapon in their own defense,
against them; but we can pray for them that persecute us, and bless them who
despitefully use us? And what is the occasion that the people called Quakers
suffer imprisonment, and the spoiling of their Goods, but the very self same;
ye have to undergo the like sufferings, were ye faithful but to your own
Principles; the cause I say is common to you with us* viz. our testimony
against that which is now set up in the Land, and both ye and many of us also
vowed to the most high God, while we were among you, we should never own such a
thing, and we have kept to our vow, and ye have shrunk therefrom. Now say ye
generally, we have not seen a clear call to sufferings as yet, and we should
not run upon them without a clear warrant and call, we are not put to it to
take any contrary oath to the former, and there is not any promise or oath
required of us, to the owning of that we covenanted against, only its laid on
us to hear them, and pay their stipends, and we may do all this without owning
them, and they shall never have the approbation of our hearts, and when an
opportunity serves, that we may shake off this yoke, we shall be found ready to
give them a heel-chop, and say some of the (so called) Ministers, why may we
not preach under the Bishops, and sit in Synods with them, and concur in the
ordering Church affairs with them, and give obedience to their lawful commands;
and yet this cannot be called an owning of them, and we conceive it is no breach
of our Covenant, and the things required of us, are not so weighty as that they
should make us quit our calling, the preaching of the Gospel, what would become
of our poor flocks, if we should not give some kind of submission, or
condescendency unto them, we could not be permitted to preach, and some of us
have got the favor, that no oath or engagement is required of us; they who
have given (as the most have done) let them see to it, we are free.

Ans. As for your alleging that ye see not a clear and manifest call to
sufferings, it is no wonder so long as your minds are abroad, wandered from the
just and righteous principle of God, his witness in your Consciences, which can
only let you see the call, but now ye not consulting herewith, but
misregarding it, and looking out to see your warrant or call in the Scriptures,
ye may look long enough upon them, e're ye can see your call; therefore, the
Light of Christ, in your Consciences being gone from, the deceitful heart will
draw, the letter of the Scriptures to its own inclinations, and promp you to
put such a gloss upon it, as may keep you from the cross; and while ye abide in
this state, should ye be tried further, and put to these things, ye think for
the time, ye could not condescend to, and ye should have a clear call then to
suffer, yet the deceitful heart would furnish you with a second shift, and a
third, till ye should never see a call to any thing at all; and is it not with
many of you so? is not your call grown dark and unclear to you in many things,
which before the cross came, was clear enough to you. Now whereas ye say ye
are not put to it, to make any contrary oath or promise, and so ye think ye
have not broken your Covenant. I ask, is not a real practical breach of it,
as well, a breach (if not more) as a verbal? ye have broken it in your
practice, forasmuch as ye have in the least bowed, or yielded to them, which
as ye mind Gods witness in all your Consciences, it will show you: Now,
admiting, or giving, but not granting, that your hearing them, and paying them
their stipends, were not an owning them, yet I query you, is it a disowning
them? can ye be said to disown them? while ye so uphold them, and come at
them, I am sure, if ye be not exceedingly blinded ye cannot call, your
hearing them, and paying them their stipends and revenues, a disowning them?
well then, ye neither own them, nor disown them; and is not this the
detestable neutrality ye in express terms covenanted to God against, I appeal
to the witness of God in all your Consciences; if it be not so, in the like
manner I answer to you called Ministers, is your Preaching under them, and
sitting in Synods with them, and coming in the ordering of Church affairs
together, and your obeying their commands a disowning them? Nay, ye cannot say
it, except ye bewray your exceeding folly; well then, ye neither own them nor
disown them, and is not this the detestable neutrality ye vowed against? and
if perhaps some of you have not given any oath or promise to these men (and it
is rare if it be so) yet your practice is as real a breach as an hundred oaths
and promises; and whereas ye say, obedience may be given to their lawf^l
commands, I answer, such as are not lawfully constitute Rulers, but Usurpers,
(as many of you affirm) no command proceeding from them is lawful as such,
though never so lawful upon the matter; for there are a great many
Circumstances required (more then the matter of the thing commanded to make it
lawful) one maine is, that the imposer of the command, have a just and lawful
authority, and power from God thereto, for there is no power but from him, the
powers that be are ordained of God, Romans 13. And as for your alleging these
things, are not so weighty, required of you, as that ye should be put from
your preaching; I answer, admitting ye were true Preachers, or Ministers (for
I argue according to your own principles) yet e're the least circumstance ye
should yield unto (...), which is sinful and forbidden of God, ye were to give
up the service of your Ministry were it never so useful, for that ye are not
to balance your Ministry with the smalness of the things upon the matter, on
the one hand, and the service ye can do on the other, but to look always to
the command of God, and the honor of his name, and truth which is weighty
enough to down-weigh all other considerations, though never so weighty.

13. And your Fathers the Primitive Protestants affirmed, that when any thing
contrary to sound Doctrine was set up, and brought in, the Ministers who stand
upon the watch tower, should not keep silence, but testify against such a
thing, and forewarn the people to be aware thereof! and they judged silence to
be a sinful connivence witness the Protestations made several times against
such things, and but of late days, the Protestation made at the Cross of
Edinburgh on the 22. day of the Month called September in the year 1638.
wherein they largely show, backing what they spoke, with pertinent Scriptures
to that purpose, that they ought not to be silent: Likewise it was a principle
among them, (the first Reformers) that they should not forbear to preach,
though all the powers on earth should forbid them, whatever punishment could be
inflicted upon them therefore, and it was their practice also, for they put
their lives in hazard, and many of them lost their lives, bearing their
testimony, and they accounted the winning of souls of people, of more worth
then the saving their bodily lives; and as ye may read in the History of the
Reformation in Scotland, to such who queried, why was not obedience given to
the Magistrates command? it was answered its better to obey God then man, as
Peter answered the Rulers of the Jews. Now such of you of the National Ministry
who stuck to take the Canonical oath or to make an active compliance, with the
Bishops, as the rest of you have done, yet have ye not shamefully shrunk he
ein, ye who could open your mouths wide, against these things, now set up,
before they were brought in among you, when there was no hazard of speaking,
and talk boldly against the Bishops and their corruptions, and spend a good
part of the hour glass on such a purpose; but now are ye not shrunk dumb with
a panick fear, that has overtaken you, and ye have quit* your Ministry at the
command of man, far unlike the good Shepherd that flees not when the Wolf
comes, but stands up to defend the flock from the Wolf, and lays down his life
for the sheep, but the hireling flies, because he is an hireling, as ye have
done; and have ye not rather obeyed man then God? if ever the Lord called you
to your Ministry, had man power to have taken it from you? is it not too
man^fest a proof that your call and power to preach was but of men, who as they
gave it you, can take it from you, as they have done; and yet poor men ye think
ye are suffering for a testimony of a good conscience; but alas, it is a
threadbare testimony, so to speak, and as it stands the Lord will not take it
off your hands; for have ye not chosen a lesser suffering to shun a greater?
your stipends are taken from you, but is that enough to make you leave off
feeding the flock? (I speak according to your own principles) regard ye no
more their souls, nor your bodily maintenance? or is there any other put in
your Pulpits, is that enough either? can ye not preach elsewhere then in a
Pulpit? may ye not preach in a field, or from house to house, as did Paul and
many others, yea, your Fathers did so; or do the people refuse to hear you,
then ye have but badly learned them, and they are not taught so much love as
to stick to their Pastor when the wolf comes; but should ye not preach to them
whither they will hear or forbear as Ezekiel did, and was commanded of the Lord
so to do; or have they commanded some of you to go over Seas? should ye have
obeyed that unjust command? or if they had taken you away by violence, what
hinders but ye may return to the flock, were not the fear of man over you? I
know nothing (in the will of God) but prisonment or death, or some such outward
violence, could hinder a true Pastor from the Flock; or has the (so called)
Church commanded you silence, but if their sentence be unjust, as ye think it
is, should ye have obeyed it? and ye have but a poor plea when ye say, it is
for peace sake ye so do; for the peace which is in hazard for the testimony of
the truth is but false, and so not worth the keeping, but that it was not the
peace sake of your Church, or any reverence to their authority (though this be
your main defense) but the fear of man, that has prevailed with you to quit
your charge, manifestly appears by your practice but a very few years ago, when
you called Church men; could either (...) the Magistrate, or when he winked at
you, then ye were busy with your Protestations, and ye became divided into
two parties or factions called Protestators, and public resolutione^s; and
your brethren charged you, who either protested, or adhered to the
Protestation, with breaking the peace of the Church, and disobedience to its
Authority; and in that day ye could roundly answer them, that ye were to be
more careful for the preservation of the truth, then of a peace that could not
stand therewith, and their authority ye were not to regard, they abusing it;
and when Oliver Cromwell wincked at you both, I well remember your carriage, and
was an eyewitness of much of it, with many hundreds, how many Protestations
were made in your Synods, south and north, and when the one party or faction
would depose, such a man or men from the (so called) Ministerial function, the
other party would bid him or them preach, and maintain, uphold and defend him;
and now the Churches authority not being backed with the Magistrates sword ye
could break through it as Cobweb, and some of you, whom your Parishes would not
receive, yet ye urged your selves upon them, whither they would hear or
forbear. All this and much more is fresh in the memory of thousands, and this
day has abundantly discovered you: And oh that ye could take shame and
confusion of face to your selves, and read the language of the Lords work in
this day, which would be answered with his witness in your Consciences; saying
with these, ( Ier. 8.14.) let us be silent, for the Lord has put us to
silence, for a more excellent Ministry; the Lord has brought forth in this
day, even that of his own spirit, whereto ye have been and are great
strangers, and ye have need to learn the first principle of the Oracles of
God, which is the light of Christ shining in the dark heart, although ye have
been so long teachers of others, and the Christ whom ye have preached so many
years, ye have him yet to learn, and if ever ye receive a part of the true
Ministry, ye must come to know him revealed within you, which for the time is
a parable to you, and ye call it delusion. And now oh ye people of Scotland
know that the Lord in his great mercy to your souls has brought this day over
your Teachers, to let you see they were but broken ^^sterns; and their fair
profession and many good words, whereby they made merchandise of you, has much
opposed and withstood the appearance of Jesus Christ, and that which let is
much removed out of the way now, and the Lord is come to teach his people
himself, and to gather them into his unchangable truth, which is not subject to
the windings and turnings of your teachers, and the pure fountain of the water
of life, has been opened unto us, and we drunk thereof to our unspeakable
refreshment and satisfaction, and we cannot any more come at your pudled waters.

14. And your fathers, the Primitive Protestants, acknowledge no head in the
Church but Christ Jesus; and they maintained the power and authority of the
Church to be altogether independent from, and not subordinate to the
Magistrates power; and John Welshe and others of his brethren bore a testimony
to this in his day; for which, together with their testimony against Prelacy,
they were imprisoned at Blaknes, as appears by a letter of his, with several
that is extant at this day; and now how far have ye shrunk from this testimony
of your predecessor, judge ye your selves, who call him in your Church-prayers,
supreme Judge in all cases, and over all causes, Civil and Ecclesiastical.

There is also two other weighty particulars, which is well known to have been
maintained by many primitive Protestants, both denied by you, viz. That
Christians ought neither to swear, nor fight with any carnal weapon; both which
were asserted by those called the Lollards of Kyle, as ye may read in the book
of the Reformation of the Church in Scotland; but the setter forth of the
aforesaid book, has added to their words, to the first Article, which is
(according to their assertion, as it was found in the Records of Glasgow) That
in no case it is lawful to swear, he has added, to wit, Idely, rashly, or in
vain; and to the other, That Christians should not fight for the Faith, is
added, if not driven thereto by necessity; which two additions manifestly
appears to be put to, by the publisher of the book, and that they are not these
men's words, for that they are printed in another character; and he alleadges
their enemies to have depraved them, for he says, These Articles, together
with several others, were found in their Records; but his alleadgance is not so
fair, being he had no sufficient ground therefore* and the Articles are true
and sound without his additions; and it is a perfect contradiction, which
neither the Lollards of Kyle, or any rational man could affirm, to say, we must
not swear at all, or in no case it is lawful to swear, which is universal and
exclusive, and then to put a limitation thereto, but in such cases, viz. idely,
rashly, and in vain; I say, these two propositions, It is lawful in no case to
swear, It is lawful in some case to swear, are a perfect contradiction, and no
rational man can affirm both, for either the one or the other must be false;
and so the Lollards saying in no case it is lawful to swear, it is clear that
they were not only against swearing, idely, rashly, or in vain (which neither
their adversaries denied, so that it needed not be a point of Dittay against
them) but against swearing in any case, or at all.

So by these 14. or 16. Articles, let all in whom there is any measure of
ingenuity, or simplicity, try your present Church constitution, and with the
Light wherewith Christ has enlightened you, examine, and ye will find, that
though ye call your selves the reformed Church, ye are far from the first
Reformers; and that the whole Protestant Church in Europe, has much
degenerated from the primitive Christians and Protestants, both in principles
and practices, and is become quite another thing, retaining the name like an
old rotten Ship, that has been so often clamped and clouted, that all the
former timbers are worn out, and others put in their place, yet keeping the
name, and somewhat of the form and shape; and ye have sailed long up and down
in this old rotten Ship, which is just upon the splitting, and suffering
shipwreck; and it were happy for you, if ye would swim forth out of her for
your lives; and the greatest loss of all, is of the Spirit and Life of your
first Reformers, as appears by your fruits and conversations at this day. Is
not that fidelity, honesty and simplicity, much lost, and quite decayed, that
some yet living remember was in the Land, and treachery, falsehood, guile, and
deceit come in the room thereof; and one brother cannot trust another, and love
is waxen cold, and much selfishness crept in, and the profession or Religion
made a mere cloak of maliciousness, and that temperance and sobriety in words,
diet and apparel, that was among many is quite gone, and wantonness, gluttony,
and drunkenness, whoredom, cursing, and swearing, and profaning of the name of
God, and fearful oaths come in stead thereof, and tyranny and oppression, more
then among savages, and yet people given to such wickedness, are accounted your
Church Members, and partake of all the Church Priviledges with you; and when
any such die, the cry goes through your streets, there is a faithful brother
departed, etc. or when any of them has a child to be sprinkled, the Priest
will cause him to rehearse the Articles of his Faith (and he has no more
faith, nor so much as the devil, for the true faith purifies the heart, and
lodges in a good conscience.) Oh horrid abomination! and is not the zeal among
Professors quite withered, and deadness, laziness, stupidity, security,
neutrality, carelessness and sottishness, generally overgrown them, and all
manner of iniquity abounds?

POSTSCRIPT.
ANd now ye who accuse us (in derision called Quakers by you) as Apostates, and
that we have denied our forefathers Faith, try your selves, and parallel your
fathers principles and practices with your own, and also with ours, and ye
shall find ye are degenerated from them exceedingly, as we were while with you;
but through the grace of God are we recovered, and brought to witness the
Spirit and Life of the primitive Protestants and Christians, and in all 16.
abovementioned Articles we agree with them, and ye disagree with them; and ye
cannot instance to us one particular, wherein we dissent from them, warranted
from the very letter of Scripture; for these things wherein we have forsaken
them, we have discovered by the Light, which has opened the Scriptures to us,
to have been but the inventions of men, and Babylons more subtle cup of
fornications, which because that the day was not so broken up among them, as
among us now, they did not discern; but now the Light has shined forth in such
clearness, that we have seen to the bottom of all Babylons treasures; and were
they living in this day, they would concur with us, in disowning these things,
and I am satisfied in it, they have been accepted of the Lord, according to
their faithfulness; but supposing ye were not shrunk from any of their
principles, it is in vain for you to think, that God will take that off your
hands, he received from them, winking at their weaknesses in the day of
ignorance; for that which makes a people acceptable with God, is their
faithfulness to the dispensation of knowledge in their day, and their answering
his requirings therein, and following him whithersoever he leads, of which ye
are very short, and this is your condemnation.

Written in the 10th. Month, from the Tolbouth of Aberdeen. G. K.

True and righteous Judgment from the God of judgment, separating the
precious from the vile, concerning the late proceedings of the people of
Scotland in the matter of their Reformation from, and their covenanting against
Prelacy, with the corruptions and popish Superstitions accompanying it; as also
concerning their Church constitution, Ministry, Worship and Government, set up
by them, after the pulling down of the former, and discrying it, as
Antichristian, wherein likewise the Lords controversy with them in laying them
by, and suffering this day to come over them, is showed in which their building
is also laid in the dust, and its the will of the Lord, that it never be again
rebuilt.
GIve ear unto me, O ye people of Scotland, of what quality or degree
whatsoever, and I will show you the true and righteous judgment of God (from
whom I have received it, and by whom I am moved to declare it unto you, for
your good) concerning your late proceedings in the matter of your reformation
from, and your covenanting against Prelacy, and the corruptions and popish
Superstitions accompanying it, and other particulars abovementioned.

A zeal there was in many of you (Rulers, Teachers, and People) in that day for
the Lord, and his name and truth, which he did tenderly regard, and it was
marked before him, though the most of you all along minded more your selves,
and how to compass your selfish, covetous, and ambitious designs then his
honor; and ye made the name of truth and Religion a mere clock to cover and
mask your hypocrisy with, yet a true simplicity and uprightness of heart was
among others of you, and ye did well in disowning and departing from such men,
who gave themselves forth to be the Lord's Ministers and servants, but they
ran, and he sent them not, and their covetousness and ambition, and seeking how
to please men for their own ends, and not his honor, nor any true zeal for
him, set them on such a work, to Lord it over the people, which he had
forbidden, and it is abomination to him, together with the many things
accompanying them, which they gave forth for his ordinances, good order,
decency and comeliness in the Church, but were the mere inventions of men, and
Babylons golden Cup of Fornications; and that ye vomitted up, and refused any
more to drink of this cup, or to admit of such things as his Ordinances, or
belonging to his worship, or as if he allowed it (whereby your iniquity is
exceedingly agravated before God, and his indignation and jealosie burns as
fire against you for your returning thereto) and because of the iniquity of
such men, their pride, pomp, covetousness, tirany and ambition his wrath
kindled against them, and he poured contempt, and desolation upon them, for the
cry of their wickedness, together with the Prayers and ^upplications which came
from many in that day (because of them) ascended up into his Throne in the time
of their great affliction of Spirit to see his Truth, and Name so much
dishonored, and the Lord heard and regarded, and delivered them from that,
which was their trouble and grief of heart, and he removed that out of the way,
which was a great let unto his work, and glorious appearance in the Land, and
after the removal thereof, the Lord put a fair oppertunity in your hands to
have been blessed instruments in his work, whereby had ye improved it, ye
should have been at this day a glory in the Earth, a Praise, a Renown, and a
Blessing, and your memory should have endured; as a sweet savor unto all
succeeding Generations. But he had many things against you, whereby he was
provoked to lay you by also, so that ye should not be honored (nor ever shall
be in the state ye are in, and way of your proceedings) as instruments in his
glorious work, which he has purposed to bring (and is bringing) forth in the
earth even a work of wonders and admiration, whereby he will make to himself a
name everlasting therein, and give matter to all the simple-hearted of
thanksgiving, and praise for ever and ever; and this work he is bringing forth
this day in the midst of you, and ye are so far from joining issue with him
therein, that ye are all opposing it, but it shall go on, and prosper, over the
heads and bellyes of all gainsayers on the face of the whole Earth, and if ye
repent not and give way unto his determination, he will bring this word to
pass against you; Behold ye dispisers, wonder and Perish. And now hear the
righteous judgment of God concerning these things he has to charge you with,
and have been snares unto you, and matter of provocation unto him against you,
for, although a true and tender Zeal (in a measure) there was in many of your
hearts in that day for the Lord, and his Name and Truth; yet much of a fiery,
headstrong, furious false Zeal, not according to knowledge, and which was not
begot of the Lords Spirit, nor kindled at his Alter, did company the same, and
much prevailled over that which was pure, and tender, and of his begetting, and
yet he regarded this, and because of it he loved and pittyed you, and suffered
you long, till he could bear no longer, for ye were become as those, yea, and
worse, whom he spued out before you, against whom his controversy was: and you
went forwards in the counsels of of your own hearts, and advised with flesh and
blood, and not with the Lords spirit, what ye should do, and ye relied upon
the arm of flesh, and thought to have reformed the Land with your carnal
weapons, and power, and force, and might, not considering his determination
which he spoke by the word of his mouth, to his Prophet of old, not by might
nor by power, but by my Spirit says the Lord. And ye dealt cruelly and
roughly with such as had not freedom, nor clearness to go on with you, in the
manner and way of your proceedings, and so ye became guilty of the same
iniquity, ye cried unto him against in those men, who dealt cruelly and
tyranically with your selves, and ye constrained many hundreds of poor people
in the Land to vow unto God and make a Covenant with you, who knew not what
they were doing, no, nor knew him at all; and because ye mixed your selves in,
with a company of ignorant, vile, profane and abominable persons, without all
fear of God, and drew them along to concur with you, thereby thinking to make
your selves strong and mighty by reason of number and unformity, therefore was
the Lord provoked against you, for he regarded none of these things; the vows
of the wicked are an abomination to him with all their services, and he
accepts no uniformity, but that which is of his spirit, which knits the
members of the body together, and admits nothing unto union with the body, but
that which is of his begeting, and but two or three fearing the Lord joining
together in a perpetual Covenant, to stand up witnesses for his name and truth,
are dearly regarded by him, but many thousands associating together out of his
fear he regards not at all. And forasmuch as by your vowing and covenanting,
ye proceeded to put a stop and limit to the Lords spirit in any further
discovery of his name and truth, his wrath waxed exceeding hot against you, and
he loathed both you and your Covenant, and suffered it, as it is at this day,
to be trampled under foot, and permitted your enemies, which were buried in the
very dust, and their memory almost perished, to rise up against you, (to wit
the Prelates) and bring you in greater slavery and subjection then ever, (and
now they are doing their work, and when it is done they most return to the
place whence they came, and the time is near) and many other circumstances in
your proceedings, the Lord never owned, nor shall own, in which as ye mind his
witness in all your Consciences, it shall instruct you, and also show unto you
the hypocritical, treacherous, deceitful, ambitious, forward spirit, that moved
in you, and set you on work many times, whereby his Spirit was grieved, and
that of his begetting over topped, and oppressed. And above all the great
controversy of the Lord with and against you, was and is, that ye got up
above the cross of Christ and turned from it (the cross which is the power of
God) which would have kept your feet in a straight, even, stedy course, so that
ye should not have declined out of the right path, either to the right or left
hand, and it would have proved a righteous balance unto you, whereby ye might
have weighed every motion that arose in your hearts, and thereby known what was
of the Lords spirit, and what was of your selves, and of the suggesti^^ of the
Devil, which laid his snares before you, and catched you in them; and for that
ye kept not chaste to his Light in your Consciences, nor to the leadings of his
spirit, this was it that which discovered to you the Popish and Prelatical
abominations, and begat a loathing in you against them so that ye could have
no rest till ye came to forsake them; and had ye kept chaste to this, it would
have carried you on all along in his work, and steered your course from first
to last in the straight, even righteous path of judgment: Oh ye did run well
who did hinder you? but year become so foolish, who began in the spirit to end
in the flesh; and now when ye got up upon the walls and bulwarks of your
enemies building, and leveled it to the ground, when ye had rooted out
Prelacy, and the many corruptions and superstitions accompanying the same, and
dug down a good part of Babylons upsetting, then ye betook your selves to
build, and ye thought it should have been a a house for God, and it was but
another Babylon, for ye had gone from the true foundation, the light, life,
power and spirit of Christ in your particulars, and ye gathered hay and
stuble, and cast upon it, and suffered the earth in you to come over, and ye
hid the talent the Lord had given you, therein, even the noble and precious and
blessed gift of his Light, and the manifestation of his Spirit (given to every
man to profit withal as says the Apostle) which would have been a sure
foundation unto you, and would have taught you in the infallible wisdom, how to
have reared up the building and frame, even to the setting of the least stone
or pining thereof, and it would have cemented and knit every part together, and
given it a comely proportion, and all its due and proper dimensions, in height,
breadth and length, and made every stone living, and it should have been a
glorious building indeed, a spiritual house to offer up a spiritual service,
and sacrifice to God continually; and though the winds had blown, and the rains
descended, and the floods had come, and assaulted it, yet it should have stood,
which it has not, but has fallen, and the fall of it is great, and it has
filled you with amazement, confusion and astonishment, and darkness has so
overtaken you, and the vail is grown so thick over your hearts, that you see
not as yet, cannot see your own folly, and that your building was but on the
sand, and the work of your own imagination, out of the wisdom of God, and this
I am moved of the Lord to declare unto you that it has been so, and though
your frame was somewhat more spacious and taking, to the eye of man, (being
somewhat in appearance, nearer the letter of the Scriptures) then that other
cast down by you, yet it was as far from being the Temple or House of God,
being not of his Spirit; for this ye had gone from in your own particulars, and
at length became so impudent as to deny such a thing could be expected, to wit,
the leadings of the infallible Spirit of Christ, to teach you, and guide you
infallibly in your proceedings; and ye set the letter of the Scriptures above
it, and in it is room, together with your own imaginations, for ye being gone
from the Spirit of Truth, the eye which read the Scriptures aright, came to be
put out, and the false eye opened, which read them backward; and the Scriptures
were perverted by you to a wrong sense or meaning, and ye drew them to the
square and rule of your opinions, which the erring mind, through Satan's
suggestion had begot in you; and now ye fathered your opinions upon the
Scripture, and they were but the brats of your own imagination. And oh, what
were the materials of your building? were they living stones polished and
smoothed by the power of God? or rather, were they not the most rude, profane
rabble and multitude of the world, the same whereof the Prelatical and popish
frame was composed of? and who were the builders? were they men taught of God
standing in his wisdom? was your Ministry a spiritual Ministry? were they able
Ministers of the new Testament, not of the letter, but of the Spirit (such as
the Scriptures speak of?) were they called from heaven by the Revelation of
Christ? or rather, was not your Ministry even such as the former, of men's
making, which stood in man's wisdom, and taught of men, as among the very
Papists? yea, it was even so. Oh, how little has the teaching of God's Spirit
been regarded! were they not accounted able Ministers who could talk upon the
letter, and give many good and fine words to the people, and speak the Saints
experiences recorded in Scripture, which generally they never knew themselves,
or if any knew somewhat of that nature (as some did) it was not principally
regarded; and men were let pass for Ministers who were gifted with humane
learning, and gifts under which the best induments of knowledge or utterance,
which come not immediately from the Revelation of the infallible Spirit of
Truth, may be comprehended; and after ye had quit the Service Book, and that
way of worship in set forms, and denied them as dead life-less things, your
humane learning and abilities (together with the customary way ye had inured
your selves to) prompted you to talk and utter many words before God, which yet
was as far from spiritual worship as the other; and if at any time somewhat of
the Lord's Spirit moved and breathed among you, as it did, for the Lord much
pitied for his seeds sake, yet it was much suffocated and choked, by your
running forth after the imaginations of your own hearts, ye not knowing the
Cross which stays the mind, and gives a check to the forward proposterous
spirit, which is rejected of the Lord with all its services; and because your
minding more the words and form, and visible things, then the living power,
whereby the Lord was provoked more and more to withdraw from among you, and
leave your house desolate, as at this day it is. And your Presbyterian form of
Church Discipline, Order and Government, it was nothing upon the matter better
then the Episcopal, there being no material difference (in the sight of God, to
render it more acceptable to him) be^wixt the one and the other, neither of you
knowing Christ the head in you, teaching you by the Revelation of his Spirit,
to determine of things coming before you, (so that ye could not say with that
Synod, Act. 15.28. It seemed good to the holy Ghost and to us) but ye went on
in the same manner with them of determining of particulars in man's wisdom; and
by plurality of voices or consents, which is but a very fallible way, and has
done more evil then ever it did good, and it is all one before the Lord,
whether one or a few should determine particulars, as it is among the Bishops;
or whether many by an equality should do it, as among the Presbyterians, you
being both out of God's wisdom, and asking counsel and not out of his mouth;
and ye called Presbyterian Ministers did step into many things ye (...) the
Bishops out of, or things much what alike, and of the same nature: ye denied
their Lordships, and took to your selves Masterships, (both being equally
forbidden by Christ) ye would not suffer them to Lord it over you, but ye would
Lord it over the People; yea, and did, as tyrannically as ever the Bishops had
done; and ye were offended at the Surplices, and the Canonical Coats and Belts
of their Clergy, and yet ye were equally superstitious and vain in your black
clothes and Gowns, with Pasments and Ribbons upon them, and other superfluity
of naughtiness; and ye were angry at their Revenues being so great, and yet ye
stepped in also to many of them (and some of you had as much by the year as some
of them) and into their pride, covetousness, lightness, vanity, ambition,
carelessness, concerning the work of Jesus Christ, and the salvation of poor
people, whereof ye took up the charge, and many other iniquities they were
found in, for which the Lord was provoked against them, ye have taken as it
were a succession of, and ye thought the Lord should have winked at you, and
indeed he bo^e much with you, and had respect unto that poor, honest, tender,
simple, zealous thing that was once among you in a day, but he could no longer
forbear, for the cry of your sins was great, and his oppressed seed in your
hearts, as a Cart pressed with sheaves under your wickedness, cried likewise
against you and he heard and brought desolation upon you also, and laid all
your stately building in the dust; and now great is the lamentation and sorrow
of your hearts, because of the fall of your building, and ye are crying in the
anguish of your souls for a day again, wherein ye may have an opportunity to
repair the breaches, and build up the old ruinous heaps; and ye are saying in
your hearts, the tyles are fallen, but we will build with hewn stones; the
Sycomers are cut down, but we will build with Cedars, and make the frame more
able and firm then before to stand out the storm. But I say unto you, in the
name and authority of the living God (should ye attempt such a thing till ye
come to his Light, and the leadings of the infallible Spirit of Truth in your
particulars) it shall not prosper, it shall be as with them who attempted the
rebuilding the walls of Ierico, and have no better success, and ye shall but
labor as in the very fire, and weary your selves for very vanity: I have
determined, says the Lord God Almighty, to race all to the foundation which is
not of my building, to pluck up root and branch; and all which is not of my
planting, I have said to my Messengers and servants, go ye up upon her walls,
break down her battlements and bull-works, for they are not mine, and level all
to the ground, and let them not be built for ever and ever, Amen, says my
soul. And it is God's rich mercy, love, and compassion, that he has brought
this day over you (could ye but open your eyes to see it, and some shall see)
that ye may suffer loss in these things which have been and are a loss and
snare unto you.

The 10 th. Month 1664. from the Tolbouth of Aberdein. George Keith.
The word of commandment from the Lord (which filled me with heavenly joy and
comfort) came unto me the 30. day of the 10 th. Month (called December) saying,
Show unto the people of Scotland my true and righteous judgment, concerning
the particulars abovementioned: And now, however these be received by you, I
have peace in my God.



The blessed long looked for day of God, broke up amongst us the Lords people
called Quakers, with a declaration of the Lords loving kindness to us, and what
he has done for our Souls in causing the light of his countenance to shine on
us.
And a brief description of our Church, Ministry, Word, Worship, order and
Government.
And a Proclamation of the foresaid day of the Lord to the People of Scotland
in judgment and mercy.
With a loving Exhortation unto them, and dear and tender counsel concerning
what the Lord requires of them in order to a perfect, and through reformation
which they have often assayed, but never as yet come at.
Also a few words to such who expect the breaking up of the day of God, and yet
deny it, broke up among us. Written in the fear and will of the Lord, and in
bowels of love and compassion to the people of my native Country.
THe day of God is the Revelation of his living and eternal arm in and among
the children of men, to put an end to transgression, and recover lost man, to
the blessed, holy, pure, innocent state, wherein he was created by God, who
breathed in him the breath of life, and he became a living soul; it is the
setting up the Kingdom of Jesus Christ, the eternal King of righteousness, in
the hearts of the Sons and Daughters of Adam, and the pulling down the Kingdom
of Satan, who has ruled over the sons of men, as God, and swayed his Scepter
as an absolute Monarch in the earth. It Is the arising of the Son of
righteousness with healing under his wings, in the shinings forth of his pure
Light, for the dispelling the the thick Egiptian darkness that has long
covered the earth, and brought upon the Inhabitants a sad, sore, and dismal
night, wherein the blessed, sweet, and amiable countenance of God has been
eclipsed, and veiled from men, whereby they could not live to God, for that
life is in the light, which by the power and prevalency of darkness has been
much shut up; so that it has not shined forth in its glorious brightness upon
mankind: It Is the pouring forth of the Spirit of the Lord upon all flesh, and
the breathing of life upon the dead bones, that they may stand up and live,
with flesh and sinews, in strength, beauty, and comeliness of proportion. It Is
the manifestation and discovery of that great and glorious mystery, hid from
ages and generations, Christ within, the hope of glory; Jesus Christ in his
powerful, spiritual, glorious, heavenly appearance in his Saints, triumphing
victoriously over death and hell, and all the powers of darkness, giving to his
Saints to sit down with him upon his throne, and making them partakers of that
glory he had with the Father before the world began. It Is the bringing of many
from the East, and from the West, and from the North, and from the South, to
sit down with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, in the Kingdom of God; and the
gathering of his elect seed from the four winds of the earth, which has been
long scattered, and pended up in the holes and caves thereof, lying in death,
bondage, and captivity. The day of God is the redemption of his beloved seed,
and raising it up out of the grave, to live in the blessed and glorious
presence of its God: It Is the marriage day of the Spouse with the Lamb, and the
bringing of her into the Chamber of Presence, and the Banqueting House, where
she is entertained with the sweet fellowship and communion of the noble plant
of renown, the beloved of her souls and under his shadow she sits down with
great delight, and his fruit is pleasant to her taste, where she gets access to
him in the bed of love, and sees his sweet, comely, soul-ravishing countenance,
and hears the sweet melodious voice, which pierces the heart with darts of
love, so that she is constrained to cry, Stay me with apples, comfort me with
flagons, for I am sick of love; turn away thy face from me, for it has
ravished me, being filled with the glory of his Majesty, that the sight of it
is scarce tolerable in the house of clay, which often trembles at the
Revelation of the weight of glory. The day of the Lord is the tabernacling and
habitation of himself with men (the Immanuel, God in us) bringing them up out
of all visible and corruptible perishing things, into fellowship with him and
his Son, through the eternal Spirit. It Is the dispensation of the new Covenant
taking place in the earth, the tenor whereof is, I will put my Law in their
inward parts, and write it in their hearts, and will be their God, and they
shall be my People, and they shall teach no more every man his neighbor,
saying, know the Lord, for they shall all know me, from the least of them unto
che greatest, says the Lord, for I will forgive their iniquity, and remember
their sin no more, Jer. 31. And again I will sprinkle clean water upon you, and
ye shall be clean from all your filthiness, and from all your Idols will I
cleanse you, a new heart also will I give you, and a new spirit will I put
within you, and I will take away the stony heart out of your flesh, and I will
give you an heart of flesh, and I will put my spirit within you, and cause you
to walk in my statutes, and ye shall keep my Judgments, and do them; and ye
shall dwell in the Land, that I gave to your Fathers, and ye shall be my
People, and I will be your God, Ezekiel. 36. It Is the coming down of the new
Jerusalem from above, out of Heaven upon the Earth, clothed with the Garments
of Salvation, the Lambs Glory (which is her Light, so that She needs not Sun,
nor Moon, nor Candle) and the pure white linen, which is the Righteousness of
the Saints; It Is the causing the old Heavens and the old Earth to pass away,
and the Elements to melt with fervent heat, and the drying up of the Sea, and
the making all old things to vanish, and the creating the new Heavens, and the
new Earth, wherein dwells Righteousness, and the making all things new. It Is
the relieving the Creation of God which has long traveled under the bondage
of Corruption: It Is the coming forth of the Woman clothed with the Sun, and a
Crown of twelve Stars upon her head, and the Moon under her feet, out of the
Wilderness; And her getting victory and Dominion with her seed (which hold the
testimony of Jesus the spirit of Prophecy, Rev. 19.10. the great quarrel of the
adversary against her, Rev. 12.) over the Dragon, Beast and false Prophet. It Is
the discovery, fall, and utter overthrow of mystery Babylon, the mother of
Fornications, who has bewitched the whole earth with the Golden Cup, her
Merchants has handed forth into them who dwell thereupon; whereby they have
adulterated, and gone a whoring from God, and the pure holy life of Jesus
Christ, and the chaste leadings of his spirit, and the true spiritual glory has
been lost from among them, who drunk of the cup of her sorceries, and a false
imaginary glory set up in its room, which is the Image of the Beast, over which
the Saints get victory; which false glory stands in some of the words and
forms of truth patched together, with the inventions of men, by the cunning
and art of the whorish spirit, which is very taking and specious to the eye of
man, whereby it comes to pass that this whorish woman has been taken for the
spouse of Christ, and her Merchants for his Ministers. The day of God is the
pulling up by the roots every plant which is not of the Lords planting, and the
fire of the fierce wrath and indignation of God passing thorough the briars and
thorns for the consuming of them, and the plowing up the fallow ground, and
preparing and digging, and dunging of it, whereby it may become good and
fruitful, that the pure and tender plant and seed of truth sown therein may
grow up, and become a tree filled with the fruits of righteousness and
holiness: this seed has long lain (as it were) barren in the earth, which has
been as a Wilderness, and brought forth the Vines of Sodom, and Grapes of
Gomorah, but now the Lord has looked upon the earth, and pitied it (for the
seeds sake) and has sent forth and is sending his servants to till and dress
it, that it may be for the Lord and master of it, a garden of pleasure, and now
the truth which has been long holden down, in and under unrighteousness is
arising, and shall arise throughout the whole earth, in victory and dominion
over all.

And we the Lords People called in derision Quakers, and mocked and persecuted
by the World (as all the Children of God before us have been) because we are
not of them, and they know us not, do witness this day of God come and broke up
among us in pure perfect brightness, to the fulfilling all these things
aforesaid (every one in their measure) and yet more abundantly to be fulfilled,
and his Kingdom revealed with power and great glory in our hearts, and the Lord
has brought back our Captivity, as the streams of the south, whereat we are as
those that dream for joy; and we who sat by the Rivers of Babylon hanging our
harps upon the Willow Trees are now returned to Zion, having our hearts and our
mouths filled with the Songs thereof, and our Harps harping the sweet Praises
of our God, in the Land of our Nativity. And the Lord has redeemed us out of
Kindreds, Nations, Tongues, and People, to be a peculiar people unto himself, a
choice Generation, a royal Priesthood, and holy Nation zealous of good works,
to show forth the Praises of him who has called us out of darkness into his
marvelous Light, which has shined forth in beams of Glory, through the
darkness in us, to the dispelling and swallowing up thereof, by its brightness,
and the Light is very dear, and precious unto us, and we cannot deny it;
notwithstanding, all the opposition we meet with, from a wicked perverse World,
shut up in darkness; and because they in the state they are in, cannot
comprehend it, therefore they mock, persecute, and blasphem both it, and the
vessels thereof, and they would have us to disown the Light, and cease to bear
our testimony unto it, because they hate the Light themselves, being it
reproves their evil deeds, and makes manifest the hidden things of dishonesty,
which they are loath should be known; therefore they would have the Light
quenched, stopped and buried, least their wickedness be seen, hence it is that
people of all Professions, ranks, orders, qualities, and degrees, Rulers,
Teachers, Priests, and People, Scribes, Lawyers, Doctors, and Disputers of this
World, have and do oppose the Light, and such who testify of it, least their
pride, pomp, ambition, lust, tyranny, deceit, covetousness, and other evil
deeds, which are rife among them, should be made manifest, and men of all
callings hate the Light; for deceit, treachery, unrighteousness, has seated
and spread it self over all and taken a dominion in the Earth, and is loath to
quit it; and therefore, it puts into the hearts of all its subjects, to oppose
the Light, which if it get footing in the earth, will put a period to its
reign, and finish transgression, and bring in everlasting Righteousness: And
the Devil sets men upon the opposing the Light, least it bind him, and cast him
out of his place, and spoil his house, and break his Kingdom, dashing it as a
potters vessel into pieces; and the Whore mystery Babylon, the mother of
Fornications hates the Light, and puts into the hearts of the Kings and powers
of the earth, to make war with the Lamb, the Light and the Children of it; for
that is it which discovers the cup of her Fornications and sorceries unto men,
and makes manifest her whorish mire whereby she may be discerned, and when she
is known the same Kings and Princes and great ones on the earth, who upheld
her, shall come to loath and hate her, and burn her flesh with fire; and now
glory to the Lord who has showed us Light, and placed it in our hearts, and
has raised and is raising it up, over all opposition whatsoever in us, and by
this Light we have discovered the Whore, the Antichrist, the Beast, the Dragon
the subtle Serpent, the false Prophet, with all their subtle workings, and
deceivableness of unrighteousness; we have seen the Land of graven Images, and
the wilderness where there is no way; we have so long walked in; hungry, and
thirsty, and our souls fainting in us, and our tongue failing with thirst; and
the light has given us an out-gate, and showed us an entrance into the way of
life, and path of righteousness and holiness, which the Vultures eye can never
reach; and this path at the beginning appeared to us very strait, and narrow
and difficult for passage, so that many times sore doubtings and fears arise in
us, lest we should never get thereinto, and many temptations have we endured
from the suggestions of the great enemy of our salvation; saying to us, it is
in vain to attempt an entrance, but now blessed be the God of our salvation, an
entrance, yea, an abundant entrance is ministered to us thereinto, and the path
is becoming more and more easy and spacious, and delectable, the way of
pleasantness, and the path of peace is opened, and opening, wherein the
wayfaring man (though a fool) cannot err or stray; and the Light has brought
us to Jacob's Well, where we have found an eternal never fading spring of
living water streaming forth into our souls and hearts, to our unspeakable joy,
comfort, and satisfaction; and it has brought us into Bethel, the house of
God, the house of prayer; and we have been made joyful therein, according to
the Lord's promise; and in this house and Temple of God, we have seen the glory
of the Lord, and had Isaiah's Vision, beholding him sitting upon a throne, high
and lifted up, and his train filling the Temple; and we have heard the voice,
Holy, holy, holy, Lord God of Hosts, the whole earth is full of his glory; and
we have been made to cry, woe is us, for we are undone, because of uncleanness,
and fear and trembling has taken hold of us, so that the posts of the door
lies moved and shaken, at the voice of him that cried; and the Angel has flown
unto us, having a live coal in his hand, taken in the tongs from off the Altar,
and therewith has touched our lips, saying unto us, your iniquity is taken
away, and your sin purged; and in his Temple we have talked of the glory of the
Lord, and of his loving kindness one unto another; and we have blessed and
praised the Name of the Lord, for his mercy and goodness to the children of
men; and we have eat and drunk in the house of our God, in the mountain of his
holiness have we been entertained with the feast of fat things, full of marrow,
of wines on the lees well refined; and we have seen the King in his beauty, and
bread has been given to us, and our water made sure, and it fails not, which
we drink every one out of our own Cestern; and the glorious Lord has become
unto us a place of broad Rivers; and we have been brought to the Shepherds
tents, and seen where he feeds the flock, and causes it to rest at noon; and
we have loved the Pasture dearly, and entreated the Shepherd that he would make
us partake with the flock, and lead us to the green field and Paradise of his
pleasure, and to the streams of that river which is full of water, and flows
richly forth, to the continual gladning of the City of God; and we have desired
it of him with the earnest of our souls, that we might see the good of his
chosen, and be remembered with the favor he bears to his people, and gladned
with the joy of his Nation, that we might have whereby to glory with his
inheritance; and the Lord has heard and granted the breathings of our souls;
we asked life of him, and he has given it us, and put a crown of pure gold
upon our heads, even a crown of righteousness, and eternal life; and he has
put a new song of praise to him who lives for ever and ever, in our mouths,
which none can sing, no nor understand, but such as are redeemed from off the
earth; and Palms of Victory in our hands are given to us, and Harps wherewith
to harp, and make melody to the God of our life, who has created us anew in
Jesus Christ, unto good works; and Censers full of incense, which are the
prayers of the Saints; and the Lord has not suffered, does not suffer us, to
want any good thing, he opens his hands plentifully, and fills us with his
blessing, and gives us to drink of the River of his pleasure, and the wine
which grows in our fathers Kingdom; and how great is his goodness! how great
is his beauty! for Corn has made the young men glad, and new wine the Maids,
as it is written, and the mountains have dropped down the wine, and the Fatts
and Wine-presses have overflowed, and the Heavens have opened, and poured down
everlasting righteousness, and rained the showers of blessing upon the tender
herbs of the Lords planting in the earth; and lo the Winter is past, the rain
is over and gone, and the Spring is come, wherein the birds do sweetly sing,
and the voice of the Turtle is heard in our Land; and the Fig Tree puts
forth its blossoms, and green figs and others are come, and coming to
perfection and maturity; and the Vines with the grapes, give a good and
pleasant smell; and at our gates are all manner of pleasant fruits, new and
old, laid up for our beloved. And the fruit of the Tree of Life, which bears
twelve manner of fruits, and yields it every month, has been manifested unto
us, the leaves whereof are for the healing of the Nations. And we have seen the
Bride, the Lamb's Wife adorned, and trimmed for the approach of her Husband,
and the new Jerusalem descending from above, the Holy City coming down from God
out of heaven, having the glory of her God, and her light is like unto a stone
most precious, like a Jasper, clear as Cristal; and we have seen the frame and
proportion of this City, with the walls and gates of it (within which our feet
have stood) whose builder and maker is God, and there is nothing of man's work
in it, but all purely of him, and we have seen to its foundation, the Light,
the Life, the Power, the Wisdom of God, revealed in the hearts of the Sons and
Daughters of men, the chief corner, the foundation stone, which the builders
among all the Sects and Professions of the whole earth have rejected, in this
night of darkness, whereby instead of building a house or City for God, they
have reared up a Babylon, which must fall, and is a falling, and shall sink as
a millstone into the bottom of the Sea, and never rise again, Amen,
Hallelujah, glory to the Lamb, whose work it is.

And now the Lord has made us Citizens of this City, and stones of this
building, even living stones, polished by the power of God, and glewed and knit
together by the same power and Spirit of Life, where is the pure perfect unity,
and in the unity, the fellowship and communion with God, and his dear Son Jesus
Christ, and one with another is witnessed; and the builders are wise builders,
standing in the wisdom and power of God, whereby they are taught to lay every
stone, and how to polish and square it, and they are but tools and instruments
in the hand of God, for the work is his alone, and the Ministry is spiritual,
and so are the Ministers; men taught by God, having experience of the saving
work of his right hand on their hearts, who speak because they believe, and are
endued with power from on high, and filled with the holy Ghost, whereby they
are made able Ministers of the new Testament, having received gifts by the
ascending of Christ on high, (even for the rebellious, that he may dwell among
them) for the work of the Ministry, to the perfecting of the Saints, and
edifying of the body; and such Minister from the Light and from the Life, and
from the power and Spirit, and Word of God, whereby those to whom they
Minister, may come into the fellowship of the mystery with themselves, and be
made partakers with them of the Unction, or anointing from the holy one, which
may be with them for ever, and a teacher unto them of all things, good,
necessary, and expedient for them to know, even to bring them unto the Spirit
of truth, which may lead them into all truth, and instruct them, in the will,
council, and commandment of God, at all times whatever it be, and to espouse
them unto Jesus Christ the great King and Lawgiver in and to his People, the
great high Priest, from whose mouth the Law is to be received, the great
Prophet by whom God speaks now to his People, whereof Moses writes, who is the
head in all things, and who so will not hear that Prophet, shall be put to
death; and this Prophet Jesus Christ is nigh unto us, yea, more nigh then all
the men or books upon the face of the earth; he is both our Maker and our
Husband, (the anointed of the Lord the breath of our nostrils) so that our
fellowship and communion with him is most intimate, and immediate, and nothing
else does satisfy our souls but the immediate embraces of his dear and sweet
love, the seeing of his Countenance which is comely, and the hearing of his
voice, which is pleasant, and powerful, and glorious, and full of Majesty; and
the Bride rejoices greatly because of the voice of the Bridegroom himself, and
now we need not say who will go down into the grave, and bring up Christ to us,
or who will ascend to Heaven to bring him down to us, or who will go over the
Seas, and bring us tidings of him from Jerusalem, where he suffered in the
flesh, him (whose name is the Word of God, Rev. 19.) we of a truth witness nigh
us even in our hearts; so that we need not either ascend or descend, or go
forth, the word of life, the word of power, the word of faith which Paul
preached, and Moses before him, and all the true Ministers, and pointed people
to this, which was able to save them, as they turned their minds thereto, and
gave up to be taught and led thereby.

And this the Ministers and Servants of the Lord among the People called
Quakers do preach (without money or price being the free gift of God) and many
have believed, and received it, not as the Word of Men, but as it is indeed the
Word of God, and found it (after diligent attendance, turning their minds
inward thereto) to spring up in themselves, and to be living and powerful, and
sharp as a two edged Sword, to the dividing of soul and spirit, and discerning
every thought and intention of the heart, and though one evil, and unbelieving
Generation, will not give credit thereto, no nor yet those of the National
Ministry, who give themselves forth for the Ministers of Christ (but are found
liars) they call it a fancy, and delusion, and turn People from it, (which is
the only Rock that can save them) yet we know it to be the Word of God, and we
have tasted the Heavenly sweetness of it, yea and our very hands have handled
that Word of Life, and we have hid it in our hearts as an only Treasure, and we
do daily, and hourly, witness the pretiousness and worth thereof, for it is the
food of our souls, the food of Angels, the living bread, which came down from
Heaven, to give life unto the World, the Manna incorruptible, which feeds us
unto life everlasting; and when we are an hungered, it refreshes us, and
satisfies our souls with good things, it is milk to the babes, and flesh to the
strong, it is health to our navil, and marrow to our bones, it is the bread which
strengthens man's heart, and the wine which makes it glad, and oil which
makes his face to shine, and when we thirst, living water springs forth from
this word of life in our hearts, and ministers drink unto us, out of the
living fountain, and we witness the promise fulfilled, he that believes in me
(Christ the Word) out of his belly shall flow a well spring of liveing water;
and when we are weak, and our hands hang down, and our knees wax feeble, the
Word makes us strong, and lifts us up as an Eagles wings, so that we run and
are not weary, and walk and are not faint, and when we are heavy through
sorrow, the Word springs forth in streams of pure joy and consolation, from
the presence of the Lord, which causes us to forget all our former troubles,
and we are comforted in our God, in all our straits and difficulties, and when
temptations from the Devil and his Instruments assault us, and the powers of
darkness environe and surround us, as if they would swallow us up, the Word
sends forth sweet and comfortable beams of Light, and opens the eyelids of
the morning upon us, and breaks through the thick Egiptian darkness, as a
fiery flaming sword, and divides asunder, and gives us victory and
deliverance: And when we are hated of the World, the Word says, peace in us,
and causes it to flow into our souls, like the waves of the Sea, and when
Satan transformes himself (with his Messengers) into an Angel of Light, that
he may deceive us, coming up out of the deep with Samuels Mantle, the Word of
truth, which searches into all the depths of Satan, and to the bottom of the
mystery of iniquity discovers to us the foulers snare, and the voice of the
inchanter, so that our souls escape as a bird out of the net; and the Word
defends us by night and by day, so that we need not fear the terror by night,
nor the arrow that flies by day, nor the pestilence that walks in darkness,
being girded with the sword of the Spirit, which is the Word of God; and the
Word is a light to our feet, and a Lanthorn to our paths, the V^im and the
Thummim by which the Lord answers us, and gives us counsel in all things
pertaining either to the temporal or eternal life, and herein we meditate day
and night, and by it are we made wiser then our Teachers, and it is sweeter to
us then the honey and the honey comb, and more precious then thousands of gold
or silver; and in the Word our fellowship stands with God, and one to another,
whereby we know, and enjoy, and have communion one with another in the
invisible, heavenly life, and though at a distance as to the bodily appearance,
yet nigh to, and present one with another in Spirit, and partakers together, as
members of one body in sufferings and afflictions, in joy and consolations,
which as sufferings abound, do abound also. And now, though the Scriptures
declare of this word, yet they are not that Word, more then a Map or
description of Rome or London, is Rome or London; or the image of Caesar is
Caesar (or bread and wine is the body and blood of Christ) which rude draught,
shadow, description, and representation of such things, and the like, may and
do borrow the names of the things by them signified or represented; and thus
the Scriptures may borrow the name of the Word of God, and may sometimes be so
called, as the words or Prophecy of Isaiah is called by himself his Vision, and
the words of John is called his Revelation, whereas they but signified these
things; and it is my testimony, with thousands, we have found another Word then
the Scriptures (which is not repugnant to them, but teaches the same things,
and bears a like testimony with them, in a more excellent way, so that they
have a sweet harmony and concord together, yet differing as much from them as
bread, wine, corn, oil, water, light, fire, differing from a verbal
description or likeness of those things: And this is no dishonor to the
Scriptures, but a putting them in their proper place, as a declaration of the
eternal life, which though pointed at by them, yet is not to be found in them,
as the Jewish people foolishly thought, (and as Professors think at this day)
for which Christ checked them, because they would not come to him to get life,
of whom the Scriptures testified, That it was in him, not in them, Ioh. 5. And
thus much concerning our Ministry, and the object thereof, or thing which is
ministered and preached, to wit, Christ the living and eternal Word, nigh, and
in the hear: and our Worship and Sacrifice we offer up unto God in this
Building, House, Temple, City or Church of God; is spiritual prayer, and praise
spiritual, even from the pourings forth of the Spirit of Life from God, praying
and singing, (and making melody in our hearts, and with our mouths and lips
also, as the Lord opens them) with the spirit and understanding in all things,
making our requests known unto God, and giving thanks always for all things,
through Jesus Christ our life, at whose Name our knees are bowed down, and our
head uncovered, and the glory is over all, and the Lord has turned to us the
pure language, and the pure lip, and given us to the throne of glory an
abundant access, and has accepted our prayers, and savoured a good savor in
them, and has largely answered the desires of our souls, blessed be his Name;
and we witness him a God who hears prayer, even to the least desire or
breathing of the upright heart, and he is worthy to be waited for, who has
come to us in an acceptable time, and prepared our hearts to seek, and his ear
to hear, and given us strength and ability to wrestle and prevail with him to
the break of day, and we have not let him go till he has blessed us, and
called our name Israel. And as the Ministry and Worship of the Church or house
of God among us is spiritual, so is the Order, Discipline and Government among
us; and we witness the Lord present with us in our Assemblies, and the head
Christ in us, (whether few or many) passing sound, righteous, and infallible
judgment concerning the particulars that come before us; and we take not that
blind, fallible way of the many Sects and Professions in the world, to
determine controversies by, viz. Plurality of Votes, but we look up to the
Lord, and call upon him to decide the matter, and pass righteous judgment, and
he does it, and each in the measure of the Word of Truth, which they have
received, does perceive the mind of the Lord therein, and believes it, their
faith standing in the wisdom and power of God, revealing the thing in and to
each particular, and we are manifest in one another consciences, and as
Epistles written and read in one another hearts; and we are of one mind, and
one spirit and life; and here is sweet unity, concord, harmony, and agreement,
not like Babylon; and where the Lord goes not before us, and opens not the
particular, or particulars unto us, we stand still and forbear, till we receive
his mind, who never is nor will be wanting to us, in whatsoever exigence. And
now the power we have is from God alone, and his Son Jesus Christ, and he bears
the government on his shoulders, and takes us up into the Throne with himself,
according to his promise and makes us a free people, Kings and Priests to our
God, and our power is free and unlimited, as to any man's determination upon the
face of the whole earth; and we own no head in our Church, but Christ Jesus;
nor can we submit our consciences to any man, or yield to the precepts and
commandments of men (out of the will and power of God) in a jot, though to the
loss of our very lives; and especially, no man or men is to impose on us the
least circumstance, in the matter of the worship of the living God, and the
exercise of our consciences therein; but what man or men set up in place of
authority, calls us to what is equitable and righteous betwixt us and our
neighbor, we are free, and holds our selves bound to give all due obedience
for conscience sake thereto; and the Magistrate, who has his power and
authority from God, we dearly own and honor, and the obedience he requires of
us, will be answered with the Witness and Word of God in our consciences, which
if we should disobey, condemnation from the Lord should fall upon us. And when
that which is sinful and unrighteous is urged upon us, then God's witness does
arise in our conscience, and forbids us to yield thereto, but to suffer
patiently what may be inflicted upon us, for our not bowing under the same, and
not at all to resist with any carnal weapon, or outward violence, but to commit
our cause to him, who judges righteously, and has said, Vengeance is mine,
and I will repay it; and so we have sweet peace and content in our sufferings,
for our consciences are kept free, and we are redeemed to God, and bought with
a price, therefore we cannot be the servants of men, and we seek not any
worldly power or force to maintain our Church, it needs it not (for the gates
of hell cannot prevail against the same) nor to propagate our Religion, for it
will never do it, and we are to force no man's conscience, nor to lay any
punishment upon them, or put any to sufferings, because of their not concurring
with us, for we matter no uniformity, but that which is of the Lord's Spirit,
persuading the hearts of people to be one with us in principle and practice,
and to stand up with us, living witnesses for the name and truth of the living
God, which he is revealing; and we assuredly know all the weapons that are
formed either against the truth or the witnesses of it, shall not prosper, and
the Lord shall make to himself a glorious name in the earth; and we the people
of the Lord, whom he has formed for himself, shall show forth his praise, and
the Lord will make it manifest, that we are his, and that he has raised us up,
and put his Spirit in us, and that he dwells in and among us, to all the
Kindreds and Nations of the Earth, and they who will not see, shall see, and be
ashamed, and confounded for their envy at the people whom God has blessed, and
will bless for ever and ever, and no deceit nor violence shall prevail against
them.

And therefore now O ye people of Scotland know ye that the day of God is broke
up among us, the people of the Lord called by you in derision Quakers, but who
indeed tremble at the Word of his power, when it is sounded forth from the
Throne of Majesty; yea, and the mighty, dreadful, terrible God of strength,
power, and Majesty, Victory, and Dominion has determined to shake the Heavens,
and the Earth, and all the powers thereof, to the utter confusion and fall of
whatsoever stands up in opposition against the seting up of his eternal
Kingdom of Righteousness in the hearts of the Children of Men, and the little
stone cut out of the Mountain without hands, shall grow and fill the earth, and
become a Mountain; and it shall dash to pieces the Image of Clay and Iron,
Brass, Silver, and Gold, and the Land of graven Images shall be smitten, and
all the Gods of the Heathen famished, and all the Idols shall be broken, and
cast into the holes of the rock, and Dagon shall not be able to stand before
the Ark; nor Babylon, before the spouse of Christ which is coming forth to face
all their enemies, fair as the Sun, and terrible as an Army with banners; yea,
clothed with the Sun, and the Moon under her feet. And the Lord is making a
work in this day, which shall make all ears to tingle, and every heart to faint
and fail that will not bow at the arm of his power stretched forth: The day of
the Lord is come, and he is preparing himself to battle as a strong man, as one
awakned of out sleep, (who has long suffered the reign and Kingdom of
darkness) and as one that cries out in the dread of his strength by reason of
Wine; and he is making bare his arm, and covering himself with zeal as with a
cloak, now will I arise, now will I lift up my self, says the Lord, and who is
able to stand up, and make war with him? whereof prepare to meet thy God O
Scotland in the way of his judgments, and repent, repent, repent of your
iniquities, from the highest to the lowest, for the controversy of the
dreadful God of power, the zealous angry God who will not acquit the guilty, is
against the one and the other of you, without respect of persons, because of
your abominations, whereby his pure holy Spirit has been grieved, and provoked
against you, Oh Scotland, Scotland, the cry of thine iniquities, has come up
before God into his throne, and he is weary with forbearing, to execute the
fierceness of his wrath upon you, though ye be not weary with sining, but are
drawing iniquity, as with Cart-ropes, and filling up the measure even to the
brime; Wherefore a Cup of trembling, trembling, says the Lord God, shall be
put into thy hands, if thou speedily repent not, and thou shall drink and shall
not escape, and it shall be more tolerable for Sodom and Gomorab in the day of
judgment, then for you; forasmuch as you have sinned against more Light, and
have had more warnings from the Lord, one way, and another, and he has borne
with you long, and strived much with you by his Spirit to reclaim you, and
would have healed you, but ye will not be healed, and oh how have your hearts
turned back as a deceitful bow, and shrunk from that measure of simplicity,
tenderness and zeal for the Lord, that was once among you, and because ye took
up a profession of God above all the Nations of the Earth, and have so
treacherously backslidden therefrom in the day of trial, therefore is your sin
exceedingly aggravated before the Lord, and he will punish you above all the
Nations of the earth, if ye break not off from your sins by speedy and
unfeigned repentance. And now ye who mock at the quakings and tremblings of the
people of God, who feel the load of wrath ready to break out upon you, and sink
you down to the bottom of Hell, and would feign stand in the gapes, and hold
off the wrath, and are in great travel, because of the dreadful day they see
coming upon you, and many times are crying unto God for mercy unto you, when ye
are adding drunkness to thirst, and persecuting them, and saying, tush, tush,
no evil shall befall us, where is the promise of his coming? ye shall be made
to tremble, and your loins to shake, and the joints of your knees with
Belshazar (reading the hand writing against you) to smite one against another,
and paleness shall come up upon your faces, and pangs as of a woman in travel
take hold of you, and the Lord will roar out of Zion, against you, and tear in
pieces as a Lion, and who will then be able to deliver you out of his hand? and
that comfort and peace will be far from you, which we the Lords people do
witness, after all our fears and tremblings; for the cup we have drunk at his
hands is sweetly tempered with mercy and judgment, and in measure he debateth
with us, and stays his rough wind in the day of his East; and our hearts,
which once trembled for fear, and dread, and sorrow, are now made to rejoice
with trembling, at the powerful and glorious appearance of him in our souls, so
that we have been made to sing unto him that song, we will praise thee O Lord;
for though thou wast angry with us, thy anger is turned away, and we are
comforted. And yet now, O Scotland, the Lord has bowels of tender pity and
compassion toward thee, which many times I have felt, and do feel, with many
others, and he is much put to it (so to speak) concerning thee, what to do with
thee, and his mercy and judgment are at a kind of holy contest and wrestling
about thee; How shall I give thee up? how shall I deliver thee, O people of
Scotland? how shall I make thee as Admah, and set thee as Zeboim, my heart is
turned within me, my repentings are kindled together; which word has often
sounded through me, toward thy Inhabitants, O Scotland, from the Lord, who yet
remembers the kindness of thy youth, and the love of thy espousals in former
days, and the tenderness, and simplicity, and uprightness of heart that was
among many of you then, with a pure zeal for his Name: And oh, what meltings
and breathings of soul was after the living God! and nothing could satisfy but
his living presence, which also no doubt has been in a measure by some
enjoyed; but oh, how have ye forsaken your first love, and turned downright
enemies against that which was once your very life, and is the life of those ye
are persecuting at this day, and blaspheming, to wit, the revelation of the
Light, Life, Power, Love, and Spirit of God in our souls, which fills us with
heavenly comfort, joy unspeakable and full of Glory. Oh, how have ye forsaken
the fountain of living waters, and dug to your selves broken Cesterns, that
can hold no water! Return, O backsliding Scotland, for this I do declare unto
thee, in the name of the Lord; he has yet thoughts of loving kindness unto
thee, and a seed there is in thee, which is very dear and precious unto him,
and he cannot forget it, more then the tenderhearted mother the fruit of her
womb; and though she should forget, yet the Lord will not forget thee; for thou
art set as a seal upon his heart, and writ upon the palms of his hands, O thou
beloved seed, and he will give redemption unto thee, and raise thee up out of
the holes and caves of the earth, where thou have lain so long buried as in the
grave, and the Lord has raised, and is raising up his seed in some already,
who are a kind of first fruits unto him; and he has brought us to walk in the
light of his countenance, and rent the vails, and given us to behold his lovely
amiable face with joy, and made us an entrance into the blessed Land of
Promise; and we have eat abundantly of the good of the Land, and the finest of
the wheat, and honey out of the Rock has been given unto us, and we have drunk
of the wine, and tasted the Vine-grapes thereof, and the Land is a good Land;
and though there be Giants, and the sons of Amaleck in the way, yet it is
conquerable, and we cannot but report well of it; and God has blessed our
testimony, and shall bless it to hundreds and thousands, who yet are not able
to hear us, nor will they, because of the anguish of soul, under the hard yoke
of Pharaoh in the Land of Egypt, and house of bondage; but God will break, and
is breaking, the yoke of oppression from off the neck of his seed, and will
give it victory and dominion over all.

And now blessed are they, who know and hearken unto the joyful sound of the
everlasting Gospel, which publishes peace, and brings good tidings of
salvation, and proclaims the acceptable year of the Lord, and the day of
vengeance of our God, to comfort all that mourn to appoint unto them that mourn
in Sion, to give them beauty for ashes, the oil of joy for mourning, the
garment of praise for the spirit of heaviness, that they might be called trees
of righteousness, the planting of the Lord, that he might be glorified. And
now, O Scotland, prize the day of thy visitation, and know the things that
belong to thy peace, before they be hid from thine eyes, and the day of grace
set upon thee, and put away thy abominations out of the fight of the holy pure
God, which are matter of provocation unto him against thee.

And whereas thou have often assayed a Reformation unto the Lord, but it has
never come to be perfect and through; and ye have been so far from going
forward, that ye have shrunk back, and turned again with the dog to the vomit,
wherefore now at last return to the Lord, with whom there is yet mercy, and
plenteous redemption, and reform thoroughly unto him, who will not receive
halfes off your hands. And now I will show you council from the Lord (which I
do declare in bowels of dear, and tender love unto you) what ye shall do in
order to a cleanly, perfect, and through Reformation: Above all mind the Light
of Christ in your Consciences, and heed it diligently in its motion and
shinings forth thorough the darkness, and as ye give obedience to it, in what
it reveals unto you for duty, and shun what it discovers to be evil, it will
more and more arise and shine forth in pure transparent brightness, from one
degree of glory to another, and lay hold upon the darkness to the dispelling of
it, and swallowing it up wholly, in the womb of its brightness; and the Light
will show you the foundation on which ye shall build, Jesus Christ, the Wisdom
and Power of God, and the Word of eternal Life, the chief corner stone, from
which the Light comes, and it leads to him, and will bring you into
acquaintance with him, and the leadings, and teachings of his Holy Spirit, to
which ye shall do well to keep Chaste, else the Serpent by his subtlety will
again ensnare you, and Mystery Babylon will bewitch you with the cup of her
Fornications: And oh your not keeping chaste to the Lord has often marred the
work in your hands, and if ye come not in the future to keep closely and
chastely to him, ye shall never prosper in any of your attempts, and all shall
be but lost labor. And take up the cross to every thought, desire,
imagination, motion, and affection, of your own hearts, and this will steer
your course aright, and guide your feet in every step, and stay, and balance
your minds, and hold down every thing which would arise out of the wrong
ground, and the pure Light will shine forth in your minds, (thus stayed under
the cross) with glorious beams of brightness, and sweetly manifest unto you,
all whatsoever the Lord requires of you, and as ye must not be forward in
running on without the leadings of Christ the head in you, so be not backward
nor slow in following after him, nor sit down by the way, saying in your
selves, thus far will we go and no further; Oh this has also been a snare unto
you: and mind the pure, holy, living power, more then the form, and wherever
the power and Spirit of life does not move, or appear in the form, disown it,
and stand against it, and whatever form or appearance the living power leads
into, or moves in, be for it, and own it, and as ye come, to live and walk in
Gods fear, it will beget more and more a discerning in you, to know and feel
the power, and distinguish manifestly the dead, dry, and life-less form and
appearance from the living; and be willing to be searched as with Candles,
thoroughly, and hide nothing which the Lord requires to be given up, nor keep
up any thing whatsoever, that his controversy and indignation is against, and
rid you of all your Idols of silver, and gold, all the wares and pleasant
things of Babylon, and the Jewels and earrings, ye have of the Egiptians, to
wit the many Inventions, that has crept in, in the night of Apostasy, to the
ensnaring and bewitching of your people, and father nothing upon the
Scriptures, nor upon God, but that which is purely of him, and revealed unto
you from the Spirit of truth opening and interpreting the Scriptures unto you,
which holy men of God did write from the Inspiration of his Spirit, and can
only be understood in and from a measure of the same, and put not the name of
the Ordinances of Jesus Christ upon Babylons brats, which whosoever takes them and
dasheth to pieces against the stones, blessed shall they be: And away with all
the Wisdom of this World, which God is a confounding, and all consultings and
reasonings with flesh and blood, and judging or determining of things, but in
the wisdom and council of God, in the Revelation of the Spirit of truth in each
particular, let that be your rule in all things, and ye shall walk surely, and
put away this dead, life-less, ignorant, profane, scandalous Ministry, own no
Ministry, but such who is taught of God, and speaks because he believes and
ministers from the power and spirit of life, and away with making any humane
gifts or indowments of Learning (which is but flesh, and must die and wither)
the qualifications of a Minister, and do not limit the Spirit of the Lord, in
choosing or refusing any for the work of the Ministry, they are well fitted whom
he enables, though foolish and contemptible to the carnal eye; and by these
foolish, weak and despicable things, the Lord has brought, and is bringing
great things to pass; and away with your dead life-less worship, praying and
singing, which comes not from the breathings and movings of the spirit of life
from God; and away with your mungrel Church, patched up of the prophance rabble
of the World, let such who fear God, separate and come out from among them, and
disown them for fellow members of the body whereof Christ is the head, and have
no communion with them in their worship which is Idolatry, and away with your
sprinklings of Infants, its but of Babylon; with many other things, the Light
of Christ (as ye heed it) will discover unto you, which in the night of
darkness has passed for Gods ordinance, but the day has discovered them to
have the Beasts mark, and superscription; and away with setting Bread and Wine
before a profane wicked multiude (who has nothing but the bare name of a
Christian) telling them its the Communion of the Body and Blood of Christ, it is
abomination to God, and away with the carnal, false licentious, unbounded
liberty ye take to your selves in words, diet, apparel, and worldly
conversation; mind the cross diligently, and it will teach you the golden path
of Mediocrity (or Moderation) in all things, and away with all respecting of
persons, and the honor which comes not from God, whose service is only to feed
the lust of the eye, the lust of the flesh, and the pride of life, and be
willing and desirous to see the glory of the pride of all flesh stained, and
the Lord alone exalted, honored, and glorified in and among the Children of
men: And away with all Uniformity, which is not of the Lords Spirit; and away
with all force, and constraint in the matter of Conscience and Religion; and
away with all carnal weapons, either to defend or propagate the truth; away
with your Lording and mastering, and monopolizing ministry, who would limit the
Spirit of the Lord, and make a monopoly of the gifts of God, away with your
distinctions of Clergy and Laics, and superstitious Habits and attires, for
discriminating them, and away with your set and alloted hires, and maintenance
for a Ministry, and forcing of people to pay them, which has been a great
snare unto many (and has lain nigh all) who from a principle of covetousness
(seeing thereby means of a livelihood) has intruded themselves into the
ministerial Function, and given poor people to believe they were called of God
thereto, whereas generally (it is a thing well known) they get into Parishes by
worldly means, they setting their friends and relations on work, to solicit
and move the Patrons of the Parishes, or such most concerned therein, to give
them entrance; and when the thing is granted, then he called the Minister,
steps up into a Pulpit, and says thus to the people, Beloved, by the
providence of God I am called to be your Pastor, and a watchman over you, as
one who must give an account for your souls in the day of judgment; and the
Lord knows, it is not any other principle, but a vehement desire (thorough love
to your souls) to teach and instruct you in the knowledge of God, and to edify
you in the Faith, that has moved me to come among you. and I have received a
talent, and I must improve it, and the ability God has given me to instruct
you, together with the great desire I have to use it for your edification, I
take for a sufficient call from God; and I have also the Patrons, and the most
considerable in the Parish their call. Whereas they make it manifestly appear,
that covetousness has set them thereon, for how soon any of their brethren
dies, so that another Parish becomes vacant, which has a greater stipend or
maintenance, they fall upon their first trade, of soliciting for an entrance
thereto, and they stick not to quit the charge of their first Flock, and to
give their Wife (to wit, the Kirk, which they say they are married to) a Bill
of divorce, though oft-times there be no occasion on her part; and it is not the
Patrons or people who has called them, but they first called them; and when
the people refuses to pay them their allotted hire, they pursue them with
horning and poinding, which shows them to be far from the affection of husbands
to their wives or parents to their children, or Pastors to the Flock, all which
they pretend to be; and were they good Pastors, their Flock would afford them
milk and wool, not of constraint, but willingly, so that they needed not,
either squeeze the pap to the causing it bleed, or tear the fleece off before
the time of casting it, to the pulling the skin in pieces many times; and the
ability they talk of, is not of God, but of men, and it is not God's free gift,
for it has cost them both much money and time at Schools to purchase it; and
were it the talent of the Lord, it would prove more effectual to the bettering
of the people, which it does not; for at ten, twenty, thirty, forty years end
and upwards, they are as bad as at the first coming among them, and in many
places much worse; and the vehement desire to do the people good, they tell of,
is but a suggestion of their deceitful hearts, for they are not come to the
Light and Word of Truth, whereby to discern the true, upright, genuine desire,
from the false and hypocritical: and this thing has proved also a great share
unto the people, who has heaped up to themselves Teachers after their own
hearts lusts, who might speak false peace unto them; and that whereon there is
so much stress laid, to wit, the calling of the people, or Patrons, is not of
God, but of Babylon; for in the state they are in, they will be loath ever to
call a good man unto them (supposing he could be found) but such who will wink
at their faults, and run with them thereinto; and when at any time they let a
reproof fall, it stinks out of their mouths, being guilty of the same things
themselves; and away with the education of youth at Universities and Colleges
of Philosophy, so called; I may say of them, which Luther stuck not to call
them in his day, That they are the stews of Antichrist; for out of them comes
this ignorant, profane, scandalous Ministry, wherein they learn to talk of
things they understand not, and to prate in man's wisdom, which is carnal,
earthly, and devilish: And the Philosophy, so called, which is taught them, is
but mere deceit and pedantry, which even I came to see, when among them; and
many of themselves see it, and confess it to be but vanity; and none can teach
either the knowledge of God, or of the creation, but such who come to be endued
with a measure of the wisdom of God, which made the creation in number, weight,
and measure, according to it is pure holy Law, and neither God nor the work of
his hands can be truly known, but in the light, which makes all manifest, which
the Doctors and disputers of this world, are strangers unto, and it is
follishness to them; and many among themselves have attempted the reformation
of their so called Philosophy, and squeezed their brains to find out a new one,
but all in vain, it shall never be found out, till they come to the Cross of
Christ, and under his cross, denying their own wisdom) become the disciples of
Christ, and learn of him ( in whom are hid all the treasures of wisdom and
knowledge) the true Science of the creation (as well as the of the Creator) for
the world was made by him, and he can best teach it, and in him manifest in
man, the invisible things of God, from the creation of the world, are clearly
seen, being understood by the things that are made, which carry upon them
indeed the characters of infinite wisdom, goodness, and power, but are a sealed
book, no less then the Scriptures, to such who are not come to the teachings of
him, who made them, and can only give an eye to read them with a true
understanding, and to advantage. And this I testify, who have had a trial and
experience, both of the one and the other, the wisdom of man (wherein I
labored much and long, and profited above many of my neighbors) and the wisdom
of God in which now I see, and for which I truly account that other loss and
dung, even for the excellency of the knowledge of Christ, the Wisdom which was
with the Father before the World began, and I certainly know the humane Wisdom
or learning is one of the main Bulwarks of Antichrist against the Revelation,
and setting up the Kingdom of Christ in the Earth, and because this is arising,
and shall rise, down must the other go, and all who seek to uphold it shall
fall therewith. And away with the many Doctrins and opinions ye have drunken
from your teachers, who have abused the Scriptures, and you both, giving you to
believe they were grounded on Scripture, and are nothing but their own
imaginations, which the erring mind through Satan's suggestions, has begot
both in them and you, and rid your selves of all whatsoever, ye have taken
upon trust, and what ye have not seen and learned, in the openings and
manifestation of the Word and Spirit of truth in each particular, and make the
revelation of the Spirit of truth in all things the rule and analogy of your
faith, believing nothing less or more, then what is revealed to you therefrom;
and where that opens not, keep wholly back from passing any determination for or
against: And away with that manner of interpreting Scripture and searching
truth by drawing and knitting consequences, by the fallible erring mind, and
natural understanding, keep close in all things to the judgment, and
determination of the Spirit of God, and where that leads you (as it did lead
Christ to infer upon the Saduces the Resurrection from the dead, from that
Scripture, I am the God of Abraham, and God is not the God of the dead but of
the Living,) to draw a consequence or frame an argument, do it, else forbear:
And away with determining of things (as ye have hitherto done) by Plurality of
Votes, it is not the way of God, and will never further the Lords work or truth,
their votes or consents not being in the unity of the Spirit of truth: And away
with thinking general Assemblies, Counsils or Parliaments, in the state they
stand in, will do you any good, in order to a perfect, and through Reformation,
they will certainly mar it, but never help it forward, being out of Gods
wisdom, and its foolishness unto them. And your looking too much to these
things in former times has been a great snare unto you.

And thus now I have showed you good advice and council concerning your
becoming a perfect, and thoroughly reformed people, and the witness of God in
all your Consciences (as ye heed it) will not fail to answer me to the truth,
and expedience of these things I have laid before you: And principally every
one mind the through reformation and change of your own hearts and life's, by
turning in your minds, to the Light of Christ in all your consciences, which
must do the work, else it never will be done; and as the reformati^ of
particulars grows, so will the same do in the general. And now what I have
declared unto you (and the manifestation of the Spirit of truth will show you
much more, even the perfect pattern of the house of God in the Mount) concerning
these things which are necessary and expedient, in order to a thorough, cleanly
and perfect reformation, we the people of the Lord called Quakers, have fallen
upon them, being taught and directed thereto, by the wisdom of God, (which
builds the house, else the building is in vain) and we have found and do find
the blessed usefulness of them, as ye shall also find, if ye be followers of
us, as we are of Christ: And now ye who say, or shall say, Tush, all this is
but vanity, and folly, we will not daine to take council from you, we are wiser
then your selves, we will not learn at you, and ye but boast of things ye
know not, and we expect a glorious comfortable breaking up of the day of God,
in order to a more perfect and thorough reformation, then as yet has been
among us, but it shall never come to us through your airth, we can never expect
good of you, for ye are but a pack of poor silly deluded brainsick fools,
therefore get ye from us, we will none of your council, the day shall never
dawn upon us, if it rise not in another airth then ye tell us of. To such I
say, Oh ye foolish, and unwise, how like are ye to the former generations,
(who ever were enemies to the wisdom of God, through their carnal, earthly, and
devilish wisdom) and to the Jews of old, who despised the son of God, and
crucified him the Lord of Glory, whom at that very time they were expecting to
come, the promised Messiah, and when he came, they mistook him, and received
him not, because of his weak, lowly, contemptible appearance to the carnal eye,
but such who had the eye of Faith, saw the glory of the only begotten of God
upon him, thorough the veil which covered him from the sight of others, and he
disappointed them in all their carnal expectations, and they are yet looking
for him, and have looked these sixteen hundred years, but have never seen him,
nor shall see him in the way they look for him; as neither shall ye, and your
judgment shall be one with theirs; you being shut forth into utter darkness,
and plagued with hardness of heart, if ye do not speedily repent. And now
whether ye will hear or forbear, this I do declare unto you, in the name and
power, and authority of the living God, the day of the Lord is of a truth
broken up among us, and ye shall look till your eyes fail you, and rote within
your eye-holes, e're ever ye see another day or appearance of Jesus Christ to
your comfort, then what we the people of the Lord called Quakers, do witness
come, and yet more abundantly coming, and if ye will not hear, my soul shall
mourn for you in secret places, and weep before the Lord on your behalf. And
ye who in the perverseness, and obstinacy of your hearts gain-stand, and
oppose with all your might and power, the appearance of Jesus Christ in this
day, and yet are calling for the day of the Lord; To what purpose do ye call
for it? (that I may use the Prophets words in the like case) Woe unto you that
desire the day of the Lord, to what end is it for you? the day of the Lord is
darkness, and not light, as if a man did flee from a Lion, and a Bear met him,
or went unto the house and leaned his hand on the wall, and a Serpent bit him;
shall not the day of Lord be darkness, and not light? even very dark and no
brightness in it.

Writ about the beginning of the 11 Month in the year 1664.
THE END.
ERRATA.
IN Page 5. line 38. for and read an. p. 16. l. 39. f. live r. alive. p. 17. l.
39. f. these r. those. p. 20. l. 30. r. in the world. p. 22. l. 37. f. this r.
his. p. 30. l. 4. f. La^ely r. Layety. p. 44. l. 35. f. ease r. case. p. 60. l.
8. r. did arise. p. 63. l. 38. f. one r. an. p. 64. l. 21. f. an r. one. p. 66.
l. 4. f. hear r. heart. p. 68. l. 29. f. their r. her.


