A Serious DIALOGUE BETWIXT A Churchman AND A QUAKER.

LONDON, Printed for Brab. Aylmer at the Three Pigeons against the Royal
Exchange in Cornhil. 1699.

Some Books lately Writ by G. Keith, and Sold by Brab. Aylmer at the Three
Pigeons in Cornhil.
AN Exact Narrative of the Proceedings at Turners-Hall, the 11th of the Month
called June, 1696. Together with the Disputes and Speeches there, between G.
Keith, and other Quakers, differing from him in some Religious Principles, in
Quarto. Price 12 d.

A second Narrative of the Proceedings at Turners-Hall, the 29th of the Month
called April, 1697. Quarto. Price 6 d.

A third Narrative of the Proceedings, etc. Quarto. Price 12 d.

His Explications and Retractations of diverse Passages in his former Books,
etc. Quarto. Price 1 s 6 d.

His Sermon Preached on the Public Day of Thanksgiving, April 16th, 1696.
Price 6 d.

A Christian Catechism for the Instruction of Youth, and others, to whom it may
be useful in the Grounds of the Christian Religion, etc. 80. Price 12 d. bound.

A short Christian Catechism for the Instruction of Children, etc. Price 3 d.
Stitched.

The Arguments of the Quakers against Baptism and the Supper, Examined and
Refuted, etc. in Quarto. Price is. 6 d.

A Serious DIALOGUE Betwixt a Churchman and a Quaker.
Churchman. WELL met. It is a most scandalous Reflection ye cast on our
Church, (as I find in a late Dialogue writ by one of your Friends, called, A
Sober Dialogue betwixt a Scoteh Presbyterian, a London Churchman, and a real
Quaker) for you to say, ye are of the same Faith with us: And ye grossly pervert
a Passage in our Common Prayer, to Prove our Agreement with you; as because we
pray, that God would inspire us with his Holy Spirit, etc. that therefore the
Inspirations we pray for, are your Light within, that is common to you and all
Mankind; and which ye say, is sufficient to your and all Men's Salvation,
without any thing else; than which nothing can be more contrary to the Doctrine
of our Church, as appears by the Thirty Nine Articles of our Church, her
Homilies, and whole Liturgy: All which hold forth Jesus Christ of Nazareth as
he is in Heaven, in our Nature, to the great object of Faith, for Remission of
Sin, and Eternal Salvation; and also to be the great Object of Adoration,
together with the Father, and the Holy Ghost.


Quaker. I confess there is a great Confusion among us, about our Faith;
especially ever since Fr. Bugg, T. C. and G. Keith, has Printed so many large
and full Quotations out of our Friends Books, both ancient and late, to show
our disagreement with the Doctrine, not only of your Church, but with the
Doctrine of all Christian Societies in the whole World, and (if they are to be
believed) with the Doctrine of the Holy Scriptures; and none of all our
Opposers has done us a greater diskindness, to expose us to the World, than he
whom W. P. calls the Rattle-Snake Man, in his Snake in the Grass, that has been
so generally well liked, that it has had three Impressions, and in his Satan
disrobed, that has had two.


Churchman. Why should these Books make such Confusion among you? You had wont
to glory of your Unity; but where Confusion is, Unity surely is not.


Quaker. Before these mischievous Books came forth, we all generally agreed (as
we thought) that the Fundamental Principle of Truth was but one; and that one
was the Light in every Man's Conscience, that taught us and all Men, that there
was a great God Almighty that created all things, and that our whole Duty lay
within the compass of a few things, viz. to love God, trust in him, pray to
him, and give him Thanks for our Creation and Preservation, and daily Mercies,
and to live soberly and justly in this World, doing as we would be done by; and
if we practiced these few things, that should serve us for Religion, and by our
Obedience to the Light in our Consciences, which taught us these few things we
did believe, we should be happy after Death, and our Souls should enjoy God
Eternally, though the Body that lies down in the Grave, being Elementary and
Earthly, finally perishes, as all other Elementary and Earthly Bodies do. But
since the publishing of those mischievous Books, many of our Friends, both in
City and Country, begin to think that Christ, as he is both God and Man without
them, is a necessary Object of their Faith for Remission of Sin, as he dyed,
and as his Blood was shed, and as he rose again, and ascended into Heaven in
our Nature, (as they say) and as he is now in Heaven, Making Intercession for
Men. And G. K. first in Pensilvania, and since here, having with his Meetings
at Turners-Hall, and his three Narratives, made such a heavy Charge against us,
particularly against G. W. and W. P. [wherein he has had Associates, Fr. Bugg,
Th. Crisp, and the Author of the Snake] that we have no other Religion but
Deism. This has occasioned G. W. and W. P. to give forth several new Creeds,
wherein they have changed both the matter and manner of their Doctrine, from
what it formerly was, making the World believe they hold all the Articles of
the Apostles Creed, as other Christians do, and that they differ not (in the
main) from the Church of England in Doctrine; yea scarcely at all, setting
aside some School-Terms in matter of Doctrine.


Churchman. What is your sense upon the whole matter, and particularly as to
these new Creeds?


Quaker. First, to the whole matter. If Christ as without us, and as (as some
call him) God-Man, beheld forth to be the necessary Object of Faith, for
Eternal Salvation, it quite overturns our whole Fabric; as W. P. (I think very
properly) charged G. K. at Ratcliffe Meeting, that he did endeavor to pluck up
the Testimony of Truth by the Roots, by preaching the necessity of Faith in
Christ, as without us. This sort of Doctrine does certainly undo all that we
have been building, as in respect of our Christianity, which we thought was all
one with Morality; but now G. K. and his Associates, tell us, That Morality at
best is but a part of Christianity; and if it is not built on the Faith of
Christ God-Man without us, it is not so much as a part of it, but pure
Heathenism and Deism. But I cannot be of that mind, That Christ, considered as
God-Man without us, in the necessary Object of our Faith for Salvation: For if
this be granted, many great and sad Consequences will necessary follow that
Concession, that will bring great Trouble upon us. And as to these new Creeds,
the Authors of them had done better to have let them alone, and not published
them; for our Friends have often declared against making Creeds and Confessions
of Faith, as hurtful; and I believe they will cause great breaches amongst us.


Churchman. Why so?


Quaker. Because it is apparent, that our chief Leaders, that give out these
new Creeds, not only contradict their elder Brethren, but also their own Books.
And the sense of many of our Friends is, concerning G. W. and W. P. that they
are not a-whit changed in their Faith, but that they give forth those new
Creeds to quiet the Nation, and be a blind to them, to make all thing the
Quakers Toleration is secured to them, as much as of any Dissenters; for by
these Creeds, all will be apt to thing, we are one in Faith and Doctrine, with
all the Dissenters who are included in the Act of Toleration; and that we own
all the Articles of the Church of England, excepting some few, that are
excepted in the Act it self in favor of such Dissenters as are of the same
Faith with your Church in all the other Articles.


Churchman. It seems your chief Leaders have some of the Policy of the
Jesuits, and other Popish Orders, that to lie and dissemble is no Sin,
providing the Peace of the Church can be preserved thereby.


Quaker. I cannotdeny, but that some of our chief Leaders, and particularly W.
P. and G. W. seem to agree with them in such Politics, as in too many other
things; which is a great grief to many sincere and simple-hearted persons among
us.


Churchman. But do ye not in good earnest believe the twelve Articles of the
Apostles Creed?


Quaker. As for my self, I cannot say that I believe them all, for there are
diverse of them I do not believe, and so I am persuaded many hundreds of our
Friends do not believe them no more than I do; for the very Books of our
Friends, of best account with us, has taught us to believe the contrary; and
none have more plainly led us into a contrary Belief, than the Books of G. W.
and W. P.


Churchman. Pray what Articles, or parts of that Creed, do ye and many of your
Friends not believe; and what Passages in your Friends Books have led you not
to believe them?


Quaker. Your Creed, that ye commonly call the Apostles Creed, has three
distinct Articles in it; one concerning your Belief in God the Father; a second
concerning your Belief in Christ, the only begotten Son, conceived by the Holy
Ghost, and born of the Virgin Mary, that suffered under Pontius Pilate, was
crucified, dead and buried; and a third concerning your Belief in the Holy
Ghost; By which it is plain to me, and I think ye will not deny it, that your
Creed holds forth a distinction of Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, as three
distinct Persons, distinguished by certain incommunicable Properties, as ye
commonly call them; otherwise, why make ye three Articles concerning them, but
that ye believe them to be three distinct Persons? But both G. W's Books, and
W. P's, have taught us a plaint contrary Belief; and what they have taught us,
we believed that they had given them by Divine Inspiration; for G. W. in his
Divinity of Christ, denies any distinction of Persons; and in his Truth
defending the Quakers, denies that they are distinguished by incommunicable
Properties; and W. P. in his Sandy Foundation, has not only argued against
three Persons, but against three, in any sense or respect, otherwise than
nominally, as he somewhere words it; as to say, three Manifestations, or three
differing Names. But at this rate ye may infer thirty as well as three; for it
is certain, there are thirty various Names given to God in Scripture, and many
more; and there are as many various Manifestations and Operations. Again,
whereas your Creed teaches you to believe, that he who suffered under Pontius
Pilate was the Son of God, W. P. in his Serious Apology, has taught us a
contrary Belief, That that outward Person that suffered at Jerusalem (so he
calls him that was born of Mary,) was not properly the Son of God; and says
plainly, we utterly deny it. And G. W. in his Christian Quaker, denies that
Christ did consist of Flesh and Bones; he grants he had a Body of Flesh and
Bones, but denies that he did consist of it, that is, as any part of him, as
you and I have our Bodies of Flesh and Bones to be parts of us; and we consist
of them, as well as we have our more noble parts, to wit, our Souls, of which
we also consist.


Churchman. But if ye believe that he who outwardly suffered Death at
Jerusalem, was properly the Son of God, ye must also not believe, that he who
was born of Mary was properly the Son of God.


Quaker. No more we do; for the Son and the Father are but two Names, and but
one God; and if we should believe that he that was born of Mary was the Son of
God, we should believe that he was God, and so Mary should be the Mother of
God; which, as G. W. has taught us to believe, is plain Popery.


Churchman. If that Child that was born of Mary was not properly the Son of
God, pray whose Son was he; for every Son must have some Father?


Quaker. He was the Son of Mary.


Churchman. Mary was not his Father, but his Mother; who was his Father?


Quaker. Abraham and David.


Churchman. Abraham and David were his remote Fathers, as your Grandfathers
and great Grandfathers were your remote Fathers; but who was the immediate
Father of Christ, if not God? And if God was his immediate Father, then surely
he was properly the Son of God, and God was properly his Father.


Quaker. I am not for answering thy ensnaring Questions, nor for disputing with
thee.


Churchman. Pray what other Articles in our Creed do ye not believe?


Quaker. That Article in your Creed, that Christ descended into Hell; and that
other Article, that he arose the third day, and afterward ascended into
Heaven; if by Hell and Heaven ye mean local places without us.


Churchman. We do indeed by Hell and Heaven, mean local places, without us.


Quaker. But W. P. has taught us to believe, that a local Heaven or Hell is
Mohammedan; and G. W. has taught us, that to say, Christ existeth Bodily
without us at God's right hand, in a personal existence, is Anthropomorphitism
and Muggletonism.


Churchman. Do ye believe that Christ was buried?


Quaker. That outward Person that was crucified on the wooden Cross, and was
buried, was not the Christ of God; but the Christ of God was in that outward
Person that was crucified and buried. I pity thy Ignorance, to think that any
thing that was mortal, or could dye, could be Christ; or that Christ could be
buried. Our worthy Friend John Whitehead has taught us, that nothing that is
mortal can be called Christ; and G. W. has told us, that Christ was never seen
with carnal Eyes; and our Friend W. P. has proved it against J. Faldo, that it
was not Christ that did hang on the Cross, but the Body in which Christ was.


Churchman. But what say ye to the places of Scripture, that expressly say,
that Christ dyed and was buried? as 1 Cor. 15. 3, 4.


Quaker. Our inspired Teachers have taught us, that the Scriptures are not
always to be understood literally.


Churchman. At this rate, I fear, ye believe scarcely one Article of our
Creed. Do ye believe that the same Body of Jesus that was buried, rose again,
and ascended into Heaven?


Quaker. We believe that Jesus rose again, but not that he rose in the same
Body, or that he ascended in the same Body; for he rose in a Spiritual Body,
that came in, the doors being shut, as the Disciples were met together: But the
Body that did hang on the Cross, and was buried, was a Carnal or Natural Body,
and Christ's Body is Heavenly and Spiritual, and is in us; for we eat it, as W.
P. has argued, and nobly defended our ancient Friend G. P. but that was not
the Carnal Body that was crucified and buried; and G. W. in his Light and Life,
has taught us, that an Earthly Body and a Heavenly Body cannot be the same
Substance; and W. P. has taught us, in his Answer to J. Faldo, that to say, a
Natural Body can be changed to a Spiritual Body, and yet be the same in
Substance, is to outdo the absurd Doctrine of Transubstantiation.


Churchman. Do ye believe that other Article of our Creed, that Christ will
come, in a Bodily Existence without us, as the Son of Mary, to judge the quick
and the dead?


Quaker. We cannot believe any such Carnal Notion, for that supposes that
Christ is in Heaven, as in a local place, without us, and has our true Nature
in Heaven; but Ed. Burr. our great Prophet, has taught us, that it is
Blasphemy to say that Christ is in Heaven, in our Nature; also it contradicts
G. W.


Churchman. Do ye believe that Article of our Creed, the forgiveness of Sins?


Quaker. We do not believe it as ye state it, and according to your Notion of
it.


Churchman. Why? What is our Notion of it, that ye do not believe it?


Quaker. Ye tell us, God forgives you your Sins, upon the account of Christ's
having paid the Debt of your Sins, and having satisfied the Justice of God for
them; but we have no such Belief; for W. Pen has taught us, that a Debt cannot
be both paid and freely forgiven; and this he says, does totally exclude
Satisfaction. And you tell us, that we must not only repent, but believe in the
Man Christ without us; and that such a Faith is absolutely necessary to our
forgiveness: This we altogether deny; for this would contradict our ancient
Faith, That the Light within us in sufficient to Salvation, without any thing
else. Ye are so ignorant, as not to distinguish betwixt a Historical Faith, and
a Saving Faith: The Historical Faith is your Faith, in a Christ without you,
that dyed at Jerusalem above Sixteen Hundred Years past; but the Saving Faith
is in the Power of God within us, the Light and Life, and that is the true and
proper Christ. Besides, your Doctrine of Remission of Sins, teaches you to
pray for a daily forgiveness, because ye sin daily; so that in your
Common Prayer, from Seven to Seventy, ye are still praying, God be merciful to
us miserable Sinners, as W. P. has well observed. We neither need nor expect
such a forgiveness; and therefore we are not taught so to pray, nor do we use
such Prayers for our selves; as Strangers that frequent our Public Meetings
can sufficiently inform thee.


Churchman. Do ye own the Resurrection of the Body that dies, and that the
deceased Saints look for the Resurrection of their Bodies?


Quaker. Nay; for if the deceased Saints look for any such Resurrection, as W.
P. has taught us, it would follow they were in some Purgatory for the time;
and he has also taught us, that a Natural Body, and a Spiritual Body, are two
Bodies.


Churchman. I am greatly amazed; I did not think that ye did so universally
disbelieve our Creed, as I find ye do; for I cannot understand that ye believe
any one Article of it, as stated by us, and all Orthodox Christians throughout
the whole World.


Quaker. What talks thou to me of your Orthodox Christians; we deny you to be
Christians, but in Name: But suppose we believed all your twelve Articles, as
stated by you, what would that Faith profit us? How many of them think ye
necessary to our Salvation, to be believed by us?


Churchman. I think all of them very necessary.


Quaker. And I think scarce any of them, as stated by you, to be necessary.


Churchman. Pray why?


Quaker. Nothing is necessary to be believed by us to our Salvation, but what
the Light within us, which is the same in every Man, teaches us to believe;
but there is scarce one of your twelve Articles that our Light within us
teaches us to believe; for if it did, it would teach our Jewish and Mohammedan
Brethren, and many other pious Gentiles, and excellent Moral Livers, these
Articles of your Creed; but this it does Not.


Churchman. Do ye then take all Just and Moral Men, Jews and Mahometans, that
profess the same Light within, and obey its dictates, to be your Christian
Brethren?


Quaker. Yea we do; for W. P. has taught us in his Address to Protestants,
that it is uncharitable to exclude any mere just Man from our Society; and
there are many just Men among them.


Churchman. But why think ye, that to take Christ God-Man, without you, to be
the Object of your Faith, together with the Light within you, will bring any
great inconveniences, and sad inferences and consequences upon you?


Quaker. Yea, Time would fail to number them all; I will mention some of them
to thee. First, as I told thee before, it quite overturns our whole Fabric,
that we have been building almost these Fifty Years past, and plucks up by the
Roots the Testimony of ancient Friends; yea, and our present Testimony among
our selves: For Christ God-Man, as they phrase it, without us in Heaven, in a
Bodily Existence, is the World's Christ, which our Friends neither think
necessary, nor profitable to preach; for we find, that the preaching of it has
not profited the Hearers; and as our great Prophet Ed. Burr. has taught us,
the Light of Christ within, is only that which is necessary to be taught for
Salvation. Secondly, That Doctrine of a Christ God-Man without us, being the
necessary Object of our Faith, will necessarily infer, that we must set up
another Rule of Faith, than the Light within us, to wit, the Scriptures: For
whatever is a Ru^e of Faith, must propose to our Minds all the things necessary
to be believed, and the full and complete Object of Faith; but this the Light
within us does not. If Christ God-Man be the necessary Object of our Faith, as
he was conceived by the Holy Ghost, born of a Virgin, dyed, rose again the
third day, and ascended into Heaven, none of all which does our Light within us
teach us to believe; but the Scripture without us, by way of History, teaches
some such things; and this is but a Historical Belief, which some of our
Friends have, [may be as amply as ye,] but many more have it not. This
Historical Belief we little regard; for as he that has it, is not profited by
it to his Salvation, so he that has it not is not hurt, nor in danger for want
of it.


Churchman. But I have heard some of you call it beneficial, though not
absolutely necessary.


Quaker. Some of us may call it so, and perhaps think it so; but I, and many
other faithful Friends do not think it so; for it is but the Letter that kills
the Flesh profits nothing, it is only the Spirit that quickens; Paul renounced
his knowledge of Christ after the Flesh. Pray, what profit can be in that Faith
to us, that plucks up our ancient Testimony by The Roots, as W. P. has well
observed.


Churchman. I have heard some of you call the Scriptures a secondary Rule of
Faith; and I think I have Read it in some of your Friends Books.


Quaker. Perhaps thou have; but all that was daubing with untempered mortar:
Thou shall find no such distinction, I warrant thee, in any of our most ancient
and most approved Friends Books. If the Scripture be allowed to be a secondary
Rule, it teaches nothing but what the primary Rule, the Light within us, and
in every Man, first teaches; but the Light within us, and in every Man,
teaches us, not that Historical Faith and Doctrine thou contendest for; as
that Christ is God and Man in one Person, having two Natures, and that as such
he is the Object of Faith and Worship.


Churchman. Possibly some of your Friends that hold the Scripture to be a
secondary Rule will say, the Light in all Men would reveal Christ God-Man,
without them, to be the Object of their Faith and Worship, if all Men were duly
faithful and obedient to it.


Quaker. If they say or think so, they are greatly mistaken. How many hundreds
of faithful Men have we of our Brethren, both Jews and Mahometans, and how many
Deists have we here in England, who are excellent Men for Sobriety and Justice,
and are obedient to the Light within them, and take it for their Rule of Faith
and Life; and yet if ye ask them if their Light within them does teach them any
thing of a Christ without them, they will plainly tell you, nay.


Churchman. But I find not that your Christian Brethren, the Jews and
Mahometans, and your Deist Brethren here in England, own or confess a Christ in
them: They seem as ignorant of any knowledge, or Faith of a Christ within them,
as of a Christ without them.


Quaker. Names of things are no wise material. What if they call not Christ in
them by the outward Names, Christ and Jesus? It is enough to their Christianity
and Salvation, that they inwardly feel the Power, Life and Virtue, of the thing
it self. they call it the Light within, and magnify it with other high Titles,
and that is sufficient.


Churchman. Pray what other hurtful Consequences would your owning the
necessity of Christ God-Man without you, as the great, yea and only Object of
your Faith, considered as your High Priest, and only Atonement for the
Remission of Sins, bring upon you?


Quaker. A third hurtful Consequence if this, It would exceedingly lessen the
number of our Christian Brethren, and abridge our Charity, which is now very
diffusive and large, as the Sand of the Sea. Ye talk of your Catholic Church;
but our Church is more Catholic and Universal than yours. The Members of your
Church are only such, as believe in Jesus of Nazareth, and hold all, or the
greatest part, of that ye call the Apostles Creed, whereof we have already
discoursed at large; but the Members of our Church, who are one Body with us,
are all just and sober Men, of Jews and Mahometans, and remotest Nations, that
own a great God Almighty, and obey the Dictates of the Light within them. A
fourth very hurtful Consequence is, That if the Doctrine of a Christ God-Man
without us, be received among us, as the necessary Object of our Faith for
Salvation, it will bring in so many other things with it, by necessary
Consequence, that we shall ere long be one with you, both in Doctrine and
Practice; and then we shall be utterly at a loss to justify our Separation
from you: yea, fifthly, we should be constrained to return to the outward
Baptism, and Supper, which we have all along called Beggarly Elements and
Worldly Rudiments, [as some that were among us lately have done]; and daily to
pray for the Pardon of our Sins. And lastly, this new Scheme of Doctrine, if
introduced among us, will not only deprive our Friends (of the Ministry) of
their Infallibility, for which they have so earnestly contended, but will break
our Meetings of all sorts, and wonderfully divide and scatter us, by the
confusion of the manner of Preaching that will be among us, and is begun to be
among us already in diverse parts, to the great Grief of many sincere Souls,
even as the People, by the Confusion of the Languages, at Babylon, were
scattered asunder.


Churchman. But Friend, it has of late been (diverse times) queried of your
Friends, whether Ja. Nayler was a Blasphemer, yea or nay, and I cannot get a
direct Answer. Pray what think you?


Quaker. Ohno, we cannot admit of a plain Answer; for if we say no, then the
Apostate Christians will be ready to stone us: If we say yea, then will they
prove it upon us, that Geo. Fox, Edw. Borough, Sol. Eccles, and others of our
ancient Friends were Balsphemers: And thou know that would go down ruggedly,
and would not suit our present Interest.


Churchman. Farewell; I think thee for thy free Discourse and Plainness, though
I greatly pity thy Ignorance.


Quaker. And I far rather pity thine. Farewell.


POSTSCRIPT.
WHat the Quakers formerly objected against either G. K. his giving them a
Public Challenge to a Dispute, or their accepting it, being against the Magna
Charta, and the Fundamental Laws of the Nation, is sufficiently made void, by
the late Practice of some of the Teachers of the Quakers, who gave a Challenge
to the Clergy in Norfolk, or any of their Cloth, to P^lick Debate. And suppose
(as they would have it ^^derstood, though very unjustly) the Quakers gave not
the Challenge, yet they cannot deny, with any shadow of Reason, but that they
accepted at least the Challenge, given (as they say) by the Clergy; and at the
Place and Time appointed came from diverse places; particularly some of their
Teachers came from London, to engage in that Debate. Will it not therefore be
great Cowardice, and conviction of Guilt, if G. W. and W. P. or any others
concerned, will neither give a Challenge to G. K. whom they charge to have
wronged them, nor accept of his Challenge? If they will not give me a
Challenge, they are once more desired to accept of mine; and let us agree,
about Time and Place: Or if they will not agree about them, with what color
can they blame me, if I shall once more appoint Time and Place to them, and
prove out of their, and their Friends Books owned by them, that their new
Creeds are utterly repugnant to the Doctrine formerly delivered in their
Printed Books; and that it is a manifest fallacy that their late Creed, given
forth at Bristol, obtrudes upon the Nation, viz. That the Quakers believe all
the Articles of the Apostles Creed? For I am ready to prove, face to face,
before any Judicatory, Ecclesiastical or Civil, (what is asserted in this
Dialogue) that they believe not truly and rightly one Article of it, according
to Scripture, and the true universal sense of sound Christians in all Ages.

G. K.

ADVERTISEMENT.
THE Principles here charged on the chief Leaders among the People called
Quakers, particularly G. W. and W. P. are clearly proved out of G. K's three
Narratives, and the late Printed Sheet, called, An Abstract by way of Index,
etc. and other late Treatises published against them; and can be further proved
by the open and plain Confessions given frequently by some of that People.


