A farther ACCOUNT OF THE Great Divisions AMONG THE QUAKERS In PENSILVANIA.
etc. As appears by Another of their Books lately come over from thence,
Entitled, Some Reasons and Causes of the late Separation That has come to
pass at Philadelphia, betwixt us, called by some the Separate Meeting; And
others that Meet apart from us. More particularly Opened, to Vindicate and
clear us and our Testimony in that respect, viz. That the Separation lies at
their Door, and They (and not We) are justly chargeable with it. WITH An
Apology for the present Publication of these Things.

Romans 16.17. Now I beseech you brethren, mark them which cause Divisions, and
Offenses contrary to the doctrine which ye have learned, and avoid them. 1 Timothy
6.3. If any man teach otherwise and consent not to wholesome words even the words
of our Lord Jesus Christ, and to the Doctrine which is according to Godliness,
etc. v. 5. from such turn away. 2 Cor. 6.14. Be ye not unequally yoked together
with unbelievers, etc. and v. 17. Wherefore come out from ^^^ng them, and be ye
separate, says the Lord, and touch not the unclean thing, and I will receive
you, etc. Rev. 2.20. Notwithstanding I have a few things against thee, because
thou suffer that woman Jezabel, which calls her self a Prophetess to
Teach, etc.

London, Printed for I. Dunton, at the Raven in the Poultrey, 1693.

An Apology for the present Publication of these Things.
WE are sorry that we should have occasion to publish such Account of things,
in the open View of all who may read the following Account, or hear of it, that
may be occasion of Grief to many, especially who had better Thoughts of some
here-away, than the said Account does give of them, and it is too probable, the
Enemies of Truth and of all true Religion, will seek to take Advantage
therefrom, and think themselves greatly gratified thereby, so as to rejoice
the more in their Iniquity, and glory over the sincere Lovers and Professors of
Truth. But as on the one hand, we have been deeply afflicted with Sorrow, to
find some so highly pretending to Truth, and to the inward and immediate
Teachings and Leadings of the Spirit of Truth, which they have greatly
professed, and some of them have Preached for some years, so very Ignorant and
unsound in some of the Chief and Fundamental Principles of the Christian Faith
and Doctrine, and so resolute and confident in their Ignorance and Error, that
they have from time to time refused and rejected good and seasonable
Information, and means of Instructions that have been in Love held forth unto
them, partly in public Testimonies, and partly in private Meetings and
Conferences. So after our great and deep Affliction of Sorrow on their account,
and for the sake of many simple people that owned them as Ministers of Christ,
whom we saw to be greatly hurt, blinded and darkened with them, but not further
enlightened by means of them, notwithstanding of their great and high pretenses
to Light and Life, and to the Spirit and Power of God inwardly revealed; we can
and do sincerely say, on the other hand, God has greatly comforted us, and we
have great Joy and Consolation in the sense of his Love, revealed and sealed to
us by his holy Spirit in our hearts, being persuaded by the same, that
according to his Sovereign Wisdom, Goodness and Power, and great Faithfulness,
he will make these very things, to wit, the Discoveries that some men have
lately given of themselves, to work for good to many; and we may sincerely and
uprightly say, They, and not We, have discovered and made public these things;
for when they heard true and sound Doctrine preached, cencerning Christ and the
true Faith in him, etc. they have whispered against it, and publicly rejected
it, which yet has been greatly refreshing and edifying to us, and to many
others, having felt the Power of Christ accompanying that Doctrine, and sealing
to the Truth of it in our hearts; so that not only we have owned, and do own
the Doctrine that has been preached among us of late Times, by diverse that God
has raised up in a zealous Testimony to the Truth of these Things ( Denied by
some, and Rejected by others, and meanly esteemed by too many, as not
Necessary, but Indifferent Matters to Salvation, to be believed, though true)
but also, we have owned, and do own the Spirit by which that Doctrine has been
zealously delivered unto us, being persuaded, it was of God; and we do not
judge so rashly and uncharitably as some do, calling that sincere and godly
Zeal, that has appeared in some among us in public Testimonies, Anger and
Passion: But it is no new thing to hear Light called Darkness, as well as
Darkness called Light, and Good, Evil and Evil, Good: We believe and are
persuaded, that as to the main, it has been, and is a sincere godly Zeal, that
has been of God's raising in some of our Brethren, both to preach in public
Testimonies this Doctrine, so much of late contradicted by some, and slighted
by others, and to defend it with great freedom and boldness in private
Conferences and Meetings, and at some Monthly Meetings, notwithstanding of what
humane Weaknesses (as to Circumstances) might at times, on great Provocations,
attend some, that we believe God has forgiven, which have been far greater on
their side, than on ours, wherein some of them have exceeded all bounds of
Christian Moderation, to the pronouncing Dreadful Woes against the Innocent
(which none of us have done) and giving bad Names to such who did not deserve
it; thus putting the Sheep of Christ into Wolves and Bear-skins, to render them
odious, and to be the Object of Tongue and Heart-Persecution, which too much
abounds in this part of the World, although by the Mercy of God, and the good
Laws of the Country, Persecution by Violence of the Hands, is restrained.

Now that these men have been the Discoverers of their own Ignorance, Error and
Unbelief, is very apparent, because they not only dared to whisper against
sound Doctrine in private, but only in Meetings appointed to hear these
Differences, and even at Monthly Meetings, they have been so bold as to resist
sound Doctrine, and show their Unbelief, and the Nature of our Meetings being
such, especially our Monthly Meetings, that too many come to them, and sit in
them, hearing all things there said, that are not qualified, either with
Christian Knowledge or Prudence, or indeed with humane Discretion, as men, to
conceal things that are not always seasonable to be published, insomuch that
scarce any thing has been said or done in a Monthly Meeting for a long time
past, but it is soon after publicly known: And we desire to reverence the
Providence of God, and to acknowledge his powerful Hand, Wisdom and Goodness,
and great Faithfulness in this Discovery; for we are well satisfied, it is far
better that the hidden things of Esau be searched and found out, than to remain
hid; for when Achan had Transgressed in the Camp of Israel, and had hid the
accursed thing, the Anger of the Lord was kindled against them, until he was
discovered, and Judgment executed against him. And seeing it is so, that many
evil and hurtful Opinions, that are as poisonous Weeds, have had too much place
among us, but have so secretly lurked under Ground, and yet have brought forth
bad Fruit above Ground; for it is the Nature of Errors in Doctrine to produce
Errors of Practice, and evil Conversation of Life, that we did not know that
such bad Fruits did spring from such bad Principles of Doctrine that were held
by them, but we did rather impute them to some other Cause, than to Ignorance
or Error in Judgment.

We have great cause to rejoice and bless God, that his Light has made this
Discovery among us; for the Light discovers Darkness, as well of Error and
Unbelief, in relation to Doctrine, as in matters of bad Conversation: And we
are fully persuaded, that it is an infallible sign of that approaching Glory of
God's blessed Day that is more abundantly to be revealed among us, and in us,
which many of our faithful Friends have foretold, as nigh at hand, and all the
Faithful have much longed and waited for, and continually pray for. And it will
have a service to bring many to Truth, that have stood at a distance, because
of Offenses and Stumbling Blocks that have been laid in their way, through the
Ignorance of many, especially who have professed the Truth with us, after some
sort, but have not received the true and sound Knowledge of it; and too many
that have presumed to preach and pray in our Meetings, their way both of
preaching and praying, has been very offensive to many tenderhearted people,
by their pretending greatly to the Spirit's Leadings and Movings, when they
have expressed very unsound and unsavory words, and have greatly discovered
their unskilfulness in the Mystery of Christ, both outwardly as he came in the
Flesh, died, and rose again and is ascended, and the great benefit of his
outward Coming to men, as so known and believed by them, and as inwardly
revealed; so that many who have come to our Meetings have been as a hungry
Child that greatly needed the Breast, and thirsted for the sincere Milk of the
Word, having heard a great Noise of it, but when they came to suck, they did
not find that which answered their desire, and went away dissatisfied, and the
Breast it self was so daubed over with what was unpleasant to them, as Mustard
or Chimney-Sout is to the Mouth or Taste of a Sucking Child. But God having so
ordered it by his great Love, that by his mavelous Providence discovering
these things, that has been a long and great hurt and hindrance to the
prevailing of Truth among us, and causing his Light to spring up more clearly
among us, that Christ and the Faith of him, both without us, and within us, is
sincerely and powerfully preached by some of God's raising up among us, more
clearly and fully than many have formerly known, although the Doctrine is the
same in matter and substance, that the most faithful and foundest Friends and
Brethren have all along held from the beginning; and we are infallibly assured,
this present Exercise that is at present so heavy and grievous to many honest
hearted, for want of a through discerning and understanding the Mind and
Counsel of God therein, and his blessed Purpose, for the advancement of his
Truth, shall greatly tend to their Comfort in due time, and to the Comfort of
many, to raise them up to give Glory to God, with high Praises in their Hearts
and Mouths, for what he has begun to do, and will finish and perfect in his
own time, for the Exaltation of his own Name, and the Name of his dear Son,
that the Mystery of him, even that great Mystery of Godliness, which is Christ
come in the Flesh, and God manifest in the Flesh, even in that Body of Flesh,
through Death, to reconcile us unto God, with the blessed Effects and Fruits of
it, inwardly witnessed by the Revelation of him in us, may be yet more
gloriously revealed, that the Souls and Hearts of many may be affected with the
same, and overcome therewith, to love him, and live to him, who died for them,
and rose again, and to love God, and live to God, through him, in all holy
Obedience, who gave him freely unto them. And though the Adversaries of Truth
may for a small time rejoice a little, and seem to be gratified and strengthened
in their Enmity against Truth, and the sincere Lovers and Professors of it, so
as even to seem to glory over them, yet after a little time their joy will be
turned into sorrow, and their great glorying and seeming gratifyings, into
Discontents and Frettings, when they shall be made to see and acknowledge the
Hand of the Lord in all these things (to their great Amazement and
Disappointment) for the good of all that love him; and the Exaltation of his
Name, and promoting Truth and Righteousness in the Earth, that his Kingdom may
come in greater Power and Glory, and his Will may be done on Earth, as it is in
Heaven. And as for all such who are by a false Spirit, acted to Prophecy false
things concerning us, (and to pronounce Woes against us) and our present Work
and Testimony, as if both it and we should fall and come to nothing, (as some
have done:) Our Faith and Trust is in God, and our Dependence and Reliance is
on him, whose we are, and whom we serve, and for whose Glory and Honor we are
zealously concerned in this present Service, with true Humility of Mind, and
earnest Prayer unto God, that he will preserve and strengthen us to the end,
and make our Almond Rods to bud and blossom, while others that resist the Truth
of our Testimony will wither; for of a Truth, God is with us, and on our side,
whose blessed Power and Presence we feel, to encourage and strengthen us; and
therefore let such who gainsay the Truth of our Testimony, and from a rash,
headstrong, and wilful Spirit, make opposition to the same; take heed what
they do, lest they be found Fighters against God, (for what is of God will
stand, let ever so many high and bold Pretenders to that which they are not
real Professors, contradict it,) and lest that be fulfilled concerning them,
that is written, Acts 13.41. Behold, ye Despisers, and wonder and perish, for I
work a Work in your Days, a Work which ye shall in no wise believe, though a
man declare it unto you, compared with Hab. 1.5.

And further, the false Reports and Rumors that are already spread abroad
concerning us, by many, laying all fault upon us of this present Breach and
Division, and loading, not only us, but the Truth it self, with many false and
bitter Aspertions, Reflections, and Calumnies, will be cause enough (we hope,
to all impartial people to whose hands this shall come,) to be a just Apology
to us, for the Vindication of Truth, and the sincere Doctrine of Christ, that
is greatly reviled in diverse great and weighty particulars, particularly the
Doctrine of Christ's being in Heaven in the true Nature of Man, and Substance
of the Seed of Abraham and David, which he took of the Virgin, according to
which he is called the Seed of the Woman that shoud bruise the Head of the
Serpent, and which was promised to Man immediately after the Fall, and the
Faith of him and in him, as such, its being necessary to our perfect
Justification and Salvation: His Coming again and Appearing without us to judge
the Quick and the Dead, in the appointed Time that approaches; and the
Resurrection of the Dead, and Day of Judgment, when all Mankind shall stand
before the Son of Man: It is dreadful and astonishing to think what Uomit and
Filth some of late have cast out against these precious Doctrines and
Testimonies of Truth, some calling them Popery, some Presbyterian and Baptist's
Principles; but we must not reject all that either Papists or Presbyterians, or
Baptists profess in words, and which our Charity obliges us to judge, that
some among them really and sincerely believe; as that there is one God, and one
Lord Jesus Christ, and one holy Spirit, and many other good and wholesome parts
of Christian Doctrine; but the greater is the Shame, and the Offense and
Stumbling Block is the greater, in the way of many, that diverse plain and first
Principles of Christ's Doctrine, owned by all Christendom, or at least for the
most part, should be either denied or questioned by any among us, that make so
high Pretenses to the Spirit of Christ, and yet are so ignorant of the Doctrine
of Christ, whereas the Spirit of Christ leads all who have it, to believe and
own Christ's Doctrine, and honorably and worthily to esteem of it, and the
true Witnesses of it, where ever it is preached.

And concerning Christ's Coming and Appearance without us, (even the Man Christ
Jesus, in his glorified Nature and Body, that is not the Godhead, but the
Temple of it, (in the Time appointed, that is nearer at hand than many are
aware of, which will be very dreadful to all the Workers of Iniquity, and
especially to all Unbelievers that do not believe that he will ever so appear,
although the Scripture Testimony is very full and plain thereto, and will be
very refreshing and full of Comfort to all that believe in him, and believe and
wait for him, that he will so appear, and that the time hasteneth; We Warn all,
not to make light of it, for it is a great and necessary Doctrine of the
Christian Faith, highly conducing to true Christian Piety and Godliness, that
he will come again and appear without us, to judge the Quick and the Dead, lest
they be found among such, and numbered with them, concerning whom he spoke, with
relation to that very time when he should so come to raise the Dead, and judge
the World, Luke 18.8. Nevertheless, when the Son of Man comes, shall be find
Faith on the Earth?

Some Reasons and Causes of the late Separation here at Philadelphia.
THE first cause of the Separation betwixt them and us, was this, That at a
Monthly Meeting held at Philadelphia the 29th of the 11th Month last, T --
having openly in the face of the Meeting, accused G. K. for denying the
Sufficiency of the Light and promising to bring his Evidence the next Monthly
Meeting, or then that he would acknowledge he had done amiss. And at the next
Monthly Meeting being required to give his Evidence, he brought W -- who was
known to be a prejudiced person against G. K. and so could be no sufficient
Evidence against him, besides that, diverse were present at the Place and Time,
where and when W -- alleged he heard G. K. deny the Sufficiency of the Light,
etc. that cleared him, That they heard him both then and at all occasions, that
he delivered his Mind on that Subject always bear Testimony to the Sufficiency
of the Light to Salvation. And at the said Meeting, being the 26th of the 12th
Month, T -- having said in the Meeting, (in Answer to a Question put to him by
G.K.) That he had not learned that Lesson, whether the Body of Christ that was
nailed to the Cross, crucified, buried, rose and ascended, etc. was the
Godhead, or somewhat that Christ took of the Virgin. At which man^ were greatly
oftended to find him so ignorant, having been so l^^g a Preacher. And after
much discourse about these Matte^s, the M^eting did adjourn with unanimous
Consent of them that staid, which was the far greatest part, and also with the
consent of T -- himself, and these who went away before the adjourning of it,
said nothing against it, nor was the Meeting understood to be broke up before
the adjournment, only some few did go away, it being cold Weather, and growing
dark; the adjourning of the said Monthly Meeting was to the next Day about the
8th Hour, at which time they met in the School-house, where the Meeting used to
be kept at times in the Winter Season. And after much discourse concerning T --
in the said Meeting, he being required to prove his Charge, and to condemn his
great Ignorance and Unbelief; but refusing to do either, (though he said
publicly in the Meeting,) If he did not prove his Charge against the next
Monthly Meeting, he would acknowledge his Error, and yet did neither,) and
going away from the Meeting, the Friends of the Meeting (some that were present
that were not in the Profession of Truth, removing at the desire of Friends)
did give a unanimous Judgment concerning T. -- a true Copy whereof here after
follows. And the said Judgment being desired by Friends that gave it to be
recorded in the Monthly Meeting Book, at the next Quarterly Meeting, that
happened within a few days after, a Party in the Meeting did withstand it, and
denied them that gave Judgment to be a true Monthly Meeting, and consequently
their Judgment was void. And by this it plainly appears, the Breach was on
their side; for there is no Equity or Reason why they having denied us to be a
Meeting* that we should own them, seeing we were really a Meeting, lawfully
adjourned, consisting of at least Sixty Persons, most of which used to keep
Monthly Meetings, and owned to be Friends in the same Profession with them.

And at the same Monthly Meeting, on the Sixth Day, W. -- an ancient Preacher,
having renewed his former Accusation against G. K. charging him openly in the
face of the Meeting, That he Preached Two Christ's, because he Preached Faith in
Christ within, and in Christ without us, etc. and on the next day, at the
Meeting adjourned, he being sent for by the Meeting, to make his Charge good,
or else condemn his Ignorance and Error; but he refusing to come, the Meeting
did also give a unanimous Judgment concerning him (not one Dissenting in either
of the Judgments, only one or two signifying their not thoroughly understanding
the Case, declared their unclearness, but said nothing against it) the true
Copy whereof does also hereafter follow. And this Judgment also given by the
Meeting, being refused by a Party in the Quarterly Meeting, to let it be entered
in the Monthly Meeting Book, gave us just Offense, because in so doing, they
refused us to be a Monthly Meeting, and denied our Judgments, which we are
persuaded in our Consciences, by the Spirit of Truth, was a just Judgment
concerning these Men, and we could do no less, both for the Peace of our
Consciences, and the honor of Christ Jesus, and also for the Credit of our
Profession, in all parts of the World, where such a Profession is made, than to
give such a Judgment concerning these Men. [ Note, That G. K. had no hand in
giving Judgment concerning th^se Persons and Matters, but was wholly passive,
he being the Person accused. And also, No^e, That they which refused our
Judgments, were present at the said Monthly Meeting, but when they perceived
things to go contrary to their Mind, they withdrew.]

Another thing, wherein the said Party, both in the Quarterly and Monthly
M^^^ing, gave us Offense, was, That whereas great Opposition had been made by
them against a late printed Book, entitled, The Christian Faith of the People
of God called Quakers in Rhode Island, vindicated, etc. several Friends
presented to this Meeting a Paper, desiring the Meeting to be cautious, not to
oppose the Rhode Island Friends Testimony to the Truth; whereupon, after having
read, and duly considered the said Rhode Island Sheet, Judgment was given by
us, approving it, and VV. B. for Printing it; but this also was refused by them
to be recorded in the Monthly Meeting Book, wherein they have given a
Threefold Instance that they have denied us to be a Meeting. A Practice that
we never knew before among the People, called Quakers, that ever such a thing
was suffered, that one party of a Monthly Meeting should deny their Brethren,
and leave them, and yet afterward lay claim to them, when they themselves made
the Separation.

Here follows a true Copy of the Judgments given at the Monthly Meeting at
Philadelphia, the 27th Day of the 12 Month, 1691, 2. which was the Meeting
adjourned by consent from the 26th, to the 27th day, where they met at the
School-House, as used in cold Seasons.
WHereas at the last Monthly Meeting, Thomas Fitswater, openly accused G. Keith
with denying the sufficiency of the Light, which G. K. denying, T. -- insisted
that he could prove the same. And coming into this Meeting, to prove his
Charge, brought VV.S. as his Witness, whom the Meeting having heard, the said
T. F. by his own consent, left the Matter to the Judgment of this Meeting;
which they having duly weighed and considered, they do unanimously agree, and
deliver it as their sense, That the said T. F. do give forth a Paper of
Condemnation of his falsely charging G. K. and to clear the said G. K. of the
said Charge. As also, it is the Sense of this Meeting, that the said T. F. do
give Satisfaction to the Friends of this Meeting, by a Paper of his true Faith
and Belief in Christ's Resurrection; and as he is now in Heaven, in the
Glorified Nature of Man, which is not the Godhead, he having given this Meeting
great cause to question his Belief therein; and that he forbear offering his
Gift by way of Testimony in our public Meetings, until he has given Friends
and G. K. Satisfaction in manner abovesaid.

Whereas VV. Stockdale, having formerly accused G. K. with Preaching Two
Christ's, and the Charge and Matter having been fully Debated at the last Yearly
Meeting, before public Friends, and others, who did deliver it as their Sense
and Judgment, That the said W. S. had abused G. K. thereby; and that G. K. 's
Doctrine was right and true in his Preaching Faith in Christ within, and Faith
in Christ without; and the said VV. S. having never given any Satisfaction, but
at this Monthly Meeting did say, That what he had formerly said in his Charge
against G. K. he did yet stand by, and justify: The Friends of this Meeting do
deliver it as their Sense and Judgment, That the said W. S. should condemn his
Unrighteous Charge publicly, by giving forth a Paper of Condemnation for his
so doing, and that he desist offering his Gift by way of Testimony, till he
has so done.

There being a Paper presented to this Meeting, Signed by several Friends, in
relation to the Rhode Island Paper, entitled, The Christian Faith, etc.
recommending the Service of the said Paper, etc. whereupon the said Paper being
read in this Meeting, the Friends thereof do unanimously agree, and give it as
their Sense and Judgment, That the said Paper is for the general Good and
Service of Truth and Friends, in this Country, and elsewhere; and that it came
forth very seasonably for the Vindication of Truth and Friends; and the W. B.
ought not to be blamed, nor discouraged for Printing the same.

Signed by Order of the Meeting, by J. W.

The Names of some of the Friends that gave the aforesaid Judgments at the said
Monthly Meeting the 27th of the 12 Mon. 1691.

George Hutcheson, Paul Saunders, John Lynam, Ralph Jackson, Phillip James,
Richard Hillyard, Anthony Sturges, Thomas Peart, Thomas Tress, John Lostus.
William Harwood, James Chick, Thomas Morris, John M Comb, John Hutchins, James
Cooper, Thomas Winn, John Heart, Anthony Tailor, Abel Noble, Nicholas Pearce,
John Furnis, John Redman, John Williams, Ralph Ward, William Dyllwin, John
Duploveys, John Budd, William Bradford, William Paschall, Joseph Willc^x,
Thomas Budd, Thomas Hooton, Thomas Paschall, Humphrey Hodges, Henry Furnis,
Robert Wallis, Thomas Jenner, William Davis, Francis Cook, Henry Johnson,
Joseph Walker, Hugh Derborough, William Say, William Hard,
But, that it may appear how weak and insufficient the Reasons are, that were
given by the said Party at the Quarterly Meeting, why we were no Meeting, we
think sit to give an Account of them, with our Answers to them. One Reason was,
That a Monthly Meeting could not Adjourn, and there was no President for it:
But to this the Clerk of the Meeting answered, That he had Minu^es to show, a
Monthly Meeting had formerly Adjourned; and why could not a Monthly Meeting,
upon a weighty occasion Adjourn, as well as any other Meeting? Another Reason
was, That the Clerk and the Monthly Meeting Book was gone: But to this it was
answered, The Monthly Meeting could make or conslitute a Clerk as other
Meetings have done; for it is the Meeting that makes the Clerk, and it is not
the Clerk that makes the Meeting. A third Reason was, There are few of the
Friends of the Ministry, or Elder Friends and Brethren that were present at the
Adourning, or at the Meeting Adjourned. To this it was answered, That there
were more, both Friends of the Ministry, and Elder Friends and Brethren at that
Meeting that did Adjourn, and met when Adjourned, than has been at many
Monthly Meetings here, that have been approved. And a 4th Reason was, That the
matter of Difference being a matter of Doctrine, and betwixt Friends of the
Ministry, a Monthly Meeting could not be proper Judges of it. To this it was
answered, That the Difference being a matter of Fact, (and not a matter of
Doctrine that could be called in Question by any Judicious Christian;) and the
Accusation being made to the Monthly Meeting they were proper Judges of it; and
if the Difference had been a matter of Doctrine, we did, and do assert, That
the Monthly Meeting, to wit, consisting of a considerable Number of Friends of
the Ministry; and other Judicious Friends were proper Jueges of it; but to
lodge the Judgment wholly in Friends of the Ministry, and to deny all other
Friends to have a share in the Judgment, even when the Difference is in a
Matter of Doctrine, we judge is an Encroachment upon our Christian Liberty, and
savours too much of the Church of Rome; as also that other case pressed too
indiscreetly at the Quarterly Meeting, when some that were known to be Parties
against G. K. did require of him his Submission to the Judgment of the Meeting;
he answered (as we judge soberly and Christianly) That he would submit to the
Judgment of the Spirit of Truth in Friends; but to give an absolute Submission*
he could not, to any Society of Men whatsoever: for absolute Submission
implies absolute Infallibility, that no Society of Men pretends unto but the
Church of Rome, and therefore, to introduce it among us, would be Rank Popery;
at which some prejudiced against G. K. were greatly dissatisfied, and one took
out his Pocket Book, and writ down some words of G. K. to that effect before he
had finished the full Sentence, which we judge was very unfair, as well as
unusual.

But whereas some from this would infer, as if G. K. denied any positive Power
of Judgment to a true Church, or Meeting of true Christians, met together in
the Name of Christ, where he is present in the midst of them. G. K. gave no
Ground for any such inference; for he does readily grant, That a true Christian
Assembly has a positive Power of Judgment, when met together in his Name, and
that he is present in the midst of them, and is felt and witnessed to guide
them in true Judgment. But we all know, that it is possible at times, that
Partiality, and Prejudice, and Annimosities may prevail in Meetings, that may
pretend to meet in the Name of Christ, and also to have him present in the
midst of them* and yet, where such things prevail, Christ is not in the midst
known to give true Judgment, or to guide Men to give it, as Friends Letter to
us from London expressly declares. And therefore we judge, That no absolute
Submission should be required of any Member, to the Judgment of that Society he
belongs unto in a matter of Truth, or Christian Doctrine, or wherein the
Conscience is concerned; for it is time enough to submit to the Judgment of
Brethren, when a Man has heard it, and has brought it to the Balance and Test
of that which gives true Judgment in every Particular that is in a quallified
Frame to understand it, even as Christ said, As I hear, I judge, John 5.30. And
if any be stiff and Refractory to the true Judgment of the Christian Society he
belongs unto, they may freely proceed to put into Practice, Gospel Discipline
against him, without requiring his Submission, as it is in Worldly Judicatories.

But if any say, At least it was yielded in the Quarterly Meeting, that the
Adjourned Meeting in the School-house was a true Meeting, but an Appeal was
made from that Monthly Meeting to the Quarterly Meeting, and the Quarterly
Meeting offering to give a new Judgment in the Case, and in order thereto,
ordered G. K. to withdraw; he refusing so to do, hindered that no Judgment
could be given. But to this it was, and is answered, That there could be no
Appeal from that Monthly Meeting, to the Quarterly Meeting, because most of the
Quarterly Meeting did consist of the Friends that gave the Judgment at the
Monthly Meeting; and such as were over, were but a few in comparison, except
some Country Friends that did not care to meddle in that matter, and so to
appeal from the Monthly Meeting to the Quarterly Meeting, was in effect but to
appeal from the Monthly Meeting to a small part or Number of Persons in the
Quarterly Meeting, the most of which, and the most leading Men, were known to
be prejudiced against G. K. and Parties against him; and G. K. did offer very
fairly in naming Seven or Eight Persons, that we know were his opposite Parties
(and had been mainly Instrumental at former Meetings about a Year ago, and at
the time of the Year^y Meeting, to hinder Justice to be done, and true Judgment
to be past concerning bringing W. S. to Conviction and Condemnation of his
Error) That if they would go out, he would go out also; but they who were his
manifest opposite Parties, and had manifestly appeared from time to time to
excuse and defend VV, S. and blame G. K. for his sound Christian Doctrine, that
he has Preached among us, refusing to go sorth; we are satisfied G. K. did
well not to go forth, so as to submit to the Judgment of these Men, who had
sufficiently shown their Partiality against him, and some of which had unjustly
accused him, as can be well proved. Besides, things being duly considered,
there was no reason that G. K. should have gone sorth, either at that Meeting,
or any other; for G. K. was no otherwise concerned in that Difference with W.
S. and T. F. than all faithful Friends, and the whole Meeting ought to have
been concerned, to wit, to defend one of the greatest Principles of the
Christian Faith, viz. That the Man Christ Jesus, who was Crucified, did rise
from the Dead* and is now in being, And that Faith in him is necessary to make
Men true Christians* And therefore not G. K. alone, nor principally, but Christ
himself, and all his faithful Followers are concerned in the same; and in none
of these Meetings was any Charge of any Trespass proved against G. K. nor so
much as brought under the Consideration of the Body of the Meeting, only one or
two particular Persons falsely accused him, but the thing was never brought to
any due Trial. And here let it be noted, That both the Meeting of Friends of
the Ministry at R. E.'s refusing to answer G. K's Complaint against the
dishonor done to Christ Jesus, that W. S. was guilty of, so as to bring him to
any Conviction or Condemnation of his Error, and also the Meetings at the House
of S. C. and A. M. at the time of the Yearly Metting, wholly neglecting to
bring the said W. S. to Conviction and Condemnation of his Error, although at the
last of six Meetings it was declared, That G. K.'s Doctrine concerning Christ
within, and Christ without to be One Lord Jesus Christ, was true, and that
therefore W. S. was blame worthy; and yet after all this W. S. persisted in his
false Charge against G. K. and has been greatly excused and supported by many,
that this has given such deep Ground of Offense, to all of us, with other
things concurring, that because to this day nothing has been done (it being
now above a Year since Complaint was made against W. S.) by these of the other
side, who meet in a Separation from us, either to bring W. S. or T. F. to
Condemnation, but suffer them to continue to Preach and Pray in their Meetings;
therefore we do justly judge, That the whole Meeting that meet in a Separation
from us, that owneth these Men, and tollerateth them in their great Error and
Trespasses, are guilty with them, and accountable for their Errors; and
therefore according to Christ's Command, recorded in the holy Scripture, we
ought to be separate from them, although (as has been sufficiently proved) they
began the Separation; and they having begun it, we cannot in Conscience unite
in Meetings with them here at Philadelphia, until they give satisfaction to
Truth in these weighty things.

The Second Cause of the Separation (which also we lay at their Door) is, That
whereas in the Monthly Meeting in the first Month last, a Proposition being
made to change the Meetings, both at the Center, and in the Town; and some
being for the said Change, and others against it, and having good Reasons why
they were against the said Change; yet a Party in the Meeting, contrary to our
declared Mind and Assent, assumed a Power over them that dissented, to change
the said Meetings; a thing we have not known formerly allowed by Friends any
where in their Monthly Meetings, that one Party (suppose equal, or greater in
Number than the rest) should assume a Power to appoint or change Places and
Times of Meetings, without the Consent of their Brethren; for things, of that
Nature especially, use always to be done with unanimous Consent, and not by
Plurality of Votes, which is not the way of Truth; and because we were not free
to stand to the Arbitrary, and rash Determination, as to that Change, therefore
we met at the ordinary Meeting Place as formerly practiced, and they began the
Separation, in keeping a public Meeting in the Afternoon at the Bank, contrary
to our declared Sense and Mind, only some of us met at a private Family Meeting
in the Evening, at the House of G. K. that could be counted no separate Meeting
for that day. And afterward, we finding they were resolved to continue in
their way of Separation, and that some had endeavored to lock us out from
Meeting at the Bank in the Forenoon, this put us upon seeking a new place to
meet in, in case we had been disappointed of the other; and though some of us did
declare our sincere Intention and Sense, that it were good but to have one
Public Meeting on first Days, to end about the second hour, and the remaining
part to be used for private Meetings in Families, yet their keeping up their
public Afternoons Meeting, has given us just occasion at present to have a
Public Afternoons Meeting, as well as they; for we hope they shall not have
any cause to say against us, that we are short of them in our Zeal for good
Meetings.

Things being thus far advanced, and the Separation being begun, and carried on
so far by them, and justly chargeable upon them, some of them having desired us
to make some Proposals, or Expedients for healing the Breach, and uniting again
as formerly; after some time we sent some Proposals to them, that we were
satisfied in our Consciences were most equal and just, and such as the Truth
required of us; but they are so far from being satisfied with most of them,
that they have the more blamed us: some insinuating, as if we had transgressed
the Law; but we are not afraid of any such thing, provided true Liberty of
Conscience, according to the just and due bounds of it, be allowed to us; and
for our part, we are so well satisfied, that all our Proposals to them (in that
Paper signed by Fifteen of us) are just and equal, that if they please, we
shall freely consent to their Printing of them, The sum of which Proposals does
principally consist in these two things; first, That all such of the Ministry
among them, whom we can prove Guilty of the Preaching false Doctrine, or of
falsely accusing the Innocent, or excusing and defending the Guilty, and
contending against some sound Principles of Truth, in Meetings appointed for
hearing these Differences, may be brought to Cnviction and Acknowledgment of
their Error and Trespasses: And 2dly, Seeing (by a marvelous Providence that
has discovered it) that our Monthly Meetings bere-away have consisted of a
mixed Number of some Believers, and some Unbelievers, or of some Men, unsound in
the Christian Faith, that we agree together to put Robert Barclay's Doctrine (
well approved of by the best of our Friends in England, and particularly by G.
F. and G. W.) into Practice in his Book, called, The Anarchy of the Ranters,
etc. see. 4. p. 32, 33. and 6. p. 48, 49* which is, To declare our Faith and
Persuasion in certain Fundamental Doctrines of the Christian Faith and
Religion, that by the same, as well as by a good Life and Conversation, it may
be known who are quallified to be Members of our Church; and that every one
owned to be a Member of our Church, declare his Faith and Persuasion in every
one of these Fundamentals, which is a secondary Bond of our Union, the Spirit
being the principal, which may be easily done by answering to some plain
Questions, with Yea or Nay.

And now a Third and main Reason that we give for this Separation, well
warranted both by Scripture Testimony, and command of Christ, Recorded in
Scripture, and the truth of it sealed to us, by the Spirit of Truth in our
Hearts, that whereas there are diverse of them guilty of most gross and
Unchristian Errors, against the Fundamental Doctrines of the Christian Faith,
who are Public Preachers among them, and whole Ministry they sit under, and
some encourage them, others tolerate and suffer them; and that others, even of
their Preachers are guilty of other gross Errors* and other Trespasses, that
render them altogether unqualified for the Ministry, and to uphold or tolerate
them, is to bring Reproach to Truth, and our Holy Prosession, and to the Body
of our faithful Friends, with all whom we remain in dear Unity, in all parts of
the World, hoping that Faithful Friends and Brethren, that have an impartial
account and information of us, and do rightly and duly consider and examine the
Righteousness of our Cause, will encourage us therein, to the Disappointment of
such who affirm the contrary; but we being principally supported and encouraged
by the Spirit of Truth in our Hearts, that as such Men immediately guilty of
these vile Errors, some of which, no Protestant Christian Society would
tolerate, neither Episcopal, Presbyterian nor Baptist, are to be turned away,
and separated from; so that Society is to be turned away from, whoever they be
that does uphold and tolerate them, and bring them not to due Conviction and
Condemnation, after due and sufficient notice is given unto them, as there has
been a long time, from one Meeting to another, as concerning some of them, now
many Months since past, and nothing done effectually to bring them to any
Conviction, but that it seems they are resolved still to support or tolerate
them. Now the Scriptures that warrant us in this Separation (although as is said
first made by them) are these following, 2 Cor. 6.14, 15, 16, 17. 1 Timothy 6, 3,
4, 5. 2 Timothy 6.2, 3, 4, 5. Tit. 3.10. Rev. 18.4. 2 Thessalonians. 3.6. Romans 16.17. Rev.
2, 14, 15, 20. and the same is expressly confirmed by the Doctrine delivered by
R. Barclay in his said Book, well approved by good Friends, who expressly says,
p. 52. We do safely conclude, that where a People are gathered into a Belief of
the Principles and Doctrines of the Gospel of Christ, if any of that People go
from their Principles, and assert things false and contrary to what they have
already received, such as stand, and abide firm in the Faith, have Power, by
the Spirit of God, after they have used Christian endeavors to convince and
reclaim them, upon their Obstinacy to Separate from such,. 6. p. 52. and. 4. p.
33. he says, The Escapes, Faults, and Errors of such who own, believe and
profess the same Doctrine and Principles of Faith with us, and go under the
same Distinction and Denomination, may by our Adversaries, justly be imputed
unto us, if not seasonably and Christianly reproved, reclaimed or condemned.
And therefore we judge, that we have equal Ground and Cause of Separation, as
well from that whole Society that does not condemn these Men for their gross
Errors in Fundamental Doctrines, as we have to separate from these particular
Men, seeing they who tolerate them, both by Scripture and R. B's Book, are
guilty with them, and the Errors of these Men may be justly imputed to them.
Note, That whereas it has been said by some, That they would have dealt with
these Men who have been guilty of those Errors, but that G. K. would not go
forth, being desired to withdraw at the Meeting at R. E 's, and at the
Quarterly Meeting: To this it is answered, That G. K. had good reason not to
withdraw at both these times, because at both these times, these who did take
upon them to be Judges, were his manifest Parties against him, and so could not
be in Justice his Judges; but at the Yearly Meeting he did withdraw at the
Meeting's Desire, and yet they did nothing to bring W. S. to Conviction;
besides, it was not G. K. but the Truth it self, that the Difference was
concerning; and they have had sufficient time since to have done it, but
nothing that we can hear of is done.

But it is very strange, what some have said, That no Error in Doctrine or
Trespass whatsoever of particular Persons, though tolerated by a Society, that
we were joined with in the Possession of Truth, can be any just cause of
Separation, does equally blame all our Friends in their Separation from the
respective Societies they were formerly joined in Profession with, as some in
their Separation from the Church of Rome, others from the Episcopal, others
from the Presbyterian and Baptists, and does equally blame the Separation of
the faithful Martyrs in Q. Mary's days, from the Popish Worship in England, yet
well approved generally by our Friends. And surely for People of contrary
Principles and Spirits, and having a contrary Faith and Persuasion in
Fundamental Doctrines, to be united together in one Worship, would make the
greatest Confusion imaginable, and be incomparably more like Babylon, than the
true Church of Christ; and so to affirm, is contrary to all common Sense of any
that has the least true Notion of a Church, that ought to be as a Field or
Garden, as clean of Weeds as possible; for though the Tares are to be suffered to
grow in the Field of the World, yet they are not to remain in the Church,
according to Christ's Doctrine. But at this rate, the Weeds shall remain with
the good Corn and Herbs in the same Garden, yea, and exceed them, that cannot
but greatly hurt the good Corn and Herbs. Besides, how can the Gardner delight
in such a Garden that is full of Weeds, and no care to separate the good Herbs
from the Weeds. And though it has been said by some, That as the Faithful stand
in the Power of God, they shall have Dominion over the Unfaithful: But we find
no warrant or promise, that God will give them Dominion, if they obey not his
Command, which is To Separate, and withdraw from such, and not to remain in
Fellowship with them; for what part has a Believer with an Infidel? 2 Cor.
6.15.17.

POSTSCRIPT.
WE have seriously considered, how that of late Years, especially, many are
crept into a bare outside Form of the Profession of the People of God, called
in Scorn, Quakers, and have assumed or suffered themselves to be called by that
Name, and have frequented not only their public Meetings, but also their Men
and Women's Meetings, and some have presumed to Preach and Pray therein, that to
our certain knowledge, by manifested Evidence of Words and Works, are not
worthy to be reputed Members of a Christian Society or Church of Christ,
because of their great Ignorance and Unbelief in the first Principles of the
Doctrine of Christ, whereof some here-away of late have given sufficient proof,
to the great Scandal of our holy Profession, by their plain and express words,
uttered before diverse credible Witnesset, and sometimes by their unsound
Doctrine published, and gross Perversions of Scripture, to the Observation of
many who are but of weak understanding, and some of them have been detected of
scandalous Conversation, and have not given any convincing Evidence of their
true Repentance, and that there has been too much forbearance used by some
toward such, for their hardening and emboldning themselves against the Truth,
and faithful Friends and Brethren, and that by the mavelous Providence of
God, that has suffered such things to come to light, some have discovered
their woeful Ignorance, Unbelief, and gross Errors by their late words, without
all shame or fear, and that some others have appeared too manifestly inclined
to cloak, excuse and support them, which gives us too great occasion to
suspect them guilty of the same, or the like things; and that things are come
to that pass of late, that contrary Testimonies are born in Meetings by -- one
against another, and yet both pretending to the Spirit of Truth, and great
Disputes and Contentions have been of late betwixt -- one against another,
before not only many, called Quakers, but some others that never were of that
Profession, and that concerning several Fundamental and Principal Doctrines of
Christian Faith, as first, Whether we are only to believe in Christ the Light
within us or whether we are to believe both in Christ within us as he is Light
and Life, and also in Christ without us, as he died for our sins, rose again,
and is Ascended* as he was that great Sacrifice of Atonement for our sins, and
is our high Priest and Mediator, and Advocate with the Father for us in Heaven:
2dly, Whether to preach Faith in Christ within and Faith in Christ without us,
be to Preach Two Christ's, or one only Christ Jesus, the Measure of Christ
within us, and the Fullness of Christ without us, in the Man Christ Jesus,
being One Lord Jesus Christ, as the Light of the Sun that is in the Body of the
Sun in fullness, and the measures of it that come into our Eyes; are but one
Light and one Sun, and as the Life that is in the Root and Branches of a Tree,
is but one Life, the fullness being in the Root, and the measures in the
Branches. 3dly, Whether it be a Doctrine necessary to be preached, and believed
to make a Christian, viz. (thoroughly and entirely in all necessary parts,) to
believe in Christ without us* as he is true and perfect God, and true and
perfect Man, etc. 4thly, Whether Christ has now any thing in Heaven that he
had not before the World was; or, Whether Christ's Body that was Crucified and
nailed to the Cross, and was buried, did rise again, and is Ascended into
Heaven, Some questioning, Whether is rose? Some saying, It rose, but after it
Ascended into the Cloud, Christ was separated from it: Some saying, It was no
part of the Virgins Substance, or of Man's Nature that Ascended in Heaven; and
one saying, He had not yet learned that Lesson, whether that which was
Crucified without us, was tho Godhead, or somewhat that he took of the Virgin;
others saying, This is a Nicety, and to be ignorant of such a thing, or not to
believe such a thing, does not hinder, but that a Man may be a true Christian,
and a Minister of Christ. 5thly, Some accusing and charging some of their
Brethren, as dividing Christ because they Preach Faith in Christ both without
us in Fullness, and within us in the Measure: Others justly charging them, That
they who preach only Christ as within, do divide Christ in a false and wrong
Notion of him. 6thly, Some accusing their Brethren for denying the Sufficiency
of the Light within to Salvation, because they preach, That the Sufficiency of
the Light within, is not to be set up in Opposition to the Sufficiency of the
Man Christ without us, in whom the Fullness is, as if the Measure within us
were the whole Savior, excluding the MAN CHRIST without us; and also because
they distinguish betwixt the first Ministration of Light, common to all
Mankind, and the second, that is peculiar and special only to true Christians,
or such who have the Faith of Christ crucified, etc. revealed to them; both
these Ministrations, with all other diversity of Operations and Gifts coming
from one God, one Lord, and one Spirit, who is over all, through all, and in
all, Ephesians. 4.6. And also, because they cannot set up the present Measure of
Light and Grace to be sufficient for all time to come, but exhort Men to Wait
and Pray in the help of the present Measure of Grace received, to receive more
Grace from him, who has the fullness of it, even the Man Christ Jesus. And
lastly, that they cannot set up the Sufficiency of the Light within, in
opposition to the necessary and great outward Helps and Means of Salvation,
such as the holy Scriptures, and Preaching, and Teaching of Faithful Men. And
beside these great Questions and Disputes that have happened among us, there
have been others concerning the Resurrection of the Dead, and Day of Judgment;
as Whether the Saints have got the Resurrection of the Body already? or Wheth^r
they get it immediately after Death? or Whether they wait for it generally
unto Christ's coming? and Whether Christ is to come without us, to judge the
Quick and the Dead? and Whether there is any Day of Judgment beyond the Grave?
and Whether there is any great and general Day of Judgment that the Deceased
are in Expectation of? And this is but a hint of these things that have been in
Question and Debate among us here-away in Pensilvania and VVest-Jersey, etc. to
which, many other great and weigthy things of Christian Faith and Doctrine do
so necessarily relate, that they stand or fall together.

And it is no small Grief and Wound to us to find some so little concerned
about these things, as if they were not so material as to cause any just
Separation, or Breach of Fellowship, when we know, that for less Errors many of
us have separated from other Professions; and we cannnot but declare before the
World, our Godly Zeal moves us to a holy Impatience, that we cannot longer
bear (some of us having born the weight of these things for many Months) such
gross Ignorance and Unbelief, and gross Errors, tending to the denying the Lord
that bought us, and making Void his Death and Sufferings, without bearing
witness against them, who either hold them, or support and defend them; and we
are convinced and persuaded in our Consciences, that God calls us to separate
from such Unbelievers, and not to be yoked together in Church Fellowship and
Discipline with any that we have not Proof of by Confession of the Mouth, that
they are sound in Faith, touching these necessary and Fundamental parts of
Christian Doctrine, as well as that their Conversation is such as becomes the
Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ. And we have been so much grieved with the
Confusion and Disorder that has lately happened in our Meetings, because of
these things, (more like Babylon than a Church of Christ) that we have great
Clearness and Peace in the Lord, to retire and separate from such disorderly
Walkers and Talkers as we have formerly done from other Professions, to meet
together in the Name of Christ, having the true Faith of him, and of his
Promise, To be spiritually present in the midst of us, and to wait upon him,
and be refreshed and edified, whether in silence, or any living Testimony of
words that God shall be pleased to enable any among us to bring forth. Yet we
design not any Separation from our Faithful Brethren here, or any where else in
any part of the World; for we declare, we are one with all our Faithful
Brethren in all parts of the World, both in Spirit, Doctrine and Practice of
true Christianity; and we faithfully believe, that our Faith in all things does
well agree to our faithful Brethren every where, and is the real, sound and
upright Faith, as it has been received, not only by Ancient Christians, in all
Ages of the World, but also by the most sound Ancient and present Friends of
Truth, called in scorn Quakers. And we altogether deny and disown to be called
the Disciples or Proselites of Man or Men, being spiritually baptized into no
other Name than that of Christ Jesus, who was Crucified for us, and rose again,
and whose Disciples and Followers we only desire to be, and to follow none, but
as they follow him.

A Quantity of the foregoing, with another of their Books, Entitled, The Plea
of the Innocent, etc. Being sent over for Sale, which the chief Quakers here
having notice of, bought them all up, in order to stifle them, which occasions
their Re-printing here in England, this 9th. of January, 1692/3.

FINIS.

