MORE DIVISIONS AMONGST THE QUAKERS: As appears by the following Books of their
own Writing.

VIZ.

I. The Christian Faith of New England Quakers condemned by a Meeting of
Pensilvanian Quakers.

II. The false Judgment of a yearly Meeting of Quakers in Maryland, condemned
by George Keith, Thomas Budd, etc. all Quakers.

To which is added, A Discovery of this Mystery of Iniquity, By GEORGE KEITH.

First Printed beyond Sea, and now Reprinted, and are to be Sold by Richard
Baldwin near the Oxford-Arms in Warwick Lane. 1693.

The Christian Faith of the People called Quakers in Rhode Island in
New England, vindicated from the Calumnies of Christian Lodowick, that formerly
was of that Profession, but is lately fallen therefrom.

WHereas Christian Lodowick has given forth several Papers Challenging all
these belonging to Newport Meeting, who speak in the Meetings of the People
called Quakers, and that within these few days past he has renewed his
Challenge, accusing the Foundation of their Gospel, Faith, Doctrine and
Religion, to be unscriptural, false and naught, shaken and sandy, and
challenging them to appoint one of their number to dispute with him.

These are to give notice to all sober People and Neighbors, that these so
challenged by him, having taken his Challenge into consideration, and finding
many things in it falsely and perversely stated, which they could not own (so
stated by him) to be the Foundation of their Faith, etc. did meet with him at
the House of Walter Clark in Newport in Rhode Island, the 18th of the 4th
Month, 1691* in order to have things fairly stated, that if any did dispute
with him, they might know before hand what he was to dispute against; but they
could not procure him to allow of this: but after that some of the things,
charged by him in his Papers began to be discoursed of, in order to a fair and
right stating of them, he would not hear of it, but went away.

And whereas diverse of us challenged by him, declared sincerely before many
People there assembled on the said day, their sincere Faith as concerning the
Lord Jesus Christ of Nazareth, and what the holy Scriptures testify of him,
yet he did continue to accuse them still, as denying the true Christ;
alleging, They had another sense than the Scripture words did bear, and that
his sense was true, but their sense was false, appealing to their Consciences
whether it was not so? Thus making himself Judge over our secret thoughts, as
having a secret sense in our thoughts of Scripture words, contrary to the true
sense of them, though we have not given him, or any other, occasion to judge so
rashly and uncharitably of us; and our Consciences bear us witness, in the
sight of God, that we do sincerely believe and think as we speak, when we say,
according to the holy Scripture, That Jesus of Nazareth is the true Christ of
God, and the only true Savior, and there is no other Name given under Heaven
whereby men must be saved; and that this same Jesus was in fullness of time born
of the Virgin, called Mary, being conceived of the Holy Ghost, who died for our
sins, and rose again for our Justification; and by his death on the Tree of the
Cross, was a most acceptable Offering and Sacrifice to God for the sins of the
whole world, having tasted death for every man, and given himself a Ransom for
all. And we believe that Christ was God manifest in the Flesh, even in the Body
of Flesh in which he did suffer death on the Cross, and that the fullness of the
Godhead dwelt bodily in him, and does still dwell bodily in him, and that of
his fullness we all receive, and grace for grace. And we also believe, according
to holy Scripture, that Christ's Body that was crucified on the Tree of the
Cross, was raised again on the third day, and after forty days did ascend into
Heaven in the sight of the Disciples, and who is exalted at the right hand of
God, and ever lives to make Intercession for us, and that Christ has his Body
in Heaven a most glorious Body, not changed in Being or Substance, but in
condition and manner of Being; and that Christ is true and perfect God, and
true and perfect Man, the Son of God, begotten of God from everlasting,
glorified with the Father before the World began, and also begotten of God in
the Womb of the Virgin, called Mary, and born of her in the fullness of time,
the Son of Abraham, the Son of David, who took not on him the Nature of Angels,
but the Seed of Abraham, and which he still has; and that Christ, as Man, has
both Soul and Body, and his Manhood is most excellently and wonderfully united
with his Godhead, yet his Manhood is not his Godhead, nor is his Body that he
had of the Virgin, and now has in Heaven, his Godhead, but the Temple of it,
as Christ called his Body the Temple, and is the Garment or Clothing wherewith
the Eternal Word did clothe himself, who is that new and living Way that he
has consecrated for us, through the Vail, that is to say, his Flesh.

And we believe, That God the Father has appointed the Man Christ Jesus to be
the Judge of the Quick and the Dead, and that he is to come to judge all
Mankind, and that his coming so to Judge all Mankind with the great and last
Judgment is at the end of the world, the which End of the world we do believe
is not come, either within us or without us, as he does falsely charge; for the
End of the world, as the Scripture declares, it is the End of the Ages or
Times of this World; for the Times and Ages of this world shall have an End;
and God has appointed a Day wherein he will judge the world in righteousness
by that Man Christ Jesus, whom he has ordained; but of that day and hour
knows no Man, as Christ has declared, that all might be watchful.

And because, according to Scripture Testimony, we do faithfully believe, that
Christ has also inwardly and spiritually appeared in the Hearts of men, and
that all true Christians do believe and own his inward Appearance and
Revelation in them, as he is the Word, Light, and Life in them, in various
measures and degrees of Divine Revelation, and that he is the true Light that
lights every man that comes into the World, and that we testify that all
should turn to his Light in them, that convinces of sin, and should believe in
it, and obey and follow it, and that all who so do, will be led in due time to
believe in him in whom the Fullness is, and to receive the benefit of Christ's
Death and Resurrection in the outward; therefore has this Accuser joined with
Thomas Hicks a Baptist Teacher at London, and John Faldo an Independent
Teacher, and diverse others to accuse us, as Denying the true Christ, because we
believe and confess to Christ's Inward Coming and Appearance, were to deny his
Outward, or to hold forth two Christ's, which is but their great Ignorance and
Unbelief, and no just Consequence of our Principle; for the true Christ of God
is One, and the true Christians Faith receives and imbraceth him whole and
undivided, and owneth his inward and outward Coming, who, as he did come
without us in a state of Humiliation to suffer, and is risen and ascended into
Heaven, so he will come again without us to Judge the Quick and the Dead, and
all Mankind shall stand before him, the Sheep on his right Hand, and the Goats
on his left. And there shall be a Resurrection of the Body, both of the Just
and unjust, that is not attained already or immediately after Death, but it is
to be attained unto in the Time appointed of God, called The Day of Judgment.
And seeing our Friends in England have fully answered to all these false
Accusations of Thomas Hicks and John Faldo, with whom Christian Lodowick has
joined, we refer to their Answers, for the further Satisfaction of them who
desire to have it.

And it is falsely charged upon us by Christian Lodowick in his Papers, That
according to our Principle, all honest and conscientious Heathens or Gentiles,
who have not the Knowledge and Faith of Christ crucified outwardly, and risen
again, etc. and Jews and Mahometans are in Christ as well as we, and true
Christians, Believers, etc. Nor does this follow by any just Consequence from
our Principles; for though we do affirm, That all conscientious and honest
Gentiles, such as Cornelius was before the Faith of Christ was preached to him,
have some measure of Light, from Christ, to enlighten them, and are under some
Administration of the Spirit, yet it is but the first Ministration, until the
knowledge and Faith of Christ, as he died for our sins, and rose again, etc. be
spiritually received; and such who have the true and saving Knowledge and Faith
of Christ, as he died and rose again without them, spiritually receiving it by
the Light and Spirit of Christ in them, and wrought in them by that mighty
Power that raised Jesus our Lord from the dead, and which conformeth them to
Christ, in the like Virtues of Love, Patience, Humility, Resignation, etc. so
as to love Enemies, are only Christians, and Sons of God, of the Freewoman,
having received the Spirit of Adoption, whereby they cry Abba, Father; but who
have not this Faith of Christ crucified and raised again outwardly, spiritually
received and wrought in them by the Spirit of Christ, whether they have or have
not heard Christ outwardly preached unto them, are at best (however just and
conscientious to the just Principle of God in them) not under the second and
more peculiar Ministration of God's Spirit, that makes Men worthy to be
esteemed Christians, but are only under the first, and such are held under the
Custody or Safeguard of the Law, shut up unto the Faith that is afterward to
be revealed, as Paul has declared, Gal. 3.23. and the state they are in under
this first Ministration, is to them as the City of Refuge was to the Manslayer
under the Law, and whereof it was a Tipe: And this first Ministration of the
Law and Light in them, (that answers to Moses and the Prophets and to John,
who are faithful and conscientious under it) prepares them to receive the
Knowledge and Faith of Christ crucified and raised again, and fitteth them for
the second Ministration of the Spirit, that brings them to witness the Spirit
of Adoption, and the Anointing that makes them true Christians, and conformeth
them to Christ in the like Virtues, so as to love Enemies, and lay down the
Life for Enemies, which is more than mere honest conscientious Gentiles, who
have not the Faith of Christ crucified and raised again, can do.

And whereas the said Christian Lodowick does further accuse us, That what we
say we know of the Scriptures, we should have known, if it had never been writ,
according to our Principle. This is falsely charged upon us, as many other
things in his Papers; for though we believe and say, that some things declared
in Scripture, we should have known, if they had not been writ, as that there is
a God, the Creator and Lord of Heaven and Earth, that requires us and all men,
by his Law and Light in us* to live soberly and righteously, and to fear, love
and worship him, and diverse other general things, of great use and service to
men, according to Paul's Doctrine; For the invisible things of God, even his
eternal Power and Godhead are clearly seen, being understood by the things that
are made, so that they are without excuse; for what is to be known of God is
manifest in them; yet the peculiar Doctrines and Mysteries of the Christian
Faith, as that Christ should be born of a Virgin, die for our sins, and rise
again, and that he is both God and Man, and many other the like peculiar
Mysteries of the Christian Faith, we do acknowledge, and have always
acknowledged, That the Doctrine of the holy Scriptures, as outwardly preached
to us by holy Men, or as read by us in the holy Scriptures, or having outwardly
heard these things, have been instrumental, by and together with the immediate
working of the Spirit of God, to beget in us the Knowledge and Faith of them,
and we desire to bless God for the benefit of the holy Scriptures given us,
being able to make us wise unto Salvation, through Faith in Christ Jesus; but
that we prefer the Spirit to the Letter, we are not ashamed to own before all
men, and that God and Christ and the Spirit, whom they testify of, are above
the Scriptures, and greater than they, we do freely acknowledge; for all
outward Testimonies, Means, Instruments and Helps, such as the holy Scriptures,
and all outward Preaching, and Men, and Books, are but Servants to God and
Christ, but God and Christ are Lord, and Master, and King over all, to whom be
Glory and Honor forever and ever.

And as to the final state of all honest and conscientious Gentiles, who have
not had Christ outwardly preached unto them either by the Ministry of Men or
the holy Scriptures, it suffices us to believe that God is not wanting to
them, and it is one God, who is the God both of Christians and Gentiles, and
who shall justify the Circumcision by Faith, and the Uncircumcision through
Faith, Romans 3.30. and it is no greater, nor other difficulty to understand how
honest and conscientious Gentiles can be saved by Christ Jesus of Nazareth,
than how Infants, and deaf and dumb Persons, so born, can be saved, which our
Adversaries generally acknowledge, and therefore they can have no advantage
against us in that respect.

Edward Thurstan. Henry Bull. Anne Bull. Thomas Cornwall. Thomas Roadman.
George Keith. Ebenezer Slocum. Joseph Nicholson. Daniel Gould. Jacob Mott.
Walter Clark. Rob Hutchins. John Easton.

Note, The foregoing Christian Faith of the Quakers in Rhode Island was so
disliked by G. Keith's Adversaries in Pensilvania, that they called a Meeting
on purpose to pass Judgment against the Publishing of it, and William Bradford
for printing it, etc. See The Plea, etc. p. 21.



False Judgments Reprehended: AND, A Just Reproof to THO. EVERNDON, And his
Associates and Fellow-Travellers.
For the false and rash Judgment T. E. gave against G. K. and his Faithful
Friends and Brethren, at the Public Meeting at Philadelphia, the 27th of the
tenth Month, 1692. And also for their bringing with them their Paquet of
Letters (Saul- like to Damascus) containing the false Judgment of a Faction of
of Men, calling themselves the Yearly Meeting at Tredaven in Maryland, the
fourth of the eighth Month, 92. And another false Judgment contained in another
Letter from William Richardson: All which will return upon their own Heads.

IT is greatly worth the noticing, That these men who call themselves the
Yearly Meeting at Tredaven in Maryland, met the 4th of the 8th Month, 1692.
have most rashly and unchristianly, contrary to all Gospel Order, condemned
G.K. and his Friends, as appears by their Paper signed by Thomas Everndon,
Rich. John's, Richard Harrison, John Pit, W. Dixon, Ja. Ridley, and several
others, without at all hearing of him, or sending any of their Brethren to
enquire into the truth of things, or true cause and ground of the Separation
here, and such other things as they lay to his charge.

And whereas they say in their Letter, That he accuses his Brethren, and
renders them to the World as a People not fit to hold Communion with; and that
there are more damnable Heresies and Errors cloaked amongst the Quakers there
(viz. in Pensilvania) than in any Protestant Society in Christendom.

Answ. O the gross partiality and injustice of these men! when was it that G.K.
published this to the World, viz. That they cloaked more damnable Heresies and
Errors here, than in any Protestant Society in Christendom? Was it not in
answer to the 28 false Judges, that had published in the face of the World
their false Judgment against him, in which they publish these words, and not G.
Keith, for he spoke them in a private Meeting at a private House in Burlington,
where about 20 men called Ministers were met; and had they been wise they would
not have so publicly accused G.K. for them in their said Paper, which though
they did not print, yet caused it to be read at monthly and quarterly Meetings,
and at other Meetings on First-days and Weekdays, where many that did not
profess to be Quakers were present, whereby it was noised all about; and G.K.
was publicly opposed and interrupted in his Testimony in most places, and when
he prayed in Meetings, many kept on their Hats, and all because of this Paper
of false Judgment against him by the 28, and it is but a circumstance whether a
thing be printed or not, seeing they published it all over the Country, and
sent it to most parts in America, where there is of the People called Quakers,
before G.K. published it in print; so they were the Publishers of it, and not
G.K. And this is sufficient to discover their Partiality and Injustice in this
particular, which is the principal thing they pretend to have against him.

Again, whereas they blame him for Separating from Friends and Brethren: By
this it plainly appears that they own such to be their Brethren, who are
guilty of denying and opposing Faith in the Man Christ without us, which these
here have done. And for the Separation which our Opposers first made, and were
the cause of, we are well warranted by the holy Scripture, that says, Come out
from among them, and be ye separate; Be ye not unequally yoked with
unbelievers; what fellowship has a Believer with an Infidel? and such indeed
are all them who have not Faith in the Man Christ without them, as in Christ in
them, as these our Opposers have not, who set up the Light within to be
sufficient without any thing else, as their Judgment against him plainly
expresses, so excluding the Man Christ Jesus without us from having any part
in our Salvation.

Again they tell G. K. That if any of them had been guilty of these things, he
ought to have labored their Recovery in Love and in the Spirit of Meekness.

Answ. And so he did for above a year, with much love and patience, and met
with great contradiction, hatred, and reviling Language from them for his
pains: and he did bear and suffer so long, that he could not with peace of
Conscience suffer it any longer, and brought the matter of Difference orderly
from one Meeting to another, but there was no Remedy. And whereas they say, He
ought to have stated the Difference and sent it to London: He did write to G.
Whitehead and Friends at London, and had their answer, approving his Doctrine,
before he printed any thing, and yet this prevailed nothing. But G. K. did not
write to them as having any uncertainty or doubt in himself of the truth of the
Doctrine asserted by him, nor was he free to submit so great a matter of Faith
and Conscience, by way of absolute submission, to any man or number of men, as
Whether Christ without us was to be believed in, as well as Christ within us,
as necessary to our Salvation? for things of that nature are not to be
submitted, by way of absolute submission to the best of men, it contradicts
our ancient Principle, viz. That the Spirit in each particular is the Rule of
Faith and Doctrine. But G. K. did never refuse to appeal or submit to the
Spirit of Truth in any of his faithful Friends in old England, or any where
else, but proffered it, and was refused, not doubting their unity with him in
this weighty matter, but because it is so unquestionable a Truth among
Christians, That Christ without is as necessary to be believed in for our
Salvation, as that God in Heaven is to be believed in; therefore he thought it
not necessary to concern his faithful Friends to seek their assistance to
determine that which all Christendom grants in words, and none but the greatest
Apostates and Heretics dare deny.

Next, Let it be observed, that after Tho. Everndon and the rest had given
forth the said false Judgment in Maryland, T. Everndon, accompanied with Rich.
John's, Rich. Harrison, and Humphry Hodges, comes to Philadelphia, and before
they had been here 48 hours out of the Meeting, on the 27th day of the tenth
Month, in a public Meeting appointed at Philadelphia, where was present about
500 People, T. Everndon said, That having seen certain printed Books that came
down to Maryland, wherein his Brethren were charged with denying the Man Christ
Jesus, and Faith in him, and the Resurrection of the dead; I said (said he) I
would go up and see what the matter is among my Brethren, whether these things
be so or not, that these Books come down among us, wherein they are charged
with denying these things; and now since I am come I have made enquiry of the
Parties so charged; and I find my Brethren sound in the Faith concerning all
these things, and therefore these are Lies and Calumnies cast upon us; and I
have this word of Comfort farther to deliver to you, my Brethren from the Lord,
That the Judgments of the Lord will overtake them that have printed and
published these things to the dishonor of God, and his Truth, etc.

Where Note first, That he said, He came up to enquire whether these things
were so or not, and yet near three Months before he came here to see whether
these things were so or not, he and his Companions believed Reports against us
in Maryland, and signed the said Judgment against us. Now pray consider whether
T.E. and Companions were the impartial men they pretend to be to enquire and
judge of this great Controversy, when 1 st, before they came here they gave
their Judgment against us upon bare Report: 2 ly, When they came here, before
they had time to make due enquiry ( viz in less then 48 hours) to say, That he
found his Brethren sound in the Faith, and, That these were Lies and Calumnies
cast upon them, was great rashness. First they condemned us, and then T. E.
said he came some hundreds of miles to enquire whether these things (for which
they had condemned us) were true, or not: Was ever greater folly acted by men
pretending to Reason, Conscience* and the highest Perfection in Christianity?
Our souls pity them, and heartily desire that they might see their rashness,
and repent.

But to demonstrate that T. Everndon had but one ear to hear, or at least to
give credit to one Party, in prejudice to the other, pray note these following
Observations.

Observe. 1. That at the said Meeting, 27th of the 10th Month, before T.E. bore
his Testimony, John Wilsford declared a long time concerning the Faith of
Christ, saying, He had the TRUE Faith of Christ, as he died, and rose again,
and ascended, and was our Mediator in But John Wilsford has not told us whether
that Heaven be within or without, into which the Man Christ is gone; Rob. Young
says it is within.
Heaven, before he came among Friends, and even from his Childhood he had that
True Faith, but yet that Faith did not purify him, nor gather him to God, but
be remained in the dark, and his Religion was only an outside Profession, etc.

Observe. 2. That T. E. did not only hear J. W. speak this, but he also heard G.
K. reprove diverse things in his Doctrine, and prove it to be false and unsound,
especially that he said, He had the true Faith of Christ as he died and rose
again, and yet that Faith did not profit him, etc. This, said G. K. is unsound
Doctrine to call that the true Faith of Christ that does not purify nor gather
to God, nor bring a man out of the dark, and to have no more of Religion than
an outside Profession; this is not the true Faith, but a false Faith; for the
true Faith purifieth the heart, and gathers unto God, and brings him that has
it to know the kirnel and inward life of Religion. If he had said, he had not
the true Faith of Christ crucified, etc. but a dead literal and notional Faith
of it, he might have said true; but to say he had the true Faith, and yet that
it did not purify him, does prove him to be yet ignorant of the true Faith,
and that he is yet in the dark: There is a true and a false Faith both of
Christ without and of Christ within, the false is only literal* historical and
notional, and many have no other but a bare literal, historical and notional
Faith of Christ within, as others have of Christ without; they say, they
believe that Christ is in them only because they read it, and hear it preached,
but this Faith is dead, and is not true, more than a dead Picture of a Man is a
true Man; but the True Faith of Christ, both without and within is a living
fruitful Faith, wrought in them who have it by the Power and Spirit of Christ,
accompanying the preaching of it, and the Testimony of the holy Scriptures
concerning the same.

Observe. 3. That at the same Meeting T.E. heard John Hutchins grossly pervert
that place of Scripture, 1 Thessalonians. 4.15. We which are alive and remain to the
coming of the Lord, shall be caught up to meet the Lord in the Air, etc. which
most evidently relates to his coming in his glorified Body without us at the
great Day of Judgment, whereas J.H. applied it wholly to men's being caught up
in the Spirit, grossly confounding Christ the Son, the Heir, with the Air, which
he also heard G. K. to contradict and reprove.

Obs. 4. That the printed Judgment concerning W. Stockdale, (which is a true
Copy of the Original) says, That it was proved by two witnesses that he the
said G.K. preached two Christ's, because he preached Faith in Christ within and
without, is evidence sufficient of his unsoundness, and yet he was all along
allowed to preach and pray in Meetings.

Observe. 5. That by their printed Judgment concerning T. Fitzwater, it is
evident that they clear T. F. and condemn G. K. for saying, The Light is not
sufficient without any thing else (to wit, the Man Christ Jesus, and what he
did and suffered for us on Earth, and what he is now doing for us in Heaven,
and which at the next Monthly meeting, Tho. Lloyd, as the month of the Meeting,
acknowledged, They knew G.K. meant the Man Christ Jesus, and what he did and
suffered for us, and what he is now a doing for us, to be that something else;
thereby denying the Man Christ Jesus from having any part or share in our
Salvation.

Observe. 6. That both on the first day before in the public Meeting, and in
the evening before this Meeting G.K. gave T. E. and Companions, a faithful
account how John Delaval had accused him of being guilty of Heresy and Error
in a Fundamental Doctrine, for asserting that the Light within is not
sufficient without some what else: thereby excluding the Man Christ Jesus
without us.

Now after this, which T. E. could not but be sensible of, for him to say in
such a great Auditory, That he had made enquiry, and found his Brethren sound
in the Faith, and these things in our printed Books were Lies and Calumnies,
bewrays his great weakness in this, as folly and rashness in his signing a
Paper of Judgment against us in Maryland upon bare Report. And therefore it is
manifest that T. Everndon has been very imprudent in the management of this
weighty Affair, thus to clear the Guilty and condemn the Innocent, and that in
the Name of the Lord. Oh! the righteous Judge of the whole Earth, who knows the
secrets of all*hearts, will judge for these things.

And in private Conference that Evening aforesaid, the principal thing for
which T.E. blamed G.K. was, for making known to the World the Errors of some
called Preachers among the Quakers here, saying, he had made Friends stink, and
become the Song of the Drunkards. But G.K. said, he had not made them stink,
but themselves had done it, as when the Sun shines warm on a Dunghill, the
Dunghill is to be blamed for the stink, not the Sun. Also G. K. did expostulate
with T. E. and his Companions, Why they did lay open to the World the Adultry
of T. T. once a great Preacher among them, whereby the Quakers generally
thereaway became a stink and a song of the Drunkards, and many on that very
account left the Quakers Meetings: They replied, His wickedness rested on his
own head. To which G. K. said, If carnal Adultery be not to be hid, no more is
spiritual Adultery, as this is to deny the Lord that bought us. So that their
blaming G. K. for not sending to Friends in other Parts, or to London, is as
idle as if we should send to London to enquire whether Adultery be a sin for
which we ought to deny them who are guilty, as fit to be separated from, and
not fit to hold Communion with. And why should G. K. and his Friends any more
delay their publishing to the World, (after endeavors used to reclaim them) a
Testimony against some men's spiritual Adultery here, which is their gross
Heresy, in denying the Faith of Christ without us, as he died for our sins,
etc. as necessary to our Salvation, any more than they in Maryland delayed to
publish T. T's carnal Adultery? Or why should G. K. and his Friends call for
the assistance of Friends in remote Parts, or at London, to condemn a Heresy
that is as manifest a sin as Adultery is? and if Friends at London found
themselves concerned to give forth a Testimony in print against one that was
said to carry the Bible to the Exchange to burn it, ought not G.K. and his
Friends to be concerned to give forth a Testimony against them that deny Christ
without us, not owning him to be concerned in our Salvation, but only the Light
within us, seeing to deny Christ, of whom the Bible declares, is more than to
deny the Bible, that is a declaration of him.

And one of T. E's Companions, viz. Rich. John's, charged G.K. for casting the
Errors of particular Persons on the Body of Friends, which G. K. denied, and
proffered to show him that he cleared faithful Friends of it, and did not
charge these Errors and Heresies upon all here nor elsewhere, nor yet upon any
others that are not guilty, as we believe many are not, but only upon a Party
or Faction of men that are no true Quakers, but degenerated from the true
Principles and Practices of the Quakers. And in their Paper Richard John's and
the rest give false Judgment in matter of Fact, viz. That we have rent and
separated from Friends; for these who have separated from us, and we are
separated from them, are no true Friends and Brethren, because holding
Antichristian Doctrines; and we have not rent, nor are separated from faithful
Friends, as we have always declared; see our first Book, called, Some Causes of
the late Separation, p. 23. we say, We design not any Separation from our
faithful Brethren here or any where else in any part of the world, for we
declare we are one with all our faithful Brethren in all parts of the world,
both in Spirit, Doctrine, and Practice of true Christianity; and we faithfully
believe, that our Faith in all things does well agree to all our faithful
Brethren every where, and is the real sound and upright Faith, as is has been
received, not only by ancient Christians in all Ages of the World, but also by
the most sound, ancient, and present Friends of Truth, called in scorn Quakers.
And in The Plea of the Innocent, p. 10. it is expressly declared, That G. K. is
in unity with Truth and faithful Friends, not only in old England, but all
places where they are.

The next is a Letter from W. Richardson to G. K. dated the 20th of the tenth
Mon. 92. from West-River in Maryland, who charge G. K. That his Spirit
strikes at the Light as not being sufficient, and sets people a gazing in the
Air, and some to question whether they have received the Truth or not; saying
further, What is the meaning of these Noises of Faith in Christ without, and
Faith within (like to what Rich. John's said to G. K. That it was a needless
distinction, viz. Christ within and Christ without) seeing no true Believer in
Christ within, dare disown the Work, Miracles, and holy Doctrine performed in
that Body. Note Reader the fallacy of his words concerning Christ without,
which are no more than any Socinian or Pelagian will own; but he has not a
word of owning Faith in Christ without us being necessary to our salvation; for
it is not enough to own the Doctrine, Miracles, and Works of the Man Christ
without us, for the Doctrine, Miracles, and Works of the Prophets and Apostles
are to be owned, but yet none of them are to be believed in as the Author of
our Eternal Salvation, but Christ only; and it is apparent by his Letter, that
he agrees with J. Wilsford, and other his ignorant Brethren, that only the
Faith of Christ within is the true Faith that purifieth the heart, and that the
Faith of Christ without is historical, outward and traditional, a made and
formed Faith that the Lord never was the Author of; and this is that Faith
which he blames G. K. for contending about, whereby he shows his exceeding
great Ignorance; for G.K. has preached in the hearing of W. Richardson several
times the Faith of Christ both without and within, not to be any made or formed
Faith of men's making, but the inward work and gift of God, wrought in all who
have it, by the Spirit and Power of God, even that mighty Power that raised
Christ from the dead. Therefore let who will despise and reject this Faith, we
are well assured we have many faithful Brethren both in America, England,
Scotland, Ireland, and other parts of the world, who are lovers of the
crucified Jesus, and will bless God in our behalf, that he has raised us up to
stand witnesses for his holy Truth in the midst of such great contradiction and
opposition.

To conclude, it is no small matter of Admiration to us, that so many called
Quakers in Maryland, who have all along pretended, That they were not free in
Conscience to contribute to the Militia, yet now join with our Opposers here,
who have begun to persecute some of us by Fines and Imprisonment, for asserting
the Quakers Principle against the use of the outward Sword; See our Printed
Appeal.

George Keith, Thomas Budd.


A DISCOVERY OF THE Mystery of Iniquity and Hyprocrisie Acting and Ruling in
HVGH DERBOROVGH.
HAving seen a Paper of Hugh Derborough's, which was read by Sam. Jenings at
their last Quarterly Meeting at Philadelphia, and approved by the Meeting, and
he received and owned as one of their Church Members, I found it convenient to
say something in Answer to it, he most falsely and maliciously accusing me in
some things, and also discovering manifestly his and his Brethrens Ignorance,
Unbelief and Hypocrisy, with whom he has joined himself.

First, he says, He was deceived in me, and ensnared by me, hearing such
Charges, etc. as if there were such as did divide Christ, and not preach Faith
in the Man Christ Jesus, nor own the Man Christ Jesus as Mediator in Heaven,
but the Grace of God within only; and such like Charges, as that they did not
own the Resurrection of the Body, and the Coming again and glorious Appearance
of that heavenly Man Christ Jesus, to judge the Quick and the Dead at the great
Day of Judgment.

Answ. That such Charges were true, I have many Witnesses, that may be produced
in due time, to discover this Hugh Derborough to be a Liar and a false Accuser,
who has writ Lies against his own Conscience and Knowledge; for does not H. D.
know that we have sufficient proof, that Tho. Fitzwater said, He owned no Man
Christ Jesus as Mediator in Heaven without him, but the Grace of God within
him? and of which T. B. complained to the Meeting of Ministering Friends at
Burlington, where Tho. Fitzwater himself was present, and did not deny it, nor
they call him to an Account for it: And was not Hugh Derborough at the Monthly
Meeting where W. Stockdale openly renewed and confirmed his former Charge, viz.
That G. K. preached two Christ's, because he preached Faith in Christ within and
Christ without? beside, the pretended Judgment given forth concerning W.S. says
the same: And the Judgment given forth by their Monthly Meeting, (which is also
in print) clearing T. Fitzwater for accusing me, That the Light within was not
sufficient without somewhat else; that something else being the Man Christ
Jesus, in whom all Fullness of Light, Grace and Truth is lodged, and out of whom
all true Believers receive a daily supply and increase of Grace; and he may
remember what work he had at a Monthly Meeting a little before, where it was
affirmed, That they knew but one Principle owned by Friends, and that was the
Light within, which I refuted both from Scripture and Friends Books; then T.
Lloyd said, There was but one Fundamental Principle, which was the Light
within; which also I denied. From this it is evident, that they exclude the Man
Christ Jesus from having any part in our Salvation, placing it wholly and only
upon the Light within; and this H. D. has heard John Delavall publicly accuse
me of Heresy, for saying, The Light within is not sufficient without something
else; yea, and H. D. himself has renewed this in his Paper against me, which
he calls The Mystery of Iniquity discovered by the Spirit of Truth; but his
Paper is the fruit of the Mystery of Iniquity, that rules in his heart, who is
acted by a lying Spirit. Now that some approved among them deny the
Resurrection of the Body after Death, and Christ's coming to Judgment without
us at the great Day, etc. we can sufficiently prove; and it is in vain for H. D.
to tell us these are false Charges, while their Preachers are found preaching
against these things, and the hearers generally arguing and contending with us
against them: A. Jennings, a Preacher among them, has been heard, not only by
me, but diverse others, to deny, That any thing of this Body rises after Death.
And Henry Willis, one of the 28 (now 27) false Judges, told me, That the only
cause why he set his hand to that Paper, was, because I had affirmed, Christ
would come again without us at the great Day of Judgment, to judge the quick
and the dead. And W. Southyby's Letter, and J. Humphery's Letter, and Paul
Saunders Letter to me, giving an Account of William Southyby and M. Hodgskins
their Unbelief in these principal things of the Christian Faith, are sufficient
proof, and which Letters, with other Instances and Proofs, may in due time be
made public; mean time, take one Sentence of J. Humphery's Letter, which is
this, I am grieved to hear some say, They expect to be Justified by that Blood
which was shed at Jerusalem. To which blasphemous Sentence I shall not make any
Reply at present, but let all impartial Readers judge of it. I have complained
of it in private to John Humphrey himself, to several of his Brethren, to their
quarterly Meeting to which he belongs, and to their Public Meeting, several
Months since, and yet no calling him to account, but of late he has writ his
second Letter, confirming and justifying his former. And therefore Hugh
Derborough falsely accuses me, in saying, I have deceived him; for it is the
lying Spirit in himself, and them he now owns to be his Brethren, which have
deceived him.

Secondly, To his accusing me of Extreme Heat and Passion, when little occasion
was given me, if any, but the clearing themselves of these Aspersions cast upon
them, calling of them Hypocrites, abominable Hypocrites, bidding them Cut him
in pieces, Chop him, Fry him, with many more unsavory words, which (he says)
appeared to him indeed, to be but Briars and Thorns.

Answ. This is another Evidence of his great Hypocrisy and lying Spirit, as
well as of his gross Prejudice and Partiality, Enmity and Malice: I called none
Hypocrites, or abominable Hypocrites, but such whom I can well prove to be
such: And did not Christ call them Hypocrites, Serpents, Generation of Vipers,
etc. who had discovered themselves to be such; and the Apostles called such
Hypocrites and deceitful Workers, etc. How then is this Briars and Thorns in
me, when those I so called were such? Have not also our Friends called their
Opposer's Hypocrites (who were such) yea, and much harder Names than ever I did
to any of them, as Dead Beast, Dark Sot, Incarnate Devils, Wolves, Dogs, etc.
But what says Hugh Derborough to his Brother Sam. Jenings, who, at their last
Quarterly Meeting, (being the 6th of the first Month) called one of his Fellow
Members, Ignorant, Idiot, and Nonsensical Puppey? Which Fruits are most like
Briars and Thorns, to call a deceitful man a Hypocrite, or for Sam. Jenings to
call a man (of as good or better sense and understanding than himself)
Nonsensical Puppey? Let H. D. answer to this, and wipe off this and many other
foul Expressions, justly charged on his Brother Jenings, if he can; and yet
this is he who would read H. D's Paper, and pronounce my Fruits to be Briars
and Thorns, but accounts his own Fruits (no doubt) to be Figs and Grapes,
though at the same Meeting he called one of his Church Members Nonsensical
Puppey, i. e. Whelp: And yet I do not understand that any one in the Meeting
dared to reprove him, except the Person he so called. I know the Scripture
says, That Dogs are without, but I never knew that Dogs were suffered to remain
within the Church: if this Person be a Puppey, Whelp, or Dog, why don't they
cast him out, or condemn Sam. Jenings for his ungodly Reviling in this
particular? but that I believe they will not do, seeing they have cloaked much
worse Crimes than this in S. Jenings.

But that H. D. says, They gave me little occasion, if any, to call them
Hypocrites, but the clearing themselves of these Aspersions cast upon them, is
a manifest Lie; for there are hundreds can bear witness, that they gave me
great occasion, as their boldly denying in public what they have asserted in
private before many Witnesses, and at other times (also in public) some of
them have called God to Witness to manifest Lies and Falsehoods, whereof we have
many to bear Witness. Nor have they ever to this day cleared themselves of
these things laid to their Charge, though they have had sufficient time and
opportunity given them. And the first days that the two Meetings were together,
I did never interrupt any of them, but they did always interrupt me, and often
many at once speaking to me, some pulling me by the Arm, and others by the
Coat, and particularly Arthur Cook was most abusive to me, crowding close to
me, and staring most inhumanly in my Face, when declaring, and calling me
Ranter, Wicked Man, Ungodly Man, and interrupting me in Prayer, (though I have
never interrupted any of them either in Prayer or Preaching) saying, Thou pray,
thou ought not to pray, thou art a Wicked Man, and others bidding take me
away: And at another time A. C. in a Men's Meeting cursing me, saying, Woe be to
thee from the Lord, which afterward he denied; and Sam. Jenings called me
Shameless Man, and at another time Apostate, and worse than Profane; and also,
they most falsely accused me with denying Magistracy, and being an Enemy to the
Government, with many other false Charges. And another of their Preachers came
into the Meeting, when I was sitting silent, and called me by Name, and said I
was a roaring Lion. To most of which Passages Hugh Derborough was an Eye and
Ear Witness: Is it not then great Hypocrisy and Partiality in him to pass by
all these great Provocations, and most Unchristian Usages (to say nothing of
the Persecution I and other of my Friends have met with from them, by Fintng
some, Imprisoning others, and Taking away Goods, only for Conscience sake) and
so boldly to affirm, That I had little occasion, if any, given me. What can I
think or say of this H.D. but that he (like many others; among them) is an
Abominable Hypocrite!

And that I said, Cut me in pieces, chop me, fry me, if ye will, etc. H D. is
very dis-ingenuous wholly to conceal the occasion thereof, which was, that they
did greatly threaten me with their outward Power, saying, This was
intolerable, this was not to be born, when I called some of them Hypocrites,
whom I well knew, and could prove to be such; and though I was in little or no
seeming danger, as to the outward at that time, yet I can truly say, I felt the
Spirit of Cain in them, and they did seek occasion against me, if possible, to
take away my natural Life, by their ensnaring words and questions, and charging
me, That I had spoke against the King; as many can bear witness, who had a
sense of their Cain-like Spirit, as well as I, which occasioned me to call some
of them Bloody Hounds, (and had I called them Hell Hounds, it would have been
but what Fox in his Book of Martyrs called Persecutors;) and one time, being
hot by their thronging and crowding about me, because I loosned some few
Buttons of my Doublet, to get a little Air to refresh me, they raised an
abominable Lie on me, viz. That in a fit of Distractson I ripped open my Breast,
and showed my naked Skin. And I can truly say, God raised me up in a Spirit of
Boldness, to warn them to repent of their Lying, Hypocrisy, Unbelief, and
Persecution, lest the Judgments of the Lord should break forth against them;
telling them, I feared them not, let them cut me and roast me, or such like
words, having in my mind, the bold words of Lawrence the Martyr to his
Persecutor, the Heathen Emperor, when he was roasting on the Grid-Iron, as Fox
relates the Passage in the Book of Martyrs, page 102. This side is now roasted
enough, turn up, O Tyrant great! Assay, whether roasted or raw, thou think
the better Meat. Which words, Fox says, he spoke in the mighty Spirit of God.
Also, I had in mind the words of Anaxagoras, when the Tyrant was causing to
beat him in a Mortar, Beat, beat, (said he) thou touchest not Anaxagoras. Which
Examples I gave them to be my Apology for such words, and with which sober and
impartial People were satisfied. And though from this H. D. and some others
would insinuate as if this was a wicked saying, it proceeds from their great
Ignorance; for seeing Christ has pronounced them blessed who suffer
Persecution for Righteousness sake, no judicious and sincere Christian will
deny but it is desirable (in the will of God) and many faithful Christians have
desired it, yea, and rushed toward it, and by their sharp words that they have
used toward Persecutors, have procured it. And our blessed Lord Jesus Christ,
who became an Example in Sufferings, said to the Jews, Destroy this Temple,
(meaning the Temple of his Body) and after three days I will raise it up; and
he said to Judas, What thou do do quickly; and he said further, I have a
Baptism wherewith to be Baptized, meaning his Sufferings, And how am I
straightened till it be accomplished! And Paul said, He was not only ready to be
bound, but to dye for the Name of Jesus. But it is very apparent these my
Persecutors and false Accusers never found any such Spirit of Courage or Love
to Truth in them, that did move them to desire to suffer such things for the
Lord's sake. And yet to prevent all mistake and mis-construction (that some
through weakness may put on my words) I do sincerely declare, That I had no
other aim or intention in such words, but to express the willingness and
readiness of mind that the Lord had wrought in me by his Power, not only to
suffer the Reproaches and false Accusations of my Adversaries, but even the
worst that God might permit them to inflict upon me, knowing it would turn to
my Reward, etc.

As to his great Commendations of John Wilsford and Thomas Everndon, from his
inward sense and discerning of them; these two men have sufficiently discovered
themselves by their late Fruits, of falsely accusing the Innocent, and speaking
Lies in the Name of the Lord, that they deserve no such Character as H.D. in
Hypocrisy has put upon them; for proof of which I refer to the printed sheet,
called, False Judgments Reprehended. And for all the great bragging and
boasting of these our Opposers, of their inward discerning, God by his
wonderful Providence has given some evident Examples of it in the face of the
World, how miserably they are deceived and blinded in that they call their
Discerning: as first, whereas the Meeting in the Country used to be kept at an
honest man's House, and this man favored me, therefore they had a sense that he
was a man of a wrong Spirit; but whereas there was another that rise up in
great Opposition to me, charging me of Blasphemy, because I said, God was
present in all his Creatures; and of false Doctrine, because I said, Christ was
in Heaven our Elder Brother, and that he would appear again to judge the Quick
and the Dead at the great Day; therefore a Company of them removed their
Meeting to this man's house, whom they thought worthy, crying him up, as if he
were no ordinary Saint, whenas at the same time a Negro Woman had his Bastard
carrying about in her Womb (though he has a Wife of his own) and though some
have endeavored to cloak it, yet it appearing with more than ordinary
clearness, has caused them now again to remove the Meeting from his House.
Secondly, Another that has lately given forth a Paper of Condemnation, as if
he were some great Convert, about the very time of his pretended Conversion,
was discovered to be guilty of attempting to commit Sodomy, which he has
partly confessed. So that they have little cause to boast of their Converts, or
yet of their Spirit of Discerning. And if some have left us, more have left
them, and come to us, and who are Persons of more Sobriety.

Fourthly, Whereas H.D. says, It is sealed upon his heart, that the Anger of
the Lord is kindled as Fire, against that Spirit of Division that appeared in
G.K. and others.

Answ. It is but ordinary to him, and such other Hypocrites, to take the Name
of the Lord in vain: it were well if he was sensible of the Fire of Gods Anger,
that is ready to kindle against him for his Lying, Hypocrisy, Enmity, and
falsely accusing the Innocent, and seeking to justify the Guilty. We are not
divided from faithful Friends and Brethren, that are found in the Doctrine and
Faith of Christ, and whose Godly Life and Practice seal to the sincerity of
their Faith; but we are divided from Hypocrites, Liars, and false accusers, and
gross Unbelievers, who deny the Lord that bought them, and Faith in him; and
for so doing God is not angry with us, but well pleased, having done it in
obedience to Christ's Command, who has commanded us to be separate from
Unbelievers, 2 Cor. 6.14, 27.

Fifthly, Whereas he accuses me for saying, The Light within is not sufficient
without somewhat else, he knowing in his Conscience, as well as his Associates,
that by that something else I understand not Humane Learning, nor the Letter of
the Scripture, nor outward Preaching, but the Man Christ Jesus without us, in
whom all fullness of Grace, Truth, Light, and Life dwells, and his Death and
Sufferings, Resurrection, Ascension and Mediation; all which are something else
than the measure of Grace and Light in us: In this Accusation H.D. falls in
with J. Delavall, and my Answer to the one will serve sufficiently to the
other. And though H.D. seems to assent and declare, That the Grace of God,
which is sufficient, is the Effect of the Death and Sufferings of Christ Jesus,
yet either like a gross Hypocrite, or most ignorant and inconsiderate Person
(not to use Sam. Jening's Phrase of Ignorant, Nonsensical, Puppey) he does most
palpably contradict his present Assertion; for if the Grace of God within us,
be the Effect of Christ's Death and Sufferings, then we are not saved only by
the Grace within, but by the Death and Sufferings, Resurrection, and Mediation
of Christ without us, seeing the Cause of a Cause is the Cause of the thing
caused, or effect. Beside, the Death and Sufferings of Christ, and his most
perfect Obedience unto Death, and shedding of his most precious Blood without
us, was not only necessary to procure the inward Grace of God to us, but also
to make a Propitiation for our sins, and reconcile us unto God, and so was
needful to our Salvation, as the great Atonement and Sacrifice of Expiation, as
well as the procuring Cause of his Grace in us. But since he charge me with
an Error for holding, That the Grace or Light within is not sufficient without
something else; then seeing nothing can be an Error, but because it is
opposite to some Truth, that which it is opposite to, is, That the Light within
is sufficient without any, or every thing else; and if so, then he excludes
wholly the Man Christ Jesus from having any part in our Salvation.

Sixthly, As to the Testimonies he cites out of Rob. Barclay's Apology, they
are of the same nature with what J. Delavall has formerly cited in his Papers,
to which I have answered, and refer to the same in print, where I show that R.
B. no where says, in all his Apology, That the Light or Grace within is
sufficient to Salvation without the Man Christ Jesus without us, and what he
did and suffered for us on Earth, and his present Mediation and Intercession
for us in Heaven. All that can be gathered from R. B's words in any of his
Books, is first, That the express distinct outward and historical Knowledge and
Faith of Christ is not necessary to Salvation, where it is not preached nor
revealed; and I say the same. Secondly, That men may be saved, and many have
been saved, who have not heard Christ outwardly preached to them, nor never
heard or read the outward Testimony of the Scriptures concerning him. Thirdly,
That a good Work of God may be begun in men, that is of a tendency to
Salvation, and is Salvation begun, in a general sense and respect, without all
Knowledge and Faith of Christ's Death and Sufferings; which I also grant, and
have all along granted; and therefore neither H. Derborough, J. Delavall, nor
any other have proved me (and I believe never can prove me) to contradict
either Rob. Barclay's Books, or any of my own Books; and it is great deceit in
this H. D. only in general to cite my Book of Universal Grace, without
mentioning the words of my Book. And it is worth noticing, that he exactly
follows J. Delavall, not bringing one place of Scripture wherewithal to prove
me in an Error, but only some Citations out of R. B. perverted and falsely
applied by him. And it is another piece either of gross Hypocrisy and Deceit,
or bold and impudent Rashness in him to say, That R. Barclay does not say the
Express Knowledge of Christ, who as Man died for the sins of the World; for
though he does not say it in one place, yet he has it in another, as page 86.
of his Latin Apology, truly thus Englished; The History is profitable and
comfortable, joined with the Mystery, but not without it; but the Mystery is
and can profit without the explicit (or express) knowledge of the History; and
I still affirm the same.

Seventhly, He grossly and most impudently belyeth me in his Paper, That in my
printed Treatise, called, Truth and Innocence etc. page 16. the Light within is
so struck at, as if it were a very insufficient thing. Nor is he less injurious
in belying me, as if I did hold that the Light within was sufficient to begin a
Good Work, but was not sufficient to perfect it; Which is his gross abuse, but
not my Assertion; for I never so said, but either in his Ignorance or
Hypocrisy he does not distinguish betwixt the several Measures and
Ministrations of the Light within; for this I have said, and still say, first,
No measure of Light can save any man, either to begin or finish his Salvation,
without the Man Christ Jesus, and his Death and Sufferings, and Resurrection,
and Intercession for us in Heaven, without us. Secondly, The Light is
sufficient in the first and succeeding Measures of it, both to begin and finish
the Work of men's Salvation, but yet not the first Ministration or Operation of
it; and though the Ministrations be diverse, yet the Light it self, in its
Nature, is but one, and is abundantly in it self sufficient, both to begin and
finish the Work of men's Salvation, but not without the Man Christ Jesus.

Eighthly, That the Faith of Christ, as he died for the sins of men, is
universally necessary to finish and perfect the Work of men's Eternal Salvation,
does no wise derogate from the sufficiency of the Light, because the Light is
as sufficient to work the Faith and Knowledge of Christ without men, as within
them, when it pleases God so to order it. And as for the Example brought by
Robert Barclay in his Apology, and also by me in my Answer to R. Gorden, it
must not be too far stretched, for commonly all Similitudes fall short in some
part; for though a Medicine may cure a man's Body, though he has no Knowledge
of it, what it is, yet the Light and Grace of Christ cannot cure the Soul
perfectly without all Knowledge of it, and Faith in it, otherwise it might be
said, That men may be saved without all Knowledge of God and Christ within, as
well as without; but the same Reason that makes the Knowledge and Faith of
Christ within needful to perfect the Work of men's Salvation, does also make the
Knowledge of him without them necessary in some measure to perfect the Work of
their Salvation, seeing the one cannot sufficiently be known without the other,
and the Scripture lays equal necessity and weight on both; See Romans 10.8, 9.
John 17.3. Isa. 53.11. Acts 10.43. Acts 11.14. Romans 3.22, 25. Gal. 2.26. And
though many have received Damage by Adam's Fall, who never heard of it, and
know not that Adam sinned by eating of the Tree of Knowledge of Good and Evil,
yet none are finally lost or condemned for Adam's sin, but for their own Sin of
Impenitency and Unbelief, which they either do, or may know; and consequently
none are finally and perfectly saved, but who have some Knowledge and Faith of
Christ, their Savior, even the Man Christ Jesus, by the Faith of whom they
receive the Forgiveness of their sins, according to Acts 13.38, 39. Cap. 4.10,
11, 12. Luke 1.77. cap. 24.46, 47.

George Keith.

Observation by another Hand.
IS it not Amazing and Astonishing, that notwithstanding the great Differences
and Divisions that are amongst the QUAKERS beyond Sea, yet (the last yearly
Meeting June 1693. at London) the Quakers should assert in their printed yearly
Paper, That their Friends beyond Sea were for the most part in LOVE and GOOD
UNITY. And also in their Book The Christian Doctrine, etc. say the Differences
are but among A FEW Persons, and that they agree in the MAIN, when as they
cannot but know, that what they say herein is notoriously false, there being no
less then ten or twelve Books and Papers printed, which give an Account, that
hundreds are concerned in the Controversy; and that the said Controversy is
not about the Women's Meetings, etc. (which those that oppose, are called by G.
W. etc. Infidels, Heathens, Wolves, Dogs and Devils Incarnate, etc.) but about
the very Fundamentals of the Christian Religion, as by their said Books, etc.
do manifestly appear. And though this is so evident and apparent, that scarsly
any Man of Sense and Common Honesty will deny or gainsay, yet such is the
Impudence and Falsnes of the Preachers and Leaders of the FOXONIAN Party, that
they have asserted the contrary, as above.

23 Nov. 1693. F.B.

THE END.
Books lately published.
1 THe Trials of several Quakers before a Court of Quakers. 2. An Account of
the great Divisions of the Quakers in Pensilvania, b^ing the Plea of the
Innocent. 3. A further Account of the Divisions of the Quakers in Pensilvania,
being some Reasons and Causes of Separation* etc. 4. The Principles, Doctrines,
Laws and Orders of the Quakers. 5. The Judgment given forth by 28 Quakers
against G. Keith and his Friends, with a full Account of the yearly Meeting
signed by 70 Quakers. 6. More Divisions still among the Quakers in Pensilvania.
All six sold by R Baldwin near the Oxford Arms in Warwick Lane.


