Some of the Many FALLACIES OF WILLIAM PENN DETECTED: In a Paper, called,
GOSPEL TRUTHS. Signed by him, and Three more, at Dublin the 4th of the 3d
Month, School. And in his late Book, called, A Defense of Gospel Truths, Against
the Exceptions of the B. of Cork's Testimony concerning that Paper. With some
Remarks on W. P. his unfair and unjust Treatment of him.

To which is added, A Synopsis, or short View of W. Penn's Deism, Collected out
of his Book called, A Discourse of the General Rule of Faith, etc. By GEORGE
KEITH.

LONDON, Printed for Benj. Took at the Middle-Temple-Gate in Fleet Street,
1699.

THE PREFACE.
Christian Reader,
THE following Treatise is not intended to be any direct or complete Answer to
the Book, called, A Defense of a Paper, entitled, Gospel Truths, against the
Exceptions of the Bishop of Cork 's Testimony. By William Penn. Printed School,
that Work belonging not to me, but to the Bishop of Cork, who, as I am
certainly informed, does intend to give him a meet Answer to his Book: In the
mean while I hoped it would be acceptable both to the Bishop, and to many good
Christians, thus far to interpose in the Defense of the Common Cause of the
Christian Faith; especially in the detecting of some of the greatest Fallacies
W. P. has used in his Book, under a seeming Disguise and Vizard of
Christianity, really to undermine and destroy it; I being of late Years better
acquainted with W. P's Fallacious way of Writing than probably the Bishop of
Cork is. If this small Treatise comes to the Bishop's Hand, before he publish
his Answer to W. P. he will find that he has been more charitable to him, than
indeed he deserved; and that he had in his large Charity, judged him more
Orthodox than he really is, although W. P. has made but an ill use of his
Charity, and has badly requited him, with many uncivil as well as unjust
Reflections, some of which I thought it was but Justice that I should vindicate
the Bishop from; and the rather because I suppose, the Bishop's Innocence and
Station may lead him in great part to neglect them, as not being so proper for
him to notice, as for another that stands by, and beholds their mutual
Treatment of each other, which according to my best understanding and
observation, as fair as it has been on the Bishop's part, has been as unfair
on the part of W. P. who as he treats him not with the least due respect to his
Station, so nor indeed as a Christian.

Some of the many Fallacies of William Penn, detected, in a Paper called Gospel
Truths, etc.
Section 1.
W. P 's Fallacy, in calling the Illumination of the Holy Ghost, which to him
is nothing but the common Illumination given to all Mankind, together with the
Scriptures a double and agreeing Record of true Religion. His false Notion of
Heaven and Hell, denying the Locality of them. His abusive Reflection on the
Bishop of Cork, his keeping the true Hell to himself. His Fallacy in pretending
to the Bishop, that he owned the Holy Trinity; where as in his Sandy Foundation
he has expressly denied it, and argued against it. His denying that outward
Person that suffered at Jerusalem, to be properly the Son of God. His denying
that the Body of Christ, was any part of Christ; and his agreement with G. W.
and other Quakers, in denying the Humanity of Christ, to be any part of the
true Christ.

Page 1. HE says, The Testimony of the Scriptures of Truth, and the
Illumination of the Holy Ghost, are the double and agreeing Record of true
Religion.

In this he is very Fallacious in the very entrance, this Illumination of the
Holy Ghost, he will have to be that which is given to be a general Rule to all
Mankind, (see his Discourse concerning the General Rule of Faith and Life,
Printed by T. Soul 1699.) But how is that, together with the Scriptures, a
double and agreeing Record? whereas that general Rule that he contendeth is
given to all Mankind [to wit, that general Illumination, as given to Infidel
Jews, Mahometans, and the Heathen World] is no Record to any one Article of the
Apostles Creed, or any one peculiar Doctrine of Christianity, but only to some
few Precepts of Morality, and general Piety toward God. Yea, W. P. has
confessed (see his Page 32 of that Discourse) That neither he nor his Brethren
have any new superadded Revelation concerning Adam's Fall, and Christ's Birth,
Death and Sufferings, etc. and says, It is not necessary. Therefore the
Illumination that he sets up for the General Rule to Quakers and Heathens, is
not any Record agreeing with the Scriptures in any one particular Article of
the Christian Faith, or positive Precept of the Gospel, peculiar to the
Christian Religion, as distinct from Deism and Heathenism.

Page 2. In his first Section the makes the eternal Reward of Happiness to be
given to all them that fear God; without the least mentioning of any Faith
toward the Lord Jesus Christ, considered as both God and Man, toward the
obtaining the eternal Happiness; nor is there the least hint of any such Faith
being necessary in all his Sections. And whereas he says, They that fear him
not, shall be turned into Hell, as the Bishop of Cork did well observe: What W.
P. means by Hell, by that Paper no one knows; but elsewhere what he means
either by Heaven or Hell, he has sufficiently told us in his Rejoinder to J.
Faldo, p. 179. viz. To assert the Locality of Heaven and Hell is too Carnal,
indeed Mohammedan. Seeing them W. P. does not own any place without us, to be
either Heaven or Hell, it is easy to understand what Heaven or Hell W. P. is
for, to wit, the Light within that is his only Heaven, and Darkness within his
only Hell, which is the old Ranters Notion, that is destructive to the great
Fundamentals of Christianity, such as, that Christ is bodily ascended into a
real Local Heaven without us, which Heavens all the Saints shall after the
Resurrection, in their glorified Bodies he taken up into; and the Bodies of the
Wicked together with their Souls, shall be cast into Hell, that is, a place of
Torment, as really as the other is a place of Joy and Felicity. It is
prodigiously Shameful and Astonishing in W. P. that though he knew in his
Conscience he did not mean Hell in the common sense of Christians, which
without doubt is the Bishop's sense, to wit, a real place of Torment without
us, yet that he should so treat, the Bishop, and so rudely and unchristianly
reflect upon him by a consequence as false as it is foul and dirty, saying in
his Page 40, either one of these is an Article of his belief, or else he keeps
the true Hell to himself.

Page 2. In his second Section, though he professes to express his and his
Brethrens Faith in Scripture Words, that there are Three that bear record in
Heaven, the Father, the Word and the Spirit, and these three are really one;
yet in his former Books, particularly in his Sandy Foundation, never yet
retracted by him, he has sufficiently discovered his gross and vile error, in
that fundamental Doctrine of the Christian Faith, thus arguing not only against
their being Three Persons, but their being Three, (otherwise than Nominally,
which was the Sabellian Heresy) since the Father is God, the Son is God, and
the Spirit is God, (which their opinion necessitates them to confess) then
unless the Father, Son and Spirit are three distinct nothings, they must be
three distinct Substances, and consequently three distinct God's. And he
brings Five Arguments against their being a Holy Three, P. 12, 13, 14.

In his Third Section, he seems to profess his and his Brethrens Faith in
Scripture terms. But this his professed Faith is quite inconsistent with what
he has delivered in his other Books, here he says, That the Word was made
Flesh and dwelt among Men, and was and is the only begotten of the Father, full
of Grace and Truth his beloved Son, etc. who tasted Death for every Man, and
dyed for Sin, that we might dye to Sin. But as it has been above showed, out
of his Sandy Foundation, he has argued against any such distinction as of the
Father and the Son in the Godhead, as inferring a plurality of God's, and
though here he professes to believe that this only begotten Son, dyed for Sin,
yet in his Serious Apology Page 146 he says, That the outward Person that
suffered was properly the Son of God, we utterly deny. And in his guide
mistaken P. 25. Christ Co-essential and Coeternal with his Father etc. of
being made Man, of his Dying, Rising and Ascending into Heaven, etc. [he says
of all this, that it is] confused Babble, and by Rote Canting, by paths of vain
Tradition, and Invention, results of Factious and corrupted Counsels. And in
his Rejoinder to John Faldo Page 299. he plainly denies, that the Body of
Christ was any constitutive part of Christ, and for seven leaves together
contends against John Faldo, That Christ did not Dye, nor hang on the Cross,
but only the Body, which he will not have to be any part of him. To this
Doctrine of W. P. does that of G. Whitehead agree (a Man as great, or rather
much greater, among the Quakers as W. P.) who says in his Dipper Plunged P.
13. Jesus Christ God-man is not Scripture Language. And in his Christian Quaker
P. 140. 141. though he grants that Christ had a humane Body of Flesh and Bones,
yet he denis, that he consisted of it, and says, he distinguishes betwixt
Christ's having a Body, and consisting of it. And in a Book given forth by the
Quakers, from their second days Meeting, (whereof G. W. is supposed the Author)
called, A Testimony for the true Christ; and his Light in confutation of R.
Cobbet printed 1668. They deny the Humanity of Christ, as Humanity signifies
the Earthly Nature of Man's Body, as coming from Humus the Ground; but as
Humanity signifies Meekness, Gentleness, Mercifulness; as opposite to Cruelty,
in this last sense, they own Christ's Humanity, but deny it in the former,
which yet is the true sense of Scripture, and of all true Christians.

Section 2.
His Fallacy in pretending to own Justification by Christ the Propitiation, in
Contradiction to what he has delivered in his Serious Apology, and Sandy
Foundation, and his fallacious way of stating the Doctrine of Justification,
wherein he misrepresents his Opponents.

IN his fourth Section, as seemingly Orthodox as he professes himself to be,
as fallacious and insincere he is, seeing he knows in his own Conscience,
that what he has here delivered, is utterly inconsistent with what is extant
in his other Books, never as yet retracted by him; nor does either he, or his
Brethren, own any change of persuasion from what they had, ever since they came
under the profession of Quakers; but as one of them has lately said in Print,
As God is the same, and Truth is the same, so his People are the same, viz. the
Quakers. I shall first set down his present profession of what he believes
concerning Justification, as follows, That as we are only Justified from the
guilt of Sin by Christ the Propitiation, and not by works of Righteousness that
we have done, so there is an absolute necessity that we receive and obey to
unfeigned Repentance, and amendment of Life, the Holy Light and Spirit of Jesus
Christ, in order to obtain that Remissionand Justification from Sin, etc. But
in contradiction to this, see what his Doctrine is in his Serious Apology, P.
148. And indeed, says W. P. this we deny, viz. Justification by the
Righteousness which Christ has fulfilled in his own Person for us, (wholly
without us) and boldly affirm it in the Name of the Lord to be, the Doctrine of
Devils and an Arm of the Sea of Corruption, which does now deluge the whole
World. Note Reader, If according to W. P's former words, we Only are Justified
from the guilt of Sin by Christ the Propitiation, and not by works of
Righteousness that we have done; then it is plainly evident, by the same
Doctrine, that we are Justified by the Righteousness which Christ has
fulfilled in his own Person for us, wholly without us, for these two manners of
Speech, are perfectly equivalent, viz. That we are only Justified from the
guilt of Sin by Christ the propitiation, and that we are Justified by the
Righteousness which Christ has fulfilled in his own Person wholly without us.
The word Only plainly importing the Righteousness of Christ Wholly without us,
unless there be some great fallacy in W. P's words, as the sequel will make
appear a little after. But if we take these two quotations in their genuine
Sense, the one, that we are Justified by the Righteousness of Christ Only, i.
e. Wholly without us, from the guilt of Sin; and the other that this we deny,
i. e. that we are Justified by the Righteousness which Christ has fulfilled in
his own Person for us, wholly without us; and boldly affirm it in the Name of
the Lord to be the Doctrine of Devils, etc. it is a perfect inconsistency and
contradiction. And yet now W. P. does teach the same Doctrine, which formerly
he called the Doctrine of Devils, without any change of his persuasion; as he
plainly tells in the conclusion of his Paper, This (says he) has all along
been the general stream and tendency both of our Ministry. and Writings, as our
books will make appear. But what a Forehead of Bras must W. P. have, with so
great confidence to assert so known an untruth! Again, the same W. P. in his
forecited Serious Apology thus argues (P 148.) against Christ's imputative
Righteousness. Death came by actual Sin, not imputative, therefore
Justification unto Life, came by actual Righteousness not imput ative. Note
Reader, If we are not Justified by Christ's imputed (which he calls imputative)
Righteousness, as here he asserts, how can this consist with his now saying,
that we are Justified from the guilt of Sin, by Christ the Propitiation.

Again in his Sandy Foundation, from P. 24, to P. 32. he pretends to bring
arguments from both Scripture and Reason, to refute the Justification of impure
Persons by an imputative Righteousness: I shall quote a few passages out of
many, to show the inconsistency of his late and former Doctrine about
Justification from the guilt of Sin. P. 25. from. Ezekiel. 18. 20, 26, 27, 28. He
draws this Argument, That the Condemnation or Justification of Persons, is not
from the imputation of another Righteousness, but the actual performance, and
keeping of God's Righteous Statutes or Commandments, otherwise God should
forget to be equal.

Again in P. 26. he says, Christ is so far from telling them of their being
Justified, abiding in his Love, by virtue of his Obedience imputed unto them,
that unless they obey his Commandments, and obey for themselves, they shall be
so remote from an acceptance, as wholly to be cast out, in all which Christ is
but our example. Where note Reader, the words BUT our example.

Again in the same Page, Nor let any fancy (says he) that Christ has so
fulfilled it for them, as to exclude their Obedience, from being requisite to
their acceptance, BUT only as their pattern. Where note again Reader, these
words but only as their pattern. This is plain Socinianism.

Again in P. 27. he thus argues, If rejoicing and acceptance with God, or the
contrary, are to be reaped from the Works, that a Man sows either to the
Flesh, or to the Spirit, then is the Doctrine of acceptance and ground of
rejoicing from the works of another utterly excluded, every Man reaping
according to what he has sown, and bearing his own Burden.

Thus Reader, thou see how earnestly he has contended against all
Justification from the Righteousness of Christ, wrought in his own Person
without us, though in this late Paper of Gospel Truths he seems fully to assert
it. I shall not need to insist at large, to show his fallacious way of stating
the question, about Justification by Christ's Righteousness without us, and of
his reasoning against it. As if these against whom he argues did plead for a
Justification, or Righteousness of Christ actually imputed to Men, wholly
unsanctified, and remaining altogether in a state of disobedience, wherein
hemost unfairly represents them. But whereas he pleads at such a high rate,
that none are Justified, while having the least Sin or impurity, so as that
none are Justified, but who perfectly, in all points, without the least sinful
defect or imperfection, obey the Law of God, and come up in their Obedience to
the outmost demand of the Law, as the whole strain of his Arguments run: by
this rate of arguing, either W. P. and all his Brethren, are under a state of
Condemnation, and the Curse of the Law, If they have the least impurity, or
sinful defect, and have not attained a sinless perfection, which yet can be
proved sufficiently they have not attained; and some of them, have so much
ingenuity in them, as to confess they have not yet arrived unto. And W. P.
would do but equally in the case, to tell us, whether he is such a Sinless
Person, that answers every demand of Justice, and who in his obedience, comes
up to the highest perfection of Holiness, that the most Holy Law of God does
now at this present require of him. If he thinks he is, he is miserably
mistaken, while his sinful Imperfections in his asserting such gross Untruths
for Truths, and some of them against the Conviction of his Conscience, are so
manifest, that he who runs may read them; besides a great vein of Pride, Levity
and Vanity of Mind, and Scornful Disdain, that appears running through his
pretended Answer to the Bishop of Cork his modest Observations; and his most
uncivil Language and Epithets he has used in his former Books, never to this
day repented of, so far as we can understand, given by him to his Opponents in
his several Books of Controversy, whereof the Author of The Snake in the
Grass, has given a large Catalogue.

Section 3.
His Fallacy, in seeming to own Justification by Christ the Propitiation;
whereas by Christ the Propitiation, he does not mean the Man Christ without,
but the Light within. His bold attempt in his Sandy Foundation, to throw down
three great Fundamentals of Christianity, viz. The Doctrine of the Holy
Trinity, The Doctrine of Christ's Satisfaction, and the Doctrine of
Justification by Christ's imputed Righteousness. His excluding Faith in Christ
Crucified, from being necessary to Justification, and placing it wholly on
Repentance and Obedience; his agreement with G. W. therein.

BUT under this seemingly fair acknowledgment of W. P. that we are only
justified from the Guilt of Sin by Christ the Propitiation, let us search,
whither there be not even in this acknowledgment, The Snake in the Grass: If W.
P. remain in his former Persuasion, as he affirms he does, by his former
Books I shall clearly prove, that by Christ the Propitiation, he does not mean
the Man Christ Jesus, as he outwardly suffered Death, and the shedding of his
Blood outwardly for the Remission of our Sins, being the great and only
Propitiatory Sacrifice for the Sins of Men; and thereby by his most perfect
Satisfaction, paying to Divine Justice the Debt of our Sins. In his Christian
Quaker, p. 97. he contendeth, That the Sacrifices and Lamb in the Passover
(under the Law) were not proper Figures of Christ without, but of Christ the
promised Seed within: One outward thing (says he) cannot be the proper Figure
of another; nor is it the way of Holy Scripture so to teach, the outward Lamb
shows forth the inward. And in Page 145, he says, As the outward Jew had an
outward Priest, at whose mouth he ought to seek the Law, so the Jew inward and
Circumcision in Spirit has an inward and Spiritual High Priest, the King,
Ruler, Judge, Lawgiver, High Priest, Law, Rule, Temple, are all Spiritual, i.
e. Inward. And in his Rejoinder to J. Faldo, p. 284. he affirms, That Christ
offers himself in his Children, in the nature of a mediating Sacrifice to
appease the Wrath of God. Again in his Sandy Foundation, from p. 16 to p. 24.
he disputes against the Satisfaction of Christ, giving this Title to his
Disputation, The vulgar Doctrine of Satisfaction, being dependent on the second
Person of the imagined Trinity refuted from Scripture, to p. 20, and from p. 20
refuted from right reason to p. 24, where p. 17. arguing from Jer. 31. 31, 33,
34. he says, Here is God's mere Grace asserted against the pretended necessity
of a Satisfaction to procure his Remission. And p. 18. he argues thus, And
forgive us our Debts, as we forgive our Debtors. Where nothing can be more
obvious (says he) than that which is forgiven is not paid. And if it is our
Duty to forgive without a Satisfaction received, and that God is to forgive us,
as we forgive them, then is a Satisfaction Totally excluded. And from Acts 10.
9. he concludes, so that Remission came by believing his Testimony, and obeying
his Precepts, and not by a Pretended Satisfaction. Thus Reader do but observe,
how Proteus like he changes his shapes, one while to argue against any
Satisfaction of Christ to God, for the Debt of our Sins, by which the nature of
Christ's propitiatory Sacrifice is wholly destroyed. Another while after he has
thrown down Christ's being our Propitiatory Sacrifice without us, he sets up an
Imaginary Sacrifice of Christ, the Lamb slain within, the high Priest within:
Whereas were his Arguments of any force (as they are not) they would be as much
against Christ's being a Propitiation (by his Satisfaction to Divine Justice
for our Sins) within Men as without them.

In one thing his Cunning is observable, though mixed with horrid Ignorance and
Folly, and bold Presumption, that he makes the Doctrine of the Holy Trinity,
that distinguishes betwixt the Father and the Son, and the Holy Ghost, the
Doctrine of Christ's Satisfaction, and the Doctrine of Justification by
Christ's imputed Righteousness, so closely joined together, that they fall
together if the first of them falls; and so he makes his bold attempt against
the first, that by throwing down the first, he may throw down the second, and
by that means the third; and having, as he thinks, effectually done the
business, he entitles his Book, The Sandy Foundation shaken; which is in effect
to say, The Foundation of the Christian Faith and Religion shaken, in order to
introduce Deism and Heathenism into Christendom. But he shall one day know (if
he know it not before he dye, which God grant that he may) that the Foundation,
he calls The Sandy Foundation, is not Sandy, but stands on that Rock on which
the Church of Christ is built, that the Gates of Hell shall not prevail
against; and if he repent not of this Blasphemy, which I pray God he may, this
Rock will grind him to powder.

There is yet one main thing further, that is needful to be noticed, in this
fourth Section, before I leave it, and that is, That whereas he asserts, there
is an absolute necessity, that we receive and obey to unfeigned Repentance and
amendment of Life, the Holy Light and Spirit of Jesus Christ, in order to
obtain that Remission and Justification from Sin, for which he cites Romans 3. 22
to 26. 8. 1, 2, 3, 4. 1 John 5 7. he mentions not one word of the absolute
necessity of Faith in Jesus Christ, as he outwardly suffered Death for our
Sins, and thereby became the Propitiation for Sin, though he expressly asserts
the absolute necessity of Repentance, Obedience, and amendment of Life; and
though one of the Scriptures quoted by him in Chapter and Verse, viz Romans 3. 22
to 26. expressly mentions Faith in his Blood for Remission of Sin; yet he
knowing himself in his own Conscience, that he was not for any such necessity
of Faith in Christ, or in his Blood, as above expressed, he did purposely omit
it. And if he, or any for him, shall say, he implied it, though he did not
express it: I say, as he did not express it, so he did not imply it, which I
prove from the following Reasons. 1. Seeing he not only expressed Repentance,
but asserted it to be absolutely necessary to Remission of Sin; had he thought
Faith in Christ, as he outwardly died, absolutely necessary to our obtaining
Remission of Sins, no doubt he would have expressed that too, either there, or
some where at least, in some of his Books; but upon all the search I have made,
I have not found it any where in his books, and indeed very rarely in any of
the books of his Brethren. 2. But on the contrary, I have found, that both he
and G. W. especially, (and diverse others, as I have proved by Quotations out
of their books in my third Narrative) have expressly opposed this Faith, to wit,
in Christ as outwardly Crucified, and in his blood as outwardly shed, by way of
Propitiation, and satisfaction to Divine Justice for our Sins. W. P. in his
Quakerism a new Nickname for old Christianity, p. 6. says, Faith in the
History of Christ's outward Manifestation, is a deadly Poison these latter Ages
has been infected with. And in his Rejoinder to John Faldo, p. 333. he says,
Christ in the Gentiles is a greater Mystery, than Christ as he was made
manifest in the Flesh. It Is strange (says he in opposition to J. F. who
asserted like a true Christian, That Christ, as he was made manifest in the
Flesh, was a greater Mystery than Christ in the Gentiles) that should be
counted most mysterious, which was the Introduction to the Mystery; and these
Transactions counted most difficult, that were by the Divine Wisdom of God,
ordained as so many facile Representations of what was to be accomplished in
Man. And page 335. In short (says he) it is to exclude the true Mystery of
Godliness, which is Christ manifested in his Children. Thus we see he makes
Christ's Death and Sufferings without us (which he calls Transactions) as so
many facile Representations of what was to be accomplished in Man, i. e. of his
being Crucified within, and his blood inwardly shed; and his offering himself
inwardly in his Children, in the nature of a mediating Sacrifice, to appease
the Wrath of God. Thus also we see how he has destroyed the great Object of
the Christian Faith, which is Christ as he was outwardly Crucified, being the
great Propitiation for our Sins. And G. Whitehead, his elder Brother in
Ignorance and Error, has given him a Copy to write after, in his Truth
defending the Quakers, p. 65. he says, Faith in Christ without Men, is
contrary to the Apostles Doctrine. And p. 66. he says, The Blood of Christ's
Humanity, the Apostle does not tell us of, Christ's Blood is Spiritual. And in
his Light and Life, p. 56. he says, The Blood of the Covenant is inward and
Spiritual. P. 59, 60. Christ's Blood that was outwardly shed, not the Antitype
or Substance signified by the Blood of Beasts shed under the Law. And p. 8. he
says, To look to Christ Crucified at Jerusalem, and in Heaven, and to be
revealed in us by his Spirit, is a Contradiction. 3. According to that
Fundamental Principle laid down by W. P. in his Discourse of the General Rule
of Faith and Life, he must needs exclude Faith in Christ, as he was outwardly
born, died, and rose again, not only from being absolutely necessary to our
Salvation, but from being given to us at all, (otherwise than barely
historically,) for seeing according to him the Light in every Man, only as
giving the ordinary Discoveries, that all Mankind have, is the Rule of Faith to
every Man, no Man either does or can believe (otherwise than barely
historically) what the Light within has not revealed; but the Light within, as
it has not revealed the Birth, Death and Sufferings of Christ to every Man, so
by W. P's Confession, it has not revealed these things to him, or his
Brethren, for he grants, they belong to extraordinary Revelation, and fall not
within the ordinary Discoveries given to Mankind, and are none of the absolute
Necessaries of Religion, and that such Revelation is not necessary; and yet
without such internal extraordinary Revelation of these things, they cannot
have the certain Faith of them, as he confesses.

Section 4.
His Fallacy, in pretending to own the Doctrine of Justification by Christ the
Propitiation, the Doctrine of the Holy Trinity, the Doctrine of the
Resurrection of the Dead, to be Fundamentals of Christianity, whereas he does
not in truth own any one of them. His ill use of the Bishop's Charity, by his
own Argument retorted on himself, it is proved, he has denied all the
Fundamental Articles of Christianity. The chief reason why W. P. and his
Brethren believe not the Fundamentals of Christianity is, That they deny the
Holy Scripure to be the Rule of their Faith, and set up the Light within to be
the Rule, which yet they confess, does not reveal to them any of those
Fundamentals.

BY all which it plainly appears, how disingenuous and fallacious W. P. has
been, not only in the Paper called Gospel Truths, published by him and his
three Brethren, but in his Answer to the Bishop of Cork on that Head; [yea, and
on all the other Heads, it were easy to show his Shuffling and Equivocation,
as well as his unfair and uncivil Treatment of him.] To detect which a little
further, let us consider W. P's words in answer to the Bishop of Cork, p. 25
and 26. I am of opinion, (says W. P.) If he (viz. the Bishop) had well
considered the Force and Comprehensiveness of our Belief concerning Christ,
That pleases him so well, he might have saved himself the trouble of what he
has published to the World upon the rest of them; for whoever believes in
Christ, as a Propitiation in order to Remission of Sins, and Justification of
Sinners, can hardly disbelieve any Fundamental Article of the Christian
Religion. Since every such Person must necessarily believe in God, because it
is with him alone Man is to be justified. To be sure he must believe in Christ,
for that is the very Proposition; he must also believe in the Holy Ghost,
because he is the Author of his Conviction, Repentance and Belief, he must
believe Heaven and Hell, Rewards and Punishments, and consequently the
Resurrection of the Just and Unjust. For why should he be concerned about the
being freed from the Guilt of his Sin, if he were unaccountable in another
World. So that acknowledging the necessity of Christ, as a Propitiation, in
order to the Remission of Sin, comprehends the main Doctrine of the Christian
Religion. And as so many Lines drawn from the Circumference to the Center, they
all meet and center in Christ: And indeed it is as the Navel of Christianity,
and Characteristick of that Religion.

Were this confession of W. P. as sincere as it is seemingly fair, it would
prove that his Doctrine were indeed Christian, and no doubt might, and ought to
give to the Bishop or any other that were doubtful in the case, good
Satisfaction, of the Christianity of his Doctrine. But that all this is mere
paint and equivocation, what I have above quoted out of his Books, fairly and
fully, does sufficiently prove, That the profession W. P. made of his belief,
in his Gospel Truths, pleased the Bishop so well, [whereof W. P. takes such
particular and great notice, and thereby takes occasion to blame his
disingenuity, as well as his troubling himself, with publishing what he has
done to the World. Yea, W. P. makes it next to impossible, that it was the
first time the Bishop has heard of that Doctrine among them, viz. the
acknowledging the necessity of Christ, as a propitiation, in order to the
remission of Sins, and Justifying them as Sinners from Guilt.] I say, that this
his profession pleased the Bishop so well, did proceed from the Bishops great
Charity, and Moderation, Charitably believing that W. P's Heart and Pen did go
along together; but as W. P. has made an ill use of the Bishop's Charity and
Judgment, thus impertinently to reflect on him, so it is fit, the Bishop should
be better acquainted with W. P's equivocations, and double dealings with him,
which he may easily find out by an indifferent search into his former Books. W.
P. in his above mentioned confession, professes his belief in Christ as a
propitiation; and this he would seem to make the Navel of Christianity and
Characteristick of that Religion. But what does W. P. mean by Christ the
Propitiation, and Faith in him as such? does he mean the same that the Bishop
means, and all sincere Christians? Nay, nothing less, Christ within as he is
the Light and Life, as he offers up himself within his Children, in the Nature
of a Mediating Sacrifice, the Lamb within but not the Lamb without, the
High Priest within, is the Propitiation, and his blood as shed within which is
the Life, and the Life is the Light within, (as he has both printed and
preached,) is that Propitiation,

And certainly, did he mean that Faith in the Man Christ without us, as he
outwardly was crucified, was necessary to Christianity, and the Characteristick
of that Religion, and that the acknowledgment of Christ as such, was necessary
to constitute a Christian, he would not plead, that a mere Just Man, who has no
Faith in Christ, as the Word Incarnate, is a Christian; and that he who
believes in God believes in Christ, because Christ is God, as he has argued in
his address to Protestants. And did he really think, that to believe and
acknowledge Christ, to wit, as outwardly crucified, and raised again, to be the
Propitiation, was the Navel of Christianity, and the Characteristick of that
Religion, he would not have excluded that Faith from the absolute necessaries
of Religion, as he has plainly done in his discourse concerning the general
Rule of Faith and Life. Nor would he have set up the Light within every Man,
with respect to its ordinary discoveries of Moral Piety and Justice without any
Revelation of Christ, as he came outwardly in the Flesh, to be the general Rule
of Faith to all Christians, as well as to all Heathens; which is making Deism
and Christianity but one and the same thing; though now he seems to distinguish
them, by calling Christianity that Religion whereof the Faith and
acknowledgment of Christ the Propitiation is the Navel and Characteristick. But
seeing W. P. does so Grossly prevaricate and equivocate, about Christ the
Propitiation and Faith in him as such; and that it has been proved, he has
not the true Faith of Christ the Propitiation, nor so much as a true notion of
it; it is fit to apply W. P's words against himself, and to Argue from his words
by the Rule of contraries. As whoever believes in Christ as a Propitiation, in
order to remission of Sins, can hardly disbelieve any Fundamental Article of
the Christian Religion; so by good consequence contrariwise, whoever believes
not in Christ, as a Propitiation, (in the true sense of Scripture generally
received by all true Christians,) to wit, as outwardly Crucified, Dead and
Raised again, etc. can hardly believe any Fundamental Article of the Christian
Religion; but W. P. believes not in Christ as a Propitiation, in order to
remission of Sin, etc. in the true sense of Scripture, generally received by
all true Christians; therefore W. P. hardly believes any fundamental Article
of the Christian Religion, to wit, as peculiar to the same. The first
proposition is proved, by the Rule of contraries from W. P's assertion, as I
think he will readily confess, the second proposition, which is the Assumption,
is fully proved from what is above at large quoted by me out of his former
Books, never to this day retracted by him. And though he reckons up, the
Doctrine of the Trinity, viz. of the Father, of Christ the Son, and of the Holy
Ghost, the Doctrine of Heaven and Hell, the Doctrine of the Resurrection of the
Just and Unjust, to be Fundamental Doctrines, yea, and the main of Christian
Doctrine; yet from what is above proved out of his Books, he has plainly
opposed the true Christian Doctrine both of the Holy Trinity, and of Heaven and
Hell; and as plainly he has opposed the Doctrine of the Resurrection of the
Just and Unjust, in their respective Bodies, as I have fully proved in my third
Narrative; and so have his Brethren, G. Whitehead, Richard Hubberthorne and
others, only at present I shall quote these following passages out of some of
his former Books, in his Reason against Railing, in answer to Tho. Hicks, P.
138. he thus plainly argues against the deceased Saints looking for any future
Resurrection of the Body, which Tho. Hicks argued for. Is the Joy of the
Ancients (says W. P.) now in Glory imperfect, or are they in Heaven but by
halves? But why must the Felicity of the Soul depend upon that of the Body? Is
it not to make the Soul a kind of Window, to be without its beloved Body, a
better sort of Purgatory Again P. 134. If a thing can be the same, and
notwithstanding changed, for shame, let us never make so much stir against the
Doctrine of Transubstantiation, for the absurdity of it is rather outdone than
equalled by this carnal Resurrection. Again in his answer to J. Faldo, called
the Invalidity of J. Faldo's Vindication, P. 369. It Is sown a Natural Body,
It Is raised a Spiritual Body, and I do utterly deny (says he) that this Text
is concerned in the Resurrection of Man's carnal Body at all, but the States of
Men under the First and Second Adam: Men are sown into the World Natural, but
they are raised Spiritual, through him who is the Resurrection and the Life,
and so they are Sons of the Second Adam.

Nor need any to wonder why W. P. and his Brethren should disbelieve all these
fundamental Doctrines of Christianity, (which now he professes to own, and
that as Fundamental, but still quite in a most differing Sense from all true
Christians) for with what certainty can he or they believe them, they
acknowledge not the Holy Scriptures to be the Rule of their Faith in any of
these things, or indeed of any others, they have no certainty of the Truth of
any of these he now calls Fundamentals, from the Rule of Faith set up by them,
which is the Light within them, with respect to its ordinary Discoveries given
to Mankind; but none of these Fundamental Doctrines above mentioned, fall
within these ordinary Discoveries, as W. P. has confessed for they belong to
extraordinary Revelation: And if he should affirm, they did belong to the
ordinary Discoveries given to Mankind, he cannot prove it: What obscure
Knowledge any of them, called Heathen Philosophers, had of any of these great
Mysteries: W. P. cannot prove they had it from the Light within, but
Traditionally either from the Jews, and ancient Patriarchs and Prophets, or
from some among themselves prophetically inspired, as it is reported of the
Sybils, the which report, were it true, does not prove, that the Knowledge and
Faith of these great Fundamentals did fall within the ordinary discoveries of
the Light within given to Mankind in general.

Section 5.
His uncivil Treatment of the Bishop, as if he did render the Text 1 John 5. 7.
defective, whereas the Bishop only charged the Defect on W. P 's Confession,
which though given in Scripture words, yet not in the true Sense of Scripture.
His Fallacious Argument against the Holy Trinity answered. His Fallacy and
Equivocation, about his calling him who was born of the Virgin Mary, Jesus
Christ, and the Son of God; whereas he has denied him to be properly so: And
his abusive Treatment of the Bishop on that Head.

IN his Page 30, he proceeds in his unchristian and uncivil Treatment of the
Bishop, unjustly charging him, as if the Text 1 John 5. 7. were defective with
the Bishop, and as if he did render the Text it self short; which (says W. P.)
with submission, I think is a bold Attempt in one of his Station, If he
believes the 39 Articles. But all this is nothing but a Scandalous Reflection
on the Bishop, and a Shuffling and Cover, wherewithal to hide his own Error
and Incredulity.

The Bishop might well enough, without charging any defect on the Text (as he
does not in the least) charge a defect on this Confession of W. P. and his
Brethren, because though given in one Scripture Text, yet he had just cause to
question not to be given in the true sense of that Scripture; for most that are
unsound, as touching the Doctrine of the Holy Trinity, even Socinians as well
as others will profess, yea, and have professed to give their Faith in the
Text, yea, and all other Texts of the like nature, who yet are professed
Unbelievers of the true Doctrine of the Holy Trinity: And though W. P. and his
Brethren will frankly confess, they believe that the Father, the Son and the
Holy Ghost, are one God, one in Substance and Essence; and thus think to clear
themselves of Sociniansm, yet he and they at the same time are grossly guilty of
Sabellianism, acknowledging no distinction betwixt Father, Son, and Holy Ghost,
other than Nominal, or at most in Manifestation and Operation, ad extra, and
with relation to the Creatures. So that W. P's Notion and Faith of the Holy.
Trinity, which he calls the Scripture Trinity, but it is not the Scripture
Trinity, but the Sabellian Trinity, is no other than this, that as the Father,
the Son, and the Holy Spirit, are one God, one Essence, and Being; so the
Father is the Son, and the Son is the Father; and the Holy Ghost is the Son,
and the Son is the Holy Ghost; for as I have quoted him above in his Sandy
Foundation, he disputes not only against their being Three Persons, but
against their being Three, or Three He Is; arguing, That if the Father be God,
the Son God, and the Holy Ghost God, then unless they are Three distinct
Nothings, they are Three distinct Substances, and consequently Three distinct
God's: Which is as weakly and Sophistically argued by W. P. as if he had
argued, If the three Dimensions of a Body be three distinct Dimensions, then
unless they are three distinct Nothings, they are three distinct Substances,
and consequently three distinct Bodies; which I only bring to show the silly
Sophistry of his Argument; but not that I think this glorious Mystery of the
Trinity can be duly represented by this Similitude, or any other natural
Similitude whatsoever; though it is a certain truth, that the distinction of
the three divine relative Properties in the divine Essence, prove them no more
to be Three Gods, than the distinction of the three Dimensions in a Body, prove
that they are three Bodies. And had W. P. given the Profession of his Faith in
all the other Texts of Scripture, that are commonly understood by true
Christians, to prove the true distinction of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost,
in their relative and personal Properties: Yet seeing, as has been fully
proved, W. P. has quite another sense of all those Texts, than the true
Scripture sense received by all true Christians, the Bishop might well enough
charge W. P's Faith with being defective, for his imposing a wrong sense on the
sound Scripture words, as he has done, and which it is like the Bishop had
just occasion of suspicion he had done in some of his books. Does W. P. think,
that if a suspected Papist, to clear himself of being free of that Popish Error
of Transubstantiation, should profess his Faith in that one Text of Scripture,
Take, eat, this is my Body; would this justly clear him of that Suspicion,
seeing he may be guilty of that Error, for all his Scripture Confession; it
being the common Policy of the greatest Heretics, to profess their Faith in
Scripture words, while by their other words they have made it appear, that they
have a Heretical Sense, as in the present case is fully evident.

In Page 31. To excuse his Equivocation, about his owning Jesus Christ to be
the Son of God, he tells the Bishop, we call him the beloved Son of God, the
only begotten of the Father. And in Page 32 and 33, he tells, they have called
him Christ, who was born of the Virgin Mary, and Conceived by the Holy Ghost,
again and again, yea, that they have not confessed his Name less than nine
times in that Paper. And from this takes occasion to blame the Bishop with
uncharitableness, and being beside the business. And if we have said so (says
W. P.) must not the Bishop be extremely beside the business? His
uncharitableness is as obvious, I will not say his Untruth. What shall I say to
his Story of some of our Friends, whom he makes to affirm, that Christ is not
ascended into Heaven, he is in us. Can it touch us, or should he have said it,
and not have proved it? Is that fair and candid; Is it charitable, supposing it
were true, which does not appear? Or is it just to insinuate upon the People as
dubious? But let it be never so true (says he) it cannot conclude the People,
if not the Act of the People. The Church of England has Doctors of very
different Sentiments, would the Bishop think it fair, the common Belief of the
Church should thereby be concluded. And in Page 35, he says, So that though we
did not dwell upon Points, but were concise in our Expressions, yet whatever is
implied, or is implicable from any Assertion, Justice as well as Charity always
grants; and so would the Bishop have done, had they been uppermost in his Mind
when his Pen run so fast against us.

It is prodigious Fallacy and Presumption in W. P. thus to treat the Bishop, or
any Christian Man, when he did know in his Conscience, how far both he and his
Brethren, for all his seeming fair Confessions, were and still are guilty, in
both these things, in which the Bishop very modestly does but blame them, for
not expressing those Matters more fully and clearly, to take away Suspicion out
of the Minds of some who might be jealous of their Sincerity, as they have but
too great ground so to be. For as to the first, viz. Whither he that was born
of the Virgin Mary, and dyed, etc. was the Christ and the Son of God truly and
properly? To this W. P. has expressly opposed, in his Serious Apology, p. 146.
That the outward Person that suffered, was properly the Son of God, we utterly
deny. It Is true, W. P. has called him that was so born, Christ, and the Son of
God; yet that will not prove that he believed him so to be truly and properly:
The Socinians call Christ the Son of God, and yet deny his eternal Generation.
And so W. P. and G. W. and others of them, call the Man that was born of Mary,
Christ and the Son of God, by some Figure, because the Son of God, the true
Christ, was in that Man; as the thing containing gets the Name of the thing
contained, by a Metonimy: But still they deny that that Man was properly the
Son of God, or that he was God: And accordingly G. W. has found fault again
and again, with that Expression of Christ his being God-man, calling it
unscripture Language, and alleging it is no where to be found but in the
Pope's Canons: Hence it is that they deny that Christ has our Nature in
Heaven, or that he consists of a Humane Nature or Body; though they grant he
had a Body, but deny that he consists of it as any part of him; as a Man may
have a Coat or Garment, but does not consist of it: The Foundation of which
Error is, that they do not believe the Hypostatical or Personal Union of the
two Natures, so as to constitute one Christ, they will have Christ to be
nothing properly but the Godhead, and that is the Father, and the Holy Ghost,
as well as the Son; as I have plainly proved in my third Narrative especially.
And as concerning their denying Christ's Ascension into Heaven; first, seeing
W. P. denies the Locality of Heaven, as well as of Hell, he must needs grant
that Christ's Body is either no where ascended, or is every where, which last
he seems to be for, p. 35. quoting Ephesians. 4. 10. that he ascended far above all
Heavens, that he might fill all things. Then (says he) he is in Man certainly.
But as he was the Divine Word, he did fill all things, and was in Man before he
ascended; but this Text does not prove that his Body fills all things, for
the Question is not, Whither the Godhead is present in all things (which yet is
well known some of the Quakers have denied, and some of them in Pensilvania
charged me in a public Meeting with Blasphemy for asserting it) but whither
the Body of Christ, now since his Ascension, is in all things, and every where;
If not every where, then but some where; and that some-where is a Local Heaven,
which W. P. has said is Mohammedan; E. Borough charged John Bunnion with
Wickedness, for saying, Christ was in Heaven in our Nature: And for the same
did G. Whitehead blame John Horn, as I have shown in my Narratives. And says
G. W. in his Nature of Christianity, p. 41. That Christ existeth outwardly
bodily without us at God's right hand. What Scripture has he (viz. his
Opponent R. G.) for these words? W. Bailey will have it, That Christ ascended
into Heaven in no body but what came down from Heaven. All which, and much more
is proved out of my three Narratives, the third especially. And whereas he
says, Let it be never so true, it cannot affect the People, if not the act of
the People, the Church of England has Doctors of very differing Sentiments,
etc. I answer, what any one of your Teachers have asserted, in Print
especially, it affects your Second days Meeting, that licenseth all your
Teachers Books, and yet profess to be all one and the same in all that ye
believe, as God and Truth is the same: And if the Church of England has
Teachers of different Sentiments in lesser Matters, yet not in Fundamentals, so
far as she knows; and if they had, and she should know it, and not censure
them, it would affect her: From all which it appears, that W. P. and his
Brethrens Conciseness in their Gospel Truths, was on purpose in general Terms,
to cover their gross Errors: And where Men are sound in the Faith, and of known
Sincerity, what is implied in their words, may in Charity and Justice be
granted; but not if they be Insincere and given to equivocate, as is the
present Case.

Section 6.
His Fallacy in asserting, that his owning future Rewards and Punishments, in
his Sense, does imply his owning the Resurrection of the Dead, which it is
proved he has disowned. His unjust Offense: at the Bishop's Censure of his
unsound Notion of the Light within, and his uncivil Treatment of the Bishop on
that account, as if he were a mere Natural Man, a Persecuter, a Nicodemus in
the Knowledge of Regeneration. The Bishop's Doctrine of the Light within, more
sound and intelligible than that of W. P. By W. P 's Definition of Light
within, and Sight within, a Natural Man is capable to understand it, though in
contradiction to himself. W. P 's Ignorance in making the natural rational
Faculty to be all the Spiritual Sight, even in Regenerated Persons. The
Bishop's Doctrine of the Light within, and Spiritual Sight of regenerated
Persons, as more sound, so more sublime than that of W. P.

IN Page 43 he proceeds in the like Fallacy and Equivocation, alleging, That
their acknowledging the future state of the Just and Unjust, implys the
resurrection of the Dead, which as it is true in a Scripture sense, it is as
false in his sense, and in the sense of all others of his Heathen Brethren,
many of whom professed to believe the immortality of Men's Souls, both Greek
and Latin; yet that profession did not imply they believed the resurrection of
the Body either of the Just or Unjust, for they generally disbelieved it, and
opposed the Christians for asserting it. And that W. P. himself has opposed
the Resurrection of the Body, is above sufficiently proved.

In his Page 51. and 52. W. P. seems not a little moved with the Bishops
saying, their discourse about the Light within, as far as he can see, is
perfectly such as we usually call Banter, that is, when Men have a faculty to
speak things seemingly profound, but in the end neither themselves, nor others
can make any distinct Sense of what they have said. This Modest Censure of the
Bishop, upon his discourse of the Light within, in his 5th 6th and 7th
Sections, W. P. calls one of the severest Persecutions, This to me (says he)
is one of the severest Persecutions, because Spiritual things are only to be
Spiritually, discerned and understood. I would fain know (says he) how a
regenerate Man can possibly make a Carnal Man understand the new Birth, yea, he
charge it to look Antichristian, as well as unreasonable, and he quotes
diverse places of Scripture, which he at least implicitly levels at the Bishop,
as if the Bishop were the Unregenerate and Natural Man; that because he is so,
he cannot understand W. P's profound Doctrine of the Light within. And the
Bishop is he that is born after the Flesh, who persecutes W. P. (that is born
after the Spirit,) and his Brethren, with Tongue and Pen, when he and others,
such as he can no longer commit violence upon their Persons and Estates; and as
if the Bishop were a very Nicodemus in the Doctrine of the new Birth. All which
(it plainly appears) and much more, W. P. indirectly and implicitly levels at
the Bishop, otherwise why quotes he such places of Scriptures, with such large
discourses on them, if not to point to him; and that his want of the new Birth,
and being but a Natural Man, though not wanting Academical Learning, made him
incapable of understanding W. P's Spiritual Doctrine about the Light within;
and after his instance of the blindness of the Scribes and Pharisees, and the
High Priest of the Jews, in not discerning the Messiah when he came, he infers,
let the Bishop also have a care: and he further tells the Bishop, he should be
glad to see the Bishop's evidence, for the knowledge of God, by the Revelation
of the Son of God in his own Soul.

To give my sense freely, so far as I am able to understand, the Bishop has
given a better account and evidence of his knowledge in the Mystery of God, and
of Christ, by his Christian Scriptural and sound expressions, than W. P. and I
suppose, in his manner of Life, is nothing inferior to him. And what evidence
of his true knowledge by Internal Illumination or Revelation can W. P. give,
or has given, that the Bishop cannot give, yea has not given in this very
case; Is it enough for W. P. to say, he has it, and the Bishop has it not? Or
wherein do W. P's fruits of a holy Life, give more evidence of his knowledge
and experience of the new Birth, than these of the Bishop? I shall first take
notice of the Bishop's sound words, in giving his sense, how the Conscience of
Man is enlightened to know and believe aright, the Doctrines and Articles of
Faith, necessary to Salvation. Conscience (says the Bishop) opened by the holy
Spirit, under the Ministry of the word (Acts 16. 14.) does and must take in its
Light from holy Scripture, quoting Psalm. 19. 8. Ephesians. 1. 18. Psalm. 119. 105.
Isaiah 8. 20. Now these things (says he) are intelligible, this Rule is fixed
and certain, nothing of which can be said of your Light within. This short
discourse of the Bishop, gives a more true and intelligible account of the
Light within, as it is in every true Christian, which the Bishop has contained
within three lines, than W. P's ramble in his Ten pages of his Book, and in the
many hundred pages of his other Books, that he has scribbled about it, to
render it intelligible, even to natural and unconverted Men, for to such he did
write as well as unto others; and yet now he affirms it is not intelligible to
natural Men, (such as he thinks the Bishop is) for want of experience of the
new Birth. And positively asserts P. 49. that our Natural Rational Faculty is
our sight but not our Light, that by which we discern, and Judge what the
Divine Light shows us. And in P. 50. he says, The Bishop's Natural Conscience,
must only mean a Capacity that Man has by Nature, that is in his Creation, of
making a Judgment of himself, his Duty and Actions, according to the Judgment
of God manifested to him by the Light of Christ within. Now since W. P. must
needs grant, that the Bishop (suppose but a natural Man, as W. P. most
uncharitably will needs have him to be) has a Natural Conscience, and the
Natural Rational faculty of the Soul, which is the Sight, or Eye by which he
can discern and Judge what the Divine Light shows him; and also that W. P.
strongly asserts, that all Men have the Divine Light in them; and consequently
the Bishop must have it also, what hinders but that the Bishop should
understand W. P's Doctrine about the Light within, were it really intelligible,
seeing by W. P's confession the Bishop has not only the Light within him the
same that W. P. has, but the same Sight within him also; that is, as W. P.
defines it, the same Natural Rational Faculty, and the same Natural Conscience,
which is the Capacity, whereby to see or discern what the divine Light shows.
Besides it were all to no purpose for W. P. and all the Teachers among the
Quakers, to preach so frequently to Natural and Wicked Men, exhorting them to
mind the Light within, obey it and give up to its Leadings, if they were not
capable to understand it, as W. P. here says they are not, though in
contradiction to his and his Brethrens daily Practice. But according to the
Doctrine of the Holy Scripture, the Spiritual or inward Eye of the Mind of
regenerate Persons, whereby they discern Spiritual and Divine Objects, is not
the Natural Rational Faculty, or Natural Conscience, which all Men (though
vicious) generally have, but some more excellent Spiritual Faculty in the Soul,
superior to the Natural Rational Faculty, as the Natural Rational Faculty is
superior to the imaginative Faculty, the which superior Spiritual Faculty of
the Soul, above the Natural Rational faculty is shut up, or as it were extinct,
in mere Natural Men, until it be opened and awakened in them by the Spiritual
Regeneration and new Birth, according to Ephesians. 1. 18. (above quoted by the
Bishop) and Acts 26. 18. and Ephesians. 5. 8. And how much more agreeable is it to
the Holy Scripture, to say, that true Divine Faith is the Sight of regenerated
Persons, whereby they look to Christ the great object and Author of it, Heb.
12. 2. than that the Natural Rational Faculty is it, as W. P. says it is. But
by W. P's discourse both here and elsewhere, he seems to be as ignorant of the
Spiritual Sight of the regenerated Soul, as of the Spiritual and Divine Light
whereby it is enlightened; and the Bishop has given a far more true account of
both in three lines, than W. P. has done either in this or all his other Books,
in which succinct and comcomprehensive definition of the Bishop, these two
things are worthily to be observed, the first is, that that which makes the
Conscience of Man capable to know and believe aright, the Doctrines and
Articles of Faith necessary to Salvation, is, that the Conscience be opened by
the Holy Spirit, for which he cites Acts 16. 14. How the Lord opened the Heart
of Lydia, that she attended unto the things which were spoken of Paul. And as
by opening of the Heart, in Acts 16. 14. is understood a special Illumination
of the Holy Ghost, by the Lord Jesus Christ, given to Lydia, whose Heart the
Lord thus opened (which she had not before, notwithstanding of the common
Illumination, which she had before) so no doubt the Bishop has the same sense
of it in agreement with the Doctrine of the 39 Articles of the Church of
England, that asserteth the necessity of a special Illumination of the Holy
Ghost (above and beyond the common Illumination given to Mankind in general) to
give the saving Knowledge and Faith of Christian Doctrine to any who have it.
But this special Illumination given to Believers only in. Christ Crucified, W.
P. does not acknowledge, he thinks the common Illumination given to Infidel
Jews, Mahometans and Heathens, is sufficient without any thing else, or without
any superadded Illumination in special; for to grant any such superadded
special Illumination being necessary to the Faithful, would quite overturn W.
P's Fabric of the General Rule of Faith and Life to all Mankind: And by this
it appears, that the Bishop's Doctrine about the Internal Illumination, or
Manifestation of Christ by the Holy Ghost, as it is much more true than that of
W. P's, so it is much more excellent and sublime, plainly distinguishing
Christianity from Deism; whereas W. P's Doctrine about the inward Illumination
does confound them, and make them one and the same thing. The second thing that
is worthy to be noticed in this succinct and comprehensive Definition given by
the Bishop, is, that the Conscience is thus opened, i. e. illuminated and
inspired by the Holy Spirit under the Ministry of the Word, and so does and
must take in its Light from Holy Scripture, to wit, the Light of the Christian
Doctrine, which the Conscience receives from the Scriptures instrumentally, the
Holy Scripture being the Instrument of the Spirit, and of his preparing,
whereby he does enlighten the Hearts of true Christians, both to believe the
Truth, and understand the depth of the Christian Doctrine.

Section 7.
A further account of W. P 's unsound Notion of the Light within, and of the
Bishop's sound Notion of it in all the Faithful, the Spirits Light within, and
the Scripture Light without, both necessary and well consistent (in God's
ordinary way of working) to beget true saving Knowledge and Faith in Men. W. P.
his various and equivocous Sense of the Light within. Christ considered as the
word God, is in and to himself Life and Light essentially, but to Men, even the
best of Men, he is Light effectively by his Operations, and is so called by a
Metonimy. We have no immediate Knowledge of the Essence of any Creature, nor of
the Creator, but by his various Operations and Illuminations.

BUT this manner of receiving Light by means of the written word preached or
read, which is the Rule of Faith, appointed and given us of God for that end
and purpose, W. P. does not acknowledge, but will needs have it, that we
receive all our Light from the inward Principle, which sometimes he calls
Christ, at other times the Light of Christ, otherwhile, as in page 49. a
Manifestation in the Soul of Man of Christ, the word God, the Light of the
World, etc. without all Instrumentality of either the Holy Scriptures, or
Ministry of Men: For to grant any such Instrumentality, would quite mar his
Notion of the Light within being not only the Guide and Ruler, but the Rule it
self of Faith and Life to all Mankind; and he earnestly opposes that Faith
which is wrought by the outward Ministry of the Word, in Preaching or Reading,
concerning Christ's Death and Sufferings, Resurrection and Ascension, etc. as
being but the Historical Faith, that must pass See his Discourse of The General
Rule of Faith, ad finem
away as the old Heavens. For if he did grant the necessity of
Scripture-Doctrine-Light, received from without, as well as the necessity of
the Spirits internal Light or Illumination (in God's ordinary way of working)
going along with the Doctrine-light of the Scripture, there would be no
Controversy betwixt the Bishop and him, provided he did also grant, that there
is necessary a special Illumination of Christ by the Holy Spirit, to be infused
or inspired into the Souls of the Faithful, to enable them to take in, and
understand the Light of the Doctrine of Salvation delivered in the Holy
Scriptures. Should W. P. own these two great things asserted here by the
Bishop, the Controversy should be none at all betwixt them; but seeing he
denies them both, and the Bishop affirms both, the Controversy remains
great betwixt them, and the Bishop has far the advantage of W. P. that he has
proved his Doctrine from Scripture; and thus he fairly distinguishes
Christianity from Deism, neither of which W. P. has done, nor ever can do: It
has been ordinary in the People called Quakers, even their chief Teachers, as
to deny the Scriptures to be the Word of God, so to deny them, [that is, the
Doctrine delivered in them] to be Light in any Scripture Sense; turning all
these places of Scripture, that mention Light, as with respect to Men's
Knowledge and Faith, to Light within only, exclusive of all doctrinal Light of
Scripture without, as being the Rule of Faith, or any necessary means of our
Instruction, in God's ordinary way of working; though it has been God's
ordinary way in all Ages, by outward means of Doctrine delivered by Men, as
well as by the Spirits inward Illumination, to beget in Men the saving
Knowledge and Faith of the things necessary to Salvation, the extraordinary
Revelation of these Truths, without all outward means of Instruction, being
given only to some singular Persons, as the Prophets and Apostles, but was
never given in any Age to all Mankind, nay, nor to all the Faithful in any Age,
for even in the days of the Apostles, when Prophetical Inspiration, and
extraordinary Revelation did most abound in the Church, it was not given to all
the Faithful, but only to some, as the Apostle Paul said, Do all Prophecy?
Intimating they did not, though a Manifestation of the Spirit was given to
every one to profit withal, yet that was not the extraordinary Revelation
given to the Apostles and Prophets, but the ordinary given to the Faithful, to
enable them to believe and understand what was outwardly taught them, by the
Apostles and Prophets Words and Writings.

Having thus taken a view of the Bishop's Christian sound Scriptural Doctrine,
both of Christ's Light within by the Illumination of the Holy Spirit, and of
the Scripture Light without, as jointly necessary (in God's ordinary way of
working) to the Faithful, the which Scripture Light, as in respect of the
Doctrine, Laws, Commands, Precepts and Promises of God delivered therein, the
Bishop has well proved from Psalm. 19. 8. Psalm. 119. 105. Isa. 8. 20. and which
Scripture Light may in a true sense be called (though more remotely) the
Spirits Light. In the next place, let us take a view of W. P.'s unchristian and
unscriptural Doctrine of the Light within, which he says in his page 48, is
with him and his Brethren a Fundamental, which one while he calls Christ, the
Word God; another while the Light of Christ, a Manifestation in the Soul of
Man, of Christ, the Word God. This Light within, his great Fundamental, as
given to all Mankind, even to them who have not the Scripture, nor any external
Revelation of Christ, as he outwardly came in the Flesh; he will not have it to
be the Law of God in the Heart of Man, nor the Impressions and Principles which
are born, and come with us into the World, page 50. As the Work is not the
Workman, so they are not properly the Light of Christ, but the blessed Fruit
and Effect of the Light of Christ, the word God in Man, which shines in the
Heart, and gives him the Knowledge of God, and of his Duty to him; so that the
innate Notions, or inward Knowledge we have of God, is from this true Light
that lights every Man coming into the World, but is not that Light if self.
But why then does he so confound the Work with the Workman, as one while he
tells us, the Light within is Christ; another while a Manifestation in the Soul
of Man of Christ, the Word God. Is not the Manifestation of Christ in the Soul
of Man, a Work of Christ? How then is it Christ himself the Word God? W. P. may
remember how his Brother G. W. in his Light and Life recommended by him, has
argued against the Body of Christ being Christ, for if it were, it would have
this Sense, the Christ of Christ, or the Jesus of Jesus, which to him is
Nonsense: Is it not great Nonsense to say, The Manifestation of Christ, to wit,
the Act or Effect of his Illumination in the Soul, is Christ himself? The Body
of Christ, together with his Soul, are constitutive parts of his Manhood
Nature, personally united to his Godhead; and may and do receive the Name of
Christ and Jesus, as the parts do receive the Name of the whole; but the
Manifestation of Christ in the Soul of Man, is no part of Christ's Manhood, nor
of his Godhead which has no parts, but is only a Work of Christ in the Soul of
Man, by which it is enlightened And as the Work supposes the Workman, or
Worker, to be present in the Soul, to wit, Christ considered as the Word God,
which the Bishop to be sure, in the true Sense, will acknowledge, so the
Workman supposes the Work as necessary to be wrought in the Soul; for Christ,
as he is the Word God, considered simply, whither as in himself, or as in Men,
is no Light to Men; but as he has his Work and Operation in them to enlighten
them, though in and to himself, he is Light and Life essentially, but to Men he
is so, by his Operations in them, and so is called Light to Men, by a Metonimy,
of the Name of the Effect given to the Cause. Such is Men's weakness, at least
in this Mortal State, that we have no immediate Knowledge of the Essence of any
Creature, we know their Essence but by their Operations; nay, we have no
immediate Knowledge either of the Essence of our Bodies, or of our Souls, but
only by their Operations: Hence it is that the greatest Philosophers are at a
loss to define the Essence of any thing, because our Knowledge does not
immediately reach their Essence, but only by their Operation; when we see the
Body of a Man, Beast or Tree, we see not the Essence of these Bodies, but the
outward Forms, and Shapes, and Colors of them, all which are but their
accidents, and not their Essence or Substance; and if we have no immediate
Knowledge of any Creatures Essence or Substance, great or small, how can or
dare we presume to say or think, we see even with our inward Eyes or Sight
(what W. P. calls the natural rational Faculty, for that is all the inward Sight
even of the Light within, that he acknowledges in the best of Men) the Essence
of the Divine Word, the Word God, by whom all things were created, by immediate
Sight or Perception; for as John said, John 1. 18. 1 John 4 12. No Man has
seen God at any time, [to wit, as in himself, in his own infinite Essence and
essential Glory.] And as Paul said, He dwells in the Light, which none can
approach unto, whom no Man has seen, or can see, 1 Timothy 6. 16. If then we see
not, or know not this Divine Workman, (who is in us, and in all things,
because he is omnipresent) by any immediate Perception, Sight or Knowledge of
him, it is only by some inward Manifestation and Operation of him in us, which
is only and alone what he pleases to give us as a most free Agent.

Section 8.
W. P 's equivocating way, of giving his Sense of the Light within. His
Contradiction to G. F. who affirmed that whole Christ God and Man, was in Men
both Flesh and Spirit. His and G. F 's and G. W 's Ignorance and Error, as if
God had parts, and did suffer in his Godhead by Men's Sins He denies the
special Illuminations of the Holy Spirit given to all the Faithful concerning
Christ. His and his Brethrens Fallacy, in stating the Question about the
Sufficiency of the Light within to Salvation, the Question truly stead and
resolved. His Fallacy in affirming the Doctrines of God, of Christ, of the Holy
Ghost, Remission of Sin, Justification from the Guilt of Sin by Christ the
Propitiation, the Resurrection of the Dead, to be Fundamentals of the Christian
Religion, seeing in his Discourse of the General Rule, be has excluded them
from the absolute Necessaries of Religion, in order to eternal Salvation.

IN the next place let us consider, whither the common Illumination, that
Christ gives to all Men, as he is the Word God in all Men, be a sufficient
Medium, or means to furnish us with all necessary saving Knowledge and Faith,
and other Evangelical Virtues, without all special and peculiar Illuminations
of Christ by the Holy Ghost, in the use of the ordinary outward means, as the
Holy Scriptures especially, preached or read to us or by us, which is the
proper and true state of the Question, which W. P. seeks to jumble, by shifting
the terms of the Question, and his equivocating way of his giving the Sense of
the Light within, as one time to be Christ the word God, the Workman, another
time the Manifestation of Christ, which is not the Workman, but his Work and
Operation in the Souls of Men universally. And W. P. to hide his Fallacy, will
rather have to be understood by the Light within every Man, Christ himself the
word God, than his Illumination in every Man, though contrary to what both
himself and G. W. has professed elsewhere, who have affirmed, that they are
wronged by their Adversaries charging them, with holding that Christ is in
every Man; Which (say they) we never affirmed that Christ was in every Man, but
a Light from Christ was in every Man; and since that they vary it thus, that
they do not affirm, that whole Christ is in every Man, or in any Man, though
contrary to the Doctrine of their great A postle G. F. who has affirmed,
(Great Mist. p. 249.) that they (i. e. the Quakers) have whole Christ in them,
Christ-God, and Christ-Man, Flesh and Spirit, which W. P. has desended,
arguing, that seeing they eat his Flesh, it must be in them; falsely reasoning
from a Metaphorical eating to a literal: Now if the by the Flesh of Christ;
which W. P. says they have in them, they mean not Christ's Body of Flesh,
which was Nailed to the Cross, and yet have whole Christ in them, both God and
Man, Flesh and Spirit, it evidently follows, that that outward Flesh was not
part of him; for they have whole Christ in them, God and Man, Flesh and Spirit,
and yet they have none of that Flesh in them which was Nailed to the Cross;
besides how improper, or rather absurd it is for W. P. to talk of whole Christ,
considered as the word God, and measures or parts of Christ, seeing the Godhead
of the Word, which is one and the same Godhead of the Father, has no parts nor
passions, as both the Doctrine of the Church of England, and of all true
Christian Churches does hold; though G. F. has made the Godhead to have parts,
and that the Soul of Man is a part of God; and G. W. has affirmed, that Christ
suffers by Men's Sins, as he is God, or in his Godhead. See his Divinity of
Christ, Page 56.

And let W. P. shift and shuffle and wind and turn ever so much, he can never
make it intelligible to any Man, that the Light within, simply as the word God
and abstractly considered, without all special Illumination, and without the
Doctrine of the Gospel as outwardly delivered us in the Holy Scriptures does
teach us and all Men, all things necessary to Salvation; seeing by his plain
confession in his discourse concerning The general Rule of Faith and Life, he
acknowledges that the Light within by its common discoveries, gives not to
Men the knowledge of Christ's Incarnation, Birth, Death and Sufferings, but
that they belong to extraordinary Revelation. And therefore that knowledge and
Faith, to wit, of Christ's Incarnation, Birth, Death and Sufferings, by W. P's
Doctrine, is not necessary to his Salvation, though he has a Historical
Knowledge and Faith of it, yet that is not necessary, for it is not certain to
him whither true of false, he has no extraordinary Revelation of it, and that
in common to all Mankind teaches nothing of it. And W. P. and his Brethren are
guilty of a great Fallacy and piece of Sophistry, to cry out against all their
Opponents, as guilty of Blasphemy, for denying the sufficiency of the Light
within to Salvation, without any thing else. Seeing that Light within is
Christ, for it is as much as to say, Christ is not sufficient to Salvation. And
thus some of them have charged me in particular, to whom I have answered, that
seeing Christ is truly Christ without us as well as within us, and much more
gloriously manifested in the Flesh without us, If it is no blasphemy to say,
Christ without us cannot save us, without his being in us, as they will readily
grant, so nor is it Blasphemy to say, Christ within us cannot save us, without
Christ without us. And with respect to Christ's inward Teaching and
Illumination, they grossly and fallaciously prevaricate in stating the question,
as whither the Light within, to wit, the Word God is a Light sufficient to
Teach or Guide every Man the way to Eternal Salvation: Thus they think to have
their Opponents every way at a disadvantage, and to catch them in their
Dilemma, if they say, Yea, the Quakers have gained the point, as they imagine:
If they say Nay, they are guilty of Blasphemy against Christ the word God
within them, as not being sufficient. But this Sophistical Dilemma is easily
discovered and answered, for by the sufficiency of the Light within every Man
to guide to Salvation, is not meant what Christ the Word God can reveal, to and
in every Man; for who questions that, that he can do it abundantly; but the
true state of the question is, What he does reveal to and in every Man, that is
or may be a sufficient discovery to him, for his eternal Salvation, W. P. and
his Brethren hold the affirmative, the Bishop, and all true Christians, Yea all
but mere Deists, hold the Negative, viz. That Christ considered as the word
God, does not reveal to and in every Man: As for example, not to any of the
Quakers, or any others here here in England, all that is sufficient to their
Salvation, by the common Illumination, without special superadded Illuminations
of Christ by the Holy Spirit, that is more excellent than the common, in the
use of the outward means, to wit, the Doctrines of the Holy Scriptures,
outwardly Preached, or at leastwise read to us or by us. If they say it does,
then let them not only tell us, but prove to us, intelligibly, to convince our
Natural Rational Faculty, (which W. P. calls the Eye or Sight, whereby the
Soul of every Man is capable to discern, what the Light within shows,) that
the Light in them, by its common Illumination, without all outward means of
Instruction, from or by the Holy Scriptures has taught them, one or more of
the Twelve Articles of the Apostles Creed, according to the true sense of
Scripture, and generally received by all true Christians; If they confess it
has not taugh: them any one of them, it evidently follows, that they think not
any one of them is necessary to their Faith or Christianity, i. e. their Deism
for Salvation. And yet it is strange, that W. P. should be so fallacious as as
to affirm, that the Doctrines of God, of Christ, of the Holy Ghost, of
remission of Sin, and Justification from the guilt of Sin, by Christ the
Propitiation, the Resurrection of the Dead are Fundamentals of the Christian
Religion, none of which the Light within them, without Scripture, has taught
him to believe as I think he has plainly confessed; and yet it has taught him
all that is necessary to his Salvation without Scripture, he having denied that
the Scripture is the Rule of his, or their Faith, as touching any of these
matters, and consequently not so much as the Instrument, whereby the Holy
Spirit has wrought that Faith in him; therefore what Faith he or they have of
these things, is but Historical and Uncertain; and as the old Heavens that must
pass away, and which has already passed away from them, seeing they pretend
they are come to the new Heavens already. And yet he is so fallacious to say P.
97. It is generally thought that we do not hold the common Doctrines of
Christianity, but have introduced new and erroneous ones in lieu thereof. This
I have sufficiently proved to be true, here and elsewhere, and so have others
done the same. But what follows, Whereas (says he) we plainly and entirely
believe the Truths contained in that called the Apostles Creed. Yes say I, just
so, as he may say, they plainly and entirely believe the Truths in the Turks
Alcoran, which may be supposed to have some Truths, though many more falsities.
This saying of his seems to have a mental Reservation, as if there were some
things in that Creed that were not Truths. W. P. would do well to tell us
plainly what they are.

Section 9.
Several places of Scripture rescued from his Perversions None are saved by the
common discoveries of the Light within, without special Revelation and
Illumination, which yet renders not Salvation impossible to virtuous Gentiles.
His Ignorance and Error, about the Nature of the Light within, considered as
the Word God. In his showing what the Light within teaches every Man, he
leaves out the chief matter that was necessary to his Argument, to prove it
sufficient without any thing else.

AND as for the places of Scripture which W. P. has brought, to prove the
sufficiency of the Light within, with respect to the common Illumination for
every Man's Salvation, without any super-added special Illumination, and all
external Light of the Holy Scripture, which are these following, John 8. 12.
John 1. 9, 14. Titus 2. 11, 12. Ephesians. 5. 13. John 16. 7. Prove. 1. 20, to 24.
John 8. 24. they are all (one or two at most excepted, that may be understood
of the common Illumination, as John 1. 9.) to be understood of the Special
Illumination given to Men under a Gospel Ministry, as is evident by the due
consideration of them, as for John 1. 9. allowing it to be meant of the common
Illumination, and diverse other places of Scripture, that might be brought to
prove that there is such a common Illumination, from the word God in all Men,
as a preparatory Ministration, this does not prove that that common
Illumination is sufficient, without the special that is given to the Faithful.
And whereas he says in his 6th Article or Section of his Gospel Truths, They
that turn not at the reproofs thereof, (to wit, the Light within, with respect
to its common Illumination) and will not repent, and live and walk according to
it, shall dye in their Sins; and where Christ is gone, they shall never come.
Though there be a Truth in the words he has here set down, yet he quite
misapplies that place of Scripture, John 8. 24. and fallaciously leaves out the
foregoing words which are these, For if ye believe not that I am he, ye shall
dye in your Sins and as it is in v 21. And whither I go ye cannot come; by
which words it is plainly evident, that for their Sin of not believing in
Christ God-man without them, especially, they were to dye in their Sins. And as
fallacious he is in interpreting John 16. 7. that the Comforter which Christ
promised to send, was the Light within, or the Word God, with respect only to
his common Illumination, reproving for common Sins; whereas it is plain from v.
9. that the Sin of which especially the Comforter, viz. The Holy Spirit should
convince Men, should be the Sin of unbelief, viz. For not believing that that
very Man that spoke unto them, was the Christ of God the promised Messiah, the
Redeemer and Savior of the World. Now unless W. P. can show that the Light
within, allowing it to be the Word God, with respect to the common
Illumination, and by the said common Illumination universally given to Mankind,
without any superadded special inward Illumination of the Divine Word, and
without all external Revelation of Scripture Light and Doctrine, does convince
all Men of the Sin of not believing in the Man Christ Jesus, that was born of a
Virgin, who spoke those words, John 8. 21. 24. and John 16. 7, 8, 9. he but
beats the Air, and argues to no purpose, that the Light within every Man
gives a sufficient discovery of the way to Eternal Life and Salvation, by the
common Illumination, without all special Illumination, and external Revelation
as aforesaid. Why God has not given the External Revelation of the Gospel
Doctrine, concerning Christ the Propitiation as he outwardly dyed for the Sins
of Men, nor the special Illumination, nor conviction of the Spirit, that
ordinarily accompanies the outward Preaching of the Gospel to many parts of
Mankind, belongs to the depth of his most righteous Judgments, against which
we have no cause to dispute, but to cry out with the Apostle Paul, Romans 11. 33.
O the depth of the Riches both of the Wisdom and Knowledge of God, how
unsearchable are his Judgments, and his ways, past finding out; and also with
Holy Admiration and Thankfulness to bless God, that he has given us the Light
of his Gospel, both by the Doctrine of it outwardly, and by the special
Illuminations of his Spirit and Divine word inwardly, which he has not given to
many others, though we were not more worthy of it than they: So that what the
Psalmist said concerning the Jewish Church of old, may be well and fitly
applied to the Christian Church, and Nations in Christendom, where the Gospel
is preached, Psalm. 47. 19, 20. He shows his word unto Jacob, his Statutes and
his Judgments unto Israel; he has not dealt so with any Nation; and as for his
Judgments, they have not known them.

Nor does all that I have said on this Head, render Salvation impossible to
these parts of Mankind, to whom the Light of the Gospel has not shined
outwardly, by any external Revelation of it; seeing God can supply that defect,
by ways and methods unknown to us, who works by his Spirit, when, where, and
how he pleases; it is sufficient to us, to know, that the ordinary way and
means, that God has provided for Men's eternal Salvation, is by outward means
of Instruction, to wit, the Doctrine of the Gospel, as outwardly delivered us
in the Holy Scriptures, which is always accompanied with the special
Illumination of Christ, by the Holy Spirit, to all that shall obtain eternal
Salvation; and that there is no other way or name under Heaven, whereby Men
must be-saved, but the Name of Jesus; nor no Promise of Salvation to any, but
through Faith in that Name, even of Christ as outwardly he came, and was and is
a Propitiation for our Sins: And though God can Save, and has saved some,
without the outward means of the Word as outwardly preached; yet this will not
prove, that ever any was or shall be saved by the mere common Illumination
given to all Men, which yet is W. P's and his Brethrens great Fundamental, and
Evangelium eternum, their everlasting Gospel, from which they exclude the
Doctrine of Salvation by Christ Crucified, and by Faith in him, from being any
part of it, because not falling within the ordinary discoveries given to
Mankind; that Doctrine is none of the absolute necessaries of Deism, is very
true, but that any were saved by mere Deism, without all knowledge of Christ,
and Faith in him, the great and only Propitiation for Sin, which is W. P's
great Fundamental he has not proved, and the Greek Calends will sooner come,
than ever he, or any for him can prove it.

In his Page 21 he tells us, The Nature of this excellent Principle, the Light
within every Man, is to discover Sin, reprove for it, and lead out of it, all
such as love and obey the Convictions thereof. That the Principle of the Light
within, even with respect to its common Illumination to and in every Man, is
excellent, is granted; and I do not think will be denied by the Bishop, or any
true Christian; but he derogates greatly from the Excellency of it, to tell us,
the Nature of it, is to do so and so, as if it were a natural and necessary
Agent; as it is the nature of the Fire to burn, of the Sun to give light, I ask
W. P. Is it the nature of the word God to Create, as a necessary Agent? If it
is the nature of the Divine word to Create, he could not but Create, otherwise
he should change his nature; as because it is the nature of the Fire to burn,
if it did not burn, it should change its nature. And if it be the Nature of the
word God, to discover Sin, and reprove for it, and lead out of it, then that
Divine word can do no otherwise; and consequently is he not a necessary, and
not a free Agent? It had been better, and more Sound and Christian for W. P. to
have said, It is the good will and pleasure of the Divine word, to reprove for
Sin, and also of the Spirit, who blows where he pleases, according to the
old Latin Translation, and which the Greek well bears, and was generally so
understood by the Ancients, both Greek and Latin, Spiritus spirat ubi vult, The
Spirit breaths where he wills and pleases, in all to discover and reprove
for Sin, and yet not in all absolutely to bring them out of Sin; or to work
that Obedience in all, so as to be brought out of Sin. It had wont to be a
Doctrine among the Quakers, that God gives a Day of Visitation, which may
expire and pass over some before they dye; and yet even such, after their day
of Visitation is expired, have that Light in them which reproves for Sin: And
as the Visitation of some may be expired, so the Visitation of others may be
yet to come; the outward Sun, though a natural and necessary Agent, yet shines
not to all at once; when it is setting to some, it is rising to others; and
when it is midnight to some, it is midday to others, that is, an Emblem of the
shining of this Divine Sun in Men's Hearts; and which, if I well remember, W. P.
has some where used in some of his Books, but is not too far to be stretched;
for though the outward Sun shine to all at one time or another, yet some parts
of the Earth have not that Influence of the Sun, that suffices to ripen the
Fruits of the Earth to sustain Humane Life, or preserve from unsupportable
Cold, as under the North and South Poles, and near adjacent parts, where scarce
ever any of Mankind yet was, or could come; and no doubt the word God does in
some sort enlighten the Devils, and all the Fallen Angels, and reproves them
severely for their Sins, so that they believe and tremble; but is it the Nature
of the Divine Word in them, to lead out of Sin, all such of the Devils and
Fallen Angels, as love and obey the Convictions thereof? Were not this to
supponere non suppmendum, to suppose what is not to be supposed, that any of
the Devils or Fallen Angels can love and obey the Convictions thereof? And is
it not thus also with many Men, though they have some real Convictions from the
common Illumination of the Divine Word, yet barely and merely by the common
Illumination given unto them by the same, until God visit with special
Illumination, and his special Grace and Favor, they are held as in Iron Chains
and Bonds, so that they cannot come out, their Prison door is shut, they are
enclosed in great Darkness, even thick Darkness like that of Egypt; so that
they cannot come out, though they have so much Light that shines in their
Darkness, as to discover Sin, and reprove for it, in many particulars, yet
power is not given them, to leave their Sins and come out of them, except God
visit with some more powerful Visitation of his special Illumination and Grace,
above what is common to all Mankind. The way for W. P. to have proved, that
this Light in every Man, teaches him sufficiently all that is needful to
Salvation, had been to have given a more full description of the Light within
than he has given, and then made Application, as thus, The Light within, whom
ever it enlightneth with a saving Illumination, that fully suffices to guide
to Salvation, without any superadded Illumination differing in specie (only
allowing the necessity of greater Degrees in the same specie) it not only
discovers Sin to them, convinces and reproves for it, and wounds the
Heart and Conscience with the Sense of God's Judgment and Wrath, and Curse due
for Sin, but shows them the Remedy the Lord Jesus Christ, as he died for our
Sins, and by his Death on the Cross, became the Propitiation for our Sins, and
is now the Propitiation for us, as he is in Heaven, at God's right Hand, in the
true Nature of Man, ever living to make Intercession for us. But all this the
Light within does by the common Illumination in every Man, therefore, etc. But
W. P. knowing that he could not affirm this of the Light within, as only
enlightening by the common Illumination, fallaciously after his ordinary manner,
leaves out the chief Matter, which was, that the Light within every Man, not
only discovers to every Man his Sin, but discovers the great Remedy, to wit,
Christ the Propitiation for Sin, by whom the Guilt and Curse due for Sin, is
taken away from all such as sincerely believe in him, which sincere Faith is
always accompanied with sincere Repentance, and new Obedience.

Section 10.
His Fallacy, in making as if it were an Article of his Faith, that we are
justified from the Guilt of Sin, by Christ the Propitiation, that Faith being
neither grounded upon the common Illumination given to all Mankind, which
discovers not that Faith, nor upon inward extraordinary Revelation, which he
confesses is not given to him or his Brethren, nor upon any external
Revelation in the Scripture, which he denies to be the Rule of Faith. The
Historical Faith grounded upon the external Revelation in the Scripture,
concerning Christ the Propitiation, his Birth, Death and Sufferings of no value
with him. His and his Brethrens Pretense, of being assisted by the Holy Spirit
to Pray, Praise and Preach, generally understood, in Matter of Fact proved
False. His and their unsound and unscriptural way of Preaching the way to the
Kingdom. They do not Preach the Necessity of Faith in Christ Crucified for
Remission of Sin, for Regeneration and eternal Salvation. For the manner of
Preaching the Necessity of this Faith, W. Penn accused G. K. at Ratcliff
Meeting, to be an Apostate; and at the Yearly Meeting at London some time
before in the Year 1694, he accused him to Friends of the Ministry, for
bringing in a new Method of Preaching Christ without among Friends in order to
Regeneration. His Arguments against Baptism and the Supper answered, in the
Book called, The Arguments of the Quakers, against Baptism and the Supper,
examined and refuted.

AND though he makes it as it were an Article of his Faith, and one of his
Gospel Truths, Sect. 4. that we are only justified from the Guilt of Sin, by
Christ the Propitiation, yet it is a notorious Fallacy and Juggle: How is it an
Article of their Faith? As it is an Historical Faith, neither grounded upon the
common Illumination, which discovers no necessity of any such Faith, nor upon
extraordinary Revelation, and special Illumination which is not necessary, nor
is given to him by his plain Concession, but upon the outward History or Letter
of the Scripture; but alas this Historical Faith is so far from being of any
valuable account with W. P. that he has told us, it is as the old Heavens that
must pass away, and belike is passed away from his long since, though to
deceive the World, he would seem still to hold it; for he has said concerning
it, in his Quakerism a new Nickname far Old Christianity, Page 6. Faith in the
History of Christ's outward Manifestation, is a deadly Poison, these latter
Ages has been infected with.

In his 7th and 8th Sections, he proceeds with the like fallacy, telling us,
how he and his Brethren, are prepared and assisted by this principle, in
Praying, Praising, and Preaching to others the way of God's Kingdom, as they
wait in their Assemblies, to feel God's Spirit, to open and move upon their
Hearts, that they may Preach in Power, as well as in words, and that they thus
wait, before they dare offer Sacrifice to the Lord.

How far this is false in matter of Fact, is well enough known to their own
Consciences; and the unsound words they most frequently use both in Preaching
and Praying, is a plain Demonstration of it, that they are not generally acted,
or moved by the Spirit of God, in their Prayings or Preachings: If the manner
of their Praying and Preaching is as the manner of their Writing, which they
will say, is the same; for they as commonly pretend to write by the Motion of
the Spirit of God, as to Preach and Pray by it. But can it be supposed that Men
are acted or moved by the Spirit of God, to bring forth so many false
Doctrines, vile Heresies and Errors, and gross Untruths and Fallacies, and
uncharitable Judgments and Perversions of their Opponents words, as they
commonly do in their writings generally. But what way to the Kingdom do they
Preach? Possibly they will say, Christ, who said he was the way: But how do
they Preach him to be the way? Just as W. P. has here and elsewhere Preached
him in Print, to wit, as the Word God and the Light within, whose Nature is to
discover Sin, and lead out of it, all such who Love and obey the Convictions of
it, and that only and alone by the common Illumination, which by W. P's
confession discovers nothing of Christ as he became a Propitiation for our
Sins, by his Death on the Cross. The great subject of the Apostles Preaching,
was Christ Crucified, and remission of Sin, by Faith in him; and how all
Spiritual Blessings, yea, the gift of the Holy Spirit himself, comes to us by
the Crucified Jesus, and Faith in him: but little or nothing of this sort of
Preaching is to be found either in your Meetings, or Books, but much against
it; though to cover your Vile Errors, you will now and then seem to own it, but
forgetting your selves, quickly disown it all again. Yea W. P. knows in his
Conscience, how both publicly and privately he has blamed me, and charged me
with my being an Apostate, for my asserting the necessity of Friends Preaching
this Faith, to wit, in Christ as he dyed for our Sins, etc. as being absolutely
necessary to Regeneration, for us to have this Faith, and to know and
experience Christ formed in us, and to live, dwell and Rule in us. For this my
Christian Testimony, he charged me at Ratcliff Meeting, that I did what in me
lay to pluck up the Testimony of Truth by the Roots. And at the Yearly Meeting
at Grace Church Street in the Year 1694, he stood up, and accused me before
some hundred Friends of them called the Ministry and others, that I was seeking
to bring in a New method of Preaching among Friends, which was to Preach Christ
without, and the necessity of Faith in him, in order to bring People to the
knowledge and experience of the new Birth, and Christ in them, as he dwells in
the Saints: And also he knows in his Conscience, when and where, and to whom he
has accused me for Preaching Christ without in opposition to Christ within;
which God knows I never did: And therefore in his so doing he has falsely
accused me, though his and his Brethrens false Notions of Christ within, as
above explained, I have opposed, and by God's help shall oppose, and witness
against while I live. But the true Scripture sense of Christ within, as the
Word God and of Christ the Word made Flesh without us, who is still but one
Christ, and of his sufficiency to our Salvation, both as without us and within
us; without us, as he came to procure and purchase it for us by his Blood and
Merits, and within us by his Spiritual appearance and special Illumination of
the Holy Spirit, in the use of the outward means, to apply it to us, and to
work the blessed and glorious effect of it in us, I have owned, and still hope
to own it, to the end of my days.

As for W. P's Arguments against Baptism and the Supper, as outwardly
administered, I know not one of them but I have fully answered, that may seem to
require an answer, and many more, in my late Book called, The Arguments of the
Quakers, against Baptism and the Supper Examined and Refuted; which he ought
more particularty to have answered, being so particularly concerned, than to
have brought them up again, as if they had been new Dishes, which are nothing,
but the Old, after some Fashion new dressed. If the Bishop thinks fit to notice
them he may, for me to meddle with them were but Actum agere, to do what I have
already done.

Section 11.
His uncivil Treatment of the Bishop of Cork, as if he were Ignorant of
Regeneration, and the way how it is wrought. The Bishop has soundly and
Christianly explained the Doctrine of Regeneration, and the way how it is
wrought. W. P's great Fallacy in his definition of Regeneration, and the way
how it is wrought. His Fallacy in seeming to agree to the Bishop's Assertion
from that Text Romans 10. 9. His Fallaeious Argument, that because the Spirit
Leads and Rules, therefore the Spirit is the Rule detected; the Ruler and the
Rule distinct. The great Blessing and Advantage of the Scriptures, being a
means to preserve us, by the Grace of God, and assistance of his Holy Spirit,
from Satan's Delusions and Impostures.

IN his 26th Page he says, I think nothing makes a Man a true Christian but
Regeneration, the Power of the Son of God revealed in the Soul, converting it
to God. And in his P. 29 he says, I would have my Reader reflect well upon
this great and Essential Truth, Tho he were as Big as a Bishop. Reader, what
think thou of this Uncivil, Proud and Disdainful Treatment! But so far as I
understand, W. P. shows himself, as if he were much more big than a Bishop,
he treats the Modest and humble Bishop as if he were one of his meanest
subjects. But for all W. P's pretense, to be so Skilful in that great and
essential Truth of the necessity of Regeneration, and the manner and way of its
being wrought above and beyond the Bishop, the Bishop has beyond all doubt, in
his short Testimony, in three or four lines on that Head, made it evident, that
he understands the Mystery of Regeneration, and the manner how it is wrought,
better than W. P. for all his Big and Lordly thoughts he has of himself, and
for all his Big talk of the new Creature and Self-denial, there is great a deal
more of it in his Books than in his Life. But mark, how W. P. describes the
manner how Regeneration is wrought; That it is by the power of the Son of God
revealed in the Soul, converting it to God, which are such general words and
terms, and true when taken in a true Scripture sense, that not only every
Bishop, but every Curate of the Church of England, and every ordinary Christian
can say the same. But under these general Words W. P. hides a great Fallacy;
what does W. P. mean by the power of the Son of God, revealed in the Soul
converting it to God? No other thing, but the power of the common Illumination
of the Light within, given to Infidel Jews, Mahometans, and all moral Heathens,
who if they are but mere Just Men, according to W. P's Gospel and System of
Divinity, they are Regenerated Persons, though they have no special
Illumination of the Holy Spirit, giving them any inward and spiritual knowledge
and Faith of the Son of God, as the word Incarnate, or word made Flesh, and as
he was Miraculously conceived by the Holy Ghost, and born of the Blessed
Virgin, dyed for our Sins and rose again. None of all this does the common and
ordinary discoveries of the Light within teach W. P. and his Brethren, and yet
this is all he sets up, in order to bring People to the work of Regeneration,
and to become the Sons of God. Not only the Bishop, but the meanest Curate in
his Diocese, I charitably think can give a better account, according to
Scripture, of the manner how Regeneration is wrought in Men, to wit, by
receiving Christ, through a lively Faith wrought in them, by the Spirit and
Power of the Son of God inwardly revealed in them, and by the Doctrine of
Christ outwardly Preached in God's ordinary way, and believing in his Name,
according to all his Offices, viz. his prophetical, priestly and Kingly Office.
The Faith and persuasion of the great Love of God, in giving his Son to dye for
us, and of the great Love of Christ who gave himself for us, inwardly revealed
in us, not by the common Illumination given to Heathens, but by special
Illumination of Christ in our Hearts, persuading us of the truth and certainty
of the Scriptures Doctrine and Testimony concerning this Love works that change
in us, that the Scripture calls Regeneration, or the New Creature; for thus the
Scripture witnesses, John 1. 12. To as many as received him he gave them Power
to become the Sons of God, even to as many as believed in his Name. And this
believing in his Name, was not only a believing his inward appearance, or Light
in them, but by special Illumination and operation of his mighty power in them,
believing in him, as he outwardly came in the Flesh, dyed for our Sins and rose
again, as our King, Priest and Prophet without us, as well as the Light within
or Word God within us, as Paul testified, ye are all the Children of God by
Faith in Christ Jesus, Gal. 3. 26. to wit, as outwardly Crucified and raised
again. And as John testified, 1. John 5. 1. Whosoever believes (to wit, with a
sincere Faith) that Jesus, (even that very Jesus that was born of Mary) is the
Christ is born of God. But none of all this Faith does W. P. think necessary to
Regeneration or Eternal Salvation, for otherwise it would exclude all his Deist
Brethren, and moral Just Men among Jews and Mahometans, and Heathens from being
Regenerate Persons and his sort of Christians; whereas the Bishop has plainly
owned the necessity of this Faith to Regeneration, and eternal Salvation, in
his sound but short Christian Testimony; and W. P. taken notice of it, and
seems (but most fallaciously) to agree to it in his Page 44. In the first part
of his note (says W. P.) I agree with him, that all who rightly believe the
Text, Romans 10. 9. Will be Saved; for that must be by the Illumination, and
working of the saving Power of Christ in the Heart, that he can so believe.
Here W. P. and the Bishop would seem to agree, for no doubt the Bishop does so
believe. But O the stupendous fallacy of W. P. in this very thing! All that
Rightly believe the Text Romans 10. 9. Will be Saved. But what if they do not
believe it at all, or but only Historically, and in the mean time Love and obey
the convictions and common discoveries of the Light within, given generally to
Heathens, according to W. P. they are Regenerated, and shall be saved. Can
there be a greater fallacy, and greater Jesuitical Equivocation under Heaven?
The Illumination and Working of the saving Power of Christ in the Heart, he
will have it to be none other either in him, or any of his Brethren, or any
else, but the common Illumination that every Heathen has, or may have, which
yet he confesses discovers nothing of Christ, as he outwardly dyed and rose
again; that discovery belonging to extraordinary Revelation, as he
acknowledges, and yet pretends not to have any such thing.

In his 150th Page he thus Argues, That which Leads, Rules, and that which
Rules is a Rule to them that follow it. But the Spirit Leads, Romans 8. ergo,
etc. It is just such a Sophism as this: That which ploweth is the Plow, but the
Plowman Ploweth, therefore the Plowman is the Plow. This is a piece of dull
Sophistry, and shows W. P. to be no very good Logician. But further to show his
Sophistry, by an Argumentum ad Hominem, that which Rules, is a Rule to them
that follow it. But W. P's Justices of Peace in Pensilvania, Rule the People
there, and so does his Deputy Governor; Ergo, he and they are the Rule to that
People But then what need of any Laws? It seems when Governor Penn goes over
to Pensilvania, because he is to Rule them, he must be their Rule also, Stat
pro ratione voluntas, his Will, and not the Laws established by the general
Assemblies of that Province, must be the Rule, according to which he proposes
to Rule them. Can any King on Earth be more Arbitrary? It has pleased God
Almighty, whose Will is most Holy and Just for ever, to give us an External
Revelation of his Will concerning our whole Duty, and that as well to us under
the New Testament, as to them under the Old; and that that External Revelation,
contained in the Holy Scriptures, (setting aside some Ceremonial precepts, and
some other peculiar to the Jewish Nation) should be our general Rule to
instruct us, both what to believe and what to do, and this partly to give
example to all Kings, and Governments, to do the like as all good and pious
Kings and Governors have done, viz. To give forth Laws, and publicly to have
them recorded, that the People may have the due notice of them, and regard to
them; and partly to prevent the Delusions and Impostures of Deceivers, and
Spirits of Delusions, who would wonderfully prevail to deceive the Professors
of Christianity; were there no outward Rule of Faith and Life established by
God himself, one would pretend his Revelation, and another his, and Thousands
of contradictory Revelations would daily appear and deceive many, were it not
for the established Rule of God's Will and Word, outwardly revealed and
recorded in the Holy Scriptures. It Is true, there are too many Deceptions
still, and Deceivers, and all pretending that their Doctrine is conformable to
the Holy Scriptures. But notwithstanding, so long as the public Standard of
God's Holy Word and Will remains with us in the Holy Scriptures, they are a
sufficient Armory to us by the Grace of God, and assistance of his Holy Spirit,
out of which to bring sufficient Armor both to withstand and overcome all
Heresies and pernicious Doctrines. Nor would W. P's Fundamental Principle, of
bringing all to the General Rule of the common and ordinary Discoveries of the
Light within, given to all Mankind, be any Remedy in the case; for besides,
that the Discoveries that he sets up for, are not the same to all Nations and
Persons, as can easily be proved: Ten thousands would break through the Hedge
of his General Rule, of binding them to the common Discoveries given to all
Mankind, (as most of the People called Quakers do) and would highly pretend to
new and special Discoveries given to them by the Light within, and to none
others; and the reason they will allege, that it is not given to others, is
their Unfaithfulness; and especially that like Corah, they Rebel against their
Spiritual Guides and Leaders. Thus we may see the great need of an outward
Rule, and the great Goodness of God, that he has given us one, full and
perfectly sufficient to be a Rule of our Faith and Life in all necessary Cases.

And besides, If W. P's Argument have any Truth in it, it would infer, that
Christ, or the Spirit, abstractly considered from all Revelation, both Internal
and External, should be the Rule, because he is the Ruler; If the Ruler and the
Rule must still be one and the same thing, then suppose all Revelation Internal
as well as External should cease, Christ or the Spirit should be the Rule,
because the Ruler: Who sees not the Fallacy and Sophistry of W. P's Argument
here? Has not every common Artificer his Rule of Wood or Brass, that is not
the Man himself, but the Instrument that he has made and prepared for his use.
The Prophets Rule, by which their Faith was ruled in what they Prophesied, was
not the Spirit, but the internal Revelation of the Spirit, the Spirit was their
Guide and Ruler, but not, to speak properly, their Rule, but the Revelation
they had, or things revealed, that was their Rule; and so now, the external
Revelation of the same Truths, is the Rule of our Faith, whereby to believe
them; as the Spirit inwardly by his secret Illumination, persuades us of their
Truth and certainty, not by any new verbal Record, but by Sealing to the Record
outwardly given.

Section 12.
His falsely alleging, that he has the first Reformers, Fathers and Martyrs on
his side, viz. That the Scripture is not the Rule of Faith, but the Light in
every Conscience. His Fallacy in this detected, in the late Book called, The
Deism of W. P. and his Brethren, etc. The Spirits being superior to the
Scripture, proves not that the Spirit is the Rule of Faith. His pretended
ground of his pitying the Bishop for his supposed Ignorance, Causeless and
Fallacious. His false Accusation and Charge, against the Bishop and Church of
England, and all Protestant Opponents to the Quakers, that they confine the
Operations of the Spirit, to the first or Apostolical Times. That the Ministers
among the Quakers are less acted by the Spirit of God, in their Praying and
Preaching, than the Ministers among their Protestant Opponents, evidently
proved.

AND this leads me to detect another Fallacy of his, which shall be the last I
intend to notice, though I could detect many more, but these I think will
suffice, to show how Fallacious he is. Let us therefore hear him once more: In
his Page 106 and 107, after he has most grossly alleged, that he has the
concurring Testimony and Assent of the best and first Reformers, as well as
Martyrs and Fathers, to confirm his Fundamental, viz. That not the Doctrine of
the Holy Scriptures without, but the Light within, is the Rule of Faith and
Life; and that the Light or Spirit within, is something at least coordinate,
if not superior and antecedent to the Scripture: Which is more (says he) than
we said before, and consequently is the Rule of Faith and Life, superior to the
Scripture.

Having in my late Treatise of W. P's Deism, rescued the Fathers and first
Reformers from his Perversions, I shall only now take notice of his fallacious
Inference by this his Argument. The Light or Spirit within is something
superior and antecedent in way of Excellency to the Scripture; therefore it is
the superior and antecedent Rule above the Scripture, the Proposition is
granted, and I know none that ever denied it; to wit, That the Spirit, which is
God, is greater and more excellent than the Scripture. But then it follows
not, that it is the greater or more excellent Rule; because, properly speaking,
it is no Rule at all. Right Logicians will tell him, if he will go and learn of
them, (which it is to be suspected, for all that he was a Student at Oxford, he
has great need to do) that things in a different kind are not to be compared.
If it were asked of W. P. whither a Knife of Gold, or a Knife of Steel, were
the best Knife; he would answer surely, though Gold is superior to Steel, and
more excellent, yet it is not fit to be a Knife, and Men make not the blades of
Knives of Gold. So though the Spirit be superior to the Revelation of it,
whither Internal or External, yet not the Spirit but his Revelation is the
Rule; and Internal Revelation was the Rule to the Prophets, whereby they
believed their Prophecies; and what internal Revelation was to them, external
Revelation is to us; though we have not that internal Revelation that they had,
which was Prophetical and Extraordinary, but the Spirit internally by way of
Seal, Sealing to us the Truth and Certainty of the external Revelation, gives
us as sure ground for the certainty of our Faith, as they had of theirs. But
this inward Seal of the Spirit is no Rule, either coordinate with the
Scripture, or subordinate to it, because it does not propose to us by it self,
all the things necessary to be believed by us, in verbal Propositions, as the
Seal of a Bond, though it is a Proof and Evidence to the Truth of the Bond, yet
it tells us not the Contents of it. And now because the Bishop found fault with
his calling the Scripture without, and the Illumination of the Spirit within,
the double and agreeing Record of true Religion; as indeed well he might so do
in W. P's sense (though in a qualified and sober sense it may be acknowledged)
as perceiving the fallacious sense that W. P. had of those words well observed
by the Bishop, That they will not believe what Scripture says, except the
Light within them dictate the same: And yet none of them can justly say, that
the Light within does dictate to them by it self, one Article of that called
the Apostles Creed; yea, W. P. does not so much as pretend that it does to him;
yet most uncivilly he falls upon the Bishop p. 107, telling him, It must be his
turn now to pity the Bishop: And truly (says he) I do it with all my Heart:
And this it seems in retaliation of the Bishop's tender Expression of his Pity
and Compassion toward some well-meaning Persons among them, who are mislead by
their Teachers. But for what must he needs Pity the Bishop? Why, for his
supposed Ignorance, that he will not allow the Spirit to be superior to the
Scripture: But this is W. P's Fallacy and Ignorance, and not the Bishop's; the
Bishop owneth with all true Christians, the Spirit to be superior to the
Scriptures, as the Author and Lord of them, and who uses them as his
Instrument, as the Work man uses a Rule or Tool that he works withal; but
the Bishop, and all sound Christians think, that it is no dishonor to the
Spirit, to acknowledge the Office proper to him, which is to Rule, and the
Office proper to the Scripture to be the Rule and Instrument, in the Hand and
Management of the Spirit. And thus the Office of the Scripture is a far
inferior Office to the Office of the Spirit, as the Servant and his Office, is
inferior to the Master and his Office; but to put the Spirit in the Office of
the Scripture, is to degrade the Master, and put him in the Servant's place.

The last thing I shall notice in this Book of W. P. is not so properly a
Fallacy, as a downright open-faced Falsehood, and false Charge and Accusation
against all Protestants whatsoever, except themselves, who though they affect
the Name of Protestants, yet for the vast disagreement of Doctrine betwixt
them, even in Fundamentals, deserve neither the Name of Protestants, nor
Christians so much as at large. The Accusation is this Page 97, That the Church
of England, and Dissenters, and generally all Protestants, Confine the
Operations of the Spirit to the first or Apostolical Times, as if these did not
want them as much; or that Christ would be less Propitious, where his Gifts
were not less needful. This I say, is a downright false Accusation, the
contrary of which cvidently appears from all the several Confessions of Faith,
of all the Protestant Churches truly owned to be such, and which also appears
from the afore-cited words of the Bishop in his Testimony, where he owns, That
Conscience must be opened by the Holy Spirit, under the Ministry of the Word,
citing Acts 16. 14. to take in its Light (to wit, the Doctrine Instrumentally)
from the Holy Scriptures. Can this be done, without an Operation of the Holy
Spirit? If W. P. say Nay, it cannot; then his own words are an Evidence against
the Falsity of his Accusation.

Again, That he charge it on them, that Ministers are made such, and preach
without the Spirit; and the People worshipping without the Spirit, which is too
rash and uncharitable Judgment in him so to affirm, without any Caution or
Restriction: How does it appear, that the Quakers Preach and Pray with the
Spirit, and all others do not? Will the Quakers saying it prove it? Or does the
great Noise of their Preaching and Praying by the Spirit, from an elevated
high-flown Conceit, through their Spiritual Pride, prove it to be so; oft-times
where there is greatest noise and show, there is least Reality and Substance.
Surely if Preaching and Printing more unsound Doctrine than all others do, and
uncharitable Judgments of them, that do really excel them both in Knowledge and
Piety, be proofs that they are not acted by the Spirit of God, commonly in
either their Preaching or Praying; and who are scarce ever heard to acknowledge
their sinful Imperfections, or ask Forgiveness of them: If these be Marks of
Men sensual, and not having the Spirit, notwithstanding of their Boastings,
[Laodicea and Pharisee like] they are abundantly to be found among them. It is
indeed matter of Regrate and Humiliation, that there is so little Preaching and
Praying with the Spirit, among many of all sorts, as the little Success it
produces does manifest in many places; yet blessed be God for what is among
many of all the several Churches; and were there but more Love and Charity,
Humility and Self-denial, it might certainly be hoped, that God would give more
of his Spirit: And for such a Time, I join with all sincere Christians, both to
Hope and Pray,

G. K.

A Synopsis, or short View of W. P 's Deism and Skepticism, collected out of
his Book, called, A Discourse of the General Rule of Faith and Life, and Judge
of Controversy, first Printed in the Year 1673, as an Appendix to his
Christian Quaker, and Reprinted in this present Year 1699. Compared with some
Passages in his other Books. With some plain and necessary Consequences,
naturally flowing from the Positive Doctrine therein delivered by him.
1. ALL Mankind has one General Rule of Faith and Life, Page 1, 2, 3, 4, etc.

2. This General Rule of Faith and Life cannot be the Scripture, because all
Men have not the Scripture, and because of their uncertainty (unless upon the
ground of inward extraordinary Revelation) and for their Imperfection, and many
other Reasons given by him (in the following Pages) to the number of about
fourteen.

3. The General Rule of Faith and Life, must be the Light in every Man's
Conscience, P. 6, 7.

4. The Light in every Man's Conscience is the Rule of Faith and Life, not
abstractly and seperately considered from the inward Discoveries it gives, but
with respect thereunto. For without some inward Discovery, it teaches Men
nothing, and therefore it can be no Rule to any Man, but with respect to its
inward Discoveries.

5. The inward discoveries of the Light within, are of two sorts, P. 32. the
one extraordinary such as were given to the Prophets and Apostles, concerning
Adam's fall and the extraordinary manifestation of God, in the Flesh of that
Man called Jesus Christ, whom some call the Son of God: But that he was
properly the Son of God we utterly deny, faith W. P. in his Serious Apology, P.
146. The other ordinary, such as fall within the ordinary discoveries given to
all Mankind.

6. The Light within is the general Rule of Faith and Life, not with respect to
these extraordinary discoveries above mentioned, P. 32. but with respect to the
ordinary discoveries given to Mankind in general universally.

7. We have no need that the Light within should give us any of these
extraordinary discoveries, P. 32. concerning Adam's fall, and that
extraordinary manifestation of God in the Flesh of that Man, improperly called
the Son of God, and Jesus Christ, because the Historical account of these
things is extant in Scripture, and it not being needful to be given us, by any
new inward Revelation, we may conclude it is not given to any of us; it
suffices we have the Historical account of them given us in Scripture, which
is sufficient to beget in us a Historical Faith of these things, without any
new inward Revelation of them, such as was given to the Prophets and Apostles

8. The Historical account of these things, though it may be called a
Historical Rule of the Historical Faith of them, yet it cannot be called, the
Rule of Faith and Life that is necessary to Salvation. For as all have not this
Historical Faith, because the History has not reached them; so to them who
have the History, the Historical Faith does not profit them to Salvation, but
does far rather hurt them, It is at best but the Old Heavens, that are to be
wrapped up as a Scrowl, as he says expressly in his conclusion near the end of
his Book, called A Discourse concerning the general Rule, etc. And in his Book
called, Quakerism a new Nickname for Old Christianity, P. 6. he says, Faith
in the History of Christ's outward manifestation, is a deadly Poison these
latter Ages has been insected with.

9. Seeing the Scriptures are uncertain, with respect to all those
extraordinary discoveries, upon the foundation of all others, who are not
Quakers, as W. P. argues expressly, and can only be certain to such as have
inward extraordinary Revelation of those things, which W. P. confesses are not
needful, P. 32. and are not given to the people called Quakers more than to
others, it necessarily follows, according to W. P's Doctrine, that the Faith of
all those Doctrines concerning Adam's fall, and Christ's Birth, Death and
Sufferings is uncertain, as well to the Quakers as other, because, as he
affirms, the Scriptures that give the account of those things are uncertain,
unless upon the ground of inward extraordinary Revelation, which neither the
Quakers, nor any others now have.

10. Seeing therefore no Men in our days have these extraordinary discoveries
given them by inward Divine Revelation, such as the Prophets had, concerning
Adam's fall, and Christ's Birth, Death and Sufferings, and many other things in
controversy betwixt the Socinians and Trinitarians, the Arians and Homousians,
Jews and Christians, Papists and Protestants, which cannot be certain to us,
and whereof we can have no certain Faith, without inward divine Revelation,
which is given to none in our days, as touching these things, it is best to
leave all asserting of them, or disputing about them, because we have no
certainty of the truth of them by the common discoveries of the Light within,
that is the general Rule of Faith and Life.

11. Whatever we read, or hear read, or Preached to us, with Scripture proofs,
do not further oblige us to believe or practice them, but as the common, and
ordinary discoveries given to all Mankind, as well as to us, Teach the same
things.

Although we may Historically believe these extraordinary things, concerning
Adam and Christ above mentioned, as we believe other Historical things, yet we
are under no obligation to believe them by any command of God, nor is the not
believing them our Sin, because they fall not within the ordinary discoveries
of the Light within given universally to Mankind, which are the Rule of our
Faith and Life, and of all Mankind, and we have no certainty of them, and
therefore we are under no Obligation to believe them.

13. The common and ordinary discoveries given to all Mankind by the Light
within, are these which Paul calls the Work of the Law writ in the Heart, and
which some of the Ancients Philosophers called the Noble precepts writ in the
Heart of Man; and which W. P. calls, the Eternal precepts of the Spirit in
the Conscience, and the Testimony of the Spirit, which (he says) is the true
Rule, viz. of Faith and Life, (universally given to us and all Mankind,) P. 14.
and 25.

14. These common and ordinary discoveries of the Light within given to all
Mankind, are but few, such as, that God is, that he is a rewarder of them that
diligently seek him; That the way of God is a way of Purity, Patience,
Meekness, etc. without which no Man shall see the Lord: These and none other
but these, and such like common and ordinary discoveries given to all Mankind
by the Light within, concerning general Piety toward God as a Creator, and
Moral Justice and Temperance toward Men, are the absolute Necessaries of
Religion, necessary to be believed and practiced by us for Salvation.

15. One great use of this Doctrine of W. P. and his Brethren (if he and they
can be believed) is, that it would bring all Men to be of one Religion, by
their Belief and Practice of these few things of Moral Piety and Justice,
according to the common and ordinary Discoveries given to all Mankind.

16. This one Religion is Deisin, which how much soever undervalued by false
Christians, (whose Faith is Historical in a Christ without them) is all one
with true Christianity, they are but two Names to one and the same thing, as
every true Christian is a true Deist, so every true Deist is a true Christian,
for he who believes in God, believes in Christ, because Christ is God. And what
is Christ, but Justice, Meekness, Patience (says W. P. Address to Protest. p.
119. 2d Edit.) therefore every Just, Meek and Patient Man, is the true
Christian, [be he a professed Infidel concerning Jesus of Nazareth, Jew,
Mohammedan or Pagan.] The mere Just Man ought not to be excluded the Communion
of Christians, says he.

17. Another great use of this Doctrine of W. P. is (as he thinks) that it
would, if duly improved, put an end to all the Controversies and Heats among
all Persuasions, not only of those called Christians of all sorts, as Papists
and Protestants, Arians and Homousians, Socinians and Trinitarians (which four
he expressly mentions, P. 45.) but even betwixt Jews and Christians
(notwithstanding of their professed Unbelief, as concerning Jesus of Nazareth,
and betwixt Mahometans and Christians by the same reason, so that they may own
another to be their Christian Brethren.

18. And seeing the Name Christian is offensive to Jews and Mahometans, it may
be laid aside, as also the Names Jesus and Christ, for it is not the outward
Name of any thing that saves, nor does the Light within Men, by its common
discovery teach them that Name. And because many are dissatisfied to call the
Light within Christ and Jesus, as Socinians, Jews and Mahometans, and many
others of those called Christians, let it suffice to call it by the name Light,
which is owned by all, and is offensive to none, and all may be called Deists,
or Professors of the Light within.

19. And ieeing many also are dissatisfied, to say, or think, that the Light
within every Man is God, or any Supernatural and Divine Principle, but think it
is nothing other but Conscience, or the natural Light of Man's Reason, let that
Dispute also come to an end, for Men may agree about the common Dictates and
Discoveries of it, though they agree not about the Nature and Essence of it, so
as to know what it is, they shall have the Benefit of it, to be happy, by
obeying it, though they know not what it is; as the Plowman has the same
Benefit that the best Philosopher has of the Sun in the Firmament, though he
knows not what the Sun is, either for Substance, Quantity or Quality.

20. One great Pinch and Difficulty in the case, is, certainly to know the just
Extent and Number of the common Discoveries of the Light within, given to all
Mankind; as whither the same number of those eternal Precepts and Laws writ in
every Man's Heart, be given to all Men; and whither some of those which W. P.
will say are the Dictates of the Light within Men universally, will not be
denied by others even of his Brethren, to be the Dictates of the Light within;
as particularly, whither attesting the Name of God in worldly matters, when
controverted, is condemned by the Light within: Whither Self-defence by carnal
Weapons be against the Dictates of the Light within, for many of his Brethren
think both are not: Whither all G. F's Orders about outward things, opposed by
many Quakers, are the Dictates of the Light within, with respect to its
ordinary Discoveries; and whither the Quakers, especially G. F. have not set up
for some new Revelations and Commands, beside the common Discoveries of the
Light within, though they have rejected the external Revelations and Commands
of Christ in the Scripture, that are not taught them by the common Discoveries
of the Light within.

Christian Reader, I have set before thee this short View of W. P's and his
Brethrens Dejsm and Skepticism, not to approve of it, but that thou, with all
good Christians, should with the greatest Abhorrency loath and detest it.

That this is a true Account of W. P's and his Brethrens Principles, and
necessary Consequences therefrom, I offer to prove, to his or their Faces,
before any Impartial Auditory,

George Keith.
London, the 17th of the 3d Month 1699.
FINIS.

