A Serious Appeal To all the more Sober, Impartial and Judicious People IN NEW
ENGLAND To whose Hands this may come, Whether Cotton Mather in his late
Address, etc. has not extremely failed in proving the People called Quakers
guilty of manifold Heresies, Blasphemies and strong Delusions, and whether he
has not much rather proved himself extremely Ignorant and greatly possessed
with a Spirit of Perversion, Error, Prejudice and envious Zeal against them in
general, and G.K. in particular, in his most uncharitable and rash Judgment
against him.

Together with a Vindication of our CHRISTIAN FAITH In those Things Sincerely
Believed by us, especially respecting the Fundamental Doctrines and Principles
of CHRISTIAN RELIGION.

By GEORGE KEITH.

Printed and Sold by William Bradford at Philadelphia in Pennsylvania, in the
Year 1692.

A few Words of Preface.
WHereas Cotton Mather in his Preface, begineth (...) a gross Falsehood, to wit,
that it has been fully pr^^^^ that Quakerism is Paganism; for it never yet
(...) been proved by him, nor any other, nor ever will be, to wit, (...) the
Religion professed by the sincere and faithful People, called (...) scorn
Quakers, is either Paganism, or any other thing than re^^ Christianity;
although there may be some that may be calle^ Quakers, but are not owned by us
to be our faithful Brethren, even as they are not all true Christians, who are
so called, nor were they all Israel who were called Israel; The Reader may
expect what full store of Lies he may be entertained with by Cotton Mather,
when the first two Lines of his Preface are such a notorious Lie.

And as for the Etymology of the Name Christian, which, as he alleges, one
that appears lately in Print, as an Advocate of the Quakers, gives as if
Christianoi were Christionoi, that is, Christ's Asses; he should have given us
the Name of that Advocate, that we might have found how truly he has cited
him. It has been thought that some of the Heathens, by way of Reproach, did
devise such an Etymology of the Name Christianos, as if it were Christionos, i.
e. Christ's Ass; but I judge not that to be the true Etymology of that Name, but
that Christianos is as much as to say, A Follower of Christ, or one partaking
of that heavenly Anointing, which in all Fullness was poured by the Father on
Christ, and is derived in various Measures from Christ, according to the good
pleasure of God, unto all that believe sincerely in him. But supposing that
Etymology, that a Christian Quaker is one of Christ's Asses, I propose it to the
serious Consideration of the People of New England, whether it be not much more
honorable and profitable to be one of Christ's Asses, so as to witness a
fullfilling (...) figure of Christ's riding upon the Ass outwardly, as was
^^^phecied of him, than to be the Priests Asses in New England (...)
elsewhere, to be rid upon by them, as is too manifest they (...) been. And for
his supposed Load he has imagined he has (...) on us, it touches us little,
and returns on himself, and (...) be his own Burden.

And concerning Christian Lodowick his Challenge to the Quakers in
Rhode Island, it is sufficiently answered, and he declared to be a gross
Calumniator.

CHAP. I.
WHereas Cotton Mather in his late Address seems (...) lay great weight on
the Opinion of Richard Baxte^ (whom he calls Reverend Baxter) concerning the
Quakers, I thought fit to Transcribe some few Passages of Richard Baxter in a
printed Book of his, called, Directions for weak distempered Christians, that
may be of some service to that injured People, called in scorn Quakers. In page
142. of that Book, he says, From my own Observation, which with a grieved
Soul, I have made in this Generation, I hereby give warning to this and all
succeeding Ages, that if they have any regard to Truth, or Charity, they take
heed how they believe any factious partial Historian, or Divine, in any evil
that he says of the Party that he is against; for (though there be good and
credible Persons of most Parties, yet) you shall find that Passion and
Partiality prevails against Conscience, Truth and Charity in most that are
sick of this Disease, and that the Envious Zeal which is described, James 3.
does make them think they do God Service, first in believing false Reports, and
then in venting them against those that their Zeal or Faction does call the
Enemies of Truth. And a little after he says, page 143. Most Christian is that
Advice of Dr. Henry Moore, That all Parties of Christians would mark all the
good which is in other Parties, and be more forward to speak of that, than of
the Evil: And this (says Baxter) would promote the Work of Charity in the
Church, and the interest of Christianity in the World; whereas the overlooking
of all that is Good, and aggravating all the Evil (and falsely feigning more than
is True) is the Work of greatest Service to the Devil, etc. Now if both Richard
Baxter and Cotton Mather had well practiced this Advice, they would not have
been so Uncharitable to the People called Quakers.

But seeing C.M. lays so great weight on his Reverend Baxter, as he calls
him (though I find not any where that he calls Paul, Peter or John, or any of
the Prophets or Apostles by such a high designation) even by Baxter's own
Judgment, neither G.K. nor his Brethren, who are of his Faith, are guilty of
any Fundamental Errors, that are repugnant to the Essence of the Christian
Faith: And it is a thing generally acknowledged by all Protestants, That where
any Man (...) ^ociety of Men, err not in a Fundamental Article of the Christian
^^^th, we ought to have Charity toward them, as our Christian ^^ethren, if in
some other things they are under some Mistakes, and ^^at their Conversation and
Practice be free of Scandal. And that I ^ay the more effectually make it
apparent, how that by the Judgment (...) Richard Baxter neither G.K. nor his
Brethren who are of his Faith, ^^e guilty of any Fundamental Errors touching
the Christian Faith, (...) think fit to transcribe (faithfully) a Passage in
his forecited Book, page 84, 85, 86. where he undertaketh to describe the
entire Essence of the Christian Faith, as to the matter of it. The Foundation
Principle (says he) or Fundamental Matter is God the Father, Son and holy
Ghost, the secondary Foundation or Fundamental Doctrine, is those Scripture
Propositions that express our Faith in God the Father, the Son and the holy
Ghost: When we name three Persons as the Object of the Christian Faith, we
express Names of Relation, which contain both the Persons, Nature and Offices,
and undertaken Works, without either of which God were not God, and Christ were
not Christ, and the holy Ghost were not, in the sense of our Articles of Faith,
the holy Ghost; as we must therefore believe, That there is one only God, so we
must believe, That God the Father is the first in the holy Trinity of Persons;
that the whole Godhead is perfect, and infinite in Being, and Power, and
Wisdom, and Goodness, (in which all his Attributes are comprehended, but yet a
distinct Understanding of them all, is not of absolute necessity to Salvation;)
That this God is the Creator, Preserver, and Disposer of all things, and the
Owner and Ruler of Mankind, most Just and Merciful, that as he is the beginning
of all, so he is the ultimate end, and the chief good of Man, which before all
things else must be loved and Sought. Concerning the Son, we must moreover
believe, That he is the same God with the Father, the second Person in Trinity,
Incarnate, and so became Man, by a Personal Union of the Godhead and Manhood
[He omitteth his being conceived of the holy Ghost, and born of the Virgin,
Mary, which was needful to have been expressed, it being a great Article of our
Christian Faith] That he was without Original or Actual Sin, having a sinless
Nature, and a sinless Life; That he fullfilled all Righteousness, and was put
to Death, as a Sacrifice for our sins, and gave himself a Ransom for us; and
being buried, he rose again from the dead, and afterward ascended into Heaven,
where he is Lord of all, and interceedeth for Believers; That he will come
again, and raise the dead, and judge the World, the Righteous to Everlast^^^
Life, and the Wicked to Everlasting Punishment: That this is the on^ Redeemer,
the Way, the Truth and the Life, neither is there access to the Father but by
him, nor Salvation in any other. Concerning the Holy Ghost we must believe,
That he is the same one God, the third Person in Trinity, sent by the Father
and the Son to inspire the Prophets and Apostles; and tha^ the Doctrine
inspired and miraculously attested by him, is true; that he i^ the Sanctifier
of these that shall be saved, renewing them after the Image of God in Holiness
and Righteo^sness, giving them true Repentance, Faith, Hope, Love, and sincere
Obedience, causing them to overcome the Flesh, the World, and the Devil, thus
gathering a holy Church on Earth to Christ, who have, by his Blood, the Pardon
of all their sins, and shall have Everlasting Bl^ss^dness with God: This (says
Richard Baxter) is the Essence of the Christian Faith, as to the Matter of it.

And now, as concerning that judged by Richard Baxter the Essence of the
Christian Faith, as to the Matter of it, I declare sincerely, without all
Equivocation or mental Reservation, in the true and genuine sense of the Words,
that I have transcribed out of his said Treatise, that I know not wherein I or
my Brethren, of my Faith and Persuasion differ from him in any one particular,
as to the matter of it, or substance therein contained; the only exception we
have, is against that unscriptural Term or Phrase of Three Persons, or a
Trinity of Persons, but we own sincerely, That our Faith ought to be, and is in
God the Father, the Son and the holy Ghost, and that these Names are Names of
Relation, respecting the Relations, as well as the Relative Offices, and Works
of those Three; and this being granted by us, in the sincerity of our Hearts,
we are excused or cleared by John Calvin, for whose Memory I suppose C. Mather
has as full and great esteem as for R. Baxter; for in his first Book of
Institutions, cap. 13. n. 5. he says expressly, Vtinam quidem sepulta essent (
se invent^ Nomina (as he expressly calls them) Trium Personarum) constaret
modo, hec inter omnes Fides, Patrem, et Filium, et Spiritum esse unum Deum, nec
tamen aut Filium esse Patrem, aut Spiritum Filium, sed proprietate quadam esse
distinctos, neque enim tam precisa sum austeritate ut obnudas voculas
digladiari sustineam; In English thus, I wish (says he) the invented Names
(viz. of Three Persons) were buried, providing this Faith were manifest among
all, that the Father, the Son, and the Spirit is one God; and yet that the Son
is not the Father, nor that the Spirit is the Son, but that they are distinct
by a certain Property (to wit, in their ^^lative Attributes, as that the Father
did beget the Son, and the ^on was begotten of the Father, and that the holy
Spirit did proceed ^^om both) for I am not of such precise Austerity (said
Calvin) that ^or bare small Words I would contend; and withal he confesses,
That the Orthodox anciently did not agree about these Terms or invented Words,
^^at he acknowledges, were invented since the Apostles days, to guard against
the Arrian, Sabellian, and other Heresies. And therefore since we are
altogether free of these Heresies, and that we detest them from our very Souls,
no sober Christian will judge uncharitably of us in that respect. And as for
the word Distinct, if some of our Friends, taking it to signify distant or
separated asunder one from another, as in remote and distant places, have
refused it, in this and other matters, as indeed sometimes, at least vulgarly
it does so signify, as when we say, America is distinguished from Europe, by a
great and spacious Sea interveening, they ought not to be accused for so doing,
seeing in that other sense of the word Distinct, that is more in use among
Scholars, as when we say, Things are distinct when the one is not the other,
they own a Distinction, as that the Father is not the Son, the Son is not the
Father, (though he is our Father, and is expressly called in Scripture the
Everlasting Father) and Christ's Manhood and Body is not the Godhead, and yet
one Christ; as the Body of a Man is not his Soul, and yet Body and Soul is one
Man; and in this second sense we do allow the word distinct. And as to the
Manner of receiving the Christian Faith, we grant with him, first, That it must
not only be received, as true, into our Understanding, by a special divine
Illumination, that is supernatural, but must be embraced by the Will, Heart and
Affections, as good, yea exceeding good, and worthy of all acceptance, by a
special divine Motion, and working of the holy Spirit, that is supernatural, in
and upon the Will, Heart and Affections: 2 dly, That as touching all the
peculiar Mysteries and Doctrines of Faith, the Scriptures have been
Instrumental, by and together with the immediate working of the Spirit, to
beget in us the true Faith of them: But in this we differ, I suppose, from him,
as well as from C. Mather and his Brethren of New England, that whereas they
hold, That the Spirit of God works in Believers Effectively, but not
Objectively, or by way of sensible Object, or sensibly and perceptibly by its
own Self-Evidence and Demonstration to men's Hearts and Souls; We affirm, That
the Spirit of God works in Believers, both Effectively (...) also
Objectively, or by way of sensible Object, or sensibly and ^^^ceptibly, by its
own Evidence and Demonstration to men's Hea^^^ and Souls: And this, diverse
called Protestants have acknowledged (...) us, though denied by C.M. and his
Brethren of New England; (...) yet I suppose R. Baxter will not call this a
Fundamental Error in (...) People called Quakers, seeing it contradicts none of
the Fundame^^^^ Articles delivered by him in his said Treatise.

And if any say, or object, That if the Spirit works by way of (...) sensible
Object, upon the inward and spiritual Senses of Believers, (...) would make
void all use of the Scriptures, as being so much as the Instrument, or
Instrumental to our Faith. But I Answer, denying this Consequence, and by
distinguishing the Object of our Faith, to wit, that the Scriptures are the
Instrumental and secondary Object of our Faith, and the holy Spirit the
principal and primary Object of our Faith (as it is sensibly felt to work upon
our inward and spiritual Senses) together with the Father and the Son: Even as
in outward and natural Objects that work upon our outward and natural Senses,
some are principal, and others are instrumental; as in our natural sight of
visible Things on Earth, as Horses, Woods, Trees, Beasts, the Sun's Light is
the principal Object of our sight, but the things are at least the secondary
and instrumental Object thereof; or, as when we read on a Book, the Light that
we read with is the principal Object, and the Letters of the book are the
secondary and instrumental; and though we cannot see the Letters of the Book
without some light, yet we may see light, yea, the Sun himself, if we have good
Eyes, without the Book; and so God, and Christ, and the Spirit may be inwardly
seen, felt and known, and is frequently seen, felt, known and enjoyed by the
inward and spiritual Senses of Believers, without all present use of Letters or
Books, when the Knowledge is Intuitive and Sensible. But as for the Doctrinal
Knowledge, as we acknowledge it is requisite, in order to bring us to so high
an enjoyment of God and Christ, as Vision, or Intuitive Knowledge, or
Intuition, so we grant, it is commonly wrought in us and increased by means of
the holy Scriptures, instrumentally working with the holy Spirit, and that
therefore the hol^ Scriptures are of great profit and service to all Ranks and
Conditions of People, yea, to such of the highest spiritual Seize, while
remaining in the mortal Body.

I (...) therefore with, and in behalf of my Friends and Brethren of (...)
Faith and Persuasion with me, in all parts of the World, (...) this Solemn
Appeal to you, the more Sober, impartial and Judi^^^^^ People in Boston, and
elsewhere in New England, to whose (...) this may come, Whether Cotton Mather
is not extremely Un^^^^^itable, and possessed with a Spirit of Prejudice and
envious Zeal, (...) R. Baxters phrase) against the Quakers in general, and me
in ^^^^^cular, as guilty of manifold Heresies, Blasphemies, and strong (...),
to the rendering us No Christians, in the lowest degree or (...) (while, I
suppose, he has some Charity to some in the Church of (...), called Papists,
and to Lutherans, A^minians, and diverse others, (...) differ widely from him)
yet agreeing in the aforesaid Fundamentals, when we hold the same Fundamentals
of Christian Doctrine, (...) Faith, both with Rich. Baxter, and many others, as
so declared by them. And notwithstanding of Cotton Mathers strong Asseverations
against us, as if we denied almost all, or most of the Fundamental Articles
(...) the Christian and Protestant Faith, yet he shall never be able to prove
it, That we are guilty of this his so extremely rash and uncharitable Charge,
either as in respect of the Body of that People, called in scorn Quakers, or in
respect of any particular Writers or Publishers of our Doctrines and
Principles, and Preachers among us, generally owned and approved by us, as men
of a sound Judgment and Understanding. And as for his Citations out of the
Quakers printed Books and Treatises, I would have you to consider, that most of
them all are borrowed, and taken not from our own Books, but from our professed
Adversaries, men known well enough to be possessed with Prejudice against us,
such as Thomas Hicks and John Faldo, and others, who^ our Friends in
Old-England, and particularly George Whitehead and William Penn have largely
answered; yea, I do here solemnly charge Cotton Mather to give us but one
single instance of any one Fundamen^al Article of Christian Faith denied by us,
as a People, or by any one of our Writers or Preachers, generally owned and
approved by us. And if perhaps there be any Citations that C.M. cites out of
our Books, that he has read, that seem to confirm his Charge in one or two
particulars against us; I do sincerely answer, that I am at a loss to find them
in these Books, partly because diverse of these Books cited by him, I am
altogether a stranger to them, and know not where to find them in all America,
and partly because he not citing the Chapters, Sections, Parts or Pages of
them, that may be (...) here in America, I cannot, but with great pains and
expense of (...) find them out; and I judge I can much better spend my precious
(...) than in searching of them; and it suffices to me, and I hope dot^ (...)
many others, that according to the best Knowledge I have of (...) People called
Quakers, and these most generally owned by them (...) Preachers and Publishers
of their Faith, of unquestioned est^^^ among them, and worthy of double Honor,
as many such there: (...) I know none that are guilty of any one of such
Heresies and Blasp^^mies, as he accuses them. Yet we deny not, but as it has
happe^ed, and does daily happen to Writers and Preachers belonging to (...)
other Societies, so it may have happened to some among us, to have at times in
writing or speaking, delivered things not so warily and cautiously worded, in
every respect, as need were: But in this case* all but prejudiced Persons, will
say, If it can be found, by comparing their words one with another, that their
sense or meaning is found, though not so altogether safely or cautiously worded
in every respect, Charity is to be allowed, and the best Construction ought to
be given to their words, or they themselves, or their Friends for them, in
respect of their absence or decease, who did best know them, ought to be
allowed to give their sense of them, as I have done, in the sincerity of my
heart, according to my best understanding and knowledge of them; and I think I
should know, and do know these called Quakers, and their Principles, far better
than Cotton Mather, or any or all his Brethren, having been conversant with
them in public Meetings, as well as in private Discourses, with the most noted
and esteemed among them for about Twenty Eight Years past, and that in may
places of the World in Europe, and for these diverse Years in America: And I
further say, That if any things, through inadvertency, have been said or writ
by any of us, and that it can be found so to be, and that a charitable
Construction cannot be safely and sincerely put upon them, but that they do
contradict the holy Scriptures, and the wholesome Doctrine therein delivered by
the holy Prophets and Apostles, we do sincerely deny and disown them, and
declare our being ready, with all possible sincerity, to disown them, upon due
notice and advertisment; for though we affirm, That the Spirit of God in us,
and all Belie^ers, in every discovery it gives, is infallible, yet we have
never judged our selves absolutely infallible, nor did we ever place or fix an
absolute Infallibility upon any Man, or Number, of ^^^iety of Men since the
Apostles days; but through Gods mercy (...) are sensible of our danger of
being liable to Mistakes, as well as ^^her men, if we be not duly humble,
watchful and careful to keep ^lose and chaste to the pure openings, teachings
and leadings of the infallible Spirit of Truth. And we readily grant the great
benefit we have by the holy Scriptures, as being instrumental, by and with ^he
immediate working of the Spirit, to preserve us from Error, or if any be
overtaken in an Error, and beguiled by the Enemy, to Recover and Restore them
therefrom; therefore it is, that in all respects we prefer the Scriptures,
both to our own, and all other Writings; and if any Doctrine or Practice be
found contrary thereunto, upon due and impartial Examination, we say, it ought
to be disowned and denied; for the Scriptures of Truth, and the Spirit of Truth
that gave them forth, can never contradict the one to the other.

CHAP. II.
IT cannot, with any color of Justice, be expected by Cot. Mather, that I
should give a particular Reply to all things in his Book, called, An Address,
said or alleged against the People called Quakers in general, or me in
particular, until such time that he give a distinct particular Answer to my
former Book, called, The pretended Antidote proved Poison, etc. particularly
directed to him and his Brethren, and to the several Chapters and Sections
thereof, which he has not so much as essayed; wherein, notwithstanding almost
the whole matter he does muster up against us in his late Address, is
sufficiently and solidly answered; and therefore until he give a full and
distinct particular Answer to the said Book, I judge not my self obliged so
much as to notice many things contained in his said Address, being filled with
manifest falsehoods, perversions and abuses, sufficiently already Replied unto,
partly by others, and partly by me, but containing no new matter against us,
excepting his Personal Reflections against me, which yet I think not to spend
much Time or Paper to answer, most of them being so manifestly false and
foolish, that of themselves they fall and evanish; only I intend to give a
short glance or hint at some of the most considerable Abuses and Perversions he
musteret^ (...) against us.

Page 3. He says, If I have one spark of Light in me, Quakerism (...) but a
profound and deadly pit of Darkness. Answ. This Assertion do^^ not come from
any true Light in him, but from his Darkness.

Page 4. Quakerism, under pretense of advancing the spiritual Obje^^ of
Religion, goes to annihilate all the Sensible. Ans. False.

Again, page 4. There is hardly any one Fundamental Article of the reformed
Religion, whereby we look to be saved, that is not undermined by Quakerism.
Ans. But of this he has not given one true instance* And as to what he
alleges, that some of us have said, The Letter is not the Word of God, to
wit, properly and without a figure, he himself has said as much, see page 59.
And that some of us have called their Books, Light risen out of Darkness,
Shields of Truth, etc. they understood it not, but metaphorically or
figuratively, by some Metonymy, as is common in all Titles of Books, but we
have always preferred the Scriptures to our Writings. And that the Scriptures
may be called the Word of God, in a figurative Speech, and also that the True
Sense signified in them, is the Word of God, I have acknowledged, and so I do
still; but that the inward Testimony of God in our Hearts, is more properly and
immediately the Word of God, than the outward Testimony of the Scripture, I
still affirm, with Augustine and other ancient Writers.

As for his citing William Penn's words agruing against that same Numerical
Body its rising at the Resurrection; it is clear that he understands the same
exact Number of the small Particles or Dusts, neither more nor less than what
is commonly buried; and what hurt is there in that? does not C.M. and his
Brethren generally say, as well as W. Penn, That at the Resurrection all shall
rise Men, and not Infants, nor lame, nor defective in any part; and yet how
many Thousands dye Infants, and defective in some Bodily Members?

That some have denied the Saints, as such, to be miserable Sinners, it ought
to be considered, that according to the common style of Scripture, Saints and
Sinners are distinguished, and the unconverted are called Sinners; for the
denomination of a thing is taken chiefly from that which is the greatest part;
but because in all Saints, even the weake^^, Grace and Holiness is the chief
and g^eatest part, therefore from that they receive their Denomination, and are
said to ^e righteous and clean, and not to do Iniquity. That one said, The
Scrip^^^^ ^s not the means by which Faith is wrought, it can receive a candid
^^^^^pretation, as to say, the only means, excluding the inward Grace (...)
Operation of the Spirit; as some say, Medicine is not the means of (...) Cure,
though a Means, it is understood not the only means.

and whereas he querieth, If their Primmer has yet been corrected, (...) they
read, False Teachers preach Christ without, and bid People (...) in him as he
is in Heaven? If he mean William Smith's Primmer, (...) I believe he does, I
Answer, Yea, it has been Corrected, in the (...) Edition of his other
Treatises joined with it, as is plainly to be (...), thus, That false Teachers
preach Christ only without, but true ^^eachers preach Christ both without us,
and also within us.

And what William Penn argues as concerning Three Persons, he ^nly argues
against the invented Names [ Persons] (as Calvin does ^cknowledge them, as
abovesaid) which in all proper Language does signify Substances, and not mere
Properties or relative Attributes, which W.P. will not deny to be in God. Nor
are W.P's words so to be understood concerning Justification, as if he excluded
Christ's Righteousness, which he fulfilled in his own Person; but only he
denies that any can be justified by that alone, without Faith and Repentance,
etc.

As for Bodily Tremblings, that they are not so common among these called
Quakers, as formerly; as good or better Reason can be given, as that these or
the like unusual Motions that seized on the Bodies of some Presbyterians in
Scotland about fifty Years ago, are not now so common among them, which the
Author of The fulfilling of the Scriptures, does plainly acknowledge, was about
that time among them; and indeed many of these Tremblings and extraordinary
Motions that seized on the Bodies of some Presbyterians, and many called
Quakers, in these days, did proceed in great part, from the small experience
of, and little acquaintance that these Persons had at first with that sensible
manner of the working of Gods Spirit, and that there were but few at first that
could well advise them to bear with more composure and quiet of Body that
manner of workings, whereas by more frequent Experience, many did, and do at
this day, witness, and feel sensibly, not only as great, but often greater inward
Workings of the Spirit of God, on all accounts, and yet can bear them, and most
willingly and gladly submit to them, with little or no Observation, of any
Bodily Trembling; for as in going to War, and heari^^ (...) dreadful Sound of
Guns, Trumpets and Drums, the young Soul^^^^^ are often afraid, even to a degree
of Bodily Trembling, yet a^^^^wards, having more Experience, they feel not
either that Bod^^^ Trembling, nor such fear that is the cause of it; and as
Water a^^ Fire at its first breaking forth, is more violent, and yet afterwar^
is fully as effectual, without such Violence; so at the first hearin^ of
Thunder, and seeing the terrible Flashes of Lightning, Perso^^ are much more
afraid, than after, when they are more acquainte^ with it, by frequency
thereof; so it might be, and was so, that the Power and Spirit of God did work
in former days with a more seeming Force upon many, and yet since does work as
effectually, now, and sometimes more without it, so as not to come under such
frequent Observation; and yet even Bodily Tremblings are still witnessed,
proceeding from the inward working of Gods Spirit, among us; as the Apostle
says, Knowing the Terrors of the Lord, we persuade men.

Page 12. For the words of Humphry Norton, alleged by C.M. I have made inquiry
at diverse, but can find no intelligence of any such words, in any Book of his;
but if any such have dropped from him, or any other, tending to deny the Faith of
Christ's being in Heaven in his glorified Body of Man without us, we shall be
far from excusing them; for we zealously believe, That the Man Christ is in
Heaven without us, in his glorified Body of Man, the same for Being he had on
Earth, but wonderfully changed in Manner and Condition, as is clearly and fully
expressed in that late Treatise given forth by our Friends in Rhode Island,
called, The Christian Faith, etc. Vindicated, etc. But yet we cannot approve of
the too carnal Conceptions of many carnal and ignorant Professors, that have
too carnal Imagination of Christ, and confine him altogether to such a
Remoteness, that they wi^^ not allow any Measure of him to dwell in Believers,
plain contrary to the Scripture.

Page 12. And whereas he says, If they own those Principles, why will not they
give us leave to own them? I Answer; We blame you not for owning them,
providing ye did own them as ye ought to do, in the true and right Faith of
them, that proceeds from the Spirits inward Inspiration and Revelation,
sensibly working, by way of sensible Object upon the inward and spiritual
Senses of men's Souls; but this ye deny; and therefore it is not the matter, but
manner of your own^^^ them, that we commonly blame, even as some said, that the
Lord ^^^ed, yet they swore falsely, because they did it hypocritically, not
^nowing him to live in them; but yet sometimes in these very things, ye err
also in the matter.

Page 15. That the Quakers adore G.K. either for his outward Learning, and make
him their Head, or for any other thing, is false; nor does he seek any such
false Honor; it suffices him to be loved by his Friends, and neither he nor
his Friends make any other account of outward Learning, but to be the
footstool of Christ, and subservient to his Truth, and as the Spoils of the
Egyptians were made serviceable to the Israelites.

And that he says, This Keith it is, who has given the greatest advantages to
Quakerism, and that with no little Alterations; How this is consistent with his
representing me, as if I were Mad, page 44. and extremely Ignorant, does not
appear. And as for Alterations, great or small, that I have made in the Quakers
Principles, as rightly understood, delivered by our most Ancient Friends, of
best account in general, he has not proved. He calls my late Catechism, A
wily Catechism, wherein Quakerism is so disguised, as that one would almost
suspect him a real Protestant; and yet he will needs have it, that the Juice of
Toads is as wholesome a Potion: But it is strange that such a Wily Catechism, and
so politically contrived should proceed from a Madman, and extremely Ignorant,
as he would have me to be. But however, I say, that Catechism is writ and given
forth in true sincerity, without any disguise, and does as really bespeak me a
true Protestant, (as all true Quakers are) as it does seem to represent me to
be, and will be found to have nothing that is hurtful in it, but profitable and
wholesome, I hope, upon impartial Examination.

That the inward excusing or condemning Principle, as he charge on us, p. 15.
which all men are born with, is the Man Christ Jesus, is not asserted by any
called Quakers, that I know, unless by a figure called Synecdoche, of giving
the Name of the whole to the measure, and by a Metonyme, as where in Scripture
the second Adam is called the quickening Spirit, and the Light of the World;
but the Quakers, so called, generally acknowledge, that the Spirit, Light and
Life dwells in all fullness only in the glorified Body of the Man Christ
Jesus without them, and the measures of it not separated from the Fullness,
more or less, as he is pleased to give in Believers. Nor do the Quakers sa^^
that men bring with them into the World these inward Illumination and
Convictions, and other Operations of the Light or Spirit, whether common or
special, that men feel by experience in them, when at Age, although none can
come into the World but as the Almighty Power and Arm of God, who formed them
in the Mothers Womb, does bring them, and as that eternal Word, without which
nothing is made, does appoint them in their several Ages and Generations. And
for Christian Lodowicks Challenge against our Friends in Rhode Island, it is
already answered, and they are cleared from his Calumnies, and our Christian
Religion sufficiently distinguished from either Paganism, Judaism or
Mahumatism. And the Exceptions he makes against my Catechism are soon answered,
if his Perversions were but detected. 1 st, That some who are left without
either the help of the holy Scriptures, or holy Men, do yet so rightly improve
the inward help of Christ's Light, as to be accepted with God; This he says is
altogether contrary to Romans 1.21, 22. but in this, as mostly every where, he
perverteth my words and sense; for he has left out my following words, [
according to the present state] And what I mean by them I show a little after,
That such who have a measure of sincerity in their Gentile state, but having no
Faith in Christ crucified, are but Servants, and not Sons of the free Woman,
but are under the Law, and though accepted so far as sincere in the Servants
state, as I proved from Acts 10.1, 2, 34, 35. yet not thereby justified as
Sons; for I have acknowledged, that without the Faith of Christ crucified and
raised again without us, none are or can be so justified (yet they are as the
Kings Prisoners, and as the Manslayer was in the City of Refuge under the Law,
till he heard of the Death of the High Priest) and such are shut up under the
Safeguard of the Law, (as Beza translates it) unto the Faith that is afterward
to be revealed, Gal. 3.23. So there is a place of Refuge, although C.M. know it
not. Nor does Romans 1.21, 22. contradict it, for that place speaks not of all
Gentiles, but these of the worst of them. 2 dly, That some may be saved without
outward hearing or preaching, is granted by the Westminster Confession, in the
case of Infants, and Deaf and Dumb Persons; and therefore how devout and
Conscientious Gentiles can be saved, has not the least shadow of greater
difficulty to understand: And that none are eternally saved without the Faith
of Christ, I have granted in my Catechism, and other Treatises, and do still
grant, see Sect. 4. Quest. 10. but how this Faith it wrought in such, is best
to leave it until God be pleased further to open it, seeing, as the Westminster
Confession says, God works by his Spirit when, where and how he pleases;
and as Christ said, The Spirit blows where it lists, the greek word can
well be translated Spirit, and is so by some Translators. 3 dly, That the
Principle of the New Covenant is in all Men, is not contradicted by Ephesians.
2.12. but is confirmed by Romans 10.8, 9, 10. compared with Deuteronomy. 30.14. and
Christ's Parable of the Seed sown in four grounds. And why may not the Seed of
the New Covenant lie in the hearts of unregenerate Men for a Season, as the
Seed of Wheat may lie not having root in the cold dry ground for a Season, till
it be moistened and warmed with the Showers and Sun's warmth in the Spring. 4
thly, That having more Wives than one was unlawful under the Law, is not
contrary to Mat. 19.45, 48. for although Man had but one wife given him at the
beginning, yet the Law that permitted such a thing to men, as the like in the
case of Divorce came in afterward. And it is absurd to think that Abraham
sinned against the Law in his Conscience, writ in his very Nature (and
therefore commonly called the Law of Nature, in having two Wives at once; for
all sins against the Law of Nature are heinous sins, and of great aggravation,
as the Westminster Confession acknowledges. But seeing no such sin is charged
on Abraham, and that he was in great favor with God at that very time, it
cannot be said to be against that Law writ in his Nature, though it be against
the Law of the New Covenant now under the Gospel. 5 thly, That we are to wait
in Silence for some aid and assistance of the Spirit, to help us to pray, does
not contradict Acts 8.22. for as Peter commanded Simon Magus to pray, so he bid
him Repent and Pray; and that he had not the Spirit, was his own fault, as it
is the fault of all others (who have it not to assist them, both to wait and
pray also) Nor does men's want of the Spirit, because they depart from it, and
resist the gentle Motions thereof, excuse their neglect of Prayer, no more than
a man's want of Money excuses him to pay a just Debt, yet he must not go to pay
his debt with fals^ Coin, no more should a man pray with a Hypocritical Spirit.
Nor, 6 thly, does Romans 3.28. prove that Repentance, as well as Faith, is not a
necessary Condition and Instrument of our Justification; for true Gospel
Repentance is not the Work of the Law, but of Faith; and his Reverend R. Baxter
does hold with the Quakers against him, That Faith and sincere Obedience are
necessary Conditions and Instruments of Justification, and to teach so, he does
not think Popish, as does sufficiently appear by what he has printed on that
subject; see his Aphorisms of Justification, page 80. where he says, Some
Ignorant Wretches gnash their Teeth at this very Doctrine, as if it were flat
Popery, viz. That Men are justified by Faith, as it is an inward Obedience. Nor
7 thly, does Romans 9.11. prove that Esau was a Reprobate before he was born, or
at any time afterward; yea, Cotton Mather, with his Boston Brethren, in their
former Book, dare not affirm, That Esau was a Reprobate, and that men are not
born Reprobates, (though some are preferred to others before they are born) but
become Reprobates after they have nothing good left in them, is clear from
Scripture, that calls reprobate men Dross, after the precious Mettle is
extracted from it, and Chaff that has no grain of Wheat in it. Nor 8 thly,
does Acts 8.38. prove that Christ's Baptism is with Water; for as the Practice
of Circumcision, after Christ's Resurrection, does not prove it a
Gospel-Precept, no more does the practice of Water Baptism, but both Christ and
John did teach, That Christ's Baptism was with Fire and the holy Ghost; but no
where is it said, that Christ baptizeth with Water. Nor 9 thly, does 1 Cor.
11.26. prove, That Believers may not feed upon Christ by Faith, and so sup with
him, and he with them, as well when they eat not, as when they do eat together
outwardly, remembering the Lords Death, with Solemn Prayer and Thanksgiving,
which we grant is good frequently to be done.

And thus I have fully answered all his frivolous and weak Objections against
my Catechism; so that he has not discovered the least grain of Error in it;
nor does any thing that I have said in my other printed Treatises contradict
the Doctrine of my Catechism, as he does falsely allege, perverting my words,
in most things, to a sense contrary to my mind, or to what they can bear, so
far is he from that Candor of giving them a favorable Construction. But I
intend not to follow him in his manifold Impertinences, to weary either my
Reader or my self, and shall come to give a brief and plain Answer to his Five
Arguments, whereby he would persuade the People in New England to turn away
from hearing me; the which Arguments savor more of bitter Prejudice and
extreme Folly and Rashness, than of ^^y Wit or Judgment, and has nothing of
Truth in them, and might be easily retorted upon himself, where they have the
best seeming show, according to that Latin Verse, Fabula narratur mutato
Nomine de te; i.e. Change the Name, and the Tale is told truly of thy thy self.

CHAP. III.
IN his first Argument he accuses me to be guilty of a Lie, in matter of Fact,
and that I pretend to an assurance for it from the Spirit of God; and the Lie
he alleges in matter of Fact, is, That I charge their Confession of Faith for
holding, that the Scriptures ought to be believed for their own outward
Evidence and Testimony, and not for the inward Evidence and Testimony of the
holy Spirit in men's Hearts. And to prove this to be a Lie, he cites some words
of that Confession, which says, Our full persuasion and assurance of the
infallible Truth, and divine Authority of the holy Scriptures, is from the
Inward Work of the Holy Spirit, bearing witness by and with the Word in our
Hearts. And for a further Confirmation he alleges John Owen, saying, That the
Scripture be received as the Word of God, there is a twofold Efficacy of the
Spirit, etc. withal affirming, That I cover Lie with Lie. To which I Answer;
Cotton Mather, and not I, is guilty of two gross Lies or Falsehoods in this
Charge: first, That I pretend to an assurance from the Spirit, in matter of
Fact, concerning what they hold, is a manifest Perversion; for I bring my
assurance, in matter of Fact, not from the Spirit, but from their Confession of
Faith, which I have diligently examined; but the knowledge I have that their
Doctrine, in that particular, is false, I bring from the Spirit of God, that
has given me the understanding thereof, and is Truth and no Lie. 2 dly, That
he says, Their Confession does grant, that the Scriptures are to be believed
for the inward Evidence and Testimony of the holy Spirit in men's hearts; but
this it does not say, nor can it be gathered by any just consequence, to be
their sense, seeing they deny, with C.M. and his Brethren, all inward objective
immediate Testimony and Revelation of the Spirit. And whereas the Confession
mentions the inward Work of the holy Spirit, bearing witness by and with the
Word ( viz. the Scripture) in our Hearts. This does sufficiently prove, That
their Confession does not mean or intend any inward Testimony of the Spirit,
reall^ and properly so called, as having a standing Evidence of its own, b^^
only borrowed from the Scripture, and therefore is no true and proper Evidence
at all, but only and altogether improper, yea, as improper as if I should say,
when I hear but one man give Evidence to the Truth of a thing, and that I read
it also in w^it from his hand, that three Evidences or Witnesses have given
their Evidence to that Truth, as 1 st, the Man, ^ dly, my Ear that heard him, 3
dly, my Eye that has re^d his writ: But what sober Man will say, these are
three Witnesses or Evidences? And would it not be a great Cheat to say, That
whereas the Law requires two Witnesses, and there is but one man that gives
witness to Cotton Mathers hearing, that C.M. should allege, his Ears are other
two Witnesses, because they have heard him, and so they are three in all: And
as great a Cheat and Fallacy is it, to call the witness of the Scripture the
inward Witness of the Spirit, when they confess, the inward Work of the Spirit,
is only Effective, to open the Ear to hear the outward Witness of the
Scripture, but not to speak by any distinct Witness, to the inward Ear: And it
is like that other Fallacy, as if James being required to give his Witness, he
gives it not by himself, but by John, and John being required to give his
Witness, he gives it by James, but neither of them by himself, or at least the
one not by himself; for when they are asked, By what do they know the
Scriptures to be the Word of God? they answer, By the Spirit: And again, By
what do they know the Spirit? they answer, By the Scripture. And thus the
Fallacy and Falsehood both of the Confession and of C.M. is detected, and G.K.
is cleared from being no wise guilty of any Lie in the case. And what I said of
John Owen is true, for the Title and design of his Book is concerning The
Self-Evidencing Authority of the holy Scriptures, only he confesses the
Spirits inward Work is necessary to let men see or know it; but that is no
proper Witness, more than a man's hearing is one Witness, and the thing heard is
another. I do therefore Appeal to all sober, impartial and judicious Readers,
Whether not I, but Cotton Mather, be not convicted of gross Lying or Falsehood,
and whether the Society he belongs unto, ought not to bring him to Repentance
for such Crimes, to use some of his own words.

His Second Argument is, That I am guilty of having committed most horrible
Blasphemy against the holy Spirit of God, which is the unpardonable Sin; And
though he does charge this one while positively, yet another while If I have
not the certain, yet fearful Marks of it; and my Sin is very like that Sin; and
yet again charging it positively on me, That I have taken part with the
Pharisees in dorg that impardonable Injury to the Eternal Spirit of God* But
how does he prove any thing of this to have the lest show or shadow of truth?
Why, because, as he alleges, I called his and his Brethrens Prayers, more
than once, a Conjuring of the Devil, and do put on them the style of Charms and
Spells; by which Prayers, he alleges, he and his Brethren did cast out the
Devil, that did Bodily possess some Young People, and that therefore their
Prayers were the special Operations of the holy Ghost, which I blaspheme, and
that therefore I have committed the Unpardonable Sin. But I Answer; 1 st, As I
said in my Book called, A Refutation, etc. I am little concerned whether or not
these Young People were bewitched, or had a Diabolical Possession; further than
to take notice, That C.M. will have it to be so, to make the simple believe,
that his and his Brethrens Prayers did conjure the Devil, and cast him out; by
which it is most clearly apparent, to every one of common sense, that I did not
mean that his or his Brethrens Prayers were done by any Diabolical Art or Craft
of Conjuration, for I do not think them to be Conjurers, but that they would
have People believe, that by some divine Power of Exorcism, as was frequent in
the primitive Church, they did conjure the Devil, which is as widely different
from his Perversion, as East from West. Now I cannot believe that they had this
divine Gift of Exorcism, which was a Miraculous Gift in those primitive Times
(that Popish Priests do also pretend to have, and many strongly affirm, they
have cured many by their Prayers) because they commonly say, That Immediate
Revelaiion, with the Gifts of Miracles, are ceased: How then can they have
them? And I appeal to all sober Readers, Whether Cotton Mather has not grossly
perverted my words, that because I did not own them to have a divine Power of
Exorcism, whereby to conjure the Devil, as if I did affirm their Prayers were a
Conjuring of the Devil, which instead of affirming, I strongly denied, as the
Reader may see in my Book called A Refutation, etc. and by this, and his other
man. Pervertions of my words, I may take measure, how he is too like to have
perverted grossly the words of my Friends, in his alleged Citations, that I
have not seen in their Books, when he does so palpably pervert my words to a
plain contrary sense, that is obvious to them of the weakest Capacity. Nor did
I call his and his Brethrens Prayers Charms and Spells, as he alleges; see my
Book p. 71, 72. only I said, That seeing they generally mock at any, at this
day laying claim to divine Inspiration and Revelation, I cannot own their
Prayers to be true, they are liker to Charms and Spells of superstitious
Persons, etc. But this will not infer that I did really call or judge them.
Charms or Spells; for I think they are not Witches, except in that sense used
by Paul, Gal. 3.1. because they bewitch (not the Bodies, but) the Souls of
People from believing and obeying the Truth; for I may say one thing is liker
to another thing, and yet not say, it is that very thing; As if I should say,
C.M. is liker to a Pharisee or Mass-Priest, than to a true Minister of Christ,
does it therefore follow, that I judge he is really a Pharisee or Mass-Priest?
or, to use his Phrase, were the Transmigration of Souls a Truth, if I should
say, Cotton Mather is liker Demetrius the Silver-Smith (who accused Paul,
because his and his Brethren's Craft was in danger to be set at naught, Acts
19.27.) than to a true Minister of Christ, Does it therefore follow, that I
judge that C.M. is Demetrius risen again from the dead? By no means And for his
comparing me to Alexander the Copper-Smith, it is foolish and envious; I honor
and esteem highly both Paul's Doctrine and himself, and all the Prophets and
Apostles of the Lord; and therefore I do nothing resemble Alexander the
Copper-Smith; but C.M. and his Brethren do too much resemble, not only
Alexander the Copper-Smith, who opposed Paul, but Demetrius the Silver-Smith,
that they are in such fear their Craft be set at naught by the People called
Quakers, else why do they make such a stir about their Wages and Hire? Whereas
if they were true Ministers of Christ, they should preach his Gospel freely, as
the Apostles and others do, and as true Ministers of Christ now do. And His
accusing me of having committed the Unpardonable Sin upon a mere Forgery of his
own, hatched in his Brains by the Father of Lies)*puts me in mind of what I
have read in the Church History, writ by Lucas Osiander, How when two of the
Patricy of Rome, that were Christians, whom Pope Sixtus had Excommunicate, for
their accusing him to have been too familiar with some of the consecrated
Virgins, had begged of him to be Relaxed, professing their Repentance, and
urging Christ's Doctrine, If thy Brother Trespass against thee, and return, not
only Seven Times, etc. thou shall forgive him; The proud Pope refused to Relax
them, affirming, They had committed that Unpardonable Sin, because they had
offended him. And like to this the English Hobbs, who is no good Philosopher,
and a worse Divine, says, in one of his Books, by way of a smart Satyr against
the Clergy, That if any offend a Clergyman (alias, a black Coat) ^e will tell
them, they have commit^^^ (...) Unpardonable Sin of Blasphemy against the holy
Ghost, as Cotton ^^^her has here served me, but without all just cause, I
bless God; and therefore the sober People of New England have cause to consider
better, what sort of men these are, who make Lies their Refuge, and their
Weapons whereby they fight against us. Nor do I yet find the least cause to
incline me to believe, that C.M's Prayers did cast out the Devil out of these
Children, as he alleges, seeing they say, Miracles are ceased, and Divine
Exorcisme was one of these Miraculous Gifts of Gods Spirit; and C.M. himself
helps us to understand (if these Children were really bewitched)* how they
were cured by some other means, than his and his Brethrens Prayers, to wit, as
he plainly confesses, page 44. (compared with page 12.) That one thing in the
Childrens deliverance, was the strange Death of an horrible Old Woman, who was
presumed to have a great hand in their affliction: And page 12. he tells,
When the Witch was going to her Excution, she said, the Children should not be
relieved by her Death, for others had a hand in it as well as she. And thus
from C.M. we have found other means of the Childrens cure, than his and his
Brethrens Prayers, the which, seeing he calls them Dirt and Dung in his Book,
were not likely to be means of dispossessing the Devil out of those Children;
indeed, we read that Christ wrought a miracle with Clay and Spittle, but no
where that I remember, that ever he wrought a Miracle with Dirt and Dung;
beside, he seems to be more guilty of Blasphemy, that calls their Prayers,
(which he says, are the special Operations of the holy Spirit,) Dirt and Dung,
as he plainly does. And with as little success does C.M. seek to defend his
false Gloss on Christ's words, as if Christ had taught, That Satan is not
divided against Satan: Whereas I said, Satan is divided against Satan, there
being no true unity in his Kingdom; and therefore it must fall, and not be
perpetual; nor in th^^ do I in ^he least wrest from Christ's Argument against
the Jews, because I did acknowledge, that Christ argued most strongly against
them ad hominem. And supposing that Satan at times, did cast out Satan, yet
that is but that Satan may enter again some more dangerous way, or fully as
dangerous; but whom Christ cures, he so cures, that Satan by his means does
not again enter, but the holy Spirit of God, as was fullfilled in Mary
Magdelen. And whereas he says, He is mistaken, if he has not the generality
of Interpreters on his side; he has not showed who this generality is, and he
shows how little he is versed in Antiquity, ot^^^wise he might have remembered
how Origin, above thirteen hund^^^ Years ago, does contradict him, and say the
same with me; for thus he writes expressly, in his Comment on John, page 424.
of his 2d Tom. printed at Basil, 1557. Cum enim admisiss^t esse quendam
Beelzebub, et que illias presidio Demonia ejiceret, dissidam ^eluti quoddam
Satane; operari eo quod secum ipse dissideret hec in quit; i.e. When Christ had
allowed, that there was a certain Beelzebub, and that he who did cast out Devils
by his Power, did work as it were a stri^e against Satan, because he did
strive against himself, he said these things. As for his false Insinuation, of
my calling Prayers, Charms and Spells, it ^^ easily discovered, I own all true
Prayer, both Vocal and Mental, that comes in the least degree from the
inbreathing, i.e. Inspiration of Gods Spirit, and have, through Mercy, found
the unspeakable advantage of it to my Soul, and do earnestly recommend true
Prayer in the Spirit of God to all, and so do all true Quakers, so called.

In his Third Argument, p. 34. wherein he gives many supposed Contradictions,
that I give to myself in my former Books, and upon that false Supposition, as
on a false Foundation, raises his Argument against me, I think not to spend
Time nor Paper to answer them all in particular; for let but the Reader see my
own words in my printed Books, and well consider them, and if he have but a
little sound Judgment, he will easily find, I have not contradicted my self in
any thing, though I could easily discover many Contradictions of C.M. to
himself. But to make me seem to contradict my self he has no better way but to
wrest and pervert my words, as in the very first instance he alleges, he
perverteth my words grossly, as if by their Fathers, whom I did acknowledge to
^ave had some measure of Tenderness, Sobriety and Simplicity (in a printed
Paper of mine) some time a go, I did mean these, who near ^orty Years a go did
put our Friends to Death at Boston: Which is a manifest Perversion, enough to
Discredit all he says, having as little Truth, against me. Whereas by their
Fathers I did not mean the present Generation, that takes in forty Years
commonly, at least in vulgar sense, but these that lived sixty, or near seventy
Years past, that had some measure of Tenderness and Sincerity, and were not of
a persecuting Spirit, as these who put our Friends to Death; nor had the
generality of the People in New-^^^^^nd a hand in our Friends Death; for many
of them disliked it, (...) ^ave been credibly informed, and some have
acknowledged the hand of God against the Land ever since, for those Murders,
and I wish many might see it, and repent of it, that they might be forgiven,
and Gods anger quenched toward them, that has been (and remains to be)
kindled against them. And he is as impertinent in laboring to reconcile his
own Contradiction that John Delavall charged upon him, as if it were no
Contradiction, either because the Assertions are thirty pages distant, or
because he did query, and not affirm; whereas the manner of his Querying
shows a plain Affirmation, in calling or bringing in their deceased Fathers
to expostulate with them for their Degeneration. And this is all the Answer he
gives to John Delavall's sollied and weighty Appendix, with a scoffing airy
Spirit, as his manner is, he compares to a Dutch Woman's unintelligible
Babbling. And no less does he belly me, to accuse me, as if I said or suggested
in my Book, called, The Presbyterian and Independent Churches brought to the
Test, etc. That these Churches of Presbyterians and Independents were false
upon all accounts, beyond that of Rome it self: Than which there can be no
greater Perversion, and Belying of a man's words. I said no such thing, nor do I
think any such thing. I have always judgded, and do still judge, that all
these Churches called Protestant Churches, whether Episcopal, Presbyterian,
Independent or Baptists, in many, yea, very many things, hold better Doctrine
than the Church of Rome, and in many things are nearer to the Letter of the
Scripture, and to the Truth, and I have Charity, that some may belong to
Christ, as his Members, among them all, even the Church of Rome not excepted;
yet all this will not prove, that any one of them all is the true visible
Church, restored to that purity of Doctrine, Worship, Discipline and
Government, as was in the Apostles days, and was before the Church fled into
the Wilderness, and as will be at her full Return, which is approaching. He is
as weak and impertinent to charge it on me as a Contradiction to my self, to
say, That in some things in speaking or writing, we may err, if we be not duly
watchful: And yet, That in many things we have been taught infallibly by the
Infallible Spirit of God, to believe them, as to believe That God is, and has
given his dear Son for us, and many such precious Truths; and if he has no
infallible Belief and Knowledge of these things, and other Fundamental Truths,
he is neither Minist^^ (...) Christ, nor a true Christian, but a mere Sceptick.
Any College Sc^^^^ Boy knows, that Contradictions lie not betwixt two
Particu^^^^* nor two Universals, but one Particular and another Universal; as
if one should say, That he is in all things taught infallibly, and yet again
say, That in some things he might or did err, it would be a Contradiction; but
this I have not said. Nor is a Contradiction betwixt two Positives, but the one
Positive, the other Negative; and therefore it is no ^ontradiction to say, Some
are Elected in Christ Jesus before the Foundation of the World, to be Holy,
etc. and yet to deny, That others are eternally or absolutely Reprobated; for
Elected and Reprobated are both Positives, and therefore not Contradictory, no
more than White and Black; as it is no Contradiction to say, Some Colors are
White, and therefore all other Colors, (that are not White) are Black. It
seems that Cotton Mather, whom some, as he tells us, have called, The
College Boy of New England, has not well learned his Logic, or at least does
not well remember it, since he was a Colledge-Boy; for he bewrays shameful
Ignorance (in the way of right Dispute) that College Boys might be ashamed
of. Nor is it any Contradiction to say, That the Lord Jesus Christ is the alone
and sure Foundation and Ground of Justification, and yet to assert, That Faith,
Repentance, and sincere Obedience are necessary Conditions and Instruments
thereunto required; and if he will not believe me, let him ask his admired and
revere^d Baxter, as he calls him, who will tell him the same. But whereas he
alleges I say, A true Believer may be only in the first Covenant, citing my
Book, page 147. But this is no Contradiction, when by Believers, I mean such as
may have a true Belief that God is, from some true and real inward Conviction
and Sense, and yet not have the true Faith in Christ Jesus, as he dyed and rose
again; for such a Faith Cornelius had, before Peter preached Christ to him,
also according to Christ's Doctrine in the Parable of the four Grounds, some may
believe in Christ for a time, and yet fall away, and that Faith is not a false
Faith, but true, in some sort. Thus I have given a short hint to demonstrate
how groundlesly he would charge Contradictions on me, the other being more
obvious to the weakest Capacities. I shall let pass, only minding the Reader,
That the nature of a Contradiction is difficult many times to understand, even
in Natural things, so that it is reckoned the subt^lest part in Logic or
Metaphy^^^^^ to understand thoroughly what are always Contradictions, and (...)
and therefore much more hard it is, to understand in (...), that contain many
seeming Contradictions; for though (...) ^cripture contains no real
Contradi^^ons coming from (...) Spirit of Truth, yet it contains (...)
seeming, which (...) and Scoffers use to object. His comparing me to Julian the
Apostate, favors of the like Spirit of Envy, as formerly, when with no more
ground, he accused me of being guilty of the Unpardonable Sin: It is a part of
my Blessing, that being reviled and fully accused, I can patiently bear it, by
the Grace of Christ in whom I believe, and to whom, I confess, even to the
Crucified Jesus that was nailed to the Cross for my Sins, whom my Soul loves,
and whom Julian openly denied. But Cotton Mather will gain no credit nor
esteem, either to himself or his Cause by (...) and Extraordinary Revilings,
rarely to be parallelled among the greatest Readers.

His Fourth Argument has as weak and sandy Foundation as any of the rest, as
namely (as he says) That I renounce both the Religion and the Savior which
the Saints have hitherto ventured their Souls upon, etc. to wit, Christ Jesus.
And this he undertaketh to prove, Satan like, by wresting my words, and
omitting some of them, in the very Sentence he cites, that were altogether
essential to make up the entire period and sense; for I said in my Book, Your
Visible Churches (...) true Churches of Christ; for the Religion ye profess is
not the true Religion of Christ Jesus, yea, in Fundamentals, and in the very
Foundation it self, which is Christ Jesus, on which the true Church is (...),
and every Member thereof; but ye who say, (note my following words, p. 137.)
all inward divine Revelation is ceased, ye ( to wit, your visible Church) build
not on Christ, but on a mere Hearsay and Historical Report of him; for how can
ye build on him, when ye have no belief, that Christ is nearer unto you, than
in some remote place beyond the Skies. Where the Impartial Reader may see,
first, That my words expressly mention their visible Church, that does not build
really on Christ, but on a Profession of him, even by Cotton Mather's
Confession, (...) nothing is required to make up the Members of a visible
Church, but a Profession of him, and of the true Religion: But every judicious
le^son will say, it is one thing to profess Christ in words or show, and
another thing really to build on Christ, that everlasting Rock* for by Christ's
Doctrine, none builds on the Rock, which is Christ* (...) that hears
Christ's Sayings, and does them, and that is much (...) than barely to profess
him. But yet I did not question, nor ^o, but that (according to my Christian
C^arity, moving me so to believe) diverse among all sorts and Societies called
Christian in Christendom, that hold the Fundamentals, as many do, do really
build on Christ, the ^^^e Foundation; and because they so do, in due time, the
Wood, Hay and Stubble of their Errors, in other things, while they build on the
true Foundation, will be burnt up by the divine Fire of the living Word, and
living Spirit of God in them; and their Lord Jesus Christ i^ mine, and mine is
theirs, and I could be glad that I could entertain that Charity to C.M. but
however, I have not that uncharitable judgment of him (as bad as he is) that he
has committed that unpardonable Sin; for though he has reproached the
precious workings and operations of the holy Spirit, both in my faithful
Brethren and me, calling them Del^sions of Satan, yet because I judge he does
it ignorantly, therefore his sin is pardonable, upon Repentance, which I pray
God may be given him, for that and all his hand Speech^^, and all other sins,
before it be too late. But because he cannot fix his ^^^se Charge upon me, of
denying Christ, he essayeth (...) but with (...) success) to fix it upon my
Brethren, as dear Isaac Pennington, whom I well knew to be a true Believer in
the Lord Jesus Christ, and a sincere Lover of him, even the crucified Jesus,
and whose Sou^ I believe is in test in Christ, in heavenly Glory. And as to his
words, We can never eat the Bodily Garment Christ, but that which appea^ed and
dwelt in ^he Body; it is easy to put a fair and charitable construction on it,
as w^^l as on Christ's words, when he said, He that (...) seen (...), has see^
the Father; and yet many saw Christ's body of Flesh, that never saw the Father:
But to clear the thing* I (...) spea^e^h ^h^s in opposition to Socinians, and
others tinctur^d with (...), as if ^he Manhood of Christ, that was born of the
Vi^gin, ex^^nd^^g the (...) Word* was the only and whole Christ, whereas (...)
was (...) his Body of Flesh; therefore he is said to have come in the Flesh,
and to have taken Flesh. And if we consider Christ, as he was before the World
was, by whom all things were created, and in respect of his Godhead, the Body
was not that, but the Garment of it, when he assumed it. But when we consider
Christ as Man, as every other man, (...) both Soul and body belonging to his
essential Constitution, as Man, (...) and Christ, and still has a mo^^
g^orious Soul and Body; and we (...) not, but according to Scripture (...),
Christ Manhood, yea, and his Body, i^ called Christ, as when the Scripture
says, that he was buried, nailed to the Cross, bu^^ited; and even his Body was
and is a part of his Manhood, and his Soul the other and more Noble part, most
wonderfully and incomparably united with the Godhead, and most incomparably
filled with all fullness of the Godhead, and of Grace and Truth, out of whose
fullness we all receive, and Grace for Grace; and yet we do not judge that the
Godhead is circumscribed within the Body of Christ; for the Godhead is
Omnipresent as well as Omnipotent and Omniscient. And whereas he querieth,
saying, Let Keith tell us honestly, whether he does not count his own Body to
be the Body of Christ, in the same sense that the visible tangible Flesh which
hung upon the Cross, was the Body of our Lord? I Answer, honestly, Nay, by no
means, as I have sufficiently formerly declared in my printed Books, and
Testimonies on all occasions; for as the Body of the Head is of far more
Dignity than the Body of the inferior Members, and has the Soul, or Spirit
and Life of man otherwise dwelling in it than the inferior Members, so much
more the Soul and Body of Christ has the eternal Word living and dwelling in
the same, than any other, and that incomparably, as Augustine well
demonstrateth, lib. de agon^ Christian^, cap. 20. thus concluding, And
therefore the Word does not so assume that Man (to wit, the Seed of Abraham) as
the rest of the Saints, but much more excellently and sublimely; and God
dwells in the Man Christ so, as there is no Mediator betwixt God and Christ,
but God dwells in us, by and through Christ, our alone Mediator, and for hi^
^ake receives us to be so (...) him, that both the Fat^er and the Son, and
also the holy Spirit dwells in all the Saints, yet the matter of Union,
called by some of the Ancients the Hypostatical or (...) Union,) and manner of
Inh^bitation in the Manhood of Christ, (...) and b^yond all humane
un^er^^anding, excelling the ma^^er of Gods dwelling in all the Saints; (...)
the Man Christ only, and none other Man nor Creatur is both God and Man, and is
the Object of divine Worship and Adoration, together with the Father, and the
Spirit, and none else. And for Hicks quoting some words of mine, out of my Book
of Immediate Revelation, recited by C.M. p. 44. on James 5.6. (...) have killed
the just One, that is, Christ Jesus in their Hearts, him they crucified. To
this I answer; This I never understood otherwise but figuratively, as when the
Scripture says, That Apostates and Wicked Men crucifie^ (...) Son of God
afresh; for I affirm expressly in my said Book of Immedia^^ Revelation, That the
Life of Christ in men's hearts can never be k^lled or crucified in it self, see
my Book of Immed. Rev. 2d Edition, page 75.^^ page, 253, 254, 255. at great
length, but men by Disobedience may deprive themselves of the Comfort and
Benefit of it, as well as of Christ's Sufferings on the Tree of the Cross, and
so in that figurative sense, according to Scripture style, may be said to kill
him, even as we are all to look to him whom we have pierced, according to
Zachariah's Prophecy concerning Christ's outward Suffering on the Cros^, and to
mourn bitterly because of our sins, which he did bear^^ on him, when he was
pierced; and because Christ cannot (as to himself, properly and strictly, in a
strict litteral sense) be killed nor crucified in men, therefore I do not
believe that he can be said to be in us that Sacrifice of Atonement and
Propitiat^on that was necessary to be offered up for the Remission of our sins,
and appeasing the Wrath of God to us; and if any think so, I am far otherwise
^inded; for it derogates from the great worth and value of Christ's Sacrifice
without us upon the Tree of the Cross; for the Body that Christ was to suffer
in as a Sacrifice for the sins of the World, behoved to (...) and holy Body, as
it was, as a Lamb without S^ot; and the Death behoved to be a real Death, and
not metaphorical or figurative; and therefore Christ, as in us, could not be
that Sacrifice o^ Atto^^m^^^; for at this rate, not only Christ had outwardly
dyed in vain, (...) had offered up himself for a Sacrifice of Atonement, as
(...) were Saints to live in the World, and as many Saints, as many (...); all
which is most absurd to imagine. But yet it m^st (...), that the Life of Christ
in the Saints is as sweet (...) God, and is a Sacrifice in another sense,
seeing even the (...) said to offer up themselves, through (...), a (...) God;
and also, the Life and Spirit of Christ (...) Saints to apply Christ's
Suffering, Death and ^^ood (...) on that outward Cross) to them, does bring
them into perfect Peace with God, so that his Wrath is wholly appeased and
quenched toward them, only for the sake and in virtue of the great Sufferings
of Christ on the outward Cross; and if this be the sense of W.S. his words, and
that they can be so construed, it is well; for that is my upright (...) and is
of many hundreds more, yea, of all my faithful Bre^^^^^, called Quakers. And
concerning what I.P. and some others (...) writ of Christ's heavenly Flesh and
Blood, and how the Saints fed upon it in all Ages, Christ being that noble Vine
Tree unto them, that yielded them his Grapes for Meat, and the Blood of them
for Drink, as Wine is called the Blood of the Grape, and being their Apple
Tree, their Fig Tree, yea, their Corn, Bread, Milk and Wine, their Wool and
Flax, their Feast of fat things full of Marrow, etc. All these are highly
Mystical and Figurative or Metaphorical Expressions, and are not to be
literally or carnally understood, yet so, as the Metaphors hold forth, that
these outward things, by which these inward Mysteries are signified, are but
the Figures, and the spiritual things are not the Figures of the natural, but
the natural are Figures of the spiritual, as the outward Light is bu: the
Figure of Christ the spiritual Light, the true Light of the Soul; but the
spiritual Light is not the Figure of the natural; which is quite otherwise than
in vulgar Metaphors and Figures; and therefore by Christ's heavenly Flesh and
Blood that he had from the beginning, is not to be understood any created
material Body, but the living Word it self, according to its divine Emanations,
metaphorically only so called, according to Scripture style, feeding and
refreshing the Souls of the Saints in all ages, with unspeakable Refreshment;
And therefore by Metaphors and Allegories they have given it such Names,
according to its various Operations. But that Christ is as much, or after the
same manner in the Quakers, or any Saints, as in the Manhood and Body of Christ
that suffered on the Cross, or that Christ has left behind him that Body that
suffered on the Cross, and was buried, as if that were the Quakers Doctrine, as
Faldo alleges, and C.M. from him, is a^ominably false: I am sure no Quaker,
that does rightly understand the Quakers Principles and Doctrine, will ever say
so, or ever did; although I shall not deny, but some ignorant Persons that may
go under the designation of a Quaker, may have at times spoke very ignorantly
and offensively in that and other (...) to the Scandal of our holy Profession,
and to the stumbling of the weak that could not rightly discern betwixt our
true and faithful Brethren, and others falsely so called; but such there are
among all Societies and Professions, that do not rightly understand the
Principles of that Profession they pretend to belong unto; yea, how many
Presbyterians and Independents, so called, to my certain knowledge, understand
not their own Principles, notwithstanding of their public Confessions; and so,
possibly some among u^, notwithstanding our public Confessions, well owned by
the generality of our Friends, as especially that noted Treatise by John Crook,
called, Truths Principles, etc. that has had a very general Reception by us,
and with which my Doctrine, in all particulars, does well agree, so far as I
know, as also with other faithful and sound Friends and Brethren.

In his Fifth Argument, which he grounds upon my supposed marvelous Giddyness,
Ignorance and Falsehood, he shows himself marvelously (not only) ignorant, but
perverse; and after he has perverted my words, and belyed me in many things,
then he cries out Ignorance, and other things that are Scripture Truths, he
calls my Ignorance; whereas it is but his Ignorance that does not understand
better: And I doubt not, but Judicious and Impartial Readers, who compare his
Books and mine, will have another Judgment concerning me, and acknowledge, to
Gods Praise, the Gifts, both of sound Knowledge and Expression, with his
manifold other Mercies bestowed on me, for which I desire to praise him
forever. And for my saying, That Light being used as a Name of God, is no
Figurative or Tropical Expression; I have already above explained my sense of
it, That the Natural Light is the Figure of God, that Divine Light; but the
Divine Light is not the Figure of the Natural, as Figures of Metaphors and
Tropes in Natural things, commonly are quite otherwise: And Augustine De Genes.
ad Lit. lib. 4. cap. 28. expressly affirms, That Christ is Properly, and not
Figuratively, called Light; and yet who will say, that Augustine was not a more
knowing Man than Cotton Mather? and who can deny but Light is immediate, though
it comes through a Medium of the Air to our Eyes, and through the medium of the
Eye to the sense of sight; for do we not as immediately see a Candle, as we see
a Man, and yet the species or image of both come to our Eyes through the medium
of the Air? So that in this, as in many other things, he shows his own
extreme Ignorance, that is not worth time to mention. And that he reckons it
my Ignorance, that I say, Christ commanded not these words to be used in
Baptism, In the Name of the Father, and of the Son, etc. commonly called the
words of Institution. As he can never prove any such Institution, so he has
Zuinglius (whom he makes his President in another case) against him: for
Zuinglius says expressly, Lib. de Bapt. page 66. tom. 2. Christus Jesus
Baptism, formulam, qua uteremur his verbis non Instituit quem ad modum Theologi
bactenus falso Tradiderunt; i. e. Christ Jesus did not institute the form of
Baptism in these words, to be used as the Theologues have heretofore falsely
delivered. And he is intoxicated with a Spirit of Ignorance, and not I (as he
falsely alleges on me) to assert, That Exodus 20.8, 9. so commands one day of
seven, as that it may be First as well as the Seventh: Whereas if Natural days
be meant, it cannot be the First, but the Seventh; for it is not said, Remember
to keep the First Day for Rest, and after that labor Six days. And that he
denies and mocketh at an inward and spiritual Day, shows him extremely
Ignorant of spiritual Things, as well as his Scoffing shows his frothy airy
Spirit, scarcely to be paralleled. Is not the Day of Gods Power, Psalm. 110. an
inward and spiritual Day? And where it is said, Let us walk honestly, as in the
Day, Romans 13.13. and until the Day dawn, and the Day Star arise in your hearts,
2 Pet. 1.19. And is not this an inward Day? And that he reproacheth me with
Giddiness, for saying, The Sabbath is Christ, to wit, the thing figured by the
Jews Sabbath. In this he reproacheth as well his pretendedly much esteemed
Calvin, who says expressly the same, lib. 2. cap. 8. n. 32. of his Institutes,
where he says, Christ is the Truth, at whose Presence all the Figures evanish;
the Body, by whose sight the Shadows are left, He I say, is the fullfilling of
the true Sabbath. And a little after he charge it as Superstition upon them
that would make the Observation of the First Day of the Week, for a Sabbath, to
be a Divine Institution; and does fully agree with us, That it is to be kept by
choice, for good Order, and assembling together for divine Worship, and other
good Reasons, but not by divine Precept, injoyning the strictness of the Jewish
Sabbath. As for that silly Jest of Baxters, that C.M. pleases his airy mind
with, telling the Quakers, That their (to wit, Presbyterian). Bells are not
carnal, else they would not sound so high, he might have used it as much
against Paul, for saying, Our Weapons are not carnal, as implying, that the
Sword was a carnal Weapon; but according to Rich. Baxter there can be no carnal
Sword, for then it could not cut; whereas things are called Carnal from the
hand that uses them, as for other causes; and the Levitical Laws were called
Carnal Ordinances in Scripture. And whereas he says, None preach the most
intimate Union and Communion with the Lord Jesus Christ, more than he and his
Brethren, is a most bold and impudent Untruth, seeing, 1 st, they say expressly,
That Christ is not at all within us, but only without us in Heaven, and no wise
in us, but by ^is Operations; as if he and his operations could be divided: 2
dly, That they deny the Working or Operations of the Spirit of God in the
Saints, to be Objective, or that the Spirit works as any sensible Object upon
the inward and spiritual Senses of the Saints: Hence with Jesuits and Papists,
from whom they have borrowed that Distinction, as I can prove, as namely from
Sacroboscus, a Jesuit, Def. decret. trident. p. 93, 94. they say, The Spirit
works Effectively and Subjectively, but not Objectively: And therefore do
they not one whit more preach any nearer Union and Communion with Christ, than
the darkest Papists; yea, some Papists that own sensible Workings of the
Spirit, as some do, go far beyond them, ( viz. C. Mather and some of his
Brethren) in that particular. But that I have slandered the Assembly, in their
saying, The Souls of the Righteous are not perfected in Holiness till after
Death, which C.M. has twice cast upon me; I desire the Reader, for his
Satisfaction, and my Vindication, but to read the place that I cited, viz. cap.
32. n. 1. where they say expressly thus, The Bodies o^ men [after Death] return
to Dust, and see Corruption, but their Souls, which neither dye nor sleep,
having an Immortal Subsistence, immediately return to God, who gave them, the
Souls of the Righteous being THEN made perfect in Holinss, etc. Where it is
plain, that the Adverb of Time [ Then] refers to the word, in the first line,
viz. After Death; yea, and as would seem then, when the Bodies return to Dust,
and see Corruption, that sometimes is a considerable time after Death, where
dead Bodies are Embalmed; but this last part I suppose is an oversight in them.
And seeing they plead for sin for term of Life, yea, to the last instant, what
difference there is, that they can make betwixt dying in their sins, and living
in their sins for Term of Life, is not intelligible; for in Scripture Phrase,
Not to have Iniquity purged away till men dye, and to dye in Iniquity, is all
one; for the instant of Death is quick as a Thought. That I said, Notoriously
Scandalous Persons, Liars, Deceivers, Drunkards, etc. are qualified Members of
your Church; I said it, according to what I found in your Confession, that
requires no more than an outward Profession of Religion, and that such
scandalous Persons may have; for if no scandalous Persons could make a
Profession, but that the very Profession it self did exclude all scandalous
Walking, then there could be no scandalous Profession, nor Professors that are
scandalous; but if ye deny that, Baxter will better inform him, in the Treatise
above mentioned; beside that, I have proved C. Mather a notorious Liar, and yet
he is a Member of their Church; and it is but too well known, how many
scandalous Persons of all sorts, belong to the Presbyterian Church, as much, at
least in some places, as to the Episcopal, and as when the Presbyterian Church
was National in Scotland, and is now lately again become National in Scotland,
can it be imagined, or was it ever known, that any Church in Christendom, that
was National, or did take in the whole Nation, ^ut had many scandalous Persons
in it. His last instance of my Ignorance, is, That I denied that Baptizing of
Infants, was the Practi^e of the Church during the first Century: But all that
he says here against me, is a bewraying his own Ignorance, and withal, his
Perversion. For to prove that Baptizing of Infants was the Practice of the
Church in the first Century, he cites Origin and Cyprian, none of which lived
in the first Century, and Agustine, that lived not till about the end of the
fourth Century, and Calvin, that lived not till at least fourteen hundred Years
after the first Century, and they might be mistaken in their thinking that
baptizing of Infants was practiced in the first Century, as well as in other
things they did too much take upon trust; and suppose some small matte^s to be
found in Origin, concerning Infant Baptism, yet that is not Church History,
and so contradicts not my Assertion; for Origin had some private Opinions that
were not generally received in ^h^ Church; beside that, wiser men that C.M.
have thought, that Ru^^^^us, Origine's Interpreter, has incerted that of
Infants Baptism, as well as some other things, into Origine's Works, that were
not really his, and did not ag^e^ to his Time; and Erasmus, much better versed
in Antiquity than either C.M. or all his Brethren, has plainly acknowledged,
that R^^^^nus did take too much liberty in addi^g things of his own, as could
be easily proved; and according to the best Chronology, Origin and Cyprian
lived together, to wit, about the middle of the third Century, as A^st^dius
shows in (...) C^ronologiae. And as for Tertulians Authority, whom he cites
for infants Baptism, while their innocent Age was yet upon them; it is a
manifest Falsehood, if not a wilful Perversion, if ever C.M. has read
Tertullian upon the place, and proves him either Ignorant, or Forgerer; and to
show this, I shall faithfully recite Tertullians words, from my own reading (I
having well read in Tertullian, Cyprian and Origin, and diverse others, I
suppose before Cot. Mather could well read in his Accidence or Grammar) in his
Book, De Bapt^s^o adversus Q^^tuti^^am, cap. 18. he says, Ait quidem Dominus
not^^ (...) prohibere ad me venire, ^en^^ut ergo dum adolescunt, etc. In
English thus, Indeed the Lord says, forbid them not to come unto me; let them
therefore come, when they grow up to Youth let them come; when they learn, when
they are taught whither they come; let them be Christians when they can know
Christ; why does ^^nocent Age hasten to the Remission o^ Sins? ^^^n will be
more wary in secular things, that to whom Eart^ly Substance is not trusted,
that which is divine should be trusted; let them know to ask Salvation, that
thou may seem to give to him that asks. Than which, nothing can be more
clear, that Tertullian was not for, but against Infants Baptism. But perhaps he
thinks to excuse himself, that he brings Tertullian's Authority by way of
Query. And for his citing Ireneus's saying, Infantes renascuntur, i.e. Infants
are born again; either it is to be understood of Water Baptism, or it is
against C.M. who does not believe that Water Baptism is our Regeneration, as
the Papists commonly call it; and seeing nothing o^ Wate^ is mentioned, it is
no clear Testimony. But seeing he has mentioned nothing of Church History, he
has not proved me guilty of Ignorance, for saying, They can gi^e no Evidence
in Church History for Infant Baptism. For his citation of Church History,
concerning Hyginus, to prove Infant Baptism, he should have named who the
Writer of that Church History is, and whether approved by true Protestants,
seeing many fabulous things are alleged by Papists concerning Antiquity. That
cal^ed, (...) is generally denied to ^e Justine's, by all judicious
Protestants; and that Justine says, in his Dialogue with Tryph. That all alike
might then receive Baptism, which is the spiritual Circumcision: As it says
nothing of Infants, so it is plainly against C.M. and his Brethren, if he mean
Water Baptism, who do not think that all who receive Water Baptism, are
spiritally circumcised, which is a Popish Opinion, and a manifest Error,
contradicted by daily experience. And his charging me with Hypocrisy, for
commending the dead Saints, but condemning the living Ones; classing W.P with
me; he shows his Folly and Rashness in that, as in other things; let him tell
us what living Saints do we condemn; we do believe that God has his living
Saints now in the World, as he has had in all Ages of the World, even in all
Professions in Christendom, that hold the true Foundation, though upon it too
many build Straw and Stubble, which God will in due time burn up, as I have
abovesaid. Moreover, that Infants Baptism was not practiced until the third Age
or Century, and was not brought in by the Commandment of Christ, there are many
men of great Note for Learning, and Skill in Antiquity, far more famous for
Learning than Cotton Mather is like ever to be, that assert the same, as well
as I, and contradict Calvin's mistaken Judgment in that particular; for
Curcellaeus says, in his Dissertations of Orig. Sin, That the Custom of
Baptizing Infants, was brought in without the Commandment of Christ, and did
not begin before the third Age after Christ was born; In the two former Ages
(says he) no sign of it does appear. And that the Ancients were of opinion,
That only the Adult are capable of Baptism, Valefridus Strabo, that lived in
the ninth Century, Ludovicus Vives, and Erasmus in the Church of Rome, and
Grotius and Salmasius, great Protestant Authors, do plainly acknowledge, and
Berengarius, and the Albigenses were of the same mind, as that learned and
judicious Protestant Writer C.M. Du Veil, in his Explanation of the Acts of the
Apostles, does show; see his Explanat. on cap. 2. v. 14. and cap. 8. v. 12, 31.
and cap. 18. v. 8. And notwithstanding of his Insinuations to the contrary, I
challenge C.M. to give any one instance wherein I have not faithfully quoted
the Ancient Writers named by me, whether in my former Book, called, The
pretended Antidote, etc. or in this, in each particular. And were I so minded,
and saw a service in it to the People of New England, I could easily produce
sufficient plain Testimonies, from Ancient Fathers, so called, and Writers both
Greek and Latin, to confirm the Doctrine of the People called Quakers, in all
the principal and most material things wherein they differ from C.M. and his
Brethren; but the Scripture Authority being that of greatest weight, in respect
of any outward Testimony, I have chosen rather to make use of that. Nor will it
serve to justify C. Mat^er, his Exclamations against me, that seeing the
Quakers hold all these Doctrines which Baxter, and some other Protestant
Writers hold to be Fundamental, that therefore I should not have so charged
them, as I have done in my first Book, called, The Presbyterian and Independent
visible Churches brought to the Test; for if they and we agree in Fundamentals,
then why are we so uncharitable to them, as not to judge them a true Church? --
To which I Answer; Although we hold all their Fundamentals, according to what
Baxter has delivered, as I have above showed, yet they hold not all our
Fundamentals; so it is a Fundamental Doctrine and Principle held by us, to wit,
The inward Revelation of Christ in all true Believers, and That God teaches
all true Believers by his inward Voice, Word and Teachings, or inward divine
Inspiration and Revelation, properly so called, that is as well Objective as
Effective, and by way of Object, working sensibly and infallibly upon the
inward and spiritual Senses of their Souls, and which their Souls and Minds, if
only and fitly disposed and qualified, do infallibly apprehend; but yet this
Fundamental held by us, is plainly denied by C.M. and his Brethren; and it is a
Fundamental Error in them who hold it, as the generality of their visible
Church Members do, That all such divine inward Objective Revelation and
Inspiration is ceased; and from this Fundamental Error, diverse other very great
Errors flow, as so many unclean streams from an unclean Fountain; for if all
true and saving Knowledge of God and Christ, and all saving Faith require true
divine inward Revelation and inspiration, properly so called; and the true and
real inspeaking of God, and his internal Word and Voice that does as sensibly
and perceptibly operate, by way of Object, upon the inward and spiritual
hea^ing, or discerning Faculty of the Soul, as any outward Voice or Wo^d of a
man does upon the outward Hearing; then, if that be ceas^d, all true and saving
Knowledge and Faith, are ceased, and all true Love, Hope and Repentance, and
all other Fruits and Virtues of the Spirit, because all these have a necessary
connection with the true saving Knowledge and Faith; also, all true Preaching,
Praying and Worship, and all true Obedience and Service unto God, and all real
and true Religion, all depending upon the inward Principle of inward divine
Revelation and Inspiration, properly so called; and yet we do readily
acknowledge, a distinction betwixt these extraordinary divine Revelations and
Inspirations, that the Apostles and Prophets had, (...) they were Apostles and
Prophets, and these other that they had common ^o them, and ordinary with all
Christians; and for the latter we contend, that were and are ordinary and
common to all Saints in all Ages of the World, but not for the former that were
extraordinary, whereby they not only wrought Miracles, and spoke with Tongues,
but had Doctrinal things of Faith revealed to them, without all outward
teaching of Men or Books; whereas we do not say, any peculiar Doctrine of the
Christian Faith is made known to us without all outward Teaching, but by it,
Instrumentally, and by the immediate Revelation and Inspiration of the Spirit,
Principally; and we are sufficiently charitable, that we judge, there are true
Believers among them (though we cannot own their visible Church) that either
hold not these Errors with them, or if some hold them in words, or Notion, and
Theory, yet as in respect of their Experience and inward sense and feeling,
hold them not, but the contrary; and such have better Hearts than Notions; and
though they err in holding an unsound form of Words* through too much relying
upon their Teachers, yet their inward sense and experience does contradict
them. And in all these twelve Particulars I first charged upon them, I still
affirm, they do grossly err, and they are such great matters of Difference
betwixt them and us, although they are not all Fundamentals, that no Society
holding such Errors, deserve to be esteemed the visible Church of Christ,
restored to that purity of Doctrine that the visible Church ought to have, and
had in the primitive Times, and yet will have, as she comes to be fully
restored to her primitive Purity. And though it seem a strange and new Doctrine
to C.M. and his Brethren, to distinguish betwixt the Scripture, called by some
the external or outward Word, and the inward living Word of God that proceeds
from the Mouth of God immediately, as every man's word that proceeds from his
Mouth, and goes into the Ears of the Hearers, is his immediate Word; yet not
only ancient Writers and Fathers, so called, did so distinguish, but even these
called the Reformed, who began the Reformation from gross Prop^ry. And for the
ancient Writers I shall give but one, (though I could give diverse besides) to
wit, Augustine, of great esteem and fame with Protestants, and particularly
with Calvin, whose Authority he more uses in his Institutions, than any of all
the Ancients: In his 5th Book de Trinitate, cap. 11. Augustine says expressly,
Proinde Verbum quod for as sonat, signum est verbi, quod intus lucet, cuj magis
verbi competit nomen, nam illud quod prosertur caruis ore vox verbi est
verbumq: et ipsum dicitar propter illud, a quo ut foris appareret assamptum
est: In English thus; Therefore the Word that sounds outwardly, is a sign of
the Word that shines inwardly, to which the Name of the Word does more agree;
for that which is pronounced with the fleshly Mo^th, is the Voice of the Word,
and it is called the Word, because of that from which it is taken, that it
might outwardly appear. Where I desire the Reader to Note these two things, 1
st, That Augustine does acknowledge the Word within, or internal Word. 2 dly,
That the Name of the Word does more belong to the internal Word, than to that
which outwardly sounds in our fleshly Ears; in both which he does contradict
C.M. and his Brethren, who do not acknowledge any inward Word in the Saints,
since the Apostles days, and hold, That the Scripture is the only Word that is
the Object and Rule of our Faith. And that famous Reformer Zuinglius (whom
(...) the rather cite, because C.M. makes him his Pre^^dent for his zeal
against the Quakers, in the end of his Address) in his Commentary De vera et
falsa Relig. de Verbo Dei, cap. de Ecclesia contra Emserum, says, Qui in
Ecclesia Scripturam Caelestis Verbi explicari, audit, etc. In English thus, Who
in the Church hears the Scripture of the heavenly Word explained, judges
what he hears; but that which is heard is not the Word it self whereby (to
wit, chiefly) we believe; for if we did believe by that Word which is heard or
read, then all should become Believers; and after, he says, It is therefore
manifest, that we are made faithful by that Word which the heavenly Father
preaches in our hearts, whereby he does also enlighten us, that we may
understand, and draws, that we may follow. And again, Who are instrusted with
that Word, judge the Word that sounds in the Preaching, and strikes the
Ears; but yet, the Word of Faith, which is seated in the Minds of the faithful,
is judged by none, but by it the external Word is judged, which God has
appointed to be preached, although Faith comes not (to wit, chiefly) by the
external Word. Both which Testimonies of Augustine and Zuinglius, do manifestly
confirm the Quakers Doctrine against C.M. and his Brethren, who acknowledge no
inward Word in the hearts of the faithful* by which their Faith is wrought, and
will have the Word of Faith to be only the written or outward Word, contrary
both to Paul and Zuinglius, who give the pre-eminence to the inward Word, and
call it the Word of Faith. And as Zuinglius holds for the Quakers in
asserting the inward Word, against C.M. and his Brethren, so in that called
Original Sin, for thus he says expressly, lib. de Baptismo, Paul, cap. 3. to
the Romans says, That the knowledge of sin comes by the Law; where, therefore
there is no knowledge of the Law, (as in Infants,) there can be no knowledge of
sin; but where no knowledge of sin is, there is no Prevarication, and so
Damnation cannot be. And after, Because Paul says, That Death is come upon all
men, because all have sinned; Theologues from these words judge, That that
Disease and Contagion that is Hereditary unto us all, and is naturally lodged
in us, is sin, that brings to us Damnation, but they Err the whole Heavens
wide: Where it is to be noted, That Zuinglius does acknowledge, That there is a
sinful Disease and Contagion conveyed from Parents to Children, but yet it is
not imputed unto them to bring Damnation upon any Infants; plain contrary to
C.M. and his Brethren, who affirm, That many Infants, both of unbelieving and
believing Parents, are eternaly Reprobated and Damned, only for Adams Sin
imputed to them; Which is most horid Uncharitableness, and horridly reflecting
upon the Mercy of God. And the same Zuinglius, in his Chapter of the Eucharist,
plainly asserteth, That Christ by his Flesh and Blood, with which he feeds
the Souls of the faithful, does understand a spiritual thing, which only the
Spirit gives, and not any Flesh consisting of Veins and Nerves; withal
affirming, with Origin and Augustine, That Christ's Flesh and Blood, which he
feeds the Saints with, is called so by an Allegory and (...), but is really
the Word it self, called also by an Allegory Bread, Wine, Milk, Honey, Marrow,
Fatness, etc. Again, the same Zuing^ius in his Commentary de vera and falsa
Relig. does thus comment on Paul's words, Romans 1.19. The knowledge of God is
manifest in them (so does he translate the place, and so does the old English
Translation) for God has showed it unto them. We see here openly (says he)
that (...) knowledge, concerning God, is of God, which we ascribe to (I know
man what) Nature; for he says God has manifested it; and what other thing is
Nature, but a continuing and perpetual operation of God, and disposition of all
things? And again, in his Cap. of God, he says, If any of the Philosophers
have spoken truly of God somethings, it was from the Mouth of God, who has
scattered some Seeds of his Knowledge even among the Gentiles, although more
sparingly, and more obscurely. So that Zuinglius had far more Charity toward
honest and conscientious Gentiles, than C.M. who differs from him very
widely, as in the (...) particulars mentioned, so in this last, that he
affirms, That what knowledge of God the Gentiles have ought to be attributed
to God, and not to Nature; and therefore not to man's Reason (as C.M. would have
it) which is nothing but a natural Faculty of the Soul. And Thomas Shepherd,
that had been a Preacher at Cambridge in New England, in his Exposition of the
Parable of the Ten Virgins, says plainly, That that inward Law given to the
Heathens, is falsely called the Law of Nature; for it is of God; and so says
Buchannan, in his Book, De jure Regni apud Scotos; and a large Volumn might be
printed of Testimonies both out of ancient and latter Authors, all of good
esteem for Piety and Learning, yea, and even diverse Protestants, that do
acknowledge, That the Illumination that is generally in men, that teaches them
that there is a God, and shows them good and evil, is a Principle above
Humane Reason: As among English Protestants, Henry Moore, cited by Increase
Mather against the Quakers, and praised by Baxter, as above, who says
expressly, in his Moral Cabbala, cap. 1. v. 1, 2. of Genesis, By the Will of God
every man living on the face of the Earth, has these two Principles in him,
Heaven and Earth, Divinity and Annimality, Spirit and Flesh; but that which is
Annimal or Natural operates first, the spiritual or heavenly Life being for a
while closed up at rest in its own Principle, etc. but by the Will of God it
is, that afterward the Day light appears, though not in so vigorous Measure,
out of the heavenly or spiritual Principle. And carrying on the Process of Gods
work in men's hearts, by way of Analogy, from the First Day to the Seventh,
concerning the Seventh, he says, Genesis cap. 2. v. 3. of his Mor. Cabb. So the
divine Wisdom in the humane Nature celebrated her Sabbath, having now wrought
through the Toil of all the six days Travel; and the divine Wisdom looked upon
the Seventh Day as blessed and sacred, a Day of Righteousness, Rest and Joy in
the holy Ghost. And thus if C.M. had but some ordinary Reading in English
Writers, and did but understand what he reads, he might have found an inward
and spiritual Sabbath, or Day of Rest, not only in the Scriptures, and the
Quakers Books, but in Henry Moore, a man of far more Sense and Learning, than I
suppose C.M. will pretend unto: Also, he might have found it in Calvin, lib. 2.
Instit. cap. 8. n. 30. So that he shows his Ignorance sufficiently, in
comparing the finding of a spiritual or inward Seventh Day, to the difficulty
of finding the Quadrature of the Circle; which if it were found, it is probable
the Penury of his Learning would not suffer him to understand. And what H.
Moore says of the spiritual or heavenly Life lying for a while closed or shut
up at rest in its own Principle, is but the same, in other Terms, with what we
say, That the Life of Christ is crucified in Unbelievers, viz. not in it self,
but to them. And why should C.M. find so great fault with this manner of
Expression, that is according to Scripture, when his reverend Baxter (as he
designeth him) writes in a phrase that must have a charitable Construction put
upon it, otherwise it would look as odd as any thing C.M has quoted out of any
of the Quakers; for R. Baxter ^ai^h, concerning God, in his Treatise
abovesaid, called, Directions to the Converted, motive 12. page 34. Does it
not wound you to think, that even there, He, (viz. God) should be so straightened,
and t^ r^st into Corners by a (...) En^my, as if that simple Habitation were
too much for him, and (...) were too good for him (meaning the heart defiled
with sin.) Now if any should accuse Baxter with Blasphemy, he^e, in saying,
(...) c^n be straightened, and thrust into Corners by a hellish Enemy, would no^
C.M. excuse him, and say, it is a Catachrestical or improper manner of Speech,
and is not to be strictly taken? and then, if he were not very partial, why
does he not excuse such Expressions in the Quakers Writings, that are capable
of the same charitable Construction? And it were an easy thing to gather may
Phrases and Expressions out of Presbyterian and Independent Books, that might
seem very offensive, to a degree of Blasphemy, if they were not charitably
cons^rued; yea, I find an Expression in Calvin, which if C.M. could have found
in a Quakers Book, we should have had him cry out aloud, Blasphemy! for he
says expressly, lib. 3. cap. 2. n. 24. Quia Christus non extra nos est, sed in
nobis habitat: In English thus; Because Christ is not without us, but dwells
in us; but if Cotton Mather say, Calvi^s (...) is, That Christ is not only or
wholly without us, but also dwells in (...), as this is a charitable
Construction, so let it be given to such, or the like words, that may be found
in the Quakers Books, unless he could find, that their words could not bear
such a favorable Construc^ion. But since C. M. finds so much fault with me
for saying, That not only Conscientious Gentiles, but (...) Chri^tians shall
know more of (...), and Christ after Death (which is the general Expectation
and Consolation of all Saints, who know now but in part, but then shall know
fully) and thereupon su^mizeth, That a Qu^kers new Purgatory (...) be erected:
what says he to his much esteemed Calvin, (...) on these words of Peter, 1
Pet. 3.19. By which also he went and (...) the Spi^i^s in Prison, etc. plainly
affirms, concerning the Souls of the deceased before the Death of Christ,
Indeed I willingly grant, (says Calvin) that Christ did shine unto them by the
Virtue of his Spirt, that they might know, that the Grace which often they had
only tasted, was then given unto the World; and by a probable Reason, that
place of Peter, 1 Pet. 3.19. may be applied to this, where it says, That
Christ came and preached to the Spirits which were in Custody, or place of
Expectation (the commonly translate it Prison) for even the Context leads us
thither, that the faithful, who before that time were deceased, were made
partakers of the same Grace with us, because he does amplify the Power of the
Death (o^ Christ) from thence, that it ^id penetrate even to the dead, while
pious So^I^ did enjoy the present sight of that Grace, which they earnestly
expected; and on the other hand, it was made more manifest to the Reprobate,
^^at they were excluded from all Salvation. But if C.M. think, that Calvin
words does not infer a Purgatory, why should he surmize any such thing from
mine? And though C.M. ignorantly in his airy fantastical Mind mocked at some
called Quakers, for calling the Flesh, by way of Allegory, the Woman that
should not speak in the Church, (although we deny not but Women are there also
to be understood literally, but yet not all Women, nor in all respects)
alleging, That the Devil is the Fleshes Husband; yet if he had been well read
in Origin or Augustine, he might have found a better account; but not to go so
far backward, let his Reverend Baxter answer him, who says, in the Preface to
his Directions to the Converted, In a weak Christian the Spirit is Master, but
the Flesh is Mistress. And notwithstanding that the said R. Baxter is too
uncharitable to the People called Quakers, yet I find in the said Book, he is
much more charitable to them, than C.M. is, who will not allow them the lowest
degree among true Christians, Because, as he will have it, they deny almost all
the Fundamentals of the Christian Faith; for thus Rich. Baxter expressly writes
concerning Quakers, B^hmenists, and some of the Religious Orders of the Papist,
in his 23d Character of a confirmed Christian, page 66. But those of them that
place their chiefest Happiness in the Love of God, and the eternal Fruition of
him in Heaven, and seek this sincerely, according to their Helps and Power,
though they are misled into some superstitious Errors, I hope, I may number
with those that are sincere, for all their Errors, and the ill Effects of them:
And truly I have that Charity for Rich. Baxter, that if he had known the
Quakers better, and had had that occasion of some more inward acquaintances
with them, he would have been still more charitable to them, in his judgment of
them; for the things he has judged to be Errors in them, either they do not
hold them, or they are not Errors, but sound things of Truth, and many of them
possibly owned by himself, but in other Terms: It is the great Calamity of
these Age, that men are often confounded in their Languages, and contradict one
another in Words and Terms, when they agree in one Sense of the same things: It
may be hoped, and is earnestly to be prayed for unto Almighty God, that all
that are sincere Lovers of the Truth in all Societies in Christendom, may have
more Charity one toward another, and they may acknowledge whatever is of Truth
and Virtue one in another; and this would prepare the way to bring them all to
one Sheep sold, and to have one Shepherd, as the Lord has promised, and which
he will in due time fulfill, and that Time is at hand, Amen.

CHAP. IV.
ANd thus having sufficiently answered what was needful, to the First Part of
his Address, which is the largest, I shall answer some things, but very briefly
to his latter part, partly because almost the whole of it is answered in my
former printed Books, directed to the People in New England, and partly because
very much of it is answered in the fore going Sheets.

In the latter part of his Address, he has greatly changed the matter of
Debate betwixt us, in most things wrongly stating things, and calling things
our Principles which are not; whereas he should have kept to the Twelve
Articles I charged them with, eleven of which they did fairly own, and the
Twelfth I have sufficiently proved to belong to them, as much as the eleven;
and he should have given an Answer to my former Book, called, The pretended
Antidote proved Poison; which he has not so much as essayed, but instead
thereof he goes to change the matter of Debate betwixt us, in the things I had
changed them with in most particulars, and by most gross Perversions of our
Friends words, would fix on them Principles which they do no wise hold. And in
this New (...) he sets down Sixteen Assertions, wherein he pretends to
contradict our Principles; but in most of them he does prevaricate, and goes
from the (...) of the Question? as in the First, where he grants, That he
does not mean, that the Paper or Letter of the Scripture, but the heavenly
Matter of it, is the Word of God; and thus he does not contradict us, for I
have told him and his Brethren more than once, Thas we readily grant, the
heavenly Matter, and true divine Sense of the holy Scripture, is the Word of
God: But the true state of the Controversy is, Whether the Scripture is either
princ^pa^y or only the Word of God, excluding any inward Word or Voice of God
in men's hearts; we say, there is an Inward Word and Voice of God in men's
hearts, which, as it does not contradict the Scripture, but agrees with it, so
it is another th^^g, and is of the greatest Efficacy, and gives or se^^e^h to
us, the assurance, that the Scriptures are of God, and divinely inspired. (...)
2^ Assertion, he does no less prevaricate, and (...) the (...), ^or I did grant
in both my former book^, (...) Ex^^a^rdinary and O^^^nary Revelations and (...)
our Lord, and that we did not say, that (...) had t^e^e Extraordinary, but the
Ordinary, that were common to them with all Saints; the which ordinary are
nevertheless true divine Inspirations and Revelations. And as to what I said
out of some ancient Writers, tending to open the Distinction of Extraordinary
and Ordinary Revelations, the extraordinary being of a more high and sublime
Nature, as proceeding from a more high and excellent measure of the divine
Light or Spirit, that is well warranted in holy Scripture, and well approved by
Christian Writers of great esteem for Piety and Learning, that he and his
Brethren call Rabbinical Fopperies, in that they show their great Ignorance in
good Learning; for it is generally acknowledged by Christians, as well as Jews,
yea, and by Protestants of good Note, That the Hebrew Names of God, mentioned
in Scripture, being various, some of them are greater than others; and the
greater Names do answer to the greater Measures of the divine Light, and that
Name commonly pronounced Jehovah (which the most learned in the Hebrew Language
among Christians do confess, they know not how to pronounce, it consisting of
quiescent Letters, and having no proper Vowels of its own, as is acknowledged
by the most learned, and as Buxto^; in his Hebrew Lexicon says, the first that
presumed to pronounce it, was Petru^ Galatinus, ^one of all the Greek and
Latin Fathers, so (...), did presume to pronounce it or read it, for the^e is
no Tract of it in any of their Writings, though diverse of them were well
skilled in the Hebrew Language) is generally acknowledged to be one of the
greatest Names of God, by which God made himself known to Moses, Exodus 6.3. but
not to Abraham, Isaac and Jacob; and though it be granted, that the Letters of
that Name are recorded by Moses in many places of Genesis, and is to be found
in Hebrew, Genesis 2.4. and that possibly and very probably Abraham might have
known the outward Letters or Sound of that Name, yet that does not infer, that
either Abraham or any of these Fathers knew the inward force and efficacy
signified by that Name, and that so high Revelation belonging to it, that Moses
did know; for that would contradict Exodus 6.3. And though I do no wise approve
Rabbinical Fopperies, or Jewish Fictions or Fables, yet what I find either in
Jewish or Gentile VVriters, that does well accord with the divine Oracles of
the holy Scripture, I do well receive it and relish it. In his 3 d Assertion,
he does no less mis-state the Question; for we deny not, but affirm, That the
will of God expressed in the Scripture, is a perfect Rule for the Belief and
Practice of every Christian, as to all Doctrinals and Practicals of Religion in
general; but we say, it is not the only Rule nor the principal; for the Will of
God and his Law is writ in the fleshly Tables of the Hearts of all the
faithful, and as so writ, is greater, and of greater virtue and efficacy than
to have it writ in Paper; and though no new Doctrinals or Morals are to be
revealed to us, but what are sufficiently declared in the Scriptures, yet that
does not hinder, but that particular Calls, to Places, Persons and Nations, and
particular Prophesies or Predictions of things to come, may be newly revealed,
as is granted by diverse Protestants, and by For in his Book of Martyrs, yea,
even Presbyterians, and Calvin does acknowledge, That even in his Time God did
raise up extraordinary O^^^cers to restore the Church, if not Apostles, yet at
least Evangelists, lib. against. cap. 3. ^. 4. And true Believers may have it
witnessed to them (as many have had and daily have) by the inward Testimony of
Gods Spirit, That their sins are forgiven them, and that they belong unto God,
and that without all logical and argumentative way of Syllogisms, that as many
faithful Souls have not skill to form, so many Hypocrites deceive themselves
with such a way of arguing themselves to be sincere. But some Presbyterians
have acknowledged, That there is another far more evident, clear and
satisfactory way that some have, whereby to be assured, that their sins are
forgiven, without any such way of Syllogysm, as particularly my Countryman
William Guthergy, in his his printed Book concerning Personal Covenanting with
God, and he calls it A felt Arms full of the holy God, filling the Soul with
God, as he is Love, Life and Liberty; and though it is no audible Voice ( viz.
to the outward Ear) yet it does countervail that of God to Daniel, O Man!
greatly beloved; and is like to that which passed from Christ to Mary, when he
said, Mary, and she answered Rabboni: And surely here was no way of
syllogising. In his 4 th Assertion he does also fail in stating the Question;
for, first, we grant, That the Day of Salvation is expired toward many men now
alive, and they are left without any saving Light in them: 2 dly, we grant,
That the clear and bright Day of Salvation has not yet appeared unto many, but
it is as yet Night unto them; and to others it is as a little dawning; but to
others clear Day; which answers to that of Paul, Now is the accepted Time, now
is the Day of Salvation, to wit, to such who had Christ crucified and raised
again, livingly and effectually preached to them by Christ's faithful
Messengers; but yet even to such who are in the Night state, and are in
Darkness, to whom the clear Day of God has not appeared, some divine Light
shines in their Darkness, and that Light, though ever so small, is of a saving
tendency, and does prepare the way of the Lord inwardly, as John's outward
Ministration prepared the Way of the Lord, as he came outwardly; and even
inwardly, the Law and the Prophets go before the clear Manifestation of Christ
and his Gospel; so that the Law even inwardly (as well as outwardly) is a
Schoolmaster to bring them who are under it, to Christ. Nor do we say, That the
Light does reveal in every man all that we must know, in order to Salvation,
upon its first appearance, or in its first Ministration; for we distinguish
betwixt the various inward Ministrations of the Light and Spirit, and teach,
That the former makes way for the latter, as it is well improved; and as he
that goes up a Stair or Ladder, must begin at the lowest Step or Round, and so
by degrees, and in process of time, gets up higher, until he come to the
place where he would be; and as the sojourning of the People of Israel in the
Wilderness, had its several Removes, which were Typical, of the Souls inward
progress, from spiritual Egypt to the spiritual Canaan, so the Souls of men
have their several inward and spiritual Sojournings from one degree to another,
until they receive the end of their Faith, which is the Salvation of their
Souls, as it is written in the Psalms, They go from strength to strength, etc.
And it is a great Perversion in C. Mather, that because I blame them for
denying, That there is any Light in men generally, that is sufficient to enable
them to do any Work acceptable to God, as if therefore I did hold, That every
man has so much Grace and Illumination, as does enable him to do any (i.e.
whatsoever) Work acceptable to God: For, All men Not to be able to do any work
acceptable to God, And All men To be able to do any or every Work acceptable
to God, are not Contradictory, as being both Universal; and therefore they are
both false, and as two Universals are not Contradictory, and are both false, so
two Particulars are not Contradictory, when the one is Positive and the other
Negative, and therefore may be both True; As it is true, That some men are
good, and That some men are not good; so it is true, That some good Works may
be done by some men, and yet it is as true, That they cannot at that time do
some other good Works; for it is a good Work to believe in Christ crucified
and raised again, and to love him as such; and yet we do not say, that the
Light in every man does either teach or enable every man at first so to do, for
that cannot be done without some special Revelation or Illumination; but yet
that more common and general Illumination, where it is well and duly improved,
does enable men to do some other good things, that prepares the Souls of men
to receive that more special Illumination that comes from the same Author and
Fountain, and so is Introductory to that more special; for the Law is
Introductory to the Gospel (and yet has the Gospel hid in it, as in a Seed) as
one Natural Science is introductory to another, as the Science of natural
Physic is introductory to the Science of Medicine, and common Arithmetic is
introductory to the more abstruse and recondite parts of Mathematical Learning;
for the Operation of the Law inwardly does so convince the Soul of sin, and
does so discover to the Soul its weakness and shortness in Obedience,
notwithstanding of some things that it does, which are good, after a sort, that
it makes the Soul sick, and so to need the Physician, which is Christ, even
crucified and raised again, as the Mystery of him is inwardly revealed and
applied to the Soul by the Spirit. In his 5 th Assertion, he does also grossly
prevaricate, and pervert the state of the Question; for we do not say, That
Christ is so in the Wicked or Unconverted as he is in the Saints, but after a
far other manner; for he is in the Saints by Union and Communion with them, and
gives great and glorious Manifestations of his Glory; whereas in others, he is
not in them by any Union or Communion, yet he is so in them, as to operate in
them, and to reveal and discover some things in them, that are suitable to
their present state, in order to their Conversion: Nor do we say, That Christ
is personally in the Saints, as some imagine.

And as to his Question, How we shall know Light within from Thought within? I
Answer; If he mean by Thought within, a good Thought or Thoughts, they are
distinguished as the cause and effect; for the divine Light within is the cause
of every good Thought and Desire, as of every good Word and Work; but all evil
Thoughts proceed not from the Light, but from the Darkness; and the Light
within does as plainly distinguish betwixt good and bad Thoughts, and other
Motions, as the outward Light of the Sun helps us to distinguish betwixt
things white and black, or straight and crooked; but as blind men cannot judge
of Colors, so who are greatly blinded with Prejudice and Unbelief against the
Light within, (as C.M. is) can but very little distinguish or know good from
evil, except in things notoriously gross; nor was it the true Light in Saul,
that approved him in his Persecution, but pricked him in his Conscience, and
witnessed against him, if he had hearkened to it; but as a man in his heat of
Passion hearkeneth not to true Reason, but is Deaf to it, though it be in him;
so men being blinded and hardened with sin, does not give due regard either to
true Reason, or the true divine Light, which are both in them notwithstanding;
and yet even those men when they become more cool and calm, may, and do hearken
to the dictates of both.

And for his other Question, Whether their Magistrates (viz. the Quakers) ever
had a Light which directed them to punish a filthy Woman for exposing her self
stark Naked before their Eyes in a public Assembly, to prove her Attainment of
that Innocence which is without shame?

I Answ. I remember no such thing that ever I heard tolerated by the Quakers
Magistrates; for we all judge, that any such Practice does really deserve
corporal Punishment; and I suppose the Passage he mentions, was that which
happened some time ago, where the Magistrates of that place, (though no
Quakers) did punish her, as I was informed, with Imprisonment, which the
Quakers (I believe in general) that heard of it, did judge, was too little, and
that she deserved much more.

In his 6 th Assertion, he does not fairly state the Question, and upon his
unfair ^^ating it, does seek to fix upon us Blas^h^mies, and then cries out,
(...) such Blasphemies as (...) that according to us, The Counsel (or Decree)
of God, and consequently the very Essence of God, being one therewith, does
depend on the free will of man; Which is a most gross and wretched Perversion;
for we say, the Decree and Counsel of God, does extend to all evil Actions of
men permissively, but not effectively, i. e. so as not to be the Cause and
Determiner of them; and Gods Decree and Counsel has no Cause to depend upon,
without God himself, as he does falsely insinuate against us: Nor is Gods
Permission, as concerning Evil Actions, as Judas betraying Christ, and the Jews
crucifying him, a bare Permission, as if God only did look on, as an idle
Spectator, which is most absurd to imagine; but he most justly, most wisely and
most soveraignly bounds and limits all evil Actions of men, that they neither
do, nor can do any thing but what is for the glory of God, and the good of his
chosen, as it is written, The Wrath of Man shall praise thee, and the remainder
of it thou will restrain. But C.M. and his brethren are too guilty of
Blasphemy, that affirm, That all evil Actions of Men and Devils, come to pass
by the Effective Decree of God, that does infallibly and inevitably determine
and move them to the same; and so say the Ranters, fathering all their wicked
Actions upon God. And it is a gross Contradiction in C.M. to himself, to say,
That God does determine all evil Actions by his effective Decree, and yet is
not the Author of them; for to effect a thing, so that it m^st be done, and to
be the Author of it, is all one, to all of common sense.

In his 7 th Assertion, he proceeds in the like gross Perversion, and
mis-stating of things; and as to the first part of it, fights against his own
shadow, and not my Assertion; for I granted, That God has chosen all the Heirs
of Salvation unto Faith and Holiness, as the means, and unto Eternal Salvation
and Glory, as the end, in Christ Jesus, before the Foundation of the World; and
also, I have granted, That all are not elected, nor are any elected who perish
finally; and yet this does not infer eternal Reprobation, because Elected and
Reprobated are not Contradictory Terms, as I have formerly declared; and yet he
has not proved that they are; but makes a noise strongly asserting what he
does not prove. Nor does it follow that Reprobation is before the Foundation of
the World, because Gods Decree and Purpose to destroy all finally Impenitent
Sinners, is before the Foundation of the World; for though Gods Decree be
before all Time, yet it does respect all Reprobates, as it does consider them
in Time, having refused all the tender Offers of Gods Grace and Mercy unto the
very last. And as Gods Decree of creating men, does not infer, that men were
created from Eternity, or that men's Creation is co-evous with Gods Decree, so
nor does it follow, that the Reprobation of men finally Impenitent is co-evous
with Gods Decree; for Reprobation is not the Decree of God, as C.M. does
strongly assert, but does no wise prove. And if some should say, (as I know
some do say) That Election, though in being before the Foundation of the World
in Christ, is not simply or only the Decree of God (as it is an Immanent Act of
God) but is somewhat by way of an Effect, resulting or flowing from Gods
Decree, existing in Christ the Head and Mediator of all Gods Elect, before the
Foundation of the World: For as C.M. cannot disprove it, as contrary to
Scripture, so it is not inconsistent with what diverse so^er Protestants have
favored, to wit, That Christ was Mediator from the beginning; and consequently
had something to be as a clothing to his Godhead, altogether necessary to his
being Mediator from the beginning, although he was not incarnate, or clothed
with flesh, until the fullness of time, that he took flesh in the Virgins Womb;
and if Christ was Mediator from the beginning, partly invested with his
Mediatory Nature, though not with Flesh till the fullness of Time came, it is
both very easy and very comfortable to the Saints, to understand, how they
were elected in Christ their Head before the Foundation of the World, and that
this Election had its being, as the Effect of Gods eternal Love and Counsel, in
Christ, the head of his Elect Members.

In his 8 th Assertion he is wholly idle and impertinent; for we own as much as
he, That there is in God, the Father, the Son and the Spirit, and that they are
One in Being, and Three in relative Attributes and Properties; and we dislike
nothing but the unscriptural invented Names of [ Three Persons] for which
Calvin has sufficiently excused us, as I have above showed.

In his 9 th Assertion he wholly fights with his own shadow, and gives up
the Cause, acknowledging, That the Price paid by our Lord in his Death, was
indeed sufficient for all Mankind, and that the benefit of it is tendered and
proffered unto all Indefinitely, if they will believe; but he should have told
us how the benefit of it is tendered unto all, seeing many Millions of men
never had it outwardly preached to them, nor ever had any outward Testimony of
it by men; and if he would stand to this, the Controversy in this Particular
would be at an end. But for his Inferences and Consequences, which he would fix
upon us, most perversely, we utterly deny them to flow justly from our innocent
Faith, according to Scripture, which is, That Christ dyed for all men, etc. As
that, First, The Virtue and Success of our Lords Death depends upon the Free
Will of Man: 2dly, That man in the principal in his own Salvation: 3dly, That
the Number of Persons interested in our Lords Death, is not certain (for we
say, none have a true and real Interest in Christ, or in his Death, but sincere
Believers) 4thly, That Simon Peter was no more beholden to the Merit of our
Lord, than Simon Magus, or any that perish (Though it will be hard for C.M. to
prove, that Simon Magus was a Reprobate) And 5thly, That God in sending his
blessed Son to dye, had as full a purpose to save them that Perish, as them
that shall be saved: These, and the like absurd and Illogical or unreasonable
Consequences we altogether deny, they being only C.M's Perversion.

In his 10 th Assertion he does as grossly pervert the state of the Question, as
in any of the former; for we deny not, but affirm, That our Justification is by
the Righteousness or Obedience of the Lord Jesus Christ imputed unto us; but we
also say, It is imputed to none but such who have Faith, Repentance and sincere
Obedience; and that is true inward Righteousness, wrought in them by the Spirit
of Christ; and though Faith, and Repentance, and Obedience are not the
Foundation of our Justification, yet they are the Terms and Condition of it, as
I have sufficiently showed in my former printed Treatises; nor does Edward
Borough and VV. Penn, if their words be duly construed, contradict what I
have affirmed. But the true state of the Question is, Whether men are
just^^^^d by Christ's Righteousness imputed to them, without any inward
Righteousness, as the requisite Condition and Terms, in order to that
imputation? And whether David, lying in his sins of Adultery and Murder,
remained Justified? Which we deny.

In his 11 th Assertion, although he states the Question in the Title, so as we
can own it, to wit, That a sinless Perfection is not attainable in this World,
as their Principle, but not ours; yet he miserably wresteth, perverteth, and
mis-applyeth, and jumbleth things in the Explication; for that Scripture in
Philip* cap. 3 v. 12. does nothing contradict our Assertion, who affirm no such
degree of Perfection as wherein a man may sit down and make no further progress,
which Paul (...) not to do, but still to go on more and more to Perfection: And
for that place in Romans 7.19. etc. it is not to be understood of the best
Condition of the Saints, when they are farthest advanced, but of their
struggling Time and State, before they obtain the Victory and Freedom, which
Paul does acknowledge in the same Epistle. And for any of the Quakers saying,
They have no sin in them, I know not any that is generally owned and approved
by us, that have said so; it is common to Ranters, and such as Tho. Cases Crew
that say so, but for the honest and sober People called Quakers, they do not
boast of their Perfection, but had rather by their innocent Walk and
Conversation, demonstrate their growth and progress in Sanctification, than by
a Talking of it.

CHAP. V.
IN his 12 th Assertion he does not fairly state the Question, especially in
the Explanation of it; for he should have distinguished betwixt the state of
Servants and Sons of the Free Woman, and so betwixt Saints by way of Inchoation
or Initiation, and Saints by way of Confirmation, as betwixt Corn in the Bud or
Blade, or green Ear, when it is in danger of blasting, and ripe Corn that is
past all danger of blasting; for as to this latter, I did grant in my former
printed Treatises, in unity with my faithful Brethren, that there is a
confirmed state in Faith and Sanctification, wherein the Saints persevere to
the end of all Trials, and from which they cannot fall away; and the Faith of
such is more precious than Gold that perishes, and endures all Trials and
Tentations, even as true Gold endures the Fire, and loses nothing in it; but
all have not attained to this State, which is indeed the only proper state of
Salvation, that is as the Harbor or Port of Safety to the tossed Mariner; and
till the Soul arrive to this state, it is but as a Ship exposed to the Waves of
the Tempestuous Sea: Also, I readily grant, that none of Gods elect can finally
fall away; for his (...) is over them, so to preserve them, as that they do not
fall, or if they do fall, as in the case of David, to restore and renew them
again by Repentance. And C M. and his Brethren have granted, in that Book
called their Antidote, or The Principles of the Protestant Religion, (...) That
the temporary Faith that may be lost, is not false; and if not false, then true
after a sort; although I grant, it is not that Faith of Gods Elect that is more
precious than Gold, that endures all fiery Trials, yet is of a saving
tendency, and such who have it, it they did well and duly improve it, might in
due time arrive to that Confirmation in Faith and Holiness, that cannot be
totally and finally lost: But whether the Faith that may be lost, and the Faith
that cannot be lost, differ in Kind or Specie, or only in Degree, it being too
Nice, and rather Philosophical, and too Logical, I did not (as I said in my
former printed Book) see cause to enquire, seeing it is a very great dispute,
among Scholars, what makes a Distinction of things, in Kind or Specie, some
affirming, That the Mettles and Elements differ not in Specie, others
contradicting, and saying they do.

In his 13 th Assertion, concerning Infant Baptism, or rather Rantism or
Sprinkling, and in his 14 th Assertion concerning the Supper, he brings no
new matter, but what I have sufficiently answered in my former Books, and
therefore shall say no more here as to them. But that he charge it upon us,
as if we did not believe Christ's coming again and appearance without us, in his
glorified Body to judge the quick and the dead, is that he cannot prove any of
us guilty, that is generally owned and received to be of our Faith, only we
have denied the gross and ca^nal Imaginations that some have vented, as
concerning Christ's ^^dy, c^lling it Natural and Earthly, which we believe is
spiritual and heavenly; and if any call it spiritual and heavenly glorified
Flesh, as well as Body, we shall not contend against them; for we do
acknowledge, it is the same in Being and Essence that it was on Earth, but
wonderfully changed in Manner and Condition; see our printed Sheet called; The
Christian Faith, etc.

In his 15 th Assertion he does most grossly prevaricate abusing and ^e^verting
our words, as because we own an inward quickening, and (...) ^aised with
Christ, in our Souls and inward Man, that therefore we deny any future
Resurrection of the Body after Death, which we deny no^, but affirm, against
Ranters and vain Norionists; and we believe, T^^t the Resurrection of the Body
is not attained immediately after Death, (although the Souls of the faithful
immediately after Death go into Heaven, or Paradise) but at Christ's coming and
Appearance to judge the quick and the dead; and the same Body that dies is
raised* in (...) true sense, being freed and refined from all Dross of
Corruption, (even as Gold is the same when it lies in the course Oar or
Miniral, and when it is refined) but wonderfully changed in Manner and
Condition.

In his essaying to prove his 16 th Assertion, he shows himself extremely
weak, as if because God commanded the Jews to keep the Seventh Day for a
Sabbath, from the beginning of the World, in the fourth Commandment, therefore
he commands the Christians in the same fourth Commandment to keep the first
Day. But I need say no more on this Head, but refer him to his much esteemed
Calvin, for his Refutation, who in that does fully agree with us, as generally
do all the Protestants in France, and the Low Countries, and many in England
and Scotland.

In his 17 th Assertion he is as weak and abusive as in any of the former, That
he and his Brethren cannot own true Piety to be essential to a true Minister of
Christ, to make a necessary Provision for the everlasting Peace of renewed
Souls, which cannot be saved without their Assertion, viz. That true Piety is
not essential to a true Minister, for this would make their Conversion or Peace
wholly depend upon Grace in the heart of a Minister. But this is a most gross
Abuse and Pervertion, and a most silly trick or cheat, to palliate or excuse
their absurd Doctrine, which a Child may discover; for the Contradictory
Assertion, viz. That true Piety is essential to a true Minister of Christ, does
not make, that the Conversion of the Souls depends on Grace in the Minister,
because many Thousands of Souls have been and are daily converted without any
Minister, good or bad, by reading or hearing the holy Scriptures, the holy
Spirit aiding and concurring therein, and this is generally confessed by all
Protestants. And if some think they were converted by means of some Ministers
that were afterward sound to be Hypocrites, all that this can prove, is, not
that they are not converted, but that they are in some mistake about the man
whom they thought was the Instrument of it, and was not. And for my saying, It
is no wonder that New England abounds with such Impious Ministers; I did argue
ad hominem, according to your Principle; for, to say, True Piety is not
essential to a true Minister of Christ, opens a door to let in a stood of
Impious Ministers upon the People of New England; and it is to be feared, this
absurd Principle has too much opened a Door unto them: And for all your strict
pretended Trial of men, before they enter into the Ministry, do ye try them
concerning their Piety? if nay, then ye open a door to them who may be really
Impious, if they have but wit enough to be Hypocrites, and only seemingly
Pious, if Yea, this contradicts your Doctrine, who say, ye have no certain way
to try whether men be really Pious or not; for ye reject all pretense to a
discerning of Spirits, whereby to know who are really Pious, and who not; and
the Marks given by Paul, whereby to try men, before they be owned to be either
Bishops (i. e. Overseers, or Pastors) or Deacons, were not outside Marks of
Holiness only, that Hypocrites may have, but to be really sober, just, holy,
temperate ( Tit. 1.8.) and where these Virtues are, they do as certainly and
infallibly discover themselves in words and works, to the spiritual Discerners,
as Spices and precious Ointments or Perfumes, discover their sweet smell and
odor to them who have the right use of their natural smelling.

And as to his Question, How People may know whether we have an Immediate Call
to the Ministry? To this I Answer; There must be some spiritual Ability or Gift
of Discerning in such, who are able to know such a thing; for it is only the
spiritual Man that is able to judge of spiritual things; and whomsoever God
calls to the Ministry by his Power and Spirit inwardly revealed (that is
immediate) his Power and Presence, according to his faithful Promise, does go
along with them, so that some that hear them, though not all, are the Seal of
their Ministry, and the Blind are made to see, the Deaf to hear, the Lame to
walk, the Dumb to speak, and the Dead to live, to wit, spiritually. And as this
was Luther's answer to the Papists, that asked for some Signs to prove his and
his Brethrens Call, who did commonly upbraid them, That they never so much as
cured a Lame Horse; so it may suffice for our Answer; for whether C.M. believe
it or not, we have had the Seal of our Ministry, that many by means of our
Testimony have had their inward Eyes opened, and have been turned from Darkness
to Light, and from the Power of Satan unto God, and this inward Change has
had its evident Effects of Christian Piety, Sobriety and Justice in their
outward Conversation. But such who were blinded and hardened against the Spirit
of Truth, did not know Christ nor his Apostles and Ministers, and therefore we
cannot expect that such can know us. And this Question of C.M. may be easily
retorted upon him, that does so confidently affirm. That there are so many
Ministers in New England, that have and use all true Piety; let him tell us,
how he or they can prove, that they are really Holy, and that their Holiness is
not a mere outside Holiness, that Hypocrites may have? If he ^^y, they may be
known by their Fruits, I query again, By what Fruits? Are these Fruits only
outward words and works, that Hypocrites may have; for there is nothing barely
outward but Hypocrites may have? But if by Fruits, he mean, that which has
some inward Virtue and savor of Life and Grace with them, that do infallibly
demonstrate themselves to be the Fruits of the Spirit, to such as have a
spiritual savor and discerning; as this would contradict their Principle, so
it makes for us, to answer his Question. Nor are there sufficient Testimonies
of ancient Christian Writers wanting, who did agree with us in our Assertion,
viz. That Hypocrites and Unholy Men, who have not the Spirit of Christ, are not
true Ministers of Christ, as not only Luther (whom I cited in my former Book)
who calls them Sectaries and Seducers, who know to preach much of Christ; but
seeing they feel him not in their Hearts, (as to be sure, such do not who have
no true Piety) they leave the right ground of the Mystery, cap. 11. Luth.
Mensal. But of the Ancients backwards, of above 1200 Years ago, I shall cite
two short Testimonies for this Assertion held by us, viz. Cyprian, who lived
about the middle of the 3d Century, and Athanasius who lived in the 4th
Century; for Cyprian, in his Epistle to Januarius says, How can he who is
unclean himself, and who has not the holy Spirit, cleanse or sanctify the
Water ( viz. in Baptism) seeing the Lord says, Numb. 19. All that the unclean
touches shall be unclean -- And after, What Prayer can a sacriligous Priest,
and who is a Sinner, make for the Baptized, seeing it is written, God hears
not a sinner, but he that worshippeth him, and does his Will, him he hears;
but who can give what he has not, or how can he do spiritual things, who has
lost the holy Spirit? And in his Epistle to Stephen, Bishop of Rome, he with
his Colleagues, gathered in Council, in Africa, writes, saying, It behooves
that Priests and Ministers, who serve at the Altar and Sacrifices, be sound and
immaculate, seeing the Lord says in Levit. cap. 21. The man in whom there is
any fault, or vice, shall not approach to offer Gifts to God; and in Exodus,
the Priests who approach to God, let them be sanctified, lest the Lord forsake
them, Exodus 19. And again, When they come to minist^^ at the Altar, let them
not bring a blemish, lest they dye. Which wo^^^ of Cyprian, and his Colleagues
are as much against Impious as Heretic Ministers; and yet Protestants, who
judge Popish Priests to be great Heretics, allow of their Baptism, so far that
they do not baptize any that leave Popery, and join to them. And Athanassus, in
his Interpretation of the Parables, says Who (...) will do the Work of God,
who will teach others, or be profitable unto (...) is behooves him to be in the
first place Virtuous, and to receive the Gif^^ (...) Grace from God, and to
possess the Fruits of the holy Spirit, and the Treasures of the Knowledge of
the good things of God, and then he can impart Gifts to others; for if any go
with his hands to anoint another with Oil, and have no Oil, how can he give to
others, what himself has not; and after the same manner we must judge of a
Teacher.

As for C.M's great Clamor for Maintenance, to him and his Brethren, for
preaching, from 1 Cor. 9.14. and Gal. 6.6. Let them first prove that they are
true Ministers of the Gospel, and have a divine and spiritual Gift and Ability
to preach it, and we should allow to such that Maintenance which the Scripture
mentions, which to be sure is neither any stinted Sallary, nor forced, which
yet many of the Priests of New England have had, and yet would have, if they
knew how, and which C.M. does plead for. Nor is he less Impertinent in his
seeking Shifts and Evasions to excuse their putting to Death our four Friends
in New England, one time telling us, There are Laws for i^, against the
Quakers, for speaking and writing Blasphemous Opinions, despising of
Government, etc. And so had the Jews a Law, as they said, against Christ, and
so had the Papists against the Martyrs, that they burned in Queen Mary's time.
But what the blasphemous Opinions were, that these were guilty of, who were put
to Death at Boston, has not yet been made appear, nor any other thing worthy
of Death or Corporal Punishment. And suppose (which yet I never heard
sufficiently proved) that some called Quakers said to People in New England,
things that were blasphemous, as, Thy Bible is the Word of the Devil, we deny
thy God, etc. as C.M. says, but does not prove; must the innocent suffer for
the guilty? if these that were put to death said no such thing, as ye can never
prove they did, they were unjustly put to Death, and their Blood yet lies upon
them that either shed it, or does justify the shedding of it; and it were far
better to C.M. not to take innocent Blood on him, if he were wise. Another
while again, These Laws were but begun to be executed, before the
New-Englanders grew sensible of their Error in making them, etc. But then, if
it was their Error to make them, why should C.M. use so many Evasions to
justify their executing them. Another while, The Quakers would not have born
New England men to have done the like, etc. But the Quakers have suffered a
great deal more disturbance, even in their ^ublick Meetings, and never used any
such Violence, even where they (...) Power. And his Example of a man's entering
into another man's Horse (...) Plague upon him, without that others Consent, is
altogether im^^^per; for the wide World, or any wide part of it, as
New England, ^^^ereth far from a man's private Dwelling; and if this Example had
any force in it, it has the same for the Papists in France and Spain,
^^nishing and putting to Death the Protestants there. But it seems C.M. is not
of our Saviors mind, who bid, suffer the Tares and the Wheat to grow together
in the Field (which he expounds to be the World) until the Harvest. And this
Example of C.M. is like that which I heard, that a New England Preacher gave,
to move the People to put the Quakers to Death, though they could not prove
them guilty of any fact worthy of it, That men use to kill the Wolves they
catch, as well these who have done no harm to the Sheep, as others who have
done harm, because it is the Nature of Wolves to do harm; and the way to
prevent their Harm is to kill them. And for all C.M's fair Pretensions of
Lenity to the Quakers now-a-dayes, yet seeing he calls us, at least the
Speakers among them, grievous Wolves, it shows his envious Mind, and how he
would have us treated, if his Persuasion could prevail; nor ought we to believe
his Protestations to the contrary, seeing he does so much contradict them, in
his so much justifying the putting our Friends to Death. But it is no new thing
that the Sheep should be put into Wolves and Bears Skins, as C.M. does to us,
in the Title page of his Book, calling it, Little Flocks guarded against
grievous Wolves, but the Title of his Book had been most true and proper,
Cotton Mather proving himself a grievous Wolf against the poor innocent Sheep
of Christ, called in scorn Quakers; for his fierce and ravenous Spirit against
the Quakers, is more like to a Wolf, than any thing that ever appeared in any
of us against him or his Brethren; and he can never prove, that ever one of us
stirred up the Magistrate to Persecution, against any that differed from us, in
any part of the World: But we can prove, that his Brethren, the Priests in
New England, did most earnestly stir up the Magistrates in New England, to
persecute our Brethren, and did prevail with them to do it; and if C.M was too
Young, or not born, in those days to join with his Blood thirsty Brethren, it
is well if his Father Increase Mather was not equally guilty with others of
them; and I find not as yet, but that C.M. does approve their deeds, and so
brings their sins upon him, as Christ said to the Pharisees, who in the like
Hypocritical Spirit, said, If (...) had lived in our Fathers days, we would
not have killed the (...) Mat. 23.30. And seeing, according to C.M. the Quakers
that (...) put to Death, were Mad, and fitter for Bedlam, than to be put to
D^^^^; on which Concession John Delavall, in his Appendix to my Bo^^, proves
by the Law of England, That these who put them to Death (...) Murderers, and
deserved Death for so doing: What says C.M. to this? Surely nothing at all.

CHAP. VI.
HIs Apology for using You to one, and saluting with the Hat, is very weak and
silly, viz. Because to say you to a single Person, became a Custom when the
Common Wealth of Rome was turned into a Kingdom, first to treat Persons of
Quality in the plural Number with You, and so by degrees, its descended unto
all particular men: But if (...) be a sufficient Reason to justify a (...)
then all the (...) and vain Inventions of Heathens and Papists may be allowed,
but the Scripture says, The Customs of the People are (...) 10.3. And that he
says, its descended into all (...) i^ false; for as I am informed, it is not
used in (...) other Countries in the World. And for his ^^^ing (...) some of us
saying, Thou writes, Thou (...) Case of the Second Person to a Verb of the
(...), It is not so much the Incongruity with a (...) fault, in using You (...)
one as the (...) and the gratifying a proud Spirit, and bowing to (...) be
pleased with Thou, although they give it to God in Prayer^ (...) or other that
they despise; also, to say You to (...) more in company, makes Confusion in
the sense, (...) uncertain, whether one or more are intended; but to say, Thou
(...), has no such inconveniency, nor argues no vain Respect o^ Person^. Nor
has he any better Argument for Sal^^ing with the Hat, (...) Custom; but seeing
uncovering the Head, as well as bowing the (...), are Religious significations
of our Reverence to God in Prayers; we should not give them to the Creature,
for it is very proper that some what of Distinction be made externally betwixt
our Reverence to our Maker, and our Re^^^ct to Magistrates, Parents, Kindred or
Neighbors: But he con^^^deth with a rare way to deal with us at last, viz. To
throw their Caps (...) us; which bespeaketh a very airy and frothy Spirit, very
unbecoming a Minister of Christ; yea, not well becoming any Colledge-Boy of
New England. When the Preachers are thus light and vain, what may be expected,
but that in Jeremiah is fulfilled, Jer. 23.32. They cause thy People to Err by
their Lies, and by their Lightness, etc. And another Instance of his Lightness
and Airyness, is, as because one of us said (as he does allege) in a
Catechism, Let none reason about us, for there they can never know us, nor com
unto us, that is, in Reason: But nothing but a mere Spirit of Perversion would
turn the sense of this, as if the Quakers did renounce all true Reason; whereas
the sense that is obvious to all impartial men, is, Reason falsely so called, or
carnal Reason, that is certainty a great Enemy to all true divine and spiritual
Knowledge; for what is the Wisdom of the World that is foolishness with God, as
the Scripture declares, but carnal Reason and Reasonings? and therefore sa^^^
the Scripture, If any will be Wise, let him be a Fool; and again, (...) ^ot to
thy own Understanding: And C.M. might as well mock at (...) saying Cor. 10. 4,
5. The Weapons of our Warfare are not (...) Mighty, and to throw down
Reasonings; the Greek word being (...) (...) it is plain, that tho Paul
expresses no distinction betwixt Reasonings and Reasonings, more than that
Catechism, yet he does not mean all Reasoning of all sort, as to exclude or
destroy the use of it, even in divine Matters; for Paul makes most excellent
use of it, in proving Justification by Faith in Christ Jesus, and the
Resurrection of the Dead, and other divine things; also, Christ and the
Prophets did make most excellent use of true and right Reason, to wit, (...)
enlightened by the divine Spirit, and governed thereby, and in due (...)
thereto; and this use of it the People called Quakers approve, and according to
their measure have made, and do make good use of, even in divine matters; and
through Gods Mercy, many can say, their Reason, or reasonable Understanding, as
men, is greatly improved and perfected, by their acquaintance with that divine
Light of Christ in them, and no wise impaired. But if C.M. think, that bare
humane Reason alone, without all divine internal Illumination, can enable a man
to understand divine Things and Mysteries, he is more a Socinian than
Presbyterian or Independent. And the like silly and airy Jest he slingeth at
Isaac Pennington, withal grossly perverting his words, page 45. as because I.P.
would have them stripped of all their fleshly knowledge of the Scripture (which
according to Paul, he calls Knowledge after the Flesh, or to be wise after
the Flesh, which (...) Death, Romans 8.6. That therefore he would have them
stripped of the Scriptures. All which Perversions, and many more in his Book,
with many gross Lies that C.M. uses, show plainly how weak he is, when he has
no better Weapons to defend himself, and render us odious.

And whereas he would in the Conclusion, fix it upon G.F. That he thought
himself equal with God, and that the Soul of man were God, or a part of him:
But seeing he brings not this from G.F. but from Faldo, a most partial and
envious Adversary, it is not to be regarded; and VV. Penn has sufficiently
vindicated G.F. and also G.F. has cleared it in his Book, That he did witness
both the Son and the holy Spirit revealed in him, who (as he takes notice by
the Westminster Confessions acknowledgment) are equal to God the Father. And
what G.F. speaks of the Soul, its being a part (but more properly a measure
of the Spirit) of God; he does not understand it of the Soul of many that is
essential to man, but of the divine Soul or Spirit in man, or to speak with the
Scripture, the Soul of God, as it is written, If (...) back ^^ith God, my Soul
shall have no pleasure in him. And again, Shall not my Soul be avenged? etc.
and though part or portion, with respect to God, be not so proper, yet by a
tolerable Catachresis, even in Scripture, it is used, Job 26.14. How little a
portion is heard of him? But to speak properly, God has no parts or portions,
as he has no Bodily Members, which yet by a figure in Scripture, are assigned
to him, in condescension to our low Capacity. But for his saying, That Souls
that can digest Quakerism, serve but as the Salt of the Flesh they live in;
shows sufficiently, he has no Salt in him to savor with the things of God.
Indeed if Quakerism were such a thing as he does represent it to be, and would
fain have People believe it to be, or that the 20th part that he says of it,
were true, it were most abominable, and such who hold it would be most
unworthy, and not fit to be esteemed Men, for less Christians; but blessed be
God, our Religion is not that which he would make it to be, nor are we such as
he describes; and it is a great Questions to me if he does really think these
things, that he says of us, to be true, either in general or in great part;
and if he does not think so, the greater is his sin.

The other things, in the last two or three Pages of his Book, are so
notoriously false, as that The main design of Quakerism is to advance and exalt
Man, and that they do in effect every one make himself a Christ, and such like
Lying stuff, I shall not need to Refute, seeing every one that has the least
knowledge of us, knows them to be scandalous ^yes: And for the advancing man
into Pride or vain Glory, it is so far from being any design of our Religion,
that it more than any tends to humble the Creature; for man can never be
truly humbled, until he see himself in the Light of God shining in his heart,
and that will greatly humble him, as it did Job and Isaiah, and all the holy
men of God were humbled, and kept humble, by bowing down and subjecting th^^r
Minds and Thoughts, with all their Desires and Affections, to that divine
Spirit, Light and Life of Christ in them, that brings men to the true Denial
of Self, and to cease from all Self-Actings, Willings and Runnings, that only
proceed from their mere Natural Pa^ts and Abilities, whether in Prayer or any
other Religious Performance; and however such Prayers and Devotions, that are
performed without the Spirit of God, may please man's carnal Mind, and give
(...) false and carnal ease and peace, and exalt Self in Man, yet they can
ne^^^^^ profit them, who use them, nor please God; for God who is a Spi^^^,
will be worshipped in Spirit and in Truth. And whereas in his 8th page he
accuses the Quakers for their horribly Prayer-less Lives, withal asking, how
many Prayer-less Houses and Prayer-less Tables are to be found among the best
of them? I Answ. In that he is very uncharitable, as that the best of us had
neither Prayer in our Houses nor at our Tables, which is false; for not only
the most grown up in the Truth, but even the least Babes in the Truth, are not
without frequent Prayer both in their Houses and at their Tables, although not so
very frequent vocally, yet sometimes vocally, as God is pleased to give an
utterance, and at other times only with our Hearts, which God accepts; for
vocal and external words of Prayer, are not so essential to Prayer, but that
true Prayer may be, and is most frequently without it; yea, Samuel Rutherford,
a great Presbyterian, says in his Epistles, Words are but the Accidents of
Prayer; yet Prayer with Words, uttered with the Mouth, as God is pleased to
enable us, we gladly own, both in our Assemblies and Families; and if any be
wanting, in their Families in Prayer, or any other part of Devotion, it is
their own fault, for which they must answer, and ought not to be charged upon
the innocent; And we believe Gods holy Spirit will be wanting to none, duly to
move them, and that most frequently to Prayer, who watch thereunto, both with
words or without them; And if they watch not unto Prayer, their Neglect of
watching, and likewise of Prayer is their sin, and chargeable upon them, and
they will bear their burden for it* But that any faithful man, owned by us has
said (as C.M. alleges* not from any Quaker, but from a partial Adversary)
That in many Years they have not had a motion to Prayer; we do not believe; if
any feel not their hearts moved to Prayer, and that most frequently, it is
their own fault and sin; for indeed every faithful Soul his Life is a Life
(...) Prayer, and he prays in his heart as frequently as he breaths in the
air; for true inward Prayer, rightly understood, is the ^^^^inual Motion of the
heart toward God, The Spirit helping our (...), with Groans that cannot be
uttered; for even Paul said, We know not what to pray for, as we ought, Romans
8.26. And also, he has solemn Times and that frequently, for solemn Prayer,
and Meditation, and Thanksgiving; but the most sincere Christians do not always
make the greate^^ show or outward appearance to pray, as the Pharise^ did of
(...): And I might easily retort this Question, How many (...) and Independents
have either Prayer les^ Houses and (...) very formal and Hypocritical, and are
wholly Strangers in the (...), Life and Mystery of Prayer? Though we have
Charity (...) some of all sorts; and as we judge neglect of Prayer a great
(...), so we judge (...) Formality and Hypocrisy to be no less; both which
Extremes are to be avoided.

Some Collections of Passages out of Jer. Tailors Book, (...) The History of
the Life and Death of the holy JESUS, Part 1. Sect. 9. of Baptism, N. 29.

Just as we use to deny the Effect to the Instrumental Cause, and attribute it
to the Principal, in the manner of speaking -- So we say, it is not the good
Lute, but the skillfull hand that makes the Music; it is not the Body, but the
Soul that is the Man, and yet he is not the Man without both. [ Note, And so
the Quakers commonly say, It is not the Scriptures, but the Spirit that
reveals to us divine Mysteries; yet by so saying, they deny not that the
Scripture is an Instrument of the Spirit, to reveal the Doctrinal Principles
peculiar to the Christian Faith, as Christ's Birth of a Virgin, his Crucifixion,
etc. as much as the Lute is the Instrument of the skillfull hand that makes the
Music.]

Infants Baptism, Part 2. N. 8. No man can conclude, that this Kingdom of
Power, that is the Spirit of Sanctification, is not come upon Infants, because
there is no sign nor Expression of it; it is within us, therefore it has no
signification; it is the Seed of God: And it is no good Argument to say, here
is no Seed in the Bowels of the Earth, because there is nothing green upon the
face of it. And N. 19. For as the reasonable Soul and all its Faculties, are in
Children, Will and Understanding, Passions, and Powers of Attraction, and
Propulsion, yet the Faculties do not operate or come abroad till Time and Art,
Observation and Experience have drawn them forth into Action; so may the Spirit
of Grace, the Principle of Christian Life be infused, till in its own day it is
drawn forth; for in every Christian there are three parts (...) to his integral
Constitution, Body, and Soul, and Spirit; and all these have their proper
Activities and Times, but every one in his (...) Order; first, that which is
Natural, then that which is (...) what Aristotle said* A Man first lives the
Life of a Pla^^, then of (...) and lastly of a Man, is true in this sense; and
the (...) spiritual the Principle to, the longer it is before it operates,
because ^^re things concur to spiritual (...), than to Natural; and these are
(...), and therefore first, the other are perfect, and therefore last. (...)
who is he that so (...) understands the Philosophy of this third Principle of a
Christians Life, the Spirit, as to know how or when it is infused, (...) how it
operates in all its Periods, and what it is in its Being and proper (...) and
whether it be like the Soul, or like the Faculty, or like a (...) to what
Purposes God in all varieties does dispense it; tha^ which is (...) is, that
the Spirit is the Principle of a new Life or a new Birth -- (...) the Seed of
God, and may lie long in the Furrows, before it springs up; that from the
Faculty to the Act, the passage is not always sudden and quick -- And a little
after, Now what was lost by Adam, is (...) by Christ, the same Righteousness,
only it is not (...), but super-induc^^ nor Integral, but interrupted, but such
as it is, there is no difference, (...) that the same, or the like Principle,
may be derived to us from Christ, as there should have been from Adam, that in
a Principle of Obedience, a Regularity of Faculties, a Beauty in the Soul, and
a state of Acceptance with God. And we see also, in men of Understanding (...)
Reason, the Spirit of God dwells in them, which Tatianus describing, (...)
these words, The Soul is possessed with the sparks of the Power of the Spirit;
and yet sometimes it is ineffective and unactive, sometimes more, sometimes
less, and does no more do its work at all times, than the Soul does at all
times understand. Add to this, that if there be in Infants naturally an evil
Principle, a Proclivity to sin, an Ignorance and Pravity of Mind, a Disorder of
Affections (as Experience teaches us there is, and the perpetual Doctrine of
the Church, and the universal Mischiefs issuing from Mankind, and the sin of
every man does witness too much) why cannot Infants have a good Principle in
them, though it works not till its own season, as well as an evil Principle? If
there were not by Nature some evil Principle, it is not possible that all the
World should choose sin: In free Agents it was never heard, that all Individuals
loved and chose the same thing, to which they were not naturally inclined;
neither do all men choose to Marry, neither do all choose to abstain; and in this
Instance, there is a natural Inclination to one part; but of all the men and
women in the World, there is no one that has never sinned; If we say, we have
no sin, we deceive our selves, and the Truth is not in us, said an Apostle* If
therefore Nature has in Infants an evil Principle, which operates when the
(...) out is all the while within the Soul, eith^^ Infants have by Grace (...)
into them, or else sin abounds where Grace does not (...) against the Doctrine
of the Apostle. [ No^^ All this does most manifestly agree to what I have said
both concerning the Seed of Sin, and the Seed of Gods Grace being in all men,
in my printed Book, (...) The Presbyterian and Independent Visible ^^^rches
brought to the (...) page 90, 91, 92.

Concerning certainty of Salvation, page 3. sect. 13. n. 9. The sum (...) this,
All that are in the state of Beginners and Imperfection, have (...) ^^^tinual
Certainty, changeable and fallible, in respect of us (for we (...) not with
what is in Gods secret Purposes) changeable, I say, as their Will and
Resolutions: They that are grown toward Perfection have more reason to be
confident, and many times are so; but still, although the strength of the
habits of Grace, adds degrees of moral Certainty to their Expectation, yet it
is but as their Condition is, hopeful and promising, and of a moral
Determination. But to those few, to whom God has given Confirmation in Grace,
he has also given a Certainty of Condition; and therefore, if that be revealed
to them, their Condition is in self certain, but their Persuasion is not so,
but in the highest kind of Hope, an Anchor of the Soul, sure and steadfast. [
Note, This does manifestly agree to what I have said on that subject in my
foresaid Book, page 136.]

Concerning Faith, Part 2. Sect. 10. N. 4. For the Faith of a Christian has
more in it of the Will than of the Understanding: Faith is that great Mark of
Distinction which seperates and gives Formality to the Covenant of the Gospel,
which is a Law of Faith: The Faith o^ a Christian is his Religion, that is, it
is that whole Conformity to the Institution or Discipline of Jesus Christ,
which distinguishes him from the Believers of false Religions. And N. 6. It
(viz. Faith) is of the same Condition and Constitution with other Graces, all
which equally relate to Christ, and are as firm Instruments of Union, and are
washed by the Blood of Christ, and are sanctified by his Death, and apprehend
him in their Capacity and Degrees, some higher, and some not so high; but Hope
and Charity apprehend Christ in a measure and proportion, greater than Faith,
when it distinguishes from them: So that if Faith does the Work of
Justification, as it is a mere Relation to Christ, then so also does Hope and
Charity, or if these are Duties and good Works, so also is Faith; and they all
being alike commanded, in order to the same end, and encouraged by the same
Reward, are also accepted upon the same Stock, which is, that they are Acts of
Obedience, and Relation too, they obey Christ, and lay hold upon Christ's
Merits, and are but several Instances of the great Duty of a Christian, but the
Actions of several Faculties of the New Creature. But because Faith is the
beginning Grace, and has Influence and Causalty in the production of the
other, therefore (...) others, as they are united in Duty, are also united in
their Title and Appellative, they are all called by the Name of Faith, because
they are parts of Faith, as Faith is taken in the largest sense; and when it is
taken in the strictest and distinguishing sense, they are Effects and proper
Products by way of Emanation. -- N. 8. So that Faith and Charity, in the sense
of a Christian, are but one Duty, as the Understanding and the Will are but one
reasonable Soul, only they produce several Actions, in order to one another,
which are but diverse Operations, and the same Spirit. [ Note, This does
manifestly agree to what I have said in my foresaid Book, page 129, 130, 131.]

Dr. Cave concerning Justification, in the Life of Paul, Sect. 9. N. 15. Works
of Evangelical Obedience, are not opposed to Faith in Justification in that
Faith, as including the New Nature, and the keeping Gods C^^mandments, is made
the usual Condition of Justification; nor (...) otherwise, when other Graces
and Virtues of the Christian Life are made the Terms of Pardon and Acceptance
with Heaven, and of our Title to the Merits of Christ's Death, and the great
Promise of Eternal Life; citing Acts 2.38. cap. 3.17. Mark 11. 25, 26. 1 John
1.7. [ Note, And so does this well agree to the Contents aforesaid.]

Joseph Glanvel, Fellow of the Royal Society, in his Treatise of Witchcraft,
Part 1. 13. page 49. says, Gods more near and immediate imparting himself to
the Soul that is prepared for that Happiness by divine Love, Humility and
Resignation, in the way of a vital Touch and Sense, is a thing possible in it
self, and will be a great part of our Heaven. That Glory is begun in Grace, and
God is pleased to give some excellent Souls the happy Antepast. That holy men
in ancient Times have sought and gloried in this enjoyment, and never complain
so sorely as when it was withheld and interrupted. That the Expressions of
Scripture run infinitely this way, and the best of Modern good men, do from
their own Experience attest it. That this spiritualizeth Religion, and renders
its enjoyments more comfortable and delicious. That it keeps the Soul under a
vivid sense of God, and is a grand security against Temptation. That it holds
it steady amid the flatteries of a prosperous state, and gives it the most
grounded Anchorage and support amid the Waves of an adverse Condition. That
it is the Noblest Encouragement to Virtue, and the biggest assurance of an happy
Immortality. I say, I considered these weighty things, and wondered at the
carelessness and prejudice of Thoughts that occasioned (...) suspecting the
reality of so glorious a Privilege; I saw how little reason there is in
denying matters of inward sense, because our selves do not feel them, or cannot
form an apprehension of them in our Minds. I am convinced, that things of Gust
and Relish must be judged by the sentient and vital Faculties, and not by the
poetical Exercises of speculative Understandings: And upon the whole, I believe
infinitely, that the divine Spirit affords its sensible Presence, and immediate
beatifick Touch to some rare Souls, who are divested of carnal Self, and
mundane Pleasures, abstracted from the Body by Prayer and holy Meditation;
spiritual in their Desires, and calm in their Affections, devout Lovers of God,
and Virtue, and tenderly affectionate to all the World; ^^ncere in their Aims,
and circumspect in their Actions; enlarged in (...) Souls, and (...) in their
Minds: These, I think, are the Dispositions that are requisite to fit us for
divine Communion; and God transacts not in this (...) way, but with prepared
Spirits, who are thus disposed for the manifestation of his Presence, and his
Influence: And such, I believe, he never fails to bless with these happy
fore-tastes of Glory.

John Norris, M.A. and late Fellow of All Souls College in Oxford, in his
Treatise, Reflections upon the Conduct of Humane Life, Reflect. 2. N. 9. page
69. says, The Right and only Method of Inquiry after that Truth which is
Perfective of the Understanding, is to consult the divine Logos, or Ideal
World; for this is the Region of Truth, and here are hid all the Treasures of
Wisdom and Knowledge: This is that great and universal Oracle lodged in every
man's Breast, whereof the Ancient Vrim and Thummim was an expressive Type or
Emblem. This is Reason, this is Conscience, this is Truth, this is that Light
within so darkly talked of by some, who have, by their awkward, untoward and
unprincipled way of representing it, discredited one of the Noblest Theorys in
the World: [Note, If perhaps some have been short in that thing, yet it has
been well demonstrated by many or most of that People here by him reprehended.]
But the thing in it self, rightly understood, is true; and if any shall call it
Quakerism or Enthusiasm, I shall only make this Reply at present, That it is
such Quakerism as makes a good part of St John's Gospel, and of St Austin's
Works. But to return; This, I say, is that divine Oracle which we all may, and
must consult, if we would enrich our Minds with Truth, that Truth which is
Perfective of the Understanding: And this is the true Method of being truly
wise; and this is no other Method than what is advised us by this divine Logos,
the substantial Wisdom of God; Blessed is the man that hears me, watching
daily at my Gates, waiting at the Posts of my Doors, Prove. 8.34. And again,
says the same substantial Wisdom, Whosoever is simple, let him turn in (...). And
again, I am the Light of the World, he that follows me (or as the word more
properly signifies, he that consorts, or keeps company with me) (...) in
Darkness: This therefore is via Intelligentiae, the way and (...) of true
Knowledge, to apply our selves to the divine (...) felt the Ideal World. [ i.
e. not Humane, but Divine (...)

THE END.

