THE Benefit, Advantage, and Glory of Silent Meetings, BOTH As it was found at
the beginning, or first breaking forth of this clear manifestation of Truth,
and continues so to be found by all the Faithful and Upright in Heart at this
Day.

Writ for the stirring up and encouraging of those, more especially who are
lately Convinced unto the love of them, and diligent improving them, unto those
ends and uses for which they serve.

By George Keith.

LONDON, Printed, by Andrew Soul, in the Year 1687.

The Benefit, Advantage, and Glory of Silent Meetings.
BEfore the breaking forth of this clear manifestation of Truth, that now
shines in great Brightness and Glory, which began in the Nation of England
some twenty six Years ago, or so, there was many People both in that Nation and
elsewhere, in whom there was some true desires and breathings raised and begot
after the Lord, by the secret workings of his Eternal Power, insomuch that many
in that day began to seek the Lord in great Earnestness and Zeal, upon whom he
had caused his Light so far to shine forth, that thereby they came to see their
Poverty, Nakedness and Emptiness, notwithstanding of the large and much
Profession which they had made in diverse Sects, and also by the same, they came
to see their want of the living God, though they had learned a notional and
litteral knowledge of him, from them who spoke weakly upon the Scriptures, what
they had gathered from the Letter, by their Hammerings and Toolings upon them,
and so it came to pass, that many who were diligent and zealous followers of
these Ministers of the Letter, through these dawnings of the Light of God and
Christ, which began to appear in them, became to weary and tire of that
ministration they were under, which was at best but that of the Letter, and for
most part also, had much of Falsehood and Untruth mixed in with it, from the
Worlds Spirit and Wisdom, so that their Doctrine had neither the sound Words of
Truth, nor the Virtue and Life of Truth to make it Savoury and Nourishing into
the Souls of the People, so that many come to loath and refuse it, for it
appeared unto them; no better then as Dead and Corrupted Water, yea as the
Waters of Egypt that became Blood, which they loathed to drink off, and the
same People who began to loath the Doctrine and Ministry of the National
Priesthood, and also of others, who pretended more, finding it both Dead and
Corrupt, they found great perpexity and heaviness of Mind, as not knowing what
to do, whether to go; they were pressed in Spirit to leave and forsake the Dead
and corrupt Ministry they were formerly under, as finding it hurtful, yea
killing (for the Letter kills) but they knew not where to find the living and
true Ministry which might administer unto them that which could answer unto
the living desires of their Souls, and could Satisfy and Nourish them; and at
the same time there were diverse, in diverse Parts, who had some inward true and
Living openings and Manifestations of Truth, but they were not come to a Clear
and Sound State and Condition in their own particulars, nor to a clear
discerning of the Manifestations and workings of Truth from their own
imaginations. And from the Enemies transformings and likenesses, and yet in
this uncleanness and unsoundness they went forth and spoke and declared and
Preached and Writ many things, which because they did in part issue or proceed
from the Light of Truth, were much taking into their hungring and seeking
Souls, who had left the Dead and tastless Ministry they were formerly under,
and so because there was somewhat in the Words or Declaration of these men,
which did partly answer unto the Witness and truth of God in their hearts, they
began much to look after them, follow and hear them, and drink in their
Doctrine, even as the parched and dry Land drinks in the Rai^ of a Summer
shower; yet this came to prove much unto the great hurt and loss both of these
Teachers, and also of them who gave up to be taught by them.

For their Ministry not standing in that cleanness and soundness, either of
Doctrine or Spirit, as was needful, it could not but prove as unwholsom and
hurtful food, especially seeing there was not that discerning begot in People,
whereby they could make a clear difference betwixt the pure and the impure,
that which was of God, and that which was but of Man, and of the Enemy; betwixt
the pure and clean Grains, and the Tares; for indeed in their Ministry they did
not sow altogether clean Grain, but many noisome Tares with it, and that in much
more abundance, then the true Wheat, and the Tares sprung up, and choked the
good Seed, and hindered it, so the good Seed withered in many, and in many
others was in a decaying and withering condition, but the Tares waxed great and
flourished, and as for those Teachers who went forth as to sow, for most part,
it proved most to their own loss and prejudice, for not being brought into a
cleanness and soundness in their own particular Condition, neither as to
Doctrine nor Spirit, the Serpent who beguiled the Woman, betrayed the
simplicity in them, and so through his subtilty drew them forth still further
and further from the true openings of Truth which at sometimes were opened in
them truly from the Lord, out into their own vain imaginations and
apprehensions, and also into the Enemies transformings and likenesses: whereby
the tender dawnings and breakings forth of Truth became to be veiled and
clouded in them, and the Darkness prevailed to blind the Eye, which had
received some half opening, and so their latter condition was worse then the
first, yea many of them became worse then others, as unsavory Salt, having run
out from the Sense and Savor of that which Savoured them in some Measure, and
thereby gave occasion of offense unto many People; for some of these aforesaid,
having run out from the Measure of Truth in their own particulars, vented and
published both in Words and Writing, Gross, Unsound and Pernicious Doctrines,
and others of them became loose and desolate in their lives, all which the
Enemies of Truth charged upon Truth it self, and spoke evil of the Way of it,
unto many Simple People, who too much believed them, and so were scared and
offended, even at the appearance of Truth it self.

And about the same time, the People, even those of them for most part, who
were most tender, Ingenious and Zealous, (through a weakness of understanding,
and because of the customary Way they had been used to) had too much an Eye to
Words, and too much a Life in them, for they could not meet together, but some
behoved to speak, in Doctrine Exhortation or Prayer, etc. Otherwise they would
have thought the Time misspent, so much as passed away of it without Words, for
their minds were much drawn forth, seeking satisfaction, and refreshment in
outward Words, Practices and Observations, which yet they found not, but both
their Words and Practices for most part proved their Burden, and they Groaned
under them, and yet they knew not what to do, for they saw no way how either to
Worship God, or profit their own Souls, or one another, but as they thought was
in Words, or outward Practices and Observations, and yet they missed the
Kingdom, which they in some true Measure desired, and so were scattered abroad,
as in Diverse Flocks and Companies, like Sheep without a Shepherd, seeking the
true Fold and Pasture, but not finding it.

And the Lord who had Pity upon them of Old, whom he beheld as Sheep without a
Shepherd, and whose Bowels Yearned over them, in the same Yearnings of Bowels
extended his tendrr Mercies and Compassion into these, who at that time had
Tender Breathings and desires raised in them after himself, and to know and
Worship Him aright, and in the acceptable Way, and he prepared Messengers, and
seat among them, in a needful and acceptable time, who having attained unto the
soundness and clearness in their own Condition, both as to Doctrine and
Spirits, through the Power and Grace of the Lord, with and upon them, (which
others before them, as aforesaid, were not come into) Preached the glad Tidings
of the Gospel in Purity and Soundness, upon a People whom the Lord had prepared
to receive them, as he had prepared them to Minister to them, the first
Principles whereof were to this purpose or effect; That what was to be known of
God was manifest within, that the Kingdom of God was to be sought after, and
found within, by every Man, in a Heavenly Seed and Principle, which was of God
in every Man, the Word near in the Mouth, and in the Heart; that God and Christ
was to be sought within, found, received and enjoyed within, in the Measure of
the Light wherewith he did enlighten every one that comes into the World, and
that whoever do truly believe in God and in Christ, must believe in the Light,
wherewith Christ did enlighten them, who is given of God a Light to lighten the
Gentiles and the People, and who so believe in the Light, which convinces of
sin, judges and reproves it in thought, Word and deed, come to receive life
by it, and be made alive unto God, so as to have a Sense of his Divine Power
and Virtue, and to see him, and behold him, and enjoy him, and have fellowship
with him; in which Life they come to receive Power over Death, Sin and
Darkness, and in the same, they come to receive the true knowledge of God and
Christ, and the things pertaining to his Kingdom; and therein, and therefrom,
and thereby they come to receive right thoughts and apprehensions of God, and
also the right and sound Words, which are fit to be spoken of him, and
concerning him, and his Way and Kingdom; and which thoughts and Words had a
manifestation of his heavenly Life and Virtue in them, as they were received in
the Living and Eternal Word, near, and in the Heart; and so that all thinking
or speaking of God, or to him, or the things of his Kingdom, behoved to have
this rise, the Word, Light and Life of God in the heart; otherwise they were
all wrong, dead and unsavory, and so neither acceptable unto God, or
profitable either unto the speakers or hearers; and in like manner, all
practices and works, which are not wrought in this Principle, the Light, Life
and Spirit of God, within, are but dead and unprofitable, Works and Fruits of
Death and Darkness, as not having the Life of God, for their Rise, Spring and
Original, and so the first beginning of the Ministry, in great part, was in the
Life and Power of God to call off people from all their dead and dark thoughts,
Words and Works, as to God, and his Way and Worship, which were not brought
forth in the Life and Light of God in the Heart, were not thought in the Life,
spoken in the Life, done and practiced in the Life, as being all but false,
unsound, unprofitable, and unacceptable; and as the sound and clear
Ministration g^ven them, in the Light and Life of God was to call people off
from all the thoughts Words and Works of Death and darkness, so was it also to
call them off, and turn them from the Darkness it self, unto the Light, which
lighted every one of them, and from Death unto the Word of Life, nigh unto
every one, and which would give Life unto every one, who became turned toward
it, in the drawings and Virtue thereof, and this was the clear and Sound
Ministration, which the Apostles received from Christ, and particularly Paul,
who was sent unto the Gentiles, to turn them from Darkness into Light, and from
the Power of Satan unto God, which Ministration, as it was greatly Blessed of
God in the primitive times, unto that effect so was it, and is it in this our
Day, the Work of Labor and Love of him, whom the Lord sent as the first of
many others who came after, did greatly prosper, (though in much contradiction
into many who opposed, some through Ignorance, and others through Malice)
whereby in a small time many out of Diverse Sects and Professions came to be
turned into the Light, and be convinced of it, and by it, that it was the very
saving Light of Christ Jesus, notwithstanding of all that Priests or Professors
said or disputed to the contrary, for the Ministration had that Light and
Evidence, Life and Authority, yea Power and Dominion of Truth in it, which even
by a Spiritual compulsion, forced an assent in the Hearts of many, and the
Measure of Truth which was Clouded and Veiled in many, came to be reached unto,
through this Ministration, so as to answer unto it, to the sufficient
convincement of these, in whom it is thus answered.

And as for them who came to be clearly and soundly reached, so as to feel the
Power and Life of God in the Ministration reach into the Measure and Seed of
Truth in their own particulars: O what a Day and Time it was unto them, that
was even such a Day as they had never the like of it before, nor (in some
Sense) after it, for it was a Day unto them both of Joy and Heaviness, Comfort
and Sorrow, Light and Darkness, Life and Death, their Joy and their Comfort was
in the Morning Dawnings of the Beauty and Glory of God, which begun somewhat to
appear in the Light, as they became turned toward it; but their heaviness was,
in that they began to find the exceeding sinfulness of sin, and how to feel
themselves so hedged and compassed about with intanglements and hindrances both
within and without, but more especially within, to stop them from entering into
the new and living and perfect way of God, which began to be revealed in the
Light, insomuch that they came to see that these things which they formerly
counted gain, were now Dung and loss unto them, and that which they esteemed as
their Glory, became now their shame, as namely their large Profession and
Righteousness, and way of Worship, which stood in Dead and empty performances,
in the oldness of the Letter, in which they had a Life, and which had a Life in
them also, but it was the Life of Death, which Reigned in them, and do Reign in
all, from Adam unto Moses, yea and whose Reign is not put down, until Christ
the Blessed Seed and Life be Witnessed raised and revealed in the Particular;
and so this Day of God brought Death and Darkness over all that false Life and
Light, which had Place in them formerly, and stained all their false Beauty and
Glory, even all the Glory of Flesh, or of the First-birth, in all the Wisdom,
Counsel and Knowledge thereof, and in all its thoughts and apprehensions of
God, and in all its Words, and Works, and Practices, and Righteousness, whereby
it came to pass that these who seemed to have, and had much Knowledge and
understanding of God and Christ, but it was according to the Flesh or First
Birth, began now to See and be Convicted, that they were very Ignorant, so as
even to say, surely I am more Brutish then any Man, and I have not the
understanding of a Man in me; and thus many, who were Teachers of others, for
many years, came to be Convinced that they had need to Learn the very first
Principles of the Doctrine of Christ, and so these who had stood in a long and
Large Profession of Words, and attained to great Abilities that Way, in
Doctrine, Exhortation, and Prayer, etc. Whether through Education or frequent
Practice, being come to a true and Living Sense and Convincement, that it was
all but Carnal and Fleshly, or at best stood in a great Mixture, having more of
Flesh then Spirit in it, and more of Death and Darkness, then of Life and
Light, which is hurtful, as aforesaid, came to be gathered out of all that
Bulk, and heap of Words into the waiting Place, in the Measure of the Light,
which had Convinced them, and given them some Sense of their Conditions, so to
wait upon the Lord in his Light in all possible stilness and quietness, and
silence of Mind, not only out of all outward Performances and Words, but even
out of all Thoughts and Apprehensions of God or Christ, and all inward motions
and Workings, which had not the Light, or Word, or Spirit of God in their
Hearts, for the Rise and Spring, and this they were brought unto through the
Ministration aforesaid, which pointed or directed them unto this place, even
silence, both as to Words and Thoughts, and that both apart and together, by
which Ministration also they were called to assemble or gather together in the
Name of Christ, whose Name is the Light, the Wisdom and Power of God, and the
second Adam, the quickening Spirit, to wait together in this Silence.

So in this Name they were called and directed to assemble or gather together,
to wit, in the Light, Wisdom, Power and quickening Spirit of God, so they were
not to come in their own Wisdom and Spirit, or in the Wisdom and Spirit of the
first Adam, as to Meditate, Teach, or Pray, or give Thanks in the Words which
that Wisdom and Spirit did teach them, for that had been to meet in the name of
the first Adam, and not in the Name of the second, whose Name is the Light, and
the Life, and the Power, and Wisdom of God, as aforesaid, and so this Wisdom,
and Power, and Name, was to furnish them in all they did or spoke in their
Meetings or Assemblies; and to this the Apostle directed the Believers in his
day, that whatsoever they did in Word or Deed, they should do it in the Name of
the Lord Jesus Christ; if they Taught, it should be in his Name, to wit, in his
Light, Life and Power; and if they Prayed it should be in this; and if they
gave Thanks it should be in this; and then the Words uttered or expressed by
them should be Spirit and Life, that would both reach unto God, for a sweet
Savor and Odor before him, and also unto his Witness in the Heart of them who
heard, for what they spoke should not be the Word of Man, but the Word of God,
Christ the Word, the Light, and the Life, speaking in them, and through them,
as Christ said unto the Disciples, It is not you that speak, but the Spirit of
the Father that speaks in you, and according to this Paul said, That no Man
could call Jesus the Lord, but by the Holy Ghost; for the Name of the Lord is a
living Name, and so cannot be named but by the Power and Virtue of his own
Life; indeed a Man, in his own natural Spirit may pronounce the Letter of the
Name, but the Letter is not the Name, for the Name is the Word of God, but the
Letter is not the Word, and so it is one thing to pronounce the Letter or
Letters, but for another to name or speak the Word of God, yea, or inwardly
only to conceive in it the Mind or Heart, which none can do but by the Holy
Ghost.

Now about this time that diverse were convinced, as aforesaid, and gathered
together in Diverse Places, through very Necessity, their Meetings came to be
Silent, for some Time, though the First Rice and Ground of their Meeting in
Silence, was, that they were taught it of the Lord, forasmuch as there were but
few, who were then attained unto that Soundness and Clearness of Condition, in
their own Particulars, so as thereby to be fitted and Qualified in the Word,
Life, Power, and Wisdom of God, to Minister unto others in Diverse Places,
Friends being but very young at that first breaking forth of Truth; and so
their Works was mostly, if not only to join together, in a joint Concurrence to
wait upon the Lord, for the indu^ngs of his Power from on High, and to see the
Work and Operation of his Word, Light and Life in them, every one being turned
unto the Manifestation thereof in their own particulars: For indeed in
beginners, or those who are but lately turned unto the Light and Life of Truth,
it has much to Work through in them, and they have many Steps of inward Trials
and Exercise to Pass through in the Light and Life of Truth, before they attain
unto that Soundness and Clearness in their own Conditions, whereby they can
safely and Purely Administer the Word and Words of Life unto others without
mixture; for First a Man must be in a good Measure gathered into the Life and
Spirit of Truth, so as to be well rooted and fastened in it, in his own
particular, before he be in such a fit Condition as to Minister unto others,
with safety and advantage, and the Word of Life must first have some free
passage in a Man's Heart, Mind and Spirit, before it can have a free passage in
the Mouth, and it must have got some good Measure of Command and Dominion over
the Heart, and the Thoughts and Affections thereof, otherwise it cannot so
conveniently, and readily have the command of the Mouth* so as to order and
direct it, that the Mouth steadily and soundly, only as the Instrument of the
Word and Spirit of God, may only express or declare the living Words of God,
otherwise as where the Heart is not under the command of the Life as aforesaid)
the Mouth will reel and stagger in its expressions, and be apter to speak the
Words of the Wisdom and Spirit of Man then of God; now as the Words of the
Spirit of God and Christ are in the Mouth Spirit and Life; so the Words of or
from the Spirit of Man, though even gathered from the Scriptures, are instead
of Spirit, but Letters; and instead of Life, but Death; the one is Spirit and
Life, the other but Letter and Death, which Profits not, but hurts; yea even
the Mixture, (as where it is partly Letter, and partly Spirit) as much as
possible, is to be shunned and forborne, especially, in this so Clear and
Glorious manifestation of Truth, which calls out of all Mixtures, both in
Words and Works unto Purity, soundness and simplicity in all, and now does more
pressingly require it, then in the Times of Ignorance and Darkness that are
past.

Thus I say, that even very necessity at first occasioned their silent Meetings
of Friends in Diverse places, every one being afraid to open the Mouth, nor
daring to open, it till the Lord opened it by the Power and Virtue of own
Spirit and Life, and though none durst speak or open a Mouth, nor had received
that Spiritual Power and ability to do it, yet a necessity and Duty they found
in it, to meet together, yea the least measure and appearance of Life and Light
in every one did even draw them together, and when or wherever they came
together in the drawings thereof, and sat down together in stilness and
quietness, every one being turned and gathered unto their particular Measures,
they came to find the Benefit, Advantage and Glory thereof, in a Wonderful and
unspeakable manner; for after this manner they became all as one Body, and as
Members together of the Body, and one of another by reason of that wonderful
and excellent and Glorious Unity, which the several Measures of Life and Light,
has in the particular Vessels and persons. For if even but two be together,
and that each of both be gathered unto their own measure of Life, the measure
of Life in thr one does after a secret and unspeakable manner reach unto the
measure of Life in the other, and flow forth into it, wh^reby the one is
raised, and Strengthened and enlarged by the other, and as it were fed and
refreshed thereby, yea and the Life in the one does so join, and Unite its
force and strength and Virtue unto the other, that every particular feels the
Strength and Virtue of the twofold measure of Life, as it were doubled within
themselves; and if they be three thus gathered together, the particular Measure
of Life in every one reaches unto every particular, so that one feels not only
the Virtue Force and Strength of his own particular Measure of Life, but also
the very force and Strength of the other two, so that his Life is as it were
strengthened, enlarged and refreshed, as in a threefold degree, and so still as
the number of these do increase, who come indeed to Witness any Measure of the
Life and Light of God to spring up in them, all the particular Measures of Life
in the particular Vessels, or Persons in whom it has appeared, Uniting in one,
even as many small Streams, become as a large river of Life, which in the
wholeness, or Vniversallity of it, has its Course Motion and Operation, in and
through every Member, in some Measure, according to the capacity of each; and
thus the whole Universal Life and Spirit of the whole Body reaches, in its
whole Virtue, in some Measure unto every Member for the quickening, refreshment,
and edifying thereof, as even it is in the Natural Body, for the Natural Spirit
that is Universally diffused through the whole, reaches unto every Member in
the Body, with its Influence Life and Virtue, end a plain example whereof we
have also in the Light, that is Natural, for if a Company of People should come
into a dark place, every one of them having a Lamp or Candle lighteh, each
person injoyeth not only the Light of his own, but also of all his Neighbors,
where each suf^er their Light freshly to shine forth.

And of this Friends having such manifest and clear Experience in their own
particulars, they became greatly indeared toward, one another in all Pureness
and tenderness of Love, and finding the great Benefit and Advantage which they
had in one another Company, Presence and Fellowship, as of one being a
Strength to another, their Life and Spirit reaching unto them, often without all
Words, yea in the silence or ceasing of Words they were drawn to meet often
together, for that in the Presence and Company of one another they were
inwardly Refreshed, Comforted, Quickened and Strengthened, through that
Communion and Communication of the Spirit and Life of God, from Vessel to
Vessel, as from one upon all, and from all upon one, and this is that Communion
of the Saints, which is a Mystery forever sealed from all Natural Men, but is
most open and clear to every Child of Light, yea even unto the Youngest, who
are but as Babes and Sucklings in the Truth.

And often times it so comes to pass, that one only particular Person is made an
occasion of great Refreshment, Quickening and Comfort unto many, yea unto a
whole Meeting, so that in good and certain experience, where diverse have come
together, but Life had but a weak or small manifestation in and among them, as
being but young in the Truth, and much Death and Darkness as yet having place,
which Burdened and Clouded the tender Life, so that, as it were the Power of
Death and Darkness could be felt to work strongly in the Meeting, by reason of
which those who met had much ado to wrestle against the said dark Power, yet
the coming of one among them, and sitting down with them in the Meeting, to
wait together upon the Lord in pure Silence, has occasioned Life in great Glory
and Dominion to shine fo^th, and flow like a mighty River through the whole
Meeting, and every particular Member thereof, by which every particular could
sensibly feel the Power of Darkness and Death, which did Burden and Weaken the
Meeting, and quench or stop the springing up of Life, to be removed by the
force and strength of Life, which br^ke forth against it, and dispelled it, as
the Sun in his strength dispelleth and breaks a Cloud into pieces, the
occasion of which has been, that the one aforesaid has had the Life of God in
his own particular raised into a large stature and measure of Power and
Dominion, whereby his Life has had its course through all that Darkness that
stood in the way, to the reaching the weak and small measures of Life in the
others, and so by its Influence quickening and strengthening Life in every
particular, till it was raise^ over all that stood in its way, and all were
abundantly Refreshed, Comforted and Quickened, and such through the Goodness
and Providence of God, are sent unto others, or raised up, among them to be
unto them as Nursing Fathers, and Stewards, and Shepherds, unto whom, as it
were, the Keys of the Kingdom were given, that may open it unto others; not but
that it is possible to be opened, even without all Instruments from without,
yea the Service and Benefit of Instruments, fitted and prepared of God, has
been, and is found to be great unto the more abundant opening of it, and
helping the Weak and Feeble unto the more ready and easy entrance into it,
wherefore such cannot but be dearly Loved and Honored in the Truth, for their
Works sake; and because of that excellent measure of Life in them, which has
such universal Influence and Service unto all.

And though the Unity and Fellowship of the Children of Light and Truth does
not simply consist in their outward Nearness, Company, or Presence, for that
though at never so great an outward Distance, their Unity remains, in that
Spirit which reaches over and through all, yet it is certain that even their
being together in the outward (when they are gathered in the Name of Christ as
aforesaid, as in the particular measure of his Life and Light made manifest in
them) does greatly conduce and contribute to increase and strengthen their
Unity, and to make their Fellowship and Communion of Life the more sensible as
is known and witnessed by certain experience; for that when they are outwardly
present, Life has and oppertunity to convey it self unto one another, by an
through the natural Spirit, and the very Face of one sharpneth another, as Iron
does Iron, for where Life is rased in the Heart, it has its Image on the very
Face or Countenance, which by a secret Virtue reaches unto others. Yea not
only does Life convey it self, and its pure influence, through the Voice and
Sight, but even through the taking one another by the Hand, where it is done in
pure and undefiled Love, and by the laying on of Hands also, as was witnessed
in the Primitive Times, so that those who were endued with a large measure of
the Life and Spirit of God, whilthey laid Hands on them who Believed, Virtue
went forth from that force and strength of Life in them, an^ reached unto these
on whom Hands were laid, whereby they came to feel the Life to be raised in
their own particulars, and the Power of the Holy Ghost to fall or break forth
upon them, as even so it is witnessed at this Day, in and among the Children of
Truth, through the form^r formality of laying on of Hands, that is in the false
Church, which has only the empty and bare imitation is not regarded.

And thus now it being showed, how great an Advantage and Benefit the Children
of Light and Truth have in their Meeting together, through the Communication of
Life, yea from all to every one, and from one to all, and that without all
Words, as well as with them, the Benefit and Advantage of their meeting
together, even in Silence, cannot but be manifest, and this serves to answer
that common Objection used by many, who say, We may sit silent at Home, and
wait in silence in our own Houses, and so be as much edified, a^ to come to a
silent Meeting, where nothing is spoke for our Instruction or Learning; to
which I say, nay if your outward Liberty and Health can permit you to come, and
yet you come not, but stay at home, you cannot Profit, nor be Edified so much
at home, though you should give your selves to waiting in silence, as by coming
to the Meeting of the Lords People and waiting together with them in silence,
first, because to meet together is the Ordinance of God, which he does bless;
yea he has promised that where two or three do meet together in his Name he
will be in the midst of them, and this promise is to meeting simply in his
Name, though there should be no Speaking among them; but secondly because as is
said, through that universal influence of Life, which the whole Meeting has
upon every particular Life, to raise and refresh, and strengthen Life in every
particular, therefore it is manifest; that it is more profitable and edifying
to wait with others, where oppertunity can be had then alone, for while we wait
with others, we become a strength and help unto one another in waiting, which
many can seal the truth of by certain experience, who have found much more
ready and easy access and entrance to wait upon the Lord, and a much more
freedom of Mind from vain Thoughts and Encumbrances while they were waiting
with others, then while alone; as also many has been Convinced and brought to
the knowledge of the Truth by coming to Silent Meetings, and seeing as is showed
that Life does readily most prevail and abound while they wait together, surely
these occasions cannot but be the more Edifing and Profitable, when rightly
improved, for when Life is most raised, and does most prevail and abound in the
Heart, then a man has the best opertunity to feel the operation of it in him
to work and purge out the old Nature and Spirit, with the Works thereof, and to
leven him into a new lump, so as to mould and transform him unto its own pure
Similitude and Image.

And so these who came together, to meet after this manner in Silence, so that
they would sit together many hours in a deep Silence and Quietness, came to
sind great Benefit and Advantage in them, yea and a great Glory, though such
Meetings became the Worlds wonder, and natural and dark spirited men did scorn
and deride them, as they do unto this day, yet the Children of Truth found
them, and do find them the most Profitable and Edifying Meetings that ever they
were at, where all Flesh is made Silent, and the Lamb alone is waited for to
appear in his Temple, and speak forth his holy Mind, Will and Counsel in such
Vessels as are fitted and prepared of him, and those who met together in this
Silence, where, at that time perhaps, not one in the Meeting had a Mouth
opened, or utterance gave them, in the Life and Spirit of God, came in due time
to receive the opening of the Mouth in a very large and powerful, and glorious
manner, as continues unto this day with them who yet remain alive in the Body,
and now many have received an opening of the Mouth, and come to witness the
Word of Life sprung up in great Power and Glory, to the putting Words into
their Mouths, which are Spirit and Life that Minister Grace, largely unto the
Hearers, and are a Sweet and Precious Savor and Odor unto God, even a
Sacrifice of a sweet Smell; and so they witnessed the Promise fulfilled unto
them, upon the matter (though the many Tongues and Languages, with other
circumstantial things be not) as the Disciples did, who were commanded to tarry
at Jerusalem, and wait for the Promise of the Father, which was the pouring
forth and effusion of the Holy Ghost, or Holy Spirit* and Life of God upon
them; and they wait, so it came to pass, that on the day of Penticost, being
assembled together with one accord, they were filled therewith, and began to
speak forth the wondrous things of God, as they felt them in their Hearts, and
as the Spirit gave them utterance.

And seeing they were not commanded to Speak, Preach, nor Pray, nor Sing, but
in the Name of Christ, that is in his Life, Spirit and Power, as it moved them,
it is manifest, at times, the Disciples, or Christians in the Primitive Times
had Silence among them, as we now have, seeing they were not to Speak, but when
the Life moved; and surely there were among them, who did not always feel the
motion of Life to Speak, nor were always in a Capacity or Condition for
Speaking, and though now, since the glorious increase and growth of Truth, few
Meettings have some or other to whom a Ministry in Words is given more or less,
so that seldom or rarely Meetings are under a necessity to be wholly Silent,
from first to last; yet because of the great Advantage, and Benefit, and Glory
that is found in them, Friends are many times willing and desirous to sit down
and feed together in Silence, upon the heavenly and invisible Life, so as to
reach unto one another in the Communications of Life, and feel the States and
Conditions of one another therein in Silence, and enjoy that secret and hid
Fellowship together which the World knows not, so as even to be silent,
though both a Liberty and Ability in the Life may be present with diverse (where
no pressure no pressing occasion is found) to utter Words, which indeed has a
great Glory in it, that People should Converse together in Spirit and deep
Silence, and without all Words.

Now among diverse great an(...)d Advantages and Benefits, which they who came
to be Convinced did find, in the sitting down together to wait in silence;
there were some that in the silence, their Minds being turned toward the Light
and Life of God which had appeared to them, they came to find their Minds
stayed therein and thereby, for a great and mighty Power broke forth, in the
Light, unto which their Minds were turned, and did gather their Minds into it
more and more, whereby they came to know a being Planted, and Grounded, and
Rooted, and Settled, and Established in the Truth, and in the Light, and Life,
and Spirit and Power thereof; and so they came to be gathered out of all the
Tossings and Waverings of Mind, and out of all the Encumbrances and Wanderings,
into Stability and Steaddiness in the Truth, which was even as to be delivered
from a Stormy and Tempestuous Sea, and brought to dry Land; and thus also they
came to be gathered out of all their own Thoughts and Imaginations, and
uncertain Conjectures and Guessings concerning the things of God and Religion,
into the clear and certain manifestation of Truth, by which also they came to
receive an inward discerning, so as to distinguish and make a difference
infallibly betwixt things and things in them, as to see and know and feel what
was of God, and what was not of him, but of Man or of Satan; and so as they
waited in this silence, their minds being turned toward the Lord, they could
discern the right and wrong Spirit, and the Work and motion of each, and came
to see what was to be Kept and Spared, and what was to be Denied; what was to
be preserved Alive, and Cherished and Nourished, and what was to be Slain and
Famished and Starved, and so in the Silence they came to find the pure Judgment
of the Lord to pass over and through all in them, as the Refiners Fire, which
purifieth the Glod and Silver, but consumes the Dross and makes a clear
Separation, and the Power of the Lord God was found and felt to work mightily
in them, for the breaking down, and Killing, and Consuming, and Destroyed every
Evil Thing and Work, which had place in them and removing and taking out of the
way whatever Clouded or Veiled, or Burdened the pure Life to arise and shine
forth, and so the Mountains which were raised over the Seed and burdened it,
came to be shaken, yea the Earth and the Heavens, (by which these bodily
Quakings and Tremblings did also seize upon diverse, and from this the Name
Quakers was in scorn cast upon Friends) that the Mountain of the Lord might be
raised up a top of them all, and so through the mighty working of Gods Power,
which was revealed in the Light, to which their minds were turned in silence,
they came to be brought out of the mixture, wherein they stood formerly, into a
clearness and soundness of Condition in the Truth, both as to Spirit and
Judgment in their own particulars; and so they came to a clear and sound
understanding of the things of God, and of Truth, and Religion, and the way of
Worship, and to have clear and sound Thoughts and Apprehensions of them, which
did purely and clearly arise in the Light, in which their minds became stayed,
and so in due time a pure and clear ministration in Words was given unto many
of them, so that they preached pure, sound and clear Doctrine, in a pure and
clear manifestation of Life, unto which pure Ministration many came to be
brought, who had a Ministration formerly among People of diverse Sects and
Opinions, which stood in the mixture aforesaid, that was not clear Grain and
Food, and therefore hurt both themselves and others, but being gathered
together unto thi^ pure Ministration (which they received by sitting down to
wait upon the Lord, to learn together in silence, with all subjection, the pure
and clear and perfect knowledge of things) they came both to be saved
themselves, and to be made instrumental to save many others: And so in silence
they came to receive these many precious openings and discoveries of Truth and
Religion; and the Scriptures were largely and purely opened unto them
concerning these many things, which are the matters of Difference between the
Friends and Children of Truth, and the Priests and Professors, and these
together with many precious and excellent Gifts of the Spirit, and also much
inward Peace, Joy, Refreshment and Consolation in the holy Spirit, and much
increase of Life and Grace, and Righteousness and much Beauty, and Glory, and
Dominion in the Life, were among the Blessed and Glorious Advantages they
received in meeting together, and waiting together upon the Lord in pure
Silence and Stilness, and which are all known and witnessed, and found at this
day (even as at the beginning) by them, who faithfully and diligently do
observe them and improve them.

And by this means also the Truth came greatly to spread and gain Ground, and
so does at this Day, even in that these who were Convinced in all the parts and
corners of the Land, where the sound of Truth came, did meet together, though
there were but two or three in a place, and sat down together to wait upon the
Lord in pure Silence, out of all their own Thoughts and Words, and Works, which
was a great and loud Testimony, and did Preach all abroad far and near, which
gave occasion unto many who had some measure of Simplicity and Tenderness to
consider the thing, and the signification of it, that in a time wherein
Professors had so much a life in Words, (as if all Religion had been turned
into Words, and in Speaking and Hearing, as indeed it was so with most part,
that they knew no more of it, but to hear and talk Words, and so their Religion
was a Monster, as if all the Body were become the Tongue and the Ear) that a
People should be raised up to meet together in Silence, and in Silence to be
Edified, and Taught and Instructed more then in all the Words they had formerly
heard or spoken, and in silence to Worship God, and Pray, and give Thanks, and
be Helped and Strengthened one by another, this gave occasion, and does and
will give occasion still more and more unto many, that have any measure of
Tenderness and Simplicity to look beyond Words into the inwards and substance
of Religion; and indeed hereby many came to be Convinced, more then by all the
Preachings in Words that ever they heard, the very Silence and Silent Meetings
of Friends Preached unto them so Convincingly, and reached them, that they came
both to confess and own the Truth, and to sit down in silence with them who
were formerly gathered, turning in their Minds to the Light, whereby they came
to be partakers of the Benefits of Silence, as aforesaid, with them, and so
they came to see the proportion of the true Religion, which is as a well
proportioned Body, and is not all Tongue or Ears, but has many other Parts and
Members, and these far greater; for the Tongue, as said James, Is but a little
Member; and so indeed the Words (which the Tongue can utter, and answers
thereunto) are but a very little part in respect of these many other things
which pertain unto the true Religion, and even, as in the Natural Body, many
other Members recei^e power to execute, and do their proper and respective
Offices, before the Tongue; as we see in Infants, who can use diverse Members of
their Body, but cannot speak with the Tongue; so is it even as to the true
Religion, which first gives power as to the use of diverse other things relating
thereunto, before it gives power as to speak of them, so that obedience unto
the Truth, and the practice of a holy Life and Conversation, does most
naturally proceed the speaking of or concerning the Truth; and this is the
order of Christ, who said, He that keeps my Commandments, and teaches men so
to do, (so her^ is first keeping the Commandments before teaching unto others)
the same shall be great in the Kingdom of Heaven.

And so Friends being turned toward God, to wait upon him for his Teachings in
their Silent Meetings, have not their Meetings to depend upon any Speakers or
Speaker without, whatsoever, and therefore they can and do meet together with
Advantage when they know not of any Speakers; and thus their Meetings are
constantly kept up for a Testimony to Truth, and the Edification of themselves,
as also for the reaching unto others; whereas among all other Professions and
Professors, it is quite otherwise, for if they have no Speaker, they have no
Meeting, and so their Meetings depend upon the Words and Lips of men, as if
they could receive no good in Meetings but what dropped from the Lips of men,
whereas the good that Friends look at, and wait for in Meetings, and do
receive, is far beyond all Words whatsoever, even the very Words of Life,
(which Words are precious unto them notwithstanding, and desirable in their
place) and that Good is the Life it self, which was before Words, and will be
when Words are not, and in which all Words are to cease; but the Life endures
for ever, in which Friends have Fellowship with God, and one with another.

And as touching Silent Meetings or Meeting together in silence, it is not only
traceable among the Disciples and Apostles in the Primitive Times as aforesaid,
but even in the Old Testament so called (although it be thought such a strange
thing among Priests and Professors generally) for did not Job and his Friends
meet together in silence 7 days, Job 3.13. And did not Ezekiel sit among the
Captives 7 days, and did not open his Mouth to any, till at the End of them,
when the Word of the Lord came to him, Ezekiel. 3.15, 16. Yea, and the Islands are
bid be Silent before him, Isa. 41.1. and said Zechariah, Let all Flesh be
Silent before the Lord, for he is raised up out of his Holy Place, Zech. 2.13.

George Keith.
POSTSCRIPT. The Copy of a Letter written from Germany, by Stephen Crisp, to
Friends, which does suit with the preceding Paper.
ALL Friends every where, who have tasted of the Goodness of God, keep in the
Savor thereof, and let not your Minds be stolen away from that which is Living,
for that which is Living comes from Above, and makes you Lively, but that
which is Corruptible comes from the Earth, and brings Death with lt over your
Souls; and therefore watch in diligence to retain the Savor of the Life of
Truth, that you may Live, from a sense that Christ lives in you, who is the
Seed, the Truth, the Noble Plant, and grows and brings forth Fruit in you.

And all Friends, every where, who thus keeps and retains the Savor of Life in
them, they will come to feel daily Quicknings thereby, and will have power over
the Nature that is dead in Adam to all good Works, and especially to waiting
upon God with a steadfast and stayed Mind: Nothing so hard as this to that old
and corrupt Nature which is soon weary. This is that Nature which cannot watch
with Christ one hour, but let his Trials and Sufferings be never so great this
leads from Watching to Sleeping, this has no Fellowship with the Seed of God
in its Sufferings, and shall have none in its Dominion. And where this drowsy
Nature stands Uncrucified, it keeps you in the Weakness out of the Power, and
this brings out of the savor and feeling of the Goodness of God, and so makes
Meetings unprofitable, and as it comes through Custom to be allowed and
subjected to, it leads into Hypocrisy, that is to say, into a professing to
waiting upon God, and a presenting the Body in the Meeting, and then letting
the Heart (which God requires) depart far from him, even into the Ease and
Liberty of the Flesh, in which the Apostle said, they that lived could not
please God.

Therefore, Dear Friends, in the Name of God I exhort you, consider what you do
when you Assemble together, and let it be in the Name of Jesus, that is in his
Power, not in the Weakness, nor in the Flesh like a Fleshly Meeting, but in his
Name and Power make War with the Flesh, and with the Drowsy Spirit that
lodges there, and in the Faith overcome it, and be not overcome by it, for
that is Bondage: And hold your Meetings in the Spirit, where every one is made
alive and flourishes, and grows in Life and in Dominion, and shines forth to
the Glory of God, and to the Comforting and Refreshing one of another.

For now as any one suffers himself to be overtaken with Sleep in a Meeting,
he loses the sense of the Power of God, he becomes a Grief to the Diligent,
and an Evil Example to the Negligent, and brings himself under the Judgment of
Gods Power in his own Conscience, which when he awaketh rises up against him;
and also he is under the Judgment of the Power in the whole Meeting, which,
when he comes to a true sense of, will be no light thing; and further, if any
that are unbelieving come in among you, and see such things among you, that
make a profession of an inward Power, and an inward quickening Spirit, and a
Worship that is inward in the Spirit and Truth, herein causes such the Name of
God to be Dishonored, the way of Truth to be holden in little Esteem, by such
who know it not in themselves, and a Stumbling Block is hereby laid in their
way to hinder them from any farther seeking after the Truth. Oh Friends!
consider these things, and be all diligent in this Matter, and let not that
earthly part have Liberty, but let it be kept in the Cross till it Dies, or
else it will keep and hold you Dead and Unsensible of God or one another. And
this is that has hindered the growth of many, namely their Carelessness in
coming to Meetings, and their Slothfulness when they are there. Therefore for
time to come, let every one that bears the profession of Truth, be diligent in
the Work of God, and be good Examples to each other; and observe your time and
hour of coming to Meeting; and set not one hour, and then come at another; and
neglect not your middle week Meetings, by reason of your outward Occasions, for
that will not bring a Blessing upon your Affairs, but let all things give way
to the Service of God, and then all things shall work together for good unto
you, and there shall be no lack of any thing that is good for you.

So dear Friends, in the true love of God have I writ this unto you, as it lay
upon me from the Lord, as a word of Exhortation, to stir up the pure mind in
you all; and the God of Power and Strength give you of his Might, and of his
Power to help you in all your Necessities, and in all your Combats, and
strengthen your Faith, in which and by which the Victory is obtained, which is
the desire of my Soul for you all, who am your Friend in the Fellowship of the
Gospel.

Stephen Scrisp.

THE END.

