G. KEITH's NARRATIVE OF THE PROCEEDINGS at TURNERS-HALL, THE Eleventh of the
Month called June, 1696.

AN Exact Narrative OF THE PROCEEDINGS AT TURNERS-HALL, The 11th of the Month
called June, 1696. Together with the DISPUTES and SPEECHES There, BETWEEN G.
KEITH and other QVAKERS, Differing from Him in Some Religious Principles.

The Whole Published and Revised, By GEORGE KEITH.

With an APPENDIX containing some New Passages to prove His Opponents guilty of
Gross Errors and Self-Contradictions.

LONDON, Printed for B. Aylmer at the Three Pigeons in Cornhill, and J. Dunton
at the Raven in Jewen-street, 1696.

The PREFACE.
THE Preface to the Friendly Readers, throughout these Three Nations, and
elsewhere, professing the Christian Faith in Sincerity. To a^l you sincere
B^lievers in the Lord Jesus Christ, and true lovers of him, and of that Holy
Christian Religion, whereof he is the Author, throughout these three Nations*
and other Countries, where the Christian Religion is Professed, I do humbly
recommend this following Narrative to your serious Reading and Consideration of
what Station Rank or Quality soever ye be, the subject matter treated on in the
said Narrative being so great Fundamentals of the Christian Religion and Faith,
that the denial of them is a downright denial of the Christian Religion and
Faith it self: Seeing therefore the Subject is so great, and so essential to
the Christian Faith, it worthily deserves and calls for the due and serious
Consideration of all the sincere Professors of Christ, to whose hands that may
happen to come. And since the report of our late differences about Religious
Matters, one with another, remaining under one common Name and Designation of
Quakers, is spread far and near, not only through these Three Nations, but
other Places abroad, as is apparent by the late GENERAL HISTORY of the QUAKERS,
Written by Gerard Croese a Hollander, writ Originally in Latin, and lately
Published in English here at London. And that the Report of the late Meeting
and Conference held at Turners-Hall in London, the 11th of the Month called
June, is much gone abroad through both City and Country, chiefly with respect
to the subject matter there discoursed, and my undertaking against them of the
opposite Party, to prove certain Persons of greatest Note among them, guilty of
denying and opposing these great Fundamentals particularly specified in the
following Narrative out of their Printed Books, it may be judged that both the
love of Christian Verity, and the sense of Christian Duty, will oblige and
induce you to read the said Narrative, if it fall into your hands, and others
to enquire after it that the truth of the matter may be searched into, whether
these whom I have undertaken, to prove guilty of denying and opposing these
great Fundamental Truths, be really so or I be guilty in accusing them. I
cannot suppose that any sincere Professor of the Christian Faith, to whose Ears
the Report of this great Controversy has come, will be a Gall^o in the Case,
so as to care for none of these things. If your outward Estates, Liberty and
Property, lay at stake to be endangered, would ye not be awakened to provide
the b^st Remedy to secure them, how much more I hope will all sincere
Professors of the Christian Religion be concerned for that which is
incomparably more valuable than all these outward things? Even the Redemption
of your Souls, which is your true riches; according to that in Prove. 13.8. The
Redemption of the Soul of a Man is h^s Riches* It is reckoned the greatest
Cheat and Imp^sture that can happen in a Nation to cor^upt and adulterate the
true Coin, and falsify it, so as to make Brass or Iron pass for true Silver;
what shall then be judged of such, who seek to adulterate and falsify the true
Christi^n Religion as to put another thing in place of it, even plain Deism or
Gentilism; to w^t, a Profession of Religion toward God, and Light in Men,
excluding Christ God Man and the Faith of him, as he dyed for us and rose
again, and is sat down in the Kingdom of the Father, and as he is to come again
to judge the Quick and the Dead in the true entire glorified Nature of Man,
having the true Soul and Body of Man, the same he had on Earth. The denial of
these great Fundamental Truths of the Christian Religion, with some others
necessarily related to them, and joined with them inseparably, I have
undertaken to prove my Opponents guilty of; and not only I, but many Judicious
Persons that were present at that Meeting at Turners-Hall, the 11th of the
Month called June of this instant 1696, of the several Professions of
Protestants in this great City, did judge that I have effectually done it. But
if I have not done it, and cannot make it justly to appear that these
particular Persons are guilty of the things charged by me on them, I shall
freely acknowledge that I deserve great blame, and therefore I greatly desire
(if it were the Will of God) that I might have yet a more Public Opportunity
to be heard, as concerning these things, were it to be called before the
greatest Persons of Authority in the Nation, either to make good my Charges
against them, and if they be found guilty the blame to lie on them; or if I be
found guilty, that I may have the blame laid on me. But let them be found ever
so guilty, as I am most sure they are, (let them cover and cloak as much as
ever they can) I would not in the least have them persecuted, or any
Sufferings, either in Person or Estate, to come upon them My design in this
undertaking is, that they may be shamed out of their gross Errors if possible;
or if they continue shameless in them, yet that all others who are not as yet
tainted with them, may be preserved from them, and cautioned and warned against
them; for this Gangrene of their vile and gross Error and Heresy, that is a
complex of the worst sort of Errors and Heresies that ever infested the
Christian Profession, has to my certain knowledge overspread many parts and
many persons in these Three Nations, as well as elsewhere. Though I charge them
not either upon the generality, far less the universality of all them called
Quakers. But if they really disown these gross and vile Errors, which I have
proved them guilty of in this following Narrative, and be cordial in the belief
and acknowledgment of the great Fundamental Truths opposite to those Errors,
then it will be that which the sincere Professors of Christianity in these
Three Nations will expect from them, and may justly require of them, as
publicly to retract and renounce these Errors, as they have publicly asserted
them in their Printed Books in the face of the Christian World, otherwise no
sincere Christians will believe them to be in good earnest, but that they
resemble many old Heretics, and particularly the crafty Arrians, that
pretended and made great Protestations that they owned the true Faith,
according to all contained in the Scriptures, when they did nothing less. And
whereas some have Objected to me, that since I have acknowledged diverse
passages in my own Books need correction, and have promised to do it, I ought
to have done that in the first place, before I had charged Errors upon others,
otherwise it would look like the Hyprocrites seeking to pull cut the Mote out
of his Neighbors Eye, when the Beam is in his own Eye. I Answer, The things
that need Correction in my Books, compared with the vile Errors in theirs, are
but as my Motes to their Beams, which I had so far already pulled out of my own
Eye, that I have freely acknowledged them to many viva voce, and have them in
readiness to Publish in Print with the first convenience. Nor are they such
things as oppose any Christian Principles of Faith, but of an inferior nature.
And it must be one of these two things that are their greatest hindrances to
publish any such Corrections; that is, either that they are still entangled in
those Errors, but are not willing it be known, fearing lest the present public
avouching of them may bring some Persecution on them, or great Infamy and
Reproach; or if they be in their Consciences convinced of those Errors, and so
are come to a better understanding of Christian Doctrines and Principles, yet
their Pride and high Authority that they have gained over their too credulous
followers will not suffer them to make any such free acknowledgment, but
especially because any such free acknowledgment, by their own argument and way
of reasoning against all other Ministers in all Christian Professions, would as
much unminister them, as others they have unministred on that account; viz want
of Infallibility, or being subject and liable to Errors and Mistakes in
Articles of Christian Faith. And this will also not a little stick in the way,
to be so humbled that they must acknowledge G. Keith has not falsely accused
them, (as they have severely charged him to have done) if they confess their
former Errors: But how much better were a sincere Confession in the case,
taking shame as due to them, and humbling themselves under the power and
victory of Truth, than a haughty and arrogant standing out to justify
themselves, in these things that neither God nor good Men will ever justify
them in. And if they continue so bold, as to hold such palpable Contradictions
as are discovered in their former and latter Books, and sometimes in the same
Books, all ingenuous Persons that know their Contradictions, will conclude them
not only still guilty of those Errors, but great Hypocrites; for n^ne but stark
mad men, and crased in their Understandings (as they have falsely and
injuriously represented me to be) will hold perfect Contradictions, as such but
Hypocrites may so dissemble and juggle with them that are weak so as to make
them think these things, that are real Contradictions, are not so indeed, but
well consistent Truths* It nothing (I thank God) moves me that they so severely
accuse me, as they have d^ne in their late Printed Pamphlets and Papers; that
Envy and Malice has influenced me thus to expose them, the Testimony of my
Conscience, and which is more, of that holy witness in my Conscience, clearing
me of all such imputation, is as a Brazen Wall to me against their evil and
injurious Aspersions: As they cannot prove it to be so by any of my words or
deeds, so the comfort I have in that inward Peace of Conscience in that
discharge of my Duty both to them, and to all in the Three Nations, to whom
this my so public Appearance, I hope will be of service, is safeguard enough
unto me against their uncharitable constructions. And I do freely leave it to
all Impartial Judges, whether they or I be guilty of this severe Charge; and
let the Tree be judged by the Fruits.

Their pretended Excuses for not meeting me, as desired, at the Place and Time
mentioned in my Printed Advertisement, are so frivolous and weak that they are
scarce worth noticing: But however the chiefest of them I Answered on the
Place, as the following Narrative will certify. Their pretense of their not
meeting me, for the sake of Religion, the Liberty granted us, and the Civil
Peace, is an empty shift, and poor evasion. Is it contrary to their Religion to
dispute their Adversary, viva voce? Why then did they dispute with the
Baptists, and mightily provoked them thereunto, and that viva voc^? And not
only with them but with many others, both at London, and in many other Places
in the Nation, and that before promiscuous and mixed Auditories, as they
commonly call the World, (excepting their own Party, whom they call, The Elect
People of God). And why did W. Penn give such a daring Challenge to Thomas
Hicks, Reason against Railing, p. 184. and complain against him in these words?
I must needs tell the World, the base Cowardice of this Adversary in hand; for
we have offered him a free Meeting, with his Books in our hands proffering to
refute them, viva voce, before the World; but instead thereof, or any other
way, (as several have been tendered) he disingenuously slinks away, and puts us
off by mere Shifts and Evasions. And let the Reader judge if W. Penn has not
shown great Cowardice, and his Party charged by not appearing at all; whereas
T. Hicks, at least, once appeared. But why should such a Dispute viva voce be
construed to be against the Liberty granted us, and the Civil Peace, more now
than then; when at that time those in Civil Authority were more severe, whereas
now they are very propitious? And why should Disputes viva voce be more
offensive to Civil Peace than Disputes in Print? I believe they can give no
Reason. And it is altogether incredible, that my undertaking the Vindication of
the Fundamental Principles of the Christian Faith, professed by the present
Authority, against such manifest Opposers of it as I have proved my Opponents
to be, can be construed by the Authority to be any breach of the Civil Peace,
especially when I had procured the Leave of the Lord Mayor of London for such
an undertaking, whereof my Opponents were not ignorant. Their upbraiding me
with vain speculations, not telling what those are, shows their great
impertinency: But such who are but a little acquainted with the Religious
Differences betwixt them and me, may easily guess what they mean by my vain
speculations, even the Fundamental Truths of the Christian Faith, and other
solid and sound Articles of Doctrine thereunto belonging: And if these be not
they, I dare them to name what my vain Speculations are, whereof they accuse
me. But to be sure, the plain and manifest Proofs I have brought out of their
Books against the greatest Truths of Christianity, demonstrate their
Speculations not only to be Vain, but Pernicious and Pestiferous. Their
Hypocrisy is manifest, in making what they call my Passionate and Abusive
Behavior, an Excuse for not meeting me, when desired. For if they thought that
I would show any such Behavior, it would be such an advantage to them, that it
would rather be an Argument to invite them to meet me, that I may discover my
self, than to dissuade them. But blessed be God, that preserved me at that
Meeting, when I had great Provocation given me by some of their Party, in such
a Temper and Moderation of Spirit (as hundreds are ready to witness) as became
a sober Christian, when some of them that appeared against me, showed
themselves very outrageous. And as insignificant is their Excuse of declining
to meet, because it was not an agreed Meeting on both sides: As if guilty
Persons are not to be tried without their consent and agreement. Was it not
more Fair, Just and Equal in me, and my Friends, to give them a fair Trial,
with open and free access of all sober Persons, as many as the Place could
contain without Crowd, and leave it to the Consciences of the Auditors how to
judge, and intimate my Intenti^n at a convenient time beforehand, than for them
to condemn me in a clandestine Place without all Trial, fair or unfair, and not
to let me have access to them, but when and how little time they pleased, and
to suffer none of my Friends to be present to be Witnesses of their unfair
proceedings against me. Their upbraiding me by insinuating my assuming a
Spiritual Jurisdiction over them, and summoning them to appear before me, is
idle and vain.

The Injurer is Debtor to the Injured, and accountable to him: But let them
tell what Spiritual Jurisdiction they had over me, to call me several times to
them at their Yearly Meetings 1694, more than I had over them to call them to
our Meeting at Turners-Hall, 1696, unless they will fly to their common
Pretense, common to them with the Church of Rome, their Infallibility; the
contrary of which they have manifestly showed; and never any Society of People
professing Christianity has given greater Instances of not only their
Fallibility, but their being miserably deceived, than these Men have done. And
as idle is that other Excuse of theirs, that they will not dispute with me,
viva voce, because I am gone off from them (but they did thrust me from them by
their Unjust Excommunication, when I would have stayed among them so long as I
could have any hope to have reclaimed them from their Errors); but if my going
off be a sufficient Reason why they will not Answer me viva voce, it is as
sufficient a Reason why they should not Answer me in Print, which yet they boast
they will do: For if I be not worthy nor fit to be Answered by Word, nor am I
to be Answered by Writ: But all this shows their confusion and inconsistency.
They think such a Meeting at Turners-Hall, is but in a corner, and not in the
face of the Nation; but they are like to find it has been so much in the face
of the Nation, that many in the Nation will notice it, possibly more than they
would either wish or expect, and more than any thing that has happened to them
for many Years past, to give the Nation a discovery of them and of their vile
Errors and irregular Practices.

If my Adversaries happen to put out an Answer to this Narrative, filled (as
their manner is) with the Falsehoods and Perversions, and vain Shifts and
Evasions, I purpose, with Leave of the Civil Authority, which I hope to obtain
as well as formerly, God willing to Print a New Advertisement of a Meeting, and
to give them timely Notice beforehand, to detect their Errors and Abuses yet
further, and to renew the like Practice, as often as they abuse the World and me
with their Prints. For their unfair way of Disputing in Print, is much easier
discovered viva voce, than by Answering in Print, and is more acceptable to all
Free and Impartial People, who in that way are more capable to judge.

G. KEITH.

It is thought proper in the first place to insert the following Advertisement,
bearing date the 11th of the Third Month, called May, 1696, and sent to those
Persons called Quakers, chiefly concerned; it being the occasion of the
following Conference.

An ADVERTISEMENT.
Of a Meeting (about some Controversies in Religious Matters of Faith) to be
held by George Keith and his Friends, at their usual Meeting place in
Turners-Hall in Philpot-Lane, London, the Eleventh Day of the Month called
June, 1696. to begin about the Ninth Hour, and to be adjourned, if Occasion
requires: To which Meeting William Penn, Thomas Elwood, George Whitehead, John
Pennington, and these of the Second Days Weekly Meeting at Lombard Street,
London, called Quakers, are justly desired to be present, to hear themselves
charged, and proved guilty of the following things, and they shall be freely
heard, to answer to their several Charges.
First, WHereas William Penn has accused me George Keith, in a Public Meeting
at Ratcliffe, of my being an Apostate, and Impostor, and endeavoring to pluck
up the Testimony of Truth by the Roots; and that he has not either then or
since, after many months, proved his Charge to be true, though he promised to
answer me (before many Witnesses) when I told him, I thought to put him to
prove his Charge in the Face of the Nation: And I being conscious to my self,
that I am not guilty of his Charge, I charge him to be guilty of False
Accusation, and Defamation, and offer to prove him to be so; as also I offer to
prove him guilty out of his Printed Books, (which it does not appear that he
has Retracted or Corrected) of most Erroneous and hurtful Principles, contrary
to the Fundamental Doctrines of the Christian Faith and Religion delivered to
us in the Holy Scriptures: And also that he is guilty of gross Contradiction to
himself.

Secondly, Whereas Thomas Elwood has Printed sundry Defamatory Books against
me, I charge him to be guilty of False Accusations, Perversions, and Forgeries,
contained in his said books, as also of most Erroneous and Hurtful Principles,
to the great shame of his Profession, and Scandal of Christian Religion, and I
offer to prove him to be so.

Thirdly, Whereas George Whitehead did join with a prevailing Party, in that
called The Yearly Meeting of the Quakers, in the Third Month, 1695. to pass a
most Unchristian Censure of Excommunication against me, (without any Proof or
Charge of either Error in Doctrine, or Evil Conversation) I charge him to be
guilty of False Accusation, and of a most false and unjust Censure, and offer
to prove it against him. As also, I offer to prove the said George Whitehead,
out of some of his Printed Books (which it does not appear that he has
Retracted or Corrected) guilty of most Erroneous and Hurtful Principles,
contrary to the Fundamental Doctrine of the Christian Faith and Religion.

Fourthly, Whereas John Pennington has Printed Defamatory Books against me,
and has Accused me to be an Apostate, I charge him to be guilty of false
Accusation and Defamation, and I offer to prove it at the said Meeting.

Fifthly, Whereas the Second Days Weekly Meeting of the People called Quakers,
in Lombard Street, London, has approved or Countenanced the abovementioned
Scandalous Books, and another late Book from Pensilvania, signed by Caleb
Pusey, falsely called by him, A modest Account from Pensilvania of the Principal
Differences in a Point of Doctrine, etc. I charge them to be guilty of great
Injustice against me, as also of being guilty of the false Accusations,
Perversions, Forgeries, and false Doctrines contained in the said Books by
their approving the same, and allowing them to be publicly sold next Door to
their Meeting Place, by one of their own Profession.

If it happen that few or none of the abovementioned Persons shall be present
at the said Meeting, being conscious to themselves of the badness of their
Cause, yet I do hereby declare and publish my full intention to be present,
(God willing) with my Friends, at the said Place and Time appointed, to make
good the Charges against them. And any moderate and Friendly People of other
Professions, have freedom to be present, so far as there is room in the place
to receive them, without Crowd or Throng, to hear what shall be said and proved
in these matters abovementioned.

GEORGE KEITH.
London, the 11th day of the Third Month, called May, 1696.
And here I think fit to give a true Account of the Just Cause I have to
intimate such a Meeting.
IN my book called, A Seasonable Information and Caveat, against a scandalous
book of Th. Elwood, I made a profer to Th. Elwood, to meet him at any Place and
Time that he would appoint, to prove him guilty of gross Forgery in matters of
Fact, etc. and also of false Doctrine: But he did no wise assent to any such
proffer, nor gave any rational Excuse for his Rufusal (pretending, he would not
give G K. an Opportunity to gratify the Rabble, and disgrace his Profession he
yet made of Truth, by so public a discovery of his ungoverned Passions). [What
is this but great hypocrisy? And no doubt, if he or his Party thought to get
any advantage against me, such a Public Appearance, either in regard of the
Cause, or of what he and they call my ungoverned Passions, they would greedily
embrace it: But the reality of the matter is, they are not willing their great
injustice, as well as their insolent carriage, and most unruly Passions in
clandestine places, should be discovered; shutting the doors upon all but
themselves, that none that were equal and impartial Hearers and Observers might
be present, to be a check to their rude and insolent carriage against me, many
speaking to me at once, which some among themselves reproved at the first
Yearly Meeting, I appeared among them. Thus they seek to murder the Reputation
of the Innocent in secret places.] And instead of assenting to my just proffer,
he prints another book against me, filled with more than double (to what was in
his former book) of Forgeries, Perversions, False Accusations and
Misrepresentations. And I having neither time, nor ability of outward Estate,
to print Answers to him and others, that heap book upon book against me, with
no charge to them, (they having got a way without any charge or cost to them,
to Print what they please). And things being thus,

I appeal to all moderate persons, whether this my intimation of such a
Meeting, in the defense of the Fundamental Doctrines of Christianity, as the
necessity of Faith in Christ, as he outwardly suffered at Jerusalem to our
Salvation, Justification and Sanctification, by the Blood of Christ outwardly
shed, the Resurrection of the Body that dies, and Christ's coming without us,
in his Glorified Body, even the same that formerly suffered Death for our sins,
to Judge the Quick and the Dead: All which I offer to prove have been opposed
and contradicted by some of them, being the common Faith generally and in
common professed by Christians in all professions, and for the defense of
which, all sincere Christians are jointly concerned, and also in my just
vindication, both as a man and a Christian, be not justifiable and commendable,
it being the best way I have at present to clear the Truth and my Innocence,
and discover their great injustice toward me, and to Answer the proud and
insulting boastings of my Adversaries.

And whereas in my late Book, called, A short List of some of the vile and
gross Errors of Geo. Whitehead, etc. I proposed a just demand to William Penn,
to give me an Opportunity for him to make good his Charge against me at any
public Meeting of the People called Quakers, in or about London; instead of
his assenting to my just Demand, there comes forth a Third Book of Tho. Elwood,
multiplying his gross Forgeries, Defamations, and Misrepresentations against
me, and also containing most false and Antichristian Doctrine, to the great
dishonor of the blessed Name of Christ, and the Christian Religion. And as if
G. W. and W. P. were not alive, or not able to Answer for themselves, he will
needs Answer for them; and the said Tho. Elwood puts a most impudent and
notorious perversion upon my plain words, in my Proposition to W. Penn, saying
of me, as he has worded his Demand, he seems to have bespoke a Public Meeting
that he might have done it himself; see page 159. and page 160. of his Truth
defended. As if (says he) he wanted such an Opportunity to prove himself an
Apostate. Let the Reader but read my words in my own Book, and at the first
sight he will see the Cheat and Forgery. Observe Reader my words, p. 32. And
let him signify to me the time and place where he will make it to appear. (I
say not when I will) that his Charge against me is true.

May I not well say, that ever such a gross and impudent Forgerer, Wrester and
Perverter of a Man's words, should be allowed or permitted to be an Agent,
Patron, or Champion for what they call the Body of the People named Quakers,
and their Ministry, is a sign that they are at a low Ebb, when they make use of
such Tools as T. E. is, whom I can, and do offer to prove not only to be guilty
of gross Forgeries and Perversions, and Antichristian Principles, but grossly
ignorant (in that which he pretends to have knowledge) -- of Humane Learning;
and who is guilty of Pedantick trifling and quibbling, from mere Errors of the
Press, not so duly corrected, yet obvious to any intelligent Reader.

And to my demanding the like Justice to be done me, as some Years ago we
demanded of the Baptists, against Thomas Hicks, he answers in his last book,
falsely called, Truth defended, page 158. That betwixt that and this of mine,
there is in parallel: For (says he) in that there was a people concerned on
each side, etc. Whereas W. P 's calling G. K. Apostate, affects no body that I
know of (says T. E.) but himself and himself, but justly: neither is G. K. of
any People now, so far as I can understand.

Now Reader consider (and judge by this Taste in the End of his Cask, what sort
of Liquor fills the whole), W. P 's calling G. K. Apostate, affects no body
that he knows of but himself. If this were true, as it is most false, is it not
most unjust Reasoning? G. K. is but one, and the charge of Apostate affects no
body but himself; therefore he must not have Right done to him, nor must his
complaint be heard of his being wronged. Has not every single person as real
and true Right to Justice, as a great number? Otherwise he must Justify all the
Persecutions and Murders that have been acted upon single persons, who have
had none perhaps to own them but God alone. But T. E. knows that G. K. has
Wife and Children that are affected with this unjust charge of W. P. tending to
the exposing of them to ruin and want. If so be either W. P. or T. E. could
beget an universal persuasion in people, that his Charge is true, but that T.
E. says, the Charge affects me justly, is his begging the Question, which
neither he, nor any else can prove; for they cannot prove that I am declined in
the least, from any Principles or Practices of Christianity that I formerly
professed: But that without any change of Principles, from what I formerly
professed, ever since I was owned by the people called Quakers, I understand
better some places of Scripture; and that God has been pleased of late Years
further to enlighten me, and enable me more clearly to conceive, and more
distinctly and safely to hold forth the same Principles of my Faith formerly
received by me, is no sign of my Apostasy, but of my growth in the Truth, and
in the knowledge of it.

And whereas there is one thing they mightily aggravate against me, and think
they have caught me in a great Contradiction, that some time ago I had an
Opinion of G. Whitehead and W. Penn, and some others, as being men of sound
Principles, and of late I have charged them to the contrary. But to this I
Answer, This is no contradiction in Principle, or matter of Doctrine; the most
it argues, is, that I have been mistaken in these men: but I never heard that
a mistake only in men's persons; was ever made a Badge or Character of Apostasy.
But they have no advantage against me in respect of the change of my Opinion of
these men, but I have the same advantage against them; for they have as much
changed their Opinion of me as I have of them. And what change of Opinion: I
have had of them, is occasioned by themselves, in their late cloaking and
excusing vile Errors, which at last, by a more diligent search into their books
(than formerly I made) I found them guilty of. But whereas T. E. says, G. K.
is of no people now, so far as he can understand; I value not what he
understands in the case; I was then, and now am a Member of Christ's body, which
is his Church, that is not limited to this or that particular Society; nor was
I ever so strait in my Charity, to think none the people of God but them called
Quakers. And notwithstanding their Bull of Excommunication against me, from a
prevailing Party or Faction in the last Yearly Meeting, I have been since well
owned, and my Testimony well received at a considerable number of Meetings
within not many miles from London, and many of them owned to be Friends and
members of the same body, whereof he professes himself a member. And if it
were necessary, I could easily bring a proof, that some, owned as his
fellow members, do own me more than they own him. And it is well known, that
these Abuses I have met with from T. E. and W. P. and the prevailing Faction in
the last Yearly Meeting, have affected many honest and Conscientious People
called Quakers, in diverse places, and have been a great scandal and offense to
them.

However, to take away all pretense of Excuse from T. E. and stop his mouth in
the Case, he may see where a Meeting of People have publicly owned me, and my
Christian Testimony, in their printed Treatise, called, A Seasonable Testimony;
(and these did own me then as now) and have disowned the unchristian and false
Excommunication given forth against me by that called; The Yearly Meeting,
1695. that gave themselves no particular designation of people, nor mentioned
any particular Meeting Place where they met, only Signed by a Raw Young Man,
that serves for his Salary, and dared not but Sign what they enjoined him, for
fear of losing his hire.

G. K.

THE Proceedings at TVRNERS-HALL BETWEEN G. KEITH, and Other QVAKERS.
AT the Opening of the Meeting, when G. K. stood up to make some Introductory
Speech to give an Account of the Occasion of the Meeting, Henry Goldney, with
some other Quakers of W. Pens Party, came with a Printed Paper, giving some
Reasons why W. Pen and Geo. Whitehead did not appear, which he desired might be
read.

It was readily granted; and the Reasons why W. Penn and G. Whitehead did not
appear, were read by G. Keith.

G. Keith. Now if ye think it has not been well read, let another read it, if
you think fit; And I offer to Answer to every one of the Reasons, if you desire
it.


The Auditory. No, it is needless.


G. Keith. This is their design, to divert us in our Business. The Reasons are
so slender, that I hope every Judicious Person here can answer them. If I am
such an angry person as they represent me, I shall lay my self the more open,
and they shall have the greater Advantage. You know well enough that they would
be glad of any Advantage against me. And then for any Offense to Authority, as
they suggest, I have the Lord Mayors leave; and he has sent his Marshal to
preserve the Peace, and therefore there can be nothing in that. Their Paper
rather reflects upon Authority, the Authority of the Worthy Mayor of this
Famous City; to whom I went, as I thought it was my Duty, to desire leave for
this Meeting; which he thought fit to consent to, and has sent his Marshal to
keep the Peace.

And I would have you to take Notice now, that they, viz. W. P. and G. W. own
those Books of Thomas Elwoods, etc. that are out against me, that I knew not
before. I went to G. Whitehead, and desired to know whether he owned a former
Book of Thomas Elwood writ against me: He said, he would neither own it, nor
disown it. And this is enough at present to Answer this Paper.

I hope in God, the Lord shall preserve me, which has been my Prayer on my
Knees this Morning, and many other times, that I might give no occasion of
Reproach to his Name or Truth, and that Religion may not be scandalized by any
thing I shall speak or act; and I hope my Prayers shall be answered.

They say, I did not exhibit to them a Copy of my Charge against them, (an
Indictment they call it, they would represent me as a Man setting up a
Spiritual Court) but my Printed Paper says, W. Penn, and G. Whitehead, are
justly desired to be present. This is no Indictment nor Summons, as they falsely
call it: And for the particulars I intend to prove against them, they were
expressly mentioned in my Printed Paper, called An Advertisement, containing
Four Fundamental Doctrines of Christianity by them opposed. I desired W. Penn
to make good his Charge against me, in a former Printed Paper, which was, That
I was an Apostate and Impostour, endeavoring to pluck up the Testimony of
Truth by the roots. This he said at a Meeting at Ratcliffe, above Fourteen
Months ago, and while I was peaceably speaking in that Meeting he interrupts
me, and like a Clap of Thunder falls on me in the midst of my Testimony, calls
me, Aposta^e, etc. I desired him also at the Yearly Meeting of the Quakers at
London held 1695. to make good his Charge, and I told him, If he refused, I
would put him to prove it in the face of the Nation. He justified his calling
me Apostate, saying, He was in no Passion, but he was so transported by the
Glorious Power of God, that he knew not whether he was Standing, Sitting or
Kneeling. And since I have in Print desired him to prove his Charge, and now at
this Meeting; but he declines to appear. Ye know the saying, Affirmanti
incumbit probatio, He ought to prove what he has affirmed.


Quaker. H. Goldnay. If those that thou did summon, had appeared, I do not
see thou had provided any convenient place for them.


G. Keith. If your Friends had appeared, they might have had a place: There
(pointing to a Table and a Bench s^t on it, opposite to the place where he
stood) is a place provided for them: If you will fetch them, they shall have a
place; or they might have been here with me where I stand.


Strangers that stood on the Table. If they come we will give place to them.


Quakers. N. M. and H. G. We came here to give an account that our Friends
think not fit to be here, and have given their Reasons for it.


G. Keith. It is a strange thing that they cannot print a Paper, but must have
so many Falsities in it. They call my Paper, a Summons and an Indictment, but I
meant it not so. But to leave that, and come to our business

The four things which I charge them to be guilty of, are these; and I appeal
to all moderate persons, whether my intimation of such a Meeting can be blamed,
when it is to defend such Points as these: Faith in Christ as he outwardly
suffered at Jerusalem to our Salvation. That is the First. Justification and
Sanctification by the Blood of Christ outwardly shed. That is the Second. The
Resurrection of the Body that dies. The Third. And Christ's coming without us
in his glorified Body, to judge the Quick and Dead. That is the Fourth. All
which have been contradicted by some of them, as W. Penn, G. Whitehead, etc.
though these are Fundamental Principles belonging to the common Faith, and are
generally owned by Christians of all Professions.

Now, if you please, I shall proceed to my Proofs Most of my business, whether
they be here or not, is to read my Proofs out of their Books, that they are
guilty of every one of these Four Errors opposing thereby Four Fundamental
Truths.

The first is, The necessity of Faith in Christ, as he outwardly suffered for
us at Jerusalem. This is the first. But that this is opposed by them, I prove
thus: The O^ject of Faith is opposed by them, and therefore the Faith it self
must needs be opposed. I hope the consequence is clear enough, it needs no
Proof.

The Object of Christian Faith is Christ, both God and Man, and yet but one
Christ. But so it is that I offer to prove, that G. Whitehead, and W. Penn by
approving of G. Whiteheads Books, has denied Christ both to be God and Man.
This is the thing, which if I make out, I make out my first Point.

And first I offer to prove that G. Whitehead in a Book of his has denied
Christ to be God, and W. Penn has owned this Book: The Book is called, Light
and Life, recommended by William Penn in his Reason against Railing, p. 186. in
Answer to W. Burnet, a Baptist Preacher, Printed, 1668. P. 47. Here he first
brings in the Baptists words. Says the Baptist, Now as he was God, he was
Co-Creator with the Father, and so was before Abraham; and had Glory with God,
before the World was, and in this sense came down from Heaven.

Now here is G. Whiteheads reply, What Nonsense and Unscriptural Language is
this? To tell of God being Co-Creator wi^h the Father, or that God had glory
with God? Does not this imply two Gods, and that God had a Father? Let the
Reader judge.

I shall read the Baptists words again, and see if there be any thing in them
offensive to Christian Ears. I hope there are not many here but understand what
Co signifies, it is with. Now see if the words of the Baptist are offensive to
Christian Ears; As he was God, he was Co-Creator with the Father. Ye know John
says, In the beginning was the word, and the word was with God, and the word
was God, John 1.1, 2. See also Prove. 8. 22,3^. If these words offend any, let
them speak with all my Heart.


Quaker. N. Mark. If I might, I desire to have liberty to speak, when was the
date of the Book?


Auditors. If you will undertake their cause, you may speak, otherwise not.


Quaker. Pray hear me. The Reason why I asked him the date of the Book, is
because I believe it was a book anciently written; and G. Keith did write in
Vindication of our Principles, and now for him to appear in opposition to our
Principles, it appears that he has apostatized from our Principles.


G. Kei^h. Now let me Answer him I do say, if it were my last words, I know not
that I ever read a line of this book till I came last to England, which is
about Two Years. And if G. Whitehead be wiser since, it is very well: But then
he should have retracted this. For this book, and some other books of his, has
leavened the minds of many in America; as well as here, with Poisonous Errors.


Stranger A Quaker. Then George Keith ought to make a candid and full
Retractation of what he has said contrary to Truth, before he appeared against
them.


G. Keith. I own I have been mistaken in these Men: But I hope this Auditory
are sufficient Judges of that, that if they cannot prove me to hold any
Doctrine contrary to my former Principles, nor any Unchristian Principle, and
that they have nothing against me Conv^rsation, they ought not to call me an
Apostate. I never heard that a Man was judged an Apostate for changing his
Opinion of some Men, especially when he finds cause so to do.


Quaker. You are fallen from your former Principles.


G. Keith. If you prove me not to have changed in any Fundamental Principle, ye
ought not to charge me to be an Apostate. I know not any Fundamental Principle,
nor indeed any one Principle of the Christian Faith, that I have varied from to
this day, ever since I came among the Quakers, which is about Thirty Three
Years ago; therefore I ought to be cleared of that Imputation.


Quaker. H. G^ldne^, began to speak.


G. Keith. Art thou deputed to Answer to what I have Charged them with?


Stranger. They have declined your Meeting, and yet several persons (it seems)
are deputed by them to speak.


Auditors. G. Keith, go on with your Charge.


G. Kei^h. There is another passage in G. Whiteheads book wherein he denies the
Divinity of Christ; and he deceives the Nation and the Parliament, by telling
them, They own Christ to be both God and Man, and believe all that is recorded
of him in the Holy Scripture, and no wonder he has deceived me. In his page 24.
Light and Life, he says, To tell of the word God Co Creator with the Father,
is all one as to tell of God being Co-Creator with God, if the Father be God,
and this is to make two Gods, two Creators, etc. For God Co-Creator with the
Father, implies two. Ye see this is positive; and he puts this Censure on the
Baptists words, Thus Nonsense, Confusion and Blasphemy is heapt up against the
Light within.


Quaker. We tell you, that whereas G. Keith has Printed several Books, they
have Answered them from time to time; and he has left two Books unanswered; and
whatever he will print to the contrary, we will defend our Principles.


G. Keith. They have a Public Stock, I have not; they are able to raise some
Thousands of Pounds sooner than G. Keith can raise an Hundred.


[Here some Noise being raised in the Meeting by some discontented persons.]
Auditors. Let there be a Moderator chosen.


G. Keith. If there be any Offense, do not charge it on me. I desire you for
the Honor of the Nation, and of the City of London, to be still. It is a Mob
from Grace Church Street to make a disturbance.

Then that passage in G. Whiteheads book was read again.

See here the Son of God, his Eternal Generation is denied. If he had a Father,
then there are two Gods. And here is as plain a denying Christ to be God, as
any Socinian can be guilty of.


Quaker. Not. Mark. The casual dropping of words is no proof.


G. Keith. I have proved to you already he disowns Christ to be God. Now I will
prove he has denied him to be Man: And then there is that great Article of our
Faith lost, and the Object of the Christian Faith denied. Here is G. Whiteheads
Answer to T. Dansons Synopsis of Quakerism, as he calls it, p. 18. This is in
the book called, The Divinity of Christ asserted, (recommended by W. Penn,
Reason against Railing, p. 185.)

See how G. Whitehead takes him up, and how he banters him: If the Body and
Soul of the Son of God were both created, does not this render him a Fourth
Person, etc. But the stress I lay is in the words following; But herein whether
does not his and their ignorance of the only begotten of the Father plainly
appear: Where does the Scripture say, that his Soul was created? For was not he
the brightness of the Fathers glory, and the express Image of his Divine
Substance? But supposing the Soul of Christ was (with the Body) created in
time, etc. Here ye see, he will not own that Christ had a Created Soul. Th.
Danson, being a Presbyterian Minister did plead, That Christ as Man had a
created Soul. This G. W. makes an inconsistency, as if he could not be God
also. This was the Error of Apollinarius, who said, Christ was without a
Humane Soul, for he was the express Image of his Father. But supposing the Soul
of Christ were created with the Body, etc. That which I would have you take
notice of, is this, Where does the Scripture say his Soul was created?


Quaker. Wait. That was only a Question.


G. Keith. Well, it was his way of Disputing, as is ordinary to him, and many
others. An^ such way of Questioning plainly imperteth a Denial.

Next I prove, that G. Whitehead says* He has not the Body of a Man. And then I
hope I shall have performed what I promised. See his Nature of Christianity, p.
29, 41. Here I undertake to prove, that G. Whitehead denies that Christ in
Heaven has any Bodily Existence without us. It he has said otherwise in any of
his late Printed Books, I am glad of it. But let him retract these, for these
have done much mischief. Now when I said he was Orthodox, I mean not as he was
Heterodox: For there is a G. Whitehead Orthodox, and a G. Whitehead not
Orthodox: I did not know G. Whitehead not Orthodox till lately. I do not say
there are two persons in George Whitehead; he is but one and the same person,
(in this and some other things) Orthodox and not Orthodox, George Whitehead
contradicting George Whitehead; he is accountable for these Contradictions and
not I. I own it, that I have cited diverse passages out of his later books that
are Orthodox to prove him sound; but I did not then know, when I so cited him,
that he was guilty of such gross Errors, as since I have found by a further
search into his books. Let him retract his Errors, and well enjoy his
Orthodoxy. Ye know contradictory Propositions cannot be both true.

I shall read to you, p. 29, 41. of his Nature of Christianity. (This is
posteriour to his former book). In Page 29. Or do thou look for Christ, as
the Son of Mary, to appear outwardly in a Bodily Existence to save thee,
according to thy words, page 30. If thou do, thou may look until thy E^es
drop out, before thou will see such an appearance of him. This is but one
place, that is, that Christ will not so appear. But why will he not so appear,
but because he has no Bodily Existence without us. That I come now to prove;
for which I shall read to you in his page 41. And that he existeth outwardly,
bodily, without us at God's right Hand: What Scripture Proof has he for these
Words? And then what and where is God's right Hand? Is it visibl^ or invisible?
within us, or without us only? And is Christ the Savior, as an outward bodily
Existence or Person without us, distinct from God, and on that Consideration to
be worshipped as God, yea or nay? And where does the Scripture say he is
outwardly and bodily glorified at God's right Hand? Do these Days express the
Glory that he had with the Father before the World began, in which he is now
glorified? And where does the Scripture say? And here is the thing that rivets.
Where does the Scripture say, that he is outwardly and bodily glorified at
God's right Hand? Do these Terms express the Glory that he had with the Father
before the World began?

Now G. Whitehead's way of writing, is to question his Adversaries, which is
the Socratical way of disputing and arguing against his Adversary.

But let me go on. Again, see his Book called, Christ ascended above the
Clouds. All that I have yet cited out of G. Whitehead's Book, Light and Life,
and that of the Divinity of Christ, and Nature of Christianity, W. Penn has
owned them all in his Reasons against Railing, page 185, 186. This Book was
printed, (and also this called Christ ascended above the Clouds) Anno 1669. Now
for the Page and Matter, p. 21, 22. John Newman his Opponent's Words were from
Rev. 1.7. Those that pierced him in his Body of Flesh, shall see that Body
visibly come again. G. W. answers, These are not the Words of Scripture, but
added, Although to add or diminish be forbidden under a Penalty, Rev. 22.18, 19.
yet this Man's Presumption leads him to incur that; -- And Christ in the Days
of his Flesh (when he visibly appeared to the World) said, Yet a little while
and the World sees me no more. Now again I shall read to you John Newman's
Words which G. W. does so much blame: From Rev. 1.7. Those that pierced him in
his Body of Flesh, shall see that Body visibly come again. Is there any thing
here offensive? Nothing but what is the declared Opinion of the Church of Rome,
the Church of England, the Presbyterians, Independents, Baptists, and mine, all
along, tho I have been a Quaker near about 34 Years.


Quaker. Then it is much that in 34 Years thou should not correct them before.


G. Keith. This Assertion that G. Whitehead charges with Heresy, see how he
answers it; These are not the Words of Scripture, but added, although to add or
diminish be forbidden under a Penalty. Why, John Newman here only uses the word
Body to his coming again, and G. Whitehead finds fault with that; and G. W.
brings a Proof from John 14.19. Yet a little while and the World sees me no
more: that those that pierced Christ in his Body shall not see that Body
visibly come again. Here is a Proof that Christ was evanished: The World shall
see me no more. The Translation will not prove G. Whitehead's Position even as
it is. But it may be better translated as yet, Yet a little while and the World
shall not see me: As yet, the Greek being (...) is not, (...) yet, i. e.
nondum, or not as yet. Does this prove that Christ has no Body at all? This is
very bad Reasoning.


Quaker. If the Translation be not good, why do you make use of it?


Note, There is an additional Postscript by me G. K. put to this Book of G. W.
Nature of Christianity, the which Postscript I left in a Manuscript at London,
and with the Quakers, printed with this of G. W. I acknowledge my want of due
Consideration that I did not better consider G. W. his Words in that Book,
having many Years ago read it, but too overly, and not having seen it since,
for many Years, till of late: but I am sure I did really then believe, (as I
now do) that Christ as Man did outwardly and bodily exist without us; for Proof
of which see my Words in that additional Postscript abovementioned, p. 73.
where at n. 11. I blame R. G. for saying, That the now present glorified
Existence of that Body (or Man Christ) that suffered at Jerusalem, is denied by
some Teachers among us. I confess I happened to find diverse Passages in G.
W.'s, and other Quakers Books, that seemed to me unsound; but in an Excess of
Charity I did construe them to be better meant than worded, and that they had
rather unwarily slipped from them, than that they were the Expressions of their
unsound Mind, until that of late I had found them to justify the same, and the
like unsound Words, in my Adversaries in Pensilvania, and to hate and
excommunicate me for telling them of them.
G. Keith. I own it a good Translation, and Thanks be to God we have such a
Translation; ^et that in some Places it may be better translated, the Quakers
themselves, as well as all (...) Professions, do acknowledge, (such as have a
little Hebrew or Greek) that is one (...) there are two or three Places more. I
will give you only a few of my Proofs, and (...) rest to a further Opportunity.
P. 24. says J. Newman, By denying any person (...) ^^ing of Christ, without all
Men, at the right Hand of God, but only a feigned (...) within, then Remission
of Sins must die, and Faith also, for want of the Object (...). This I look on
to be good Doctrine. And if you deny that, ( G. K. turning (...) to his
Opponents, Henry Goldney and Nathaniel Mark, who spoke by turns, sometimes
one, and sometimes another, and stood close by him in the Gallery, a Favor his
Adversaries would scarce have allowed to him, in any such Dispute, at
Grace Church Street- Meeting Place, or elsewhere) ye may speak; to which they
not replying, G. K. further said, I think this is a good Deduction. Now to this
G. Whitehead answers, p. 29. (I defend not J. Newman in all he owns, but so far
as he holds the Truth: And if a Papist say the Truth against a Jew, I am
engaged to defend him in it) This manner of excluding God's right Hand and
Christ to a Limitation out of his People in a personal Being, which are no
Scripture-terms, still implies him to be a personal God or Christ, like the
Anthropomorphites and Muggletonians Conceits of him. And again, page 69. he
says: And these Words, Christ in Person remote in his Body of Flesh, etc. and
not in any Man, are not Scripture, but added. What strange Conceits would J. N.
put upon the unlimited God, like the old heretical Monks of Egypt, called
Anthropomorphites. By these Words of G. W. all Papists, Church of England-men,
Presbyterians, Independents, Baptists, who believe that the Man Christ has any
bodily Existence in Heaven, as he thinks, are Anthropomorphites and
Muggletonians. So you see all of you are Muggletonians as well as I.

But mark the Words of John Newman abovementioned, which are sound; and I say,
whoever under a Christian Profession deny Christ to have any personal or bodily
Existence without us in Heaven, whatever Notion they may have of Christ within,
it is but a feigned Christ within; but who have the true Knowledge and Faith of
Christ within, to wit, of his Spirit, Light and Grace within, that leads them
to own and confess to the Man Christ without, as well as to his Spirit within.
There is no Church-of- England-man, Presbyterian or Baptist, etc. that holds
that Notion, that the Godhead has the Shape of a Man; but the Manhood of Christ
has the true Nature of Man. And what Shape Christ's Body has now, that I leave,
but I believe he has the self-same Body in Heaven that he had on Earth; the
same I say for Substance and Essence of Body, tho wonderfully changed in Manner
and Condition.


Another Quaker. Then you reflect on an Act of Parliament which allows the
Translation of the Scriptures, if they be not truly translated, [ Note, This
Man's Impertinency and Prejudice, as if to say a Place of Scripture may be
better translated, which all the Learned of all Professions of English
Protestants do allow, were a Reflection on the Parliament: how earnest is this
Man with other of his Brethren, to make the Innocent an Offender? Is this your
Christianity?]


G. Keith. Here is a Book of G. Whitehead's, called, The He-goats Horn broken.
I hope this Meeting will give Satisfaction to many; and therefore that it may
be profitable, I desire you to keep Silence.


Quaker N. Mark. I have a Proposition to make. I would not interrupt, but I
desire to be heard, if I may have leave.


G. Keith. Will you (speaking to them all four that spoke sometimes one and
sometimes another) take upon you to vindicate your Friends? then you may say
what you will.


Quaker. George, I desire thy Leave to be heard.


G. Keith. If you will but speak briefly.


Quaker N. Mark. The Proposition is this: 1. I tell you I am here accidentally.
2. I observe that G. Keith takes the Liberty of putting his own Interpretation
on the Passages of several Books; and since G. K. has departed from the
Quakers, he has taken on him to write several Books, which are extant; and over
and over he makes his Appeal to this Assembly; which I desire you to consider
how improper and impracticable it is to decide it here. Therefore what he
purposed to urge here, if he will print it, and proceed no further in this
Meeting, I will be at the Charge of whatever he shall print.


G. Keith. I say, If he would lay me down five hundred Pounds, I would not
break up this Meeting till it is over.


Stranger. He will pay for it, i. e. N. Marks.


G. Keith. But it is upon Terms.


Quaker, Began to speak, [thus they often sought to interrupt him to divert the
Proofs.]


G. Keith. Thou know thou art not so qualified to speak in this Auditory.
Let me go on with my Proofs. I prove further, that G. Whitehead writing against
one Jo. Horn, reflects on him scornfully, he calls his Book the He-goats Horn
broken. Now see whether G. Whitehead has not broken his own Horn rather. It is
a Shame, the Reflections they have made on Men sounder than themselves. Let me
read the Words; The He-goats Horn broken, or Innocence, etc. in answer to two
Books against the Quakers, Printed, London, 1660. Now if I understand any thing
of true Divinity or Theology, the Passage this Man or Men (for there are two of
them) lays down here, is a sound Passage, which G. Whitehead contradicts. Now
here is the Passage, and do you judge of it. And where we lay down this as Tho.
Moor's Principle, That their Nature is restored in Christ, and that their
Nature is a filthy Nature. This they say is falsely expressed and perverted, and
yet J. H. and T. M. a little after say thus, viz. That our Nature, Kind or
Being, as in us, not in Christ, is corrupt and filthy in it self; yet Christ
took upon him our Nature, not as it is filthy in us by Sin in it. And they say,
That we might as well have taxed the Apostle of Confusion, for saying, Men by
Nature do the things contained in the Law; p. 11, 12. Now here is G.
Whitehead's Answer, We may justly tax these Men for Confusion indeed, but not
the Apostle; for here they cannot discern between the sinful Nature and the
pure Nature, for the Nature of Christ is pure; so that it is not their Nature,
for their Nature is filthy, and therefore it is not in Christ. Observe, Christ
did not take upon him Jo. Horn's Nature. No, says he. As I have often told G.
Whitehead, that he and W. Penn will needs embrace false Notions in Philosophy,
they will needs seem to be Philosophers by Divine Inspiration, as well as
Ministers and Preachers by it. But it is a sad thing, that their false
Philosophy should destroy their Faith. Now here is a false Notion, that Christ
could not take on him Man's Nature, except he took on him the Pollution of it.
As if the Pollution of Sin were an essential Attribute of Man's Nature. Now
Sin, if it be like Scarlet, is no more essential to the Nature of Man, than
Filth to a Garment: for a Garment is the same Garment still, whether it be
filthy or clean. Therefore I say, our blessed Lord might well take on him our
Nature, and the Nature in us be sinful, and in him pure and holy. And Jo. Horn
distinguishes so. Now judge ye whether G. Whitehead has broken Jo. Horn's Horn,
yea or no; or rather whether has he not broken his own Horn?

Thus I have done as to the Object of Faith, at present at least. Now I come to
the Act of Faith, or the Virtue of Faith. See for the Proofs, William Penn his
Quakerism, a new Nickname for old Christianity, p. 12. Printed Anno 1672. This
Book is without the Printer's Name, and most of W. Penn's Books are without it,
tho they persecuted William Bradford in Philadelphia for printing some of my
Books without putting his Name. Here is the Point, Jo. Faldo makes this Charge
against the Quakers, p. 12. Christianity was introduced by preaching the
promised Messiah, and pointing at his humane Person, but Quakerism by preaching
a Light within. Now if I had this to answer, I would have said, Any Quakerism I
know of, that I learned, was introduced into my Heart both by believing in
Christ without, and in Christ within, (at once, and by one Faith) but instead
of that he answers thus: I answer, That this is nothing injurious to the
Quakers at all, but highly on their side, for had they preached a Christ now
coming in the Flesh, they had dented his true and only great visible Appearance
at Jerusalem, which all true Quak^rs own. Since t^en they believe that
Appearance, but therefore need not preach wh^t is not to be again: And that the
whole Christian World besides have so long and lazily depended on it, without
their thirsting after his inward holy Appearance in the Conscience, etc.

This is the thing I come to; Since then they believe that Appearance, but
therefore need not preach what is not to be again; if every one of them believe
there was such a Man that was born of a Virgin, and died for our Sins sixteen
hundred Years ago, they therefore need not preach that he was so born, or that
he died for our Sins, etc. Christ is not to be born again, is not to die again,
etc. We need not preach it, but throw it over the Shoulder, and give it up and
bury it in Oblivion from Posterity. Judge if this ^e not the true Consequence.
Let them retract these Errors, and not say I am an Apostate for telling them of
them: As I told G. Whitehead, there are Errors in thy Books as well as others,
and either thou or I must correct them, and he was very angry with me. Let them
retract them, and not count me a Liar for telling them of them. But let me
again r^ad out the entire Paragraph. Since then they believe that Appearance,
but therefore need not preach what is not to be again. There it clinches, they
need not preach what is not to be again And by this same Argument they need not
preach his Example of holy Life, nor the Example of the holy Lives of the
Patriarchs, Prophets and Apostles, nor the Creation of the World, nor any of
God's gracious Providence toward his Church and People in former Ages, they
all being past, and Persons not to live again in Mortal Bodies. But why do the
Quakers labor to keep up the the Remembrance of their deceased Friends, and
their Works and Sayings, and collect them in Print for Posterity? Is not the
keeping in Memory the Birth, Life, Death and Resurrection, etc. of our Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ infinitely of more Value to be remembered? and what is the
way to have it remembered (according to God's ordinary manner of working) if not
by preaching? O what great Blindness and Ignorance is this of W. Penns!
. Take notice also of his uncharitable dealing here; if he had said many, it
might have past. But he says the whole Christian World has lazily depended on
it. Is there none in the Christian World but the Quakers, that thirst after the
Power of God in their Souls? I was never so uncharitable to think so. There is
more yet, p. 6. The Distinction between Moral and Christian. The making holy
Life legal, (I know none that do so of any that are sincere in all the
Professions in Christendon) and Faith in the History of Christ's outward
Manifestation, has been a deadly Poison these latter Ages have been infected
with, to the Destruction of God^y Living, and apostatizing of those Churches,
etc. Another Proof I bring against W. Penn is out of his Address to
Protestants, p. 119. printed 1692. the second Edition corrected and enlarged:
But this Passage remains in it however. I will begin a little before the main
thing: For it seems, p. 118. a most unreasonable thing, that Faith in God, and
in keeping his Commands should be no part of the Christian Religion: But if a
part it be, as upon serious Reflection who dare deny it, then those before and
since Christ's time who never had the external Law, and have done the things
contained in the Law, their Consciences not accusing, nor Hearts condemning,
but excusing them before God, are in some degree concerned in the Character of
a true Christian; for Christ himself preached and kept his Father's
Commandments, and came to fulfill and not destroy the Law, and that not only in
his own Person, but that the Righteousness of the Law might also be fulfilled
in us. Now comes the main thing. Let us but soberly consider what Christ is,
and we shall the better know, whether Moral Men are to be reckoned Christians.
What is Christ but Meekness, Justice, Mercy, Patience Charity, and Virtue in
Perfection? Can we then deny a meek Man to be a Christian, a just, a merciful,
a patient, a charitable and virtuous Man to be like Christ? But in this way of
arguing there is a Fallacy; these Moral Virtues are a Part of a Christian, as
Animal is a part of the Definition of a Man, and belong to the Genus of a
Christian. But there are two things in the true Definition of a Man, the Genus
and the Differentia: they have the Genus, but not the Differentia; therefore it
is true to say, every Man is an Animal; but it is not true nor good Logic to
say, every Animal is a Man. Let us but soberly consider (says William Penn)
what Christ is, what is Christ but Meekness, and Justice, and Mercy, and
Patience? And now take notice, (I would not misconstrue what I have read) by
William Penn's Argument, a Man may be owned to be a Christian, and yet
disbelieve that Christ is either God or Man; if he own or practice a Habit or
Quality of Moral Virtue, as that of Justice, and Meekness, etc. and practice
accordingly, tho he believe not in Christ, if he have but some Moral Habits: So
that here the Jew is the Christian, the Mohammedan is the Christian, the Pagan
is the Christian, and the professed Pelagian is the Christian, tho they deny
any inward supernatural Principle, and call the Light within only natural, as
many sober and moral Men do; why then have they so fiercely contended against
such Men, denying them to be Christians, in whom as much of Mora^ity has
appeared as in many of t^em? But it is strange to heathenise all Christendom
through, calling them the World, and christianise Heathens for their Morality.
See again the Christian Quaker, p. 125, 126, 127. let me but recommend it to
you to read the Book. This Christian Quaker it is a Folio Book, he bestows
about three Pages to define what a Christian Quaker is. In all this large
De^^nition, not one word of the Man Christ (who is God over all blessed for
ever) to be the Object, either of this Christian Quaker's Faith, Love or
Homage: it is too large to reci^e, but I recommend it to you to read it, and
shall go to the next.

Again, see the Preface to R. Barclay's great Volume, p. 36. where he makes the
Work of Regeneration greater than the Manifestation of the Son of God in the
Flesh. R. Barclay is my Countryman, I will not be partial to him on that
account; but I do not now blame any thing in his Book, I know he is the
soundest Writer among them. But the thing I blame, is a Preface supposed to be
writ by W. Penn, and, however, commended by G. Whitehead and some others: By
the Style it is thought to be W. Penn's, and it commonly goes under his Name.
These are the Words: O Reader! great is the Mystery of Godliness! And if the
Apostle said it of the Manifestation of the Son of God in the Flesh, if that be
a Mystery, (and if a Mystery, it is not to be spelt out but by the Revelation
of the Spirit) how much more is the Work of Regeneration a Mystery, that is
wholly inward and spiritual in its Operation? Who is sufficient for these
things? Now pray take notice, that I tell you, I cast no Reflection on R.
Barclay, I blame nothing at present in his Books, tho there may be things both
in his Books and mine that may need Correction. If there be any Reflection on
him, it is chiefly this, that such an unsound Preface should be put to his
Book, for I can sufficiently prove, that R. Barclay's Doctrine is plainly
Antipodes to this Doctrine See his and my Answer to the Students in Aberdeer,
called Quakerism confirmed, in the Collection of his Works, called, Truth
triumphant, page 627. Prop. 3. we say, That the same Seed and Life is in us
which was in him, (viz. the Man Christ) and is in him in the Fullness, as Water
in the Spring, and in us as the Stream. -- As the natural Life is in all the
Members, but more principally in the Head and Heart, without any Division; so
this spiritual Life and Nature is both in Christ our Head, and in us, by which
he dwells in us, as the Spirit of Man does in the Body.

Again, p. 628. Prop. 10. As for the Satisfaction of Chritst without us, we own
it against the Socinians, etc. And page 629. The Doctrines of the Incarnation,
Sufferings, Death and Resurrection of Christ, etc. are necessary every where to
be preached: See the Places at more length, than which nothing can be more
contradictory than W. Penn's Doctrine, as will appear in diverse Places in this
Treatise, from his own Words faithfully quoted out of his Books.


. O Reader, great is the Mystery of Godliness; for which is cited 1 Timothy 3.16.
Great is the M^stery of Godliness, God manifest in the Flesh, etc. which all
Christendom judge to be God manifest in Christ's outward Body of Flesh, and but
consequentially of his Spirit and Grace in Men and I think it is the greatest
Mystery next to that of the Holy Three in One, and One in Three; the
Manifestation of the Son of God in that Body of Flesh is next to that. Now you
see how he makes Regeneration in a Believer a greater Mystery than the
Manifestation of the Son of God in his Body of Flesh; How much more, says he,
is the Work of Regeneration a Mystery? For the other here, 1 Timothy 3.^6. he does
not say it is a Mystery, but he puts three ifs to it, If a M^stery, etc. Pray
was our blessed Lord a mere Shell? Was he like the Shell of an Egg without the
Meat of an Egg? or was he like the Shell of any Fruit, and no Kernel in it? Was
there any Holiness ever in any Prophet or Apostle, but it is like a Drop to the
Ocean to what was in ^ur blessed Lord? Therefore to compare the Work of
Regeneration to the Incarnation of our Lord, so as to equal it, (he prefers it,
and does not equal it only) I appeal to you, whether is it not a most
abominable Error, and whether it does not make every regenerate Man not only
equal to the Man Christ, but greater; for we truly value any Man as more holy,
according as the Manifestation of God is more in one Man than in another. It is
not enough, to say, he has unadvisedly dropped this Doctrine, but it is his main
Aim in diverse of his Books: See W. Penn's Rejoinder, p. 330, 337, 340. where he
makes Christ in the Gentiles a greater Mystery than Christ incarnate, p. 335.
J. Faldo is now in his Grave; and I confess I never thought I should be raised
up to vindicate J. Faldo. I cannot say I ever read the fourth Part of this Book
of W. Penn's called his Rejoinder, till within this two Twelve months. But if
J. Faldo speak Truth against my Father, I must defend him against my Father.
Hear what J. Faldo says, p. 100, 101. For Christ to be in the Gentiles, rightly
understood, would be no hard Matter for the Gentiles to believe, as to believe
such a Glory to be attained by Faith in, and Obedience to the Laws of a Man,
who died as a Malefactor, and that this Death of his should reconcile God to
Man, with the Addition of such a Purchase To this W. Penn answers, This sort
of Doctrine will becomes John Faldo, I perceive I have not mistaken him. What
Carnalist in the World could have let drop a more perricious Sentence to the
Doctrine and Kingdom of Christ, than to render it more difficult to believe,
and lay a greater stress upon the external than the internal Work of Christ? we
must read the most weighty Scriptures backwards upon this Man's Principles, he
has helped us to a new way of rendering the Text; not this Mystery among the
Gentiles is Christ in you the Hope of Glory, but this Mystery among the
G^n^il^s is a Man who died as a Malefactor, by his Death reconciled to God,
etc. Behold your Expositor! I dare warrant this Man's Comment will never
trouble the next Collection of Critics. At this rate the Lord, Lord Criar is
highly privileged, and the Galatians had passed the most difficult Birth before
they had known Christ to be formed in them. Regeneration is a slight thing in
comparison of the Knowledge of Christ after the Flesh. This Doctrine brings not
Men to Christ in them the Hope of Glory, but inticeth them into the vain Hope
of the Hypocrisy which perishes: the History is made the greatest Mystery; and
to believe the one, matter of greater Difficulty than to experience the other.
-- It Is strange that should be reputed most mysterious which was the
Introduction to the Mystery, and those Transactions counted most difficult that
were by the Divine Wisdom of God ordained as so many facile Representations of
what was to be accomplished in Man.

In short, it is to lessen if not totally to exclude the true Mystery of
Godliness which is Christ manifested in his Children, their Hope of Glory.

We had wont to say, All other Professions denied Christ within but here J.
Faldo owns Christ to be in the Gentiles rightly understood. But to me Christ
crucified, in whom the Fullness dwell th, is a greater Mystery, and a greater
Matter to be believed. I can show many of the Philosophers that owned the Light
within, under the Denomination of the Word, Light, Spirit, etc. yet it was so
hard for them to believe that a Man that was crucified as a Malefactor should
die for their Sins. Yea Julian the Apostate, and Porphirius, professed and
owned a Divine Principle within, [as generally the Platonist Philosophers did,
and Aristotle also] but Christ crucified they could not away with. And now it
is a Stumbling Block to these Quakers. This sort of Doctrine well becomes J.
Faldo. See how he hanters him. W. Penn thinks it is a Matter of little or no
Difficulty to believe God sent Christ to die for Sinners, and to reconcile God
to Men by his Death. But Christ told the Jews, This is the Work of God, John
6.29. that ye believe on him whom he has sent And surely that was the Man
Christ Jesus. And he said also, No Man can come unto me, ex^ept the Father
which has sent me draw him, John 6.44. And every one that has heard and
learned ^f the Father comes to me, ver. 45. Now to come to him is the same as
to believe in him with a true saving Faith. So that it is plain, he teaches the
Jews that they cannot believe in Christ (that appear^d outwardly among them)
whom God has sent, but as they are taught of God and drawn of him. And yet W.
Penn makes it inseriour to Reg^neration, as you may see by his Words: [Whereas
true saving Faith in Christ crucified, who died as a Malefactor, to reconcile
us to God, is a great and principal Part of Regeneration, and is as great a
Work of God, as to make us believe Christ's inward Appearance in us]. But says
William Penn, "Behold your Expositor! I dare warrant this Man's Comment will
never trouble the next "Collection of Critics, etc. A rare way to refute him,
to banter him at this rate. Now I will give you my Sense. I do not reckon J.
Faldo was so ignorant a Man, that he believed a Man could be a Christian only
with a traditional Knowledge or Faith of Christ without him. But tho
Regeneration is no slight thing, yet I say, comparing Christ's Incarnation,
that is a Complex of Mysteries, (a certain Writer This Writer is J. Reuclinus
de verbo mirifico, lib. 3. cap. 2.
shows a Complex of twenty and more Mysteries in that one Mystery of Christ's
Incarnation) I say, comparing that with the Work of Regeneration, I do affirm
the Work of Regeneration is a light thing, tho not light in it self. Therefore
this of W. Penn is but a mere Banter. There is none of all the Church-of-
England-men, or Independents, or Presbyterians, say the mere historical,
literal, traditional Faith of Christ will save any. But the Matter is, there is
a saving Faith of Christ without us; and Christ without us as he is both God
and Man, the Emanuel, as well as his inward Appearance in us, is the Object of
saving Faith; but these Men would not own it. I desire you well to mark and
consider the several Passages in this whole Paragraph of William Penn's
Rejoinder, what gross and absurd things it contains. He says, This Doctrine
brings not Men to Christ in them the Hope of Glory, but inticeth them into the
vain Hope of the Hypocrite which perishes. Yea see how he makes it the vain
Hope of the Hypocrite to believe that Christ without is a greater Mystery than
Christ within; that is History, this is Mystery, according to him.

Now I have some other principal Proofs yet remaining about this gross Error of
W. Penn. I shall read to you in his Christian Quaker, a Passage, p 97, 98.
printed Anno 1674. but the Printer's Name is not to it. To conclude, as Abraham
outward and natural, was the great Father of the Jews, whose Seed God promised
to bless with Earthly Blessings, as Canaan, etc. and that they were figurative
of the one Seed Christ, and such as he should beget unto a lively Hope through
the Power of his Spiritual Resurrection; it will consequently follow, that this
Seed must be inward and spiritual, since one outward thing cannot be the proper
Figure or Representation of another, nor is it the way of holy Scripture so to
teach us. The outward Lamb shows forth the inward Lamb; the Jew outward, the
Jew inward. As God attended the one with many singu^ar outward Mercies (to say
no more) above other Nations; so the Jew in Spirit does he benefit above all
other People.

I have these two short Arguments to prove what I believe and assert as to the
Spirituality of the true Seed, and a clearer Overthrow it is to the Opinion of
our Adversaries to the true Christ.

First, Every thing begets its like; what is simply natural produces not a
spiritual Being; material things bring not forth things that are immaterial.
Now because the Nature, or Image begotten in the Hearts of true Believers, is
spiritual, it will follow, if the Seed which so begets, and brings forth that
Birth, must be the same in nature with that which is begotten, therefore
spiritual; then Christ's Body, or what he had from the Virgin, strictly
considered as such, was not the Seed.

Secondly, It is clear from hence, the Serpent is a Spirit: Now nothing can
bruise the Head of the Serpent, but something that is so internal and spiritual
as the Serpent is. But if that Body of Christ were the Seed, then could he not
bruise the Serpent's Head in all, because the Body of Christ is not so much as
in any one, and consequently the Seed of the Promise is an holy and spiritual
Principle of Light, Life and Power, that being received into the Heart,
bruiseth the Serpent's Head: And because the Seed, which cannot be that Body,
is Christ, as testify the Scriptures, Gal. 3.16.
the Seed is one, and that Seed Christ, and Christ God over all, blessed for
ever. We do conclude, and that most truly, that Christ was and is the Divine
Word of Light and Life, that was in the Beginning with God, and was and is God
over all, blessed for ever. W. Penn will needs have this to be not Christ
without but Christ within. And you see his Arguments.

So the Paschal Lamb was no Figure of Christ without. And when John said,
Behold the Lamb of God! it was meant of Christ within us, not of Christ without
us, for our Passover is slain for us. You see, according to W. Penn, that
Passover that was slain for us, was slain in us, not without us: And so they
throw away our Arguments against the Jews: the Jews may plead the Messiah is
not yet come. [The Light within is owned by the Jews, and their Rabbis speak
highly of it, yea, they call it a Ray or Beam of the Heavenly Adam; and by way
of Allegory, his Flesh and Blood, as I can plainly prove out of their Writings.
And if the Types and Prophecies of the Old Testament mean only the Light
within, by the one Seed that was promised, and held forth under these Types,
how shall we convince them that the Messiah is come? and that because he is
come, these Types, Figures and Shadows of the Law are abolished.]

W. Penn says, Then Christ's Body he had from the Virgin, strictly considered
as such, was not the Seed. This is rare Logic. Here is a Fallacy, but I
believe it proceeds not from any Design, but from his Weakness in Logic. You
know there should be no Term nor Thing of Importance in the Conclusion of any
Syllogism or Argument, but what should be in the Premises; but strictly
considered is not in the Premises, therefore it should not be in the
Conclusion. No Man says, the Body of Christ strictly considered without the
Soul of Christ is Christ, or that either the Soul and Body of Christ strictly
considered, without the Godhead, is the Christ. Therefore he fights against a
Man of Straw. But the Sense of his Argument is, that his B^dy was no Part of
him. The one Seed cannot be an outward thing, this ye see is universal and
exclusive of any outward thing; for says W. Penn, one outward Thing cannot be
the proper Figure or Representation of another. -- Again, Nothing (says he)
can bruise the Head of the Serpent but something that is also internal and
spiritual, But is not the Serpent or Devil without Men as well as within many
Men?
as the Serpent is. And whereas W. Penn says, The Body of Christ is not so
much as in any one; this contradicts his Brother John Whitehead, that says, He
denies that Christ has a Body out of every Man on Earth. Here is their
Contradiction, and yet they both pretend to be infallible.

But see what a Sorites is here, says W. Penn: The Seed is one, and that Seed
Christ, and Christ God over all, blessed for ever. We do conclude, and that
most truly, that Christ was and is the divine Word of Light and Life that was
in the Beginning with God, and was and is God over all, blessed for ever. Thus
you see he makes the promised Seed to be nothing but an inward Principle, God
over all, etc.

But I think it is not true, to say, The Seed of God in Men is God; I judge it
is unsound Doctrine, and contradicts R. B. who calls that inward Seed,
Vehiculum Dei, the Vehicle of God. But to say, Christ is only God, and not Man
without us, as W. Penn's way of arguing imports, is most false Doctrine, and is
as great and dangerous an Extreme as to say, Christ is only Man and not God.
But the true Christian Doctrine is, that Christ is both God and Man, and yet
one Christ. I have done at present with my first Head.


Quaker N. M. Then you will admit of a short Appeal. I appeal to the Persons
here met, presuming upon their Generosity and Temper, how unfair it is for him
to make his Illustrations and Aggravations of these Matters, and to how great
Difficulty he exposes those Persons he treats of. I think what he says to you
is inconsistent with Christian Principles, should be read by another Person:
for many things are explanatory of one another, etc.


Qua. Henry Goldney also blamed his reading, that what made against him he read
low, but what he thought made for him he read high.


G. Keith. If any of you scruple my reading, if you desire it, another shall
read: Only there is this Inconvenience, I have not the Places so well marked on
the Margin that another can so readily find them as my self. But if I wrong the
Quotations, it will appear in Print, for we intend that the Quotations shall be
printed.


Stranger. Let him overlook you, if he thinks you do not read right.


Quaker N. M. I think he does not read false.


G. Keith. The second Head is Justification and Sanctification by the Blood of
Christ outwardly shed, which is opposed by William Penn, G. Whitehead, and
others. For this I shall bring my Proofs. Reason against Railing, by W. Penn,
page 91. And forgive us our D^bts, as we forgive our Debtors. Says W. Penn,
Where nothing can be more obvious, than that which is forgiven, is not paid;
and if it is our Duty to forgive without a Satisfaction received, and that God
is to forgive us, as we forgive them, then is a Satisfaction Totally excluded.
I confess I was surprised with this word, Totally excluded. Satisfaction is not
the strict Solution of a Debt in all Respects and Circumstance. When we
consider the Dignity of our Lord, that was both God and Man; his Sufferings,
(suppose they were not the Thousand Part of what the Damned suffer) yet it was
a true Satisfaction: Therefore I was scandalized with these words. An Hundred
Years ago the Church of England has very well answered this fallacious Argument
of W. Penn's, that is, the same with the Socinians, in her Homily on Salvation,
the First Part.

And here he gives Nine Arguments to prove that the Notion of Christ's
Satisfaction for Sin brings with it Nine irrational Consequences and
Irreligious: But they are so weak and insignificant, that it were but loss of
time, to mention them here, or answer them. Only give me leave to add, These
very Persons, G. Whitehead and W. Penn, after they have thrust out of Doors by
their false Logic, Christ's Satisfaction without us; they own that Christ in
us See W. Penn's Rejoinder, page 284. And G. W. Light and Life, p. 44.
offers up himself a Sacrifice, to appease the wrath of God. Now, if free
forgiveness exclude the Satisfaction of Christ without us, by W. Penn's
Argument, by the same it does as much exclude his Satisfaction within us; pray
mark that.

Now you have heard a Proof from W. Penn, let me come to Geo. Whitehead again.
You shall have here a rare Dish of Divinity, not that I would provoke any to
Lightness. But I have read many Books in my time, but I never read such a Book
(except the Ranters) in my Life; Popery is Orthodoxy to it. No Popish Priest
will Argue as he has done, G. Whitehead's Light and Life, page 8. He blames
here W. Burnet, for saying, The Blood shed upon the Cross sprinkles the
Conscience, Sanctifies, Justifies, Redeems us. Now here is G. Whitehead's
Censure of him. Observe here a twofold stress is laid upon that Blood; 1.
Merit, to Salvation; 2. Work, to Sanctification: And so he has set it up above
God, for God could not save, he says.

Observe. To say, That Christ's Blood merits Salvation, is to set it up above
God; for God could not save, he says.

Now, he wrongs W. Burnet: I know not the Man, his words are these, which some
where or other I have noted. W. Burnet says, Christ as God, without being Man,
he could not save. See his Book, page 35. called, The Capital Principles.
But I wholly wave that Dispute; I think it is above man's Capacity, whether
Antecedently to God's purpose, he could have saved us without the Death of his
own dear Son. But God having so ordained it, consequentially to his purpose, it
may be as safely and truly said, as when the Scripture says, God cannot lie.
Is it any Reflection to say, God cannot lie, and that he cannot contradict his
purpose? And the Scripture says, God has not appointed us to wrath, but to
obtain Salvation by our Lord Jesus Christ; I hope then he cannot save us
without the Man Christ, because he has said, he will not; and the Man Christ is
a Joynt-Saviour with God the Father. Again, page 38. G. W. brings the words of
W. Burnet thus.


Bapt. Now the Quakers would be so far from directing Men to go to the Material
Temple at Jerusalem, that they make it but a vain thing to look to Jerusalem,
to the Antitype of that Temple, viz. to Jesus Christ, as he was there
crucified; or to that Blood, that was there shed for Justification, p. 24. Now
see the Answer, The Quakers see no need of directing Men to the Type for the
Antitype, neither to the outward Temple, nor yet to Jerusalem, either to Jesus
Christ, or his Blood, knowing that neither the Righteousness of Faith, nor the
word of it does so direct, Romans 10. And is it the Baptists Doctrine to direct
Men to the Material Temple, and Jerusalem, the Type for the Antitype? What It
is no more Nonsense than many good Christian Teachers have used, to expound and
open the Types of the Old Testament, and to show how they directed to Christ,
the Antitype; yea, diverse Quakers Preach the Types as directing to Christ and
his Spirit within: And G. Fox used much to Preach upon the Types of the Old
Testament, as the Booths they made at the Feast of Tabernacles, and the Lamps
in the Temple, and the Snuffers, how they had a Spiritual signification. And
shall any Christian say, that none of these Types signified Christ without, but
only Christ within?
Nonsense and Darkness is this? And where do the Scriptures say, the Blood was
there shed for Justification, and that Men must be directed to Jerusalem to it?

It may be questioned whether there may not be some need to expound the Types,
as directing to Christ, though not to pract^ce them. But let that pass. Now he
says, it is contrary to Romans 10. to direct People to Jesus Christ as he was
crucified at Jerusalem. But let the Bible be Judge. He has not cited the Verse,
but the Verses he aims at I shall read; Ver. 5, 6, 7, 8. For Moses describes
the Righteousness which is of the Law, that the man which does those things,
shall live by them, etc. See Verses 6, 7.8.

Now, in their Preachments they have used to stop there, and go no further. But
read the 9th. Verse, If thou shall confess with thy mouth the Lord Jesus, and
shall believe in thine heart, that God has raised him from the dead, thou
shall be saved. And where was it that God raised Christ from the Dead? Was it
not at Jerusalem? And there he died, where he rose. And Christ, when he took
the Cup, said, Drink ye all of it, this is the New Testament in my Blood, shed
for many for the remission of sins. And I believe he meant his Blood shed, was
the outward Blood of his Body.


Stranger. Read the words again. Which G. Keith did.


G. Keith. You see G. Whitehead has falsified the Scriptures, and made them to
say what they say not; as if to direct to Jesus Christ as he was crucified at
Jerusalem, and to his Blood that was there shed, were contrary to Romans 10.
whereas it is plainly according to Romans 10. 9,10.


Quaker. It may be, something following may explain it; read on. Which G. Keith
did.

Light and Life, page 39. (Whereas that Blood shed is not in being page 40) But
the true Apostle directed them to the Light (which is so much opposed by the
Baptists) to walk in the Light, for the Blood of Jesus to cleanse them from all
sin, 1 John 1. And he died for our sins, but rose again for our justification;
which Resurrection surely was after the shedding the blood outwardly.


G. Keith. Neither W. Burnet, nor no Baptist, place the all and whole of our
Justification on Christ's outward Sufferings, and shedding his blood. For I say
with them, and all Christendom, That if Christ had died, and not risen again,
he could not have been an Atonement for our sins: Therefore both his Death and
Resurrection are concerned in our Justification. Give me leave to tell you one
Passage. The. Ellwood thinks to put a trick on the Reader, and says, it is
wrong Printed, and that it should have been for, instead of to; and he charges
some Typographical Errors in my Books on me. He says, it was corrected in his
Copy with a Pen; bu^ he does not say, G. Whitehead mended it. He says, it
should be thus read, Either for Jesus Christ, or his Blood. He thinks that will
so turn it, that it mends the matter, but it mends it nothing at all. And G.
Whitehead has it, to, to, to, several times, (See page 38, 39. Where do the
Scriptures say, says G. W.) the blood was there shed for Justification, and
that Men must be directed to Jerusalem to it? Again, in page 61. Light and
Life, he says, Another while People must seek their Savior above the Clouds
and Firmament, contrary to the Righteousness of Faith, Romans 10.6. Another while
they must look to Jerusalem for Justification to the blood that was there shed,
contrary to Deuteronomy. 30.13, 14. and Romans 10. Is not this abominab^e Perversion of
Scripture, to confirm his Antichristian Doctrine?

Light and Life, page 61. What Confusion what a Labyrinth and Uncertainty is he
in, and does he bring his Hearers into (says G. Whitehead of Will. Burnet)
because, according to Scripture, he asserts, that Men must be directed to
Christ for Justification and Salvation, both as he suffered at Jerusalem, and
as he rose again, and is ascended into Heaven, above the Clouds and Firmament.

Next, you shall hear Solomon Eccles's Letter, That the blood of Christ is no
more than the blood of another Saint.


Quaker N. M. I beg a Favor. Here are several things urged as false Doctrine,
which refer to several places of Scripture, which Scriptures ought also to be
read.


G. Keith. They have been read, except Deuteronomy. 30. Romans 10. is a repetition of
Deuteronomy. 30. This is only to prolong time, and hinder me to proceed in my Proofs.
But if the Auditory please, I will read both Deuteronomy. 30. and Romans 10.


Auditory. There is no need, go on and read Solomon Eccles's Letter.


G. Keith. Before I read the Letter, let me read these Lines, in G. Whitehead
his Light and Life, page 8. W. B. (says he) tells of looking to Jerusalem, to
Jesus Christ, as he was there crucified, or to that blood that was there shed
for Justification, Contradiction. That Christ, that restores man's loss, is
both to be sought and found in Heaven, etc. but in contradiction to both, the
Reception of the Spirit the only means, the gift of Christ to us, and his being
revealed in us by his Spirit. Here you see G. Whitehead makes it a
Contradiction, that we must look to Christ as he died at Jerusalem, and as he
is now in Heaven. Judge ye if this be a Contradiction; but in Contradiction to
both, he says, it is a Contradiction to direct to Christ our Savior, as he
died at Jerusalem; and that Christ that saves us, is revealed within us by his
Spirit. Now the Letter, which G. Whitehead does own, it is a Letter of Solomon
Eccles, it is this: Robert Porter.
TAKE heed of belying the Innocent; for I hear that thou have reported to a
Friend of mine, that I should say, That the Blood of Christ is no more than the
Blood of another Man. I never spoke it, but do very highly esteem of the Blood
of Christ, to be more Excellent, and Living, and Holy, and Precious than is
able to be uttered by the Tongues of Men and Angels: I mean the Blood which was
offered up in the Eternal Spirit, Heb. 9.14. But the Blood that was forced out
of him by the Soldiers, after he was dead, who before that, bowed his Head to
the Father, and gave up the Ghost; but thou say, that was the Blood of the
New Covenant, which was shed after he was dead, which I do deny; yet I did say,
That was no more than the Blood of another Saint. These were my Words, which
thou art wresting to thy own Destruction. And for the other Lie that thou
chargest me withal, that I should say, That the Blood of Christ should fall to
the Ground within a twelfth Month, it is false, and never was spoke by me: But
I did say, That the Baptists, and Independants, and Presbyterians, and Pope,
are all of one Ground, and none of you understand the Blood of Jesus Christ no
more than a brute Beast; therefore repent, for God will suddenly overthrow your
Faith, and your imputative Righteousness too, for the Imputation of Christ's
Righteousness which he did at Jerusalem, and without the Gates, the Pope, the
Episcopal, the Presbyterian, Independants and Baptists, shall fare all alike,
and shall sit down in Sorrow, short of the Eternal Rest: But the true
imputative Righteousness of Christ we own; but it is hid from you all, till the
Lord do open an Eye within you.





Stranger. Who Printed that Letter?


G. Keith. W. Burnet, the Baptist Preacher.

Have you any Testimony of their owning that Letter?


T. Slaughter. I can answer to the Letter.


G. Keith. It may be thou art the Man.


T. Slaughter. I am not the Man, but I have had a Copy of the Letter. It was
writ to one Porter at Whe^stone, and the Letter is true.


Auditors. Pray, Sir, where do you live, and what is your Name?


T. Slaughter. My Name is Thomas Slaughter, I live at Darking, I have a Son
that is a Tallow Chandler that lives in Bow-Lane, where you may have an Account
of me.


G. Keith. George Whitehead does not question the Letter to be true, but
defends it, and as much opposes Justification by the outward or material Blood
of Christ, as Solomon Eccles does. Here is a weighty Passage, George Whitehead
says in his Book, Light and Life, which T. Ellwood transcribes and vindicates,
T. Ellwood represents G. Whitehead. And this is one of the Books, they say (in
their printed Paper they have sent and read at this Meeting) I have not
answered. And this is G. Whitehead in Effigy. I had charged G. Whitehead for
saying, That Christ's material Blood, shed at Jerusalem, was but a Type of the
Blood we were justified by. T. Ellwood finds fault with me for this. And you
shall see T. Ellwood's Vindication, and how far G. Whitehead has owned or
disowned S. Eccles's Letter. All things under the Law, (says VV. Burner) in the
Type, was purged with Blood, and this Blood was material Blood and not
mystical; and that Blood that Christ shed in order to the effecting the
Salvation of Man, must needs be visible and material Blood.

These are VV. Burnet's Words. Now G. Whitehead says,

Baptist. All things under the Law, in the Type was purged with Blood, and this
Blood was material Blood, and not mystical, and that Blood that Christ shed, in
order to the effecting the Salvation of Man, must needs be material and visible
Blood.

Answ. Do but mark here what sad Consequence he has drawn, as if one should
Reason, that because the Type was material, visible, and not mystical,
therefore the Antitype or Substance must needs be material, and not mystical.
By this all Mysteries or Divine things are excluded from being either
Spiritual, Antitype, or Substance; whereas it was the Heavenly things
themselves, that are in Christ, in which consists the Substance and End of
Types and Shadows. But to say, that material Blood was a Type of that which was
material, this is to give the Substance no Pre-eminence above the Type
(especially if neither of them be mystical nor in being) or like as if one
should say, one Type was a Type of another. Whereas both the Heavenly, and more
perfect Tabernacle and Altar, with the Heavenly things, are all a Mystery, and
Spiritual, the Offering and Living Sacrifices are Spiritual, the Passover
Spiritual, the Seed Spiritual, the Bread, the Fruit of the Vine Spiritual, the
Oil, the Flesh, and the Blood, which give Life to the Soul, yea, the Water and
Blood, which washes and sprinkleth the Conscience, are all Spiritual and
Mysterious, as the New Covenant it self is, which they belong to, and these
things known in. And this is the new and living way, which Christ set open,
through the Veil of his Flesh, Heb. 10. Let them receive this who can.

Note, By G. Whitehead's Argument, as the New Covenant is Spiritual and inward,
and not outward, so the Blood of the New Covenant is inward and not outward; so
the Passover is inward, which is Christ the Mediator, and not outward; this is
a plain denial of the Man Christ without us to be our Mediator, our Passover,
Offering, or his Flesh and Blood without us to be concerned in our Salvation
otherwise than as the Type. That Christ's Flesh is called the Veil, is not to
be understood like the Typical Veils, Figures, and Shadows, but has a far
greater and profound sense and consideration.

But mark, W. Burnet does not express it universally, but in this particular
Case: And G. Whitehead extends it to an Universal; as if all the Types of the
Old Testament signified nothing Internally and Spiritually. But VV. Burnet
says no such thing, though he justly contends that the material Blood of the
Beasts that were offered, was a Type of the material Blood of Christ that was
outwardly shed; yet many of the Types signified the internal and spiritual
Gifts and Graces that true Believers have by Christ.

Now here I clinch the matter: G. Whitehead says, But to say material Blood was
a Type of that which was material; this is to give the Substance no preeminence
above the Type (especially if neither of them be mystical, nor in being) or
like as if one should say, one Type was a Type of another. Now the Argument
lies here; If the Sacriffces under the Law were Types of Christ's Blood then
that Blood must not be outward Blood, but inward, to wit, the Light and Life in
Men; but this is a false Consequence of G. Whitehead, and shows, that he
denies Remission of Sin, and Justification by the Blood of Christ outwardly
shed. And this whole Passage of G. Whitehead, his Advocate T. Ellwood does
defend in his Book called Truth Defended, which is one of the two they say I
have not answered.

Now as to the Letter, we go on to what T. Elwood says. He is so unfair, he
will have it, that G. Whitehead owns, that the material B^ood of Christ is that
by which we are justified. But here is the Trick, G. Whitehead makes a typical
Offering of Christ, and an anti-typical; the typical was the Offering of Christ
at Jerusalem, the anti-typical is the Offering of Christ within. See here then
their Answer: It was queried, whether they owned that we are by the Blood of
Christ outwardly shed, justified; or that the Blood that was outwardly shed,
did belong to the Sacrifice? G. Whitehead has since of late answered: Yea, here
they have sought to blind all the World; Christ, as he outwardly suffered was a
Sacrifice, but a typical Sacrifice. Therefore the next Question to be put, must
be, Whether he was the anti-typical Sacr^fice?

Now see what G. Whitehead has said to the Letter of Solomon Eccles, to blame
or censure it. I can find nothing at all. He does not own that Solomon Eccles's
Expression was an Article of their Faith, but does he disown it? Nay, a man may
not own a thing to be an Article of his Faith, and yet not disown it. If G.
Whitehead had had the true Faith in Christ crucified, and had the true Value of
Christ's Blood, outwardly shed, he would have very severely and sharply blamed
and censured Solomon Eccles's Letter as blasphemous, but I find not that he
censured it all. He tells you in what Sense he owns it, viz. That Blood had a
peculiar Significat^on; I told him, so had the Blood of Beasts a peculiar
Signification, for their Blood signified Remission of Sin, but was no
satisfactory Offering for Sin: And if Christ's Blood outwardly shed was a Type,
as G. Whitehead affirms it was, then he confirms Solomon Eccles's false
Doctrine, and makes it no more than the Blood of the Beasts that were offered.

But says T. Ellwood, He does own that the Blood of Christ is more than the
Blood of another Saint; but what B^ood? the Blood of Christ within, there is
the Trick. Is not this enough to cheat all the World? They have a double
Meaning as See for this in the Church History of Socrates Scholasticus, lib. 2.
c. 7. and c. 25.
Arius had. They say they own the Blood of Christ, and every other thing said
of him according to the Scripture; so said the Arians and Macedonians, when at
other times they discovered their Meaning to be quite contrary to Scripture.


Quaker. N. M. I offer a Word in Vindication, which is this: I am here an
accidental Man, as you are. What I would offer is this. 1. I acknowledge the
Favor you give me leave to speak. Next, this little Tumult gives me Occasion
to let you know that the principal Reason of the Persons not being here, that
were challenged, was that Confusion and Disorder that would be the Consequence.


G. Keith. Who makes it?


Quaker. N. M. There are not fifteen of us here, Note, The Meeting was for most
part orderly and attentive; if any little Disorder happened, it was by occasion
of W. Pen's Party, and particularly by Henry Goldney that threw printed Papers
among the People, in the Meeting, on purpose to make a Disturbance; but what
Disturbance happened, it was soon ended by the Care and Diligence of the
Marshal, sent by the Lord Mayor, to prevent any Disorders.
therefore we take care not to be parties to it. The Persons challenged I do
respect; I know their own Ability, I think my self not capable to speak in
their behalf. What I wou^d say, is to the Letter. The Letter you are to
understand, is the Effect of a Dispute between two Persons. Though this Letter
was writ by one that had Conversation with us, yet I think we are not entitled
to what is in it. But if G. Whitehead has writ in Vindication of it, it
affects us as a People: And whatever we publish as a People, we are so far
affected with it. But this Letter was writ by the Hand of a particular Man,
whose Conversation among us I think not fit to answer for.


G. Keith. He was an Eminent Preacher among them.


Quaker. He says, G. Whitehead has vindicated this Letter; now I observe G.
Whitehead finds fault with the Letter.


G. K^ith. Here he makes G. Whitehead the Representative and Metropolitan of
the Quakers, saying, what G. W. writes, affects them as a People. I am a Quaker
still, though I glory not in any Name, but that I may be accounted a true
Christian. But he says, if G. Whitehead has justified the Letter, it is
imputable to the Body. What is this, but to make G. Whitehead the Metropo^itan?
And I protest against it. I have so much Charity and Knowledge of many of the
Quakers, that I believe there are Thousands will not own that Letter, though G.
Whitehead does. He says, if G. Whitehead justifies that Lett^r, the whole Body
is understood to justify it. Now, I see not one Syllable wherein G. Whitehead
blames it: And he that does not testify against a thing, when he has just
occasion for it, justifies it. But hear what G. Whitehead says, page 58. Light
and Life. Now, to these words, viz. No more than the Blood of another Saint,
his intent was, says G. Whitehead, as to Papists and you, whose minds are
carnal, etc. This never was my Quakerism. For my belief all along, was, that
Papists, and Baptists, and all, have a Benefit by Christ's Death. Now it is
come to this, That the Blood of Christ is no more to Papists and Baptists, than
the Blood of another Saint.

His next Defense of S. Eccles's Letter is, That it was no more simply as to
the matter of Blood. Then they may [with Reverence be it spoken] as it was
reported some have said, say, it is no more than the Blood of a Thief, simply
as to the matter of Blood; but it may be affirmed, that simply considered, it
was more than the Blood of any Saint; for as it was never defiled with sin, so
his Body of Flesh and Blood had a Miraculous Conception above all other Men,
though it had the true Nature of our Flesh and Blood, yet it had an Excellency
above that of all other Men.

But let us consider these words of S. E. which G. W. says, might satisfy any
Spiritual or unbyassed Mind, I do very highly esteem of the Blood of Christ, to
be more Excellent, etc. Here is Solomon Eccles's Fallacy, and George
Whitehead's Fallacy also.

Now you know what Blood they mean, and see what Blood G. Whitehead means; The
Blood is Spiritual and Inward, the other is a Type. It is confessed, says G.
W. Light and Life, page 56. That God by his own Blood purchased to himself a
Church, Acts. 20.28. Now the Blood of God (says he) or that Blood that relates
to God, must needs be Spiritual, he being a Spirit; and the Covenant of God is
Inward and Spiritual, and so is the Blood of it. So you see he does not allow
the Blood outwardly shed to relate to God, or to be the Blood of the New
Covenant, or that God purchased his Church with that Blood outwardly shed on
the Cross. Is not this a plain Justification of Solomon Eccles's Letter, That
that Blood is no more than that of another Saint? judge ye, who are Intelligent.

Again, He judges none of them guilty of Blasphemy therein, as he says page
58. Light and Life. viz. Neither Solomon Eccles, nor W. Burnet. But wherein
does he charge him? I find not in any thing.

I cannot produce and read to you many of my Proofs for want of time, but two
or three to every following Head.

You have had an Account of them as to Justification. Now it is worth your
while to see how these [pretended] Infallible Men contradict one another. W.
Penn, (Reason against Railing) falls in with T. Danson, and Argues like a
Christian, though in Contradiction to himself elsewhere, That no Obedience that
Man can perform to God, by the help of the Spirit is strictly Meritorious,
according to the Law of God. This is good Doctrine, and so is the Reason too,
because it is but finite; and I would make use of the same Argument. But G.
Whitehead, in Answering this Argument, Answers T. Danson thus: Whereas T.
Danson Argues, That the Obedience and Righteousness, wrought in the Saints by
the Spirit, is but finite, and therefore not Meritorious, G. Whitehead denies
this, that it is finite, and says, it is infinite. So that by his Argumen^,
our Obedience and Righteousness that God works in us, is equal to God himself.
Now I will read the Passage. W. Penn's Reason against Railing, Page 82.
Rewardableness is a work without which God will not bestow his Favor, and yet
not the meritorious Cause, for that there is no proportion betwixt the work
that is finite and temporary, and the Reward which is infinite and eternal, in
which sense both the Creature obeys the Commands of God, and does not merit,
but obtain only; and God rewards the Creature, and yet so, that he freely gives
too. A good Protestant Argument, and good Protestant Doctrine, so far; but that
he contradicts it again, by opposing the necessity of Faith in Christ crucified
for Justification, and totally excluding Christ's Satisfaction, in order to
Justification and Remission of sin.

You see W. Penn says, the Work is finite and temporary, and therefore does not
strictly Merit. But hear G. Whitehead, in his Book, called, The Voice of Wisdom
against Antichrist, etc. page 36. Printed at London, Anno 1659. Note here two
Gods of one Kind and Nature, by his absurd Logic and false Philosophy; one
that works, another that is wrought. Oh gross Darkness and Ignorance in G.
Whitehead!
The Righteousness which God effects in us, is not finite, but infinite; for
Christ is God's Righteousness, and Christ is formed in us, Gal. 4.19. And so
that Righteousness which God works in us by his Spirit, is of the same Kind and
Nature with that which works it, for the Saints are made partakers of the The
Saints are partakers of the Divine Nature, and so are they of the Holy Ghost;
is therefore the Holy Ghost a Work or Effect wrought in us? This is to comfound
the Creator with the Creature, and is a Divinity more fit for Bedlam than any
sober Society of People.
Divine Nature, 2 Pet. 1.4. Now, if you think I have read wrong, read it your
selves.


Quaker. I do not think so, only I think the whole Paragraph should be read. I
hope you have all so much Christianity, as rather to hope, that what G. Keith
has pretended to be a Proof, that he cannot prove it, than that he can: For it
were well, if there were no Party of People that there could be any Proof
against.


G. Keith. I wish I had no occasion to produce any Proofs of this kind.


Quaker. To pick here and there a piece, out of two or three Books, it is
impracticable.


G. Keith. They should have been here then to have defended it. I will read the
whole Paragraph to you.

Now I would haste to a Conclusion. I have proved to you, that they have
excluded the Blood of Christ, that we are not justified by the Blood outwardly
shed. I come to prove that they say, we are not sanctified by that Blood. I
shall read to you, G. Whitehead, page 49, 50, 51. Here is one Proof, if ye
think this is not enough, I will bring more. Neither did I ever read, says the
Baptist, that it was the Blood or Life of Christ in his People that we are
justified by.

Now here is G. Whitehead's Answer, Light and Life, page 59. The Spirit of
Christ (which is Life) does both Quicken, Sanctify, and Justify the true
Believers, John 6.63. 1 Cor. 6. And that Blood and Water that is said to
cleanse, is not of another kind, but agrees in one with the Spirit, all which
is known within, and the Effects thereof.

So you see he takes it away from the outward Blood, and gives it to the inward
Blood.


Auditors. Go to the next Head.


G. Keith. That is but G. Whitehead's Proof, I shall give you W. Penn's Proof.


Auditors. Let us hear it.


G. Keith. I would be loath to mention this Man, Is. Pennington. However this
Question is in his Book, and I charitably think this Passage dropped from him
unawares: I wish I could have that ground of Charity to others of them. But
Truth ought to be more Precious to me, than any Man. I only mention his Name as
to the Subject we are on. Jo. Faldo thinks that he has made Is. Pennington his
own. Can outward Blood wash the Conscience? p. 29. A plain Denial, says Jo.
Faldo. Here is Jo. Faldo's Commentary on Is. Pennington's words. Now see how W.
Penn explains Is. Pennington's words, page 149. Is he so impiously Unjust, that
because we do deny, that outward Blood can be brought into the Conscience, to
perform that inward work (which they themselves dare not, nay, do not hold)
therefore Isaac Pennington denies any Efficacy to be in that outward Offering
and Blood toward Justification, as it respects mere Remission of former Sins
and Iniquities. So in short, I take it thus: W. Penn Answers, That Is.
Pennington's words are to be understood with reference to Sanctification, but
not Justification. Says he, Outward Blood cannot be brought into the Conscience
to perform that work: But the way that Blood has been brought into my
Conscience, is by the application of a living Faith in Christ, whose Blood it
was, the Spirit of God working that Faith in me; and that Blood is not a
Physical, but a Moral once of our cleansing. 1 Christ Jesus, by his Obedience
and Suffering, procured the Pardon of my Sins, as well as he sealed it by his
Blood. And, 2. He procured the Spirit to Sanctify me. Therefore I agree with
all true Christians herein.

I find none say, there must be a material application of that Blood, but a
Spiritual and Moral; and we can give Instances that Moral Causes are many times
more effectual Causes than Physical are: As the Money wherewithal we buy the
Medicine that cures the Body, is not the Physical cause of Health, but a Moral;
and the Money that we buy Bread with, is not the Physical cause of our
Nourishment and Refreshment, but a Moral; and yet it is so great a cause, that
without Money, neither Bread nor Medicine can be readily obtained, and not at
all without somewhat equivalent.

Now I have done with the two first Heads, shall I go on to prove the other
two, or shall we adjourn to another day?


Auditors. If half an hour will do, go on.


G. Keith. I know not but it will, but that they often interrupt us with
Digressions.

The Third Head to be prove, i^, That the Body that dies, rises not again.
First, from W. Penn's holding the Resurrection immediately after Death, in his
Rejoinder, page 138. I think this will be enough for W. Penn, if I give no
more. T. Hi^ks Argues thus for the Resurrection of the Body; That if there be
no Resurrection of the Body, the Joys of Heaven should else be imperfect. Now
here is VV. Penn's Answer to it. I Answer, Is the Joy of the Ancients now in
Glory imperfect? Or are they in Heaven but by halves? If it be so unequitable,
that the Body which has suffered, should not partake of the Joys Celestial,
is it not in measure unequal, that the Soul should be rewarded so long before
the Body? This Principle brings to the Mortality of the Soul (held by many
Baptists) or I am mistaken. But why must the Felicity of the Soul depend upon
that of the Body? Is it not to make the Soul a kind of Widow, and so in a state
of Mourning and Disconsolateness, to be without its beloved Body? Which state
is but a better sort of Purgatory. G. Whitehead Argues the same way: If the
deceased Saints in Heaven, or their Souls, have not all that they expect to all
Eternity, all the Resurrection they look for, then they must be in Purgatory
for the time: But if the latter be not, then not the former. But this
contradicts many Scriptures, that especially in Acts 26. That Christ should
suffer, and should be the first that should rise from the dead. Now, according
to this Doctrine of VV. Penn, and G. Whitehead, Christ's Resurrection was
later than that of many Millions.

Now, if you will hear a Proof from G. Whitehead, you may.


Auditors. Yes, let us hear it.


G. Keith. Here is the place, page 353. G. Whitehead 's Christian Quaker. Says
T. Danson, The Happiness of the Soul is not perfect without the Body, its dear
and beloved Companion, the Soul having a strong desire and inclination to a
reunion to the Body, as the Schools not without ground determine. Vide Calv.

And here is G. VVhitehead's Answer, page 353. Both Calvin, T. Danson, the the
Schools, and diverse Anabaptists, are mistaken in this very matter, and see not
with the Eye of true Faith, either that the Happiness of the Soul is not
perfect without the Body, or that the Soul has a strong desire to a reunion
to the Body, while they intend the Terrestrial Elementary Bodies, for this
implies the Soul to be in a kind of Purgatory or Disquietness, till the
supposed resumption of the Body. You see I hope here is Proof enough, that G.
VV. holds, that the deceased Saints look for no Resurrection of the Body.


Quaker. Elementary Body, G. Whitehead says.


Quaker H. Goldney. He reads that word faintly.


G. Keith. What other Body could it be? The Matter is, there is the same
Argument of G. Whitehead, and VV. Penn. A little Philosophy I hope will not
offend you; I hope if they make use of false Philosophy to defend their false
Faith, I may make use of true Philosophy to defend the true Faith. And the
Objection they make is the same against Christ's Body. Pray, was not Christ's
Body Elementary? Did he not eat and drink? And was it not the same as we eat
and drink? And if we eat and drink of what are Elementary, then his Body did
receive the same Elements, and they were converted into his Body. And G.
Whitehead owns in his later Writings, that Christ's Body that rose, is the
same with his Body that suffered; but his Pride will not suffer him to own his
former Error, either in that, or in other things. And seeing VV. Penn thinks it
absurd that a Body can be transformed from an Earthly and Animal Body to an
Heavenly Body, as he Argues, Reas. against Rail. p. 134. He makes it not only
as gross as Transubstantiation, but worse. But this is his gross Ignorance in
true Philosophy, and his false Philosophy destroys his Faith. It is not
Transubstantiation, if I say, a Saint's Body is the same at the Resurrection
for substance, as it was when it went into the Grave, leaving the Faeces, or
drossy part of it behind. But if he say, Christ has not the same substance of
Body that he had on the Earth, this is plain Transubstantiation. For have not
many that Understanding, that a gross body of Herbs, or other Substance, can by
Chemical Operation be made so Subtle, Volatile, and Spiritual (without any
Transubstantiation, or change of the Substance) that a Glass can scarce confine
it, or hold it. Now, VV. Penn holds, that grossness is so Essential to a Body,
that a Body must cease to be a bodily Substance, if it put off Grossness or
Carniety, and that Carniety is Essential to a Carnal Body. But see how contrary
this is to common Sense and Understanding. There is no Woman that sets a Hen to
breed Chickens, but knows the contrary; you know the Substance of the Egg (the
White and Yolk) by the force and heat of the Hen sitting on the Egg, is changed
into a Chicken And in Egypt we hear that Chickens are bred of Eggs simply by
heat, without the Hen.
. Is here any Transubstantiation? So that W. Penn and G. Whitehead are guilty
of the Doctrine of Transubstantiation, and not we, and abuse the World with
false Philosophy. They warn People against G. Keith, and his false Philosophy;
and I appeal to you to Judge, whether they have not abused the People with
false and vain Philosophy.


Auditors. If you will answer one of these two things, you that are a Friend of
W. Penn, do; you have excommunicated G. Keith, either answer, or justify it.


G. Keith. If they will appoint a Meeting of Friends, to prove me guilty of
Error, I will never refuse to meet them; and here are many Persons of
discretion. I thank God, that has given me that humble Heart, that if they
bring any Passage out of my Books that is not to be justified, I will own my
Error and shortness. Now, if they would do the like, it would be well. But the
matter is here, T. Danson says, Our want of Infallibility is no Argument
against our Ministry. G. Whitehead says, it is; they that want Infallibility
are not true Ministers. Now, I hope I have proved they want Infallibility, and
therefore by their own Doctrine, they are no true Ministers of Christ.
Therefore I think it necessary to have the Passage read. G. Whitehead's Voice
of Wisdom, page 33. Says T. Danson, As for our want of Infallibility, it is no
valid Plea against our Ministry, etc. Now here is the Answer. His falsehood here
appears plainly, for they that want Infallibility (says G.W.) and have not the
Spirit of Christ, they are out of the Truth, and are fallible, and their
Ministry is not of the Spirit, seeing they speak not from the Spirit, but from
their own Hearts, which are deceitful, when they want Infallibility.


Quaker, N. Marks. I do make my further Appeal to you, and if I am either
impertinent or defective, I beg your Excuse.


G. Kieth. Then thou art not Infallible.


Quaker. You may be ashamed to mention that. N. Marks does not profess himself
to be Infallible, being not of the Ministry: But whence is it, that the Laics
should own themselves Fallible, and the Min^stry Infallible? But at last it is
come to this, that some of the Ministry are Fallible also, but such Principal
Ministers as G. W. are not.



Quaker N. Marks. What I have to offer, I submit to you. The Person that has
denoted me to be W. Penn's Friend, has hit right; and I own I am not capable to
represent him. And as you are Professors of Christianity, I hope you will not
conclude that Philosophy or Logic are any Essentials to Christianity.


G. Keith. Who says it is? But is it not sad, that their false Philosophy
should destroy their Faith, and deceive so many People, and destroy their Faith?


Quaker N. Marks. I hope you will observe too, that the Method taken to make
the Proofs, has been principally by the Rules of Philosophy and Logic. Next, I
beg the Charity of you to consider, how much it is the Right of every Man to
give his own Interpretation of all he says and writes. Therefore I hope you
will not believe all you hear, having the Illustrations of an Antagonist. Next,
I would Apologize for the Persons, they are not here; it may be you are not all
of you capable of knowing the Reason of things. G. Keith has had his
Conversation among us many Years, between Twenty and Thirty Years.


G. Keith. Between Thirty and Forty Years.


Quaker N. Marks. Now for as much as these Writings were then extant long ago,
and he was then entirely passive, still, and quiet, under all; these Objections
he now makes, I hope, as we know, so you will believe, it does not arise
altogether from the matter of Fact: For I do not think this a good way of
proving, to take a bit here and a bit there. Next I say, I hope you will
reasonably conclude, that we who knew the Circumstances of his Life and his
Temper, knew his Conversation has been such that we could not own him. He
stands not charged with us on the Account of his Principles. I do not know but
you will find, when you have an Answer to what he has offered, that those he
charges and paraphrases on, will agree with him in Principles; nor have we any
thing against his Conversation among Men in the World. It was his Discontents
with particular Persons, because he was a little troublesome petulant Man and
we could not pacify him; and it was for that Reason chiefly that we did disown
him.


G. Keith. A little petulant Man.


Quaker. I would have you note, I do not pretend to personate any of the
Persons challenged.


Auditors. What is this Discourse for, then? They are ashamed to come.


Quaker. I am coming to give you a further Reason why they do not meet him. We
have had several Meetings with him before he was put from us. And the Reasons
why they did not think fit to meet him now, you have heard, the Paper gives you
an Account of it. Now since he is disowned by us, and also by them where he
lives, we do not think our selves obliged to submit to such a peremptory
Challenge.


G. Keith. I suppose you cannot think I can answer to every particular because
my Memory does not serve me. He charges me to take a bit here and a bit there
out of their Books, I have quoted full Periods at length, as all Authors do,
the Quakers when they refute Books of Adversaries, do not use to recite the
whole Author they write against.


Stranger. About what you say as to Philosphy, Dr. Sherlock says, the Salvation
of the Soul Depends not on such niceties; but for you to charge G. Keith as an
Apostate, is one of the greatest Charges under Heaven; and now for you to say
that he differs not from you in Principles, is to clear him from that Charge.

Upon which the People made some Shout.


G. Keith. Pray be quiet, and regard the Honor of your Nation. Let me put you
in mind of one very great falsehood. He says -- Here one Wyat, or Wait a Quaker
interrupted G. K. as they did often, on purpose to divert him from his matter.


Quaker Wait. There is an Apostasy from the Spirit of Christianity, as well as
from the Principles: Friends have excommunicated him, not for his Principles,
but for going from the Spirit of Meekness, Charity, etc.


G. Keith. The Tree is known by the Fruits. I was like a Lamb among I know not
what, where there were Two or Three Hundred. I had scarce One that sympathized
with me, at their Yearly Meeting, when clandestinely with their Doors shut,
suffering none that were my Friends, to be present, they passed false Judgment
against me, without any Trial: A Notorious Falsehood he charge against me, and
nothing else: only he calls me a little petulant man; and he is not a Story
above my height. He says, I am --


Quaker. I observe a Contradiction in G. Keith; he said, he was not disowned by
half the Yearly Meeting; and now he says by all.


G. Keith. Let me answer that. I say, Diverse in the Meeting were favorable --
but W. P. and G. W. overruled them, and influenced them against me with
Prejudice; and some they overawed and frighted. There was a Person that came
to me, and told me, he would rather suffer his Life to be taken from him, or
his Right Hand to be cut off before he would sign a sentence against me. And
some others that were not free to consent to them, did purposely absent and
this I told them in their yearly Meeting; that there was such a person that had
so spoke to me that day, they asked me who it was, I told them, I desired to be
excused, in not telling his Name, that was not convenient.

After I was gone, they called over the Roll one by one; and the poor man
seeing it coming to him, says, You need go no further, I am the Man; now what
is this, but to set up something like the Spanish Inquisition? And there is one
(viz. T. E.) has applied that passage in Scripture, Master, is it I? but the
question there was, Is it thou? And tho I had cause to think that diverse then
present did not in Conscience consent to their false Judgment, but thought it
too severe, as some has since acknowledged, yet I did not know, as to the last
Meeting, that of all them that were present, that I had one that Sympathized
with me; they were all silent, and were-over awed by G. Whitehead and W. Penn's
Party. And this poor man, abovementioned, has come to me since, and disowned
that false Judgment, and declared to me before two Witnesses, he did not join
with them in it. He says I am disowned by them, where I live, I suppose he
means the Tho some in Scotland, being influenced with their false reports, have
seemed to disown me, yet others have not, and some of them have writ kindly to
me, and owned me.
Scots, do I Live among them? this is a notorious falsehood.


Stranger. All this is very impertinent to the business in hand.


G. Keith. I happened to drop an Expression in Pensilvania, finding the same
Errors there I have now mentioned in their Books here, that no Protestant
Society would suffer such Errors as these, no not the Church of Rome it self;
my words were, that no Protestant Society would Tolerate them. They began with
me. There was an universal neglect among them of Preaching Christ Crucified,
and concerning Faith in him; Preaching only the Light within, and Christ
within. Whereupon, a little while after, I began to Preach this; and they stood
up against me, and charged me with new Doctrine; and one Arthur Cook a Preacher
and Justice of Peace in Pensilvania.
appealed to the Monthly Meeting, whether they ever heard of such Doctrine
Preached in the Quakers Meetings, directing them to Faith in Christ without us:
I answered, The more shame, and it was now, full time to begin, if it was never
Preached in the Quakers Meetings before. But that to witness against Error, and
sharply to reprove it, is no Argument of Apostazy. I have most effectual Proofs
from the Quakers themselves, Ed. Burrough's says, It is no breach of the Peace
to witness against Error, Truths Princip. G. Fox says, He was moved by the Lord
to testify against False Teachers, that deceive the People with false
Doctrine. Now if they be guilty of these things, I say I am not to be blamed to
withstand their false Doctrine. They say I began first to Print, which is true;
but they sent out their defaming manuscripts against me to England, Barbados,
Maryland, before I Printed a line against them. What is the last Remedy against
oppression? Why, Printing. Therefore I began.


G. Fox. p. 15. Some of the Principles of the Too high a Title for such who are
quilty of such gross Errors.
Elect People of God, called Quakers. I hope this one Testimony of G. Fox will
clear me, that I am not guilty of the breach of the Peace in the Church for
opposing their Doctrines. Some Principles of the Elect People of God, signed by
G. Fox. Says G. Fox, Moved of the Lord, written from the Spirit of the Lord,
for the cleansing of the Land of all false Teachers, Seducers and Deceivers and
witches, who beguile the People, and Inchanters and Diviners, and Forgerers and
Hirelings, and which is for the good of the People.

Now was this man of a Turbulent Spirit? What work did G. Fox and G. Whitehead
make? What breach upon breach did they make on all other Professions whereof
they had been formerly, as Church of England, Presbyterian, Baptists? Do not
mistake me, I Reverence Divine Providence that I became a Quaker. But if I had
known they had had such Errors among them, I would as soon have put my Head in
the fire, as have owned such among them: But I am of the same Faith as I have
been above this thirty years.


Quaker. It has been here asserted, that he has been a Quaker above thirty
years, and he has Vindicated their Doctrine; he is a Studious man, and our
Books have been public always; now for him to come now and call over all
Books, that he has, by not opposing, consented to, it looks as if he had
Apostatized from what he formerly held.


Auditor. Did he ever write against these Principles he now holds?


Quaker. He has constantly Vindicated our Principles.


G. Keith. Whereas they say I have not taken notice of their Errors, I say I
can appeal to W. Penn and G. Whitehead, that in the year 1678. three Ministers
of London rose up against me, and I opposed their Errors at that very time.


Auditor. What Ministers were they?


G. Keith. They were Quakers. They accused me of three Principles in my Book,
called, The way cast up. The first was, That Christ's body rose out of the
Grave. They said it never did. 2. That I said It was Lawful to Pray to Jesus
Christ Crucified. They denied it, and dared me to give an Instance of one
English Quaker that I ever heard Pray to Christ. Whereupon W. Penn said, I am
an Englishman, and a Quaker, and I own I have often Prayed to Christ Jesus, even
him that was Crucified. And they answered, He is not an Ancient Friend of the
Ministry; and G. Whitehead, a man Ancient in the Ministry, told them (there
were forty or fifty present) It is neither what W. Penn, nor what G. Keith
says, but let Scripture decide it; and he took the Bible, and oponed it, and
Read, 1 Cor. 1.2 To all that call upon the Lord Jesus Christ, both their Lord
and Ours. Their answer was Paul was dark and ignorant, as G. Keith is; For our
part we know better The third was, (...) they blamed me, for saying the best
Saints had need to come alwa^s to God by the (...) ^or the Man Christ Jesus,
they said, They could come to God without him, and this (...) of Doctrine is to
be found in W. Shewen's Book, a Quaker greatly owned by them. Treatise of
Thoughts, see page 37.38.



Quaker. Will you say this, and not mention their Names.


G. Keith. I will not do it, it is not convenient; there is one of them a
Citizen of very good repute, and therefore it will be better to conceal his
Name.


Auditor. Go on to the last head.


Quaker. H. Goldney, you ought to name his name particularly, if thou do not,
thou art an Impostor.


Auditor. He has done enough.


G. Keith. I think it not convenient, we must use a little Policy as well as
you. Jo. Delawall Published a Manuscript against me, wherein he charges me with
Heresy, for saying, The Light within was not sufficient without something else,
and that something else was Christ without us. Now they say there is no
diference between them and me. I will cite a passage or two out of a Manuscript
from Pensilvania, it is a thing that will satisfy your Consciences as much as
any thing. I brought the Manuscripts, they were read at the yearly Meeting at
London, 1694. and something was objected to the hand; and it was asked at
Samuel Jennings, my Adversary, whether it was the hand of that man, and he
said, he believed it was; and you will find it is matter of Doctrine at the
bottom, for which they have Excommunicated me, however they would cloak it: Let
them retract their Errors, and I will forgive them my Excommunication.

See the Book called, Light and Life, page 41. See what is here said by G.
Whitehead, That there is not an outward coming of Christ to Judge the Quick and
Dead. What I prove from G. Whitehead, is proved from W. Penn; for W. Penn has
Authorized his Book, therefore it is the proof of them both. Here is the place.
Moreover Christ said, The Son of Man shall come in the Glory of his Father with
his Angels, etc. Matt. 16.27, 28. Luke 9.26, 27 Now what is that Glory of the
Father, in which his coming is, is it visible to the Carnal Eye? And when was
that coming to be? Is it now to be looked for outwardly? But farther we do
acknowledge the several comings of Christ, according to the Scriptures, both
that in the Flesh, and that in the Spirit, which is manifest in several degrees
as there is a growing from Glory to Glory. But three comings of Christ, not
only that in the Flesh at Jerusalem and that in the Spirit, but also another
coming in the Flesh, yet to be expected; we do not read of, but a second coming
without sin unto Salvation, which in the Apostles days was looked for.

And as concerning that noted place, 1 These. 4.17. brougt by W. B. to prove
Christ's coming without us to judgment G. W. denies it to be meant of his
Personal coming, and uses a Sophism to contradict it, and wrest it, to his
inward coming: whereas all the stress of his Sophism lies in that, We, We, that
remain; but the true Sense of these words is, those Saints, those Believers,
that shall be living at that day, shall not prevent them that dyed in Christ
before. It is an enallage personae frequent in Scripture, putting we for they,
live that or James, therewith bless we God and Curse men.

Now all these proofs he has Allegorized to Christ within, he has allegorized
away his Birth, his Death, Resurrection, and Ascension, and coming to Judgment;
and so we have nothing from Scripture to prove Christ's Death to be of any
benefit to us, and we have no Argument to prove he came in the Flesh: And so
all the proofs against Jews and Philosophers he has Allegorized away.

Thus you have had a proof from G. Whitehead and W. Penn. Now if you will
adjourn the Meeting to some other time, or continue it a while longer, I am
content. And I hope I have proved that I am not Petulant, and that I have had
just cause to accuse them of these Errors. I was presented by a Grand jury at
Philadelgpia; and the Presentment would have been Prosecuted, if the Government
had not been changed, and I had been accused for endeavoring to alter the
Government, which is Capital by their Law; and they would have found me guilty
of Death, had they not been turned out of the Government, tho I was innocent:
And when I objected against the Jury, they would not suffer one of the Jury to
be cast. Now it I had been guilty of any Trespass and, Offense against K.
William and Q. Mary, (the King is alive, and God bless him) do you think that
Governor Fletcher, (put into the Government by King William and Queen Mary)
that was the Governor there, if he had found me guilty of High Treason, he
would have passed me; but he ordered them to let fall the Indictment. And I was
cleared by a public Writ, signed by the Deputy Governor, C. Markham, and the
Counsel, in Philadelphia, which I have to show.


Then the Company desired G. Keith to proceed, if he had any more proofs
against G. Whitehead.


G. Keith. Yes, I have.

See the Nature of Chapter page 29.
Says G. Whitehead to R. Gordon, Do thou look for Christ's coming again to
appear outwardly in a bodily Existence? If thou do thou may look until thy
Eyes drop out before thou will see such an Appearance of him.

Now see how G. Whitehead has excused this, The real Quaker. A real Protestant.
he says, He did not mean it of Christ's coming to Judgment; but he meant it
thus, because R. Gordon would needs have it, that Salvation was delayed till
Christ's outward coming. I am apt to think he abuses R. Gordon (not that I
would vindicate R. Gordon in every thing, for I think he did overcharge the
Quakers in some things at that time, but now I do not accuse or acquit him.)
But I say, he says, he only opposed that false Notion of R. Gordon, as if the
Saints remained under their Pollution till the Resurrection from the Dead. Can
you think so? He was a Protestant, and no Protestant will say any such thing.
We say, we are saved by hope. I say, in a Scripture sense we may expect that
great Salvation then even from all charge of Sin, tho not from any stain of
Sin. Not that the sense of Pardon is not made manifest before that day; but
that in that day, all that have Repented and Believed, he will clear them,
before God. Angels and Men. The Devil will be ready to accuse them in that day,
but Christ will then clear them. It will be a great solemn Assize, and there
will be a solemn Acquitment to all that have sincere Repented of their sins,
and believed in the Lord Jesus Christ.


Quaker. Let the passage be read out.


G. Keith. If we had not had these oppositions, we might have saved an Hour. I
will read the passage. Do thou look for Christ, as the Son of Mary to appear
outwardly in a bodily Existence to save thee, Nature of Christian. p. 29
according to thy words p. 30. If thou do, thou may look until thy Eyes
drop out, before thou will see such an appearance of him. Ye see these are plain
and express words agianst Christ's outward coming. The Scripture says we are
saved by hope, and hope that is seen is not hope, our great Salvation in the
full accomplishment of it, is at the Resurrection and Christ's last coming, then
will be the great Discharge and Acquitment, according to 2 Timothy 1.18. and 2 Timothy 4.16. The Lord grant that we may find mercy in that day, and that our sins
may not be laid to our charge. And Acts 3.19. it is said, Repent, and be
Converted, that your sins may be blotted out, when the times of refreshment
shall come, etc. The word is very well Translated, when the times of
Reanimation shall come, the Greek is, (...).


Quaker. I desire to be heard a word.


G. Keith. I have not done yet. I beg of you, I shall be but short. I had said
I had upward of six Manuscripts. What says T. Elwood (in his way of quibling)
six and an half? All these Manuscripts were read at the Meeting two years ago,
and for the Censure they gave of them; I said I thought they had (tho I confess
I judge very mincingly) censured these unsound expressions, Yet Tho. Elwood
tells me that I am guilty of Forgery, that I said the Yearly Meeting said any
thing like it. Here is the Paper of the Yearly Meeting, this Paper shows whom
it came from; does it find no fault with these Expressions in these
Pensilvanian Papers. Here is seven or eight, I will read a few lines. I have
brought an Original here, it is somewhat worn, but it may be read well enough;
I am glad that my Neighbor has such Charity for me, that he thinks I will not
read wrong; I can read every word of it, tho it be somewhat worn. I shall
forfeit the Name of an honest man, it I read one word different from the
Original.

The words in John Humphrey's first Letter.
Who is he that dares to make a Distinction between Christ's Body and his
Spirit, and to put asunder what God has joined together? Is not this to divide
Christ to use that Terms, viz. Christ within, and Christ without? when he
himself, in that very Body that suffered, said, he that eats my Flesh, and
drinks my Blood, dwells in me, and I in him, and in that day we shall know
that it is the very same that lives in us, that has died for us, which before
we could not come to know, although any should tell us of it; for Christ in us, is
the hope of Glory, and they that draw, us to look for Christ without, we are
not to go forth after them, to divide Christ's Body from his Spirit. I perceive
by G. Keith's Ten Articles of Faith, that they relish too much of Carnality, a
Carnal Body of Christ in Heaven, a Carnal Election and Reprobation, a Carnal
Justification and Adoption, a Carnal Day of Judgment and Resurrection, beyond
the Grave. I am grieved to hear some say, they did expect to be Justified by
that Blood that was shed at Jerusalem. Is It not to be carnally minded.


I have not read the whole Letter, but an entire Paragraph of it. So farewell
Christ without. You divide Christ, if you mention Christ without.

Now mark, these Ten Articles of mine, that he calls Carnal, they are short,
will you hear them? They are in Print. My Adversaries sent them over from
America to England, and that before I came to England, as an Indictment against
me; Frances Bugg met with them, and Printed them; my Adversaries here sent them
about as a great Crime against me.

Some of the Principles of G. Keith and his Friends.
1. That Bodily Sickness and Death came in by the Fall. 2. That Christ has now
in Heaven a Soul and a Body, that is not the Godhead, but the Temple of it, and
most gloriously united therewith. 3. That Christ's Body that was Crucified and
Buried without us, rose again without us; and is now in Heaven without us 4.
That the Man Christ Jesus will come again in that Body without us, to judge the
Quick and the Dead. 5. That there shall be a general day of Judgment, that all
the deceased Saints are in expectation of. 6. That we get not the Resurrection
of the Body, either in this mortal Life, or immediately after Death. 7. That
Faith in the Man Christ without us, as he Died for us, rose again, and is gone
into Heaven, wrought in us by thy Spirit of Christ, is universally necessary to
make Men true Christians, and Children of God, born of the Free Woman, who have
the Spirit of Adoption, crying, Abba Father. 8. That Christ's Obedience and
Righteousness, which he performed in, himself, without us, is imputed to us by
Faith for the Remission of Sins. 9. That Christ is not only God's Elect, but
all that shall be saved from the beginning to the end of the World, are God's
Elect, being chosen in him (not only before they Believe and Repent, but)
before the Foundation of the World. 10. That all and every one of the Members
of the Church of Christ (who are at age can speak) ought to confess with their
Mouths, in the hearing of some of their fellow Members, the Fundamental
Principles of their Christian Faith, before they can be owned to be Members of
the Church, that by the same, as well as by a good Life and Conversation, it
may be known who are qualified to be Members of our Church, which is a boundary
Term and Bond of our Union, the Spirit being the Principal, which may be easily
done by Answering to some plain Questions.

G. Keith his Ten Articles read all condemned to be Carnal by the Pensilvania
Letter of J. H. a Preacher among the Quakers there, these Ten Articles were
read at the Yearly Meeting at London, 1694. and the Letter that Condemned them,
also read at the said Yearly Meeting, and that Letter Justified by Th. Elwood,
the Patron and Advocate for that Yearly Meeting; and therefore we ought, if we
give Credit to Th. Elwood, to conclude that the Yearly Meeting at London, 1694.
has concluded all these Ten Articles to be Carnal, which yet express the
Common Faith of all Christendom.

The Second Letter Read.

The Words of John Humphery's Second Letter.
I craved no favor to my Paper from thee, nor them, but that word (only) which
was the omission of my Pen, and never intended to be put under a Bushel, if
occasion did require. But however let Deceit and Malice have its full force and
scope upon it, and that word (only) taken off the conclusion of my Paper, which
that saying of our Savior himself, when he Expounded his meaning unto them
(who in these days had offended at his own words) will clear me of your
Aspersion, John 6.63. It is the Spirit that Quickneth the Flesh profits
nothing, so he himself ascribed the Work of man's Salvation, and
Sanctification, not to the Flesh that Suffered, but to the Spirit that
Quickened; not to the Blood that was Shed at Jerusalem, but unto the Flesh and
Blood that is Spiritual, which the Saints was to feed upon, and their Robes was
made white by* and it does appear, that these that are otherwise minded, do not
rightly discern the Lord's Body.


Some of his own Fraternity persuaded him to put in the word, only, and that
would excuse the matter; he puts in the word, only, and he thinks it was
against his Conscience, and so bids put it out again.


Quaker. Whether do ye own sanctification to the blood outwardly shed, or to
the Spirit inwardly given.


G. Keith. I say to both, to the blood of Christ that was outwardly shed at
Jerusalem, and to the Spirit of Christ inwardly given, to believers.

Now they say that I have belied them, they never knew any that said they were
not sanctified by that blood. You see what proofs I have brought, and therefore
I must be an Apostate for accusing them of errors. Who would have thought, but
that the yearly Meeting, if they had any regard to the honor of Christ's
blood, would have shown greater zeal against these Men, than to excommunicate
me, for opposing their vile errors in Pensilvania, and for rendering that
precious blood shed for us as an unprofitable thing, so trampling it under
foot: But ye see, they have little at all censured them, and if you will
believe their Patron, (as ye have cause, they owning his Books) nothing at all.
Th. Ellwood affirms, I am guilty of Forgery, for saying that the yearly Meeting
passed any reproof on those passages, and whereas I was accused for saying, the
light within was not sufficient to salvation without something else. I have a
Letter from B. Chambers, one of the principal Evidences, that were against me,
he owns that I mean, by that, something else, not humane Learning, not the
Letter of the Scripture, not outward preaching, but I mean only the Man Christ
Jesus, and his death and sufferings and resurrection, etc. Now here is a new
book of Caleb Pusey come out, he calls it a modest account of the difference in
Principles between G. Keith and his Adversaries; and he would father it on me,
tho it was not in my thoughts, that Jesus of Nazareth cannot be something else
than the light within. I tell you, he would father it on me, because I say
there is but one only Christ. Now I say, Christ without does not admit of
another Christ within, and Christ within does not admit of another Christ
without us. But Christ without us admits of something else within us, and that
is his Spirit and Grace: And Christ within us, admits of something else
without, and that is his manhood. This is not another Christ, than what the
Scripture speaks of; but the Light within is one thing, the body of Christ is
another thing. Now they of Pensilvania and Th. Elwood give out that I differ
from them in Doctrine, these men say I do not: What Confusion is here among
them that say they are in Unity? I say the Light within is not sufficient,
without the Light without, Christ without us, yet the Sufficiency of the Light
and Grace of God within, in a true sense, I deny not, but own. And whereas they
say the most of my Proofs I have brought, have been from Philosophy; but it has
been only, that I may, by true Philosophy, overthrow their false Philosophy,
which destroys their Faith. I need not bring Scripture to prove these Points,
because they now profess to own them; but the thing is, the Honor of
Infallibility, and that they have accused G. Keith; that G. Keith has not
charged them truly. And here are the two things, their own infallibility, and
that I have unjustly accused them. Now whether I have or no, see by the
Articles: But if they grant or yield, that they have any Errors in any of their
Books, or unsound passages, that they need retract, and correct, then they are
found the false Accusers against G. Keith, and G. Keith's found Innocent. But
this will be hard for them to own; First, That they have Erred: And Secondly,
That they have falsely accused G. Keith, for saying they did Err. I have here a
Testimony from W. Penn, to prove that Bodily Death did not come in by Man's
Sin; and then it follows that the Resurrection of the Body does not come by
Christ's Resurrection.

W. Penn's words are, in Answer to Muggleton and Reeve, p. 55. If the Flesh of
Beasts is capable of Dying, rotting, and going to dust, who never sinned, why
should not Man have Dyed, and gone to dust, though he had never sinned.

You see this is almost expressly in terms. And whereas J. H. calls one of my
Articles, a Carnal Reprobation.

There is nothing about Reprobation in my Articles, and the word Carnal is not
in-any of the Ten.


Auditor. Now let him that Answers for W. Penn and Geo. Whitehead tell us what
he says to them Articles. But they said nothing to them good or bad, rare
Defendents!


G. Keith. I happened to charge W. Penn with self contradiction, will you hear
that proved? It was in my Printed Paper.


G. Keith has contradicted himself. How? Not as to Principles or Practices, but
as to his Opinion of W. Penn and G. Whitehead, but I distinguish betwixt G.
Whitehead and VV. Penn Orthodox, and G. Whitehead and VV. Penn Hetrodox, so
far as I quoted them, as Orthodox, I stand to these quotations; but when in
other Books and places they have contradicted them, they are accountable for
their Contradictions, and not I. So not the G. Whitehead Hetrodox, and guilty
of these vile Errors I have commended, but the G. Whitehead Orthodox, and the
like of W. Penn.

Now I beg your Patience for one or two Quotations more, before I have done. It
is out of Tho. Elwood, to show you that Tho. Elwood charges me with forgery,
because I said the Yearly Meeting did censure some of these unsound Papers.
Here is the passage, it is but short, p. 84. T. Ellwoods further Discovery.
Here ye see Friends (says T. Elwood) that that Paper of the Yearly Meeting is
so far from owning them of the other side, as he calls them, that is the
Friends in America, to be guilty of unsound and Erroneous Doctrines (which G.
K. here Expressly says, it does) that it does not undertake to determine,
whether the Offense (said to be given by some persons) was throuhg Erroneous
Doctrines, and unsound Expressions, or through weakness, frowardness, want of
Wisdom, and right understanding. And yet this man has the confidence and
falseness (meaning G. K.) to say positively, that paper does own them guilty of
holding unsound and erroneous Doctrines. This was my Charity to them, that I
thought they censured them, in some part or degree at least.

Now these are their words in their Yearly Meeting Paper, 1694. London, from
which I gathered, that they censured the words of those in Pensilvania: And
although it appears that some few Persons have given offense, either through
Erroneous Doctrines, unsound Expressions, or weakness, forwardness, want of
Wisdom, and right understanding, I construed, or to be equivalent to and, as
sometimes it is: Now see if I was not more charitable to the Yearly Meeting,
than he is to them. Here you see that that Paper of the Yearly Meeting, is so
far from owning them guilty of unsound Doctrines, which G. Keith says it does
etc. By all which it is plain, that not only Th. Elwood, but all that approve
his Books, approve and justify all these Vile Errors, I have proved them in
Pensilvania, guilty of, and if he may be credited, the Yearly Meeting at
London, 1694. is equally guilty with them.


Quaker. This is only thy different apprehension.


G. Keith. He says the Yearly Meeting has not found fault with any of these
Expressions.

Now let me read one Passage more, it is but about six Lines, and I have done
with the Printed quotations at present. page 99. He blames me for comparing the
Books of Friends, to the Books of the Greek and Latin Fathers, p. 99. For
further Discovery.

In comparing ( says Tho. Ellwood) the Books of Friends to the Books of them
called the Greek and Latin Fathers, he has not done as a Friend and Brother,
but as an Enemy, in supposing Friends Books to have been written by no better
guidance nor clearer sight than theirs who lived and writ in those dark times.

You see how modest they are here.


Auditors. They gave a shout, signifying their dislike, that the Quakers Books
should be preferred so far to the Greek and Latin Fathers, next to the days of
the Apostles.


Quaker, N. M. It is very well that the whole Paragraph be read, that it may
give the more satisfaction to the Auditory: which was accordingly done. T.
Ellwood says, He (viz. G. K.) turns off, and says, I reflect not only on him,
but on the late Christian Teachers and Writers, who have corrected the Errors
and unsound Expressions contained in the Books of them called the Greek and
Latin Fathers.

Now hear what he further says, In comparing the Books of Friends to the Books
of them called Greek and Latin Fathers, ut supra.


Quaker, J. Wait. I have made few Observations on the whole, one or two
particular, the other are general. The first is, that he charges G. Whitehead
and W. Penn to destroy the Object of Faith. Now, when he speaks of some
Doctrines, that were preached by him in 1678, and that he was reproved for
saying it was lawful to pray to Jesus Christ, he has vindicated W. Penn as to
this Point, who said he did so. -- Also he has vindicated G. Whitehead, saying
that -- He directed not to what either of them could say, but what Scripture
says, and he cites them a clear passage, that was then believed by him, and, I
believed by all Quakers. The other particular Observation I did note, is, that
the Quakers have not used recite the whole Author they write against; and I
appeal to you, whether G. Keith, in the opposition he has made, has ever
repeated a whole Author. These are my particular Observations. The general is,
that what has been casually dropped, and I believe there are none concerned on
this occasion, but (I say) they may sometimes be apt to drop some Expressions,
that they will not stand by. But to urge these against the whole Party, is too
hard, and is very G. Keith does not charge it on the whole, but only on the
Guilty, and such as cloak and excuse them.
uncharitable; and therefore, I hope, you will not conclude the whole body
concerned in it. And G. Keith has been conversant among us eight and twenty
years, or more, and has preached the Doctrines owned by us, and writ many Books
that related to fundamental Articles of Faith; I believe him that they were
owned by the People he was joined with. And at the yearly meeting, the charge
against him, and his expulsion, was not matter of Doctrine, but Practice, which
was turbulent: And therefore he has apostatized from what he was before, from
the meekness and integrity that is agreeable to the Doctrine of Christianity.


Stranger. G. Keith. I see you are almost spent, I will answer for you. He
says, it was the whole body that was against you; it was the worse, that the
Excommunication should be from the whole yearly Meeting, without mentioning any
thing in particular. For a man to apostatize, is to apostatize from the whole
Faith; but for a man to differ with respect to particular things, this is not
Apostasy.


G. Keith. The words of the Excommunication run thus "I am a man of no
Christian "Spirit, I have dismembered myself from the Church of Christ. If they
had said from this particular Society, it might have passed; but they say, from
the Church of Christ. And why? Because there is no Church of Christ on Earth,
but the Quakers; and no Representative of them, but the Yearly Meeting in
Gracechurch-street. You see how weak that man's Objections are. The Auditory
shouted.


Quaker, H. Goldney. This man asserts a Lie, and then the People are taken with
it, as if it were a Truth


G. Keith. If I have spoken amiss, I am willing to be brought to a trial. He
says I have answered many Books, wherein I have not recited all the Books I
have answered. It is true, and I blame not them for not doing so. But they say,
I only take bits and scraps here and there. I say, what cause have I to recite
G. Whitehead and W. Penn's whole Books to you, when they have not done so? I
think it sufficient to give an account of their sense from full Periods and
Paragraphs. He says I have already cleared George Whitehead and William Penn,
from that charge that they have not destroyed the Object of Faith. And I say I
have proved that they have destroyed the Object of Faith; if they have at other
times Owned it, let them disown and retract their Errors; I am not to account
for their Contradictions. They have Contradicted themselves; they have disowned
the Object of Faith; and if I have charged them with it, this is no
Contradiction in me, but in them.


Quaker. H. Goldney made an interruption, while G. K. was speaking, as he often
did, and gave great offense to the Auditory with his impertinencies and
reflections, calling G. K. Liar, Impostor, Apostate.


G. Keith. The reading of this Paper, if ye please, shall conclude this
Meeting. After T. Ellwood came out with his further discovery, I made my
Complaint to the Monthly Meeting at Bull and Mouth, against the Forgeries and
false Accusations that his Book was filled with, and I begged of them, that
they would hear my Charge against him; but they would not suffer me, they said
I might print, as T. Ellwood did; but I said I could not, they have a Stock, I
have not. Whereupon I went to some of the Church-Party that favored me, and
told them, if I could not get a meeting to hear me, my design was to give forth
a printed Advertisement of a Meeting to clear myself of these things, and they
might be present if they would. Some of their Party said to me, George, do not
they, or some of them would give me a meeting. Accordingly they gave me a
meeting. They took notice of some of Ellwood's Forgeries and Abuses; some of
them have, I hope, that Courage, that I believe they would not be offended nor
afraid if I named them: They have said in their Paper, T. Ellwood has done me
wrong.


Quaker, H. Goldney. Let us know their names, who they are.


G. Keith. We must use some little Policy, as well as ye. Some of them are
eminent among you. Here is a Copy of a Paper containing an account of the
matter. There were, I think, nine or ten of them, H. Goldney, if I should name
them, would not deny them to be his Brethren.


Quaker, H. Goldney. I dare thee to name their names, or else thou art a Liar,
an Impostor, a Cheat; I dare say it is a Cheat. And turning to G. K. he said, O
thou Liar, thou contentious Creature!


G. Keith. See this little man's passion now, what is he but a Creature, and a
contentious Creature? I contend for Truth, he and they against it. I will not
name them without their consent; only bid this angry man, Henry Goldney, be
silent, and I will read their Paper, containing their Censure against T.
Ellwood in diverse Note, They told me, It was sufficient to name a Few of Many,
to prove T. E. guilty of wronging me in his Books.
particulars.


The true Copy of a Paper containing a Censure and Judgment of a Meeting of
Friends, (owned by Tho. Ellwood's Brethren, to be in Unity with them, and
generally in good Repute among them) held at London the 12th Month, 1694, in
diverse weighty particulars.
IN Thomas Ellwood 's Book, entitled, A further Discovery, etc. page 31 Thomas
Ellwood blames G. K. for mistating the Controversy, and cunningly sliding in
the word Within, when he knew it was not in the words charged, nor in the words
proved.

A true Copy of the three Judgments, p. 6. are these words: All which are
something else than the People called Quakers understand by the Light, to wit,
the light in every man's Conscience, which G. K. alleges, is Proof that G. K.
intended the Light within.

In Benjamin Chambers Letter, dated Philadelphia the 24 th of the fourth Month,
1693. one of the four credible Evidences against G. K. are these words
following. The substance of what Tho. F^tzw^ters had said, to wit, that
according to his own Apprehension of thee, thou did not believe the Light of
Christ within Man is sufficient for Salvation without something else: To which
words thee did then in the audience of the Meeting forthwith reply, No more I
do not, without something else

In John Delaval 's Letter, dated the 24th of the 10th Month, 1692. are these
words, cited out of G. W. 's Book: That the Light which is sufficient to
convince of Sin, and leads out of it, is sufficient to guide unto Salvation,
but such is the Light of Christ in every man.

John Humphry's Two Letters read, and both to the same purpose.

T. E. Further Discovery, etc. page 101. are these words: And this makes a
Verbal Confession; yea, a bare Verbal Confession, sufficient to yoke them, as
he phrases it, together in Church Fellowship.

Reasons and Causes of the Separation, page 22. ad finem; Tho. Elwood leaves
this out, viz. Touching these necessary and fundamental Principles of Christian
Doctrine, as well as that their Conversation is such as becomes the Gospel of
our Lord Jesus Christ. Page 36. That the Church of Christ is the multitude of
sincere Believers in Christ, who ought to manifest their Faith to one another,
by the living confession of the Mouth, flowing from the living Faith in the
Heart, accompanied with the seal and confirmation of a Holy and Christian life
and conversation.

Page 103. Tho. Ellwood accuses G. K. for giving of false Quotation, or
forging Quotation out of Robert Barkly's Book. Let the Quotations be read out
of R. B's Anarc.
G. K's Quotation compared with Robert Barkly's agrees, as quoted; Reasons and
Causes, etc. page 16. for Substance of Doctrine, page 24, 25, 26. in express
words, page 106. T. E. admits of Substance.

Further Discovery, p. 19. Tho. Ellwood accuses G. K. that he blames Friends
that they were gone too much from the outward to the inward. But G. K. p. 20.
which Tho. Ellwood brings for Proof, says, That he blames some persons for not
rightly and fully preaching Christ without; so that Tho. Ellwood's consequences
seems not fair, but strained.

Page 22. Tho. Ellwood accuses George Keith of a Fallacy, in declaring, he
refused not to go forth at the Yearly Meeting: which Fallacy alleged, was,
That G. K. should refuse to go out some one day of the yearly meeting: but that
not appearing to us by any Quotation, the supposed Fallacy appears not. And
further; whereas Tho. Elwood alleges, tha^ he was led into this Mistake by G.
K's obscure way of writing; for although in page 14. nor 18. of the Book Reasons
and Causes, as Tho. Ellwood unduly argues There is not mentioned, any Day,
Month or Year wherein the yearly Meeting at Philad. was held.
, yet in page 3. Plea of the Innocent, quoted by himself, page 19 of his first
Book called an Epistle, etc. we find G. K. gives account* the Yearly Meeting at
Philadelphia was in the first week of the 7th month 1691.

Further Discovery, p. 26 Tho. Ellwood says, G. K. asks why they contradicted
the sound Judgment of a Monthly Meeting at Philadelphia, passing due Censure
upon W. S. sixth month thereafter, and says. It does not sound as if it came
from a sound Judgment; as if a Judgment now were capable of contradicting a
Judgment that should be given six months after; whereas it appears by the date
of the Judgment given by the public Friends, to be nine months after the
Yearly Meeting, the first being as above, the 1 st of the seventh month, 91;
the other bearing date the 4 th of the fourth month, 92: The which Book, Tho.
Ellwood being so conversant in, looks as if he could not be ignorant of the
adjourned Meeting, being six months after the Yearly Meeting, to wit, the 27 th
of the twelfth month, as appears in page 10. Reasons and Causes; and that
wherein the supposed Judgment of the Yearly Meeting is, is dated nine months
after the Yearly Meeting.

In the same Book, page 35. Tho. Ellwood alleges, That he no where gave that
as the only, or any Reason, why the Meeting could not adjourn, to wit, because
the Book and Clark was gone. Page 36, and 37. he adds, Let G. K. clear himself
fairly of this if he can, till then I shall take it for certain, that that
Monthly Meeting was ended and broken up, part of the Friends gone away, the
Clerk gone, the Book in which the Proceedings of the Meeting should be recorded
gone, before the adjournment was made, and consequently that Adjournment not
good, but invalid. Ditto, page 42, and 43. Whereas Tho. Ellwood should have
brought matter of Fact, to prove G. K. guilty of the Separation, instead
thereof, he argues, as we think, unfairly by logical Nicety.

Page 42. he blames G. K. greatly, for not putting the Printer's name to some
of his Books. But it is well known this has been the frequent practice of the
People called Quakers, not to put the Printer's name to their Books, in times
of suffering.

Page 91. Tho. Ellwood alleges, he did not understand that the Doctrine of the
Faith of Christ, as he died, being necessary to our Christianity and Salvation,
etc. was by him reputed a Doctrine in Controversy between G. K. and others, in
America, when in several places of his Books it plainly appears, it was the
principal Doctrine in Controversy. See Reasons and Causes, page 8, and 21, 22.
with many others.

G. Keith. The Paper is read, the Question was not concerning the Light
indefinitely, but whether the Light within was sufficient to Salvation, without
the Man Christ and his Death, etc. Thomas Ellwood accuses me unjustly. That I
cunningly slid in the word Light within; as if that were not the state of the
Question, but Light indefinitely comprehending Christ both Light without and
within. But ye see how the citations they bring in their Paper clear me, and
show T. Ellwood his injustice against me. -- You see there is the Light within,
not the Light without, in the Citations they have brought to clear me, and to
blame T. Ellwood.

And here is another thing they find fault with, as to T. Ellwood's wronging
me, as if I had made a mere Verbal Confession, a sufficient qualification to a
Member of the Church of Christ.

See here they cite my Book, Reasons and Causes, p. 22. -- Take notice how they
notify his Forgery, that he leaves out my words, -- T. Ellwood says, I make a
mere Verbal Confession a Qualification for being a Member of the Church. But I
say not so, as if a Verbal Confession were enough, but as well a Conversation,
such as becomes the Gospel, is necessary to qualify a Member.

So my Book is, Such a Conversation as becomes the Gospel, p. 36. Reasons and
Causes, etc. -- I appeal to you, is not this more than a Verbal Confession? T.
Ellwood charges me to say, That a mere Verbal Confession is enough to make a
man a Member of the Church of Christ.

Now, p. 103 T. Ellwood accuses me unjustly (as his own Brethren do observe)
for giving a false Quotation out of R. Barclay's Book called the Anarchy, etc.
but they clea^ me, and declare it to be true, as it is.

T. Ellwood quibbles about Substance, finding fault with my Saying. Somewhere
it agrees in Substance with R. B. as elsewhere in express words. -- Now these
men take notice that T. Ellwood is unfair in taking that liberty to himself he
will not allow to me: They observe, he admits of Substance of Doctrine in his
own Citations, but will not allow it to me.

Another thing T. Ellwood accuses G. Keith (as they observe in their Censure)
that he blames them for going too much from the outward to the inward: But
these are not my words, nor sense. And they censure T. Ellwood for making a
strained Consequence on my words; for, though I blamed them for not rightly
preaching Christ without, yet not for going to the inward Light: for if they
did go rightly to God's Light and Gift in their Hearts, they would not hold
such gross Errors. But he says, I blame them for going from the outward to the
inward, which is not so. See p. 22.

Again, they censure him in his blaming me for not naming the Day, Month, or
Year wherein that Yearly meeting at Philadelphia was held, which he makes the
ground of his perversion, and would excuse it.

You see he argues like a rare Logician. He says, I do not name the Year, nor
Day; nor is it in p. 14, nor p. 18. But what then? I do it in another page.
This is rare Logic. Now, I say, you have both in p. 3. quoted from The Plea of
the Innocent. Which p. 3. T. Ellwood has quoted for another purpose, but could
not see it for that.

And all this Proof is, that I did not tell it in p. 14, nor p. 18 but I did it
in p. 3. His Argument is a Sophism, and is faulty in not making a sufficient
enumeration.

Again they censure him for charging me with Nonsense. Pray, may not a meeting
held six months after contradict a meeting going before? Very well. But he has
given out that I am so weak a man, that I cannot write sense. This morning one
came to me with Henry Goldney, and said, People would hoot at me in the
Meeting, (but it is fulfilled on themselves) thinking me crazed: And so here is
a Paper against me, that I cannot speak sense: And why? Because he feigns, that
I said a meeting six months before contradicts a meeting held six months after
it; when there is no such thing; but that a meeting six months after,
contradicts a meeting six months before.

When Tho. Ellwood could not prove, that I began the Separation at
Philadelphia, by any Evidence of Matter of Fact, he essays to do it by false
Logic, arguing, That the Cause must be before the Effect. Therefore because, I
say, Th. Loid and they that were Magistrates went away, this was the beginning
of the Separation, and a cause of it. And so when he cannot bring a reason in
Matter of Fact, he will go to false Logic for it: So I answered his Argument,
saying, All learned men, that write of causes and effects, acknowledge that a
priority of time is not necessary to the cause; but it is enough that there be
a priority of nature; the first moment the Sun was created, there was light.
And then besides, the cause cannot be the effect, says he; if their going away
from that meeting were the cause of the separation, it was not the effect. But
I said to him, formal and material causes may be both cause and effect. As for
example; The formal and material causes of a man, are his Soul and Body, and
they are the man. The material and formal causes of this House, are the Stones,
the Bricks, the Timber, and the Fashion. Now here these causes are the effect.
Now Th. Loid's going away was a cause of the Separation, and yet was a
beginning of the Separation: And is it not shameful? They accuse me of
Separation, but they run to a perversion of Philosophy to prove it by, that the
cause is before the effect; when they have no other Arguments against me, but
false Logic and vain Philosophy and Deceit, and his own Brethren here in this
Paper do censure him, for his arguing unfairly by Logical nicety.

Here is another Observation of these honest men: they censure him for saying,
he did not understand that the Doctrine of the Faith of Christ, as he died,
etc. being necessary to our Salvation, was reputed a Doctrine in Controversy
betwixt us. -- Whereas the principal Doctrine in Controversy between them and
me, was about the Faith of Christ, as he died, etc. whether necessary to our
Note, W. Penn (as is proved) has said, We need not preach it, the necessary
consequence whereof is, They need not believe it.
Salvation.

Here is something also to take notice of, that he blames me as not fair, for
not putting my Name to my Book, nor the Name of the Printer. Now the Quakers
have done so in England, in Suffering Times; and yet the Printer in America was
prosecuted by an Act of Parliament, for not printing his Name to some of my
Books, and they took away his Letters and Frame: But, I find, that which is
Persecution in England, is esteemed good Justice in Philadelphia.


Quaker, N. Marks. I have something to propose to you, if you please. We are
all in general very apt, and too apt, to have a good Opinion of ourselves, it
is very near to Mankind to do so. You have very well answered the Design of
this meeting in this; you have heard him with a great deal of temper. I desire
you further to consider, that all considerate men, when they hear one part,
hear but with one Ear. So far as G. Keith thinks fit to make this public, you
may expect an Answer, and I hope you will reserve one Ear to hear that. I have
a Paper that some persons concerned in this Challenge have sent, that they
desire may be read. Which was consented to.


G. Keith. The truth is, I could be almost content to go away, and say nothing
to it, there is so little of value in it. They say I began with them, but they
began with me in Pensylvania. I was doing my duty, in preaching Christ without,
and Christ within; they charged me with preaching two Christ's. I went to some
of them about it, but they took their part against me. I laid it before the
Ministry at the Yearly meeting, they also took their part. Now, you know, he
that affirms, on him lies the business of proving. W. Pen, when I was opening a
place of Scripture, he charges me with being an Apostate and Impostor. Here he
charges me with being an Apostate; I say, to him it belongs to make his charge
good, but he goes away. -- At the Yearly meeting, I put it to him to make it
good. I do not doubt but this meeting will sound through the Nation. They urge
me to Printing; I say again, I have not either Estate or Time to print Book
upon Book. And though I have not answered the said two So nor have they answered
my Book, Gross Error and Hypocrisy detected; nor my Book against Samuel
Jennings. So here are Two for Two: But I think I have effectually answered them
here, as to the main, and so, I hope, will many others judge.
Books, why may not I say as they do, They are not worth answering? As for
example, There is a Book called, The Snake in the Grass, (I would not vindicate
all things in it) but they have been urged to answer it; their Answer is, it is
not worth answering: This man that prints this half-sheet says, it cannot be
supposed that G. Keith can answer eighteen sheets of Paper in a Meeting. Why
can it be ^upposed? But G. Fox can answer an hundred sheets of Paper in a few
Pages. He has answered Books of ten or twelve sheets in a few lines. And as for
their upbraiding my Friends for not bearing the charge of Printing my Books,
they that own me here, are not many of them rich, and I would not put them to
it. But now there is the thing, the Controversy is, whether the rich Church,
or the poorer Church, be the Chapter of Christ. G. Keith's is the I call it not G.
Keith's Church, otherwise than as related to them as one of them; as I call the
other their Church, N. Mark's Church, i. e. to which he is related; but he did
well to own his Fallibility, seeing he gave so great a Proof of it not long
ago, by severely accusing a poor innocent Maidservant of his of Theft, whose
Innocence soon after was manifest to him.
poor Church, and theirs is the rich Church, and I am not ashamed of my
Poverty, seeing I have not done any dishonest thing. I have weakened my Estate
by printing what I have printed already; there is a Printer here, that can own
I have paid near forty pounds to him for Printing. Now they upbraid me for my
Poverty. Their Church is the true Church, because the rich Church; and ours the
false Church, because the poor Church.


Quaker, N. Marks. You should hear one side but with one Ear, and leave the
other free for the other side.


G. Keith. I am persuaded the Reasons given in the Paper read at the beginning,
were no just Reason for their not appearing. But though some comparisons are
odious, yet give me leave to make a comparison. May a Malefactor make this
excuse; You shall not call me before a Justice without my consent? If a man rob
me, I may complain of him as a Robber, and without his consent call him to
account; but here is a strange thing, injuring men may not be called to account
without their consent, it will trespass against the Law, and intrenches upon
liberty of Conscience. I was advised to go before the Lord Mayor of London, and
I did, and told him, I hoped it would give no offense to Authority: for the
things I was concerned in were the common Doctrines of Christianity; if there
be any Tumult, says I it shall not be on my side: And the Lord Mayor was
pleased to consent to it. Now their printed Paper seems to reflect on the
public Authority, and not what I have done.

And thus the Meeting peaceably ended, between the second and third hour in the
Afternoon.
Note, If any of my Adversaries object, That diverse of these Proofs here
brought, were brought formerly in my Book against W. Penn and G. W. called, A
short List of the vile and gross Errors which T. Ellwood has replied to in his
printed Book called Truth defended; I answer, I know not any one of them that
he has sufficiently answered unto, to give the least Sati^faction to any sound
Christian, his Answers being merely Evasions and Perversions; as I should have
shown, if he had appeared. But beside, there are many new Proofs here brought,
beside the former, which I am well satisfied they can never truly answer, but
by a sincere and free Confession of their gross Errors, and a hearty retracting
and relinquishing them, And if any that were present at that Meeting, or may
happen to read this printed Account, with the proofs brought out of their Books
in full Periods and Paragraphs, as often as there was any occasion, are
desirous to see the Books, and to read the Proofs in the said Books, that were
then brought, or any others that may be brought, I freely offer them that are
sober and impartial persons, to let them have the free sight and view of them,
leisurely to read and consider them, if they please to call at my House. And I
the rather make this Offer, because diverse of these Books are not easily to be
had, not being in the hands of many. And because I had not time enough to read
diverse other great Proofs that I had, being hindered with the impertinent
Digressions of those that interposed, (whom we had no just Cause to hear,
pretending no Deputation from the persons they spoke for, and therefore only
were permitted, by Favor, to show their Impertinencies). I therefore think fit
to add some other few very considerable Proofs out of these men's Books, and
perhaps one or two out of Books approved and commended by them, and some few
more of W. Penn's and George Whitehead's Self-Contradictions.

AN APPENDIX, CONTAINING Some other Considerable Passages for Proofs, out of
these Men's Books, relating to the foregoing Heads; and some few more of W.
Penn's and G. Whitehead's Self-Contradictions, which were designed to have been
read at the Meeting at Turners-Hall, 11th of the Month called June, 1696. but
for the Diversions made, could not then be read.
IN George Whitehead's Book called The Divinity of Christ, he has this most
unsound and scandalous passage concerning Christ, how a Sacrifice, and his
Blood.

In his Answer to T. Danson's Synopsis of Quakerism, p. 70. first he sets down
the words of John Owen thus: The Sacrifice denotes his Human Nature, whence God
is said to purchase his Church with His own Blood, Acts 20.28. for He offered
Himself through the eternal Spirit; there was the Matter of the Sacrifice,
which was the Human Nature of Christ, Soul and Body; His Soul was made an
Offering for Sin, Isa. 53.10. His Death had the Nature of a Sacrifice.

Against these sound words of John Owen he quarrels, and contradicts thus:

Answ. These passages are but darkly and confusedly express^d; as also we do
not read in Scripture, that the Blood of God, by which he purchased his Church,
is ever called the Blood of the Human Nature: nor that the Soul of Christ was
the Human Nature, or was put to death with the Body, (for the Wicked could not
kill the Soul) though his Soul was made an Offering for Sin, and he poured it
out to Death, (he bore the Sin of many, and made intercession for
Transgressors) but what Death (and in what manner) was it, is a Mystery truly
to know; for his Soul in his own being was immortal, and and the Nature of God
is divine, and therefore that the Blood of God should be of human (or earthly)
nature, appears inconsistent; and where does the Scripture call the Blood of
God Human, or Human Nature? Neither do we read, that the Blood which bears
Record in the Earth, and agrees in one with the Spirit, (and which purges the
Conscience, washes and cleanses the Believer in the Light from all Sin) was
ever called by the Apostles the Blood of the Human Nature. Nor do we read, that
the Saints did eat and drink Flesh and Blood that was of a human nature, to
receive Divine Life in them thereby: for the Water of Life and Blood of Christ,
which are said to wash, sanctify, and justify; which agrees with the Spirit
in those Works and Effects We never read, that they are called in Scripture by
the name of Human Nature, for the Spirit that quickens is divine, and it is the
Spirit that gives Life, the Flesh profits nothing, John 6. Now this unsound
Doctrine of G. W. does so well agree with that in John Humphrey's two Letters
abovementioned, that John Humphrey seems to have been his Disciple in the Case:
and it is certain this sort of Doctrine of G. Whitehead has corrupted the
Minds of many. We see he will not own either the Flesh, or Blood of Christ, or
Soul of Christ, to belong to the human nature.

Annotat. Before I understood the Mystery of Iniquity and Antichristianism that
lay hid, under the finding fault with this name or term Human Nature of Christ,
and his Humanity, observing that diverse found fault with it, I was ready to
excuse them, thinking, that though they disowned the term Human, yet they owned
that signified by it, to wit, the real Manhood of Christ, having a real Soul
and Body, that is not the Godhead, but most gloriously united therewith. And
accordingly I did in part excuse them, as in my Book The True Christ owned,
page 20 and page 105 I cited some words of Hilarious, Lib. 10. de Trinitate;
Quid per Naturam Humani corporis concepta ex Spiritu S. caro judicatur. i. e.
Why is the Flesh conceived of the Holy Ghost, judged by the nature of an Human
Body? But neither Hilarious nor I judged that the Body, though conceived of the
Holy Ghost, was any part of the Substance of the Holy Ghost, the Particle of in
that place denoting the Holy Ghost to be the Efficient Cause of that
Conception, but not the Material. But that my Mind and Sense, that Christ had
the true Nature of Man, of Soul and Body, neither of which were the Godhead,
was sound then as now, and the same as now, plainly appears from Page 20. of my
Book above cited, where I say, Human Soul may signify the true Soul of Man,
having all the essential properties of man's Soul, and its whole Perfection.
And if in this sense any will say, That Christ has a Human Soul, and call the
Manhood of Christ his Humanity, there needs no contention about it: For in
the Latin Tongue we have not a word so proper as Humanitas, to signify the
Manhood; and if we may say Humanitas in Latin, we may say in English, Humanity.
G Whithead his Objection against the word Human, as signifying Earthly, has
the same force against calling Christ Adam, coming from the Hebrew word Adamah,
that signifies Earth. And the Scripture calls the Man Christ the second
Adam; and certainly the Man Christ had not only that which was Heavenly, but
had even our Earthly part, but without sin; his Body being nourished with
Earthly Food, which Body now glorified is Heavenly. But that I differed as much
in Doctrine from G. Whithead then as now, as concerning the Blood of Christ,
and the sense of that place of Scripture, Acts 20.28. (what that Blood of God
was, wherewith he purchased his Church, he affirming it was the Blood, not of
the Human Nature or Humanity, but of the Divine Nature, as may be seen above)
appears in my Book abovementioned, The true Christ owned, page 94. I expressly
say, I grant that there is such a figurative speech of the Communication of
Names and Properties, whereby the Man Christ is called God, and also God is
called Man; and God is said to have shed his Blood, although Christ as God has
not Blood to shed, but only as Man; yet by reason of that most rare and
wonderful Union betwixt the Godhead and Manhood, the Blood of the Man Christ is
called the Blood of God, Acts 20.28. This may serve as one great Instance, to
show, That as I am not changed in this Doctrine from what I was many years ago
(that Book of mine being printed Anno 1679.), so I did then as widely differ
from G. W. in that great Article of Faith, as I do now. But I confess I knew
not that any such absurd Doctrine was in his Books, till of late that I made a
more narrow search, occasioned by his defending the same Errors in his
Pensilvanian Brethren.

Again; In the same Answer to T. Danson's Synopsis, T. D having affirmed that
there is a continual need of Faith and Repentance in this life, G. Whithead
answers, That there is a continual need of Repentance, this I deny; for true
Repentance, where it is wrought, and the fruits of it brought forth, this is
unto Salvation never to be repented of, and is attended with a real forsaking
of sin and transgression.

Annot. G. Whithead's Ignorance greatly appears in this, that he thinks
Repentance and Perfection inconsistent; but it is a strange Perfection that
destroys an Evangelical Virtue and a Fruit of the Spirit, such as Repentance
is; and what is Repentance? A change of the mind, or a transformation of the
mind, as the Greek word, Englished Repentance, implies; or more particularly,
true Evangelical Repentance is a great aversion and perfect hatred of the soul
to all sin, and a deep humiliation before God, with godly sorrow and contrition
of soul for sins past, which is very consistent with, and very becoming the
most perfect and holy men that ever lived, since all have sinned* It seems it
is from this great Error that he and many others of his Brethren seldom, if
ever, pray for Forgiveness of sin, at least for themselves; for if there be no
need of Repentance, it will follow that there is no need of praying for
Forgiveness: But all sound Christians of true spiritual experience do know,
that both Repentance for sin, and praying for Forgiveness of sin, are well
consistent with the greatest degree of Holiness attainable in this life: Nor
does the praying for Forgiveness imply universally the want of it, more than
the praying for the Spirit implies the want of it.

Again; Whereas it was said in the above Narrative, That G. Whithead has
allegorized away the Birth, Death, Resurrection, and coming again of Christ
without us to Judgment; take these plain Proofs.

1. His allegorizing away his Birth, prophesied of by Isaiah, 9 6. Unto us a
child is born, a Son is given: This he expounds of Christ born within.
He-Goats Horn, Page 51.

2. He allegorizeth away his Resurrection, expressly denying that Christ was
bodily seen of Paul, and perverting that place in 1 Cor. 15.8. to Christ
within. Page 51.

3. He allegorizeth away his coming without us to Judgment, in these
Scriptures, Matthew. 16.27, 28 1 These. 4 15, 16, 17 Light and Life, Page 40, 41.

4. Both he and Richard Hubberthorne allegorize away his Burial, Light and
Life, Page 52. and He-Goats Horn, Page 62 perverting that Scripture, Isa. 53.
He made his grave with the wicked; he adulterates the true Translation, and
turns it, in the wicked, which the Hebrew does not bear: Where see a most
absurd account of the Resurrection, turning it wholly to the Resurrection of
two Seeds in two Bodies within men.

5. He allegorizeth away the Resurrection of the Saints Bodies, by his
perversion of that place of Scripture, -- Who shall change our vile body, and
fashion it like to his glorious body, Phil. 3.21. to a change of the Body that
the Apostles and Saints witnessed before death; and yet in contradiction to
that, in his Real Quaker a Real Protestant, Page 105. he understands that very
place of a change of the vile, or low and humble Body, like unto the glorious
Body of Christ, as a thing to come.

Some other of Geo. Whithead's Contradictions.
1. GEO. Whithead in his Light and Life, page 69. thinks him a very blind and
ignorant man that reckons Bodies Celestial and Terrestrial to be all one in
Matter and Substance; and yet the same G. W. in malice of the Independent
Agent, page 17. (recited and approved by John Pennington, Apostat. exposed, p.
16.) owns that Christ's Body now in Heaven is the same in substance he had on
earth: So by his own words he has declared himself to be a blind and ignorant
man, and yet Infallible, otherwise by his own word no true Minister.

2. In a late Called the Christian Faith.
printed Half sheet, signed by him and seventeen more, he owneth Christ to be
both God and Man, and owneth the Humanity of Christ, making it synonimous with
Manhood; and yet it is proved in the above Narrative, that he neither owneth
him to be God or Man; finding fault with W. Burnet for saying that Christ as
God had a Father, and had Glory with God before the world began; arguing as the
Socinians do, that this would imply two Gods; s^e Light and Life, page 47.
Again; He finds fault with T. Danson for saying that the Man Christ had a
Created Soul: Answer to T D. 's Synopsis, p. 18. And he blames R. G. for saying
Christ has a Bodily Existence without us, in Heaven; Not. of Christianity,
page 41.

3. In his late Answer to the Queries sent to the Yearly Meeting of the people
called Quakers, at London, signed by Dr. Lancaster, Chaplain to the Bishop of
London, he owns the Blood of Christ that was outwardly shed, to be a part of
the Sacrifice, even Christ's Blood that was shed without the gates of
Jerusalem, together with the whole Sacrifice of himself, both of Soul and Body,
was a true Propitiation and Atonement for man's Reconciliation and Peace with
God, for Remission of sin, through a living Faith, and true Repentance, etc.
But in his Light and Life, he denies that the outward Blood was that by which
we are either sanctified or justified, and calls it a Type, and says the
shedding of it was a wicked man's act; from whence he infers that we are not
justified by the outward Blood, but pleads, that the Offering Passover Blood,
by which we are cleansed, is within, as the New Covenant is, and not without;
See in the Narrative above. And this sort of Unchristian Doctrine G. Whithead
(as many others) did receive neither from the Spirit of Christ within, nor from
the Holy Scriptures, but, as it seems, from G. Fox, who in a printed Paper of
his, having this Title, To all People in Christendom, concerning Perfect Love,
etc. also concerning Christ's Flesh which was offered, (which printed Paper I
have; it is joined with some other printed Papers under this general Title,
Several Papers given forth for the spreading of Truth; See Page 55, 57, 59.)
has very unsound and unchristian Doctrine concerning Christ's Flesh, that is,
the Offering, in which is the belief; by Christ's Flesh meaning not his outward
Flesh. Some of his words I shall faithfully recite as follows, (that to me
are very unsound, and I believe in general to all sound in the Faith): -- And
Christ according to the flesh crucified, the Lamb slain; that flesh of his
which is a Mystery, when the first Adam's and Eve's flesh was defiled, and so
death reigned from Adam to Moses, page 55. -- And Page 57. So Adam's, Eve's
flesh was defiled, but the flesh of Christ, the Lamb slain from the foundation
of the world, yet his flesh never corrupted, which flesh is the offering; for
as he was God he did not dye; and this flesh is a Mystery; and in this flesh
(Note) is the belief that takes away the sin, that never corrupted, that is the
Offering for sin, and the Blood of this flesh cleanses from sin, p. 58. -- Now
they that are in the belief of this flesh, and offering, sees over all
offerings, to the beginning into the Glory which was with the Father before the
world began; for all outward Offerings and Sacrifices was given to man after he
fell, and the Lamb slain; which Offering is a Figure of Christ, the Seed to be
brought forth and offered up, and he the Top stone over all laid, to end and
finish all the outward Offerings, and Types, and Shadows, and in him there is
none, Page 59. So through this Offering is the Reconciliation, through the
offering of his flesh, that never corrupted, but takes away corruptions, and
his Blood cleanses from Corruptions the Life real. And so this pure Flesh,
this Offering, is set over all, which never corrupted, which must be your meat
if you live: Though there is more in all these things, which is hard to be
uttered, and cannot be uttered Yet.

Annot. It seems what G. Fox did not so fully utter as to this Mystery, George
Whithead had a mind to utter in his Book called Light and Life, that may be as
a proper Key to these dark Sayings of George Fox. If any object to me, as Th
Elwood has done in his Book falsely called Truth defended, That I have in some
of my Books owned Christ's flesh and Blood within; I answer, I confess it; but
no otherwise but in the Scripture sense, and by way of Allegory, and in
Metaphor; as when the Divine Life inwardly enjoyed in the Saints, is also
called by way of Metaphor and Allegory, Bread, Wine, Oil, Milk, Honey, M^rrow,
and Fatness: But I no where remember that I ever said or writ, That the Life or
Flesh of Christ within men is the Offering, the Atonement for sin. And if any
can show me any such Passage or Saying in any of my Books, I am most willing
and ready to disown and retract it, and blame my Rashness in so saying; but I
know no such Passage in any of my Books.

4. In a Treatise of Oaths presented to the King and Parliament, 1675.
recommended in a Preface to it, and the Reasons given in it, which Preface is
signed by George Whithead, and William Penn, and Eleven more, and which Preface
obliges G. Whithead to confess that he owned the Contents of that Book at that
time, otherwise he might be construed to put a Trick upon the whole Nation, it
is expressly said, Page 17. N 7. We look upon it (says he and they) to be no
less than a presumptuous tempting of God, to summon him as a Witness, not only
to our terrene but trivial business, such as we should doubtless account it an
high Indignity always to solicit an Earthly Prince to give his attendance
about. What! make God, the Great God of Heaven and Earth our Caution in worldly
Controversies; as if we would bind him to obtain our ends, that is to make too
bold with him, and to carry an undue distance in our minds toward him that
made us; an Irreverence we can by no means away with. But in flat Contradiction
to this, there is an Epistle printed to the Friends called Quakers, within
these few Weeks, in this present Year, 1696. that comes from the Meeting of
Sufferings, signed by Benjamin Bealing, their Clerk to their Yearly Meeting. In
which Epistle they say they give the Sense of Ancient Friends, George Fox, Edw.
Borough, Francis Hougel, W. Penn, and diverse more, That Friends may use such
solemn words, when called to declare the Truth, even in worldly matters, as, I
do in the Presence of God declare, or calling God to record, or God is Witness.
But if it be said that G. Whithead has not signed that Epistle, so is not
chargeable with that Contradiction; I answer, So nor has any other of the
Ministry, not indeed any one but their Hireling Clerk: But it is well known
that G. W. is a frequent Member of that Meeting of Sufferings, and has been a
main Instrument to persuade his Friends to give these Solemn Attestations,
which he and many others (I say not all) judged unlawful, and forbidden by
Christ, to use in cases of worldly affairs, as Recovery of just Debts, and the
like. Nor will G. Whithead's hiding himself by not signing to this Epistle, and
others concerned, but getting their Hireling Clerk to sign for them (who for
his Yearly Salary must do their Drudgery-Work; and if fault be found afterward
with what is done, have this hole to creep out at, They did not sign it), be
any Excuse for him or them, to clear them of such palpable Contradiction, or
not varying from their former Principle. The only use I make of it, is to
prove, That George Whitheaed (as well as others of the Ancient Friends of the
Ministry, have palpably contradicted their former Testimony, delivered in Print
to King and Parliament, Anno 1675. and that in a very weighty matter; and
therefore they are not such infallible men as they have made their too
credulous Followers think them to be, and have given out themselves for,
charging all others to be no Ministers of Christ, if not infallible, as the
above Narrative shows. But let none from this infer, that I blame them who in
some weighty Cases, especially in declaring their Fidelity and faithful
Subjection to the Government they are under, do use such solemn Attestations,
or judge and condemn their liberty in so doing. But the Contradiction of George
Whithead and some others to what they have formerly asserted very publicly, is
that which I would have notified, and their great Hypocrisy still to pretend to
Infallibility, and as if still they had never varied in their Principle in any
thing; and also charging G. K. with Apostasy, because I have declared. That in
diverse places and passages of my former Writings, I have found cause to make
some Correction and Retractation; God having been pleased of late years further
to enlighten me, yet without any change of my Faith as to any one Article of
the Christian Faith, so far as I know.

Having done with G. Whithead at present, I shall next bring some two or three
more unsound and scandalous Pass^ges for Proofs, out of William Penn's printed
Books, to show the unsoundness of his Doctrine in relation to Christ, his Flesh
and his Bodily Existence without us in Heaven: And then take notice of some of
his palpaple Contradictions to himself, though he would still make his
credulous Followers (that are much fewer than sometime ago they were) believe
he is the same infallible W. Penn.

1. In his Rejoinder to John Faldo, page 179, 180. he greatly blames Sydrach
Sympson, an Independent Preacher, for excommunicating Robert Norwood for his
Opinion, which he, to wit, W. Penn himself, says, Is not very offensive; and
he tells us what that Opinion is; 1. For denying the Locality of Heaven and
Hell, that is void of outward place, as looking upon them to have a more
Spiritual signification; and that the other was too Carnal, indeed Mohammedan.
2. That he believed the Soul to have been breathed from God, thereby assigning
to it more of Divinity than the usual Opinion does. -- Now that he says this
To. Norwood's Opinion is not very offensive, and so not to deserve
Excommunication, it is plain he thinks it not very offensive, to deny that
Christ's Body that was raised from the dead, is in any Heaven, that is, an
outward place, or without us; which yet (as I appeal to all sincere Christians)
is really so offensive, that the denying of that one Truth, is a plain denial
of one of the greatest Fundamental Doctrines of the Christian Faith, and so
makes void the whole, to any that holds such a damnable Opinion. And next, his
excusing the said Robert Norwood, for assigning to the Soul something more of
Divinity than the usual Opinion does, is offensive and scandalous to Christian
Ears: For though it should be owned, That the Divine Power that made the Soul
of man, is in it, and operateth in it more manifestly than in the inferior
Creatures; yet the Soul of man is a created Being, and has nothing of Divinity
essential to it; for that were to make it God himself. And whoever shall
compare the Excommunication given out against Rob. Norwood by Sydrac Sympson,
with the Excommunication given out against me by William Penn and Geo. Whithead
at their Yearly Meeting, will say, if they be impartial men, William Penn has
blamed that in another unjustly, which most unjustly he justifies in himself,
and in his Tyrannical Brethren of his Party, who for no other cause did
excommunicate me, but for not obeying their most unjust and unreasonable
demand, which was, To clear the Body of the People called Quakers, and their
Ministry, from some of the Errors charged upon them in Pensilvania; which as I
at that very Meeting told them, I could prove some of them were guilty of, and
which I have since effectually done. And that William Penn thinks it was such a
notable Argumentum ad hominem, that Rob. Norwood used to them who did
excommunicate him, Are none the People of God but your selves? Have not I the
same Argumentum ad hominem, against them that excommunicated me; who in their
Nameless Bull of Excommunication, given out against me at the Yearly Meeting at
London, 1695. call themselves the Church of Christ, from which (they say) I
have separated my self? And because I could not obey their most unjust and
unreasonable Demand, they pass this Judgment against me, as if they were the
only Church of Christ; and in their Yearly Epistle this very year 1696.
directed to the Quarterly and Monthly Meetings in England, Wales, and
elsewhere, they call themselves (to wit, those that generally go under the Name
Quakors, professing Unity with them) God's whole Heritage and People; this
agrees with Solomon Eccles Paper, called, The Quakers Challenge, p. 2, 3.
1668. The Quakers are in Truth, and none but they. The Tabernacle of God is
with you, and his Dwelling Place is among you, and only among you is God known,
said Edw. Borough to the Quakers; see his Works, page 64.

2. In the same Rejoinder, page 310. he has a Passage that is either perfect
Nonsense, or Antichristian Doctrine, or rather indeed both. I shall cite it
verbatim. Seventhly, Because that Flesh of Christ is called a Vail, but he
himself is within the Vail, which is the Holy of Holiest, whereinto Christ
Jesus our High Priest has entered, Heb. 10.20, 21. And as he descended into,
and past through a suffering-state in his fleshly appearance, and returned into
that state of Immortality, and Eternal Life and Glory, from whence he humbled
himself, which was and is the Holy of Holiest (then obscured or hid by his
Flesh or Body, the Vail while in the world) so must all know a death to their
fleshly ways and Religions, yea their knowledge of Christ himself after the
flesh, or they stick in the Vail, and never enter into the Holy of Holies, nor
come to know him in any spiritual relation, as their High and Holy Priest, that
abides therein.

Annot. I shall make no large Commentary on these words, only in short note, 1.
His saying Christ has entered into the Holy of Holies within the Vail, and that
Vail is his Flesh, and that Holy of Holies is himself; What Nonsense is this?
Was not Christ always in himself? 2. His entering in within the Vail of his
Flesh is either perfect Nonsense, or it has this sense, That he has put off
his Body he had on earth, and is separated from it; as one Robert Young, a
Preacher among the Quakers in Pensilvania, at a Meeting affirmed, and brought
these very words of W. Penn's to confirm it, That Christ has entered within the
Vail, and Christ's flesh is that Vail; whereas it is plain, and generally
understood by all Christians, That the Vail within which Christ is entered,
according to Heb. 6.19. is not his flesh; though elsewhere, but in another
respect, his flesh is called a Vail, the word Vail having diverse significations
in Scripture. 3. That he says, That all must know a death to their knowledge
of Christ after the flesh; it is plain from his words, that he has this
unsound sense of it. That they must know a death to the knowledge of Christ
after the flesh, as that flesh signifies the flesh of Christ, as he came in
the flesh. But this is a perversion of Paul's words, as if Paul had rejected
the knowledge of Christ as he came and suffered in the flesh, as inconsistent
with the revelation of Christ in himself; which are so consistent, that as none
have the saving knowledge of Christ as he came and suffered in the flesh,
without the inward revelation of him in their hearts, so none have that inward
revelation of him, sufficient to Eternal Salvation, but who by that inward
revelation know and believe that he came and suffered in the flesh, and that he
is now in Heaven, in the same Body that suffered, the same, I say, as to
Substance, though wonderfully changed in Mann^r and Condition.

3. W P. in a Book he calls Truth exalted, presented to Princes, Priests, and
People, reprinted Anno 1671. he gives a large description of the Quakers
Christ, as he calls him, page 13, 14. without mentioning in the least his
Birth in the flesh, Death, Resurrection, Ascension, as the Son of Man, or the
Son of Abraham and David; and wholly applying that, Isaiah 9.6, 7. Unto us a
child is born; and Deuteronomy. ^1.18 A Prophet shall the Lord your God raise up, to
the Inward Principle of the Light in all men; and thus he describes the
Quakers Christ, page 14.

This is the second Adam, the quickening Spirit, the Lord from Heaven, the new
and spiritual man, the Heavenly Bread, the true Vine, the Flesh and Blood that
was given for the Life of the World, the second Covenant, the Law writ in the
Heart and Spirit* put in the inward parts, the way in which the fool cannot
err, the Truth before Deceit was, the Life that is hid in God, eternal in the
Heavens, glorified before the world began, the Power, the Wisdom, the
Righteousness of God, the Plant of Renown, the Royal Seed that bruiseth the
Serpent's head; in short, that Grace which has appeared unto all men, teaching
them to deny Ungodliness, etc.

Annot. By this it is plain he makes nothing of Christ, but an inward Principle
in all men, which yet falsely he calls the second Covenant, the Law written in
the heart; for the Law writ in the heart, that is, the second Covenant, is not
in any Unbelievers, but only in the hearts of True Believers. Again, in his
large description of the Christian Quaker, filling Three Pages of his Folio
called the Christian Quaker, he mentions not one word of Christ, as he was born
of the Virgin, suffered death for our sins, rose again, etc. as the Object of
Faith, Hope, or Love, or Christian Devotion; see his Pages, 125, 126, 127. By
which it plainly appears that he, and G Whithead, and many other Teachers among
the Quakers, have no other Notion of Christ, but an Inward Principle; which is
manifestly contrary to the Gospel preached by the Holy Prophets, Evangelists,
and Apostles, who preached Christ chiefly without men, as both God and Man, and
consequentially his Light, and Grace, and Spirit within men.

I shall now point at some of W. Penn's most gross and palpable Contradictions.

1. His first Contradiction. In the Treatise of Oaths abovementioned, signed
particularly by William Penn, he is earnest against all Oaths under the Gospel;
and yet in his Reason against Railing he uses the greatest Oath that ever was
used among the Jews, to wit, As God lives, or The Lord lives; which was the
form of their Oath, as is clear from many places of Scripture, but particularly
Jerem 4.2.5.2. Now let us hear how he himself has practically used this Oath
against Thomas Hicks, page 180. O that these heavy things might not be laid to
thy charge, for so sure as God lives great will be the Wrath that shall
follow, yea, God will visit for these unrighteous dealings; and I testify to
thee from God's Living Spirit, if thou desist not, and come not to deep
Repentance, the Lord will make thee an Example of his Fury, and thy head shall
not go down to the Grave in Peace; and by this shall thou know that not a Lying
or Delusive, but a True and Infallible Spirit has spoken by me.

Annot. These words imply some Prophecy that W. Penn thought he had from the
Infallible Spirit of God, against Tho. Hicks, importing he should be made an
Example of his Fury: But they that saw Tho. Hicks dye, and knew him living,
say, nothing of this was fulfilled, nor did any thing extraordinary, as any
Example of Divine Fury happen to Tho. Hicks either before he died, or at his
death.

2. His second Contradiction is this; In the Book called Judas and the Jews,
page 13. owned and signed by W. Penn, he thus glosseth on Matthew 18.17. Go tell
the Church, That Christ as well gave his Church Power to reject, as to try
Spirits, is not hard to prove; that Notable Passage, Go tell the Church, does
it to our hand; for if in case of private Offense betwixt Brethren, the Church
is made Absolute Judge, from whom there is no Appeal in this world, how much
more in any the least case that concerns the Nature, Being, Faith, and Worship
of the Church her self?

Annot. This he spoke with respect to the Quakers Church, whose Power he so
mightily extols, that she is made Absolute Judge, from whom there is no Appeal
in this world. But having to do with the Church of England, or any other Church
of them called Protestants, we shall see how he makes a contradictory Gloss on
the same Text, Matthew. 18.17. Go tell the Church. In his Address to Protestants,
second Edition, p. 152. he says, But what then can be the meaning of Christ's
words, Go tell the Church? Very well, I answer, It Is not about Faith, but
Injury, that Christ speaks; and the place explains it self; Moreover, If thy
brother shall trespass against thee, go and tell him his fault between thee and
him alone; here is Wrong, not Religion; Injustice, not Faith or Conscience
concerned, as some would have it, to maintain their Church Power.

Annot. Here you see he makes the Church Power very low as by Church he means
the Church of England, or any other Church besides the Church of the Quakers.
But when he means the Church of the Quakers from the same Text, he magnifies
her Power as great as ever Bellarmine or any other Jesuit magnified the Church
of Rome. She (to wit, the Quakers Church, otherwise tell us what other Church
he means) is made Absolute Judge, from whom there is no Appeal in this world.
Then be sure, if W. Penn can prevail to keep up this Authority in the Quakers
Church, neither G Keith, nor any other against whom that he calls the Church,
to wit, the Yearly Meeting at London, has passed any Sentence, however unjust,
must expect to have any Relief or Redress in this world. Well, It is a great
Comfort that we may expect it in the world to come. If this be not to play the
Ambidexter (a Crime T. Elwood unjustly casts on me in another case) I know
not what is.

3. His Third Contradiction is this. In his Address to Protestants, second
Edition, page 246. he says, Men that are angry for God, passionate for Christ*
that can call Names for Religion, and sling Stones for Faith, may tell us they
are Christians if they will, but no body would know them to be such by their
fruits; to be sure they are no Christians of Christ's making.

Annot. One would think this man would be far from giving hard Names to any
that differ from him in Religious Matters, and that he would be one of the
civilest men on earth, for softly and gently treating his Opponents. But
instead thereof, I know not if ever I read or heard more angry and passionate
words, and more und^cent and unbecoming any man, either Christian or sober
Heathen, than William Penn has given to his Opponents, and such as he has
differed from in Religious Matters; witness what he says in his Guide
mistaken, p. 18. 1668 The old Gormandizing Priests of England. -- No sort of
people have been so universally through Ages the Bane of Soul and Body of the
Universe, as that abominable Tribe, for whom the Theater of God's most dreadful
Vengeance is reserved to act their eternal Tragedy upon Again, in his Quakerism
a new Nickname, etc. p. 165. he says, But in the earth there is not any thing
so phant^stical, conceited, proud, railing, busy-body, and sometimes ignorant,
as a sort of Priests, to us not unknown, among whom our Adversary ( viz. John
Faldo, an Independent Preacher) is not the least, who think their Coat will
bear out their worst Expressions for Religion; and practice an haughty Reviling
for Christ, as one of the greatest demonstrations of their Zeal; an Ill bred
and Pedentick Crew, the Bane of Reason, and Pest of the World, the old
Incendi^ries to mischief, and the best to be spared of Mankind; against whom
the boiling Vengeance of an irritated God is rea^ly to be poured out, to the
destruction of such if they repent not, and turn from their abominable Deceits.

Annot. Seeing the only Reason that was given at the Meeting at Turner's Hall
the 11th of this Instant, 1696. by one of William Penn's Party, why they
excommunicated George Keith, having nothing either against his Doctrine or
Conversation among men, but that he was (as he was pleased to call me) a little
petulant, and turbulent Man; and that they have aggravated some few words I
gave to some professed Infidels among us in Pensilvania, to that height, as
deserving Excommunication: Let the Impartial Reader judge, whether W. Penn has
not far exceeded me, and that incomparably, (for I thank God I have not the
faculty to invent such words) as well as George Whithead has also done, in
calling some that but differed from him about Women's Meetings, and Church
Orders of G. Fox Incarnate Devils, Wolves, Dogs, in his Preface to Judgment
Fixed, 1682. Behold therefore their Injustice and Partiality, for when did they
ever so much as censure either of them for such scurrilous, abusive Language,
or any others that have used the like? Nay, of all people on the face of the
Earth, many of the Preachers and Writers among the Quakers, that I know of,
have been most guilty in this thing, and doubled this guiltiness in fathering
these sinful Words, and their sinful Passion on the Spirit of God, as W. Penn
did, when he called me Apostate, and Impostor, for defending Christian Doctrine
common to all Christendom, saying, He was transported by the Glorious Power of
God. For my own part, wherein I have at any time either in word or Writ
exceeded in giving any uncharitable Names to any, or in any uncharitable
practice or behavior, I declare I am sorry for it, and have begged, and do beg
God's forgiveness for it, for his dear Son's sake, and also the forgiveness of
any whom I have at any time justly offended in Words or behavior; and I bless
God, who has taught me more patience by the late Exercises I have gone through
of the strife of Tongues; and I hope I can in measure say, that I witness that
place of Scripture fulfilled, That tribulation works patience, and patience
experience; and this I have diverse times acknowledged to my late Adversaries,
who have made ill use of it against me, but I never knew they made any such
acknowledgment to any, I am sure never to me, whom they have most unworthily
abused both by Word and Pen.

And now before I have quite done with William Penn, let me put him in mind of
his Promise, That he would answer me in the face of the Nation; for I think I
have made good my word, that I have put him to prove his Charge against me
(that I am an Apostate) in the face of the Nation; and let him not put off this
Work that belongs to himself, to any Deputy, or busy Intruder, as Th. Elwood,
or John Pennington, who have already sufficiently shown their folly in print;
but let him perform his Promise by himself, and also remind his words in his
Christian Quaker, page 1. who says, I was not willing that any should answer
for my faults, if any there were; and if innocent, I osteemed my self both
sufficient and obliged to my own relief.

Some of Tho. Elwood his Vile and Gross Errors; truly collected out of his
Book, falsely called, Truth Defended.
I Shall pass by at present his many Forgeries, and Perversions, and Abuses
against me in this his last Book, and his two former Books; to the first of
which I have answered in print, having collected out of his two last Abusive
Books above an hundred manifest Perversions, Forgeries, and Falsities he has
heaped up against me, which I have in readiness to show, and which I keep by me
for a reserve, until I find an occasion to publish them, either by print, or
otherwise; therefore I shall only now make an Index of some of his Vile and
Gross Errors contained in his last Book, called Truth Defended.

1. The Blood that came out of Christ's Side, its shedding, was not done to
complete the Offering, because, before that, Christ said, Consummatum est, it
is finished, p. 99. Note, this is as much against his Death, for before his
Death he said, it is finished.

2. He justifies George Whithead's Doctrine and Words, denying that the
material Blood of the Beasts were Types of Christ's material Blood, and yet
fallaciously seems to own it, p. 106.

3. He justifies W* Penn's Doctrine; saying, The one Seed cannot be an outward
thing; for one outward thing cannot be the proper sign of another outward
thing; p. 113.

4. He denies that the gift of the Divine Grace or Power within, is the real
Purchase of Christ's Obedience unto death; arguing, That if so, that would not
be the free Gift of God, p. 121. This is contrary to Romans 5.15. Ephesians. 1.14. and
4.7, 8 compared with Psalm. 68.18.

5. He blames me for saying Christ's Body is the same in substance it was on
Earth, p. 129. now if not the same in substance, then that Body he had on Earth
is not in being, or he must hold the Doctrine of Transubstantiation in that
case.

6. He denies that Christ came by Generation of, and from the Properties of
Man in Mary, p. 136. and in so doing, he must deny him to be the Son of David
and Abraham.

7. He perverteth the Apostle's Creed, in that Clause; Conceived of the Holy
Ghost, p. 138. by which he infers, that Christ came not by Generation of* and
from the Properties of Man in Mary; and in so doing, he makes the Holy Ghost to
be the material Cause of that Generation; as if that Holy Thing conceived, were
of the Substance of the Holy Ghost; whereas the Holy Ghost was the efficient
Cause thereof, but not the material Cause.

8. His false way of reasoning against the Man Christ's being created, from my
reasoning, if not created, therefore not Man; by retorting, if created,
therefore not God; and in this he charge me to be deeply drenched into
Socinianism, but this is his ignorance. This is as foolish as to argue, A. B.
is no English Man, therefore is no Man; whereas it is good arguing, A. B. is no
Man, therefore no English Man; the Socinian Error is not, that Christ is a
Creature, but that he is a mere Creature, viz. only Man, and not both God and
Man, p. 139.

9. His blaming me, to make light of the work of Generation in comparison of
Christ's Incarnation; therefore according to him, Regeneration is greater than
Christ's Incarnation. Oh great Blasphemy! page 155.

10. His saying, That the Author of Regeneration is Christ chiefly, as he is
manifested inwardly in the heart, p. 152. This is as absurd, as to say, The
Beams of the Sun that descend on the Earth, are the chief cause of the Earth's
fruitfulness, and not the Sun it self that is in the Firmament.

My answer to John Pennington's Book, falsely called, An Apostate Exposed: In
his said Book he brings no matter against me, either as to Doctrine or Life;
but sets down some Citations out of my Books, and the Doctrine in all these
Citations I own. But that I thought it had been the Doctrine of the Quakers in
general, and of George Whithead and William Penn in particular; in that I own
my mistake; but this is no contradiction, or proof of my Apostasy; for I did
not positively say, they had no Errors, but according to the best of my
knowledge they had no Errors; this is no contradiction; for Contradictions
(according to that true Maxim) are secundum idem, ad idem eodem loco, tempore
and ratione. But he has not so much either Logic or common Sense to
understand, that this is no contradiction, or what a true Contradiction is, as
neither his quondam Tutor Tho. Elwood has.

As concerning Caleb Pusey his Book, falsely called, His Modest Account; I have
a full Answer to it in readiness, but there is no present need of its
publication. But let it be noticed, that my Adversaries have owned it, as
having unity with it; and no doubt it was approved by the 2d Days meeting.

I only at present note these few gross things in it.

First, He mis-states the Question, which was not, That the Light within is
sufficient for Salvation, without something else; for the Light within, or
Grace within Paul and Peter, etc. is sufficient to Salvation, without thousands
of some things else, as without thousands of Caleb Puseys, and all of us; but
not without the Man Christ without us. But the true state of the Question was,
and is, That whereas they blamed my Assertion, viz. The Light within is not
sufficient to Salvation, without something else. They are obliged to hold the
Contradictory, which is, The Light within is sufficient to Salvation, without
any, or every thing else; true Contradictions being betwixt the one Particular,
the other Universal; but it has been my Lot to have to do generally with such
ignorant Men of late in dispute, that know not either by true Logic or common
Sense, what a true Contradiction is.

2. Page 8. His false quotation of my words, citing my Book called* A
Refutation, page* 38, 39. where he brings me in saying, It is a real degree of
Blasphemy to say, This Light cannot make Satisfaction, etc. But I use no such
words, therefore this is a gross Forgery, which I charge upon the Second day's
Meeting; for in all that Treatise I neither said nor intented any thing of the
Light within making Satisfaction; for the Question there treated of by me, was
not about Satisfaction, but Revelation, what the Light within could reveal. And
I was so far from affirming, the Light within, as we give Obedience to it, to
make any Satisfaction for our sins, that I plainly said, page 41. ad finem,
That man's most exact Obedience to the Light in him, cannot be an Atonement or
Propitiation unto God for sins past or present.

3. His Fallacy or Forgery, page 12. in feigning a Contradiction on me,
concerning the express Knowledge of Christ, necessary, and not necessary;
whereas I never said it was universally necessary, but only to such who have
the occasion to hear it preached; therefore I distinguished betwixt the Express
and Implicit, saying this last was universally necessary, the former only to
Particulars.

4. Page 15. His most gross Assertion, which is justly charged on the Second
day's Meeting (who have approved his Antichristian Book), That surely Jesus of
Nazareth cannot be something else than the Light, Spirit, and Power within: For
at this rate the Jews who own and confess to the Light within, and Pagan
Philosophers who blasphemed against the Man Jesus of Nazareth, yet confessing
to the Light within, may be said to confess Jesus of Nazareth; and if Jesus of
Nazareth be not something else than the Light within, then it is in vain to
preach any Christ without, that was born at Bethlehem, and conversed at
Nazareth. But he is guilty of gross Forgery, to infer it from my words: He
says, page 14. The Word only is alone, and admits of nothing else; but I
answer, It admits not of another Christ, but it admits of something of Christ
without us, that is not within us; as Christ that died for us is the only
Savior; this only admits not of another Savior, or Christ, within us, yet it
admits of something of Christ within us, that was not outwardly crucified, viz.
His Grace and Spirit.

As concerning the pretended Confession of Faith, called, Our Ancient Testimony
renewed, of our Adversaries from Pensilvania, subscribed by Caleb Pusey, and
above Thirty six more, though the Scripture-Words as therein recited, we own,
yet seeing they (and particularly he) who have differed from us in Pensilvania,
have declared a contrary sense to all these Places of Scripture touching the
things in Controversy betwixt us, and have neither in that Confession, nor
elsewhere, renounced their former Errors, whereof they have been proved guilty,
their Confession is but a mere Sham, and Mock-Confession.

G. K.

ERRATA.
Page 17. line 7. for Days read Words. Page 48. line 44. read clear me.

A Sermon preached at the Meeting of Protestant Dissenters, called Quakers, in
Turners-Hall, London; on the 16 th. of the Second Month, 1696. Being the
Public Day of Thanksgiving for the Deliverance of the King and Kingdom. By
George Keith. To which is added, A Testimony of Fidelity and Subjection to King
William the Third, from the aforesaid People, on behalf of themselves, and
others of the same Persuasion with them.

Printed for B. Aylmer at the Three Pigeons in Cornhill.

THE General History of the Quakers; containing the Lives, Tenants, Sufferings,
Trials, Speeches, Letters, and Travels, of all the most Eminent Quakers, both
Men and Women, from the first Rise of that Sect, down to this present time.
Collected from Manuscripts, etc. A Work never attempted before in English;
being written originally in Latin by Gerard Croese, and now made public
against their present Yearly Meeting in London. To which is added, Fox's
Conference with Oliver Cromwell. The Trials and dying Speeches of the Quakers
executed in New England. An Account of their Marriages and Burials. A Quaker's
Letter to King Charles II. charging him with several vile Practices. Keith's
Learned Speech at his Trial in Pensilvania. The Trials of Mead and Pen. Pen's
Speech to the Judges. His Conference with the Princess Palatine. His Sermon
before Her. The Princess's Letter to Geo. Fox. Margaret Fox's Letter to a
General Meeting of Women, held at London in the year 1692. A very particular
Account of the Women Preachers. Hester Bidly's Speech to the late Queen Mary.
Her Entertainment at Versailles by King James. Her Letter to the French King.
Her Discourses with him. The great Sufferings of two Quaker Women in the Island
Malta. The Rarity of Mary Fisher's Voyage to Adrianople. The Audience given
this Maiden Quaker by the Grand Signior. The Present State of the Quakers. As
also a Letter writ by George Keith, and sent by him to the Reverend Author of
this Book; containing a Vindication of himself, and several Remarks upon this
curious History. Price Bound 5 s.

Printed for John Dunton at the Raven in Jewen-Street.


