THE GENEALOGIES Of the Highborn PRINCE and PRINCESS, GEORGE AND ANNE, OF
DENMARK, etc, SHOWING; The Lineal Descent of these two Noble and Illustrious
FAMILIES: With Their Matches, Issue, Times of Death, Places of Sepulcher,
Impresses, Devices, etc. From the Year of Grace M. to this present Year,
MDCLXXXIV.

Extracted from the most Authentic Testimonies of the best Historians and
Antiquaries of their Times.

Printed by N. Thompson at the Entrance into the Old-Spring-Garden near
Charing Cross, MDCLXXXIV.

TO Her Highness The PRINCES ANNE, etc.
Madam,
GReatness, so Eminent as that of Your Highness, placed in a Sphere beyond the
level of the Ordinary Noble, becomes never so Attractive and Illustrious, then
when it is attended with those Excellencies of Affability, Benignity, and a
constant Charity: Virtues so masterly and commanding, that Piety and Religion
were but shadows without some one of them: The least whereof being sufficient
to entitle a lesser Greatness to Perfection, which are all by Accumulation
con-center'd in Your Highness: And I may safely say, he must be a Foreigner
indeed to this our Country of Great Britain, at least to Whitehall and St.
James's, who is a stranger and unacquainted with your Highness's worth* Those
early Blossoms in Your tender years gave Us hopes, that the succeeding Fruit
would answer their appearances which we now find Happily accomplished even to
our admiration: And what in other Princes has been the result of a sudden
thought only, or some motion of Virtue by surprise, has in Your Highness been
an Habitual Practice from your Infancy: Your Birth at the same time adorning
this our Island with Greatness and Goodness.

In assurance therefore of your Gracious Pardon, this small Treatise is humbly
offered at Your Highness's Feet, containing the Origin and Succession of those
two August and Royal Families of Great Britain and Denmark, and the present
Union in Your Highness and Prince George: At whose Auspitious Arrival (like a
second Patron to the English,) all the Plots and Conspiracies of Yours and the
Nations Enemies became Blasted and Abortive. The Noble Brightness of Your most
Excellent Father His Royal Highness, (so long and so unjustly clouded by
Faction and the Unthinking Vulgar,) restored, all good men (who were in pain
for His Majesty's and His Safety) Comforted; and the whole Monarchy receiving
at once both Deliverance, Strength and Secucurity from this Alliance. The
continuance of which Happiness for the present, and the joyful expectation of
Establishing it for the future in Your Royal Progeny, are the constant Wishes
and Desires of,

Madam Your Highness's Most Humble, most Faithful, and most Obedient Servant,
HENRY KEEP.

THE PREFACE
TWo Objections have been offered against the appearance of this small Treatise
in this form (which has occasioned this Preface:) The one, That as a
Genealogist I have been too Prolix, as an Historian too short in this my
Discourse. The other, That my intention being to deduce the Pedegrees of these
Illustrious persons from the Male-line only; I have inverted that order, by
running up an Ascent for at least six Generations in the first; and in the
second, by descending Ten: The one beginning, and the other terminating, in a
Female.

To the first of these I Answer; I do not think a Genealogist (even in the
strictest sense) ought so to be confined, as to be obliged to Register nothing
but the Nativities, Days of Marriage, Issue, Times of Death, Funerals, and
Place of Sepulcher, of those he intends to speak of: (as some have taught) But
that he may, by a Pertinent Digression, here and there set down some one, or
more Memorable Action or Acquisition of Honor, or by a short Encomium, or
pithy Character, Illustrate any Deserving Person in his Descent; provided that
he do not confuse and break the contexture of his Genealogical Discourse by
overlong and tedious Harangues: For then he is rather to be esteemed a
Genealogical Historian, than a Genealogist in its strict acceptance, (such is
the Learned and Elaborate Sir William Dugdale in his three Tomes of the
Barronage of England; And Mr. Sandford, (Lancaster-Herald) has Judiciously and
Truly styled his Book of the Kings of England, a Genealogical History. So
likewise you have Monsieur Rosieres (in his Stemmat: Lotharingiae and Bari
ducum.) And the Famous Antiquary And: du Chesne, (in his Histoire Genealogique
des duces de Bourgongne, etc*) for the French* Scipio Amiratus (in his Famiglie
Nobile Napolitane) for the Italians. And Johannes Orlerius (in his Genealog.
Comitum Nassovi,) for the Dutch. But in case the matter treated of shall so far
enlarge it self, that it exceed the rules observed by the afore-cited
Authorities, the Title of Genealogist becomes wholly swallowed up, and is lost
in that of the Historian: And the Work to be esteemed no longer a Genealogy, or
Genealogical History; but an History it self of such and such particular
Persons and Things: And therefore I have on purpose avoided both these, that
this little Treatise might answer its Apellation, by being no more than a
Genealogy, and that properly so called; although I have made some slight
excursions corresponding to the Principles before laid down; and herein I am
not without President (even of those who have had the Reputation of excellent
Genealogists*) For Hieronimus Henninges, in his Theatro Genealogico, (Printed
at Magdenburg in the year one thousand five hundred ninety and eight, and set
out in four large Volumes) takes this course; as he has occasion to Record the
Pedegrees of the Chiefest Princes and Potentates in Christendom. The Learned
Reusnerus treading the same steps, though with much more diligence and
exactness (in his Basilicon Genealogici, published in the year one thousand six
hundred and twelve) all along adornes his Principal Branch with some Historical
Memorial: And that Ingenious Noble Florentine Antonius Albicius esteemed his
Curious Engraven Tables de Stemmat. Christianorum Principum (put forth in the
year one thousand six hundred and seventeen) Deficient and Imperfect, till such
time as he had added some small Remarks to his Sculptures; so that I see little
of weight in this first Objection.

To the second, what I have to say will be this: First, That whereas the
present Kings of Denmark are vulgarly reported to have continued the Descent of
the House of Oldenburgh from the first Institution; I have bestowed the labor
of running up the Pedigree to the Original of that Honor; as likewise shown by
what means it came United and Descendable to the present Kings, which could not
so coveniently be done by an other method; and which I did to gratify the
Curiosity of some who had a desire to be satisfied therein. And lastly, it was
my choice to continue the Genealogy of the Stuarts in the first Line, 'till it
Terminated in Mary Queen of Scots, and that for several Reasons.

First, That so Noble a Branch of His Majesty's Predecessors should not lie
dormant from the time of Alexander, the second of that Name, High Steward of
Scotland, viz. from the year one thousand two hundred and sixty, until the year
one thousand five hundred fifty and nine, 'till the uniting thereof in the Lord
Henry Darnley by the Marriage of Mary Queen of Scots. Secondly, That the
Paragraphs or Sections might in some proportion answer those of the House of
Oldenburgh; which the House of Lenox alone could not supply* Thirdly, that at
the Union of the Families a sufficient opportunity might be found to trace the
Pedigree of this younger Branch to its Fountain, without much interruption or
disorder. And lastly, to inform those who have been misled, or are ignorant
upon what warrantable grounds this Royal Family of the Stuarts came first to be
Kings of Scotland; and how the Succession has continued from Robert the Third
in an Uninterrupted Line till this day; And I Pray God may so continue 'till
time shall be no more, against all Factious Opposers whatsoever, which ought to
be the repeated Prayers of every Loyal, Honest, Good and Faithful,
Christian-Subject.

H. K.

THE GENEALOGY OF THE MOST Illustrious and Highborn PRINCE, GEORGE, OF
DENMARK, etc.
HAIO the Frisian, (Great-grand-son to Regenbert Duke of Angria and Westphalia,
and Earl of Regelshem, who valiantly defended his Contrymen from the
Incursions of the Danes, A. D. 918.) having married Rixa the Daughter of John
Earl of Oldenburgh, Sister of Huno, and Aunt to Frederick her Brothers Son,
(both Earls of Oldenburgh) who became Heir to her aforesaid Brother and Nephew,
they dying without Issue, was in Right of this his Wife entitled to the Earldom
of Oldenburgh; although the possession thereof came not to Him, but was
transferred to his Son, as we shall see hereafter. JOHN, Father of Huno and
Rixa, (living A. D. 1007.) was the eldest Son of OTHO, fourth Son of
THEODORICK, the second Earl of Ringelshem and Oldenburgh, only Son of
WALPERTUS, who was Duke of Sarony, Angria, Westphalia, and Nordalbingia, and
the first Earl of Ringelshem, A. D. 850. who, in memory of his Wife Alteburga,
sole Daughter to the Earl of Lesmone, built a strong Castle not far from Breme,
and called it Alteburgh, from whence the whole County adjoining has taken the
denomination, and is at this day called by the Latins Alteburgia, and by the
Inhabitants Oldenborch. This Walpertus finished the Monastery begun by his
Father WIGBERT at Wildeshusen, and lies there interred with his aforesaid
Father, who was the Son of WITIKIND the Pagan, (King of Sarony, Prince of
Rugea, and Duke of Angria) by Geva his first Wife, the Daughter of Gotrick King
of Denmark. This Witikind waged War with Charles the Great Emperor, for the
space of 30 years, with various success; 'till at length, being totally
overcome, and his Forces defeated, he surrendered Himself and Countries to the
Conqueror, by whose means he was likewise converted to the Christian Faith,
about the year of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ 785. After which, he became
wholly devoted to the Service and Interest of the Emperor, and was by him,
from a King, created the first great Duke of Sarony; in commemoration whereof,
he altered the Insignia, or Arms of the Kingdom, by changing the Sable Horse,
bridled and sadl'd, in a Field Silver, into Gules, an Horse without Equipments,
Rampant Argent. From this Witikind are descended (besides the present Kings of
Denmark) all the Kings of France since Hugh Capet, the ancient Dukes of
Burgundy and Savoy, the Marquesses of Montferrat, the Earls of Oldenburgh, with
several other Illustrious Families in Germany, France, Italy, Denmark, and
Sweden. He died (courageously fighting in behalf of the Emperor against Gerard
Duke of Suevia) A. D. 807. and was buried in the Church of Angria, whose Body
was afterward translated by his great Nephew Henry, surnamed the Fowler,
Emperor, and Duke of Sarony, A. D. 916. and reinterr'd at Padeborne.

1. Elimarus I. Earl of Oldenburgh.
EILMARUS, or ELIMARUS, the first in descent from Haio, and his only Son by his
Wife Rixa, was (after the death of his Cousin-german Frederick) Earl of
Oldenburgh, in whose behalf he had often showed himself faithful and valiant
against the Prisons his Enemies. He married Rixa the Daughter of Dedo Earl of
Stetin and Ditz-march, by whom he had two Sons and one Daughter; ELIMARUS his
eldest, who was Earl of Oldenburgh; JOHN his second Son; and BEATRICE, a
Daughter, married to Frederick Earl of Antwert.

2. Elimarus II. Earl of Oldenburgh.
ELIMARUS the second of that Name, succeeded his Father in the Earldom of
Oldenburgh, in the year of Grace 1120. He married Helice, or Alice, the
Daughter of Otho Earl of Cappenburgh, by whom she had three Sons. CHRISTIAN,
his eldest, who succeeded him; HENRY, second Son, who married Salome Sister to
Henry Earl of Gelderland, by whom he had, first Henry, who died valiantly
fighting for the defense of his Father, on the 27 th. day of July in the year
of onr Lord God 1234. Gerard his second entered into Religion, and was shaved a
Monk. He had likewise one Daughter, who became the Wife of Witikind
Stumpenhusan; OTHO, youngest Son of Elimarus, was President of Bremen.

3. Christian Earl of Oldenburgh.
CHRISTIAN, the eldest Son of Elimarus the second, succeeded his Father, and
was Earl of Oldenburgh; who being powerful, and indefatigable in carrying on
the fatigue of War, joined himself with the Princes of the Empire, to oppose
the Interest of Henry, surnamed the Lion, Elector of Sarony; and by the
assistance of the Frisians, demolished the Castle of Weige, and took Bremen:
But afterward, enclosing himself in his Castle of Oldenburgh, he was
surrounded by Duke Henry with a great Army, and besieged; where he fell sick,
and died; giving order before his death, that with all privacy they should keep
his departure secret, which they did, 'till the Leaguer broke up, and the Town
was relieved. He left behind him, by the last Countess of Loken, two Sons;
CHRISTIAN his eldest, who succeeded him, and was Earl of Oldenburgh; who, as he
was traveling toward Jerusalem, was basely murdered, having no Issue; and
MAURICE after the death of his Brother (to which some say he was privy) Earl of
Oldenburgh.

4. Maurice Earl of Oldenburgh.
MAURICE, younger Son of Christian Earl of Oldenburgh, took part with Adolph
the third Earl of Holstein, against Knute King of Denmark, in the year of Grace
1201. by lending him many Auxiliary Soldiers; and with Simon de Tecleburgh,
and Bernard de Walpen, adhered to Otho King of the Romans against Philip. He
lived to be very ancient, and leaving his Inheritance to be divided amongst his
Children in his lifetime, betook himself to Devotion, retired into a
Monastery, and there ended his days in peace. He had to Wife the Countess of
Schualenburgh, by whom he had three Sons and a Daughter. OTHO, the eldest, was
Earl of Oldenburgh: He built the strong Castle of Dalmenhorst, so called from
its situation on the Banks of the River Dalme, in the year of our Lord 1247.
and having married the Countess of Ritburgh, died without Issue. MAURICE,
second Son, entered into Orders, and was a Canon at Colen and Bremen. CHRISTIAN,
third Son, succeeded his Brother Otho in the Earldom; and CUNEGUNDA their
Daughter was married into the Family of the Bronckhursts.

5. Christian II. Earl of Oldenburgh.
CHRISTIAN, youngest Son of Maurice Earl of Oldenburgh, after the death of his
Brothers Otho and Maurice, was Earl of Oldenburgh. He took to Wife Mathilda, or
Maud, Countess of Stetin and Harcinia, and by her had Issue, JOHN, OTHO, and
THEODORE: JOHN continued the descent; OTHO founded a College at Dalmenhorst,
and died in the year 1265. THEODORE was great Master of the Teutonick-Order in
Prussia.

6. John Earl of Oldenburgh.
JOHN, eldest Son of Christian, was Earl of Oldenburgh; who, with the help and
assistance of his Kindred, built a stately Church at Aurich in Broickmerland.
He married Anne Countess of Hoien, and had by her three Sons, John, Christian,
and Otho: JOHN succeeded his Father in the Earldom of Oldenburgh; CHRISTIAN,
second Son, was a Pious, Affable, Learned, and Eloquent Prince; and having
studied at Paris, became the Moecenas of his Age: The County of Dalmenhorst was
allotted him for his Inheritance, which he left to his Posterity that he gat on
Gertrude of Mercana his Wife, viz. Christian his eldest Son, joined in
Matrimony to Luitgardis Countess of Bronckhorst; and Otho, married to Margaret
Countess of Bentheme, both living in the year 1360. OTHO, youngest Son of John
and Anne, was a Canon in the Cathedral Church of Bremeu.

7. John II. Earl of Oldenburgh.
JOHN, eldest Son of John and Anne of Hoien, was Earl of Oldenburgh and
Dalmenhorst in the year of Grace 1300. He greatly assisted his Nephews (by his
Brother Christian) against Gilbert Bronkhurst Archbishop of Bremen. In his
youth he was so lavish and profuse in his expenses, that he became extremely
poor; which in his more mature years he recovered, and gave himself to acts of
Piety and Devotion. He was joined in Wedlock to Margaret Countess of Lippien,
who bare to him CONRADE, afterward Earl of Oldenburgh; and JUDITH, who was
affianced to Rudolph Earl of Diepholitan.

8. Conrade Earl of Oldenburgh.
CONRADE, only Son of John and Margaret, was Earl of Oldenburgh and
Dalmenhorst, who enlarged the Privileges of the Burghers of Oldenburgh, for
some signal Services performed by them in his Domestic wars, in the year 1345.
But going into Butiarenland, to quell the Tumults and Insurrections raised
there, he lost his life in Battle, A. D. 1366. This Character is given him,
That he was an experienced Soldier, Eloquent, Beautiful, ready in action,
Pious, Liberal and Bounteous to Sacred Structures. He had two Wives; The first
was the Countess of Hoien, on whom he begat MAURICE, his eldest Son, who was
Earl of Oldenburgh and Dalmenhorst, joined in Matrimony to Anne Daughter of
Magnus, surnamed Torquatus, Duke of Lunenburgh, by whom he had only two
Daughters, Anne the Wife of Otho Count Waldeck, and Ingleburgh married to Occo
a Captain in Aurich: This Maurice died in the year 1410. and was buried at
Rastede by his Wife. JOHN, second Son of Conrade by his first Wife, died in his
youth. The second Lady of this Earl Conrade, was Cunegunda Countess of
Diepholitan, by whom he had likewise two Sons, THEODORICK, who was Earl of
Oldenburgh, after the decease of his half Brother Maurice; and CHRISTIAN.

9. Theodorick Earl of Oldenburgh.
THEODORICK, surnamed the Fortunate, eldest Son of Conrade by his second
Nuptials, succeeded his half-Brother Maurice in the Earldom of Oldenburgh and
Dalmenhorst. He married twice; First, Adelheda Dalmenhorst, Sister to Nicholas
Archbishop of Bremen, in the year 1401. but by her had no Issue: He took to his
second Wife (in the year 1423.) Hedvigen the Widow of Balthazar of Meckleburgh,
and Sister to Gerard and Adolph, both Dukes of Sleswick and Holstein, whose
Inheritance (after their decease without Issue) came to this Hedvigen, whose
eldest Son CHRISTIAN, the first King of Denmark, in Right of his Mother had the
Titles of Duke of Sleswick and Earl of Holstein remaining in him, which has
continued to his Successors Kings of Denmark to this day. The second Son of
Theodorick and this Hedvigen, was GERARD, surnamed the Warrior, a man of a
turbulent and restless Spirit; Being banished, he died in France in the year of
our Lord 1500. He married Adelheda the Daughter of Nicholas Earl of Tecleburgh*
and had Issue, Gerard, Theodorick and Christian, who all died of untimely
deaths; Adolph fourth Son, and Otho that was a Canon of Bremen, both slain on
the 16 th. of February, in the year 1500; And John the youngest, who married
Ann Daughter of George the elder Prince of Hannault, dying in the year 1526.
Adelhede, eldest Daughter, was the Wife of the Lord Plessian: Irmengard, of
Hero Ommake, in the year 1491. Helwise, third Daughter, to Edo Wimecken Lord of
Jevera, in the year of Grace 1498. Anne and Elizabeth died of the Plague in
their Virginities, A. D. 1505. The third and youngest Son of Theodorick and
Helwise, was MAURICE, who married Catharine the Daughter of Otho Earl of Hoien,
who bare to him three Children, James, Hedwise, and Adelhede, who died young.
ADELHEDE, only Daughter of Theodorick and Hedwise, was first married to Ernest
Honsstein, and afterward to Gebhard Mansfield. This Teodorick died at his
Castle of Dalmenhorst, in the year 1440.

10. Christian I. King of Denmark, etc.
CHRISTIAN, surnamed the Rich, eldest Son of Theodorick the Fortunate, Earl of
Oldenburgh and Dalmenhorst, was by the procurement of his Uncle Adolph, Duke of
Sleswick and Holstein, (his Mothers Brother, who had declined the offer by
reason of his age) chosen King of Denmark, by the Estates of that Kindom, and
crowned in the year of Grace 1448. by the Name of Christian the first; to which
Kingdom, upon the death of his Uncle Adolph aforesaid, (whose Heir he was) he
added that great Dukedom of Sleswick, and Earldom of Holstein; and in the year
1457. the Kingdom of Sweden by Conquest. For the better support of these
Honors, and to strengthen his Interest in these new Acquisitions, he took to
Wife Dorothea of Brandenburgh, Widow of Christopher the third, and the last
King of Denmark of that Family, and bought out the Claim which his Brother
Gerard and Otho Earl of Schaumberg, pretended to have in the aforesaid Dukedom
of Sleswick, and Earldom of Holstein, according to the custom of Germany,
giving to Otho 43000 Florins of Gold, besides diverse small Towns; and to Gerard
50000 Marks of Silver, as likewise his Interest in the Earldom of Oldenburgh,
(reserving only the Title thereof.) After this, (upon the account of Devotion)
he went to Rome in the year 1474. where he procured from the Emperor Frederick
the third that his Earldoms of Holstein, Stormer, Wagria, and Ditzmarch, (of
which he stood then possessed) should be erected into a Duchy and Incorporated
with that of Sleswick. So that his Titles were King of Denmark, Norway, Sweden,
Goths and Uandals Duke of Sleswick, Holstein, Stormar, Wagria and Ditchmarch,
Earl of Oldenburgh and Dalmenhorst; which he left to his Successors, and is the
Style of His present Majesty of Denmark, King Christian the Fifth. At the same
time that he was at Rome, Pope Sixtus the fourth among other Honors Invested
him with the Knightly Order of the Elephant, in memory of the Passion of our
Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. That Magnificent Chapel of the three Kings in
the Cathedral Church of Roschilt was erected by this King, who dying at
Copenhagen on the two and twentieth day of May, in the year of Grace one
thousand four hundred eighty and two, in the fifty sixth year of his Age, was
buried there by Dorothea his Wife: By whom he had Issue four Sons and a
Daughter, OLAUS the Eldest, who died of the Plague in the year one thousand
four hundred fifty and one, an Infant. CANUTUS born Anno Dom. one thousand four
hundred fifty and one, and died the same year. JOHN who succeeded his Father
and was King of Denmark. FREDERICK, who was likewise King of Denmark. And
MARGARET their only Daughter, Married to James the Third King of Scotland.

Impress or Device.
Christian the First King of Denmark, etc. Bare for his Impress or Device, a
Scepter and Sword placed in Saltire between four Coronets, under that in Chief
a Mond or Globe with a Cross thereon. The word VIGILANTIBUS.

JOHN, third Son of Christian the first, born in the year one thousand four
hundred fifty and five, was King of Denmark, Norway, Sweden, Goths and Uandals,
Duke of Sleswick, etc. and Knight of the most Noble Order of the Garter, he
took to Wife Christiana the Daughter of Ernest Elector of Sarony; and dying at
Elburgh on the twentieth day of February, in the year of Grace one thousand
five hundred and thirteen, and of his Age sixty and two, was buried with his
Wife at Ottenwaldt who likewise died in the sixtieth year of her Age, and of
our Lord one thousand five hundred twenty and one, leaving Issue, Christian his
Son and Successor, Francis who died in his Childhood, and Elizabeth married to
James the second Marquess of Brandenburgh, who lived to see threescore and ten
Princes that were descended from her Loins. Christian eldest Son of King John
was born at Niburgh, on the second day of July sixteen minuits after three of
the Clock in the Morning, in the year of Grace one thousand four hundred eighty
and one, after the death of his Father chosen King of Denmark by the name of
Christian the second, etc. But by reason of his Severity to the Conquered
Swedes, and his Cruelty to many of the Danes he was deposed, and his Uncle
Frederick elected in his stead. He was joined in Matrimony to Isabella the
Daughter of Philip King of Spain, and Sister to Charles the fifth and Ferdinand
Emperors of Germany, by whom he had first, Philip, secondly Maximilian, who
both died young; his third and youngest Son was John Duke of Holstein, who had
his Education at the Court of the Emperor Charles the fifth his Uncle, but
attending him in that Expedition toward Hungary, in the year one thousand five
hundred thirty and two, he fell Sick and Died at Steinburgh, on the same day
that his Father became a Prisoner in Denmark, leaving no Issue. Dorothea his
Eldest Daughter was Wife to Frederick Elector Palatine of the Rhyne, she died
at Neagon in Norway in the year one thousand five hundred and eighty. And
Christiana the youngest was first married to Francis Sforza Duke of Milan, and
after to Francis Duke of Lorrain. This King Christian died under Confinement at
Callingburgh, on the one and twentieth day of January, in the year one thousand
five hundred fifty and nine, and was buried at Ottenwaldt by his Father. His
Queen Isabella departed this Life on the nineteenth day of January, in the year
one thousand five hundred twenty and and five, and lies Interred at Gant.

Impress or Device.
Christian the Second King of Denmark, etc. Bare for Impress or Device. An
Eagle displayed treading upon a Serpent, and wounding her in the Belly. The
word DIMICANDUM.

11, Frederick I. King of Denmark, etc.
AFter the Deposition of Christian the second King of Denmark, etc. FREDERICK
Surnamed the Pcaceable his Uncle (fourth Son of Christian the first) was
Elected into the Kingdoms of Denmark, Norway, etc. and Crowned King by the Name
of Frederick the First, who gave way for Establishing the Doctrines and
Principles of Martin Luther in those Countries, about the year one thousand
five hundred thirty and three, which were settled and confirmed in his Sons
reign: And the Ecclesiastical Government of those Kingdoms continues to this
day according to that Exemplar. After he had ruled his Subjects in great peace
and quietness for well nigh ten years, he departed this Life at his Palace of
Gottorp in Juitland on the tenth day of April, in the year of Grace, one
thousand five hundred thirty and three, and in the fifty sixth year of his Age;
and was Buried at Sleswick in the Cathedral-Church there, under a Noble
Monument of Alabaster. He married two Wives, first Ann the Daughter of John
Elector and Marquess of Brandenburgh, in the year one thousand five hundred;
who dying on the third day of May, one thousand five hundred and fourteen, was
buried in the Abbey of Borsholme, under a Curious Monument of various colored
Marble; by whom he had CHRISTIAN the Third King of Denmark, etc. and DOROTHEA,
married to Albert the first Duke of Prussia, in the year one thousand five
hundred twenty and five, and died on the tenth day of April one thousand five
hundred forty and seven. The second Wife of King Frederick, was Sophia the
Daughter of Bugslajus the tenth Duke of Stetin in Pomemerania, in the year one
thousand five hundred and eighteen, who dying at Kilo in the year one thousand
five hundred sixty and eight, and of her Age seventy, was buried at Stenburgh,
leaving Issue by her said Husband JOHN the Elder Heir of Norway, Duke of
Sleswick, Holstein, Stormar and Ditzmarsh, etc. He was a great encourager of
Learning and Learned men, and died unmarried at Hadersleve on the 30 day of
September, in the year one thousand five hundred and eighty, in the fifty ninth
year of his Age: And after he had lain Magnificently in State for ten Weeks was
buried at Sleswick in the Royal Sepulcher. ADOLPHE her second Son, Heir of
Norway, Duke of Sleswick, Holstein, Stormar, Ditzmarsh, born at Flensburg on
the six and twentieth day of January, in the year of our Lord, one thousand
five hundred twenty and six, thirteen minutes past eleven of the Clock at
night; who was one of the Knights Companions of the most Honorable Order of
the Garter, in the year of our Lord, one thousand five hundred and sixty. He
died at Gottorp on the first day of October, in the year one thousand five
hundred eighty and six, and of his Age sixty. He Wedded Christiana the Daughter
of Philip Landtgrave of Hesse, in the year one thousand five hundred sixty and
four, by whom he had five Sons, Frederick, Philip, John-Adolph, Christian,
John-Frederick: And as many Daughters, Sophia, Christiana, Elizabeth, Ann and
Agnes. FREDERICK third Son of King Frederick and Sophia of Stetin, was Bishop
of Hildesheim and Sleswick, who dying at Kilo on the twenty seventh day of
October, in the year one thousand five hundred fifty and six, in the twenty
fifth year of his Age, was buried at Sleswick in the Monument of his Ancestors.
ELIZABETH a Daughter, first married to Magnus, after to Vlrick both Dukes of
Meckleburgh, who dying on the four and twentieth day of October, in the year of
Grace, one thousand five hundred eighty and six, (it being the same day of the
month whereon she was born) and of her Age sixty two, found Sepulcher at
Gustrow in Germany* ANN a second Daughter, who dyed of the Plague at
Flensburgh, and was Inhum'd at Sleswick. DOROTHEA the third and youngest
Daughter, was the second Wife of Christopher Duke of Meckleburgh, who departed
this Life on the eleventh day of November, in year of our Lord, one thousand
five hundred seventy and five, was buried by her Sister at Gustrow in the
Sepulcher of the Princes of Meckleburgh, on the eight day of December following.

Impress or Device.
Frederick the First King of Denmark, etc. Bare for his Impress or Device:
Fortune naked, standing on a Globe in the midst of the Sea, and catching the
small Wind that seems gently to breath on the Surface of the Waters. The word
FIDELTA E COSA RARA.

12. Christian the III. King of Denmark, etc.
CHRISTIAN the third, Surnamed the Pious King of Denmark, etc. succeeded his
Father Frederick in all his Dominions, He was born on the twelth day of August,
in the year of Grace, one thousand five hundred and three, fifty six minuites
past three in the Afternoon: And bred up in his youth under the Elector of
Brandenburgh his Uncle, where he profited in all sorts of Exercises and Studies
becoming the Ingenuity of a Magnanimous Prince: He was Solemnly Crowned by the
Hands of John Bugenhage a Divine of Pomerain on the twelfth of the Kalends of
July, that is, on the twentieth day of June, in the year of our Lord, one
thousand five hundred thirty and seven. From which time he wholly applied
himself to benefit the Commonwealth, by Instituting wholesome and good Laws,
restoring public Edifices, and raised the University of Coppenhagen (almost
destroyed) to its former Splendour and Magnificence, doing many other Acts of
Piety and Justice: Wherefore this is recorded to his Glory; that his House was
the Temple of the Holy Ghost, the Eye of Prudence, the Pattern of Honesty, the
Fountain of the Graces, the Choir of the Muses, the School of Learned men, and
the Temple of Divines; the Table of the Poor, the Refuge of Innocence, and the
Protection of the Miserable. He departed this Life, (not without (as is
reported) a Heavenly Revelation by an Angel) on the first day of January, in
the year one thousand five hundred fifty and nine, at Koldingen (in
Cimbria-chersonesus) after he had lived fifty and five years four months and
twenty days. His body was first Interred at Ottenwaldt in the house of St.
Canute, but afterward by his Son translated to Roschilt, where he lies Nobly
Intom'd under a stately Monument of Alablaster and Marble. He took to Wife
Dorothea the Daughter of Magnus Duke of Lower-Sarony, Angria and Westphalia;
who dying on the seventh day of October, in the year one thousand five hundred
seventy and one, and of her Age sixty, was first buried at Scanderburg in
Denmark, but afterward removed to Roschilt, where she lies with her Husband.
Children by Christian the Third and this Dorothea, were first FREDERICK, who
was King of Denmark. MAGNUS the second Son, Heir of Norway, Duke of Holstein
and Sleswick, born at Coppenhagen on St. Bartholomew-day, in the year one
thousand five hundred and forty, forty minutes past ten in the morning; he
married the great Duke of Muscovy's Niece, and was made Bishop of Orpen in
Livonia, where he died, in the year one thousand five hundred and eighty. JOHN
the youngest, Duke of Holstein, Stormar, and Ditzmarch, etc. was born at
Koldingen on the one and twentieth day of March, in the year one thousand five
hundred forty and five, at half an hour after seven at night. He married first
Elizabeth the Daughter of Ernest Duke of Lunenburgh, in the year one thousand
five hundred sixty and seven, who died on the twelfth of February, nineteen
years after, without Issue; so that in the year one thousand five hundred
eighty and eight, he took to his second Wife Agnes-Hedwise the Daughter of
Joachim Ernest Prince of Anhault, and Relict of Augustus Elector of Sarony, by
whom he had seven Sons and six Daughters. Christian his Eldest Styled Heir of
Norway, Duke of Sleswick and Holstein, Ernest second Son, Duke of Sleswick and
Holstein, Alexander Duke of Holstein, Augustus Duke of Sleswick and Holstein,
John-Adolph Duke of Sleswick and Holstein, Frederick and Philip Dukes of
Holstein; Dorothea eldest Daughter, Mary, Ann, Sophia, Elizabeth and Margaret.
ANN Eldest Daughter of Christian the Third was Wedded to Augustus Elector of
Sarony, who died at Dresden in the Palace of her Husband on the Kalends of
October in the year one thousand five hundred eighty and five. DOROTHEA the
youngest, was the Wife of William the younger Duke of Brunswick and Lunenburgh.

Impress or Device.
Christian the Third King of Denmark, etc. Bare for his Impress or Deviee: On
the Revers of his Coins* the Letter S. twining and enterlacing it self about
the Body of the Letter F. both Roman Capitals, Ensign'd above with a Coronet:
The word REGNA FIRMAT PIETAS.

13. Frederick the II. King of Denmark.
FREDERICK, (the Eldest Son of Christian the Third,) Surnamed the Magnanimous
for his great Courage: After the Death of his Father was chosen King of
Denmark, Norway, etc. Goths and Uandals, etc. Born on the first day of May at
Hadersleben in Denmark, in the year of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, one
thousand five hundred thirty and four, at half an hour after nine in the
Morning. And died at Andersoe in Zealand on the fourth day of March, in the
year one thousand five hundred eighty and eight, at four of the Clock in the
Afternoon, being Aged fifty three years, eight months, three days and seven
hours. He was one of the Knights Companions of the most Honorable Order of the
Garter, and was buried at Roschilt. His Wife was Sophia the Daughter of Vlrick
Prince of Meckleburgh, joined in Matrimony on the twentieth day of May, in the
year of our Lord, one thousand five hundred seventy and two, by whom he had
Issue CHRISTIAN, who was King of Denmark, etc. ULRICK his second Son, Heir of
Norway, Duke of Sleswick and Holstein, born on the thirtieth day of December,
in the year one thousand five hundred seventy and eight, and was one of the
Knights Companions of the most Honorable Order of the Garter. JOHN the
youngest Son, was Duke of Sleswick and Holstein, born on the twenty sixth of
July, in the year one thousand five hundred eighty and three. ELIZABETH the
eldest Daughter, born at Koldingen, on the one and twentieth day of August, in
the year one thousand five hundred seventy and three, and was Married at
Cronenburgh to Henry-Julio Duke of Brunswick and Lunenburgh on Easter Day, in
the year one thousand five hundred and ninety. ANNE second Daughter, born at
Scanderberg, on the twelfth day of October, in the year one thousand five
hundred seventy and four, and was Married to James the sixth King of Scotland,
afterward of England, France and Ireland, where she was Crowned Queen,
Great-Grand-Mother to her Highness the Princess Anne, and Great-Aunt to Prince
George of Denmark her Husband; of whose Death and Funeral see more in the
Paragraph of King James. AUGUSTA third Daughter, born on the eighth of April,
in the year one thousand five hundred and eighty, was the Wife of John-Adolph
Duke of Holstein. And HEDWISE, born at Hadersleu on the twenty sixth of July,
in the year one thousand five hundred eighty and three, Married Christian, the
second of that Name, Elector of Sarony.

14 Christian IV. King of Denmark, etc.
CHRISTIAN eldest Son of Frederick the second King of Denmark, born at
Fridersburgh, on the twelfth day of April, in the year one thousand five
hundred seventy and seven, at three minuets past four in the Afternoon, and
Elected King of Denmark in the twelfth year of his Age, but not Crowned so,
until the eighth day of July, in the year one thousand five hundred ninety and
eight, when he was Styled Christian the Fourth King of Denmark, Norway, Goths
and Uandals, Duke of Sleswick, Holstein, Stormar, Wagria, and Ditzmarsh, Earl
of Oldenburgh and Dalmenhorst; and coming into England, in the year one
thousand six hundred and six, (to Visit his Brother-in-Law King James, and his
Sister the Queen,) was Installed Knight of the most Honorable Order of the
Garter: In the year one thousand six hundred and ten, he was again in England;
and in the year one thousand six hundred twenty and five, made Head of the
League in Germany against the Emperor Ferdinand, and Warred often with the
Swedes, until in the year one thousand six hundred forty and eight, he fell
Sick and Died, having had Issue by Anna-Catharina (Daughter of
Joachim-Frederick Elector of Brandenburgh) CHRISTIAN his eldest Son, who (being
only King Elect, lived not to possess the Crown,) departed this life before his
Father. FREDERICK the second Son, after the death of his Father was King of
Denmark. They had several other Children, who dying young, no other Memorial is
left concerning them.

15. Frederick the III. King of Denmark.
FREDERICK second Son of Christian the fourth, was (during his Fathers
Lifetime) Archbishop of Bremen, after whose decease he was Crowned King of
Denmark, Norway, Goths and Uandals, etc. The first part of whose Reign was very
troublesome and uneasy; as being not only oppressed with Foreign Enemies and
Invaders, but Domestic and Intestine Factions arose, which almost overthrew
the State. And that at a time when the Royal Family of Great Britain could not
possibly assist him; (who lay under a more severe pressure, by the unjust
Tyranny and Usurpation of the worst of men and Villains the Fanatics.) Yet
this benefit accrued to his Posterity thereby; That whereas the Ancient Kingdom
of Denmark had hitherto been Elective and in the choice of the Nobility to
approve their King; upon the healing of these differences, it was by the
unanimous consent of the Estates of this Kingdom constituted Hereditary, as an
Argument of their Sincere intentions and Faithful returning to their Obedience.
His present Majesty of Denmark being the first who by virtue of this setlement
has succeeded as Heir to his Father. King Frederick married (whilst as yet he
was but Archbishop) Sophia-Aemilia of Lunenburgh on the eighteenth day of
October, in the year one thousand six hundred forty and three: And dying of a
Fever in the year one thousand six hundred sixty and nine, left Issue by her,

CHRISTIERN his Eldest Son, now King of Denmark, viz. 1683. He was born on the
eighteenth day of April, in the year one thousand six hundred forty and six,
and Crowned on the twelfth of June, in the year one thousand six hundred and
seventy, by the Name of Christiern the Fifth* He took to Wife the Lady
Charlotta-Aemilia, (Daughter to William the sixth Landtgrave of Hessecastle, by
Hedwig-Sophia Electoral Princess of Brandenburgh,) on the tenth of May, in the
year one thousand six hundred sixty and seven, by whom he has had Issue,
Frederick his eldest Son, Prince of Denmark, etc. born the one and twenteth of
October, in the year one thousand six hundred seventy and one.
Christiern-William second Son, born the one and twenteth of November, in the
year one thousand six hundred seventy and two, and died the twenty fifth day of
January following. A second Christiern born on the twenty fifth day of March,
in the year one thousand six hundred seventy and five. Charles youngest Son,
born on the twenty eighth day of August, in the year one thousand six hundred
eighty and two. And one Daughter, the Princess Sophia-Hedwig, born the twenty
eighth day of August, in the year one thousand six hundred seventy and seven.

ANNA-SOPHIA eldstest Daughter of King Frederick the Third, born on the first
day of September, in the year one thousand six hundred forty and seven, and
Wedded to John-George, the Third of that Name, Prince Elector of Sarony in the
month of September, in the year one thousand six hundred sixty three, but the
Marriage was not Consummated until the sixteenth day of October, in the year
one thousand six hundred sixty and six. FREDERICA-AEMILIA the second Daughter,
born in the year one thousand six hundred forty and eight, and Married on the
third day of November, in the year one thousand six hundred seventy and seven
at Gluckstadt, to Christian-Adolph Duke of Holstein, Sunderburgh WILHELMINA or
GUILLIEMETTA-ERNESTINA third Daughter, born on the twentieh day of June, in the
year one thousand six hundred and fifty, and given in Marriage to Charles (now)
Prince Elector Palatine of the Rhine, in the year one thousand six hundred
seventy and one. ULRICA*ELEONORASABINA youngest Daughter, (the present Queen of
Sweden,) who in the year one thousand six hundred and eighty, was Wedded to
Charles the Fourth King of Swedes, etc.

Prince GEORGE of Denmark, second and youngest Son of King Frederick the Third,
was born in the year one thousand six hundred fifty and three: He is only
Brother to his present Majesty of Denmark, and Knight of the Noble Order of the
Elephant; who has taken to Wife the Lady Anne Stuart, second Daughter of his
Royal Highness James Duke of York and Albany, etc. by the Princess Anne his
first Wife, Daughter of Edward Earl of Clarenden, and Lord High Chancellor of
England. Which Lady Anne Daughter of his Royal Highness, is Niece to his
present Majesty of Great Britain King Charles the Second; Sister and Cousin
German to their Highnesses the Prince and Princess of Orange: Cousin to Charles
Count Palatine of the Rhyne, Duke of Babaria, Cup Bearer and Great Steward of
the Empire, and to the Lady Charlotte his Sister Duchess of Orleans, Ualois
and Chartres, Countess of Blois and Mountargis, Wife of Philip only Brother to
Lewis the Fourteenth now King of France and Navarr, etc. She is Granddaughter
to King Charles the Martyr; Great-Grand-Daughter to King James of England, and
Henry the Fourth of France: And Great-Great-Grand-Daughter to Frederick the
Magnanimous King of Denmark, Norway, Sweden, Goths and Uandals, Duke of
Sleswick, Holstein, Stormar, Wageia, and Ditzmarch, Earl of Oldenburgh and
Dalmenhorst, her present Husband Prince George's Great-Grand-Father.

THE GENEALOGY OF THE MOST Illustrious and Highborn PRINCESS, ANNE, OF
DENMARK, etc.
BANQUO one of the chief Nobility in the Kingdom of Scotland, about the year of
Grace one thousand; was in the time of Duncan (who began his reign in the year
one thousand thirty and five, made Thane of Loquhaber,) and his Principal
Receiver, or prime Steward of his Revenues; unto whose Care and Conduct,
together with that of Macbeth (Cousin-German to the King) the most weighty
Affairs of the Kingdom were committed: By whose prudent Council and Advice,
Scotland became the Envy of her Neighbors for her Tranquillity and Happiness;
until such time as through the Ambition of Macbeth, prompted thereto by certain
Prophetic Speeches, (intimating that he should be King) and spurred on by the
restless desires of his more Ambitious Wife, unfortunately became the im pious
Rigicide himself, by imbrewing his hands in the Blood of his Prince, and then
usurped the Crown. And as Tyranny is always attended with Cruelty and distrust,
so fearing the Interest of Banquo might give disturbance to his ill-gotten
Diadem; commanded, that Banquo and all his Posterity should be slain; and the
rather, for that the same Fore-tellers of his assuming the Crown, had likewise
assured him, that although Banquo should not be King himself, yet from his Loins
should proceed a Generation of Kings to Rule the Scepter of Scotland for ever:
Accordingly Banquo was most Inhumanely made away by Treachery; and none of his
Posterity left to survive, except FLEANCE one of his Sons, who escasped the
hands of his Fathers Murderers, and fled into North Wales; where, after he had
stayed some time, and being a youth bred up in all the Accomplishments
belonging to Greatness, he so far prevailed upon the affections of the Lady
Nesta, Daughter of Griffith ap Lewellin Prince of the Country, that he gained
her to his Embraces, on whom he begat a Son that was called WALTER. Fleance
being dead, this Walter continued in the Court of his Grandfather 'till he
came to man's Estate; when hearing the Usurper Macbeth was slain, and that
Malcome (Surnamed Cammoir the right Heir of Scotland) was Invested in the
Throne, he privately conveyed himself from Wales, and came to the Court of
Scotland; where making his Lineage and Extraction known, he was not only
restored to all the Honors and Estate of his Ancestors Thanes of Loquhaber,
but preferred to the Stewardship of the Kingdom, about the year one thousand
sixty and seven: The Name of Stuart or Steward growing from hence Hereditary to
his Posterity; and from whom his present Majesty of Great Britain, and his
Royal Highness James Duke of York and Albany, the Princes of Orange and the
Princess of Denmark are Lineally Descended. He had likewise given him (for the
signal Services performed for his King in reducing the Enemies of his Prince in
Galloway and the Isles to his obedience) the Lordships of Stragis, Coil and
Stuarts-land. This Walter had a Son named ALAN, who with Godfrey of Boloigne,
Duke of Lorrain, and Robert Duke of Normandy, (Eldest Son of King William the
Conqueror of England) went into the Holy Land, in the year one thousand ninety
and nine, where he behaved himself with much Valor for the recovery of
Jerusalem; leaving Issue ALEXANDER his Son and Heir, who Founded the Abbey of
Paseley for Monks of the Order of Saint Benedict, who likewise had a Son named
Walter Stuart.

1. Walter II. High Steward of Scotland.
WALTER STUART of Daundonald, the second of that Name, (but first in descent
from, and only Son of Alexander who Founded the Monastery of Paseley) was a
famous Commander in the Scots Wars, who with the Earl of March overcame the
Bastard of Galloway, in the year one thousand two hundred thirty and eight: He
is said to have gone with Lewis the French King into the Holy Land; but
returning before the Battle of Largis, he there particularly signalized
himself, which was Fought against the Danes on the third day of August, in the
year one thousand two hundred sixty and three. He was likewise Great Seneschal,
or Hereditary Lord High Steward of Scotland, or he who had the chief Charge of
the Kings Revenues. He left two Sons, ALEXANDER the Eldest, who succeeded him
in the Stewardship, and ROBERT, who having the Lands of Tourbouton assigned him
for his Appennage; and that he Married the Daughter and Heir of Robert Crux (or
Cross) of Crurstone, became Lord of most ample Possessions, who going with
Lewis the French King in the Expedition against the Sarazens, in the year one
thousand two hundred and seventy, died in Indea. From whom the late Earls and
Dukes of Lenor in Scotland and Richmond in England* the Earls of March, the
Lords Darley, d'Aubigny or 'Obigny in Auvergne in France, with several other
Noble Families of the Surname of Stuart in both Kingdoms derived their Original.

2. Alexander II. High-Steward of Scotland.
ALEXANDER STUART of Paseley, of that Christian-name the second (eldest Son of
Walter) and chief Seneschal of Scotland, was at that remarkable Battle of
Largis with his Father: Being then but a Knight, he led the right Wing of the
King's Army against the Danes, who were overthrown, and finally routed. The
year following he was joined in Commission with John Commin, and recovered the
Isle of Man, (then in possession of the Danes) and afterward, with the Earl of
Lenos, helped to subdue the other Isles, where he performed the part of a most
wise and experienced Soldier; who had Issue, JAMES, his eldest Son, who died
young, and JOHN, who succeeded him in the Seneschalship; with many more, who
changing their names of Stuart, assumed others, according to the appellation of
those Lands which were assigned them for their Inheritance.

3. John High-Steward of Scotland.
JOHN STUART of Bute, eldest Son living of Alexander of Paseley, was one of the
six Governors of the Kingdom of Scotland during the Controversy between
Robert Bruce and John Baliol, with the rest of the Candidates for the Crown,
Anno Domini One thousand two hundred ninety two. He lost his life in the Battle
of Falkirk, on St. Mary Magdalens day, (viz. 22 Junii) Anno Domini One thousand
two hundred ninety eight; and having married the Daughter and Heir of Bonkill,
had these large Possessio ns of Bonkill, Ransrew, Rothsay, and Bute, made over
to him* whose only Son WALTER inherited them.

4. Walter III. High-Steward of Scotland.
WALTER STUART, the third of that Christian-name, was the only Son of John: As
Heir to his Father, was High-Steward of Scotland, and Lord of Stragis, Coil,
and Stuarts-land; and to his Mother, Lord of Bonkill, Ransrew, Rothsay and
Bute. He married Margery the eldest Daughter (which he had by his first Wife,
the Lady Isabel Daughter to the Earl of Mar) of Robert Bruce King of Scotland,
and that by the advice and approbation of the Nobility of that Kingdom: which
King Robert, Anno Domini One thousand three hundred and fourteen, procured an
Act of Parliament for the Entailment of the Crown on Himself, and the Heirs
male of his Body lawfully begotten; and for want of such Issue, then to his
Brother Robert Bruce, and his Heirs male; who dying without such Heirs, then to
this Margery his eldest Daughter, and to the Heirs general of her Body, etc. By
virtue of which Establishment, her eldest Son ROBERT (after the death of his
Grandfather, Mother, and Cousin King David Bruce) was crowned King of
Scotland. She had likewise three other Sons by the aforesaid Walter; JAMES,
JOHN, and ALLAN, all slain in the Field before Berwick on St. Mary Magdalens
day, Anno Domini One thousand three hundred thirty three, thirty seven years
before their Brother Robert was crowned King. The Lady Margery died in the year
One thousand three hundred and nineteen, and her Husband Anno Domini One
thousand three hundred twenty six.

5. Robert II. King of Scotland.
ROBERT STUART, only Son and Heir living of Walter great Seneschal of Scotland,
and Margary his Wife, being born Anno Domini One thousand three hundred and
thirteen, was in the fifty seventh year of his age (viz. on the 25 th. day of
March, Anno Domini One thousand three hundred and seventy) crowned King of
Scotland, at Scoon in the Sheriffdom of Perth, by the name of Robert the
second; soon after which, being in years, and having many Children, he got the
succession of the Crown established and ratified in Parliament: all the
Nobility and chief Gentry taking their corporal Oaths to perform the same, viz.
That his eldest Son JOHN, (which he had by his second Wife, Elizabeth Moor)
should succeed him, and the Heirs male of his Body lawfully begotten; and for
want of such Issue, then to his Son ROBERT; who dying without Issue male, to
his younger Son ALEXANDER, (both begotten on the aforesaid Elizabeth Moor;)
which Alexander dying likewise without such lawful Heirs, then to his eldest
Son David, (which he had by his first Nuptials) and for want of such Issue, to
his younger Son by the same Venture, viz. WALTER; who likewise departing this
life without lawful Issue male, then the Crown to devolve to the next of Kin.
He took to Wife, before his coming to the Crown, Euphemia, Daughter of Hugh
Earl of Ross, who lived to be Queen of Scotland, but dying three years after,
(viz. Anno Domini One thousand three hundred seventy three) left DAVID her
eldest Son, who was created Earl of Strathern, and died without Issue male,
leaving behind him one sole Daughter his Heir, viz. Euphemia, the Wife of
Patrick Graham, younger Brother to the Lord Graham, by whom she had Milo
Graham, that was made Earl of Monteith by King James the first. WALTER her
younger Son was created Earl of Athol; but being the principal of the
Conspirators that took away the life of King James the first his Nephew, and
for that he was the chief instigator of Robert the Governor to murder David
Duke of Rothsay, the King's Uncle: he, together with all his Family, were
destroyed, his Honors and Revenues reverting to the Crown, then in the
possession of James the second. She had a Daughter likewise, named EUPHEMIA,
married to James eldest Son to Earl Douglas. King Robert, after the death of
his first Wife, married Elizabeth the Daughter of Sir Adam Moor Knight, and
Widow of Gifford* of Louth, by whom he had JOHN, his eldest Son, afterward
King of Scotland; ROBERT, Earl of Mentith, Fife, and Duke of Albany,
constituted Governor of the Realm, by reason of the great Age and Infirmities
of his Father, weakness of his elder Brother, and Captivity of his Nephew. He
married, and had Issue Mordack Stuart, Duke of Albany after the decease of his
Father, (which happened on the third of September, Anno Domini One thousand
four hundred and nineteen;) which Mordack was likewise Governor of Scotland,
Anno Domini One thousand four hundred and twenty; who, together with two of his
Sons, Walter and Alexander, and his Son Walter's Father-in-law, Duncan Earl of
Lenos, suffered death in the time of King James the first, for being in the
Conspiracy to promote Walter Earl of Atholl to the Crown. The Earldoms of
Monteth, Fife and Lenos reverting to the King, the first was bestowed on Milo
Graham, his Cousingerman, and the last on Allan Stuart, who had married one of
the Daughters of the aforesaid Duncan. This Mordack Duke of Albany had likewise
another Son, named James, who having treacherously slain John Stuart the King's
Uncle, fled into Ireland, where he died without Issue; with him likewise his
Brother Walter's two Sons, Andrew and Alexander, and their Mother (another
Daughter of Duncan Earl of Lenos) lived, till King James the third came to the
Crown. ALEXANDER, another Son of King Robert by Elizabeth Moor, was created
Earl of Buchquan, and Lord of Bradzenoch, who married, and had Issue Duncan or
Dajeth Stuart, who died young. JOHN Stuart of Dondonald was his youngest Son,
slain by James third Son of Mordack Duke of Albany. His eldest Daughter by his
last Wife was given in marriage to John Dunbar, and he created Earl of Murray,
(being the younger Brother to George Earl of March) by whom she had a Son, who
likewise married, and left Issue one sole Daughter and Heir, married into the
Family of the Douglas, and by which they came by the said Earldom of Murray.
ELIZABETH, a second Daughter, wedded to John Lion the King's Favorite, made
Chancellor of Scotland, and Earl of Glamis, and killed by James Lindsey Earl of
Crawford, Anno Domini One thousand three hundred seventy and five. GILIS, or
EGIDEA, the youngest, was Wife of William Hamilton, natural Son to Archibald
Lord of Galloway, by whom she had only a Daughter, married to the Earl of
Orkney. King Robert Stuart departed this life on the 19 th. day of April One
thousand three hundred and ninety, at his Castle of Dondonald in the seventy
seventh year of his age, and was buried at Scoon before the high Altar.

Impress or Device.
About the latter end of his Reign, King Robert the first took for his Impress
or Device, A Coronet pointed, with two Rows of glistering Stars, and placed
over a Terrestrial Globe. The word, VANITAS VANITATUM, and OMNIA VANITAS.

6. Robert III. King of Scotland.
JOHN STUART, eldest Son of King Robert by his second Wife, was Earl of Carri^,
and High-Steward of Scotland, and upon the death of his Father Crowned King on
the Assumption of the blessed Virgin, the fifteenth day of August, in the year
one thousand three hundred and ninety, according to the establishment made in
Parliament in the life time of his Father. On the day of his Inauguration or
Anointing, he was Importuned by his Nobles to alter his Name; wherefore he was
Crowned by the Name of King Robert the Third, The reason given is: For that it
was observed how unfortunate the Name of John had been not only to several of
the Blood Royal of Scotland, but likewise to John King of England, and to John
the French King. This Robert after he had ruled the Kingdom with great
Integrity for the space of sixteen years; having lost one of his Sons by the
wicked contrivance of his Brother Robert whilst he was Governor, and his
second Son continuing a Captive in England; took it so to heart that he died
for grief thereof at Rothsay on the first day of April, in the year one
thousand four hundred and six, and was buried at Paseley, having had Issue by
his Queen Annabella Drummond; Besides these two Sons, as many Daughters; the
one Married to the Earl of Angus, by whom she had William Earl of Augus. The
other was twice Married, first to Kennedy, by whom she had Sir James Kennedy
Knight, and another James, who was Bishop of St. Andrews, who built a Church,
and erected the famous College of Philosophy in the said City. Her second
Husband Graham, and her Son by him Patrick Graham, who was the first
Archbishop of St. Andrews, and who died in Prison at Lockleven. DAVID eldest
Son of King Robert and his Queen Annabella Drummond, born in the year one
thousand three hundred seventy and eight, was created Duke of Rothsay, but
being delivered to the Tuition of his Uncle the Duke of Albany; that he might
reclaim his Extravagancies, was by him enclosed in the Castle of Falkland, and
there Starved to death; he Married Mary the Daughter of Archibald Duglas, but
left no Issue, so that his Brother JAMES succeeded his Father in the Throne of
Scotland. The Character bestowed on King Robert the Third, is this, That he was
a Prince of wonderful Innocence of Life, and unspotted Manners, deficient in
nothing that might make a private man excellent; and that it was most truly
said him, that he was a much better Man than King.

Impress or Device.
King Robert the Third bare for his Impress or Device. A Sword and Scepter
passing through a Coronet, and placed in Saltire over a Mond or Globe, with an
Aveline cross thereon. The Word, HIS ORNARI AUT MORI.

7. James I King of Scotland*
JAMES STUART second Son of King Robert the Third, as yet a Youth, was sent
into France (to prevent the Butchery of his Uncle Robert, who had already
destroyed his Elder Brother) but being cast by Storm on the Coast of England,
was taken Prisoner and sent to the Court, where by the care of King Henry the
Fifth, and his Son King Henry the Sixth. Noble Provision was made for his
Education; so that by the time he came to man's Estate, he was excellently
accomplished in all sorts of Learning, and good Literature: And having lived
thus a Captive and a Stranger to his own Country for near Eighteen years; was
upon the Death of his Father King Robert soon after set at Liberty, and
returning into Scotland, (with his Wife Joan, Eldest Daughter of John Beaufort
Earl of Somerset and Marquess of Dorset, whom he Married in England,) He was
Crowned King thereof on the one and twentieth day of May next following, in the
year one thousand four hundred twenty and four. This King James ruled the
Scepter of Scotland in great Tranquillity for some years, making diverse wholesome
and good Laws, especially to restrain the force of Thieves and Robbers, and was
the first who ordained that Organs should be used in the Churches of Scotland.
But a Confederacy and Association of mutinous Outlaws and Malcontents being
entered into, to take away the Life of this King, they Bloodily perpetrated
their Villainy by assaulting his Person, and giving him no less than twenty
eight Mortal Wounds, of which he immediately expired on the one and twentieth
day of February, in the year one thousand four hundred thirty and six, after he
had reigned thirteen years ten months and odd days, in the forty and fourth
year of his Age, and was buried in the House of the Carthusians in the Suburbs
of Berth of his own Foundation, not far from the Sepulcher of his Wife Joan, by
whom he had two Sons and six Daughters. JAMES the Eldest was King of Scotland,
and ALEXANDER born on the same day with his Brother, a Twin, who died young;
MARGARET Eldest Daughter, given in Marriage to Lewis the Dauphin, afterward
King of France, by the Name of Lewis the Eleventh, Son of Charles the Seventh,
she died in the lifetime of her Father in Law at Chalones in Champagne, where
she was first Buried in the great Church there. But after, when her Husband
came to the Crown, he caused her Body to be Translated and Interred in the
Abbey-Church of Laon in Poictou. ELIZABETH Wife to Francis the first Duke of
Brittany. JANE first Married to the Earl of Angus, and after to George Earl of
Huntley. ELEANOR Wedded to Sigismond of Cyroll Archduke of Austria. MARY
Espoused to the Prince of Uerense, or Lord of Camp-veer, in France. ANNABELLA
sixth and youngest Daughter, celebrated her Nuptials with the Earl of Morton.
Queen Jane lived many years after the death of her first Husband King James;
and was afterward Married to James Stuart Son to the Lord of Lorne, commonly
called the Black-Knight of Lorne, who being taken Prisoner by the Flemings,
died in Durance. The Queen not long surviving him, who died on the fifteenth
day of July following, in the year one thousand four hundred forty and six, and
was buried in the Charter House at Perth by her Husband, leaving Issue by the
aforesaid Black-Knight, John Stuart Earl of Athol, James Earl of Buchane, and
Andrew Bishop of Murrey.

Impress or Device.
This King James bare for his Impress or Device, a branch of Thistles with a
Sprig of Rue. The word POUR MA DEFENSE. Which was first taken up by Achaius
King of Scotland, when he made that strict League with the Emperor Carlemain,
A. D. 787. giving intimation by the Motto, That he feared not the Power of any
Foraign Prince, seeing he leaned on the Succor and Alliance of the French.

8. James II* King of Scotland.
JAMES STUART, Eldest Son of King James the First of Scotland, was born
together with his Brother Alexander on the fourteenth day of October, in the
year one thousand four hundred and thirty: And being scarce seven years of Age
when his Father Died, was Crowned King of Scotland at the Monastery of St.
Cross, (Vulgo, Holy-rood-house) in Edinburgh by the Name of James the Second.
The first part of whose Reign was spent in composing the Domestic jarrs and
differences amongst his Nobles, afterward he wholly bent his mind to War
against the English; and was himself at the head of the Army that sat down
before the Castle of Rorbourgh, (at that time in possession of the English)
where being unhappily upon one of the Batteries, at the discharge of a great
Ordnance, which fatally burst in pieces, he was therewith slain on the thitd
day of August, in the year one thousand four hundred and sixty, in the Thirteth
year of his Age, being Interred in the Abbey of St. Cross at Edinburgh. He
Married Mary the Daughter of Arnold Egmont Duke of Gelderland, in the year one
thousand four hundred forty and eight, a Lady of singular Modesty, who likewise
departed this Life on the sixteenth day of November, in the year one thousand
four hundred sixty and six, and found Sepulcher in the College of the Holy
Trinity of her own Foundation at Edinburgh; by whom he left Issue, JAMES his
Eldest Son, who was King of Scotland, ALEXANDER second Son, was created Duke of
Albany and Earl of March, a man sufficiently experienced in the strange
unconstancy of Fortune, who having been thrice banished, returned twice into
his Country again, esteemed and in reputation; but the third time being in
Exile in France, as he was running at Tilt with Lewis Duke of Orleans, received
his Mortal wound in the year one thousand four hundred eighty and three, and
was buried in the Celestines at Paris; he was twice Married, his first Wife was
the Earl of Orkneys Daughter, by whom he had a Son named Alexander that was
Bishop of Murrey and Abbot of Scoone; his second Lady (whom he Married when he
went first into France) was Anne Daughter to Bertrand Earl of Bulloign, who
dying the year before her Husband, in the year one thousand four Hundred eighty
and two, left Issue only one Son named John, who (upon the resignation of his
Half-Brother Alexander when he entered into Religion) was Duke of Albany and
Earl of March, as likewise Governor of the Realm, and Tutor to King James the
Fifth his Kinsman; being slain by the Faction of the Hamiltons. JOHN youngest
Son of King James the Second, for speaking words derogating from the Honor of
his Brother James when he was King, was confined to the Castle of Craig-miller,
where growing distempered in his mind, the King pitying his Condition, ordered
him to be removed to the Cannons-gate in Edinburgh for Cure, where (whether
through the Unskillfulness or Negligence of the Chirurgions who let him Blood?
or through his own obstinacy or wilfulness?) he bled to death, in the month of
December, in the year one thousand four hundred and eighty, having no Issue.
MARGARET, alias MARIAN, was first Marrried to Thomas (Eldest Son of Robert)
Boyd (who was Governor of Scotland) created Earl of Arran; he fled together
with his Lady into Burgundy where he died an Exul, and was buried at Antwarp,
under a Noble Tomb erected there for him by Charles Duke of Burgundy; (tho
others say he died at Florence of an untimely death.) He had two Children by
his Wife in his Banishment, both born at Antwarp. James Boyd, who returning
into Scotland, was killed by Hugh Montgomery of Eglington. And Grecile Boyd,
first Married to the Earl of Cassiles, and after to the Lord Forbes, but by
them had no Issue. After the return of the Lady Margaret (before the death of
her Husband) into Scotland, her Brother King James Confined her, caused her to
Sue out a Divorce, and Re-married her to James Hamilton, and gave him the
Earldom of Arran, whose Posterity are living at this day. CECILY, youngest
Daughter of King James, died unmarried.

Impress or Device*
King James the seccond bare for his Impress or Device, A Coronet placed on a
Mount of Earth; a Sword the point downward, and Crucifix placed in the form of
a Roman Capital V issuing therefrom: The word, PRO LEGE ET GREGE.

James III. King of Scotland.
JAMES STUART, eldest Son of King James the second was crowned King of Scotland
at Kelsoe, in the year year 1460. (being then but seven years of age) by the
name of James the third: The first part of whose Reign was very peaceable and
quiet; but afterward, what with the divisions of his Nobles, and diverse
Factions of the common people, (who setting up his own Son against him) was
driven to take up Arms in his defense: when seeking to chastise the Insolence
of those Rebels, he was at the unfortunate Battle of Bannocksbourn slain, on
St. Barnabies day, (viz. June 11.) Anno Domini 1488. when he had reigned 29
years, in the thirty sixth year of his age. He was buried in the Monastery of
Cambuskenneth, not far from Sterling; and having married Margaret the only
Daughter of Christian the first King of Denmark and Norway, etc. at Edinburgh,
on the tenth day of July Anno Domini* One thousand four hundred sixty nine,
(who was then but twelve years of age) had three years after (upon the Birth of
their first Child) all the Right, Title, Claim and Interest which the aforesaid
Christian pretended to have in the Isles of Orkney and Schetland, resigned to
him. She died Anno Domini One thousand four hundred eighty seven, and was
buried by her Husband the 29 th of February in the same year, in the Monastery
of Cambus-kenneth; leaving Issue, JAMES, her eldest Son, who was King of
Scotland. ALEXANDER, second Son, who was Archbishop of St. Andrews, slain with
his Brother King James in the Battle of Flodden fought against the English,
Anno Domini One thousand three hundred and eighteen; And a third Son named
JOHN, who was Earl of Mart.

Impress or Device.
James the third King of Scotland bare for Impress or Device, An Hen sheltring
her young ones under the cover of her wings: The word, NON DORMIT. His second
Device was, Two wellspread Rocks placed in the midst of a most tempestuous Sea:
The word, DURABO And when he saw his Son in Arms against him, A large growing
Vine-tree watered with Wine, (which instead of causing it to sprout and grow,
makes it fade and wither: The word, MEA SIC MIHI PROSUNT.

10. James IV. King of Scotland.
JAMES STU TAR, eldest Son of James the third, was born on the tenth day of
March, Anno Domini, One thousand four hundred seventy two, and created Duke of
Rothsay; and upon the death of his Father crowned King of Scotland, on the
twenty fourth day of June, Anno Domini One thousand four hundred eighty eight,
by the name of James the fourth. After he had ruled the Kingdom of Scotland for
the space of twenty five years, he (together with the chief of the Gentry, and
flower of the Nobility of the Realm) was slain in that most unfortunate and
fatal Battle of Floddenfield, on the borders of Northumberland, fought against
the English, on the 9th. day of September, Anno Domini One thousand five
hundred and thirteen. Yet various have been the opinions concerning the loss of
this King: Some will have it, That he fell in the Battle on that fatal day;
others, That he made his escape. The English say, (with greatest likelihood)
That he was slain in the field; that they found his Body (well known to several
of their Officers) conveyed it to Berwick, embowelled, seared, and wrapped it
in Lead, carried it to London, and from thence to the Monastery of Shein in the
County of Surrey, where it was buried. And John Stow assures us, (both in his
Survey of London, and his Chronicle) That after the spoil of that House, (to
wit, in the time of King Edward the sixth) he saw the aforesaid Leaden Chest,
and the reputed head of the said King; the hair both of the Head and Beard
being red. To this the Scotch Annalists make answer, That on the day of the
fight several men of renowned Valor, resembling the King in stature and
proportion* were apparelled like him, had peculiar Guards and Followers
appointed them, in all appearance as the King himself, that in case the King
should be killed, it might not be justly known to either party until after the
Battle; whose fall might encourage the one, and dishearten the other; and that
the person so taken by the English, was one of those mock-Kings, viz. Alexander
Lord Elphinstone, the King's Favorite, who resembled him both in Face and
Shape; who courageously fighting that day, and many of his Friends and
Followers of the Nobility falling on each side of him, was at length himself
slain; which number of Nobles, the courage and resistance of the person, and
the resemblance he had of the King, gave the English occasion to believe it was
himself.

A second reason they give (why the Body found by the English was not their
King's) is, For that he had been accustomed to wear next to his skin an Iron
Girdle of a considerable weight, (a severity imposed upon himself ever since
his being in arms against his Father when he was killed at Bannocksbourn) and
that no such Girdle or Chain of Iron (unto which he usually every three years
added more links) was found on the Corpse that was carried to Berwick. They
further say, That he was seen soon after the Battle between Kelsoe and Dunce,
and supposed to be carried to the Castle of Humes, where he was privately
murdered, and for which the Lord Humes was afterward accused, tried in
Parliament, but acquitted because there was no positive evidence that could
make it appear that they had seen the King after the fight. But the more common
and vulgar report was, That he was still living; who seeing the Victory incline
to the Enemy, and that so many brave men perished through his own wilfulness in
not declining the Encounter, (according to the advice of his Nobles) the shame
thereof made him timely withdraw himself, and forsaking the Kingdom went to the
Holy Land, where he spent the remaining part of his days in tears and
repentance: And this they grounded upon some former resolutions he had made to
visit the holy Sepulcher; but being prevented by the death of Bishop Blacktour,
(and other occurrences intervening) who had been sent before to prepare his
way, took this opportunity to accomplish it.

Much like the story of Charles Duke of Burgundy; who having lost the Battle at
Nancy, was never heard of more; and therefore his Subjects for many years would
not believe but that he was alive, and at Jerusalem. Be it which way it will,
we are certain of this, that neither the one nor the other ever afterward
appeared on the Stage of the World, to act either as Princes or private persons.

This King James took to Wife the Lady Margaret, eldest Daughter of King Henry
VII. of England, by whom he had four Sons, and two Daughters; JAMES, Prince of
Scotland, and of the Isles, born at Holyrood-house on the 21 st. day of
January, Anno One thousand five hundred and seven, and died the 17 th. of
February next following at Sterling. ARTHUR, Prince of Scotland, and of the
Isles, born on the 20 th* day of October, Anno Domini One thousand five hundred
and nine, at Holyroodhouse, and died on the 14 th. of July the next year, at
the Castle of Edinburgh. JAMES, third Son, was King of Scotland; and ALEXANDER,
a Posthume, born six months after the death of his Father, (viz. on the 30 th.
of April, Anno Domini One thousand five hundred and fourteen) and was created
Duke of Rothsay, but died young at Sterling, and was buried at Cambus-kenneth.
The Daughters (one born on the 15 th. of July, Anno Domini One thousand five
hundred and eight; the other Anno Domini One thousand five hundred and
thirteen) died soon after Baptism. The Queen, after the death of her Husband,
married again, and took to Husband Archibald Douglas Earl of Angus, by whom she
had one sole Daughter and Heir, born at the Castle of Hathottel in
Northumberland, and named Margaret, given in marriage to Matthew Stuart Earl of
Lenox, Governor of Scotland, Father and Mother of Henry Lord Darnley, who
wedded Mary Queen of Scots. She was afterward divorced from the Earl of Angus,
and married a third Husband, viz. Henry Stuart, (Son to the Lord Evendale) who
was created (by his Son-in-law King James the fifth) Lord Meffan; but dying in
the year One thousand five hundred thirty nine, at Methven, was buried in the
Charterhouse of St. Johnston, near the Tomb of King James the first, her
Husbands Great-grand-father.

Impress or Device.
King James the fourth bare for his Impress or Device, these Hebrew Characters
within a wreath of Laurel, (...): The word, IN VIRTUTE TUA. A second Impress he
had, viz. An high Rock in the midst of a calm Sea, between two Promontories, or
Necks of Land; on the Rock was placed a Column, or Pillar, on whose Capital
stood two Caesar's Heads endorsed, and crowned with Garlands of Laurel,
respecting or looking toward the said Promontories. The word, UTRUNQUE.

11. James V. King of Scotland.
JAMES STUART, eldest Son living of King James the fourth, was born on the 11
th. day of April, Anno Domini One thousand five hundred and twelve, in the
King's Palace at Luithgo, and crowned on the 21 st. of September the year
following, by the name of James the fifth King of Scotland. In his minority He
and the Realm were governed by his Mother the Queen-Dowager, during her
Widowhood, according to the will of K. James the Fourth; Afterward his
Grand-father's Brother's Son, John Duke of Albany, was both his Tutor and
Governor until he came to mature age: and then perceiving a powerful Faction
arising amongst his Nobles, he endeavored to divert their minds by waging War
with the English; when coming to his Castle of Falkland, and hearing the ill
success his Forces had on the Borders, grew so troubled and dissatisfied, that
he fell sick and died for grief thereof, on the 13 th. day of December, Anno
Domini One thousand five hundred forty two, being buried in the Monastery of
St. Cross by the Lady Magdalen his first Wif* Daughter to Francis the French
King, by whom he had no Children; wherefore, five months after her death, he
espoused the Laday Mary of Lorrain, (Sister to Francis, and Daughter of Rhene
Duke of Gnise, and Widow of the Duke of Longeville) viz. on the 7 th. of July,
Anno Domini One thousand five hundred thirty nine, by whom he had JAMES, Prince
of Scotland and of the Isles, born in the month of February, Anno Domini One
thousand five hundred thirty nine, and died at St. Andrews the year following;
ARTHUR, a second Son, who deceased within a month; and MARY, a Daughter,
afterward Queen of Scotland. This Mary of Lorrain was a Lady of excellent
Perfections, who being quite tired and wearied out (after the death of her
Husband) with Foreign Wars and Domestic Differences, during the minority of
her Daughter, at length resigned up her Soul to Him who gave it, on the 10 th.
day of June, in the Castle of Edinburgh, Anno Domini One thousand five hundred
and sixty.

Impress or Device.
King James the fifth in the beginning of his Reign took for his Impress or
Device, A Whale swimming from the shore into the Sea, and looking back on the
Sword-fish following just at her back: The word, URGET MAJORA. Afterward his
Device was, A sharp-pointed Pyramid standing on three Globes, whose base was
fixed in the midst of a most turbulent and tempestious Sea; on the very point
of the Pyramid was placed a Coronet, Winds, Hail, Rain, Thunder, Lightening,
and a violent Storm, darting themselves against the Crown* The word, ADHUC STAT.

Mary of Lorrain his Queen had for Device, A Phaenix burning her self in a Nest
of Spices: The word, EN MA FINGIT MON COMMENCEMENT.

12. Mary Queen of Scotland.
MARY STUART, sole Daughter and Heir to her Father James the fifth King of
Scotland, born on the 7 th. day of December, Anno Domini One thousand five
hundred forty two, whilst as yet an Infant was proclaimed Queen of Scotland,
and James Earl of Arran constituted Governor during her minority: But upon the
unfortunate loss of the day at that fatal Battle of Mussleburgh, Anno Domini
One thousand five hundred forty seven, she was conveyed into France, (to
prevent her falling into the hands of the English) where after some time she
was married to the Dauphin, afterward King, by the name of Francis the second,
both of them being crowned King and Queen of France and Scotland, Anno Domini
One thousand five hundred fifty nine, and laying claim to the Crown of England,
quartered the Arms thereof, (which Fact was never forgiven her by Queen
Elizabeth, although she disused them afterward:) But King Francis dying the year
following without Issue, gave her the Freedom of returning to her own Country,
where she consummated her second Nuptials with the Lord Henry Darnley her
Cousin-german, eldest Son of Matthew Stuart Earl of Lenor, that had been
Governor, and Margaret Douglas his Wife, (Daughter and sole Heir of Archibald
Douglas Earl of Angus, by Margaret Queen of Scots his Wife, eldest Daughter to
King Henry the seventh of England.) He was the Son of John Stuart Earl of
Lenor, and Brother to Robert that was Bishop of Cathuess and Earl of March, and
John Stuart Lord d' Aubigny; which John Earl of Lenor was Son of another
Matthew Earl of Lenor, (who married the Daughter of James Hamilton Earl of
Arran, which he had by the Lady Marion Daughter to King James the second.) He
was the Son of John Stuart Earl of Lenor, that was elder Brother to Robert
Stuart, (Captain of those Scotch-men who made themselves so renowned under the
French-King Charles the sixth, both in his Wars in Italy and elsewhere, and in
recompense whereof the said King bestowed on him such large possessions in
France, and gave him the Seigniory or Lordship of d'Audigny in Avergne, whose
Successor Robert Stuart Lord d'Aubigny, (and Marshal of France in the time of
King Lewis XI.) in commemoration thereof bare the Royal Arms of France with
Buckles; or in a Bordure Gules, and quartered them with his paternal Coat, viz.
or a fes cheque Ar. and B. within a Bordure ingrailed Gules, and which the
House of Lenor have ever since continued.) This John and Robert were the Sons
of Allan, (the first of the surname of Stuart) Earl of Lenor, who having
married one of the Daughters of Duncan Earl of Lenor, (who lost his head in the
time of King James the first) had that Earldom bestowed on him; which Allan was
descended from that Robert Stuart who married the Daughter and Heir of Cross or
Crux, younger Brother to Alexander Stuart of Pascley, Great-grand-father to
Robert the second King of Scots.

Henry Lord Darnley, and King of Scotland in right of his Wife, enjoyed not
that Title long, being most barbarously murdered, his Body flung out at a
window, and the House blown up with Gunpowder, by the practice and contrivance
of James Stuart Earl of Murray, the Queens base Brother, and of James Hepburn
Earl of Bothwell, whom the Queen out of fear was forced afterward to marry;
upon which a defection of her Subjects immediately followed, and an open
Rebellion commenced; Bothwel flies the Kingdom, and she endeavors to pacify
the Mutineers, but all in vain: they growing so powerful and strong, that
nothing less than the life of their Queen, or the resignation of the
Government, will quiet them: Having got her young Son (which she had by the
Lord Darnley) into their power, they proclaim, crown and declare him King,
depose the Queen, and drive her by force to seek protection in England; where,
alas! she became the sport of Fortune, by changing her Diadem for a nauceous
Prison, and was made a Sacrifice to the Ambition and Revenge of One who would
never admit a Competitor, or forget so as to forgive an imagined Injury; and
therefore, after she had undergone the severity of an eighteen years
Confinement, her Royal Head was separated from her Body by the stroke of an Ax,
on the 8 th. day of February, Anno Domini One thousand five hundred eighty
seven, at Fotheringay-Castle in Northamptonshire, to the great dishonor of the
English, and her Corpse (out of a Policy of State, that the odium of so
inhospitable a fact might be blown off from the Authors, as being done by
surprise) were conveyed with all the outward solemnity befitting the Funeral of
so great a Queen, to the Cathedral-Church of Peterborough, where she was
buried; Afterward, when her Son King James came to the Crown of England, he
commanded that her Body should be removed, and carried to the Abbey-Church of
St. Peter's Westminster, where it was deposited in a new Vault on the South Side
the Chapel of the B. Virgin, under a most Magnificent and Splendid Monument.

Impress or Device.
Mary Queen of Scotland bare for her Impress or Device in the beginning of her
Reign, A Lionness with a young Lion, beside her the word, UNUM QUIDEM SED
LEONEM, (meaning her Son King James.) Afterward, when she was driven by force
from her Kingdom, A wheel rolled from a Mountain into the Sea: The word* PIENA
DI DOLOR VODA DA SPERANZA. And reflecting on the inconstancy of Fortne and
Queen Elizabeth, she had, Two Women placed on the wheel of Fortune; the one
holding a Lance, (whereby she meant her self ready for the War) the other a
Cornucopia, (showing the Plenty of Qu. Elizabeth:) The word, FORTUNAE COMITES.
As soon as she was confined in England, and began to relish afflictions;
Camomile with the Flowers pressed hard down in a Garden* The word, FRUCTUS
CALCATADAT AMPLUS Contemplating the vanity of Greatness, she took Wings and
Feathers of Birds dispersed here and there: The word, MAGNATUM VICINITAS. But
when she saw she must die, contrary to the promise of Q. Elizabeth, her Device
was, Brenno's Balances, with a Sword cast in to weigh Gold: The word, QUID
NISI VICTIS DOLOR. And a little before her death, Eclipses of the Sun and Moon:
The word, IPSA SIBI LUMEN QUOD INVIDET AUFERT, reflecting on Queen Elizabeth.

Bernard Stuart descended from Robert Lord D'aubigny, who was Marshal of France
Temp. Lewis the Eleventh; used for his Impress or Device, a Lion between two
Buckles. The word, DISTANTIA JUNGIT, Intimating, That although France and
Scotland were in distance so far asunder, yet by a strict League of Friendship
and Alliance they were Conjoined.

13. James the VI. King of Scotland, etc.
JAMES STUART, Surnamed the Peaceable, only Son and Heir of Henry and Mary,
King and Queen of Scotland, was born on the nineteenth day of June, in the year
one thousand five hundred sixty and six in the Castle of Edinburgh, and was
Proclaimed, Anointed and Crowned King when he was scarce thirteen Months Old;
coming to the Age of Twenty and four years, he took to Wife the Princess Anne,
second Daughter of Frederick the Second King of Denmark, whom he Married in
Person at Cronenburgh on the twentieth day of August, in the year one thousand
five hundred and ninety, and conveyed her to be Crowned in Scotland. Upon the
Death of Elizabeth Queen of England (viz. on the twenty fourth day of March, in
the year one thousand six hundred and two) He was proclaimed by the Nobility
and Gentry of both Nations, King of England, Scotland, France and Ireland; and
on the twenty fourth of June following, was (together with his Queen) Solemnly
Crowned at Westminster: And thus these two Kingdoms (that for so many Ages had
been at Variance) became United in King James, whose Title was so Indisputable,
that his greatest Opposers otherwise, did acquiesce and rest satisfied in this.
Queen Anne departed this Life on the second day of March, in the year one
thousand six hundred and eighteen. And the King her Husband on the twenty
seventh of the same Month seven years after, viz. in the year one thousand six
hundred twenty and five, who were both Interred at Westminster, on the
North-side the Tomb of King Henry the Seventh. They had Issue HENRY-FREDERICK,
Prince of Wales, Duke of Cornwall, Rothsay, Earl of Chester, and Knight of the
most Honorable Order of the Garter; he was born in Scotland on the nineteenth
day of February, in the year one thousand five hundred ninety and three; and
died at St. James's the sixth of November, in the year one thousand six hundred
and twelve, and lies in the same Vault with his Grandmother Mary Queen of
Scots, he was never married. ROBERT second Son died an Infant in Scotland.
CHARLES, third and youngest Son was King of England, etc. ELIZABETH Eldest
Daughter, born in Scotland the nineteenth day of August, in the year one
thousand five hundred ninety and six, and joined in Wedlock with Frederick the
Fifth Count Palatine of the Rhyne, Duke of Babaria, Silesia, Elector, etc. And
King of Bohemia) on the fourteenth of February in the year one thousand six
hundred and twelve. She lived till she saw the Miraculous Restoration of her
Nephew King Charles the Second, and then departing this life on the thirteenth
day of February, in the year one thousand six hundred sixty and one, was
Inhumed at Westminster having had Issue by her aforesaid Husband seven Sons and
five Daughters; Frederick, Charles, Rupert, Maurice, Edward, Philip, and
Gustavus: Elizabeth, Lovisa, Henrietta, Charlotta, and Sophia. MARGARET second
Daughter of King James, died an Infant in Scotland. MARY and SOPHIA, born died,
and were buried in England, in the Chapel of King Henry the Seventh, when they
were Children.

Impress or Device.
King James the Sixth of Scotland, bare on one side of his Meddals for an
Impress. A Sword erect in Pale; the Point Ensign'd with a Regal Crown. And from
the Sinister side an Hand pointing with the Forefinger to the same Crown. The
word PRO ME SI ME REOR IN ME. A second Impress of King James when he was under
the Faction, was an Apple Tree growing in a Thorn. The word PER VINCULA
CRESCIT. But when he gained his Liberty and had settled all things in Peace, he
bare a Regale of Arms and Warlike Trophies, as Helms, Croslets, Lances, Pikes,
Colors, Standards, Drums, Fifes, Trumpets, Muskets, Cannon and Bullets. The
word DABIT DEUS HIS QUOQUE FINEM. And after the Conference at Hampton Court,
where so many various points of Religion were discussed, and as many Clamours
stopped, he took a Mercury charming Argus with his hundred Eyes, expressed by
his Caduceus, two Flutes, and a Peacok. The word ELOQUIUM TOT LUMINA CLAUSIT.

14. Charles the I. King of Great Britain, etc.
CHARLES STUART, surnamed the Martyr, was born in Scotland on the nineteenth
day of November, in the year one thousand six hundred, and after he came into
England created Duke of York and Albany, Marquess of Ormond, Earl of Ross and
Ardmanoch, and upon the death of his Father Crowned King of England, Scotland,
France and Ireland on the second day of February, in the year one thousand six
hundred twenty and five. Who when he had reigned twenty and three years,
struggling with an Impetuous, Resisting and Stubborn Faction, became at length a
Sacrifice to their Malice and Revenge, who having gotten him under their power,
first Restrained him, and after made a Solemnity of the Horridest Murder that
ever was perpetrated under the Sun, and Gloried in the Cruel Action; by making
his own Palace the place of his Execution, and ten thousand Spectators a
witness of their Savage Impiety, where the common Executioner struck off his
Princely Head, on the thirtieth day of January, in the year one thousand six
hundred forty and eight, and with That, the Laws, Liberties, Lives and Estates
of all True and Loyal Hearted Englishmen. The Martyrd Trunk was afterward
conveyed to Windsor, where it was deposited (according to the Exigency of the
times, with more Tears and Sighs than Prayers and Ceremonies,) in the Vault
with King Henry the Eighth of England.

Impress or Device.
This Excellent King had diverse Impresses or Devices, according to the several
Alterations and Vicissitudes of his Affairs. When he came first to the Crown he
bare an Arm and Hand Armed issuing out of the Clouds, and brandishing a naked
Sword. The Word DONEC PAX REDITA TERRIS. (For at that time almost all the
Princes in Christendom were at Variance among Themselves or Subjects,) when he
went into Scotland and was Crowned there, in the year one thousand six hundred
thirty and three. He had for Device on the reverse of his Medals: A spreading
Branch of Thistles in their Bud, with one full blown on the top. The word, HINC
NOSTRAE CREVERE ROSAE, (alluding to his present possession of England, but that
his Original was derived from Scotland.) In the beginning of his Troubles he
took a Palm Tree pressed down with might, Weights and Millstones; and the
common word, CRESCIT SUB PONDERE VIRTUS. Afterward a Ship laboring to break
through a most tempestuous Sea. The word ECELO SALUS. And when the pretended
Parliament offered base and unworthy Conditions, destructive to the Fundamental
Laws of the Land, and his Kingly Dignity. He had a Ship with the Mast broken
and fallen into the Sea: The word, NUNQUAM NISI RECTUM. But when the Rebels had
Confined him, and grew Insolent with the success. His Emblem was a Lion
surpised in a Net, Hares and Leverets wantonly passing over him. The word ET
LEPORES DEVICTO INSULTANT LEONE.

This King Charles the first Wedded Mary de Bourbon youngest Daughter of Henry
the Fourth, Sir-named the Great King of France and Navarre, etc. by whom he had
Issue CHARLES his Eldest Son, who was Born, Christened, and Died on the same
day, viz. on the eighteenth day of March, in the year one thousand six hundred
twenty and eight. A second CHARLES born on the twenty ninth of May, in the year
one thousand six hundred and thirty, upon the death of his Glorious Father, was
King of England, Scotland, France and Ireland, but not so declared publicly
till some time after (the niniquity of the times not permitting it) nor Crowned
'till the twenty third day of April (viz. St. George's-day) in the year one
thousand six hundred sixty and one; when withgreat Pomp and Splendour, he was
Solemnly Inaugurated and Anointed in the Abbey Church of St. Peter's
Westminster, by the Name of King Charles the Second: Whose miraculous
Protection, Restitution and Preservation, (together with his Royal Highness and
the rest of the Children of that Excellent King) through an Ocean of Miseries
and Afflictions, were sufficient to convince all men of Piety or Reason, how
much they have been the peculiar care of Heaven: And to deter the most
Nefarious Conspirators from attempting any violence against them for the
future; from whose Bloody and Sanguinary Hands, (as of late) so may they ever
be Defended and Protected, The Designs of their Enemies laid open to the Light,
and all Abhorrers of Monarchy and Kingly Government, brought to Condign
punishment.

His present Majesty King Charles the Second, has Married Donna Catharina
Infanta of Portugal, Daughter of John the Fourth King of Portugal, and Sister
to Alphonso the Sixth (late Deceased) and Don Pedro the present King of
Portugal; by whom as yet he has no Issue.

Impress or Device.
His Majesty King Charles the Second bare diverse Impresses. In his Exile, The
Sun in an Eclipse. The word MEDIO OCCIDIT DIE. Upon hopes and sometime before
the Restoration his Mother Queen Mary bare a Yew-tree planted in a
Churchyard, and encompassed round with dead men's Bones. The word, PIETAS
REVOCABIT AB ORCO. Upon making the Peace with the Hollanders, in the year one
thousand six hundred sixty and six: The Effigies of the King, Apparelled and
Garnitured, altogether like a Roman-Caesar, with Lawrells, Mantel and
Commanders Trenchen, placed on a Pedestal by the Sea-shoar; the Sea it self
spread all over with a mighty Navy or Fleet of Ships. The word REDEANT
COMMERCIA FLANDRIS* And in the year one thousand six hundred and seventy, I
have seen this Device on the reverse of his Medals; A Terrestial Globe, with
the word DEFUSUS IN ORB BRITANNUS.

JAMES Duke of York and Albany Earl of Ulster, and Knight of the most Noble
Order of the Garter, and third Son of King Charles the First, Born at St.
Iawes's on the fourteenth day of October, in the year one thousand six hundred
thirty and three; who has Espoused for his second Wife the Lady Mary D'Este
(Sister of Francis, and Daughter of Alphonso D'Este, both Dukes of Modena) born
the twenty fifth day of September, in the year one thousand six hundred fifty
and eight, and Married on the one and twentieth day of November, in the year
one thousand six hundred seventy and three, by whom he has had four Children,
Charles Duke of Cambridge, Catharina-Laura, Isabella and Charlotte-Maria, who
all died young and were buried at Westminster. By his first Nuptials with the
Lady Anne Hide, Eldest Daughter of Edward Earl of Clarendon, etc. and Lord
Chancellor of England, (who dying on the thirty first day of March, in the year
one thousand six hundred seventy and one, in the thirty fourth year of her Age,
was buried at Westminster) he had four Sons and as many Daughters, viz. Charles
Duke of Cambridge, James Duke of Cambridge, Charles Duke of Kendal and Edgar
Duke of Cambridge, all dying young, and were Interred at Westminster. The Lady
Mary Eldest Daughter was born on the thirtieth day of April, in the year one
thousand six hundred sixty and two, and is at present the Wife of William-Henry
of Nassau, Prince of Orange, whose Nuptials were Celebrated at Whitehall on the
fourteenth day of November, in the year one thousand six hundred seventy and
seven. The Lady Anne second Daughter, was born on the sixth day of February, in
the year one thousand six hundred sixty and four, and is now Wedded to Prince
George of Denmark, second Son of Frederick the Third, and only Brother to
Christian the Fifth his present Majesty of Denmark and Norway, etc. The
Marriage being Solemnized on the twenty eighth day of July, in the year one
thousand six hundred eighty and three. Two other Daughters likewise had his
Royal Highness, Henrietta and Catharine, who dying in their Infancies, were
buried with their Mother and Brothers in the Sepulcher of our Kings at
Westminster.

HENRY fourth Son of King Charles the first, was Duke of Gloucester, Earl of
Cambridge, etc. and Knight of the most Noble Order of the Garter, born on the
eighth day of July, in the year one thousand six hundred and forty, and
departed this life on the thirteenth day of September following the
Restoration, in the year one thousand six hundred and sixty, but was never
Married; he was buried at Westminster. MARY Eldest Daughter of King Charles the
First, born at St. James's on the fourth day of November, in the year one
thousand six hundred thirty and one, was joined in Wedlock to William of Nassau
Prince of Orange, on the second day of May, in the year one thousand six
hundred forty and one, by whom she had an only Son William-Henry the present
Prince of Orange, (a Posthumus, and born eight days after the death of his
Father, viz. on the fourteenth day of November, in the year one thousand six
hundred and fifty, Stilo Novo.) And being a Widow came over with her Brothers
at the Restoration into England, where she died on the twenty fourth day of
December following, and was Interred at Westminster. ELIZABETH second Daughter,
born on the twenty eighth day of December, in the year one thousaud six hundred
thirty and five, who being in Custody of the Regicides at Newport in the Isle
of Wight, departed this Life on the eighth day of September, in the year one
thousand six hundred and fifty, and was buried there. ANNE third Daughter, born
the seventeenth day of March, in the year one thousand six hundred thirty and
six, and died on the eighth of December four years after. HENRIETTA-MARIA
fourth and youngest Daughter of King Charles the First, was born at Creter on
the sixteenth day of June, in the year one thousand six hundred forty and four,
Married to Philip Duke of Anjou, afterward Duke of Orleans, etc. only Brother
now living to Lewis the Fourteenth King of France and Navarr; by whom she had a
Son who died in his Infancy, and two Daughters. She died in the month of June,
in the year one thouthousand six hundred and seventy, and was buried at St.
Dennis in the Sepulcher of the French Kings.

FINIS.
BOOKS Printed and Sold by Nathaniel Thompson at the Entrance into the
Old-Spring-Garden near Charing Cross.
A Narrative of the Phanatical Plot, setting forth the Treasonable and Wicked
Designs which they have been carrying on against King and Parliament ever since
the last Westminster Parliament. With an Account of the Treacherous
Contrivances against several Worthy Persons, and the Measures which they used
to take off the Kings-Evidence by Subornation. To which is added, A Relation of
the Evil Practices of John Rowse (who was lately Executed at Tyburn,) William
Lewis, (who stands Convicted,) and others. By John Zeal Gent. Price 1 s.

A Vindication of the Lord Russel's Speech and Innocence; In a Dialogue betwixt
Whig and Tory: Being the same that was Promised to the Observator in a
Penny-Post-Letter. Price 4 d.

Stafford's Memoirs: Or, a Brief and Impartial Account of the Birth and
Quality* Imprisonment, Trial and Principles* Declaration, Comportment,
Devotion; Last Speech and Final End of WILLIAM late Lord Viscount STAFFORD,
Beheaded on Tower Hill Wednesday the 29 th. of December 1680. Whereunto is
annexed a short Appendix concerning some Passages in Stephen Colleges Trial at
Oxford. Price Bound 1 s. 6 d.

The Lawyer Out-lawed; Or a Brief Answer to Mr. Hunt's Defense of the Charter.
With some Useful Remarks on the Commons Proceedings in the last Parliament at
Westminster, In a Letter to Friend. Price 6 d.

Oates's Manifesto; or the Complaint of TITUS OATS against the Doctor of
Salamanca: And the same DOCTOR against TITUS OATS; Comprised in a Dialogue
between the said Parties, on occasion of some Inconsistent Evidence given about
the Horrid and Damnable POPISH PLOT. Price 6 d.

A LETTER to Mr. Elkana Settle, occasioned upon his Famous Recanting and
Plot-Ridiculing Narrative. Price 4 d.

Some Brief Remarks on the Debates of the House of Commons in the last
Parliament at Oxford, etc. Price 6 d.

The Badger in the Fox-Trap, or a Satyr upon Satyr* An Excellent new Satyr.
price 6 d.

The Arraignment of Co-Ordinate-Power; wherein all Arbitrary-proceedings are
laid open to all Honest Abhorrers and Addressers: With a Touch at the London
Petition and Charter, etc. very useful for all Lawyers and Gentlemen. Price 1 s.

An Answer to a Scandalous Pamphlet, Entitled, A Character of a Popish
Successor, and what England may expect from such a One. Price 6 d.

Janua Scientiarum: Or, A Compendious Introduction to Geography, Chronology,
Government, History, Philosophy; And all Gentile sorts of LITERATURE. price
Bound 1 s. 6 d.

Anima Mundi: Or, An Historical Narration of the Opinions of the Ancients
concerning Man's Soul after this Life; according to Un-enlightned Nature.

Great is Diana of the Ephesians: Or, the Original of Idolatry; Together with
the Politic Institution of the Gentiles Sacrifices. Both Bound together, price
1 s. 6 d. All three written by C. Blount Gent.


