An ADVERTISEMENT
OF an intended Meeting, to be held by George Keith and his Friends, at their
usual Meeting Place, in Turners-Hall, in Philpot-Lane, the 29 th. day of this
instant and present Month called April, 1697. to begin about the 9 th. Hour. To
which Meeting William Penn, Thomas Ellwood, George Whitehead, John Penington,
and these of the second Day's weekly Meeting at Lombard Street, are justly
desired to be present, to hear themselves recharged and proved Guilty of these
vile and gross Errors and Heresies, wherewith they have been formerly charged
by George Keith, and proved Guilty off, at a Meeting held at Turners-Hall, on
the 11 th. of the Month called June, 1696. notwithstanding of the pretended
Answers and Defenses, given by Thomas Ellwood in his pretended Answer to the
exact Narrative of the Proceedings at Turners-Hall, at the abovesaid Meeting;
and notwithstanding the pretended late Answer and Defense of George Whitehead,
in his late printed Book, called, An Antidote, etc. At which Meeting, to be
held at the Time and Place abovementioned, by Divine Permission and Assistance,
and by permission of the Civil Authority, he is further to detect the vile and
gross Errors of the abovementioned Persons; with respect to four great
Fundamentals of the Christian Religion, to which these Errors and Heresies are
directly Repugnant; the which Errors, as they were formerly in the printed
Advertisement and Narrative expressly mentioned, are here again expressly
rehearsed, viz.

1. That Faith in Christ, as he outwardly Suffered at Jerusalem, is not
necessary to our Salvation.

2. That Justification and Sanctification is not by the Blood of Christ
outwardly shed.

3. That there is no Resurrection of the Body that dies.

4. That Christ is not to come without us in his Glorified Body, even the same
that formerly Suffered Death for our Sins, to Judge the Quick and the Dead.

At which Meeting also, he purposes to show, that the Answers and Defenses
given by Thomas Ellwood, and George Whitehead, in their late prints, in the
vindication of themselves and some of their Brethren are (as to the principal
things charged against them) weak, impertinent, false and palpably Sophistical;
and that notwithstanding their seeming present contradiction to some of these
gross Errors, and disowning them; yet until they disown, retract, and
acknowledge their former Errors, as they stand upon Record in their printed
Books, they are still justly chargeable with them. But this they refuse to do,
for one has in print by approbation of their 2 d. days Meeting) put his and
their Infallibility and Immutability in a Class, with the Immutability of God
and Truth, saying, God is the same, Truth is the same, His People is the same;
but George Keith is not the same. And let all impartial Men judge, with what
Conscience these Men can say, they are the same as ever formerly they were
(since their profession of being Quakers,) as God and Truth are the same (with
whom is no variableness nor shadow of change) as to all their former
Principles, Doctrines, Words, and Sayings, and yet so palpably to contradict
their former Assertions, that stand upon Record in their printed Books, against
them. Is not this thick Egyptian darkness that may be felt? notwithstanding
their false pretenses to the Light within, which they still hold to be
sufficient to Salvation without any thing else; so exclude the Man Christ Jesus
of Nazareth, and all that he did and suffered for us on Earth, and his
Mediation and Intercession for us now in Heaven, as being jointly concerned, as
a necessary concurring Cause, together with the Divine Light and Spirit in the
work of our Salvation: And in their so doing, notwithstanding their fained
pretenses to Christianity, yet do what in them lies to throw down the
Christian Faith and Religion, and set up Deisme and Gentilisme in its place;
which all sincere Christians ought to be awakened to consider and contend
against; and more especially such as Occupy the Room and Place of Christian
Teachers and Pastors, to oppose (not with Carnal, but Spiritual Weapons) this
spreading Gangrene and Contagion, that has infected, and does at present
infect many Thousands in these three Nations, and many abroad in other Places.

To which said Meeting, to be held on the 29 th. of this Instant, at the said
place, any moderate and friendly People of other Professions (as well as these
called Quakers) have freedom to be present, so far as there is room in the
place to receive them, hoping they all will so peaceably and civilly demean
themselves, as to give no offense either to Civil Authority, or to any other
Persons, by any undue or unsuitable Behavior of Words or Actions.

George Keith.
The 9 th. of the 2 d, Mo. called April, 1697.

