A TRUE RELATION OF A CONFERENCE Had Betwixt G. Keith and T. Vpsher, at
Colchester,

The 6th of the Fifth Month, 1699, The truth of which is attested by Three
Witnesses, who took it from their Mouths in Shorthand, and afterward by joint
consent writ it out at length.

The Question stated at the said Conference, was, Whether Thomas Vpsher's
Preaching in the Forenoon, That Faith in Christ, as he was born of the Virgin
Mary, and dyed for our Sins, etc. was absolutely necessary to Salvation (as
some affirmed he said, or as others affirmed, was necessary) and in the
Afternoon, his Preaching, That the Light within (universally, for which he
quoted many Scriptures) is sufficient to Salvation, IS A CONTRADICTION.

AND A Brief Account of the uncivil and illegal Treatment used by some
principal Quakers at Colchester and Bristol toward G. Keith; and some other
material Passages in his Traveling through several places in the Country, this
and the former Summer. And a POSTSCRIPT, containing some Notes and Observations
on the Assertions of T. Vpsher and his Brethren, detecting their
Self-contradictions. And a Certificate from Parson Shelton of Colchester, to
the truth of the Case in debate (which is also attested by Nine other credible
Witnesses) and to the truth of the Conference.

By GEORGE KEITH.

LONDON: Printed for Brab. Aylmer, at the Three Pigeons, over against the
Royal Exchange, in Cornhil. MDCXCIX.

A TRUE RELATION OF A CONFERENCE BETWIXT G. Keith and T. Vpsher, at Colchester,
etc.
G. K. THEY that heard me on the first Day, may remember, that I said, That, to
the best of my remembrance, Tho Vpsher in the Afternoon contradicted what he
declared in the Forenoon; if it happens to be proved that he did not, all the
damage that will happen to me, is, that I am mistaken, or I misunderstood him.

Now I offer to prove it, to the best of my understanding and remembrance. Tho.
said in the Forenoon, That Faith in Christ, both as he was born of a Virgin
without us, and dyed for our sins without us, as his Blood was shed without us,
and as he arose again without us, and as he ascended into Heaven without us,
and as he sits at the right Hand of God, as our Mediator, without us, and as he
will come again and judge us, and as he is spiritually revealed in us, is
absolutely necessary to Salvation. To prove it, Tho. brought 1 John 1. 7. That
we are cleansed from Sin by the Blood of Christ, even by the same Blood that
was shed without the Gates of Jerusalem; and said, That his Friends and he
differed not in Faith, and that the whole drift of Friends Testimony tended to
the same Doctrine.


T. Upsher. It is not worded as I worded it; for I did not say absolutely
necessary to Salvation. And observe, Friends, I am not come to give an account
of my Faith, nor to be Chatechised by George Keith; but I am come to stand on
the defensive part: I said necessary.


G. K. Thou said absolutely necessary: For this I offer Witness.


Rob. Hannay. Thou said absolutely necessary.


Tho. Cook. To the best of my remembrance, he did say, absolutely necessary.


T. Figget. You said, absolutely necessary.


Geo. Wetherly. He did say, absolutely.


Faith Till. He did say it.


T. U. I say, that I am sure, that I did not say absolutely necessary. I have
Witness as well as thee.


G. K. There can be no Witness to prove a Negative.


T. U. My Witness may be heard as well as thine. Call Will Drewit.


Will. Drewit. I do really believe he did not say absolutely necessary.


Tho. Danks. I don't remember he said absolutely necessary.


Rich. Waller. I do believe he did not say absolutely necessary.


Rob. Hoskins. I cannot tell whether he said it or not.


Tho. Wier. I remember nothing of the word absolutely.


Tho. Kettle. To the best of my Memory, he said, necessary.


Moderator, Parson Shelton. Well, then you all remember, that he said
necessary; but you don't remember he said absolutely necessary.

This is but a Negative Testimony (said Parson Shelton) that will not hold in
Law. They answered, The difference was not a matter in Law. G. Keith said, Nor
will it hold before any reasonable Judicatory; however, necessary here is
equivalent to absolutely necessary.


G. K. Now I offer to prove the Contradiction, that is, to the best of my
remembrance and understanding, he Preached in a contrary strain, and brought
several Scriptures to prove the Light within sufficient to Salvation; John 1.
4, 9. In him was life, and that life was the light of men. He was the true
light, which lights every Man that comes into the World. John 3. 16. God so
loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son, a light into the world,
that whosoever believes in him should not perish, etc.


T. U. Thou say wrong; I said not that the Light within is sufficient for
Salvation; I never used the Expression in any Meeting in my Life.


G. K. Thou broughtest Eleven or Twelve Scriptures to prove it.


T. U. Thou art not against my using Scriptures.


G. K. No, but against a perversion of the Scripture, and a misapplication of
them. How did thou word that Scripture? God so loved the world, that he gave
his only begotten Son, etc.


T. U. I worded it only thus, That God so loved the world, that he gave his
only begotten Son into the world, that in him they might have Light.


G. K. These Scriptures thou made use of, were to prove, That the Light
within was sufficient to Salvation, John 3. 16.And some Verses thou spoke to
after; He that does evil, hates the light. And every one that does Truth
comes to the Light. 49 Isa. 6. I will also give thee for a light to the
Gentiles, that thou may be my salvation to the ends of the Earth. 27 Psalm.
The Lord is my light and my salvation. 26 Acts 17, 18. Delivering thee from
these people, and from the Gentiles, unto whom now I send thee, to open their
eyes, to turn them from darkness to light, and from the power of Satan to God,
that they may receive forgiveness of sins, and an inheritance among them that
are sanctified. 2 Tit. 21. The grace of God that brings salvation, has
appeared to all men.


T. U. I spoke of them; but thou art gone from the word Light.


G. K. You know it has been common, whatever denomination the principle goes
under, to say the Light, or the principle of the Spirit of God, or the Grace of
God, or the Manifestation of the Spirit; you make them all one.


T. U. When I say the Grace of God, or Light, or inward Manifestation of the
Spirit, I mean Christ's inward Manifestation to the Soul.


G. K. Thou quoted that Scripture 2 Cor. 4. 6. God, who commanded light to
shine out of darkness, has shined into our hearts, to give the light of the
knowledge of God in the face of his Son.


T. U. I don't remember that I used that Scripture.


G. K. There is Witness thou did use it.


John Raller. I think he did.


Rob. Hannay. He did use it.


G. K. 5 Ephesians. 13. For all things that are reproved, are made manifest by the
light; for whatsoever does make manifest is light. 2 Cor. 12. 9. My grace is
sufficient for thee. There is the sufficiency; and by Grace he means Light. 20
Acts 32. Now brethren, I commend you to God, and the word of his grace, which
is able to build you up, and to give you an inheritance among them that are
sanctified.


T. U. O! George, thou art wrong: I did not make use of that Scripture on the
first Day; it was on the fourth Day.


G. K. Then thou contradicts thy self two or three Days after; it is no great
difference; but thou did use it in part on the first Day.


T. U. To the best of my remembrance, on the first Day I committed them to the
Lord Jesus Christ, and to the word of his Grace; and so drew toward a
Conclusion after that manner.


G. K. Those in the Revelations who have washed their Robes, and made them
white in the Blood of the Lamb. This Blood, to the best of my understanding, he
meant to be the Light: I think he did expound it so.


T. U. I did use those words; but I deny I meant the Light.


G. K. If I cannot prove it, all the damage will be, that I was mistaken. In the
Afternoon he brings 1 John 4. 9. In him was life, etc. And that Scripture, My
grace is sufficient for thee. These we shall go through with: That I shall
insist on, that Tho. brings these Scriptures to prove, that every Man that
comes into the World is so lighted, and so taught, that if he obey the
teachings and discoveries of that inward Principle, it is sufficient for
Salvation, or he shall be saved. All these Scriptures he brought to prove it,
And I will give thee for a covenant to the people, a light to lighten the
Gentiles, that thou may be my salvation to the ends of the earth. Thus he
paraphrased upon them; and, to the best of my understanding, said, That
whosoever was obedient to the dictates and discoveries of this Light, the Grace
of God, or inward appearance of Light, it shall be his Salvation: This he said
in the Afternoon, which contradicts what he said in the Forenoon. Now the
Contradiction lies here; whereas Tho. in the Forenoon, said, it was his belief,
and the drift and tendency of all the Friends and their Books and Writings, and
that his Faith and Friends did not differ in this point, That Faith in Christ,
as he was born of the Virgin without us, suffered without us, arose and
ascended without us, and as he is spiritually revealed in us, is necessary for
Salvation; I say, he said, That he and his Friends did not differ in this; but
that it was the drift of all their Friends, though they did not express it as
he did.


T. U. I did not mention the Faith of the Friends; I did not mention their
Books, as I remember; but I said, It was necessary to Salvation to believe
these things; and that it was the drift and tendency of my Testimony.


G. K. Call Rob. Hannay. Who proved he was speaking before of some that falsely
charged Friends about this doctrine; but, says he, they misrepresent us, and
falsely accuse us; it has been, and is the drift and tendency of all our
Friends, to preach this Doctrine. Tho. Cook, I call thee for a Witness, Whether
Tho. Vpsher said so or not? He answered, Yea. One asked Tho. Cook, What Vpsher
said? He answered, That Tho. Vpsher said, it was the drift and tendency of our
Friends to Preach such Doctrine. Tho. Lawrence offers himself a Witness; he
says, That Tho. Vpsher mentioning some opposing the Quakers, that charged
them, that they not did hold Faith in Christ outwardly as necessary to
Salvation; says he, I do verily believe, and it is my Faith, and I have Faith
in Christ Jesus, as he suffered without the Gates of Jerusalem, and it is the
drift and tendency of our Declarations which we Preach to the People.


T. U. I did say Friends, but not a word of Books and Writings.


G. K. Now, two ways, I prove, that he contradicts himself. If I prove, that
his Faith differs from the Faith of some, or most of his Friends, as Will.
Penn, Geo. Whitehead, and the most eminent, is not here a Contradiction to
himself? Is not their Faith his Faith?


T. U. George, this is from the matter; we are not come here to meddle or
dispute what others hold, but thou art to show, I contradicted in the Afternoon
what I said in the Forenoon.


G. K. It is my Sense, that whereas he said in the Forenoon, that his and his
Friends Faith was one and the same, if he differs from his Friends, he differs
from himself; and then, I say, what he said in the Afternoon, contradicts both
himself and his Friends.


T. U. I said, it is the drift and tendency of our Friends.


Tho. Auger said, He meant the Friends there present; What have we to do with
W. Penn and G. Whitehead, they are not here?


G. K. If any say, What have we to do with our Friends W. Penn and G.
Whitehead, that are not here? Then, I say, thou should have been more wary
than to have mentioned such a thing in an Auditory. If I have any understanding
in what he said, I never heard a greater Contradiction in my life. The places
he brought especially 49. Isa. 6. 2. Titus. 11. 26 Acts 18. He did not barely
quote these places, but paraphrased on them, and applied them to Christ's
inward appearance; call it what you will, Light or Grace, as it is in every
Man; for he numbers these places with John 1. 4, and 9th Verses: this is a
Contradiction; these places he brings to prove the Light in every Man; 2 Cor.
12. 9. My grace is sufficient for thee. It has no reference to that inward
appearance or Principle of Christ in the Heathens that the Gospel is not
Preached to. This in Isa. I will give thee for a covenant to the people, for a
light to lighten the Gentiles, that thou may be my salvation to the ends of
the earth. This has no reference to the Light of the Gentile World, that has
not the Gospel Preached: I say it is a Prophecy which was not then fulfilled to
the Gentile World, nor is not now fulfilled to the Heathen Gentiles; but it is
fulfilled to us Christian Gentiles; 2 Titus 11. The grace of God that brings
salvation has appeared to all men; teaching them, etc. I say, this Text has
no relation to the common discovery or inlightening that the Gentile World
has, that never had the Gospel preached.


T. U. This is what I spoke in the Afternoon; compare it with what I said in
the Forenoon, and show the Contradiction.


G. K. There is no illumination or discovery in the Heathen World, that has
not the Gospel outwardly preached, that gives them and teaches them what to
believe concerning Christ as he was born of a Virgin, etc. I say, what is
ordinary and usual according to the Methods of divine Providence, I do affirm
the Heathen World has no Principle in them, that does teach or discover what
they ought to believe concerning Christ outwardly.


T. U. Where is the Contradiction? I never meddled with Gentile or Heathen; but
that which was the tendency of my Testimony, was, That People should take heed
to the inward appearance of the Lord Jesus Christ to their Souls, in order to
their Sanctification.


G. K. Thou did speak it universally; and thou laidest great Importance on
these two Scriptures, In him was life, and the life was the LIGHT OF MEN; and
the grace of God that brings salvation, has appeared TO ALL MEN. Now, I
believe, thou meant all Men without distinction, Christians, Turks, Jews, or
Heathens; all Men. Now if there be no Principle in the Heathen universally
(what knowledge the Sybils had concerning Christ's coming in the Flesh, was not
by that ordinary Illumination, but by such extraordinary Revelation, as the
Prophets among the Jews had) that teaches them to believe in Christ, as he was
born of a Virgin, then he contradicts himself, to say, that Faith is necessary
to Salvation, when there is nothing in those Heathens to teach them it.


T. U. Had I said in the Forenoon, that Faith in Christ's outward appearance
was absolutely necessary to Salvation, even to the Gentile Heathens, that are
deprived of the historical Means, and said, in the Afternoon, that there is a
Light within that is able to teach all Men to Salvation, it had been a
Contradiction, if it be proved, that the Light is insufficient: But I did not
paraphrase, or treat of the universality of this Light; though I came to the
Scripture that spoke of the Light, yet I did not paraphrase on that which
lightened all Men in the World; I did not speak of the Heathens, my great Work
was to show, that those that were privileged with the historical Account of
these things, have reason to be thankful for it, and their Work is to walk
answerable to it.


G. K. Observe, he grants, that if he had said, that Faith in Christ's outward
appearance was absolutely necessary to Salvation to the Gentile Heathens, he
had contradicted himself, on this condition, that I will prove, that the Light
given to the Heathens is insufficient to Salvation.


T. U. I say, that the Gentiles, that have not the privilege of the outward
means, by which we come to understand and instrumentally, they being deprived
of this, if they walk answerable to those discoveries the Lord has given them,
doubtless the Lord will accept of them; and if they have not this means,
doubtless, it is probable, the Lord will save them, seeing they walk answerable
to what they know.


G. K. Tho. says, That if he have affirmed, that Faith in Christ's outward
Manifestation is absolutely necessary to Salvation of those Heathens that have
not the outward Means, and if he said, that there was a Light in all Men that
was sufficient, and I prove this Light is not sufficient, then it is a
Contradiction.


T. U. I say it is, upon that condition thou provest the insufficiency of the
Light within, and proves the universality of that Faith necessary to Salvation,
then it is a Contradiction.


G. K. Tho. Vpsher says, That Faith, in the outward Manifestation, is
absolutely necessary to those that have the outward Means, and if there be not
that Light in them that have not the History, he contradicts himself; if he
affirmed, that there was a Manifestation in all Men that was able to give them
that Discovery and that Faith; and that I can prove, that there is no such
Manifestation, that was able to give them Salvation, he contradicts himself.
But Tho. said, That there was a Manifestation in Men universally, that was able
to give this Discovery; he brought places of Scripture to prove it, as the 1
John 4th and 9th Verses: He argued for it, that there was that that would give
a Discovery to all Men of that that was necessary to Salvation.


T. U I deny it, I did not say absolute.


Rich. Waller. He did not say absolute.


Arthur Cotton, William Drewit, the same.


G. K. He did affirm, That there was that Manifestation, or Light, or inward
appearance; he paraphrased upon those places of Scripture, He was the true
light, that lights every man that comes into the World. I have given him for
a covenant to the people, a light to the Gentiles, and the grace of God has
appeared to all men. Now if he did not mean universally, let him deny it.


T. U. I did mean universally then.


G. K. I offer to prove, that there is no Manifestation in the Heathen World,
where the Gospel has not been Preached, that gives to that Heathen part of
Mankind, or can give that which is necessary to Salvation: Now necessary is a
Scripture Word, and if by necessary we mean not really necessary, we may deny,
that Obedience to the Light within is absolutely necessary. I say, necessary,
in Scripture Sense, is absolutely necessary, with respect to Christ without as
well as Christ within; for otherwise you cannot show a Scripture that will
prove, that Obedience to the Light within is absolutely necessary. I offer to
prove, that there is no Manifestation in the Heathen World, that has not the
Gospel preached to them in God's ordinary way, that either does, or can give
them to believe all that is necessary to Salvation. But first, I distinguish
between Light within, as it signifies the great inlightener, that is God; and
the Manifestation and Discovery that comes from this great God. I know this
great God is in all Men, he gives some Manifestation of himself in all; but, I
say, he gives no Discovery or Manifestation of himself to all Men, that does or
can give that Knowledge or Faith in Christ that is necessary to Salvation.


T. U. Prove this, that there is no such Manifestation in Man.


G. K. I say, I distinguish between the Light, as it signifies God the great
Illuminator, and the Manifestation, or Illumination that comes from God. When I
say the Manifestation is not sufficient, I do not say, that God is not
sufficient; but, I say, that there is no Manifestation or Discovery in the
Heathen World, that God gives them ordinarily, that is sufficient to Salvation:
This I offer to prove, 10. Acts 43. To him give all the Prophets witness, that
through his name whosoever believes in him, shall receive the remission of
sins. 26. Acts 18. I send thee to the Gentiles, to turn them from darkness to
light, etc. that they may receive forgiveness of sins, and inheritance among
them which are sanctified through FAITH THAT IS IN ME. [This Me, is Jesus of
Nazareth, as without them.] And Romans 10. 8, 9. The word is nigh thee, even in
thy mouth, and in thy heart: that is the word of faith which we preach, That if
thou shall confess with thy mouth the Lord Jesus, and believe in thine heart,
that God has raised him from the dead, thou shall be saved. Now, I say, this
is the absolutely necessary terms of Salvation; and if there be no such thing
in the Heathen to teach them this, and seeing th^re is no such Manifestation in
the Gentile Heathen World that discovers or teaches this, then there is no
Manifestation in them sufficient to Salvation.


T. U. He has not proved, that the Manifestation of God and Christ, in his
Light to all Men, does not give, nor can give to Man, that which is necessary
to Salvation; because he cannot bring one word of absolute necessity, or that
says after this manner, that without this, and this kind of knowledge they
cannot be saved.


G. K. The Light within teach them and all Men, even the Heathens, that I must
not commit Murder, Adultery, nor be Drunk, etc. I find in Scripture as
positively Faith in Christ without us, required to remission of Sin and eternal
Salvation, as obedience to the Light within us; 1 Cor. 1. 21.


T. U. I should be loath to be so uncharitable to the poor Heathens, which live
up to their Light, as G. Keith is.


G. K. I am no more uncharitable to the Heathen, than you or any Man; I dare
not conclude, that any of the Heathens that live virtuously are damned: What is
wanting to Heathens in respect to the outward, God may make up to them in an
inward extraordinary Manifestation. What do we know what God may reveal to them
in a dying Hour?


T. U. I never did declare, that the Light within, without the outward
Manifestation of Christ, is sufficient for Salvation.


G. K. Whither Tho. did not speak to this purpose, That the Light within,
without Faith in Christ, is sufficient for Salvation, I apprehend I have proved
by his Paraphrases on those Scriptures that he brought; from those Scriptures,
say I, Tho. did say, That this Light, or this inward Manifestation, is enough
for the Salvation of Man; then, say I, if one thing be enough, there needs not
two: If this be enough, then there is no need of that Faith in Christ that he
mentioned in the Morning; which is a Contradiction.


In the Conclusion, diverse of T. Upsher's Friends gave this Consession, and so
did he, viz.

It is necessary to Salvation, to believe in Jesus Christ, that was born of the
Virgin Mary, and was Crucified without the Gates of Jerasalem, and is ascended
into Heaven, and is there in Glory, and from thence will come without us at the
end of the World; this we acknowledge to be our absolute Belief, and that he is
ourwardly to come in a glorified Body.

This they owned as necessary to believe, to those that live in the Christian
World.

Parson Shelton told them, This plainly did contradict the Doctrine in their
Friends Books; however, he was glad of this their Confession now.

We having carefully compared, and thoroughly examined, do affirm this to be a
true Copy of the Conference between G. Keith and T. Upsher, the 6th of July,
1699. Witness our Hands, Edw. Brasier. Tho. Streaton. Arthur Winsley, Junior.

This 6th of July was the 5th Day of the Week, next to that 1st Day wherein G.
Keith had charged T. Vpsher with Contradiction.

A BRIEF ACCOUNT OF THE Uncivil TREATMENT
Vused by some principal Quakers at Colchester and Bristol toward G. Keith;
and some other material Passages in his Traveling through several places in
the Country, this and the former Summer.
THE occasion of the above mentioned Conference (the true Relation whereof is
above given) was, That whereas G. Keith, at the public Meeting House of the
People called Quakers, at Colchester, the Second of the First Month, 1699, in
the Afternoon, had affirmed, That T. Vpsher had contradicted in the Afternoon
what he had Preached in the Forenoon, the which T. Vpsher denied, and put G.
Keith to prove it; whereupon it was mutually agreed by them both, to debate it
before Witnesses on both sides, on the 6th of that Instant following, as was
accordingly done. The Moderators chosen to regulate the Debate, were William
Shelton, a Minister of the Church of England, in Colchester, and Samuel Rider,
a Presbyterian there. But it is sit the Readers should be further informed of
some other Particulars relating to the Difference betwixt T. Vpsher and his
Friends at Colchester, and G. Keith and some of his Friends there; one of which
is, That whereas T. Vpsher did offer a Conference with G. Keith, in order to
defend his Doctrine from being a Contradiction, G. Keith did readily accept it,
on the Condition that he would agree to debate it with him before Witnesses,
whether T. Vpsher had done justly and Christianly at a Meeting in Great Staten
in Huntingtonshire, in the Month called August, School. to pronounce Woes and
Curses in the Name of the Lord against G. Keith, and all that adhered to him,
that were there present, and came to hear him (which were many, reckoned in the
U^ity with T. Vpsher and his Friends) saying, God would confound, destroy, and
dash to pieces both him and them, which, he said, he was moved by the Lord so
to affirm (as many are ready to witness if he deny it) but this Condition T.
Vpsher would by no means agree unto. Another is, that whereas G. Keith had been
accused at the said Meeting at Great Staten in Huntingtonshire, by T. Vpsher,
that he was an Apostate, and had wronged and perverted Friends Books in his
printed Narratives, and that he offered to prove it against him, providing G.
Keith would begin to dispute with him the next day; G. Keith replied, He was
very desirous to hold the Debate with him, but it was well known to diverse
there present, he could not begin any such Meeting for Debate next Day, being
under an Engagement to be at a Meeting at Bedford next First Day, which was the
Day following; but he was ready to engage with him the Third Day following,
which T. Vpsher by no means would yield unto; alleging for his Excuse, the
great need he had to be at home; which to many appeared fallacious, because he
had before proffered to hold the Dispute with G. Keith for two Weeks together,
if he would begin next Day. R. Bridgeman, a Friend at Huntington, did propose
to have the Meeting for the Debate begin next Day, and he would undertake, in
defense of G. Keith, that he had not wronged the Friends Books in his said
Narratives, and proffered to hold a Dispute with T. Vpsher on that account,
until G. Keith should have time to return to manage the Dispute by himself; but
this T. Vpsher would not agree unto. Some few Days after, in the 6th Month
called August, School. G. Keith came to Colchester, and in the public Meeting of
the Friends there, put T. Vpsher in mind of his former promise to engage in
Dispute with G. Keith, in order to prove him an Apostate, and a perverter of
Friends Books in his said Narratives, telling him, He hoped he had time now to
do it, being at home; but T. Vpsher replied, Since his former offer was not
accepted, he found himself clear of any such Engagement. And now again in the
beginning of the 5th Month called July, 1699. T. Vpsher refused to engage in
any such Debate with G. Keith, though earnestly desired by him. And the like
proffer he made to the principal Friends, called Quakers, at Colchester, That
whereas they had the last Summer sent out a Paper against him, signed by many
Hands, charging him to be an Apostate, and an Enemy to Truth and Friends, they
would now make that one of the Matters of debate, as well as this, viz. Whether
T. Vpsher had contradicted himself? But by no means would either he or they
assent to any such Debate, save only, that it might be debated before
sufficient Witnesses, Whether G. Keith could prove a Contradiction in T.
Vpsher's Doctrine to himself, expecting that they might have some advantage
against G. Keith, if the Subject of the Debate should be confined to that alone
Particular? But why they were not as willing to debate other Matters with him
as well as that, which yet were of greater moment than that, as whether T.
Vpsher had contradicted himself (it being very common both to him and his
Brethren to Preach Inconsistencies and Contradictions in great plenty) is easy
to be understood, even because they knew they were never able to prove against
G. Keith, that he was an Apostate, or Enemy to Truth, or guilty of any of the
hard Names they had given him. And therefore the further to detect them, and to
leave them without Excuse, G. Keith did yield to have a Debate with T. Vpsher
only upon that single Head, viz. Whether T. Vpsher was guilty of
Self-contradiction? The which is now left to the Judgment of the Impartial
Reader, after he has viewed and considered the foregoing Contents.

And here let it be noted, that on the said First Day, at Colchester Meeting,
the 2d of the Fifth Month called July, 1699, in the Forenoon, after G. Keith
had peaceably sat and heard T. Vpsher, and their other Preachers, and stood up
to Speak, he was, most uncivilly, and contrary to the Act for Tolleration,
interrupted by many of their principal Men, called Friends, who cried out
against him, Thou Apostate, hold thy peace, this House is ours, thou have no
right to speak in it without our consent. G. Keith replied, He was no Apostate,
and if they thought him to be such, they ought to prove it; and their Proof he
desired to have. They told him, Friends at London had judged him to be such,
and they stood to their Judgment. G. Keith replied, That was downright Popery,
to believe as the Church believed, by an implicit Faith; and as for their right
to the House, his Right was as good as theirs, until they did prove, that he
had forefeited his Right which he formerly had, all being Tenants in common,
and that place being no Man's proper Right, but free to all traveling Friends
of the Ministry among that People, and to him as well as to any of them, until
they did prove, that he was no Friend of Truth; which he believed they could
never do, he retaining all the common Marks of a Friend, and that he had better
Principles than they, that was no bad sign of his being a Friend of Truth. But
they continuing in their uncivil and illegal manner of interrupting him, which
many friendly People that were present who were desirous to hear G. Keith, both
of the Church of England, and Dissenters, did blame them for, (being illegal as
well as uncivil and unchristian) some Constables seeing the Peace broke, being
called upon by several to keep the Peace, took away one, called a Quaker,
before the Mayor, for his illegal Behavior, who threatened to bind him over to
the Peace, though diverse others were as rude and uncivil as he, especially they
of the richer sort. In the Afternoon the Mayor sent several Constables to keep
the Peace, which they broke as much in the Afternoon as in the Forenoon, crying
out at G. Keith, while he was speaking, and calling him Apostate, and Enemy of
Truth; the which great disorder and interruption the Constables, who in the
Afternoon were sent to keep the Peace, soon did quiet, by telling them who made
the greatest Interruption (who generally were the richest Men among the People
called Quakers in that place) that they would take them away to the Mayor, in
order to have them bound over, if they would not forbear; whereupon, they
generally, in great haste, went away, and as fast as they thronged to go out,
as fast did many more throng to get in, who were not Quakers, but sober and
friendly People of the Church of England, and of the Dissenters of several
sorts, who had a desire to hear G. Keith, and did hear him after the Friends
did generally withdraw, some few remaining that were his Friends in that place,
and some others that were friendly affected toward him. On the 4th Day
following, G. Keith did again go to their public Meeting place, which they
suspecting that he would do, and speak again in their Meeting as he did the
foregoing First Day, which gave great content to many, and was a great trouble
to his Adversaries, to find them so exposed, and their great and vile Errors so
detected by G. Keith, they set Men at the Door to keep him out; so that when he
essayed to get in, they hindered him: This gave occasion to G. Keith to go to
the Mayor and complain of their uncivil and illegal treatment, who forthwith
commanded two Constables to go to their Meeting to make free entrance for him,
as accordingly was done, (whose Generosity, as well as Justice in that Affair,
is greatly commendable and worthy of imitation by Persons of his Quality and
Station) but after he came in and waited patiently till their Ministers had
done, and then stood up to speak, they bid the Friends withdraw, the Meeting,
they said, was ended; and as many of them were going out, and others coming in,
desirous to hear G. Keith, that were not of their Profession, they shut the
great Door, bolted and barred it, and knocked in the Bars, that the People
that were got in might not open them (leaving only a little private Door open,
that few but themselves knew) and indeed they made such disorder, and
especially the richer sort of them, that it was a shame to see it, to behold
their rude actions, and hear their outcries against G. Keith, many crying to
him at once, and pulling him by the Sleeve to be gone, insomuch that a Friend
there present, said, It seemed like Bedlam let loose.

The like Incivility and illegal Proceedings, the People called Quakers at
Bristol used against G. Keith, the 23d of the Month called July, 1699. who
offering peaceably to come into their Meeting House, was stopped by a great Guard
of them they had set at the Door to keep him out by Violence; he did very
softly expostulate with them (and so did some other of his Friends that came
from London to countenance him, and to be Witnesses of their treatment toward
him) that it was contrary to their former Profession, to use any carnal
Resistance; let them not henceforth say, their Weapons are not carnal, for he
saw no other Weapons they had to fight with him, but their Arms, Shoulders, and
Breasts, wherewith they opposed him as he essayed to come in. He also and his
Friends told them, They would have formerly re^koned it Persecution, and did
so, when some of their Preachers came in to oppose the Ministers, both of the
Church of England and Presbyterians, in their public Meeting-places, and met
with some resistance on that account. But that whi^^ the more aggravates the
matter against them, is, that G. Keith told them that stood a Guard to keep him
out, he came ^ith (...) Intention not to speak at that time in their Meeting,
but only to hear, having a real desire to hear how their Ministers did Preach,
he being informed, that they did preach better Doctrine than formerly; some of
them replied, Our Ministers are not changed in their Doctrine. Charles ^ones,
Father-in law to Will. Penn Junior, said concerning G. Keith, He is a false
Fellow, we will not trust him. To whom G. Keith modestly replied, That is not
enough to call me so, but he ought to prove it. I^ I (said G. Keith) should
call thee Thief or Adulterer, thou would p^t me to prove it. Some of them
that were the Guard at the Door asked G. Keith, What he was? he said, He was a
Christian. They asked again, Was he a Quaker? he replied, He was never proud of
the Name Quaker, that Name being given to that People is a Na^^ of Reproach,
which now they seem to (...) and asked them, What (...) of a Friend of Truth,
which he had (...) to his Question. One (...), who (...) by G. Keith, at the
Door, If he was (...) which they took for some great (...) his Friend. G. Keith
bid them ask him, If he did not own himself a Friend of Truth? he said, Yea, he
was a Friend of Truth; but the Name Quaker he disowned, as well as the Errors
that were among them. G. Keith did further Expostulate with them, saying, If
the Power of God be among you, as ye say it is, what know ye, if ye let me come
in, but that Power may reach me, and bring me out of what ye call my Apostasy,
and join me again to you? Some of them replied, Thou do not believe it thy
self. G. Keith answered, Though I do not believe it, yet that Power might make
me believe it. How many have come into a Christian Assembly Unbelievers, and
have gone forth Believers? am I past all possibility of Conversion? But as
uncivil as the Quakers, his old Friends, at Bristol were to him, the People
called Baptists were as civil; who freely, at his request, granted him liberty
at their public Meeting Place, near to the Quaker's Meeting Place (and about
as capacious) to have a Meeting that Day, the Meeting Place being called,
Andrew Gifford's Meeting Place; who freely consented, and his Son and Friends
also, that he should have the use of it. The Meeting began about the 6th Hour
in the Afternoon, which was very full of People, both of the Church of England
and other Dissenters; who generally showed their great satisfaction with what
they heard him speak at the said Meeting. In the close of the said Meeting, he
did intimate to the People, his purpose of having another Meeting the next Day,
to begin at the same time, in order to detect the great and vile Errors of the
most approved Authors among the Quakers, particularly of G. W. and W. P. and in
order to the clearer detecting them, to read large and full Quotations out of
their Books, as accordingly he did; and did intimate his purpose to write to W.
P. and other noted Ministers of the People called Quakers at Bristol, to desire
them to come; and if they did think they were able to defend their Cause, they
should be freely allowed, and have a fair Hearing. The next Morning, being the
24th of that Instant, he writ to them to that effect; they sent no direct
Answer to him, but writ a severe Letter to Andrew Gifford, and his Son, and
another Baptist Teacher, called Found, greatly blaming them for letting him
have the use of the House, comparing what was to be done there to a Stage Play,
and G. Keith to be the Actor: And among other frivolous and empty Reasons they
give why they will not meet him, one was, that it was offensive to Authority;
and yet, in the same Letter, they pro^^er to meet with those Baptists if they
will Imbark on his Bottom; as if to meet with G. Keith were offensive to
Authority, but to meet with the Baptists were not; whereas neither is offensive
to them if discretely managed; and if any behave themselves indiscretely, they
are justly obnoxious to Censure. At the time appointed, a great Meeting of
People assembled (both Towns-people, and others, it being at the beginning of
the Fair time) where he laid open the Errors, particularly of G. Whithead, W.
Penn, and Edw. Buroughs, in many Quotations, which he did publicly read out
of their Books, and which another did read the second time, standing on a Table
in the Peoples audience, that the People might be satisfied, that the
Quotations were all truly read; the Quotations were the same as are noted in a
late printed Sheet, called, An Account from Colchester, of the Quakers Errors
against the very Foundation of the Christian Religion; Signed by Nine credible
Persons of Colchester, two of which are Ministers of the Church of England, and
two others, Non conformist Ministers; and some other Quotations were read out
of their Books, that are mentioned in G. Keith his said Narrative; to which, as
to diverse other his Books against his Adversaries, they have made no Reply,
though they most falsely allege, they have replied to all he has published in
Print against them, whereas there are at least Six of his late Books in Print,
to which they have made not one Line of Reply; as his 2d and 3d Narratives, his
Book answering their Arguments against Baptism and the Supper, the Deism of W.
Penn and his Brethren, in answer to his Discourse of the general Rule of Faith
and Practice; and his late Book, called, Some of the many Fallacies of W. Penn,
etc. In his Paper called, Gospel Truths, etc. and his larger and shorter
Chatechisms; all which do plainly detect and refute their vile and gross Errors
and Heresies, prejudic^^ and destructive to Christianity. And here I give the
Reader to understand, how as I was civilly treated and respected by sober
People, both of the Church of England (...), at Colchester, and at Bristol, so
I found the ^^ke (...) Respect generally in all other places where I traveled,
(...) Summer and this, as at Bedford, Huntington (...) bridge, and diverse other
places, (...) this present Summer, having traveled through the same places
again, and had considerable Meetings at them all, either in Licensed Houses, or
such, as by the favor of the Magistrates of the place, were allowed; and in
diverse other places where I had not had Meetings before, as at Cogshel, in
Essex; at Chippenham, in Wilishire; at the Devises, at Caln, at Malebury, at
Lambourn Woodlands, at Wantage, at Oxford, at Reading; in all which places
where I had Meetings, many of which were very considerable for number of sober,
discreet, and well affected People, I met with great Civility, Kindness, and
Respect, for my Testimony to the great Truths of the Gospel, and against the
great and vile Errors that abound among the People called Quakers, which their
Leaders have drawn them into; though in diverse places above mentioned, few of
the People called Quakers came to hear me; and in some of them not one, so far
as I could hear. I generally sent to them, to come and show before the People
what they had against me; but they generally fled before me, and would not so
much as appear to reason the Case with me. One at Caln, in Wiltshire, in a
great Meeting which was in a large Barn on a First Day (the last of the Month
called July) called John Savage, a Quaker, while I was speaking, said, I spoke
by the Spirit of the Devil; because I was proving, That the Light that is
common to all Mankind, and is in Heathens, was not the Gospel that Paul
preached, but another. I desired him not to interrupt me, but let me alone till
I had done, and then I would answer to what he would object; but he said
nothing to me after I had done. At Huntington and Ives also I met with some
Interruption, but none of them would come to any fair Debate with me; some of
their Ministry at Ives calling me Judas and Demas, but when I put them to prove
it, and offered to show, that Character did not belong to me, but to some of
them, they would not reason the case with me. One of the chief Men among the
Quakers in that Town, saying, That place was for Preaching, but not for
Dispute; and as by his means I had got liberty to speak there (for which I
thanked him) but he would not suffer me to dispute; I did expostulate the case
with him, Why he would be less fair than the Jews, who not only suffered Paul
to Preach, but to Dispute in their Synagogues. But the greatest openn^e^ (...)
reception, among any of my former Friends called Quakers I found, was in diverse
Country places in Huntingtonshire, and thereabouts; who met in diverse places on
purpose to hear me, and appointed several Meetings for me, at several places,
both this and the former Summer, whither they came to hear me, and declared
their satisfaction with my Testimony, and my opposition to the great Errors
among the Quakers; and they have declared, that it is their Sense, That there
is great need of a Reformation in Doctrine among the said People, and that the
great Errors contained in the Books of their great Authors ought to be disowned
and retracted, otherwise a separation will necessarily follow; whereof Margaret
Everard, a Speaker among them, has given a plain and Christian acknowledgment
in her printed Epistle to them; and particularly to the Ministers among them.

A POSTSCRIPT TO THE Impartial READERS,
Containing some Notes and Observations on the Assertions of T. Upsher and his
Brethren, discovering their Self-Contradictions.
THE Impartial Readers are desired to compare the several Assertions of T.
Vpsher here, one with another; and also with the many Assertions of G.
Whithead, W. Penn, and others of the most approved Writers among the People
called Quakers, contained in their Books, as most faithfully quoted in G.
Keith's three printed Narratives, and in the late printed Sheet, called, Some
Account from Colchester of the Quakers Errors against the very foundation of
the Christian Religion, etc. and I doubt not but it will evidently appear to
them, that T. Vpsher has both foully contradicted himself, and also his said
Brethren. And especially I desire the Readers to take notice of this one
Instance of T. V's Self-contradiction, in p. 8. of the printed Copy, ad finem,
he grants, that there is universally in Men (both Heathens and Christians) such
a Grace or Manifestation of Christ, as can give them a discovery of that that
is necessary to Salvation; for which he grants, he quoted Titus 2. 10, 11. Isa.
49. 6. John 1. 9. and diverse other Scriptures; and this is the known Principle
of G. Whithead, W. Penn, and most of the greatest Authors among the Quakers;
and yet, in contradiction both to himself and them, he has told us (see page
10. of the printed Relation) he never did declare, That the Light within,
without the outward Manifestation of Christ, is sufficient for Salvation. And
yet (as in the same page 10.) he did plead, that Heathens are saved (who live
up to their Light) and yet have no K^owledge or Faith of Christ's outward
Manifestation. Again, pray let the Reader well consider this Assertion of T. V.
That he never declared that (...) Light within, without the outward
Manifestation, was sufficient to Salvation; and his and his Brethren of
Colchester their Assertion (as in page 11.) that i^ is their absolute Belief,
That Faith in Christ, as he did outwardly come, etc. and was Crucified, and as
he is outwardly to come in a glorified Body, is necessary to their Salvation,
and compare it with G. Whithead his Assertion, in his late Antidote against the
Venom of the Snake, p. 28. where he plainly affirms, That the Quakers are
offended with G. K. for undervaluing the Light within, and saying, it is not
sufficient to Salvation, or not sufficient without something else. That
something else he confesses, is (according to G. K.) Christ's outward
Manifestation, and coming in the Flesh, and the Doctrine and Faith of it,
without which, G. K. has affirmed, the Light within either Heathen or
Christian is not sufficient to Salvation; for which Assertion of his, not only
G. Whithead, W. Penn, and generally the most approved Writers and Preachers
among the Quakers, but also T. Vpsher, and most of his Brethren at Colchester
(John Rallet, and a few more at Colchester excepted, who own G. K's Doctrine to
be sound) have judged him to be an Apostate, and do still so judge him; this
being the chief Controversy betwixt them and him, viz. Whether the Light
within be sufficient to Salvation without Christ's outward Manifestation and
coming in the Flesh, his Death and Sufferings, and the Doctrine and Faith of
it, which are that something else, without which, no Light in Men is sufficient
to Salvation? And yet now T. V. and these his Colchester Brethren, by their
late solemn Confession, have declared themselves to be of the same Faith in the
case with G. K. so that by undeniable consequence, either G. K. is no Apostate
for his saying, The light within is not sufficient to Salvation without
something else, or if they think he is for his so affirming, they are as great
Apostates as he, and guilty of the same Apostasy with him. Again, is it not a
palpable Contradiction betwixt these Colchester Quakers, who say it is their
absolute Belief, That Faith in Christ without them, is necessary to their
Salvation; and G. Whithead, who has positively and expressly affirmed, That it
is contrary to Scripture to confide in Christ without Men; and to tell of a
Christ whose person is above the Clouds, and of a Christ within, is to make two
Christ's. See his Book, Truth defending the Quakers, p. 65. and p. 23. And in
his Book called The Light and Life, p. 61. he says, It is contrary to
Scripture (viz. Deuteronomy. 30. and Romans 10.) for People to seek their Savior above
the Clouds and Firmament, or to look to the Blood that was shed at Jerusalem
for Justification. And in p. 56. he says (expounding Acts 20. 28.) Now the
Blood of God, or that Blood that relates to God, must needs be spiritual, he
being a Spirit; and the Covenant of God is inward and spiritual, and so is the
Blood of it. Here G. Whithead perfectly agrees with W. Bailly in his Notion,
That the Blood is the Life, and the Life is the Light of Men (see W. B's
Testimony of the Light in him, page 23.) This I did take to be also T. V's
Notion of the Blood, seeing he told us, he differed not in his Faith from other
Friends; and yet he will not allow, that by the Blood of Christ, Rev. 7. 14. he
meant the Light, see True Relation, p. 5. This is another Instance of his
Contradiction both to himself and his Friends, from whom, he said, he does not
differ. As to the distinction, making the Faith in Christ, as he outwardly came
in the Flesh, etc. necessary to the Salvation of those that live in the
Christian World, but not to the Heathen Gentiles. I query first, Does not the
Scripture plainly refute that distinction, that holds not forth two ways of
Justification and of eternal Salvation; one by Faith in Christ without Men,
another by obedience to the Light within, without Faith in Christ without Men;
which is a plain setting up of Salvation by the Covenant of Works; see Gal. 3.
26. and Romans 3. 30. Where Faith in Christ Jesus, as he outwardly suffered, etc.
is declared to be necessary, as well to the Gentiles as the Jews. 2. If the
Light in Heathens be sufficient to Salvation, without the Faith of Christ's
outward Manifestation, is it not as sufficient in Christians without that Faith
(otherwise it is less sufficient in Christians than in Heathens) and
consequently that Faith is superfluous, or at least not more necessary in
Christians than in Heathens? 3. Why is that Faith necessary to the Christians
but not to the Heathen? If it be said, because that the Doctrine concerning
Christ, as he outwardly came and was Crucified, is Preached, or declared to the
Christians (though not to the Heathens) by the Scriptures and other outward
means. But the Question is again, Is that Faith necessary to us, because
externally the Doctrine is Preached or declared to us, then let it not be
Preached or declared to them that are ignorant of it, and they shall be saved
without it; yea, according to this corrupt Notion, they shall be more easily
saved without it than with it; because the dictates of the Light within, as
common to all Men, are fewer and easier to be obeyed, than the many Commands
given by Christ in the Writings of the New Testament. Again, if the Doctrine of
Christ, as outwardly Crucified, etc. and the Faith of it be necessary to us in
Christendom, because Preached or declared to us, what makes the Faith of that
Declaration necessary to us? Not the Scriptures, seeing they are not with them
the Rule of Faith and Practice to Christians; nor the Light within, because the
Light within does not, without the external Doctrine, teach us that Faith; and
if the external Doctrine be necessary to have that Faith, it is a plain case
the Light within is not sufficient to us, without the external Doctrine, to
beget that Faith in us, and consequently is not sufficient to our Salvation
without that external Doctrine. That the Scripture is not to them the Rule of
Faith and Practice, is expressly affirmed by W. P. in his Discourse of the
General Rule of Faith and Practice, Reprinted this Year, 1699. To which I have
printed an Answer, called, The Deism of W. Penn and his Brethren. If the
external Doctrine be necessary to be added to the Light within, in order to
give the Faith of Christ's outward Manifestation and coming in the Flesh, then
the Light within is not sufficient without it, if not necessary; then seeing
the Light is the same in kind and nature (according to these my Adversaries
among the Quakers) both in Heathens and Christians, the Light in the Heathens
does as much oblige them to have that Faith, as it does oblige us to have it in
order to Salvation; because, according to this way of arguing, the Light within
does, without the necessity of the Scripture, or outward means, reveal it in
Christians, and therefore also in the Heathens; or if it does not in the
Heathens, and yet does it in the Christians, then it is of a differing kind,
because of a differing ability, as not performing that in the Heathens which it
performs in the Christians; by all which it does plainly appear, how
self-contradictory and inconsistent these Colchester Quakers are, both with
themselves, and with their most approved Authors and Brethren at London, and
elsewhere, and indeed all of them one with another.

Here follows a Certificate of Parson Shelton to the truth of the Case in
debate betwixt G. Keith and T. Upsher, as the said Parson Shelton sum'd it up
at the end of the Conference; attested likewise by Nine other credible
Witnesses: And another Certificate of his to the truth of the Relation of the
said Conference that is now printed.
WHereas I William Shelton am informed, that a Quaker in Colchester has Written
to a Quaker in London, that I stood up at a Conference in Colchester (when G.
Keith was to prove, that T. Vpsher had contradicted himself) and did declare
openly, that G. Keith had wrongfully charged T. Vpsher with contradicting
himself, and that G. Keith was, in my Judgment, quite routed, and worsted in
that Dispute; I do hereby testify, that it is a very false Report, and he that
wrote the Letter has done me great wrong; for I do averr, that (as I was not,
that I remember, desired to do it, so) I did not at all declare my Judgment at
that time, whether G. Keith had wronged T. Vpsher or no. That which I then
said, was a summing up the state of the Case in these words, or, I am sure to
this Sense; but conditionally, viz. If G. Keith has proved, that T. Vpsher in
the Forenoon did affirm, that Faith in Christ, as he was born of the Virgin
Mary, and dyed without the Gates of Jerusalem, and ascended into Heaven, and is
there in his Glory, and shall come again at the end of the World, is absolutely
necessary (as some say he said) or (as others) is necessary to Salvation; and
if in the Afternoon he did affirm, that the Light within, or Christ within, or
Grace within, (or any other word in use with them of the same signification) is
sufficient to Salvation, then G. Keith has proved T. Vpsher contradicted
himself. Taking a Pen in my Hand, I added; If I should say this Pen is
necessary for me to write with, and should say, I can write without it, I
should contradict my self. To this they generally assented, that I had stated
the Case right and fair; and this if proved was a Contradiction. But whether G.
Keith had proved this or no, I did not say on either side.

William Shelton,
July 17. 1699.
That thus William Shelton summed up the State of the Case in debate betwixt G.
Keith and T. Vpsher, the 6th of July, 1699, as he himself has above declared,
is further attested by Daniel Gilson, and John Gledhil, Nonconformist
Ministers, Samuel Ryder, the Person chosen by the Quakers for their Moderator,
Edward Brasier and Thomas Streaton, who were two of them that took the
Conference in Shorthand, Jacob Johnson, Peter Covency, Noah Raoiil, and Thomas
Cook, all very credible Persons (the last of which, viz. Tho. Cook, is a noted
Quaker, and of good report among the Quakers at Colchester, but that they blame
him for being a friend to G. Keith, and for owning his Doctrine) all which
abovenamed Persons have signed to a Certificate of the truth of W. Shelton's
Testimony, as above delivered. The said William Shelton, at the end of his said
Testimony, adds these following words. If I may but know who it is has done me
this wrong, I doubt not but I shall prove to his Face, by many credible
Witnesses then present, that he has abused me, and consequently done his Cause
wrong, by thinking to strengthen it with such a notorious Lie. When I have
taken a more thorough view of the Narrative of that Conference, than I have yet
time to do, then it may be time enough to say how far G. Keith has proved what
he undertook. In the mean time, because my words are so liable to be
misrepresented, I only say, that I think G. Keith has no reason to be ashamed,
nor T. Vpsher and his Friends to boast of that days Conference.

Witness my Hand, this 17th Day of July, 1699. Will. Shelton.

And in another Paper, he gives the following Testimony to the truth of the
Relation (that is now in Print) of that Conference.

Being (at G. Keith's request) present at a Conference between him and T.
Vpsher in Colchester, on the 6th Day of this Instant July, and having read over
the Narrative of the said Conference, subscribed by Edward Brasier, Thomas
Streaton, and Arthur Winsley Junior, who took it in Shorthand Writing, I do
hereby testify, That to the best of my remembrance (though I do not undertake
for every word) this Narrative subscribed by the forenamed, etc. is, as to the
substance of it, a just and true Account of the said Conference; and I am not
aware of any thing unduly expressed to the advantage or disadvantage of either
side.

Witness my Hand, this 14th Day of July, 1699. Will. Shelton.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
PAGE 10. l. 11. for them, r. me. p, 12. l. 3. for unsed, r. used. p. 12. l.
12. for First, r. Fifth.


