The Way Cast up, And the Stumbling-blockes removed from before the feet of
those, who are seeking the way to ZION, with their faces thitherward CONTAINING
An Answer to a POSTSCRIPT Printed at the end of SAMUEL RUTHERFORDS Letters,
third Edition by a namelesse Author, indeed not without cause, considering the
many lies and falsehoods therein, against the people, called Quakers, which are
here disproved, and refuted and the truth of what we hold touching those
Particulars faithfully declared, according to the SCRIPTVRES.

By GEORGE KEITH, Prisoner in the Tolbooth of Aberdeen, with many (...) have
joyfully suffered the spoiling of our goods, (...) sonement of our bodies for
the precious Name (...) Lord JESUS CHRIST, and for the (...) who has said,
forsake not the assembling (...) together. Written in the Spirit of love and
(...) Soul traveling for the everlasting (...) Souls of all men, but
especially of them, called (...) to whom this Answer is particularly directed.

Exodus. 23: 1. Thou shall not raise a false report; (...) wicked to be an
unrighteous witness. Prove. 14: 25. A true witness delivers souls, (...)
speaks lies. Math. 5: 11. Blessed are ye when men shall revile (...) shall
say all manner of evil against (...) The PREFACE To the READER.
Having seen a Postscript added to the third edition of Samuel Rutherfords
Letters, upon occasion of a Letter wrote by him, doubtless out of zeal, to some
persons in Aberdeen, at the time when they were endeavoring to separat
themselves from the communion of profane and scandalous People, reckoned
commonly for Membe^s of the Church of Scotland; and also withdrawing from under
the yoke of impos^ing Presbyterial government (for which he was a sufferer, by
confinement in Aberdeen, in the time of the former Prela^s) from which Letter
the Author of this Postscript has taken occasion to vent and vomit forth more
malice and bitter prejudice against the despised witnesses of the Lord (called
Quakers) then ever the Scribes and Pharisees did against our Lord Jesus Christ,
when he was among them, in his bodily appearance, I have judged fit to desire
all sober People, that profess the name of Christians, and have any knowledge
of us, or our principles, that they would seriously consider, if we or our
principles deserve such characters, as this man has put upon us; seeing we are
known to many to be an innocent, harmless and blameless people in all our
behavior and conversation, making conscience of our duty toward God in
purity of worship and tenderness of owning the same, notwithstanding any
threats, punishments, fines or imprisonments for our faithfulness therein, and
our real endeavors to obey all his holy commands, in which we shall never
decline to be tried by the testimony of the holy and precious Scripturs of
Truth. Nor are we less known to all neighbors, relations and acquaintances, to
be just and righteous in our dealings toward men.

Next as to our principles, they are so often and upon so many different
occasions holden forth to the world in all places, where we live; that none can
pretend ignorance thereof, unless it be wilful. Wherefore I shall not enter
upon this here, being unsuitable to a Preface, and that so many of our Friends,
both in our own Nation and in England, have performed this task* in clearing
them from all the malicious and gross misrepresentations, which opposers have
labored to asperse them with, so that none needs remain ignorant of them, but
such as love to continue so, through wilful prejudice, or lazyness at least.

Wherefore when I perceive from what a height of malice and spleen this Author
has vented himself against us, by which any may see that the Jews, Turks and
Heathens had never more against Christians, nor the malice and cruelty of the
Papists and Popish Inquisitors in Spain, or Italy, was ever greater against
dissenters from them, whom they judged Heretics; I cannot in the least doubt,
but, if this man had power to influence the Civil Magistrate to exercise his
power against us, he would not only parallel the cruelty of Heathens and
Turks, but equal, if not exceed, the inquisition of Spain, yea those cruel and
bloody persecuters in New England, who cut off the ears, scourged and
tormented several of our Friends, till their flesh was like a Gelly, banished
diverse, and hanged three men, and a woman, 1659, ^660. for no other cause, but
this very thing, that they owned the Testimony of that Truth which we profess,
and for which we are sufferers this day: which may serve abundantly to scare
any sober people, that profess to own the meek and lowly Spirit of Jesus, yea
to cause them to abhor to keep company, or converse with men of such spirits.
And if any have not yet seen the prejudice to all Civil Interests, that flows
from persecution for Conscience, I shall referr them to the several books,
that have been published thereanent in this age.

But when I consider the great rage, that appears in this man, and many of his
brethren against us, I can not impute it to any thing like zeal for the
interest of the Gospel, as they would willingly have people believe, it being
to me most clear, that their chief quarrel is, because, we, of all the people
that ever appeared, are they that have most discovered their pride, ambition,
greedynesse and covetousness, malice and the rest of their deceits, we
asserting, and they denying Immedia^ Revelation, or that God by his Spirit has
any immediate converse with the Souls and hearts of his people, by which he does
most clearly make known his will to them, and gives the most effectual call
to the Ministry, which they have put mostly into the hands of men, and made to
depend upon an humane ordination. Yea some of them derive a succession from the
Pope of Rome, and hence practically claim a power to be Lords over the faith
of Gods people, imposing their glosses on the Scripture to be no less believed
then the Scripture it self, and so all that are not of their persuasion, must
be heretical and heterodoxe, though they lay no claim to be led by an
infallible Spirit themselves.

Again: The Lord has brought us to witness the spirituality of worship, in
preaching, praying and praising, knowing that God will accept of none but what
flows immediately from the Life of his own Spirit, moving in the heart:
whereas this man and his brethren are for performing all those dutys, whether
they have this immediate assistance of Gods holy Spirit, or not. For they have
learned by art to supply that defect with their natural and acquired parts,
else many times they would sit silent in their pulpits; whereas now they have
laid and do lay a necessity upon themselves, and their followers to go about
those dutys at their appointed times, whatever be their temper or condition at
the present. And according to our principle, other besides them, may perform
these dutys in public, as they find themselves moved and furnished by the
Lord, whereby their trade and traffic in the matters of the Worship of God,
would readily be quite spoiled, and they be necessitated to betake themselves
to other callings to gain a livelihood to themselves and familys, seeing there
would be no use for studied sermons and their rhetorical conn'd discourses, by
which they have labored to tickle the ears and please the fancys of their
hearers, and have done all, their art or eloquence could, to reach the natural
affections of people. But now the Lords chosen people that are taught by the
true Shepherd Jesus Christ, have learned to know his voice, from the voice of a
stranger, and to feel more of the true Life of Jesus Christ, raised up in their
hearts, by a few words spoken from that Life, though it be but in a homely way,
by a Tradesman, or a poor handmaid, then ever they sensibly felt by the most
eloquent and mere artificial Preachers, that are strangers to this Life: and
therefore it is but little wonder, though these men stretch forth, and employ
the most of their Rhetoric and parts to declare against us both in pulpit and
print. For they homologate that word, which Erasmus spoke concerning Luther,
that it was a hardtask he had taken in hand, seeing the Popes mi^re and the
Monk^ bellys stood in the way. So it is with the Lords Witnesses in this day,
their work would be easier in promoting the true Reformation of Gods worship
and people, if the pride and greedyness of the Clergy, their esteem with, and
power over the people, their stipends and set rents were not concerned: for
they walk no further by Scripture rule (though they call it their only rule)
then the Scripturs do stand with their interests. Hence though there be no
warrant to admit of any to be members of the Christian Church, but true
Believers, that know upon what ground they own the Christian Faith, yet they
will have all the Subjects of the Nation (whether they have any evidence of
Faith, or not) to be members of their Church, that their power may be of as
large extent, as that of the Civil Magistrate: yea without any Scripture
warrant, they take Infants to be members, by sprinkling them: and though they
have no better warrant, for joining men and women in marriage together, then a
Popish Canon; yet such is their love to have a hand in all the concernments of
the people, that they must needs be the instruments, against which, with many
more of this nature, we bear our Testimony, and therefore no wonder they rage
so much against us.

Now there being no formal charge in all the said bitter postscript, set down
against us; but that false one, that we put a false Christ in stead of the true
Jesus, deny Christ to be the second Person of the Trinity, and Jesus the son of
Mary to be the true Christ alone, etc. as he goes on in that page 553. without
any proof, it shall here suffice to say (those things being so fully answered
in this following Treatise, and also in other books of our Friends) The Lord
knows we are shamelesly traduced and slaundered in this matter, as in most of
other things charged upon us, by our adversarys, and it can not be but strange
to me, that any who pretend to be Christians, or Gospel Ministers should be so
impudent, or otherwise so grossly ignorant (if not malicious) in their
calumnys, seeing it has so often been published both by word and writ, and in
print that we own no other Savior, but Jesus Christ borne of the Virgin Mary
and crucified at Jerusalem, and that the Lords People never had, have or ever
shall have remission of sins, but through the meri^s and virtue of that
precious blood and sufferings, which our Lord Jesus the Only begotten Son of
God did undergo and shed at Jerusalem, that He is true God and Man, yea what
ever the holy Scripturs of Truth do witness concerning him that we dearly own
with our souls and hearts, avouching with a firm faith, that the same Christ
has given a measure of Light to every man, Joh. 1: 9. Tit. 2: 11. which is of
a Divine, Supernatural, Substantial being; a beam and ray of his Blessed
Spirit to convince the world of sin and duty, sufficient to bring all men to
Salvation, being joined unto, and rightly improven, according to the testimony
of many places of holy Scripture, which call him the Light of the world, and a
Light to inlighten the Gentiles, the true Light that enlightens every man that
comes into the world; and that the Grace of God that brings Salvation has
appeared unto all men, teaching us that denying ungodlynesse and worldly lusts,
etc. This is the free Gift which Christ has purchased, Romans 5: 18. and
therefore ought to be taken heed to, and believed in, as John 12: 36. For
Christ is given to be a Leader to his people, and has promised to be with them
to the end of the world, and this is by his spiritual and inward appearance in
the Hearts of men. And, because we bear our Testimony to this appearance of
Christ in us, shall we be therefore thus maliciously traduced by such
prejudicated men? I shall wish no worse to him, or them, but the Lord forgive
them, and open their eyes; seeing I know some that have been little inferior to
them in prejudice, in a day, to whom God has showed mercy, and therefore my
bowels are moved for such.

This man also charge us, that we are greater enemies to none, then to the
faithful Ministers and eminent laborers in the Gospel, as he does expatiate
at large in the beginning of that page 556 in the Postscript. To which I reply
(passing by his ungodly and unchristian expressions and Epithetes) that we have
ever had a reverent esteem of all faithful ministers, that in simplicity and
sincerity of Heart have endeavored to preach the Gospel; though in many things
short of these blessed discoverys God has manifested to us, and we do remember
them, that were such, with that due respect, that becomes, as having been
faithful according to their measure in their day, and were blessed to be
instruments in Gods hand to the good of many, that in singlness and sincerity
of heart, did hear them. But it is not the duty of any Christian to stand
still, and shut out any further discovery then they attained unto: for as all
the degrees of the Apostasy came not at once, nor with the first or second
trumpet, Rev. 8. so neither is the Reformation to be completed by the first or
second vial, Rev. 16. And therefore though they studied Sermons, yet many of
them at times spoke, as the Lord gave it them: witness John Knox, who told the
Queen of Scotland when she was threatening him (as Alexander Petry, in his
History of the Kirk* shows, Page 236.) that in the preaching place he was not
master of his own tongue, but behoved to speak as God commmanded him, etc. So
many good men, after the Reformation from Popery, could be instanced, who have
born testimony against studied sermons, and leaning to their Notes, and
limiting the Holy Spirit. I shall for this give but one clear instance, amongst
the first Reformers, for all. Franciscus Lambertus Avinionensis in his book de
litera and Spiritu. 5 Tractat. fol. 84. Printed 1526. His words are these,
Sum autem de vita, ne sequaris morem hypocritarum, qui ferme de verbo ad
verbum quicquid dicturi sunt, scripserunt, and quasi recitaturi aliquot versus
in the atro cum tragoedis totam concionem didicerunt: and postea cum sunt in
prophetandi loco, or ant Dominum, ut linguam eorum dirigat, sed interim
claudentes viam Spiritui Sancto, definiunt se nihildicturos, praeter id quod
scripserunt. O infelix prophetarum genus, imo vere maledictum, quod a suis
scriptis aut meditatione, non a Dei Spiritu pendet! Quid pseudo-propheta or as
Dominium, ut Spiritum det, quo loquaris utilia, and interim Spiritum repellis?
Cur praefers tuam meditationem aut studium Spiritui Dei? alioqui cur ipsi
Spiritui non te committis?

Fol. 85. He adds, Sed tu quisquis es, si vere Propheta Dei es, docebit te
Spiritus Domini, quod sane prophets. Which Englished is thus: But chiefly be
thou aware that tho^u follow not the way of Hypocrites, that have written down
almost word by word whatever they are to declare, and even as stage players,
that are to repeat some verses upon a theater, they have learned and got by
heart their whole sermon, and when they are in their pulpits, pray that the
Lord would order or direct their tongues, but in the mean time shutting up the
way to the Holy Spirit, determine to say nothing but that which they have
written. O unhappy kind of Preachers! yea really accursed, that depend upon
their own writings or meditation, and not upon the Spirit of God. Thou false
prophet, why prayest thou to the Lord, that he would give thee his Spirit, by
whose assistance thou may preach profitably, and yet in the mean time
rejectest the Spirit, why preferrest thou thy meditation, or study to the
Spirit of God? Otherwise why do thou not give up thy self to the Holy Spirit?
But thou, whoever thou be, if thou art a true Prophet of God, the spirit of the
Lord will teach thee what thou ought safely to preach.

I have set down this at large, that all sober people may observe whether the
National Preachers, or these called in derision Quake^s, are in greatest unity
with the first Reformers. To this pu^pose I might add that of Calvin against
the Papists, in his I^stitut. Lib. 3 cap. 2. sect. 39. and several other Godly
men since his time, which for brevity I omit.

But seeing God has promised a complete deliverance from Babylon and all
Antichristian idolatry and superstition, it is sad, that they, who profess to
pray for it, and expect it, should oppose it, because it comes not in that way
and manner, as they desire it. Thus that in Isay 53: 1, 2, 3. which was spoken
of Christ's coming in the flesh outwardly, is fulfilled at this time in his
inward appearance, for it is said, He shall grow up before him as a tender
Plant and Root out of a dry ground, having no form nor comeliness, when we
shall see him, there is no beauty that we should desire him. He is despised and
rejected of men, etc. Because the discoverys of the Truths of God, which he
has revealed to these despised people, called Quakers, are not come out with
the authority, which a General Assembly, etc. had, and they are a ridiculous
people in the carnal eye, therefore they are all stigmatized by the wisdom of
this world, as blasphemys and heresys, and so can not be received by many, who
have been educated and brought up other ways, even as Christ said, Luk 5: 39.
No man having drunk old wine straightway desires new, for he says the old is
better. And as upon this account many rejected Christ and his doctrine, that
were educated under the Mosaical ceremonys; so many now adays reject us and our
testimony, because we are not a people in power and authority in this world,
and bring new things, as to the worlds observation, which agree not with their
education: and it is upon this account and the like, that we have been
misrepresented by many, as the most odious and abominable people, that ever
appeared. But God will vindicat his own truth in his own good time, and wipe
away our reproach, and get us praise and fame in every land, where we have been
shamefully used, Zeph. 3: 19. and in the living hope and expectation of the
Lords glorious and gracious appearance for us, we are content to suffer, and
bear the most ignominious and disgraceful epithets and characters, this
Author with many of his brethren has put upon us, such as his calling
Quakerism an abyss of all abominations. Satan's slime, and the botch of bell.
pure devilism. monstrous brood swallowing down the dung of all desperate and
soul-destroying heresys, hatched in hell by the Father of falsehoods and ^yes.
and whatsoever is any of these heresys most dreadful and damnable, that is to
them their darling, a piece of the black art* peculiar to that tribe, dishing
up the dung of hell: the stink of hell. blasphemys against God, Christ, his
Spirit, his Word, etc. a most odious vermin of black locusts, that ever crooked
upon the face of the earth. the sound of their blasphemous belchings is to be
fled, as the very sibilation of the old serpent. doctrins of devils, as if in
this one shape and size of enemies to the Gospel, were gathered together and
cemented all the several partys, that ever Abaddon and Apollyon commanded in
his several expeditions against the Prince Michael. matters void of the whole
Gospel of the Grace of God, and of all that blessed contrivance of salvation by
the Son of God as a slain Savior. Satan's sole trustees and his only janizarys,
with a multitud of such like characters, which were tedious here to relat.
Against which I shall take up no railing accusation, but as the Angel rebuked
the devil, The Lord rebuke thee, Satan.

It was for the sake of some sober people in this City and Country, that I
wrote this, upon the first sight of this Postscript, which was in the 4 month,
called Iun last, 1676. And now seeing my dear Friend G. K. has since answered
it more largely, and has discovered the folly, malice, mistakes and
partialitys of the Author, I have yielded to let it be set down as a Preface to
the Reader, as my testimony to the precious Truth, which the Lord is
manifesting in this day* wherein he is about to discover the heels, and make
bare the skirts of all that have transgressed by their iniquitys, Ier. 13: 22.
And if G. K. in this following Answer has dealth more plainly then will be
pleasing to the Author of this Postscript, for which he may blame himself (for
the Truth of God will not want witnesses) yet I hope these, that are not
biased with prejudice and malice against us, will find he has said nothing
but the Truth, and vindicated our Principles by solid arguments from
Scripture, and from the unjust aspersions, that the Author of the Postscript
would fix upon us. As for those that are prepossessed with prejudice, what
their tohughts will be, I shall leave them to the Lord, for, as one says,
Periit judicium, ubires transiit in affectum, where the affection is
forestalled, the judgment will never be just. but I wish all may be so
charitable to their own Souls, as to make an impartial and diligent search
after Truth, and not rely upon the testimony of man, especially of that kind
of men that any have in most of their controversys against us, been found such
gross and palpable slaunderers and calumniators, that it may seem strange,
that ever such impostors should be any more hearkened unto, when they have been
so often discovered in their bold and impudent lies, even to the conviction of
many, that are ready to receive all that comes from them as Truth. But the
cause is the Lords, and in his good time he will vindicat his people, and his
own Truth, no less now, then in former ages. Blessed are they that are not
offendded in Christ, who has been a stone of stumbling and rock of offense to
the wise professing Jews, and foolishness to the ignorant and vain Gentiles.
However this may be constructed, it is my real desire to the Lord, that all
testimonys, that come from any of us, whether by word, or writ, may tend to
nothing but the true conviction and conversion of the opposers, and edification
of all the upright in heart, that love the prosperity of the kingdom of Jesus
Christ on earth: this is the sincere desire of him, who is

A real Friend and wel-wisher to the souls of all men. ALEXANDER SKEIN.
From the Tolbooth of Aberdeen, where I am prisoner for the true liberty of all
Christians: the 20 of the 12 month, called February. 1676/77.
SECTION 1.
1. Separation from the National Presbyterian Church no provoking sin why God,
should give them up, who did so separat, to the delusions of Satan. 2. But a
further step of reformation. 3. The inconsistency of this Presbyterians high
commendations of S. R. and of his Epistles with the Presbyterians doctrine, that
Immediate Revelation is ceased since the Apostles days. 4. Other Book^ more
wort^y of Commendation. 5. That Immediate Revelation is not ceased. 6. A
deceitful distinction, of some Presbyterian Teachers, refuted.

IN my answer to this Postscript I shall not repeat all his words, for that is
needless, the book being current in the hands of Professors, but only mark the
most remarkable, and he that will, may be at the pains, to read the passages
at more length, in the book it self.

Page 1. lin. 7. Thou art desired to take notice t^ what dreadful and strong
delusions such who were ringleaders in this separation etc.

Answer
He means some persons at Aberdeen, who some years ago did separat from the
National Church, in the time of the Presbyteriall government (so called) only
as to the use of these external signs of bread and wine, being so burdened in
their Consciences, even in that die, to partak with such and eat with them, at
that they judged to be the Table of the Lord, many of whom were openly known to
be scandalous, and these passed under the name of Independents, or of the
Congregationall way. Now this so small a separation, this nameless Author does
^o aggravat, as if it were the main and greatest provocation why the Lord, as
he judges* did give them up to the ^trong delusions of Quakerism. But why may
we nor much rather conclude that the Lord regarding their sincerity, and
tenderness of Conscience, in making that separation, such as it was, did reward
them with a further discovery and sight of some precious truths formerly hid
from them, which though this Author calls strong delusions, we know are no
delusions at all, but most, useful and comfortable Truths? But if falling into
Quakerism be such a proper and peculiar punishment for them who separated from
Presbytery, so called, how is it that so few of that separation, I mean of them
called Independents, have joined with the way of Quakerism in England, but have
been so great persecuters of it, that in new England, the Independents [being
gone from their first tenderness and sincerity] did put four persons called
Quakers to death [for no other cause, but that they were of that profession,
and returned to that place after they had banished them, for worshipping God, as
the^ were persuaded in their consciences] a crime more barbarous and cruel,
then I have heard of committed by any called Prote^tants upwards of some scores
of years? also how comes, it that so many in this Nation, are become Quakers
so called, who were Presbyteriants, and immediately out of the Presbyterian way,
came to be Quakers? and some, who were once of the Episcopal way left it, and
became Presbyterians, and afterward Quakers? and some from the Episcopal way
have immediately become Quakers? but is this a just ground for them of the
Episcopal way to conclude, that their ^eparation from Episcopacy to Presbytery
was such a heinous sin, that it provoked the Lord at last to give them up to
the strong delusions of the Quakers? I am sure the Episcopal men have as good
reason to make such a conclusion against the Presbyterians on this bare account
of separation: yea and the Papists against Protestants, for some, who are now
Quakers, were once Papists, and afterward became presbyterians, before they
became Quakers. Have the Papists therefore just ground to conclude, that the
separation of those persons from Popery to Presbytery, was the sin that
provoked God to give them up to the strong delusions of Quakerism? I know the^
will be as ready to make such a conclusion, as the Presbyterians can be, but
indeed who will view the matter with a spiritual eye, will see the wonderful
goodness of God, in his leading, on the souls of them, who most love him, out
of Babylon, by those various steps of separation, one degree after another,
till he has brought them to Zion. 2. These are they who follow the Lamb
whithersoever he goes, and some of these, whom he calls the ringleaders of
this separation, after they had walked faithfully and religiously in that way
called in derision Quakerism [wich is nothing elce but pure Christianity
restored again, unto the world by the mighty operation of the power and Spirit
of God, after so long and so dark a night of Apostasy] have finished their
course in that way, and are now at rest with the Lord in the heavenly mansions,
who, both at their death, and many times before, gave powerful and living
testimonies of Gods accepting them, and giving them more manifest and sensible
enjoyments of himself, and blessing them more abundantly, with the fruits of
holiness and righteousness and victory over corruption, in that despised way,
then formerly they ever witnessed, although their experience of any things,
that were true, among them called presbyterians, was not short of many, if not
of the most of them even in that day.

Page 1. l. 18. That which this great Seer [much upon his Masters secrets,
because he had frequent access, to lean his head upon his breast who come ou^
of the Father's bosom] foresaw would follow upon this turning aside, and fall
upon the head of such forsakers of a Church so often honored, by receiving
signal testimonys of the great Bridgroom's love toward her as his Spouse, etc.

Answer.
3. I wonder how this man has the confidence to call this Author a great Seer,
and to tell us of his being much upon his Master's secrets, because he had
frequent access to lean his head upon his breast, who came out of the Father's
bosom, for these and such like expressions do plainly imply Immediate
Revelation, and that S. R. was a prophet, and had the Spirit of Prophecy, in
the same sense, as any of the Prophets, who were Penmen of the holy Scripturs,
for what higher elogies could be given to any of the most eminent Prophets,
then these here and elsewhere given by him to this Author? And here I shall set
down some other expressions parallel to these in the Postscript, or rather
surmounting them, to be found in the Epistle to the Reader, whether one man
has writ that Epist^e, and the Postscript is not material to inquire, seeing
doubtless they are both of one profession, if differing persons, and he that
writes the Postscript, ownes the Epistle to the Reader. In the beginning of
that Epistle, he tells us, Considering how little need Master Rutherford [as he
calls him] his Letters have of any man's Epistle commendatory, his great Master,
whom he served with his Spirit in the Gospel of his Son, having given them
one, written by his own hand on the hearts of every one, who is become his
Epistle, etc. This is the very same commendation, that the Spirit of God gives
to Paul, who was not behind the chiefest of the Apostles, as you may read, 2.
Cor. 3: 1, 2 verses. And indeed this is the greatest ground why we believe the
Scripturs to be divinely inspired, because the inward Testimony of the Spirit of
God, which is the Epistle commendatory written by Gods own hand, upon the
hearts of believers, is the Seal of confirmation unto the Scripturs, as being
divinely inspired And seeing GOD does give the same Seal, as this writer plainly
affirms, to S. R. his Epistles, that he does to the Epistles of Paul: will it
not prove that S. R. his Epistles are as really divinely inspired, as Paul's
Epistles were, and then why may not S. R. his Epistles be put into the Bible,
with Paul's Epistles? This question is the more pertinently put to this man,
and these of his profession, because they do so argue against us, the People
called Quakers, that if any of our words or writings be divinley inspired, then
we equal our writings to the Scripturs. For this cons^quence, if it has any
weight at all, does as much fall upon their heads, as upon ours, and if they do
still make a difference betwixt the one and the other, although both divinely
in^pired, can not we do the same? But he proceeds in his admirable
commendation of this book, thus, as being a piece (the holy Scripturs being set
aside) equal to any the world has yet seen, or this day can show, in respect
of the spiritualness of it. A friendly testimony indeed! I remember the
Presbyterians had wont to commend Calvin's Institutions above any book in the
world, next to the Scripturs, according to these Latin verses, made on them,
Praeter Apostolicas post Christi tempor a chartas,
Huic peperere librum secula nulla parem.


And I have heard an eminent Presbyterian Preacher in his pulpit commend the
Confession of Faith, with the Larger and Shorter Catechism, set out by them,
called the Assembly of Divines at Westminster above all books in the world,
except the Scriptur. But now both Calvin's Institutions and the Confession of
Faith, must give place to S. R. his Epistles, yea and most books in the world
besides.

I write not this to lessen any due worth, that belongs to S. R. his Epistles,
for I acknowledge, having read them all over once, and many of them several
times, I find many savoury expressions in them, that savor of that blessed
life of Christ revealed of God in my heart, yet I must needs say, I find also
very many unsound and unsavory expressions in them, that the life and Spirit
of Christ does not only not bear witness for, but against, as I may
afterward show.

4. and I do really believe that there are diverse books in the world, besides
the Scripturs (nor shall I bring into the compari^on, our Friends books, lest
any say, I am partial) more sound, and more spiritual, then this book is, and
which are more profitable to direct the minds of them, who are strangers to
Christ, where, or how to find him, little or nothing of which I can find in all
this book of S. R. only somewhat of his own experience, but I can not find in
him any certain and clear directions, certainly and in^allibly directing
strangers how to attain to the least true spiritual experience, nor can I find
the least hint or shadow of a testimony in all his book to the saving power
and efficacy of that universal Light of Christ, wherewith Christ has
enlightened every man that comes into the world, which blessed, heavenly,
divine testimony I find in many of the Ancients, for which cause a few lines of
them are of more value to me, and all who love Gods Universal Gift, then this
whole book of S. Rs. And I question not but many, having as much of a spiritual
taste and discerning, as any Presbyterian, will affirm, that the writings of
not only Augustine, and the like Ancients, but of later writers in darker
times, as of Bernard, Thaulerus, Thomas a Kempis, and that little book called
The Dutch or German Theology, are fully as ^pirituall, though I am far from
justifying any errors in these books, as neither do I the errors in S. R. his
Epistles. And although I know the Presbyterians, some of them as have seen and
read the Dutch Theology account it a most dangerous book and full of
bla^phemyes, as I. L. did call it expressly to I. S. whereof both B. F. and I
were witnesses in Holland, yet Luther does commend it as one of the best books
he had met with, next to the Scripturs and Augustine, and teaching more sound
Divinity, then all the Divines in Germany or any where else in that time, and
he wrote an Epistle commendatory of it, which is prefixed to it in some
Editions, a printed copy whereof is by me, but of all this man's commendations,
this is the most high and admirable, that follows in his Epistle aforesaid,
where he says, So that in respect of us, this Angel of the Church speaks, as
one standing already in the quire of Angels, or as an Angel come down from
heaven among men, to give us some account of what they are doing above. These
words import not only immediate new revelations, (I do not say, of new
Evangelicall Truths, not declared in the Scripturs, for I acknowledge none such)
but also great abundance of them. And yet if we will believe the Presbyterian
Confession of Faith, published by the assembly at Westminster, where S. R.
himself was a Member, Those former ways of Gods revealing his will unto his
people are now ceased, see Chap. 1. sect. 1. And sect. 6. They exclude all new
revelations of the Spirit, and they tell us, the whole counsel of God
concerning all things necessary for his own glory, man's salvation, faith and
life, are set down in Scripture.

5. And amongst other Scripture Testimonies they abuse, to favor this corrupt
doctrine, they cite Heb. 1. 1, 2. God who at sundry times and in diverse manners
spoke in times past unto the Fathers by the prophets, has in these last days
spoken to us by his Son, etc. And their scope in this place, is to prove from
these words, that there are no prophets, that is to say, no men divinely
inspired or immediately taught of God in our days, but I have showed in my book
of Immediate Revelation, that this Scriptur does not prove that prophecy or
prophets (that is to say, men divinely inspired, who preach and teach by divine
inspiration, and as they are moved of the holy Ghost) are ceased in our days,
more then in the days of the Apostles. For if it could prove such a
dispensation to be ceased now, it would prove it to be ceased then, even in the
days of the Apostles, and that the Epistle to the Hebrews was not divinely
inspired, which is absurd, yea this Scripture rather proves mor clear
revelation then formerly under the Law, God now speaking to (...) by his Son,
or in his Son Christ Jesus, who is in his people, and lives and walks in
them, and also speaks in them. But now if the Presbyterians think, that this
place does prove that Prophets are ceased, how comes it that they think S. R.
not only a Prophet, but a great Prophet, for he that is a great See^, is a
great Prophet, for the Prophets are called Seers, in Scripture? And for a
further proof that the Presbyterians think that men do not speak in our days by
divine inspiration, see James Dur^am in his Exposition on the Revelation, page
1. where he tells us, that the words of the Revelation are the last words,
which God has spoken unto his Church. Sad tidings! that for above this sixteen
hundred years, God has spoken no words to his Church, or has had no Prophets
since John, who wrote the Revelation but John himself was not of that mind, nor
belief, for he prophesied of two witnesses, that should prophecy a thousand two
hundred and sixty days, even all the time of the Apostasy: also John heard many
voices, coming out of heaven, long after him, and he tells us not only of
the presence of the Son of man in the midst of the golden candlesticks, but
also of his voice, which was the sound of many waters, also he saw the new
Jerusalem coming down from God out of heaven, and that the^ of this city should
see his face, and not need the light of a candle, nor of the sun, because the
Lord God shall inlighten them, which diverse Protestants understand of a Church
upon Earth, p^rticularly Thomas Brightman, who does expressly affirm, that the
goodness of God shall shine forth in ^ greater manner, then can be ascribed to
any means so that men shall appear Divinely inspired. But if God has spoken no
words to his Church, since John's days, his words being the last, how comes it,
that this Presbyterian threatens us with S. R. his predictions, or of what he
did foresee, would fall upon the heads of the forsakers of the Presbyterian
Church? For if this prediction of his, be not from the LORD, we have no cause
to fear, yea we know by blessed experience, it was not from the Lord, for since
we left that corrupt way of the Presbyterian worship, and their corruptions in
Doctrine and Discipline, we have found the more abundant blessings of God from
heaven to fall upon us, and we have enjoyed more of the presence of Christ,
since our separation from such a corrupt Church, then ever formerly we knew,
yea many of us that knew nothing, before our separation, what the enjoyment of
Christ's presence was, are now come to know it, since we were separat from them,
as a National Church, although we are not, nor ever were, in spririt separated,
from these few scattered ones, amongst them, that fear, or love the Lord in the
least measure, these are our little sister, that we pray unto God for often,
and we have unity with them in every good thing, that is in them, and are only
separated from the evil where ever it is, in our selves, and in all persons
every where. And the Lord has let us see in his divine Light that the
national Presbyterian Church, at her best, was never a purely constitut
Church, nor ever had the pure form of the Gospel Church, according to the
pattern in the Mount, nor was the doctrine of the Gospel purely taught among
them, only some things they taught, but they did not know the Truth, in some
of the most Weighty doctrines of the Gospel. And when the Lord raised up a
sinceer Ministry, directing to a more pure way of worship, and preaching the
doctrine of the Gospel more purely, then any of the Presbyterian Preachers did,
I mean some of our brethren, whom the Lord sent among them, faithful laborers
indeed, diverse of whom since have put of the Earthly Tabernacle, and their
souls are at rest with the Lord, I say, when these came among them they
opposed them, and stirred up the people against them, and such of the people
who received them, and their testimony, they excommunicated in the west of
Scotland, and none were more active and industrious, in stiring up both people
and Rulers in that day to banish imprison, and persecute the true Servants and
Prophets of the most high God then the Presbyterian Ministry, so sadly were
they de^erted of God, both in England and Scotland, and the common objection
that both Teachers and People made against our Friends in those days, was
this; who gave yo^ a call to come and preach among us? and when they saw that
many of them were unlettered men, as to the Languages and Heathenish
Philosophy, they cried out against them, as not being fit to teach: and when
our Friends answered they mere taught of God immediately, by the divine
i^spiration of his Spirit; and by that also they were called.

Then they cried out blasphemy, and delusion. There are no Prophets, or men
divinely inspired, or immediately taught and called since the Apostles days,
divine inspiration, and immediate teaching and revelation ceased with the
Apostles. And yet now they are not ashamed to allege, as if some of themselves
were great Prophets and Seers. 6. But I remember a dec^itfull distinction, that
James Dur^am has in his exposition on the Revelation, that prophecy, as it is
taken for an immediate revealing of Gospel truths is now ceased; but he
acknowledges that God may in an extraordinary way indue some with a Spirit of
Prophecy to foretell things to come^ and he mentions some, of our Nation that
had the Spirit of prophecy in former times. This I say is a most dec^itfull
distinction, and altogether without any real ground from Scripture, as if God
would reveal himself to his Church, by immediate revelation as to things of a
lesser moment, and not reveal himself theirunto, as to things of greater, yea
of the greatest moment, such as the truths of the Gospel are^ but we plead not
for any immediate revelation of new Gospel truths not formerly revealed to
others, or not declared sufficiently in the Scriptures: but we say, it cannot
suffice unto us, that the truths of the Gospel have been immediately revealed
unto others, and from, or by them at second hand declared or reported of unto
us, but we need to have the same truths of the Gospel, especially such as
belong to the inward testimony, experiences and feelings of life, as immediately
revealed unto us, as they were unto them, otherwise our faith and knowledge
should be merely humane, traditionall, historical, and but after the letter.
And although what belongs to the historical part of the Scripture, and
particularly concerning Christ his outward comminginto the world, his outward
birth, life, sufferings, miracles, death, return to Judgment, be indeed made
known unto us, by the Scripturs Testimony, yet it is the blessed ^^fe and
Spirit of Christ Jesus immediately revealed in our hearts, and the shining of
his heavenly and divine Light in our inward parts, that both enclines us, to
believe the reports which the Scripturs give us, of things, to be true, and
also opens our understandings to know, and see unto the great and blessed
advantage of them, and unto the Spiritual intent and signification of the
things that belong unto the history itself.

SECTION II.
1. Presbyterian Teachers assume the title of Master, and yet give it not to
the Apostles. 2. S. R. his alleged prophecy against those in Aberdeen who
seperat from the National Presbyterian Church, of no Weight. 3. Diverse
remarkable instances of S. R. his declining from that good condition, he was
once in, and also from his own principles. 4. S. R. His Prophecy inconsistent
with the Presbyterian doctrine of once in grace and ever in grace. 5. As also
with his own judgment that some Independents were gracious men.

But whereas this Writer threatens us with a prophecy of this great Seer (whom
he calls master Rutherford,) [but why should he call him Master Rutherford,
seeing that I can not find that he, or his Brethren gave this title of Master to
any of the Prophets, or Apostles? I wonder wherefore they are so angry at the
title of Lord Bishop and yet so allow the title of Mr. unto their own teachers,
seeing Christ did as expressly forbid the one, as the other.] 2. Let us examine
what Weight is in that alleged prophecy, he told them who had gone from the
Presbyterian way toward the Independents, they would not stand or remain
there, and this, says this Post-scribe, is fullfilled, for they are proceeding
now to join with the people called Quakers. But if this be any prophecy, it
may be such an one, as to this particular, as was that of Cajaphas the high
priest, who said, it was expedient that one should dye for the people: but he
understood not his own prophecy, so nor has S. R. for he meant, that they
would go into more errors, whereas the truth is, they only were advanced
further into more clear discoveryes of Truth, supposed by him and his Brethren
to be errors; and that S. R. as to this particular, was as blind and dark as
Cajaphas was, as touching Christ, I have not the least question, and indeed, if
we will consider the particular time wherein S. R. wrote this Epistle to these
well meaning people in Aberdeen, it will much help to clear it unto the
impartial, how much he was then in the dark himself. Know therefore Reader, that
when S. R. wrote this Epistle to them in Aberdeen, it was not in the time that
he had these fresh and lively enjoyments of Gods presence, and power, which he
had formerly in his more pure times, wherein he both experienced, and declared
of Immediate Revelation and the Spirits immediate teachings, as his Epistles
abundantly witness, and as I intend to show in its proper place, but it was
after he had in a manner altogether lost those blessed enjoyments, and was
become exceeding dark, and barren, which thing ^ay plainly appear by the
strain of his Epistles, writ in his later years, which to him, that has the
true Spiritual discerning, and can savor words, as the mouth savours meat, do
as far come short and faill (as in respect of life) of his Epistles he wrote
in his best times, as a dark night falls short of a bright day, or as a cold
Winter of a warm and fruitful Summer.

But let us hear himself, giving an account, of his inward condition, in his
later times, in the 2. part of his Epistles, Ep. 49. he says, but I am at a
low ebb, as to any sensible communion with Christ, yea as low as any soul can
be, and do scarce know, where I am, and do now make it a question, if any can
go to him, who dwells in Light inaccessible, through nothing, but darkness.
And a little after, but what shall I say, either this is the Lord making grace
a new creation, where there is pure nothing, and sinful nothing to work upon,
or I am gone, I should count my soul engaged to your self, and others there,
with you, if ye would but carry to Christ for me a letter of ciphers, and
nonsense (for I know not how to make language of my condition) only showing
that I have need of his love. Again in the 3. part Ep. 56. he says but for
me, I neither know what he is, nor his Sons name, nor where he dwells. I hear a
report of Christ great enough, and that is all. O what is nearness to him? And
in this Epistle he not only acknowledges his own great deadness and dryness,
but that it is a general thing over professors. O (says he) where are the
some times quickening breathings and influences from heaven, that have
refreshed his hidden ones? The causes of his withdrawings are unknown to us.
Yet afterward he points, truly at the causes, saying, no doubt we have
marred his influences, and have not seconded nor smiled upon his actings upon
us. But let none mistake me, as if I judged that none of the faithful servants
of the Lord did, or could, feell at times, withdrawings of sensible
refreshment, or could not be under great heavyness at times, yea and sense of
deadness, for that I most readily acknowledge: but then such times, are not of
long continuance, where faithfullness is kept unto, but the Lord quickly
returns unto them, and visits them again with rich and plenteous
visitations of his love and life, so that they can give frequent testimonies,
of his living, and powerful appearance in their souls, raising them up
frequently over all heavyness, and though they have sometimes more and some
times less of life, yet they have always some, are always in some sense of
life, unless unfaithfulnes cause the removal of it from them: whereas it is
manifest that the general ^raine of S. R. his Epistles in his later years
holds forth ^uch a general, and constant complaining and ^nguishing, as does,
without all controversy, ^emonstrate an exceeding great change in his inward
condition, from better to worse, and that not only, for an hour, or a day, or
some days, but throughout.

All which do plainly speak forth to me, that this sad and lamentable
withdrawing of the Lord's presence from him, and this so dark a cloud, that he
was brought under, happened unto him, as the effects of his unfaithfulness to
the Lord, and as a real judgment, or chastisement upon him, because of his not
following on to know the Lord more fully, but sitting down by the way, and
opposing further discoveryes, and breakings forth of Light in others, yea
turning back again, and declining from what he once witnessed, of this I shall
give ^ome manifest Instances.

3. First: Notwithstanding so many clear and evident testimonys, to be found in
his former epistles, to God his immediate revelations and teaching^ in himself,
yet after all this, he joined with the Assembly of them, called Divines (though
they may rather be called Dry-vines, and blind Diviners) ^ Westminster, to
oppose all immediate revelation, and to cry down the former ways of Gods
revealing himself to his people, as wholly ceased, since the Apostles days,
affirming that the whole counsel of Go^ was committed to writing. Whereas in
his forme^ Epistles, he plainly declares, that he had the counsel and mind of
God, in some things, not to be found (...) Scripture, as I may show afterward.

Secondly. Although in his former years, as his Epistles declare, he was
exceeding zealous for private meetings, see Ep. 2. part 2. Yet afterward, he
complied with the members of the General Assembly at Aberdeen 1640 to make an
act, against all private meetings, which did exceedingly gratify the profane,
and sadned the hearts of the sober, and, as I heard, S. R. himself was
displeased with the act, yet did cowardly comply to gratify the humor of his
Brethren, without giving any public protest to the contrary, to which I may
add:

Thirdly: His so fervent and hot opposing of further discoverys of God in both
them called Independents, and others, whom they invidiously brande with the
name of Sectaryes, as also upon the other hand:

Fourthly: Although he complains sadly of the Prelates their persecuting him,
for his Conscience, yet after, when Presbytery got up, he joined very keenly,
with those, who persecuted the Prelates, and banished them out of the Nation,
whereas he was only confined, for some time at Aberdeen, where he was very
kindly received by diverse, and this was the greatest persecution he did
undergo by the Prelates, of whom he complained sadly. And in his Ep. 24: part
2* he regreteth his persecution, thus, Our learned Prelat (said he) because we
can not see with his eyes, so far in a millstone, as his Ligh^ does, will not
follow his Master meek Jesus, who waited upon the wearied, and short-breathed
in the way to heaven, and where all see not alike, and some are weaker, he
carries the Lambs in his bosom, and leads gently those that are with young.
But we must either see all the evil of ^eremonys, to be but as indifferent
straws, or suffer no less then to be cast out of the Lords inheritance. Who
sees not, that what strength is in this reasoning (as indeed it is strong) was
as fit against the Prelates being persecuted by S. R. as it was against his
being persecuted by them? If the Prelates could not see with the Presbyterians
eyes, so far in a millstone, as their light does, (to apply S. R. his words
against himself) should he therefore persecut them, or (...) up persecution
against them, as he did, and wrote most bitterly against toleration for
Conscience sake?

And Lastly; addunto all this, that notwithstanding in the time, when
Presbyterians were low, and under sufferings, he wrote thus, to a great man,
Ep. 17 part 1. I am not of that mind, that Tumults or Arms is the way to put
Christ on his throne: yet afterward, how much both he and his Brethren came to
be of that mind, and to preach up fighting and arms as the way to reform,
many thousands yet living do well know yea that they carried on their league and
covenant by force of arms, rather then by that meek way, l^^d down by Christ.
Again it follows in that Epistle, Or that Christ will be served and Truth
vindicated only with the arm of flesh and blood: nay, Christ does his turn
with less dinn, then with garments rolled in blood. But how the word [onely]
comes into the former sentence, I do not understand, for it marreth the sense
of the discourse altogether. I never heard of any professing Christ, that Truth
was to be vindicated only with the arm of flesh and blood, nay, the grosse^t
sort of Papists will not say so, for they will acknowledge, that preaching and
writing are ways also, whereby Truth is to be vindicated: if this be not an
error in the printing, it seems to be fraudulently put in, by the Publisher,
to excuse the Presbyterians so much using the arm of flesh and blood, to carry
on that, which they judged a reformation. And how much garments were rolled in
blood, by the instigation of Presbyterian Teachers, the whole Nation was a
witness; so that many thousands were made widows, and fatherless, by that war,
they stirred up the people unto, expressly contrary to the nature of the
Gospel. These Instances show that S. R. his testimony, especially against any
further discoverys of Truth, has no wieght, he being so dark himself, and
having so palpably contradicted himself, in diverse things of great weight: nor
should any think it ^trange, that S. R. should misjudge them at Aberdeen, to
whom he wrote that Epistle: he never looked on himself, as infallible, nor do I
think that his Brethren judge all his sayings infallible truths, or divine
oracles, otherwise they may be bound up with Paul's Epistles.

But let us hear himself, Ep. 52. 2: part; The Saints are not Christ, there is
no misjudging in him, there is much in us, and a doubt it is, if we shall have
fully one heart, till we have one heaven: our starlight hides us from our
selves, and hides us one from another, and Christ from us all, but he will not
be hidd^n from us.. It is no wonder to me, that S. R. found it so dark a time,
to him, when he wrote this, for he was then at London, carrying on that dark
work, the Westminster Confession and Catechism, which cries down all new
revelations of the Spirit, and cries up sin for term of life: and in that
large description, they give of GOD, out of the Scripture, and of CHRIST, they
altogether omit these two most excellent and significative, that God is Light,
and in him is no darkness at all: and that Christ is the true Light, that
enlighteneth every man, that comes into the world. It ^eemeth verily, the true
Light had small place in their hearts, that they did so altogether forget it.
However it is well, that S. R. confesses, there is much misjudging in himself,
and his Bretbren. It is possible then, that he misjudged these sober people at
Aberdeen, as they well know he did, for whereas he threatened, that if they did
forsake the National Presbyterian Church, Christ would forsake them, (but S. R.
is not Christ, nor are all his sayings Christ's) these people have found more
of Christ, since that time, then before, and they may on good ground, better
believe their own experience, then his rash uncharitable judgings.

I write not these things in the least out of prejudice to S. R. his memory, or
as if I did conclude, that he has not found mercy with the Lord, God forbid I
should harbor any such uncharitable thought, only because the Author of the
Postscript brings in his testimony, against those people at Aberdeen, and
lays such weight upon it, I found my self more concerned in the love and zeal
of God, to take some pains, to remove this stumbling block, out of the way of
the simple, as because such a good man as S. R. judged so, of such a people, and
of such a way, therefore it is bad; which yet will have no more weight with
those, that are truly judicious, then when the Papists tell us, of their
eminent Saints, who had such holy lives, and witnessed so much of spiritual
communion with God, and yet opposed the Waldenses, as great Heretics, and
cried up the Church of Rome, as the only true Church, will have weight with
us, either to believe the one, or the other. And I do not question it, but
Bernard, who lived in the darkest times of Popery, was as holy a man, and had
as much, or rather more spiritual experience, as S. R. as his writings do
declare to any, who have the true spiritual discerning, and shall compare
Bernard's with those of S. R. and yet the same Bernard was a most vehement
opposer of the Waldenses, who were a good people, and bore a true and faithful
testimony in their day, according to the discovery, given them of God, against
the idolatry and superstition of the Church of Rome.

4. But before I leave this particular, I shall take notice of another thing,
that will serve not a little to discover, how weak S. R. his authority is, as
to his peremptory conclusion, he made, concerning those few sober people at
Aberdeen, which was no less, then this, that if they did forsake the National
Church, Christ would forsake them: which threatening the Author of the
Postscript looks upon, to be a divine prediction, confirmed by their since
turning to Quakeri^in, which he calls the abyss of all abominations. But I ask
this Author of the Postscript, Can any divine prediction contradict an article
of Faith? If he say, nay, then I query again, Is it not an article of the
Presbyterian faith, that none truly gracious in the least measure, can totally
fall away from grace, or be totally forsaken of God? This is their express
doctrine; whereupon it will follow, that none truly gracious can fall into
Quakerism, which he calls the abyss of all abominations, the ^otch of hell, yea
pure hellism, and devilism, again seeing their falling into Independency, was
the sin, that provoked God (as this Author would have it) to suffer them to
fall thus, it is clear, that according to S. R. none truly gracious can turn
Independent, seeing to turn Independent, is to be forsaken of Christ, as he does
positively threaten in his Letter, and yet in the same Letter, he tells them
of their work of faith, and labor of love and patience of hop^ in our Lord
Jesus, as also he tells them, of their being sealed unto the day of redemption,
and having received the Spirit by the hearing of Faith.

All which plainly import their being in a state of Grace, and if either he, or
the Author of the Postscript, think that after all this, they could fall away,
so as to be forsaken of Christ, they contradict their own principle. If he
reply, that S. R. judged them to be Saints, only in a judgment of charity: I
Answer, by inquiring, whether this his judgment of charity was true, or false?
from his own spirit, or from the Spirit of God? for there is no midst. If he
say, it was false, and from his own spirit, and not from the Spirit of God,
then surely these People, whom he so threatened, had no cause to fear, or look
upon him, as a Prophet, or divinely inspired, in the writing of this Letter,
seeing he begins with a false judgment, that is confessed to be from his own
spirit, and not from the Spirit of the Lord. And seeing the Author of the
Postscript will allow him to have been greatly mistaken, in his judging them to
be Saints, we may with as much ground, in all reason, judge him to be mistaken,
when he did so threaten them, that Christ would forsake them: but if they never
had Christ, how could he forsake them?

5. We need not fear such predictions, as carry in their bosom flat
contradictions, but S. R. did not think Independency inconsistent with the
Grace of God, for Ep: 53: part 3. he gives an express testimony of some
Independents, particularly Thomas Godwyn Jeremiah Buroughs, that they were
gracious men, so he tells that he conceived of them: which abundantly proves,
he thought men might be truly gracious, and yet Independents, and mighty
opposits to Presbyteriall government, as his words in that Epistle show.

SECTION III.
1. The Presbyterian Reformation not a matter to make so great a boast of, as
the Author does. 2. That S. R. said in Presbytry, the letter only was
reformed, and scarce that, and that God will not build his Zion on that skin of
reformation. 3. Many thousands of the Presbyterian Church not fit to be members
of a well ordered humane society. 4. A precious life stirring among many
Presbyterians, especially in the West, 40 years ago, and upwards. 5. The
Presbyterians did not go foreward, but backward, and so provoked the Lord. 6.
The body, or generality of the Presbyterian Church full of ignorance, and
guilty of swearing, drinking drunk, and other gross sins. 7. Some, among the
Presbyterians, that belong to the true Church of God. 8. A National Church, as
National, can not be a Church of Christ. 9. The Presbyterian Church deeply
tinctured with the great sins of persecution and hypocrisy, 10. Other Churches,
beyond the Presbyterian, since the primitive times.

Now let us proceed to hear further, what this Author says, page 1. lin. 22.
Forsakers of a Church, so often honored by receiving signal testimonys of the
Bridegrooms love toward her, as his spouse, in rejoicing over her, with
singing, and so frequently helped to give him testimonys of her endeared
affection to him, as her Head, Husband, supreme Lord and-Governour. In this we
may through Grace humbly boast, nay despise or envy who will, we can not do
less, without being guilty of the basest ingratitude, that we have not been
inferior to (O blessed be his Grace, to whom we ow it, and it is for the
commendation of his glorious goodness, we mention it) whatever we were beyond,
any Church we know upon the Earth.

Answer.
1. That this is not an humble boast through Grace, as the Author would have
it, but a proud boast through flesh, I hope by the Grace of God, to make
appear. The Apostle says 1 Timothy 3. That in the last days perilous times shall
come, for men shall be lovers of their own selves, covetous, boasters, proud,
blasphemers, etc. having a form of godlyness, but denying the power thereof,
from such turn away. That the reformation of the Church of Scotland was not a
matter to make so great a boast of, as this Author does, I need go no further,
for a proof, then to S. R. himself, who was so great a S^e^, in this man's
account.

3. Let us then hear, what S. R. says, of the Presby^erian Reformation, Ep.
32. part. 2. and this in the year 1640. When Presbytery was up most over the
whole Nation, and the Bishops were all excommunicated, and fled. It is true
(says he, in his Ep^ to John Fennick) in a great part, what ye write of this
Kirk, that the letter of Religion only is reformed, and scarce that; I do not
believe our Lord will build his Zion in this Land, upon this skin of
reformation, so long as our scumm remains, and our heart-idols are kept, this
work must be at a stand. And therefore our Lord must yet sift this Land, and
search us with candles, etc. This is a notable testimony, and it appears
plainly unto me, that this John Fennick, to whom he wrote, had a true sight of
the defectivness of the Presbyterian reformation, of which he wrote in a letter
to S. R. and which S. R. did as freely acknowledge. In which Testimony note
these particulars. 1. That he says, it is true in great part, that the Letter
in Religion only is reformed where take notice of the word [onely.] 2. That
even scarcely the Letter is reformed, so that the Presbyterian reformation, was
but as the skin of a man's body, wanting flesh, bones, and sinews. 3. That the
Presbyterian National Church was not come to the true fundation of a Gospel
Church; which his words clearly hold forth. I do not believe (said he) our Lord
will build his Zion upon this skin of reformation: therefore, not the skin, but
some better foundation, not yet discovered to the Presbyterians, must be that
on which God will build his Church, according to S. R. And indeed this
abundantly proves, that the Presbyterians began too hastily to build their
Church, and did not follow Gods method, so that the Presbyterian Church could
not say unto the Lord, as Job said, chap. 10: verse 10. Have thou not poured me
out as milk, and curdled me like cheese, thou have clothed me with skin and
flesh, and have fenced me with bones and sinews; thou have granted me life and
favor, and thy visitation has preserved my spirit. But the National
Presbyterian Church being only letter and skin, having neither flesh nor
bones, not sinews, how can it be a true Church of Christ? how can it have life
and spirit? And surely that is a great defect, for as the bare skin of a man,
can not be called a man, so nor can the bare skin of a Church be called a
Church. But 4. he tells them of the remaining of their scum, and heart-idols,
this shows they were no true spouse of Christ, for he will marry himself to
none, who keep idols in their hearts. And 5. he tells, that the Land must be
sifted, and searched with candles; and surely that was very needful, for the
Presbyterian reformation was but as a wide riddle, that did let through much
more cha^^ and straw, then true corn. I mean chaffy and strawy Professors, to
be members of the Church.

3. Many thousands of them really not deserving to be members of a well ordered
humane society, because of the grossness and scandalousness of their
conversation; far less of such a Divine fellowship, and common wealth, as the
true Church of Christ is. I do not in the least doubt of it, but the Lord had
in that day, as I believe he now has, many, that were precious untohim, among
them, called Presbyterians; and did, and do belong to the Catholic and
universal Church, even as I believe, God has many such, not only among them,
called Independents, and Baptists, but also among Lutherans, Episcopalians, and
Papists.

4. Moreover that about 40 years ago and upwards, there was a very precious
life appearing, and breaking forth among them called Presbyterians, in some
corners in this Nation, especially in some places in the West, I do not
question, yea it is abundantly sealed in my heart, that it was truly so: and
happy had they been, if they had kept faithful unto that; for a precious
tenderness there was, and a precious sense of life, and feeling of Gods blessed
power among them; especially at their private meetings. And also, this life and
power did in a blessed measure attend some Preachers, in those days, in so much
as diverse particulars were wonderfully reached and changed in some parts, and a
good simplicity was in diverse, so that I am fully persuaded it was a time of
love, wherein the Lord allured them, and led them into the wilderness, and
spoke comfortably unto them, or spoke unto their hearts, as the words of the
Scriptur are. (Hosea, 2.) And God remembered their simplicity and tenderness,
and this first love and kindness of their youth was very dear unto him,
although even in that day, there were many errors and weaknesses among them yet
the Lord winked at these things, pitying them, for his Seeds sake, and with a
regard to that honest simplicity and love that was among them; who had they
continued faithful, to that manifestation, which was as the dawning of the
morning, no doubt the day of the Lord would have arisen among them and the true
Light would have shined in that brightness, as to have discovered unto them,
those errors they should have forsaken, and these Truths they should have
embraced.

5. But alas! this glory of God did not long continue to appear among that
handful, who in measure saw it, and tasted of the sweetness of it, but they
not following the Lord, in his further requirings, and leadings, but standing
still, and in diverse things going back again (as I have showed in diverse
particulars, in my book called Help in time of need, printed in the year,
1665.) the Lord was provoked to withdraw (...) presence by degrees, from them,
till at last (...) ^ecame opposers and persecuters of the sa^e appearance of
God in others, rising up in more power and glory. But the greatest power and
glory, that ever shined in this Nation, in the purest and best times, since the
first reformation from Popery, reached only some few particular meetings, and
persons; by which they came to have a sense of life, and feeling of Gods power
in their meetings.

6. Whereas still the body of the National Church continued full of thick
darkness, knowing nothing of the power of God, and for most part extremely
ignorant of the very first Doctrinal principls of Chri^^ianity, as also they
still continue at this day. Nor was the strong current, and stream of
profanity, ordinary cursing and swearing by the blessed Name of God, drinking
drunk, and other such scandalous practices, utterly inconsistent with the least
measur of true Christianity, ever stopped from running through the body of this
Nation: but exceedingly abounded ^n most places of the Nation, even when the
Presbyterian doctrine worship, discipline, and government had most sway. Of the
truth of this there are thousands of witnesses yet alive, but especially these
^wo abominable sins of ordinary swearing, and pro^aning the Name of God, and
drinking drunk still ^emained among the plurality of their Church ^embers,
among which, those called the Com^ons, had their kind of swearing, and these,
called ^he Gentry, had theirs; so that the ordinary way ^f swearing would not
serve their turn; but as they ^xceeded the Commons in outward greatness, so
(...) thought it a property, to exceed them, in ^^earing more great and
terrible oaths, and these (...) called, Gentl-man-oaths, which two fearful
(...) of later years, with many more, especially for^^cation and adultery are
much increased, and ^^ily increasing in that, called, the National Church,
^^ich, if not prevented with repentance, the ^^rd will certainly punish, with
great and sore judg^ents.

7. So that although I do freely acknowledge, that the Lord had, and has among
the Presbyterians some who belong to his true Church, yet I cannot, i^ the
least, acknowledge, that ever the National Presbyterian Church was a true
Church. And that no^ only by reason of the gross and scandalous lives o^ the
far greatest number of their Church Members utterly inconsistent with true
piety; but also by reason of their constitution, way of worship, discipline, and
government.

8. Which makes it impossible, that ever any National Church can be a true
Church of Christ, I mea^ their sense of a National Church, that is to say,
(...) National, so that simply, because men are natives and living in the
Nation, they and all their posteri^^ must be members of the Church; and if they
be (...) willing unto it, they must be compelled.

This is utterly inconsistent with the way, the Christ, and the Apostles took
to build the (...) Church, which began (I mean, the primiti^^ Church in the
days of the Apostles) in particul^^ persons and familys, and so spread more and
mo^^ yet never did take in, the whole body of a Natio^^ as such. It were indeed
greatly to be wished, (...) not only this Nation, but all Nations of the (...)
were the true Church of Christ, but men should (...) make such preposterous
have, to make Nation^ Churches, by mere humane law and power; (...) they should
wait on the Lord, and join with (...) ^o do it in his way, and by his power.
For it is the power of the Lord, that is to make the Nations a willing people,
and to bow them to a true subjection to the S^^pter, and dominion of Christ
Jesus. Bare humane laws, and edicts, and decrees will never do it, for indeed
this has been the ground and rise of all the persecutions, that have been in
Christendom, first in the times of the Arian and Eutychian Emperors, and next,
when Popery prevailed, and Popish Emperors and Kings made compulsive Laws, and
decrees, that all should join to the Popish Churches every where, which were
National: so that this form of a National Church under the Gospel, is not from
Christ, and the Apostles; for all the primitive Churches were Congregational,
and not National, upwards of the first three hundred years. Yea I see no
National Church set up in the world, till after Constantin, and though
Constantin gave great encouragment to all, to become Christians, yet I find
not, that he forced any, to take on the profession of Christianity. But these,
that will have a National Church, they will have all others to bow to them, and
join with them, and this gives a natural and most necessary rise to
persecution: so that all those, whom she can not persuade to take on her yoke,
and become her members, the only remedy in the next place, is to force and
compel them, if she can; otherwise her project is spoiled, and she will not be
National. And as the National Church is always a persecuting Church (it is her
very nature) so it must always be exceeding Hypocritical, seeing it begeteth
thousands to be its children and members, by the mere will and power of man,
which only makes hypocrites, for the true Children of God (who are the true
children of the true Church of God, Jerusalem from above, who is free with all
her Children) are born, not of the will of the flesh, nor of man, but of GOD:
so that all, that are born of the will and power of man, are but bastards, and
not true Children of GOD, nor yet of the true Church.

9. And indeed that the National Presbyterian Church was deeply tinctured with
these two great sins of Pers^c^tion and Hypocrisy, we need seek no other
Instances, but what most men now living, in the Nation, have seen with their
eyes. They did not only persecut the Bishops, who did well foreesee before
hand, the cruel usage, they might expe^^ from them, and therefore generally
fled out of the Nation, before they had opportunity to lay hands on them. But
some of their party, that they got hol^ of, they made them feel the dint, as
namely, Bishop Wishart, who then was not a Bishop, but only of their party,
this man they imprisoned, in the Tolbooth of Edinburgh, and used so hardly and
unkindly, that he could hardly get any, to minister to his outward necessitys,
but had almost perished with want of necessary things for his body. And the
Lord Cremond, (who was no Clergy man, but only a favourer of Bishops, being
then an Advocat) because he would not bow to their wills, was constrained to
flee the Nation. Not to mention the fineings, and other oppressions, that many
endured on that account, and the Papists also, some of whom had almost their
all swept away, and many fled. Besides some few scattered ones, whom they
called Sectarys, they grievously persecuted, and threatened, as namely John
Garden of Tillifroskie a Baptist, whom they imprisoned in Edinburgh, for a long
time, and reduced to so great outward necessitys, that no body durst well
minister to him, what he wanted. But was the Presbyterian National Church any
more favorable to their lawful Prince? Did they not also extend their power
to the utmost against him, to compel him? And what the sad effects were, which
this produced, I am loath to mention; so that none were spared, but all, Great
and small, must fall down, and worship this beast, as it was in the darkest
times of Popery: otherwise they knew what they were to expect. And it would
saden a man's heart, to think, to what perplexity many simplehearted men were
brought, while things were carried thus: on the one hand the Kirk issued forth
her acts, that people should do so and so; and on the other hand the Lawful
Magistrate issued forth acts to the contrary; and so the body of the Nation was
divided, some following the one, some the other, until they ceased not to make
the three Nations a field of blood. And all this happened by that persecuting
and compelling spirit in the Presbyterian Church, that is the very life of such
a Church, without which it can not subsist, as such.

Next, as to her Hypocrisy, we need go no further, then the various changes of
the far greatest number of her Church Members, and especiaily her Teachers,
one while Episcopal; again Presbyterian, and to wheel round again, Episcopal:
and these changes all falling within a short time, even upon the self same
persons, they who were zealous for Episcopacy, and cried it up yesterday, the
next day zealous against it, crying it as much down, and then up again: one
while preaching against festival days, and set forms of Worship, then for
them, then against them, then lastly for them again. All this bewrayes horrible
and detestable Hypoorisy, especially in the Teachers, who pretend to preach the
Word of GOD, and the Truth of Christ. Whereas the Word of the Lord is One
forever, and the Truth is the same always, and is not yea and nay. And it is a
thing, as manifest, as the light of the day, that the Teachers, even of the
Presbyterian Church, have been generally and for the most part, Self-seeking,
worldly minded and covetous men, who loved pleasures and riches, more then God.
And this the M^gistrat did well know, and saw the best way to prevail with them,
was to bribe them, with augmentations and benefices, as they did in the year
1649, and at diverse other times, as they saw occasion. And in the time of great
burdens upon the Land of Cesses and Taxations, that many honest familys were
redacted to great straits, by reason of these public burdens, yet the
Presbyterian Preachers table was as full as ever, his cup did overflow with
outward abundance, he must bear no part of the public burden, but the burdens
of the people must be augmented to give him augmentations. But alas! This
Presbyterian kingdom is now fallen, and great is the fall of it, especially it
falls heavy upon such, as the Author of the Postscript; who want those golden
days, of gathering up their stipends and augmentations, but are fain to be at
their purchase, or conform: which some have so much sense of shame still
remaining in them, as suffers them not to do, yet they fume and rage, and the
honest, harmeless people, called, Quakers must be the main butt and object of
their wrath: but such paper bullets and darts that contain nothing ^olid, as
this Postscript, being full of horrid lies and false accusations, will make
little execution against us, but certainly return upon their heads, with shame
and loss.

10. All this shows that the Presbyterian Church was not so glorious a
Church, as she did take her self to be: And many in the Island, and elsewhere,
on the one hand did judge the Congregational Churches far beyond her: And
those, called Baptists, I mean the more sober kind of them, beyond both: yea
the Lutheran Church, and the Church of England, at lest as to diverse
particulars in doctrine, is really beyond her. But what shall I say, concerning
the Waldenses, who had all what the Presbyterian Church had, that was
commendable, and diverse other things^ that they want, and wherein they do not
imitat them, although they boast to be their successors? For the Preachers of
the Waldenses, were Laymen most of them, and wrought with their hands, as the
Teachers of the primitive Church did, and had no s^t stipends or salarys, but
preached freely, yea Peter Wal^^, the first, a most famous Preacher of that
People, was a mere Layman, and had not Philosophy, but was a Merchant in the
Town of Lions in France, whose labor the Lord did wonderfully bless, and the
labor of such honest, plain, simple men, as he was.

SECTION IV.
1. That some good men have been in the Presbyterian Church, proves not, that
she was a true Church. 2. In the darkest times of Popery, God raised up some
good men, and Prophets in the Popish Church, yet the Popish Church no true
Church of Christ. 3. Few Sects but have had some good men among them. 4. The
Presbyterians in our days shamefully are declined from the footsteps and spirit
of th^se ancient good men, that were among them. 5. The Presbyterian Church
guilty of treacherous practices. 6. Christians should not make war against the
Magistrate. 7. Presbyterians sufferings not pure and cleanly. 8. The Episcopal
Church had its Sufferers and Martyrs also. 9. The Presbyterian Church,
especially their Teachers have much blood-guiltiness upon them. 10. If the
house of God under the Law, was not to be built by men of blood, far less
under the Gospel. 11. GOD will not honor the Presbyterian party to build his
Zion, or Gospell-Church in this Land. 12. Yet he will make use of many among
them, after he has ^^ashed them from such bloody, Antichristian and unsound
principles and practices. 13. Of this they were warned, eleven years ago, in my
book, called Help in time of need, printed in the year 1665. 14. The
Presbyterian Church of Scotland guilty of Apostasy and spiritual adultery,
proved fully out of S. R. his Epistles. 15. S. R. his Faith uncertain, and he
doubtful in his later days, concerning the Covenant, its being made an
instrument of Reformation. 16. Some other testimonys of Great Presbyterian
Teachers, that God had forsaken the Presbyterian Church of Scotland.

1. But if the Author of the Posts^ript think to get a fame to the Presbyterian
Church, because of some noted men for piety, that have been among them; It is
easily answered, that they did not ow this piety to the Presbyterian Church,
but to the Grace of God, which is Universal, For the Grace of God, that
brings Salvation, has shined in All (so Beza translates it) Tit: 2: 10, 11.
and this Grace teaches to deny ungodlyness, and worldly lusts, and to live
righteously, and soberly, and godlily in this present world. And whoever in any
age or place of the world joined their hearts unto this Grace, and did believe
and obey its teachings, it made them good and pious men, so that they did
excel others, in many good things; although by reason of the darkness and
corruption of the ages and places, where they lived, the prejudice of education
and custom prevailed so far, that they also were dark and ignorant in many
things. Yet the Lord regarding their sincerity, winked at their ignorance in
those things. And thus the Apostle Paul takes notice of some among the Gentiles
in the time of Heathenism, who were a Law unto themselves, and did by Nature (to
wit, the Divine Nature of the Word ingrafted in them, James 1. or by their own
nature, restored and repaired by the Grace of God (as Augustine expounded that
place) the things contained in the Law, and such was Socrates among the
Gracians, whom Justin Martyr in one of his Apologys, did expressly call a
Christian, and classeth him with Abraham, etc.

2. Also all along the dark times of popery, the Lord raised up some even in
the very heart of the popish Church, that excelled others in virtue and piety,
and were as Lights shining in a dark place, and witnesses to the truth, some in
some things and some in others; and yet even these men lived still in the
Popish Church, and in too many things were carried away, and tinctured with
diverse corruptions, and superstitions. Of this Illyricus in his Catologus
^estium veritatis, gives an account; And the Author of Fasciculus temporum,
with diverse other Historians; And particularly our countryman Alexander Petry,
in his Church History from the year 600 unto the year 1600, as in the seventh
Century, Gregory, called the Great: and Isidorus in the eighth Century: John
Damascen, and Aponius in the ninth century: Claudius Turinensis Bishop of
Turin, and Rabanus Maurus, in the tenth Century, (a very dark age.) Theophilact
Archbishop of Bulgaria and Smaragdus a Benedictin Abbot in the eleventh
Century: Berno and Fulbert Bishop of Carnatum in the twelfth Century: Hugo de
S. Victore and Bernard of Clarevall in the thirteenth age: Gulielmus Bishop of
Paris, and Ioachim Abbot of Calabria, in the fourteenth age or Century: Dantes
Aligerius and Robertus Gallus; this Robertus Gallus was a Franciscan Friar, and
had prophetical visions, which were interpreted to him, by the Spirit of God,
there is a Treatise under his name, printed together with the Prophecyes of
Hildegardis, a Woman prophetess in the Church of Rome, of both whose
Prophecyes, Fox takes special notice, in his Martyrology. And in the fifteenth
Century Vincentius a Venetian, who also prophesied against the Clergy, and
Theodorick Vrias: There was also another Theodorick Bishop of Croatia, that
prophesied in this same age, that the Church of Rome should be brought to
naught, and that Justice which has been shut up in darkness, shall come into
Light, and the true Church shall flourish in Godlyness, more then she has
done. In this age also lived John Huss, a pious and virtuous man, whom the
Papists burnt, as an heretic, and yet the same good Man retained diverse Popish
opinions.

Now in the sixteenth century, the reformation from the grossness of Popery
began by Luther, in Germany, and the Lord raised up diverse other instruments,
in other nations, as in France, in England and also in Scotland, and many
worthy men dyed martyrs, and sea^ed to the truth with their blood, before the
Presbyterian Reformation, yea some that were Bishops in England, dyed martyrs,
for the truth, as Cranmer, Ridly, Latim^r.

Therefore, albeit I grant, that there has been diverse pious men, among the
Presbyterians, and some who enjoyed communion with God in Spirit, and some also
who had a Propheti^all Spirit, and were accompanied with the power of God, in
their ministry, 40 years ago, and upwards; and were made blessed instruments of
God, to many souls, in that day, to whom the Lord gave signal Testimonys of
his love and of his admitting them at times, unto near communion with him:
among whom were chiefly, John Welsh, Robert Bruce, Davidson and Patrick
Simpson, and diverse others, concerning whom, the Author of the fullfilling of
the Scripturs, gives an account. And I do verily believe, they were pious men,
and had precious feelings of the life, and power of God, which did at times
accompany them, in their ministry, whereby many souls were reached, and
converted unto God. And as touching some things, related by the Author,
concerning these men, I may afterward in its due place, take notice, which
will not a little make for the present testimony of the people, called Quakers.
But all this will not in the least prove, that the Presbyterian Natio^all
Church was the true Church of Christ, and needs no further Reformation from
many things then it will prove, that the Popish Church was the true Church of
Christ, which (as I have already mentioned) had pious and virtuous men, and
some of them endued with the Prophetical Spirit. Also the Episcopal English
Church, in the days of Q. Ma^^ had very excellent men, that were Bishops, and
some of them were burned for the truth, yet thi^ proves not that the English
Church was sufficiently reformed, or that those called Puritans, who would not
conform to her, did sin, or were guilty of Schism. And I suppose the
Presbyterians will no^ deny, but Luther for piety and zeal, may be compared
with any of these in Scotland, and yet Luther was no Presbyterian, and the
Lutherans have had since Luther, diverse excellent men, of whom I ca^ not
forbear to mention Johannes Arnd, who has writ a more Spiritual treatise of
Spritual doctrine, containing more spiritual and profitable Doctrine, then any
book, that ever I could see, writ by any Presbyterian, and yet the Luther^ns
differr fa^^ from Presbyterians. Nor should the Presbyterians in Scotland so
exalt themselves, above all other Churches, because some in their Church were
endued with a Prophetical Spirit, for as I have already mentioned, diverse in
the Popish Church had the Spirit of Prophecy, as Fox, in his Martyrology does
bear witness, and^ I must needs say, that as for Spiritual doctrine, some
Mysticks among the Papists, have exceeded any P^esbyterian Writer, that ever I
could yet see.

And to speak freely, that one little book De imitation^ Christ^, said to be
written, by Thomas a Kempis a Popish Monck, is really to me, a more useful
book, for spiritual doctrine, then all the Presbyterian books in the world,
that ever I saw; and I believe has fewer errors in it. I except the last book,
concerning the Sacrament of the Altar, because, for good reasons, it is judged
not to be his, but a spurious birth of some other Writer, and it is not to be
found in some of the most ancient coppys.

This little book of Thomas a Kempis has had an exceeding great reception
among Protestants of all sorts, only some peevish, narrow-spirited
Presbyterians can not endure to hear it commended, because, writ by one, that
lived in the Church of Rome, in a dark time; and yet the doctrine of it
excell^th that of their most spiritual Preachers. It is a most unreasonable
thing, to cry up a faction, or party, or particular Church, because of some
excellent men, that have been among them, and perhaps zealous for that way.

3. For indeed few Professions, or Sects in Christianity, but have had some
excellent men in them. The Baptists in Holland have had some, also they had
faithful and zealous men, that dyed Martyrs, and were put to death, by
Papists. And both Independents and Baptists in England, had some excellent men
among them, whose labors no doubt the Lord did bless with his presence. Few
hills so barren, but some exc^llent medicinal herbs grow upon them, and in
their bowels there are some mines of gold and silver, and some deserts yield
Diamonds, and precious stones.

So I shall most willingly grant, there have been holy and spiritual men, in
the Presbyterian Church, that have known ^ommunion with God in spirit, in a
blessed measure, and were faithful in the talents given them of God* And I
believe, their souls are entered into everlasting rest, and their memory is as
a box of precious ointment, among others of the Lord Witnesses in other
professions and places of the world. And though they have been h^noured by
receiving signal testimonys of ^he Great Bridegroomes love, toward them, as
his spouse, in re^oycing over them with singing, and frequently helped to giv^
him testimonys of their endeared affection to him, ^ Head, Husband, Supreme
Lord and Governor; yet I altogether deny, that such high commendation does
belong to the National Presbyterian Church, in the heap, or indeed to any
considerable part o^ her, for they, who had any measure of true piet^ among
them, did certainly bear as small proportion unto the body of the Nation, as
the white of the eyes, and teeth in an Ethiopian, or Black mor, does unto the
rest of his body.

4. But alas! The Presbyterians in our days, both Teachers and People are
sh^mefully declined from the footsteps and spirit of those ancient good men,
and this generation now living is no more of the true faith and spirit of these
Worthy men, then the Jews, that put Christ to death, were of the faith and
spirit of Abraham.

5. But that the Presbyterian Church deserves ^o such commendation, as this
Author gives her, as ^eing so frequently helped to give him testimonys of ^er
endeared affection to him, as her head, husband, ^upream Lord, and Governor,
we need go no ^urther to bring witnesses, to confute this, then (...) own
treacherous practices, upon every occasion, (...) had to show her infidelity.
For although she ^^yed up the Presbyterian goverenment, as being (...) a Divine
right, and the only government esta^^^shed by Christ in the Church, yet at two
seve^ll times, the National Presbyterian Church, when ^^elacy was imposed by
the supreme Magistrate, (...) received it, and at lest in outward appearance,
^^atever she was in her heart, turned Prelatical; (...) most shamefully
conformed to that, which (...) has often called Antichristian.

The first time was, when King James the Sixth ^ught in Prelacy, which lasted
about 28 years.

And the second time, when it was again introduced of late years, and is at
this present day remaining.

And I can not think, that the Author of the Postscript thinks the National
Church of Scotland, at this present time Presbyterian, otherwise she is a great
Hypocrit, seeing she does outwardl^ conform to Episcopacy: so that whereas
there ar^ reckoned to be in this Nation, about a thousan^ Parishes, yet, so
far as I can understand, or learn^ there is not One parish in all the Nation,
that (...) k^ept it self entirely free from conformity. And it (...) welknown,
that the body of the Nation is conformed to Episcopacy, and the far greatest
number^ the Presbyterian Teachers, conformed also; (...) some of them, who were
zealous for presbyteri^^ government, are become Bishops. And inde^^ they, who
have not conformed, bear little or (...) proportion considerable to them who
have: (...) the Presbyterian Non- conformist Teachers have g^^nerally
manifested base and unchristian cowardi^^ in running away from their flocks,
through fear suffering, and exposing them, to those, they (...) to be Wolves,
and some of them are fled beyo^^ Sea, Others lurk in corners here and there,
(...) keep private conventicles, where many times (...) preach Sedition against
their L^wfull Prince, instigation of whom, that insurrection happ^^ed 1666.

6. And some of them have printed books, in defense of the lawfulness of making
wa^r against the Suprem Magistrate, in order to reestablish the Presbyterian
Government, a way flat contradictory to the nature of the Gospel, to the
express commands of Christ, and also to the practice of the primitive
Christians, to make any carnal or military resistance, so much as in their own
defense, which lasted for hundreds of years, so that it is but of later times,
that any professing the Name of Christianity, did offer to defend themselves by
carnal weapons, against their Lawful Magistrates. During the ten persecutions,
not so much as a shadow of any such thing, is to be found in Church history.
And yet, as Tertullian gives an account, who lived in the heart of those
persecutions, it was not for want of number, or strength, that they did not
oppose themselves in their own defense, but only because they were Christians.

7. And although suffering be a thing greatly commended, and also commanded
under the Gospel, and is as S. R. calls it, in one of his Epistles, a great
part of the Ministry, yet I know not if the Presbyterians can instance one
single person of them all, since the late revolution, that have suffered, or do
at present suffer, for Conscience sake, in a pure and cleanly way: I mean for
matters purely Evangelical, and out of pure Conscience; for such of them, who
did suffer, had not keept their hands clean, from too much incroaching upon
affairs of the Stat, and power of the Magistrate, so that they had little cause
to glory in those sufferings.

8. And if the Presbyterians think, they have had any Martyrs for Presbyterian
government, yet this will not commend their Church above the Episcopal, which
has had its Sufferers also, who have suffered unto death; and whose Sufferings
were as much matters of Conscience unto them, as the Presbyterians was unto
them. Yea the Episcopal Church gloryeth, that she had one of the most religious
Kings, that either then was, or had been in the world for many ages, a Martyr
for her, whose life was worth many thousands of others.

9. And in very truth, the Presbyterian Church will never be able to purge her
self of the iniquity of the killing of many thousands, in the three Nations, by
the occasion of a most bloody war, raised up through the instigation of the
Presbyterian Teachers. I am fully persuaded of it, that the Presbyterian Church
has as much blood-guiltiness lieing on her head, unwashed off, as any People,
called a Church, that I know of in the world, next unto the bloody Church of
Rome. And as she has drunk the blood of many, so blood has been given her to
drink, and it is to be feared, that more will be given to her, as a just
judgment from the hand of God, except she repent, and condemn that
blood-thirsty spirit, that has too much led and influenced her. And I am well
ass^red of it, that a bloody Church is no^rue Church of Christ, for the true
Church of Christ is washed by the blood of Christ, from all lust or desire to
shed blood: She can suffer her blood to be shed, for Christ; but she is white
and pure from the blood of others.

10. The Lord would not have David to build his house, because he had been a man
of war, and had shed much bl^^d. O! that the Presbyterians could read the
spiritual signification of this! If the house of God under the Law, was not to
be built by a man of blood, (although in the sheding of the blood of the Lords
enemies, he was allowed) shall the house of God under the Gospel be built by
men of blood; And who have shed so much of the blood of their very Brethren, of
the same profession, both as Christians and as Protestants; only differing
from them, as to some small circumstances, and worldly matters? Surely Nay.

11. And if there were no more, this one consideration might be enough, to
peswad any man, that believes the Scripture testimony, and has the least ^rue
understanding of the nature of a Gospel Church, that God will never honor the
Presbyteri^n party to build his Zion, or Gospel Church, in ^his Land: nay, from
the Lord God I have seen, and do see her rejected, from having any part, or
portion in this honorable work.

12. Although I do believe, the L'ord will make use of many among that people,
but it will be after he has washed them, and purged from them the spirit of
blood, and of much other filthyness, by his Spirit of judgment and of burning,
that he will make them as stones of his building. But I know it from the Lord
God, by his Spirit in me, and from the same I declare it, that the Presbyterian
Church* as such, and as holding such bloody and Antichristian, and otherwise
unsound principles and doctrines, shall never be honored of the Lord, to build
his true Zion in this Land; it is the Word of the Lord God in my heart, and the
mouth of the Lord has spoken it, and sealed it again and again in me; and
their laboring to do such a thing, shall be but as men laboring in the fire,
and like unto them, who essayed again to build Ier^cho.

13. And this I warned them of from the Lord, about eleven years ago, in my
book, called Hel^ in time of Need, printed in the year 1655, which was a year
before their insurrection in the West. Yet I most assuredly know, that the Lord
will buil^ unto himself a glorious Church in this Land, and therein I aggree
with S. R. What he writs in diverse Epistles, as Ep. 7. part 1., a dry wind upon
Scotland, but neither to fan, nor cleanse; but out of all question, when the
Lord has cut down his forest, the after-growth of Lebanon shall flourish,
they shall plant vines in our mountains, and a cloud shall yet fill the Temple.
Again, Ep. 55. part 1. there shall be a fair green young garden, for Christ in
this Land, etc. Again Ep. 70. I believe our Lord once again shall water with
his dew, the withered hill of mount Zion in Scotland, and come down, and make a
new marriage again; as he did long since. (he adds) Remember our Covenant. See
also Ep. 34. and 2: part Ep. 56, and 57. and part 3: Ep. 13.

14. But what means the matter? These words of S. R. hold forth a great back
sliding and apostasy of the Presbyterian Church, according to this great Seer
S. R. Otherwise what nee^d of a new marriage: but let us hear him express his
mind more distinctly, concerning this so highly commended Presbyterian Church.
part I: Ep. 34. he says, We, woe, woe be to apostat Scotland: there is wrath,
and a cup of the red wine of the wrath of God Almighty in the Lords hand, that
they shall drink, and spue, and fall, and not rise again. and part 1. Ep. 43.
But this Nation has forsaken the fountain of living Waters. And part 1. Ep.
54. This is a black day, a day of clouds and darkness, for the roof-tree of my
Lord Jesus his fair temple is fallen, and Christ's back is toward Scotland. and
part 1. Ep: 1. yet more distinctly, My heart is (...) indeed for my mother
Church, that has played the barlot with many lovers, her husband has a mind
to sell her, for her horrible transgressions, and heavy will the hand of the
Lord he upon this backsliding Nation. All this, and much more might be cited
out of his Epistles, do prove, that S. R. had no such thoughts of the
Presbyterian Church, which he calls his mother Church, in the time he wrote
those Epistles, which was at Aberdeen, the best time he ever knew, and had
great nearness unto the Lord.

15. And whatever faith S. R. had of the Lord his appearing again, to reform
the Land, by the Covenant; yet we find, that in his later days, his faith was
very wavering and uncertain, touching the Covenant its being made an instrument
of reformation: for thus he writs, Ep. 70. part 2. I believe he comes quickly,
who will remove our darkness, and will shine gloriously in the Isle of Britan,
as a crowned King, either in a formally sworn Covenant, or in his own: glorious
way; which I leave to the determination of his infinite Wisdom and Goodness. It
seems he had some other way in his view, as possible, if not probable, which
God would take to reform the Church, then the Covenant, (that instrument of so
much blood) Hour this is certain, his faith was very uncertain about the
matter now in his dyeing days: and he speaks not at all as any true Prophet of
the Lord, in this matter. Albeit the Presbyterians generally are still so
blind, and dark, that they positively judge, that the covenant will be a main
thing, that God will make use of, to reform the Land, and that both Covenant
and Presbytery will up again, where as S. R. is unclear in the matter.

16. And I could tell them of one of themselves, whom they judge no less then
a martyr for the cause, that published his mind in print, before his death,
some years, that God had forsaken their National Church, and was not like to
return to her again: and he answers all the common reasons from Sciptur, or
the Covenant, that seemed to prove, that the Lord would return unto them, and
plainly shows the weakness and invalidity of them. The book is in the hands
of many which I have read, and I had it from the mouth of an honest faithful
man, that he heard John Livingston, say, in prayer, Lord since Dumbar, thou
have spit in our face, and since that never looked over thy shoulder to us
again. This is he, whom the Author of the Postscript, calls that great man of
God, and this prayer he had in a certain family in Aberdeen. And this is that
Church, that was such an apostat, and whom the Lord had so forsaken by the
confession of their chief Seers, and who indeed was never a true Gospel
Church, that we the people called Quakers have forsaken, and we are resolved by
Gods grace never to return unto her, for the Lord has said unto us, let them
come unto you, but go not ye unto them, the Lord has added diverse, who were
among them, and under that profession unto us, and will add many more, yea
thousands in due time, for the Lord has a precious seed to gather out from
among them. And there are many among them, I know, who have true breathings
after the Lord, and these in due time the Lord will regard, and bring them to
his Zion, which he has begun to build in great glory, even in, and among the
people, called in Scorn Quakers.

SECTION V.
1. What is said against the Presbyterian Church in general, as national and as
being so guilty of persecution and blood, is not understood of all that go
under that name, many among them being free of such crimes, and of a more sober
Spirit and principles. 2. An Apology, why I frequently use the word
[Presbyterian.] 3. Presbytery too good a name for them, unless with this
addition Pseudo-Presbytery, that is Pr^sbytery falsely so called. 4. The
Presbyterian Church guilty of denying the true Christ, who would exclud him out
of the very Saints. 5. The Presbyterian Church a foolish builder, and guilty of
very bad and Unchristian Doctrins. 6. The Presbyterian Church, although she
pretend to be more for a spritual way of preaching, and worshipping, then the
Papal, or Episcopal, yet upon the matter, she is not one jot more for the same,
then they are, proved by diverse Instances. 7. Two Questions put to the
Presbyterians. 8. A list of the r^viling, false acousations and railing
speeches of the Author of the Postscript, against the people, called Quakers.
9. Presbyterian teachers have not that credit now with many people, as to make
them believe, whatever they say, with an implicit faith, as formerly they too
much had.

1. ANd as to what I have said in general against the Presbyterian Church, as
National, and as being so guilty of persecution and blood, I understand it,
not of all that go under that name, for I do believe many among them are
altogether free of having a hand in such things, and are of a more sober
Spirit, and of more sober principles: but I understand it of a great faction
and party of them, that did most prevail, and carried away many simple
wel-meaning people along with them, what by deceitful persuasions, and what by
fears: And I know many that were so carried away, are now come to see the evil
of these practices, and are resolved never to concur in, or countenance the
like of them again. But especially the Presbyterian Clergy and priesthood had
the main hand and stroke in these disorders, and all to uphold their kingdom,
and gratify their lust, and ambition.

2. And that I have so frequently used the word [Presbyterian] or may
afterward use it, is only for distinction's sake, because I know not how
otherwise to design them, yet I am far from judging them to be true
Presbyterians, or that their Classical judicatorys were true Presbyterys, such
as were in the primitive times.

And therefore Presbytery is too good a name to give them, unless with this
addition Pseudo-Presbyter^, that is to say, Presbytery falsely so called, seeing
they have so positively denied that which gives the very life, and being,
either to any true Church, or Presbytery, viz, the immediate Revelation, and
(...) teachings and leadings of the Spirit of Christ in every member; so that
as of old, there were, who called themselves, Jews, and Apostles and were not,
so these Presbyterians call themselves true Pre^^^^erys, but are no more so,
then a dead image of a man is a true man. And indeed who ever has a true
knowledge of either the Gospel, or a true Gospel Church, will see, that with
good reason, and good ground, we have forsaken the Presbyterian and National
Church, and that not only because of her bad practices, but also for her bad,
Antichristian and unsound Doctrins in many things, she denying the real
in-being and reve^ation of Ies^^ Christ in any of her Members, or indeed in any
men in those days.

4. And although she falsely accuse us, as denying the true Christ, yet I hope
to make it apparent, that she, and not we, are the denyers of him, who would
exclud him out of the very Saints, and altogether confine him to some
particular place: but this I intend to reserve till afterward.

5. Also she discovers her self to be a very foolish builder, who makes her
foundation so narrow, and her building so wide, for no less, then the whole
Nation, she would take into her building; yea all Nations, if she could. And
yet the true and saving Power, and Grace of Christ Jesus, which ^elongs to the
very foundation of the Church, she ^ill only have it extended but to a small
number of ^er members, and that the greatest part have neither ^eceived this
Grace, nor ever shall; but are exclud^d inevitably from it, without their own
consent, ^y Gods absolut decree, that barreth them out from (...) possibility
of Salvation, before they ever came (...) the world. Surely this is too narrow
a foundaion for so wide a building; and it is but a small ^avour to so many
thousands of her members, than ^hey are not so much as under any possibility of
Salvation: yea it seems they are rather the worse, then the better, for being
her Church members, seeing, to the boot, they shall be more guilty of
condemnation, then the Heathen, who never heard the Gospel outwardly preached,
and yet never a whit the more near unto Salvation. These ar^ sad tidings, she
preaches to her Church members Again, her most eminent Saints, she leaves
the^ still in the dirt, and mire of sin, for term of life and tells them, they
can never be free from sin, i^ this life; but sin, and can not but sin daily,
in though^ word, and deed, Surely, such un-Christian Doctrins, with many more
could be named, an ground enough for any man, whose eyes are true^ opened to
leave her, and come out of her.

6. And though she pretend to be more for a sp^ritual way of preaching, and
worship, then either Papists, or these, called the Episcopal; yet reall^ upon
the matter, she is not one jot more for the same, then they are; but does fully
aggre wit^ them, in those principls, that in their very natur^^ oppose all
spiritual preaching and praying. For (...) they say, that true Grace or ptety
is not essential to (...) Minister of Christ? She says the same. Do the^ say,
that men may preach and pray, without the spe^cial and immediate movings of the
Spirit of God, an^ while they thus preach and pray, they ought to b^ heard, if
having an outward call from the Church She says the same. Do they say, that
immediate calls are not needful to Preachers? She says the same. And in a
word, I know not in the least, wherein she is any more a friend to the Spirit
of Christ* and to preaching and praying by the same, or wherein she is not
fully as great an enemy, yea rather upon the matter, she is greater; for I
believe there shall hardly be found any Council Provincial, or General among
the Papists themselves, that have so expressly and directly denied and judged
out, all new revelations and immediate teachings of the Spirit, as the
Presbyterian Church have done in their assembly at Westminster: and indeed all
praying by the real movings of the Spirit of Christ, being once denied, and a
Worship without the Spirit being set up, it is a mere circum^tance, whether it
be in a set form of words, yea (...) or nay; only that which is for a set
form of words and a stinted Liturgy (the Spirit being once exclud^ed by both
partys) seems to be less sinful, and al^o less scandalous, for he that
prays by his set ^orme, is out of all hazard to use words of nonsense and
blasphemy, providing the set form contain nothing but sound words: whereas he,
that pray^th only out of his imagination, (for out of what else ^oth he pray,
seeing he does not so much as pretend to ^eceive his words from the Spirit?) is
really in this (...) And it is well known, how often some have really spok
nonsense and blasphemy, who had no (...) better guide, then their own roaving
imagination, when they said their prayers; and many times the people, in stead
of being moved to seriousness by such prayers, were moved to laugh at the
ignoran^^ and folly of such Speakers: and certainly of two evils it is the
lesser, to have a Liturgy or stinte^ form, then to suffer such abuses, as have
bee^ committed by some both Presbyterian and Episcopal Preachers in their
Pulpits, in their Pray^ers.

7. And indeed there are two Questions I could never get resolved by any
Presbyterian. 1. W^^ their Preachers study their Sermons before hand left they
should speak nonsense to the People, a^^ yet study not their Prayers before
hand, but (...) them forth ex tempore? 2. Why they think Lawful to sing by a
book, and yet think it unlavfull to pray by a book? And these two questi^^ I
leave with this Author of the Postscript to answe^ and shall proceed to take
notice of his other (...), wherein I intend to be more brief, ha^ing no
arguments to answer, and the Author havi^^ brought none against us, nor indeed
any Testimo^nys to prove the Quakers guilty of any such (...) as he accuses
them of, but spends most of all (...) paper, in most horrible, bitter
revilings, and (...) accusations, Some of which I shall here insert, (...) give
the Reader a trial of the bitterness of this man's spirit, and that he has not
the least true ground for any such revilings, in the next place I intend to
show.

8. Let us then stand still a little, a^nd hear his rai^ings, and rai^ing
revilings and uncharitable speeches he soameth out against us, even as a
troubled Sea casts out foam and dirt: -- this abyss of all abominations,
de^perat Quakerism, root of bit^erness, this ditch and deep pit, pernicious
ways, Soul-murthering delusions, spreading contagion, ^equally loathsome and
hateful to their Souls with (...) bell; Satan's slime, botch of hell, pure
Devilism, (...) the dung of all these desperate, soul-destroying heresys, ^
videlice^t of Popery, Arminianism, Erastiamsm, ^Socinianism, Arianism,
Petagianism, Familism, ^Antinomianism, Heathenism, and Atheism; (...) ^having a
special power and influence over and (...) (...) the bodies and spirits of not
a few of that monstrous (...), dung of hell dished up with a piece of the black
^Art, peculiar to that Tribe; the very stink of hell, which comes forth at
their impure and po^^u^ed ^mouths in blasphemys against God, his Christ, his
^Spirit, his Word, his precious and pure Ordinances, (...) purchase of the
blood of Christ, and the means (...) fellowship with the Father, and with his
Son Jesus christ: most odious vermin, and black locusts, that (...) crawled out
of the infernal lake, or crooked upon the face of the Earth, blasphemous
belchings, (...) the very sibilation of the Old Serpent. What name or notion
can be fallen upon, or found fit to unfold the nature of that doctrine,
comprehensive of all these doctrins of Devils: whereby the Gospel has been
from the beginning opposed through Satan's black art and utmost malice, as if
this one shape and size of enemy^ to the Gospel, were gathered together and
ceme^ed all the several partys, that ever Abaddon an^ Apollyon commanded in
his several expedition^ against the Prince Michael.

And thus Reader I have set before thee, some part of this Presbyterian man's
Rhetoric, for^ ^trial, and if thou have the least measure of true di^cerning,
so that thy ear can try words, as (...) mouth tastes meat, it will be easy for
thee to judg^ whence such bitter and unchristian revilings pro^ceed, and what
spirit has taught him to utter (...) many gross lies and slanders against an
innoce^ People, and none can expect that I will be at the pains to refu^e such
stuff, it containing nothing (...) argument nor proof, that we are guilty of
(...) things, but only bare affirmations.

9. And though in former times, the Presbyt^rian Teachers had such great
esteem (through the great blindness, that was over the Nation) (...) the minds
of most people; that their bare saying (...) were like Divine Oracles, yet the
times are now (...) a great measure changed, that what they say will not be
believed so easily; nay will not at all be believed by thousands, unless they
bring good and sufficient proof for the truth of what they say: for there is an
eye opening in many in this Nation, that is seeing clearly, how these
deceitful men had too great power over them, to impose upon their faith: and
they are now resolved not to be so abused by them, as formerly: and therefore I
am persuaded, such bare affirmations without the least shadow of a proof, will
have weight with none, but such as yet give up themselves blindly and implicitly
to be led by these blind guids, and for such there is no remedy, until it
please the Lord to open their eyes, which is my earnest desire.

SECTION VI.
1. The Scripturs no warrant for peopls refusing converse with the People,
called Quakers. 2. They bring no doctrine contrary to the Scripturs. 3. The
Author and his Brethren guilty of horrid injustice against them, in condemning
them, whom they neither know, nor their principls. 4. Many of them with a blind
and mad zeal refuse all means of Information. 5. The Presbyterian Teachers in
laboring to perswad people, not to converse with us, nor read our books,
practice that usual policy of the Popish Church, that forbids to read
Protestants books, or converse with them. 6. Many are the more moved to read
them, and seek occasion of their converse. 7. Finding them grossly and falsely
accused. 8. John Livingston his unchristian carriage to some of their
profession at Rotterdam. 9. The people called Quakers, not Here^icks, nor their
principls heretical, but truly C^^^sstian and Apostolic. 10. Presbyterians in
great confusion and contradiction in comparing some of themselves to the
greatest Prophets, and yet denying Immediate Revelation and Spirit of Prophecy.
11. A cowardly Spirit in many of the Presbyterian Teachers. A question put to
the Author of the Postscript.

Page 5. ad sinem. And here by the way, let me set before thee, the practice of
that Great man of GOD [Master John Livingston] (of whom without vanity, or
being judged to hold men's p^nsons in admira^ion for advantage, I fear not to
say, that in the day he was taken up from us, I knew not so great an
Ambassador for Christ left behind upon the Earth. O to see some, on whom this
Elijah's mantle is fallen!) as a fit patt^rn for thy in^itation, etc.

1. Answer: The Author of the Postscript has been giving some persuasions, why
People should deny all converse with the People, called Quakers, from the
exampls of the Apostles, Paul and John, and lastly from the example of Master
John Livingston, as he calls him. (behold the Presbyterians pride, that will
honor one another with the title of Master, whereas when they speak of the
Apostles, they give them no such titles, but bare John, Paul, Peter. But to say
John Livingston, and Samuel Rutherford, withholding the proud title of Master,
which Christ did expressly forbid, does greatly offend Presbyterian ears) But
first I must tell the Author of the Postscript: As to the exampls of Paul and
John, the case does no ways meet, for the people called Quakers are of the same
spirit, and hold the same principls, and have the same life and conversation,
which the Christians had, whom Paul and John loved, and were kindly affected
unto, even as parents unto children.

They are neither like seducing Elymas (a title more aggreable to this Author)
nor like Hymeneus and Alexander, whom Paul delivered unto Satan: nor have they
the least affinity with such, as John forbad the Disciples to receive into
their house, or give them a friendly salutation, for such were they, who
brought another doctrine unto them, then John preached. See 2 Ep: Ioh: ver: 10.

2. Whereas the Quakers bring no other Doctrine, but the very same doctrine of
Christ, which Christ himself, and both John and all the Apostles preached. And
this, upon trial, we are assured by the Grace of God, that we can make good
against this Author and all his Brethren; as likewise that we can prove that he
and his Brethren are the men, that bring a contrary doctrine. For whereas Christ
preached himself to be the Light of the world, and John preached him to be that
true Light, that lighteneth every man, that comes into the world, that all
through him might believe. And the Apostle John said, This is the message, that
we have heard of him, that God is Light, and in him is no darkness at all^ I^
we walk in the Light, as he is in the Light, we ha^ fellowship one with
another, etc. The Presbyterian Teachers can not endure to hear the same doctrine
preached by the Quakers, and they are ready to g^ash with their very teeth at
us, when we preach GOD to be the LIGHT, and CHRIST to be that TRUE LIGHT, that
inlighteneth EVERY Man, that comes into the World. And both Christ and the
Apostles preached God and Christ in men, as well as Christ his coming in the
flesh, or God made manifest in flesh, in that prepared body, which was
crucified at Jerusalem, and afterward raised up again, and glorified. And this
same doctrine the Quakers preach, whereas the Presbyterians are no^ for Christ
his being in a true and real sense no not in the very Saints.

3. Surely this Author and his brethren have committed an horrid injustice
against the people called, Quakers, in condemning them, whom neither he nor his
brethren do know, nor what principls they hold, whereas they believe lyeing
reports, that malicious men have invented against that people, and there is a
mind in them, that is too ready to give ear to such lies, and foment yea
augment them.

4. And yet I have really such charity to this man and many of his brethren,
that it is through ignorance that they thus condemn us, and speak evil of us,
and therefore is their sin the more pardonable, were it not that with a blind
and mad zeall, they refuse all means of information, whereby to be instructed,
either what we are, or what principles we hold, otherwise it were impossible
they could be so ignorant concerning us, as really they are; for thousands in
this land know that we are not guilty of these horrid things, which this man
lays to our charge.

5. And certainly this is a great sin in them, and near bordering with that sin
that shall never be forgiven, that they refuse to be informed of us, and are
willingly ignorant themselves, and seek by all means to keep people in ignorance
concerning us, that they may not converse with us, nor read our books, an
usual policy of the Popish Antichristian Church, who cry out against all
di^^enters from them, as damnable Heretics, not to be conversed with, nor
their books to be read, upon pain of the Popes curse, and surely those
groundless threa^^ of these Presbyterian priests, have as small weight with
ingenuons people, and their curses or excommunications we value as little, as
the Popes; being both from one Spirit, and we know the more the^ curse, the
Lord will the more bless us, as we are faithful in our Testimony to him.

6. And it is observable, that the more these me^ disswad people from reading
our books, and conversing with us, many have been the more moved to read them,
and seek occasion of our converse, who upon an impartial search, have found
that we have been most grossly abused, and belyed by these men.

7. Which has raised in them a love to us, and an indignation against those
men's deceit, who did so injuriously and basely traduce us, and thus also by
degrees, their understandings have been opened* and their hearts inclined by
the Lord to join with us in the same Testimony.

8. Now as concerning John Livingston, whose exemple this Author commends to
be imitated, who, when a certain person of that Profession, being his former
acquaintance, came in love to visit him, and also to give him true information
concerning that people, if there had been place in him to receive it, did in a
most rude, and Unchristian way, refuse him access into his house, yet having
nothing justly wherewith to charge him, and when he inquired of him, what was
the reason of his carrying so toward him, he told him, that he had joined with
a people, that held blasphemous principles; and when he again inquired, what
these blasphemous principles were, he would not give an instance in one
particular; but found fault with him for speaking the plain Scripture language
of Thee and Thou, which Christ and the Apostles used to one person* and of this
rencounter B. F. a merchant in Rotterdam, and I my self were both eye and
ear-witnesses, then present in company with the said person, and it is a
certain truth, that this was the first time that John Livingston spoke with the
said person, after he was of that profession, and yet he rejected him, plain
contrary to the Apostle, (upon supposition that he had been an heretic, as he
was not) an heretic, after the first and second admonition reject. And wherein
also he dealt contrary to many of his own brethren, who have judged it their
duty to speak with such, and confer with us, and the Apostle willed that in
meekness we should instruct them, that oppose themselves, if peradventure God
may give them repentance.

9. But our great defense is, that we are not Heretics, nor our principles
hereti^all, but truly Christian and Apostolic, and it is the height of
injustice to condemn us, before we get a fair hearing and opportunity, as often
as need is, to clear our selves; which neither this Author, nor I. L. have ever
given us. And therefore I leave it with all sober people to consider whether
this practice of I. L. does not more resemble the Pope, who forbids to converse
with Protestants, or read their books, as being in his sense damnable
Heretics, then either Paul or John, or Christ who often reasoned with the
Srciber and Pharisees his greatest enemies, and Paul disputed with the Jews,
and Greek Philosophers, that opposed themselves to the truth, and bid reject
none* but such as were self-codemned, which neither (...) Author nor I. L.
could justly say of any, called: Quaker.

10. And here again, I cannot cease to wonde^ how this Author cries up John
Livingston, and gives him no less tittle, then if he were another Elijah,
while he falls out into such an exclamation, ^ (says he) to see some, on
whom this Elijahs mantl^ is fallen, etc! Which words plainly import, that I. L.
was a Prophet and had the same Spirit of Prophesy, that Eli^ah had, which is
enough to make a man's teeth to water, to perceive their pride and insolency on
the one hand, and there confusion and self-contradiction on the other, while
they plainly teach, as I have already observed, that the Spirit of Pr^phecy and
immediate revelation, and teachings of the Spirit are generally ceased, since
the Apostles days; as for I. L. himself, whatever he was in former times, sure
I am, in his latter days he was much in the dark, otherwise he could not have
so mistaken and misjudged us, as he has done, if his habitation had been in
the Light, he would have seen and known better what we had been. But to pass
this, it does not a little discover him to have been but a weak and cowardly
man, that at the mere will and command of men, went over sea and subscribed his
sentence of banishment with his own hand, as others likewise did, which the
Author of Ius Populi does plainly acknowledge. I challenge the Author of the
Postscript to show me, where any of the true Prophets of God, or Ambassadors
of Christ did such a thing, surely this was no Prophetical act, but rather a
renuncing of all true obedience unto God, not only to desert his ^lock, but
promise never to return to them, nor to his native country on pain of death,
without leave of men. Now put the case that God had commanded him by immediate
revelation, or given him an immediate message to return, as he had wont to give
immediate messages to Elijah, did he not here bind himself up not to go, or
else to make himself a transgressour, guilty of death by his own hand-writting?
And if it ^e said, there are no such immediate messages to be expected in our
days; then for shame let them forbear comparing him to Elijah, or telling us
of I. L. (...) mantle.

11. Surely it appears to me, his mantle was ^ cowardly Spirit, which has
fallen upon many of them, that they are runn away from their ^locks, for they
were not sent prisoners over sea, but went away to shun greater sufferings, and
I. L. in his letter, to his parishoners a little before his death, is so
ingenuons as to confess, he failed in his duty in not bearing a faithful
Testimony before them who sentenced him, and yet I find not that he ever mended
this fault, although he lived many years afterward; however he is now before
his Judge, and far be it from me, to conclud he has not found merry with God,
nor should I have med-led with him, if the great inju^tice of the Author of the
Postscript had not constrained me, and put me on a necessity so to do.

But what if the Author of the Postscript knew no^ so great an Ambassador left
behind upon Earth? Surely there are many greater and more true Ambassadors
then ever he knew, and how did he know that he was a true Ambassador, I
suppose he wi^^ not deny his words to imply that I. L. was a very holy man.

12. Now I ask him how does he know this, what is his rule in this case? Not
the Scripture; for it (...) nothing of such a man, and as for the marks of
true holiness, how does he know that they were ^eally applicable to him, seeing
an (...) go ^he length of all outward, and he can not know ^he inwards of a
man without immediate revelation, ^ndowning the Spirit to be the rule contrary
to the Confession of faith, and Catechism that say. The Scripture is the only
rule, and immediate revelation (...) ceased.

SECTION. VII.
1. An Account of all the particulars, upon which the Author of the Postscript
lays the whole stress of his accusations against us, being eight in number.
2. The first accusation false. 3. We own Christ to be true and perfect God, and
true and perfect man. 4. His Godhead is not his manhood, yet the man Christ,
is God, by reason of the most wonderful union betwixt the two Natures. 5. The
Christian Quakers free of the errors of Socinians, Manichees, Apollinarians,
Nestorians, and other Here^icks Concerning Christ. 6. The second accusation a
mere quible about the invented words of man's wisdom, but the truth of the
mystery is owned by the Quakers. 7. Father, Word, (or Sone) and Ho^y Ghost, are
three, otherwise then in mere union, operation, or manifestion toward us
only, but not three substances. 8. Diverse judged pious and learned men of the
Ancients denied and disputed against 3. hypostases, and 3. persons, as Jerome
and Augustine. 9. The third accusation a quible, and false upon the matter. 10.
Christ is a singular man. 11. Whatever excellency other men have, the heavenly
Man Christ Jesus has the same, and more also. 12. The man Christ Jesus has a
substantial dignity, and excellency above all men in his manhood Nature. 13.
The Christian Quakers, esteem more highly of the manhood of Christ Ies^^,
then either Presbyterians or Papists.

Page 9. to wards the beginning. And yet every Article of this, that they may
for ever destroy the foundations of salvation, is by them oppugned and
subverted; They putting a false Christ in stead of the true Jesus the Son of
David, our only savior, denying Christ to be the second person of the
Trinity; denying Christ to be a singular person, denying Jesus the Sone of
Mary, to be the alone true Christ, but affirming Christ to be a common sort of
thing, to be found in every man as it was in the Son of Mary, even the common
Light to be found in the mind of every man in the world, affirming Jesus, the
true Christ, the Sone of Mary, to be only an ordinary vessel, which
contains this Light, as the Spirit of every other (...) man does, and so not
only pulling down our exalted Prince from his throne of glory but putting
their false Prophets in his place cloa^hing them with the glory of his proper
titeles, as being Christ, as well as he, because containing the some Light with
his?

1. Answer. Because the Author of the Postscript lays the whole stre^s of all
his accusations, upon what he does here lay down, as the principls of the
people, called Quakers, and for which (as supposing all these to be truly
alleged, which ye^ are extremely false,) he goes on at an high rate in diverse
whole pages, both before and after these words of his already mentioned,
alleging that we deny all the Articles of the Christian ^aith, strike at name
and thing of Christian religion, thus robing us of the whole Gospel, and
turning us over into pure Heathenism, shuts us out eternally from all access
unto God, and makes our salvation for ever simply impossible.

Therefore I have found it sit to set down, word by word, these his particular
charges, which are the alone foundation of his whole discourse. And allthough
it may suffice to any sober man, simply to deny these charges as applicable to
us, who are called Quakers, and to inform the ignorant that they are a mere
bundle of lies and falsehoods upon the matter; and that this is enough (...)
overturn the foundation of his discourse, and consequently the dis^ours it
self, that is built on it, seeing he does not bring the least proof for what he
alleges against us, from the words or writings of any of that people, but
mere blind suppositions and false consequences, which do no ways follow from
our principle, yet for the further satisfaction of the sober inquirer ^ intend
God willing, and assisting me by his grace, to go through every one of these
particulars, and in the simplicity and nakedness of truth, to give^ ^^ithfull
account and declaration of our faith, touching every particular, which are
eight in number The first whereof is, that we put a false Christ in ste^^ of
the true Jesus, the Sone of David, one only (...).

2. This is a false accusation, for we acknowled^ no other Christ, but the one
only and true Christ Jesus, the Sone of David, our only savior.

3. And that the soundnes and truth of our fait^ may appear, in this
particular, let the reader kno^ that we do most faithfully believe and
acknowled^ Jesus Christ to be true and perfect God, and true and perfect man.

4. And that the nature and substance of his Go^-h^ad is not the nature and
substance of his M^^-hood, his Manhood is not his God^head, (...) his Godhead
his Manhood yet the Man (...) God* by reason o^ that most wonderful union
(...) the two naturs: so that, as the soul and body of a man, are but one man,
by reason of (...) union, that is betwixt them, although the soul be not the
body, nor the body the ^oule: in like manner, but in a more wonderful sort,
the Godhead and Manhood of Christ are but one Christ without any confusion or
transmutation of the Godhead into the Manhood, or of the Manhood into the
Godhead. And the Godhead of Christ is not any inferior divinity, or deity,
but the very same Godhead of the Father; so that Christ, as God, is equal
with the Father, and one and the same God with him, of one nature and
substance. Again the Manhood of Christ is a true and perfect Manhood, so that
Christ as man has a true and real soul distinct from the Godhead, yet
forever united with the same, in a most immediate and wonderful manner of which
union, no other soul or Spirit of men, or angels, ever were, or shall be
partakers. As also he has a true and real body, so that whatever per^fection,
the Manhood of any other man has, the Man Christ has the same, and that much
greater and more excellent, as may be afterward shown.

5. And thus the soundnes and truth of our faith may appear, concerning the
Lord Jesus Christ our ^lone faviour where we agree with all that are (...) and
in the faith, against the Socinians who deny (...) true Godhead of Christ, and
who also deny that Christ was before Mary: whereas we believe that Christ was,
and is, before all, the First and the (...).

As also against them who deny the true and real manhood of Christ some
denying him to have a true and real body of the Virgin Mary, but only
^antasticall, as is said of the Manichees: ot^ers denying him to have a true
and real soul, affirming that the naked Godhead took flesh and suffered in
that flesh, which is said to be the heresy of Apollinarius: as also against
them, who affirm upon the matter, tha^ there are two Christ's, and two Sons of
God, as if the eternal Word or Logos were the one Christ and Son of God, and
the man Jesus, borne of the Virgi^ Mary, the other Christ and Son of God, which
i^ said to be the heresy of Nestorius; whereas the eternal Word and Man Jesus,
are not two Christ's, no^ two Sons of God, but one and the same; subsisting in
two naturs, as the soul and body are one man according to what is already
said, which example (...) soul and body, the Ancients have much used to
explain this great Mystery, as also they have used another, to wit, of a red
hot iron, the fire in the (...) answering to the Godhead or eternal Word, an^
the iron it self burning and shining by the virtue an^ power of the fire in it
answering to the Manhood (...) Christ, both which examples I judge to be
useful and pertinent, yet falling exceeding short of the Mystery it self, which
is so great that is passeth^ (...) understanding of men and Angels.

The second particular is, that we deny Christ (...) be the second person of
the Trinity.

6. This is a mere quible about the invented words of man's wisdom, which we
deny, albeit the truth of the thing it self we deny not, but faithfully
believe, to wit, that Christ as God, is the second of the Three, that bear
record in heaven, which three are, the Father, the Word, and the Spirit, and
these three are One, as John declared, and we believe that these three, that
bear record in heaven, are not three distinct natures and substances, but the
one in nature and substance: not three Gods, but One, only God: not having
three understadings, three wills, or three powers, but one only understanding,
one only will, and one only power.

7. Yet they are three, otherwise then in mere name, operation, or
manifestation toward us only, being distinct in their relative modes or
propertys, so that the Father is not the Word, nor is the Word or Son the
Father [allthough he be our Father] nor is the Spirit that proceeds from the
Father and the Son, either the Father, or the Son, the Father is uncreated and
unbegotten, the Son or Word from everlasting is uncreated and yet begotten of
the Father, the Spirit is neither created nor begotten, but proceeds from the
Father and the Son, from everlasting, the Father did not become flesh, nor was
born, and crucified and rose, but the Son or Word, and yet the Father is in the
Son and the Son in the Father, and the Spirit that proceeds from them, is and
was in them and with them from everlasting, and is unto everlasting, and
whatever the Father does, the Word and Spirit do the same, being one, as in
nature, so in operation. This Father does all things by the Word, and the
Father and the word do all things by the Spirit, and yet as they are distinct
in the manner, or modes of being, so also in the manner or modes of operation.
As the Father is first in the manner of his being so is he first in the manner
of operation, as the Son is second in the manner of his being, so is he second
in the manner of operation, and as the Spirit is third in the manner of his
being, so is he third in the manner of operation. Yet this priority is not a
priority of time, but of order, for they were three before time, even from
everlasting, and they all cooperat and work together. And thus it may appear,
that we are sound in the faith, as touching this great mystery, and that we
differr not in the matter, or thing it self, but only as to the manner of
expression, which they themselves grant, is not by words divinely inspired, as
namely a Trinity of persons, or three distinct persons. Christ and the
Apostles, who declared of this mystery, expressed it not in these terms, of
three distinct persons, nor are these words recorded in Scriptures, therefore we
are not bound to express our faith in these unscripturall terms, which the
holy Ghost has not taught, nor indeed is there any need of those terms, three
distinct persons, but rather they darken then explain the mystery, which have
occasioned, not only some of the vulgar, but even some of them, called the
learned, to err grossly in their conceptions about the mystery it self, as if
the Father, the Word, and the Spirit, were really three distinct substances,
each having a distinct understanding, will and power, and as if the word or Son
were inferior in nature to the Father, and the Father greater then the Son, as
Origin is thought by some to have taught, and as some do now teach, and such
although they affirm, that the Word and the Spirit are di^tinct substances
from the Father, and that the Father is greater then they, yet they do not
acknowledge, that the Word and Spirit are created, or that they have their being
from the Father, by way of creation, but only by way of emanation, and they
affirm, that the Father is only the most high God, and the Word and Spirit
inferior unto him, as being God only by participation from, and union with
the Father, and thus they think to defend themselves, as not being guilty of the
Arian heresy, whereas it was a branch of the Arian heresy, to say, that the Son
or Word was not equal unto the Father.

But whither or not they be guilty of the Arian ^eresy, sure I am they are in
an error occasioned in great part, by these unsound and unscriptural terms of
three Persons in the Trinity, for persons signify substances, and not the modes
or propertys of one Substance.

8. And it is well known, that these words of Three Persons, and 3 Hypostases
have made great contention in former times, and diverse, judged to be pious and
learned men, have denied them, and disputed against them, as namely Jerome
against three hypostases, and Augustine disputes solidely, lib. 5. and 7. de
Trinitate, that the words [Three Persons] are not properly applicable to the
Mystery it self; although he does not know, what other names to give them: and
surely it is too great presumption and curiosity in any men, to dive further
into this mystery, then what God has pleased to reveal, or to give names unto
it, which the Lord has not given. And yet it is more presumption, and smells
rankly of a persecuting spirit, to impose upon others these words, which the
Spirit of God has not taught, nor left upon record in the Scripture; and yet,
because we do not own these words of man's wisdom and spirit, to cry out against
us, as blasphemers, and as denying the true Christ: whereas we believe in, and
do own the true Christ, according both to his Godhead and Manhood, more
according to the Truth, and Testimony of the Scripture, then our accusers do,
as I hope in its due place to show.

The Third Particular, whereof he accuses us, is, that we deny Christ to be a
singular Person.

9. But this is another quible, like unto the former; for I ask him, What does
he mean by the word [Person] whether the Godhead, or both united? If he place
the personality upon the Godhead, it resolves into the second particular
already cleared; but the Word, or Godhead of Christ is not properly a person,
but an invisible Power and Life: if he place it upon the Manhood as united with
the Godhead, this is contrary to their own doctrine, who teach, that the Word
did assume the nature of Man, but not the person, otherwise he would be two
persons, and thus they distinguish the personality from the nature of man: but
this is a most foolish, and groundless distinction, that they have borrowed
from the Popish Schoolmen. The Scriptur tells us nothing of this nicity, yet
we do acknowledge the person of Christ.

10. And if by Person they understand his manhood, or the man Christ Jesus, we
believe that Christ is man, and a singular man, that is to say, he is not two,
or many men, but one only man: as also he is singular for the excellency of
his nature, even as Man.

11. So that, whatever excellency any other man* has in his nature, Christ
has the same, and also far greater, and more excellent in his, who is the
heavenly Man, or Lord from heaven, the second Adam, that is a quickening
Spirit, whereas other men, in comparison of him, yea Adam the first Man, is but
of the Earth, Earthly. So that, as far as the most high heavens do excel the
base and low Earth, so far does Christ even as Man, excel all other men, and
that not only in accidents, as the Popish schoolmen, and the Presbyterian
Teachers, following them, do teach: but in nature and Substance. And therefore,
as the Heavens do influence the Earth, and make it fruitful, by the virtue,
that proceeds therefrom, so the heavenly Man Christ Jesus does influence all
other men, by his Light and Life, that they may be fruitful in holiness, and
righteousuess: and who remain unfruitful, it is not for want of the Life and
Spirit of the Heavenly Man, as not influencing them, but because that by
unbelief they harden their hearts against his Heavenly breathings and
influences. And this distinction betwixt the very nature of the Soul and Spirit
of Christ as man, amd that of the souls of all other men, is clearly held
forth by Paul, according to the wisdom given him of God, that whereas the Soul
of any other, as namely the Soul of Adam, was made a living Soul, the second
Adam is a quickening Spirit, who quickens both the Souls and bodies of other
men, who in faith receive his quickening life and Spirit: and whatever virtue
the Souls of any other holy men have to quicken others, they have it not of
themselves, nor yet immediately of God the Father, but they derive it from the
heavenly man, or second Adam Christ Jesus, who has it immediately of the
Father, who is the Mediator between God and Man, even the Man Christ Jesus.

12. And this does manifestly hold forth a substantial dignity and excellency
in the nature of the Man Christ Jesus, even as a man, above the nature of all
other men and Angels, which the Papists and Presbyterian Teachers do both deny.

13. And thus it may appear, how much more we do esteem of the Manhood of
Christ Jesus, then either Papists or Presbyterians.

SECTION VIII.
1. The fourth accusation is false, for we own no other Jesus Christ, but him
who was born of the Virgin Mary. 2. He was the true Christ of God before. 3.
That the man Christ Jesus was from the beginning. 4. Some Scripturs brought and
opened to prove this, as Ephesians: 3: 9* Joh: 6: 38. 1 Cor: 15: 47, 48. Joh: 3: 13.
Ephesians: 4: 9. 1 Cor: 10: 3, 4. the same proved from 1 Timothy: 2: 5. and 1 Cor: 11: 3.
5. Christ was anointed from the beginning, Prove: 8: 23. Psalm: 2: 6. 6. The Man
Christ before Abraham and John the Baptist. 7. Some more Scripturs opened, as
Psalm. 110: 34. Amos 2: 13. Heb. 6: 6. Rev: 11: 18. And some more Scripturs
opened out of the Old Testament, to prove that the Man Christ was from the
beginning, as Genesis 32: 24. Genesis 19: 24. 8. That the outward flesh and blood is
not properly the Man, but the Soul or inward man. 9. More Scripturs opened out
of the Old Testament, as Ezekiel. 1: 26, 27. Dan. 7: 9. 10. Christ his Soul and
heavenly flesh and blood from the beginning. 11. The Soul, Life, or Spirit of
the Heavenly Man does as far extend as his heavenly flesh and blood, even to
all the Saints. 12. Though they have not the center or root of his Soul and
Life in them, but only a measure, ray or emanation of it. 13. The Scripture no
where says that Christ did take his Soul, but only his outward flesh of the
Virgin, and so according to the flesh he was only the Son of Mary, David and
Abraham by virtue of his outward conception and birth.

The fourth Particular, whereof he accuses us, is, that we deny Jesus the Son
of Mary, to be the alone true Christ.

1. This is a false accusation; We own no other Jesus Christ, but him, that was
born of the Virgin Mary, who, as concerning the flesh is the Son of Mary, and
the Son of David, and the Seed of Abraham.

2. And yet he was the true Christ of God, before he took flesh, and before he
was the Son of Mary, or David, or of Abraham: for his being born of the Virgin
Mary made him not to be Christ, as if he had not been Christ before, But he was
Christ before, even from the beginning, as I shall prove clearly out of
Scripture, Ephesians. 3: 9. it is said expressly, that God created all things by
Jesus Christ. Now if all things were created by Jesus Christ, then Jesus Christ
was before all things; for the cause is always before the effect, at least in
order of nature. But to this they object, that by Jesus Christ is meant the
Word only in this place, whereas the Word only is not properly the Christ,
but the Word as clothed with the Manhood, or the Man as united with the Word.
And so I answer, that the Word only is not properly the Christ without the
Manhood; but it is the Word made Flesh, or made Man, And therefore seeing the
Apostle by the Spirit of God has declared that all things were created by
Jesus Christ, and that Jesus Christ signifies properly the Word made Flesh, or
made Man, it is clear, that according unto the Apostle, the Word was mad flesh
or Man, even from the beginning.

3. And this will yet more appear, by comparing this place with other places of
Scripture, as Ioh. 6: 38. For I came down from heaven, not to do mine own will,
but the will of him that sent me. Now Christ spoke this, not simply as the Word
or as God, but as Man; for as God he had no will of his own distinct from the
will of the Father, for the Father and the Word have but one only will:
whereas the Man, or Manhood of Christ has indeed a distinct will, which yet is
always in union with the will of the Father. And seeing Christ spoke this as
Man, it is clear from his own words, that as Man, he came down from heaven, and
was Man before he descended to take part of our flesh in the Virgins womb, and
therefore Paul calls him the Second Adam, the Lord from heaven, and that
heavenly Man 1 Cor: 15: 47, 48. Also it is clear, that Christ himself speaks
in the 6 of John of his flesh and blood, that did come down from heaven,
whereof men must eat and drink, to the end that they may live by Christ John 6:
51. I am that living bread, which came down from heaven, If any man eat of this
bread, he shall live for ever. And the bread that I will give is my flesh. Now
many understood not that saying in that day (as many at this day do not
understand it) for they thought he had spoken of Earthly flesh and blood, and
therefore they were offended, and* said, How can this man give (...) his flesh
and blood to eat? Whereas Jesus understood it of his heavenly flesh and blood:
therefore he said unto them, Does this offend you? What if ye shall see the Son
of Man ascend up where he was before? So that Christ was the Son of Man, before
he descended, that is to say, true Man; for Son of man is a Syriack phrase
signifying man. Compare with this, John 3: 13. No man ascends up to heaven,
but he that came down from heaven, the Son of man which is in heaven; see also
Ephesians: 4: 9, 10. Now in that he ascended, what is it but that he also descended
into the lowest parts of the Earth? He that descended is the same that ascended
far above all heavens, that he might fill all things. And this will yet
further appear, if we shall consider what Paul writes of this mystery, 1 Cor.
10: 3, 4. that the Fathers [to wit, the people of Israel] (long before Christ
came outwardly in the flesh) did all eat the same spiritual meat, and did all
drink the same spiritual drink, for they drank of the Spiritual Rock that
followed them, and that Rock was Christ. Nor can it be said that it must be
understood figuratively, to wit, the Rock signified Christ; for we read no
where in the Scriptur of any Rock that followed the people in the wilderness as
outwardly, that was a figure or type of Christ; but Christ himself was that
Rock that followed them. And certainly if the Saints, before Christ came
outwardly in the flesh, had ^ot eat of the flesh of Christ, and drunk of his
blood, they could not have had life by him: but they had life by him, and
therefore they did eat his flesh and drink his blood. And therefore Christ had
flesh and blood, to wit, heavenly and spiritual, even from the beginning, on
which the Saints in all ages did feed, even from the beginning, such as Adam
and Evah, Abel, Henoch, Noah, Abraham, etc. And seeing Christ had flesh and
blood from the beginning, he was man from the beginning; for as God simply, he
can not have flesh and blood, For God is a Spirit; therefore it is the flesh
and blood of Christ as he is Man or the Son of Man, as Christ said unless ye
eat the flesh of the Son of man, etc.

4. All which prove effectually that the Man Christ Jesus was from the
beginning, and if the man Christ Jesus had not been from the beginning, it
would follow that the Church all along from the beginning, had wanted a
Mediator and Head, for it is the Man Christ Jesus united with the Godhead of
the Logos, that is the Mediator betwixt God and man, as Paul declared 1 Timothy 2:
5. and the Head of every man is Christ, and the head of Christ is God. By
Christ, Paul in this place 1 Cor. 11: 3. understands the Man Christ, which he
places as a middle between God and men: so that God is the head of every man.
But it is most absurd to suppose; that the Church and Saints all along, until
Christ came outwardly in flesh, wanted a Mediator and Intercessor, or that they
wanted a head; for even as the natural body can not live without its head, so
nor can the Church, which is the body of Christ, live without its head, which
is the Man Christ Jesus.

5. But let us descend more particularly into particular places of the Old
Testament, and we shall see the same truth confirmed abundantly, Prove. 8: 23. I
was anointed from the age, from the beginning, so the words should be
translated, the Hebrew word nissakti signifies anointed, and is so rendered by
Buxtorf in his Lexicon, and also by the English Bible Psalm. 2: 6. in the
margin, I have anointed my King upon my holy hill of Zion; the Hebrew root is
the same in both places, and both places are to be understood of Christ, as is
generally confessed.

6. Now Christ signifies Anointed, and it is the Man Christ that is Anointed
with the Holy Spirit, and not the Word or Logos, which is God himself, for the
Godhead anoynts not the Godhead, but it is the Godhead that does anoint the
Manhood of Christ, which Manhood has been Anointed from the beginning, and
therefore the Man Christ has been from the beginning, who is Gods Anointed
King, and the Head of his Church in all Ages, the First and the Last, even the
firstborn of every creature, who said to the Jews, Before Abraham was I am:
and it was the Man Christ that said this to the Jews: and of him John the
Baptist thus declared, John 1: 30. there comes after me a man that is
preferred unto me, for he was before me, and this was the man Christ of whom he
spoke. Again let us consider Psalm. 110: 1, 3, 4. The Lord said unto my Lord,
sit thou at my right hand, until I make thine enemies thy footstool. and ver.
3. from the womb before the morning star I have begotten thee, so the
Septuagint and Vulgar Latin, which does little differ from the Hebrew it self
in this place. And verse. 4. Thou art a Priest forever after the order of
Melchizedek. Now that Christ as man is here understood, and not simply the
Logos or Word, I prove, First, because here are two Lords, The Lord said unto my
Lord, the Father speaking unto the Man Christ, for indeed the Man Christ is a
distinct Lord from the Father, as he is a distinct Being and Substance, as Man;
and as Man he is a Lord and King, who said All power in Heaven and Earth is
given me of my Father: but the Word simply considere^ is not a distinct Lord
from the Father, because not a distinct Being or Substance. Secondly, it is the
Man Christ that is Gods high Priest, and not the Word barely considered, for a
Priest is one that prays unto God for the People, and mediats o^ interceeds
betwixt God and them; but the Word barely considered can not do this, because
he is no^ a distinct Substance or Being from the Father* whereas the Man Christ
is a distinct Being, although not divided or separated from him: and if he be ^
Priest forever, then from the beginning, and consequently Man from the
beginning, according to which the Apostle said Jesus Christ the same yesterday,
to day and forever. Yesterday, that is, from the beginning; to day, that is, at
present; and for ever, that is, in all time and ages to come. This is the
promised Seed, which God promised to our Parents after the fall, and actually
gave unto them, even the Seed of the Woman, that should bruise the head of the
Serpent. And therefore though the outward comeing of the Man Christ was
deferred according to his outward birth in the flesh, for many ages, yet from
the beginning this Heavenly Man the promised Seed did inwardly come into the
hearts of those that believed in him, and bruised the head of the Serpent, and
destroyed him that had the power ^f death, that is the Devil, the stronger man
entering (...) house, and dispossessing the strong man, and casting (...) out.
And thus Christ is the Lamb that was slain from the foundation of the World,
namely in that (...) the beginning, even as soon as our first Parents (...),
the measure of the Life of the Lamb which (...) in our first Parents in the
innocent state, came as (...) were to be slain in them by transgression, and to
^ndergoe sore and deep sufferings by reason of (...) sin, even as the Seed
Christ complained by the ^rophet Amos 3: 13. Behold I am pressed under you
(...) cart is pressed that is full of sheavs: this must (...) be understood of
the Life of Christ as Man, for as God he can not suffer, nor be slain; whereas
the Life of Christ as man, is capable of suffering, and being crucified as unto
us, (although that Life still live in it self unto God) namely, that Seed or
measure of it graffed or imprinted in us, according to which the Apostle
declares, that they who fall away from Christ, do crucify again to themselves
the Son of God, Heb. 6: 6. And John saw that after Christ was outwardly
crucified at Jerusalem, he should be again crucified in spiritual Sodom and
Egypt, which is the Apostat Church, Rev. 11: 8. And (...) has he been
crucified by the Wicked, even from the beginning, and has lived in all Saints,
as (...) before he came in the flesh, as to his outward birt^ as since. So that
as Paul said I live yet not I, but (...) that lives in me* The same could
Abraham (...) Moses and all the Prophets say, that Christ the Heavenly Man and
Second Adam lived in them, (...) they lived by his living in them, as he said
to (...) Disciples because I live, therefore shall ye live (...) But Christ as
he is God lives in all, and is altog^ther incapable of the least suffering;
and althoug^ as Man he may and does suffer, yet in due time (...) suffering
Life will prevail, and be raised up over (...) its Suffering in all men, where
it suffers by (...) of sin; to the everlasting comfort of them that (...) in
him, and obey him; but to the everlasti^ torment of them that do not believe in
him, (...) give obedience unto him.

7. But yet more particularly to prove, that the Man Christ was from the
beginning, see Genesis 32: 24. Now when Jacob was left alone, there wrestled a man
with him unto the breaking of the day: and that this was Christ, is clear from
Hosea. 12: 4. For it was such a man, as was also the LORD GOD of Hosts, to whom
he prayed and made supplication; whom Hosea calls also the Angel. See also
Genesis 18. where the Man Christ appeared unto Abraham with two Angels, that are
called men, ver. 2. (for Angels are a sort of Heavenly Men) and one of these
three men Abraham prayed unto, and therefore it was the Man Christ, who after
he had talked with Abraham ascended, and did afterward destroy Sodom and
Gomorrah with fire and brimston. And Genesis 19: 24. it is said The Lord rained
from the Lord fire and brimston: therefore this was no other man, or Angel, but
the Heavenly Man Christ Jesus, who at diverse times appeared unto the Fathers in
the true form of a Man, yea even unto Kiug Nebuchadnezar together with the
three children in the fiery furnace; and although it is commonly supposed, that
it was only God that appeared thus, in a fantastical form and shape of a man,
and not that it was really the Man Christ Jesus: yet this is by no means to be
granted, otherwise we should give away the cause to the Manichees, and such who
affirm that Christ was never a real and true Man, even when born of the Virgin
Mary and crucified (...) the cross, but only that it was a phantasme or
fantastical appearance of man. For indeed, seeing he (...) called as really
Man, before his outward birth in the flesh, as afterward, we have as good
cause to believe him to be true and real Man, before his outward birth (...) in
the flesh, as after.

8. For it is not the outward flesh and blood that is the Man (otherwise the
Saints that have pu^ off the outward body, should cease to be men, (...) Christ
should have ceased to be Man, betwixt (...) death and his resurrection) but it
is the Soul or inward Man that dwells in the outward flesh or ^ody that is
the Man most properly, such as Christ (...) even from the beginning.

9. And this was the Man, even Christ, who^ Ezekiel saw in his vision upon the
throne above (...) firmament, Ezekiel. 1: 26, 27. and whom (...) saw, Dan. 7: 9.
and this was long before his outward birth in the flesh, and was as real a
vision of the Man Christ Jesus, as that which John ^ad, Rev. 1: from ver. 13 to
19. And this same Man the Lord Jesus Christ Isaiah did see, Isa. 6. sitting
upon his heavenly Throne, so that his train or skirts filled the Temple. The
same also appeared unto Adam* Genesis 3: 8, 9, 10. nor will it prove that he whom
Ezekiel saw; was not the real Man Christ Jesus, because it is said that he saw
as the similitude of a man, for even when Christ came outwardly in the flesh,
he is said to be found in fashion or likeness as a Man, and yet he was a true
Man, and did truly and really partake of our flesh and blood by his outward
birth.

10. Yet before this, even from the beginning, he was the heavenly Man, and had
his Soul and Heavenly flesh and blood, by which he reached unto the Saints in
all ages, and did refresh and feed them unto eternal Life. And forasmuch as he
gave them of his flesh and blood from heaven, he also gave them of his Life or
Spirit, as he is the Heavenly Man, or Second Adam.

11. For the Life or Spirit of the Second Adam does extend, as far, as his
heavenly flesh and blood. And thus the Word was made Flesh even from the
beginning, and dwelt in us, as in all Ages; and they beheld his glory, as the
glory of the onely-Begotten of the Father, full of Grace and Truth, yet he
dwells not only in the Saints, but also without them, in himself, and did so
from the beginning.

12. For the Saints can not contain Christ, even as Man; they only partake of
some measure or ray, or emanation of him, they have not the Center or spring of
his Soul and Life in them, but only an emanation or stream of it: the Center
and Spring it self was for most part in heaven, until it descended and
clothed it self with the likeness of our (...) flesh in the Virgins womb.

13. And therefore let all the Scripturs be searched, and it shall not be found
that Christ became Man and took to himself the Soul of Man, at his conception
in the womb of the Virgin Mary; but only that he took flesh, and was the Son
of Mary, David and Abraham according to the flesh: but according to his
Heavenly Nature, even as man, he was the Son of God, and was the Father and
Lord of all the Faithful in all Ages, therefore David in spirit called him
LORD, whose Name is Wonderful Counselor, the Mighty God, the Everlasting
Father, and Prince of Peace.

SECTION. IX.
1. That Christ is in every man, yea in every Creature in a true sense proved
from Scripture. 2. That it derogats no more from the honor of Christ then from
the honor of God the Father that he is in all things. 3. Christ in the saints,
proved from Scripture. 4. Yea in all men, even the wicked, proved from
Scripture. 5. The Godhead properly does not suffer in men but the soul or
life of Jesus Christ the heavenly man. 6. More Scripture to prove that Christ
suffers in the wicked as Heb. 6. 6. Rev. 11. 8. 7. Paul preached Christ in the
Corinthians and Galatians when unbelievers proved from 1 Cor. 2. 2. Gal. 1. 3.
Ephesians. 3. 8. 1. Tim. 3. 16. 8. If Christ be in the Saints he must be in all men,
proved from a most convincing reason, that otherwise he would be divided from
himself and in discontinued places. 9. Christ is otherwise in all men then in
the other inferior creaturs in regard of his operations. 10. And otherwise in
the Saints, then in other men, not only in regard of operation but also in
regard of union and communion. 11. How Christ is, and yet is not, in
unbelievers in different respects, cleared by two manifest examples. 12. Christ
is otherwise in the outward body and temple that suffered at Jerusalem then in
the Saints. 13. The Saints union with God is but mediat through the heavenly
man Christ whereas the union of Christ with God is immediate. 14. The Saints not
Christ, but Christians, and receive all things from God by the Heavenly Man
Christ Jesus: 15. How Christ has given eternal life to all flesh or all
mankind according to John 17. 2. which place of Scripture is falsely translated
in our English Bible.

THe fifth Particular whereof he accuses us is, that we affirm Christ to be a
common sort of thing, to be found in every man, as it was in the Son of Mary,
even the common Light to be found in the mind of every man in the world.

1. Answer. That Christ is in every man, yea in every creature, we do boldly
affirm, conform to the Scripture, which says, all things were created by
him, even Jesus Christ the incarmate Word, or Word made flesh, and therefore he
is in all things: and as John said, he was in the world and the world was made
by him; for indeed it is impossible that the maker can be separated from the
thing that is made, I say; according to the Scripture that seeing all creaturs
were made by Jesus Christ, therefore he is in them all, even as God is in all,
giving them [and upholding them] their beings, and ministering unto every thing,
what is needful and fit, for it.

2. Does it any more derogat from the honor and glory of Christ, that he is in
all, then it derogats from the honor and glory of God the Father, who is in
all, and through all, blessed in himself for ever more. For as God is a pure
being and life, that nothing can defile, even so is Christ Jesus, an
incorruptible and incontaminable life and being, and as God is Light, so Christ
is Light, a Light that shines every where, even in the darkness, as John
declared, but the darkness cannot comprehend it, nor can the darkness obscure
and darken it, only it can and does obscure and darken the eyes, of them who
are in darkness, that they cannot see nor behold the glory of the Light. But
more particularly to come to the matter in hand, I shall first prove from
Scripture, that Christ is in the Saints; and secondly both from Scripture and
good reason, that is grounded on Scripture, that he is in all men, in a true
sense; yea in all creatures. And thirdly I shall show that in regard of his
operations, he is otherwise in men, then in the other creaturs of an inferior
degree. And fourthly that he is otherwise in the Saints, then in other men, and
that not only in regard of operation, but also in regard of union and
communion. And fifthly, that he is otherwise in the vessel or temple, that
suffered on the Cross at Jerusalem, and is now glorified in heaven, then he is
in any, or in all of the Saints, or in any other creaturs whatsoever howsoever
excellent.

3. As to the first that Christ is in the Saints, see Ioh. 6: 56. he that
eats my flesh and drinks my blood, dwells in me and I in him, see also
John 17. 23. I in them and thou in me etc. see again, Romans 8. 10. And if Christ
be in you the body is dead, Ephesians. 3. 17. That Christ may dwell in your hearts by
faith, Collos. 1. 27. Christ in you the hope of glory, 2 Cor. 13. 3. Seeing that
ye seek a proof of Christ speaking in me, and verse 5. know ye not your own
s^lv^s, how that Jesus Christ is in you, unless ye be reprobates. Many more
Scriptures may be brought, but these shall suffice to show that Christ is in
the Saints, and Christ is Gods anointed King, Priest, and Prophet, and therefore
by Christ is not to be understood the Word simply considered, as in God, but
the incarnate or ingrafted Word, or the Word made flesh that dwells in the
Saints, Ioh. 1. 14. for the Word simply considered as in God, is not the
anointed, but the annointer, whereas Christ is Gods anointed.

4. Secondly that Christ is in all men, even in the wicked, see Amos 2. 13.
Behold I am pressed under you, as a Cart is pressed that is full of sheaves.
This cannot be understood of God, or the Word simply considered, that cannot be
pressed or suffer any grief but it is well understood of the incarnat, or
ingraft^d Word, to wit, the precious Seed of the life of Christ in us. that is
exceeding tender and is capable of grief, and suffering, by men's sins. Psalm.
95. 10. Forty years long was I grieved in this generation, Isajah 63. 9, 10.
In all their affliction, he was aff^icted, and the Angel of his presence saved
them, in his love and in his pity he redeemed them, and he bare them and carried
them all the days of old, but they rebelled and vexed his holy Spirit etc.

5. This is the holy Spirit of the heavenly man Christ Jesus, or the ingrafted
or incarnat Word, that is capable of grief and suffering, whereas the Godhead
is not capable of any suffering or grief, for all suffering and grief is a
finite and temporal thing, whereas nothing can be in God but that which is
infinite and eternal, otherwise God would not be in all respects, an infinite
being which is absurd.

6. See again. Hebr. 6. 6. They who fall away from Christ are said to crucify
to themselves the Son of God afresh. Now they could not crucify him, if he were
not in them, because he was not outwardly present with them, in his body of
flesh: so that they could not crucify him outwardly: and Rev. 11. 8. our Lord
is said to be crucified in Spiritual Sodom and Egypt, that is, the Apostat
Church, Babylon, the Mother of fornications.

7. And when Paul first preached to the Corinthians, and Galathians, in the
time of their heathenism; he preached Christ crucified in them, see 1 Cor. 2.
1. Gal. 3. 1. The Words in both places according to the Greek, are crucified in
you: And it was a great part of the mystery that Paul preached unto the
Gentiles, to wit, Christ in the Gentiles, which Satan and his ministers
labored to hide and obscure, as they do at this present, but Christ and his
Ministers labor to make known. See Collos. 1. 27. To whom God would make
known, what is the riches of the glory of this Mystery in the Gentiles. And
Ephesians. 1. 8. he preached the unsearchable riches of Christ in the Gentiles. And 1 Timothy 3. 16. God manifest in the flesh preached in the Gentiles, so the Greek in
all these places, but the Translaters of the Bible, not understanding this so
blessed and comfortable a truth, have translated these places, among, and not
in, whereas if Christ was among them, he was also in them, seeing he was not
outwardly present among them, in his body of flesh.

8. And seeing that both they who are not Saints, as well as they who are
Saints, are created by Jesus Christ, he must needs be as really in the one, as
in the other. Also seeing the Saints and the wicked in this world, walk up and
down together, and are scattered, among one another, good and sound reason
teaches us, that if Christ be in the Saints, he must needs be in all men, yea
in all this world, through which the Saints are scattered, otherwise Christ
would be divided from himself, and be discontinued, and in discontinued places,
which is impossible, as all men of sound reason must needs acknowledge.

9. Thirdly, all though Christ be in all the creaturs, yet he is otherwise in
all men, then in the others creaturs, that are of an inferior degree, unto
mankind, in regard of operation, because he exerteth or puts forth, more
noble operations, in and upon men, then in other creaturs, men having immortal
souls that are more noble principles and subjects of operation, then the
inferior creaturs have, so that all men, even the worst of men are capable of
knowing and enjoying the blessed life of Christ, which the in^erior creaturs
are not, and that which hinders them from this knowledge and enjoyment, is not
the want of capacity* as it is in the other creaturs, out sin, and especially
the sin of unbelief; that they will not come unto him, who is come unto them,
that they may have life, as he complained against the Jews.

10. Fourthly, Christ is otherwise in the Saints, then in other men, and that
not only in regard of operation, but also in regard of union and communion, for
the Saints are joined unto him by living bonds, as the branches are unto the
vine, and as the living members of the body are unto the head, and they are one
Spirit, 1 Cor. 6. 17. Ephesians. 4. 15, 16. Ioh. 15. 5. Ioh. 17. 23. Also they have
communion, both with the Father and the Son, Christ Jesus, 1 John 1. 3. and one
with another in him, 1 John 1. 7. and Christ dwells in the hearts of the
Saints by Faith, Ephesians. 3. 17. And he is formed in them, Gal. 4. 19. So that they
are his mother who bring him forth, by a Spiritual and divine birth, Matthew.
12. 49. And thus the Church brought him forth, long after he was outwardly
born, and crucified, and rose and ascended, Revel. 12. 5. And she brought forth
a manchild who was to rule all Nations with a rod of iron, this is the hidden
man of the heart, 1. Pet. 3. 4. which (...) the heavenly ornament, not only of
all good Wom^n, but of all the Saints, whom they do put on, Romans 13. 14. who
is the new man, Ephesians 24. And the heavenly man, or Lord from heaven, 1 Cor. 15.
47, 48. So that having eat his flesh and drunk his blood, they are members of
his body, of his flesh, and of his bones, Ephesians. 5. 30. whereas all other men,
who are not Saints, they have no union nor communion with Christ, and he
dwells not in them by faith, he is not formed in them, nor revealed, as he is
in the Saints, as Paul declared he was in him, at his conversion, Gal. 1. 18.
and then he preached him, (...) in the Gentiles, to the end that he might be
revealed in them, as he was in him, and thus the being of Christ in the Saints,
is after a more special presence, then he is in others, whose understandings
are darkened, being alienated from the life of God, through the ignorance that
is in them, because of the blindness of their heart. Ephesians. 4. 18. And here
observe, that he does not say, because that the life of God is not in them, but
because of their blindness and ignorance they were alienated and estranged from
it, being past feeling: so that once they had a feeling of this Life, and
therefore it was in them, which Life is Christ.

11. Now because that Christ is not in Vnbeliever^ according to that special
presence and revelation, as he is in the Saints and Believers; but is hid and
unrevealed in them, therefore it is that sometimes Christ is said not to be in
them, even as we commonly say, in a cloudy and dark night, when no Stars
appear in the air or Firmament, that they are not in it, whereas they are in
it, even then, but they do not appear in it as when the air is clear. For
Christ the Light shines in the darkness, although the darkness comprehends him
not, and this is the night state. But when men believe, he is said to rise ^n
them, and therefore he was in them before, but (...) arisen, even as the Sun is
in the Firmament at ^^dnight as well as at midday, but the dark shad^ow of the
Earth hinders us from its Light: and ^hus the darkness of the Earthly mind
hinders the ^oul of the Unbeliever to see the Sun of righteous^ess, who
reaches through all, and is in all, Col. (...) 11. and is that true Light that
inlighteneth every ^an that comes into the world, Joh. 1: 9.

12. Fifthly: Christ Jesus he is otherwise in the (...), then he was, and is,
in that vessel and temple (...) suffered at Jerusalem, and is now glorified in
(...) Heavens; for the Saints have not the Heavenly (...) Christ Jesus, as it
were, centrally and original^^^ them, the Spring and Center of his Soul, Life.
(...) Light is not in their vessels, but only in that (...) which was born of
the Virgin Mary: they (...) enjoy of his Life and Light, as it proceeds (...)
him by way of emanation and participation. (...) that although the true Light
be both in him, and (...); yet it is otherwise in him then in us, as the (...)
of the Sun is otherwise in the body of the Sun, (...) it is in other bodies into
which it emanates: and (...) Life is otherwise in the Principal part or parts
(...) the Natural bodies, then as it is in the other Mem^^^. And both these
exampls have been used by (...) Ancients, to shadow forth this great Mystery
(...) they also are used in the Scripture it self, which calls him the Head
of the Body, and the Sun of Righteousness; and it pleased the Father that in
him all fullness should dwell, and out of his fullness we all receive and Grace
for Grace, for in him dwells all the fullness of the Godhead bodily, see
Coloss. 1: 19. and 2: 9. and Joh. 1: 16. So that in all things he has the
pre-eminence, as the Apostle declared. And look, as the sap or moisture and
living virtue is otherwise in the Root and Stock of the Tree, then it is in the
Branches, although i^ be really also in the branches: even thus it is as
concerning Christ and the Saints, he is the Vine, they are the Branches, he is
the Root that bears them, and sends forth his Life conti^ually into them,
to make the^ fruitful; that they may bear living fruits of Life. Now he is the
Root and Vine (into which the Saints are grafted) not simply as the Word, but
as the Word Incarnate, and as dwelling in that most pure and most Wonderful
Vessel, that suffered at Jerusalem.

13. For because the fullness dwelt in him, and that he was immediately and most
intimatly united with the Godhead, so as no men no^ Angels are, but only the
Man Jesus, he is only the true Christ. And because he it is alone, who in an
immediate way, and originally, is Gods Anointed, who has anointed him with his
Holy Spirit; and all other men* even the most holy, but mediately united with
God through him, and mediately by and through him receiving the Anointing or
Holy Spirit, therefore all other holy men are not Christ, but Christians, not
being immediately anointed of the Father, but by the means of Jesus Christ.

14. Nor are they otherwise partakers of the Anointing, or of the Holy Ghost,
but as they are partakers of Christ. And this the Name Christian does plainly
import, for it is a derivative name from Christ, holding forth that as we
derive our name from him, so also we derive from him whatever Light or Life,
Grace or Heavenly Virtus we do enjoy: The Father first gives it unto him, and
he (even the Man Christ Jesus, that was born of the Virgin Mary, the Son of
David and Abraham according to the Flesh) does give it unto us.

15. He it is, by whom Grace and Truth comes unto Mankind, he it is to whom
the Father has gi^en power over all flesh (as he himself declared, Ioh. 17:
2.) that whatever the Father has given to ^im, he may give to them eternell
life: for so the (...) are according to the Greek, and so both ^rias Montanus,
and the vulgar Latin and Dutch Translation render them. So that Christ has
given (...) all flesh, that is, All mankind, eternal Life; even (...) has
received it of the Father, not that all (...) do enjoy or possess eternal
Life, but yet the Seed or Principle of it is put in them, which is the Light of
his Son Christ Jesus that lights every man that comes into the World, and
thereby All men may have Life (as Christ himself said, I am come that ye may
have Life) and if they have it not, it is not because they can not, but because
they will not have it; for it is really tendered unto them by Christ Jesus,
who, on this account, is the Savior of all men, but especially of them that
believe.

SECTION X.
1. All true Christians do worship the Man Christ Jesus. 2. True Believers
worshipped him upon Earth in the days of his flesh. 3. The Wisemen from the
East worshipped the child Jesus, but not Mary, thereby condemning the gross
idolatry of the church of Rome. 4. Many exampls out of Scripture to prove they
worshipped the Man Christ Jesus. 5. Some Presbyterians have taught tha^ the Man
Christ Jesus was not to be worshipped, to the great dishonor of the Christian
Religion 6. The Christian Quakers falsely accused that (...) do not pray to the
Man Jesus Christ. 7. We often expressly mention the names JESUS CHRIST in our
prayers, and when we do not mention these names, yet praying by the movings of
his Life (...) Spirit, we pray always unto Christ Jesus, who^ the heavenly Man
and God over all blessed for ever. 8. In what sort of expressions I have heard
some of our Friends pray to Christ in our Meetings, and which I have also used
in prayer to my great comfort. 9. That because all true Christians do worship
the Man Christ Jesus, he, to wit, the Heavenly Man must needs be really present
in and among them, in their meetings, and consequently every where; but this is
not meant of his external person. 10. Who pray unto the Man Christ and do not
believe him to be present, are real Idolaters, as this Author of the
Postscript. 11. That distinction refuted, that he is present as God, not as
Man. 12. That the Man Christ hears our prayers, proves that he is present
every where. 13. That distinction refuted that the Man Christ Jesus knows our
prayers and thoughts not by immediate perception, but by having them revealed to
him by the Godhead, which is the Popish evasion for worshipping Saints and
Angels. 14. Some places of Scripture opened, as Heb. 4: 15, 16. Psalm. 18. 9,
10. 15. That Christ did immediately kow the thoughts of men, proved from diverse
Scripturs. 16. Omnipercipiency of the Soul of Christ proves him as man to be
Omnipresent.

1. ANd for these causes it is, that all true Christians do worship the Man
Christ Jesus, and pray unto him, as they do unto the Father: so that he is a
true and proper object of Divine adoration, as is the Father, yea it is in and
through him that we can only in a true and acceptable way worship the Father,
and call upon him.

2. And even in the days of his flesh, they who saw his glory, and did truly
know what he was, did both believe in him and pray unto him, and he bid his
Disciples believe in him, Ye believe in God, believe also in me, said he, that
is, in me, the Man Christ Jesus whom God has sent.

3. And seeing we are to believe in him, we are also to call upon him, for that
which is the proper object of true Faith, is also the proper object of true
Divine adoration, as accordingly we find, that they who had true faith in him,
in the days of his flesh did also worship him and pray unto him, as the Wise
men that came from the East did worship him, even when he was an Infant, Matthew.
2: 11. And when they were come into the house, they saw the young Child with
Mary his mother, and fell down and worshipped him. And here observe, it is not
said, they worshipped Mary his mother, no: they were more wise, although they
did know that she was blessed above all Women, yet they did also know that she
was not an object of Divine worship, as Christ was. Surely these men, although
commonly accounted Heathens, had more sound understanding then all the wise
men, so called, of the Popish Church, who worship Mary the mother of Jesus, and
pray unto her, as they do also unto other Saints, which is gross idolatry.
Again see Matthew. 8: 2. And behold there came a Leper, and worshipped him,
saying, Lord if thou will thou can make me clean, and this was the Man Jesus.

4. And many such examples are to be found in Scripture of those that
worshipped him in the days of his flesh, see Matthew. 9: 18. and 14: 33. and 15:
25. And after his Resurrection the Disciples both Men and Women did worship
him, see Matthew. 28. 9. 17. as no doubt they did so before and after his
Ascension the Disciples did call upon him, see Act. 7: 59. And they stoned
Stephen, calling and saying, Lord Jesus receive my Spirit. and Act. 9: 21. the
Disciples are said to be they that call on this Name, to wit, JESUS; and Paul
saluteth the Corinthians thus, 1 Cor. 1: 3. Grace be unto you and peace from
God our Father, and from our Lord Jesus Christ: and ver. 2. unto the Church of
God which is at Corinth, to them that are sanctified in Christ Jesus called
Saints, with all that in every place call upon the Name of Jesus Christ our
Lord, both theirs and ^urs. And it is the will and command of the Father that
at the Name of Jesus every knee should ^ow, and every tongue confess to the
glory of God the Father. So that whatever honor or worship is given to the Man
Christ Jesus, it redounds to the Father. He that honors the Son, honors the
Father, and he that honors not the Son, honors not the Father. And Rev. 5:
11, 12, 13, 14. All the Saints and Angels and every creature are brought in not
only worshipping the Father, but the Lamb, that was slain, and this is the Man
Christ Jesus, or Word incarnate; for the Word or Logos simply considered never
was nor can be slain. All which Scripturs and many more that could be
mentioned, prove clearly that the Saints did worship the Man Christ Jesus, and
did pray unto him. And they who believe not this doctrine, are more blind, then
the poor blind man Bartimeus, who when Jesus of Nazareth passed by, saw him
with the eyes of his Soul to be the Christ of God, and prayed unto him, saying,
Jesus thou Son of David have mercy upon me; Mark 10: 46, 47. Also the
Canaanitish woman, that was not a Jew, but in the Jews account an Heathen, she
believed in him with a great and marvelous faith, and also prayed unto him; and
when he seemed to have refused her, yet she continued in prayer, saying Lord
help me.

5. I have been the more full and express in this Particular, for three weighty
reasons.

First. Because I know that diverse Presbyteria^ Teachers in this Nation have
openly professed, and some have taught it in the Pulpit, that Christ as
Mediator, or the Man Christ, is not to be worshipped, or prayed unto, which
occasioned a great contention in their Synods and Presbyterys in some places,
of late years; to the great dishonor of the Christian Religion, and of that
Worthy Name, whereby we are called.

6. Secondly: Because that some have ignorantly accused us, that we did not pray
to the Man Jesus, nor call upon the Father in the Name of Jesus Christ; which
is a gross calumny.

7. For many times have I both heard others, and also I my self have called
upon that Blessed Name, expressly naming the words JESUS CHRIST; although when
we express not these words, yet if we pray by the moving of his Life and
Spirit, we pray in the Name of Jesus, and also to Jesus the Heavenly Man, that
is glorified with that glory he had with the Father before the world was.

8. Yea I have heard expressly such petitions put up in our Prayers, at our
Meetings, unto Christ as Jesus, Son of David have mercy upon us, O thou Blessed
Lord Jesus, that were crucified, and dyed for our sins, and shed thy precious
blood for us, be gracious unto us. Thou that in the days of thy flesh were
tempted of Satan, afflicted, bore our sins on the cross, felt our infirmitys,
and were touched with them. O thou our Merciful High Pr^est, whose tender
bowels of compassion are not more straitened since thy Ascension, but rather
more enlarged, and whose love and kindness is the same toward thy Servants in
our days, as it was of old; help us, and strengthen us: and by the power of thy
Divine Life and Spirit raise us up over all tentations, and indue us with a
measure of the same patience and resignation that dwel^ so fully in thee, and
which thou did so abundantly manifest in all thy sufferings, in the days of
thy flesh. Thou art the same that thou were, thy heart is the same toward thy
Servants, as when thou were outwardly present with them in the flesh. Thou art
our Advocat and Mediator in Heaven with the Father: our Merciful High Priest,
who is not untouched with the feeling of our infirmitys. Thou, even Thou,
Blessed Jesus, thou know our most secret desires and breathings, which we
offer up unto thee, in the enablings of thy blessed Life and Spirit, that thou
may present them unto thy Father and our Father, that in thee, we may be
accepted, and our services also, and for thy sake our defects and short
comings, our sins and transgressions that we have committed, may be forgiven
us. These and such like expressions frequently used by us in prayer, both in
secret, and also in public, in our Assemblys, plainly demonstrate, that we
worship and pray unto the Mediator betwixt God and Man, the Man Christ Jesus,
the anointed King, Priest and Prophet of his People, who also is God over all
bessed forever. For he is that Mighty One, upon whom the Father has laid help,
so that although the Father himself loves us, and is most willing and ready to
help us in all our necessitys, yet we can no otherwise receive his help, but
as it comes to us by the conveyance of the Man Christ Jesus, our alone Mediator.

9. Thirdly: My third reason, (which is mainly for my present purpose, and
which alone is enough to conclude) is, because it demonstrats this great and
blessed Truth, to wit; that the Man Christ Jesus is really present in and among
us [and consequently every where) I do not mean by his external or outward
person, for that is ascended into Heaven, but in virtue of his Divine Life and
Spirit, or Soul extended into us in his Divine Seed and Body, which is his
Heavenly flesh and blood, wherewith he feeds the Souls of them that believe
in him. I say Our worshipping the Man Jesus and praying unto him, does plainly
demonstrate, that he is really present in and among us, and with us, as his
Name Immanuel does signify, not only as God, but as Man; for it were a most
absurd thing to worship an object that is altogether absent, as the Manhood of
Christ is, according unto these Presbyterian Teachers. We know how the Prophet
Elijah mocked Baals worshippers with a Godly zeal and indignation, on this
account, as supposing him in their account as an absent God. Cry aloud, said
he, for perhaps he is asleep, or has taken a journey. As for us God forbid
that we should worship an absent Christ, or call upon a Savior to help us, in
whom we do not believe as really present.

10. Sure I am they who pray unto him, and yet do not believe him to be
present, and have not some sense of his presence, are real Idolaters; for they
pretend to worship an object, which wants a property altogether essential to
an object of Divine worship, that is, real presence.

11. Nor is it enough for them to say, he is present as God, but not as man,
for if the Man be not present, he is not to be worshipped, and if he be to be
worshipped, as most certainly he is, then he is present, for this is one of the
great motives of worship and prayer, that he whom we worship and call upon, is
present to help us, as David called him ^ present help in time of trouble: and
we are commanded to come and worship before his presence.

12. But again, Our praying to the Man Jesus does imply, that he does really
hear our Prayers, and is really sensible and perceptive of them, and that not
only when we use vocal prayers, but also when we pray only in our most secret
thoughts. Now it is impossi^le that he could hear us, and be sensible of our
prayers, and especially of our thoughts, if he were not immediately present in
us, and with us; For, to say that his Godhead does reveal our prayers and
thoughts unto the Manhood, does no wise answer the strength of this reason;
for hearing and perception, are immediate acts of the soul, and reach unto the
objects immediately, or the objects unto them, but what is made known by
revelation simply, does not so reach, and that cannot be properly called
hearing our prayers, or being sensible of them. As suppose that God should
reveal immediately to a man, in Persia, or China, that I am praying here at such
a distance, that man could not be said, to hear me praying or be sensible of
the very breathings of my soul, as when the Lord revealed to Ananias, that
Saul, who after was called Paul, did pray, yet who will say that Ananias heard
Paul pray at that time?

Surely this is such a slender and deceitful evasion and answer, as the
Papists use commonly to give, when we bring this reason against their praying
unto Saints and Angels, to wit, that they do not, nor cannot, hear our prayers
every where, because they are not every where present nor can be, because of
their limited capacity, they tell us, that they read ou^ prayers, in the
mirror or looking glass of the Deity, or have them revealed unto them
immediately by God, which answer the Protestants, most deservedly reject, for
that is not properly to hear.

14. And indeed none is fit to be a Mediator, but he that immediately hears
our prayers, and has a sense of the breathings and yearnings of our souls
toward God, and is touched with the feeling of our infirmitys, as Christ Jesus
our high Priest really is, for [said the Apostle Hebr. 4. 15, 16.] we have not
^n high Priest, which cannot be touchea with the feeling of our infirmitys, but
was in all points tempted like (...), yet without sin, let us therefore come
boldly unto the (...) of grace, that we may obtain (...), and find grace to
help in time of need. Here observe, how he makes this the reason, why we should
come (...) unto the throne of grace, even because (...) have an high Priest,
that is not of so A damantine a nature, nor yet so remo^e from us, as that he
cannot be touched with the feeling of our infirmitys, and therefore he has a
real feeling of them, which is more (...) the Prophets mantle fell, and this
was a figure of this great mystery, for Christ the greatest of all Prophets,
when he ascended, he let fall his mantle upon his disciples, to wit, a
plenteous emanation of his spiritual and divine Body and Life, the proper
vehicles and conduit of the Holy Ghost, and of God himself, so that they came
to be wonderfully endued with the Holy Ghost, and indeed that which Jesus
Christ has left with us of his Divine Body, and Life, is Gods Throne of Grace,
or Heavenly Throne, on which God sits, and to which we have access, while we
are here upon Earth, that is of the same nature with that above, and one entire
being with it, the Altar, the mercy seat. The Cherub on which God rides, as it
is Psalm. 18. 9, 10. He bowed the heavens also and came down, and darkness was
under his feet, and he rode upon a Cherub, (...) did flee, yea he did flee upon
the Spirit* so the Hebrew. This Cherub is the Man Christ Jesus, the heavenly
rays of whose Spirit, Light and Life, are his wings, on which the most
glorious and most High God does ride, and bring speedy deliverance to his
afflicted Saints, in all ages. And Christ also is (...) heavens that God
boweth, to wit, the Heavenly Man, that most willingly boweth, and obey^^^ the
Fathers commands in all things, who is the Man of Gods right hand, by whom he
does all things (...) heaven and Earth, he bel^g his most immediate and most
universal instrument, and organ of operation, in all things, in heaven or
Earth, or under the Earth, and therefore to him must every (...) bow, whether
in heaven, or earth or below the earth.

15. But I shall more particularly prove that (...) Man Jesus, even in the
days of his flesh, did kno^ the thoughts of men, from express testimonies
(...) Scripture. Math. 12. 25. and Jesus knew their though^ see also Luke 6. 8.
and John 2. 24, 25. But (...) did not committ himself unto them, because he
(...) all men, and needed not that any should testify (...) Man, for he knew
what was in man. And sure^^ John understood this of Christ, as man, for he
(...) here speaking of the Man Christ, even Jesus (...) was borne of Mary, but
to say that he knew (...) thoughts, not immediately, but by revelation, (...) to
contradict the express words of this Scripture which says that he needed not
that any should testify^^ man, and so needed not divine revelation to know
(...) thoughts or hearts of men. And Peter said unto (...) Man Christ Jesus,
Lord thou that know all (...) know that I love thee: all which prove that
(...) Man Christ Jesus, to wit, his soul has a real (...), and is really
omnipercipient and (...), of all things, present and past, if not of (...)
things to come, for as things to come he may (...) know them by divine
revelation from his Father but he cannot properly be percipient of them, (...)
sense and perception require always a present object.

16. And if Christ as Man be omnipercipient, he is also omnipresent, not only
because omnipercipiency is as great, or rather a greater propriety and
privilege, but also because omnipercipiency does really imply and involve in
it, omnipresence; for how that which is so altogether absent from us, can be
sensible of our affairs and thoughts, is altogether unconceiveable, and puts
our understanding as much upon the rack as the Popish doctrine of
transubstantiation, and the Lutheran of Consubstantiation, whereas in the way
as I have expressed it, the thing ^s easy to be understood.

SECTION. XI.
1. An objection answered that I seem to agree with the Lutheran doctrine, of
the ubiquity of the Man Christ. 2. That the external Person and body of Christ
is not every where, nor his Soul wholly in every place, by a certain
multiplication of ubications, as the Lutherans commonly, but falsely teach. 3.
The Center, Spring or Fountain of his Soul, Life or Spirit, as he is the
Heavenly Man, is only in that body that was crucified outwardly at Jerusalem,
and is now glorified in the Heavens. 4. And is extended unto us by way of
emanation. 5. Some examples given to illustrat this Truth. 6. As we agree with
Luther in the general, so we differ from him in the particular manner of the
ubiquity of the Man Christ Jesus, which in their way is inexplicable and
repugnant to Scripture (...) the certain instincts and dictats of Reason, but
(...) our way most r^tional and agreeable to Scripture. 7. The great comfort of
this Doctrine, that we ha^^ the Man Christ Jesus so near unto us in virtue of
his Divine Life and Soul in his Divine Seed an^ Body extended unto us. 8. That
the most glor^^ous Angels can not see God, but in the Man (...) Jesus; to wit,
in his Spirit, Life and Light r^vealed in them. 9. How the words of Jame^
concerning the Word Ingrafted, are to be understood: and the words of John
concerning the Wor^ made Flesh. 10. That Scripture Heb. 9: 1^ opened. 11. A
Saying of Hermes Trismegist^^ concerning God his being a Circle, whose Center
is every where, and is no where circum^cri^ed. 12. The Man Christ Jesus a real
a^ proper middle betwixt God and us.

ANd if it be objected, that I seem to agre^ with the Lutheran doctrine, as
concernin^ the ubiquity of the Man Christ.

1. I answer, that I do indeed agree wit^ them in the general; but differ from
them as to (...) manner in great and weighty circumstances. For they say, the
external person and body of Christ that suffered on the Cross, is every where,
even the whole in every place.

2. I say Nay: his external Person is arisen, and ascended, and is not here;
as the Angel said, sur^^exit, non est hic, he is risen, he is not here: meaning
his outward body, for that was it they were seeking; and it is impossible that
one and the same (...) body can be in many places, at once. 2. They say, the
whole Soul of Christ is in every (...), and in every thing, not by an
extention, but a ^ertain multiplication of its ubication; but this is as
^^possible and unconceivable as the former.

3. But I say, The whole Soul or Spirit of Christ ^not in every place, nor in
every man; for the ^enter and Spring or Fountain of it is only in that ^ody
that was crucified on the Cross at Jerusalem, and is now ascended and glorified
in Heaven; which ^emaineth the same in Substance, that it was on ^arth,
although it be wonderfully changed as to the (...) and manner of its being: it
being no more a ^ody of flesh, blood and bones, but a pure, ethereal (...)
heavenly body, like unto which the bodies of the ^aints are to be at the
resurrection. For Earth^^ and Heavenly are not so differing, but that re^aining
one in Substance: they may be changed ^e into another, so that as one and the
same (...) Soul may by the operation of the Mighty Power of God, be changed, so
as to be made heavenly and pure; even so one and the same Earthly body may by
the same Power be made Heavenly, and thus in different respects they are one
and the same, and yet not the same: one in Substance, and not one, but another,
in the manner of being.

4. And the Center or Spring of Christ's Soul remaining in that glorified body,
it extends its precious Life Spirit and Light into the Saints, and (...) some
manner into all men.

5. Even as the Light of the Sun, that is centra^^^ in the body of the Sun, and
yet emanats and (...) forth its Light in most abundant streams and rays^^ to
all the world. And as the Soul of any ordin^^^ man has its center in one
principal part of the body, as some think the Head, but others the Hea^ and
sends forth its Life and vital Rays into (...) whole body, and therefore the
Soul is sensible^ whatever affects any part or member in the who^^ body. Even
thus our blessed Lord and Savior ^^sus Christ is sensible of whatever affects
or moves (...) Church, which is also his body, by the real (...) of his Divine
Life, Soul and Spirit in the Divi^^ Seed extended into the same.

6. And thus indeed as we agree with Luther an^ his followers in the general,
so we differ from the^ as to the particular manner and way of the real
pr^^sence and ubiquity of the Manhood of Christ, (...) in their way is
inexplicable, and repugnant to the most certain instincts and dictats of
Reason, that God has endued us with, as Rational creaturs. Whereas the way as I
have expressed it, is most rational, and will be found to be most true and
solid, by all, that shall seriously ponder the matter, and weigh the reasons
and arguments I have given for it, and may yet further give from Testimonys of
Scripture, and experience of the Saints; that no reason can contradict, but
does highly favor.

7. And surely it is no less a comfortable, then (...) is a true doctrine, that
we have the Man Jesus Christ (...) near unto us, in virtue of his Divine Life
and Soul, in his Divine Seed and Body extended into us: and thus he is the
Incarnat Word, or Word made flesh, ^welling in our flesh, and is made like unto
us; for as we are flesh, so he is flesh also, but of a more excellent make or
creation. And thus he is the Bride^room and Husband of our Souls, to whom we
may approach, and whom we may kiss and embrace, and handle with the hands of
our Soul, and whose glory we may behold; even the glory of the Word made flesh,
and dwelling in us. Whereas the glory of the Word as it was in God, before it
became flesh, or clothed it self with the heavenly Manhood, no eye of Angel or
Saint ever could or can behold: for the Glory of the Word simply considered, in
God, out of the Manhood of Christ, is God himself, without any middle or
Mediator.

8. And this none has ever seen, or can see, no not the most glorious Angels;
but it is the Word made flesh, or God made manifest in flesh, to wit, in the
Heavenly Flesh or Manhood of Christ, that is the alone proper and adequat
object of the contemplation and enjoyment of the most glorious Angels as well as
of the most Holy Souls, as Paul declared; Great is the mystery of Godlyness,
God manifest in the flesh, etc. seen of Angels. Observe here, it is not God
simply, but God manifest in flesh, that is seen of Angels, and is believed on
in the world; although he was both seen of Angels, and believed on in the
world, long before he was manifest in that outward body of Flesh, which was
also a most glorious manifestation, and excels in glory all the outward
manifestations, that ever were, or shall be; but the Angels and Saints did
really see him, before that nanifestation in outward flesh; and the Saints do
now really see him, although his outward body and external person be not now
present for us to behold.

9. Yet the Word Incarnate, or made flesh, and called by James the Ingrafted
Word, we do really see, for it (...) in us: and unless it were made flesh, or
incarnate, it could not be ingrafted into us, for all ingrafting or implanting
requires some simili^ude or analogy of nature and substance; therefore we can
not graffe an apple or cherry-graffe upon stone; or iron, or bare earth; by
reason of the great unlikenesse and distance of their natures: and yet the Word
simply and nakedly considered in God, before it was made flesh, is more unlike
unto us, and in nature more remote from us, then an apple is from stone, or
iron. Therefore to the end that the Word may be ingrafted into us, and we again
ingrafted into it, the Word must be incarnate, or become flesh, as we are; for
all men are a sort of flesh, and so called in Scripture, in comparison of God
that is purely a Spirit; and though the Souls of men (...) Spirits, yet
comparatively as unto God, they are as it were flesh. And thus the Word is
become flesh, that is to say, has advanced a step, or degree nearer unto us,
then as it was in God before any thing was made: and the Word was first of all
made flesh, to be the Root and Foundation of all other created beings, and for
which they are created.

10. For it is a more noble creation then all things else; and is (...) this
creation, as the Apostle declared expressly (Heb. 9: 11.) the words [not of
this (...)] should be translated [not of his creation] (...): and therefore
some think fit, rather to call it an emanation from God, then a creation, to
speak strictly, which I shall not dispute about; for it rather is a strife
about words, then in the thing it self. Now when I say that the Light, Life and
Spirit of the Heavenly Man, Christ Jesus, is not in us, as in respect of its
Fountain and Center, or Spring, but only by way of emanation or participation,
we deriving it from that Central Light, and Life, that was in him, that was
born of the Virgin Mary.

11. I do by no means acknowledge, or understand, that the Deity had only its
Center, in that Man, and from him does ray into us; for the most Blessed and
Glorious Deity properly has no center, and rays distinct, by way of emanation;
but rather is all Center, according to that noted saying of Hermes Trismegist;
God is a Circle, whose cent^^ is every where, and is no where circumscribed.
And therefore the Blessed Deity is as centrally and essentially in us, as in
the Man Christ Jesus

12. But still as in respect of union, manifestation and operation, and also in
respect ^f communion, and fellowship, the Man Christ Jesus, or Word Incarnate,
is the only and proper middle and Mediator betwixt God and us, so that where^^
God is immediately united with the Man Christ Jesus, no other men or Angels
have, or indeed are capable to have an immediate union with God; their union is
only mediat with God, and so their communion and fellowship with him is but
mediat also, by the means of Christ Jesus, although in respect of other means,
it is immediate. And of this I found needful once for all to acquaint the
Reader, to prevent his mis^^ke.

SECTION XII.
1. How much more truly we own and esteem the Manhood of Christ, then the
Author of the Postscript, or his Brethren. 2. A testimony of Luther, for the
Man Christ his being every where. 3. Another Testimony from those, who embraced
the Aungustane Confession in that Treatise, called Liber Concordiae, that
Christ as Man is really present with the Saints on Earth. 4. The Lutherans
gross error in the manner of this presence, has given occasion to many to
deny the Truth it self, because they could not understand the manner. 5. The
manner offered in this Treatise most consonant both to Scripture and Reason,
and almost to Sense. 6. How John saw the Son of Man in the midst of the golden
candlesticks after his Ascersion. 8. How Christ (...) the ladder, by which we
ascend unto God. 8. The Nephesch and Neschamah of Christ's Soul distin^guished.
9. Christ his spiritual coming in his Saints as the Son of Man, Ma^th. c: 16:
ver: 28. 10. A Testimony of Calvin, that Christ as Man, does sanctify us and
give us Grace. 11. Some testimonys from S. R. his Epistles, that Christ is in
the Saints, not only by his Gra^es, but by himself. 12. Another Testimony of
Calvin. 13. That S. R. speaks of the Man Christ his being in the Saints. 14.
Many call that h^rrid blasphemy in us, which they commend in S. R. and others
of their own Teachers, which is great injustice and partiality. 15. Christ his
knowing the heart of the Samaritan Woman, and curing the woman of Canaan of her
issue of blood, proves the extension of his Soul, and Life or Spirit
aforesaid, as he is the Heavenly Man.

1. ANd thus it may appear, how much more truly (according to the Scripture,
and our own blessed experience, agreeing most exactly with the experience of
the Saints of old) we own and esteem of the Manho^^ of Christ Jesus, above
whatever the Author of the Postscript, or his Brethren did acknowledge; who
would exclude the Heavenly Man or Second Adam Jesus Christ altogether out of
the very Saints: whereas the Second Adam is the quickening Spirit, that raises
up both Soul and body into Life, as Paul declared.

2. And indeed Luther did conceive a most just indignation and zeal against
them (such as this Presbyterian is) who exclude the Manhood of Christ out of
the Saints, and confine it to one place. For thus he writes in his Larger
Confession of the Supper of the Lord. Absit autem, ut ego talem Deum agnoscam
aut colam, ex his enim consequeretur quod locus and spatium possent duas nature
as separare, and personam Christi dividere, quam tamen neque mors, neque omnes
diaboli dividere aut separare potuere. Et quanti tandem obsecro pretii esset
talis Christus, qui unico tantum loco simul divina and human^ person^ esset, in
omnibus voro locis dun^axat and quidem separatus Deus, aut divina persona esset
sine assumpta sua humanitate? In English thus: Far be it from me, that I should
acknowledge, or worship such a God, for hence it should follow, that place and
space could separat the two naturs, and divide the person of Christ, which
neither death, nor all the devils could ever do. And I pray, of what worth
were such a Christ, who ^n one only place should be both a divine and humane
person together, but in all other places should be God separat, or a divine
person without his assumed humanity.

3. And also those, who embraced the Augustan confession in that Treatise,
called Liber Concor^^a; where they give a new declaration of some articles in
that confession, upon the head concerning the person of Christ, speak their
mind very notably, in these following words, which express the very something
upon the matter, as to the general, that (...) plead for. Quare perniciosum
error om esse judicamus, quando Christo juxta humanitatem, Majestas illa
derogatur; Christianis enim ea ratione summa illa consolatio eripitur, quam e
promissionibus paulo ante commemoratis de presentia and inhabitatione capitis,
Regis, and summi sui Pontificis, haurire poterant. Is enim promisi^ non modo
nudam suam divinitatem ipsis praesto futuram (quae nobis miseris peccatoribus
est tanquam ignis consumens arridissimas stipulas) se^ ille ipse, homo ille,
qui cum discipulis loquutu^ est, qui omnis generis tribulation^s in assumpt^
sua humana natura gustavit, qui ea de causa nobis (ut and hominibus and
fratribus suis) cond^lere potest, se in omnibus angustiis nostris nobiscum
futurum promisit, secundum eam eciam naturam, juxta quam ille Frater noster
es^, ^ nos caro de carne ejus sumus. In English thus: Wherefore (say they) we
judge it to be a hurtful^ error, when that majesty is derogated from Christ,
according to his manhood, for by that means, the most great consolation is
robbed from Christians, which they could have drawn from the promises, a little
before mentioned, concerning the presence and ^ndwelling of their head, King
and high Priest. For he promised that not only his Godhead should be present
with them (which to us miserable sinners, is as a fire consuming most dry
stubble) but the same, that man, who spoke with his disciples, who tasted all
kind of tribulations in his assumed manhood; who for that cause can be grieved
with us (being also men, and his brethren) did promise that he would be with us
in all our afflictions, also according to that nature, by which he is our
Brother, and we are flesh of his flesh.

4. But the Lutherans conceit, that the external person of Christ, not only
virtually, but formally, is in every place; yea the wole in the whole, and the
whole of it in every part; is so absurd and repugnant unto rational perception;
that from this many have taken occasion, unjustly to deny the Truth it self,
because they did not see how this manner of the Lutherans of the ubiquity of the
man Christ could consist with Reason.

5. Whereas the manner offered by me, is most consonant both to Scripture and
Reason, yea and almost to Sense it self; for there are sensible examples, by
which we may illustrate the manner of it, as namely, that of the stream of
Light, that flows from the candle, and fills the whole house, while as the
body of the candle it self is but in one place.

6. And what does that fiery stream or river signify, that issued and came
forth from the Ancient of days, but the extension of the Life and Spirit of
Christ, as he is the Heavenly Man? And as John Rev. 1. describes him is a
wonderfully Great man, even that Son of man, whom John saw, after his
ascension, in the midst of the golden candlsticks, even he that lives and was
dead, ver. 18. to show that it was the Man Christ, and he had in his right hand
seven star^^ which are expounded to be the seven Angels or Pastors of the seven
churches. This shows it is not his external person, or outward body that is
here described, for it is impossible to conceive, how he can hold a number of
men in the right hand of his external person. Therefore by his right hand is
signified his power, as he is the great Heavenly Man, which can well hold all
the men that ever were in the world.

7. Also this wonderful extension of the Spirit of Christ as Man in his Divine
body and Seed, is most clearly described hy Christ himself, John 1: 51. Verily,
verily I say unto you, hereafter ye shall see heaven opened, and the Angels of
God ascending and descending upon the Son of Man: This is the Great and
Heavenly Man Christ Jesus, who is that Ladder which Jacob saw in his vision;
the top whereof reached unto Heaven, and the foot of it reached the Earth. But
this can not be the external Person of Christ, and therefore it is the Spirit
of Christ, as he is Man, or his Soul that is extended into us here upon Earth,
in his Heavenly body that he gives us to feed upon, by means of this Heavenly
Ladder.

8. But when I say, the Soul or Spirit of Christ ^ Man is extended into us, I
do not understand the Nephesch of his Soul, but the Neschamah or Nisch^ah, even
that Divine Spirit of Life, that God breathed into Adam, and is that which
Solomon calls the Candle of the Lord searching all the inward parts of the
belly; and James the Ingrafted Word, and John the Word mad flesh, or Incarnate
Word, that dwells in us. By the Nephesch I understand that of the Soul of
Christ common to him with the Souls of other men, as namely, the Root and Life
of the Animal Senses, and discursive parts. By the Neschamah or Nischmath I
understand, that substantial dignity and excellency of the Soul of Christ, that
it has in its nature (being a Divine Nature, so to speak) above and beyond
the Souls of all other men, and Spirits of the most excellent and holy Angels.
But whether his Nephe^ch and Neschamah be two principles really distinct, or
two facultys and powers of one only principle, I shall not in this place
determine, nor is it material to the thing in hand to inquire.

9. Again, Christ himself has taught us, that (...) spiritual coming in his
Saints, is as the Son of Man, Matthew. 16: 28. Verily I say unto you, there are
some standing here, that shall not ^ast ^f death, till they see the Son of man
coming in his kingdom. This can not be meant of his Last coming at the day of
judgment, else it would infer that some that hear him speak these words, have
not as yet tasted (...) death, nor shall, unto the Last Day, which is absu^^
Therefore this coming of the Son of Man must (...) his inward and spiritual
coming into his (...) Again, he said himself, that the Father had (...) him
authority to execut judgment, as he is the (...) Man, and that the hour should
come, wherein (...) that are in the gravesshall hear his voice. And (...) told
them, that time was in part come already, (...) must be understood spiritually
and inwardly, at (...) in great part, John 5: 25, 26, 27, 28.

10. And according to this I find a very obse^vable saying in Calvin, on the
Epistle to the (...) upon these words, For he who (...), and (...) who are
sanctified are all of One. His words are the (...) following: Neq^e enim,
tantum q^atenus Deus (...) nos (...), etc. For neither ^oth he sanctify (...)
only as God, but also the virtue or power of his sanct^fying is in his
manhood, (or, humane nature) (...) that is has it from it self, but that God
has poure^ forth a solid fullness of Holiness into it, that from thence we may
all draw, to which pertains tha^ saying, I for their cause do sanct^fy my
self, theref (...) if we be profane and unclean, the remedy is not to (...)
sought afar off, which is offered to us in our flesh^ Thus Calvin. Now if he
does sanctify us as man^ it is certain, as man be must he in us: for a cause
(...) (...) at a distance, but by some medium or middle; (...) there can be no
middle, but the man Christ him^^lf, his Life or Soul extended unto us: for it
were a ^ost absurd thing to think, that the Manhood of christ does operate upon
the Deity, and through (...) Deity upon us, for the Deity is altogether an
^^passible being, by reason of his most infinite perfe^^on. And seeing he faith
the Remedy is not to be ^^ght afa^r off, which is offered to us in our flesh, I
(...) not how this can be understood of his external (...), for indeed that is
at a great distance from.

I know Calvin has a conception that the (...) do partake of the flesh or body
of the exter^^ person of Christ, which yet is hardly intelligible, (...) we
should conceive, that it does send forth (...) exceeding subtle influence upon
us: but if it (...) so, the argument will hold stronger, that if ^^ody of
Christ can influence us at such a distance, (...) more the Soul, seeing the Soul
is more capable (...) vast an extension, then the body, but flesh of Christ,
that the Saints feed upon, is (...) that divine body, the substance of which is
(...) another kind, then the outward body, (...) much soever made glorious, or
spiritual: but body can not sanctify us, without the Soul of (...) extended
into it, for it is rather the Soul, o^ (...) that is the man, then the body;
and holy^ can not be properly inherent in any mere body, being the property of
an intellectual being, and therefore it can not convey holiness into another,
simply by itself, but only as it is the instrument of the Soul, which is the
only proper and immediate subject of holiness.

11. And thus having given an account, not only from Luther, and those who
embrace the Augustan confession, but also from Calvin himself, (for whom the
Presbyterians have so great an esteem) of the wonderful power and influence,
that the Manhod of Christ has in and upon the Saints, and of his being so near
unto them. Let us now see, what their great Seer S. R., as the Author of the
Postscript calls him, says to the matter. Almost all his Epistles,
especially the First part, are so full of expressions, concerning that nearness
of Christ to himself, and of his enjoying his Love, and hungering more and more
after the enjoyment of it, that it is needless to cite any particular
Testimonys out of the book for the same: yet for the satisfaction of those that
have not read his book of Epistles, I shall cite some particular places,
holding forth that wonderful nearness of Christ, that I plead for, and that
Christ himself is present with and in his People, and that he gives them not
only his comforts and Graces, but himself to be enjoyed by them, even in this
life. See 1 part, Ep. 120. If joy and comforts (says he) came singly and alone
without Christ himself, I would send them back again, the gate they came, and
not make them welcome, But when the Kings train comes and the King in the
midst of the company, O how am I overjoyed with floods of love? This is such a
plain testimony, that it quite destroys that deceitful distinction, that
the Presbyterian Teachers have, when they tell us, Christ is in us by his
Graces, gifts, and operations, but not by himself. For are not his joy and
comforts, his gifts, or graces and operations? and yet S. R. says, If these
came singly and alone without Christ himself, he would send them back again the
gate they came, and not make them welcome. And indeed Christ can not be separat
from his Graces, no more then the Soul can be separat from the love, and joy,
that is in it, and emanates from it; or then the Sun can be from his beams, or
the fire from its heat. Again, see 1 part, Ep. 29. I can neither speak nor
write feeling nor tasting, nor smelling, come feel, and smell, and taste Christ,
and his love, and ye shall ^all it more then can be spoken: To write how sweet
the honeycomb is, is not so lovely as to eat and suck the honeycomb, one
nights rest in a bed of love with Christ, will say more then heart can think,
or tongue can utter. Surely these words hold forth an immediate presence of
Christ, for we can not taste, nor feel that which is not really present. Again,
see Ep. 191. There is nothing will make you a Christian indeed, but a taste of
the sweetness of Christ, come and see, will speak best to your Soul. This
plainly implies that Christ is present, even to them who are not Christians
indeed, seeing to taste of the sweetness of Christ is that only, which makes one
who is not a Christian indeed, to be a Christian. But beside all this, I shall
cite some express testimonys for Christ his being in the Saints. See 1 part.
Ep. 43. It Is not for nothing that it is said Coloss. 1: 27. Christ in you the
hope of glory: I will be content of no pawn of heaven, but Christ himself. And
2 part. Ep. 1. I have good confidence, Madam, that Christ Jesus, whom your Soul
throug forests and mountains is seeking, is within you. Many more testimonys
may be cited, but these may suffice, to prove that this great Seer, in the
Presbyterians account, did believe that not only the Graces and Comforts of
Christ are in the Saints, which are as it were his train and attendants, but
that he himself is in the midst of them. And if it be replied, that by Christ
his being in the Saints, he meant is God, not as Man, as we understand it.

12. To this I answer 1. God, or the Word or Logos singly considered, is not
Christ, but the Word incarnate, or the Word made flesh, and planted in us. For
Christ signifies [Anoynted,] and it is the Man Christ, that is Gods Anointed:
and indeed we can not see, nor taste, nor smell, nor feel, of the naked Deity of
Christ, nor converse with Christ simply as God, but as God-Man, or the Word
incarnate; and the Presbyterians commonly teach, that there is no access to
God, nor communion with him, but through the Mediator Christ Jesus, as Calvin
himself teaches, for thus he writes on the Hebrews, cap. 1: ver. 2. That God
is no otherwise revealed to us then in Christ, for there is so great a
brightness in the essence of God, that it blinds our eyes, till it shine upon
us in Christ. Whence it follows, that we are as blind men to the Light of
God, unless it shine to us in Christ. By this it is clear, that Christ
imports somewhat beside the essence of God, which is his Manhood, or as he is
the Word incarnate.

But 2. The Presbyterians now adays would not only exclude Christ as Man, but
even as God, out of his Saints, for they are greatly offended at John Owen, an
Independent Teacher, who in his book on the Perseverance of the Saints, has
affirmed, that the Holy Ghost himself does really indwell in the Saints, so
that not only the graces and gifts of the Holy Ghost, but he himself is an
indweller in them, and is united unto them, and they to him: and for this
Caudry, a Presbyterian has found fault with him.

And 3. I shall produce some of S. R. his own words, and leave them to the
Reader, whether they do not hold forth somewhat of the truth of that, which I
plead for, although I believe he had not a distinct and explicit understanding
of it. See 2 part, Ep. 38. I know (said he) God is casten (if I may so speak)
in a sweet mould and lovely image, in the person of that heavens-Iewel the Man
Christ, and that the steps of that s^eep ascent and stair to the Godhead, is
the flesh of Christ, the new and living way. Surely these words import no
less, but that Christ as Man, although not as to his external person, yet in
some other mysterious way, is present with the Saints on Earth, seeing they can
not see God, as in himself, but as he is to be seen in that lovely image of the
Man Christ, whose flesh is the steps and stair to the Godhead. And therefore we
must have that flesh in us, else we can not ascend to any true communion with
him in our hearts.

13. But again, see a more express testimony, that the Man Christ is in the
Saints, and buddeth forth blossometh and bears fruit in them part 3. Ep. 13.
But the Plant of Renown, the Man whose Name is the BRANCH, will budd forth
again, and blossom as the rose, and there shall be fair white flourishes
again, with most pleasant fruits upon that Tree of Life, a fair season may he
have, Grace, Grace be upon that blessed and beautiful tree, under whose
shadow we shall sit^, and his fruit shall be sweet to our taste Again, see 3
part. ep. 8. Jesus that flower of Jesse, set without hands, gets many a
blast, and yet withers not, because he is his Fathers ^oble Rose, casting a
sweet smell through Heaven and Earth, and must grow; and in the same garden
with him, grow the Saints. Now I would ask the Author of the Postcript, Do
these words of S. R. hold forth a false Christ, or another Jesus, then the
(...) Jesus, the Son of Mary? If they do not, then why does he accuse the
Quakers, as holding another Christ, only because they speak of Christ in them,
as formed in them, budding and growing, and bringing forth fruit of Life, who
is the Plant of Re^own, the BRANCH, the Tree of Life, the incorrup^ible Root,
the Seed, and Word Ingrafted. And surely it is impossible to understand how the
Man Christ Jesus casts a sweet smell through Heaven and Earth, if he is not
present both in Heaven and Earth. Again, see 1 part. Ep. 127. If Christ b^d and
grow green, and blossom, and bear seed again in Scotland, and his Father send
him two summers again, in one year, and bless his crop. O what cause ^ave we to
rejoice in the free salvation of our Lord, and to set up our banners, in the
Name of our God! I have cited these passages the rather, because many
Presbyterian Teachers, as well as others, when they hear, or read such words as
proceeding from us, namely, that Christ is a Seed or Plant of Life in us,
growing, sprouting, budding, blossoming and bearing fruit, and that this
Heavenly Seed and Plant, is a tender Plant, as he is so called in Scripture,
that is bruised and wounded by men's sins, and hindered to bring forth fruit in
them, that give place to sin, but grows strong, and becomes exceeding
fruitful, in all them, that join to it, and love it, and deny those things
that are contrary to its nature, such as all kinds of sin are; then they cry
out, horrid blasphemy, this is to deny the true Christ of God, the Son of Mary.

14. But if these expressions be found and orthodox in S. R. I hope they are
not blasphemous in us, seeing we hold forth no other Christ Jesus, but the same
that all the Saints believed in, and was of Mary and David, according to the
flesh, and before them, and the Father and Lord of them, according to the
Spirit, who is the Saints hiding place in all ages, as it is written Isaiah 32:
2. And the man (to wit, the Man Christ) shall be as an hiding place from the
wind and a covert from the tempest, as rivers of wat^r in a dry place, as the
shadow of a great Rock in a weary land. Surely this is a Great and Mighty Man,
so that we may justly say, as these did of old, what manner of Man is this,
whom the ^^inds and sea obey? For indeed he commands the winds and the sea* and
all the creaturs, to whom all power is given in heaven and earth: and though he
has his Deputys and Servants under him, yet they can do nothing without him.

15. And therefore he himself is every where present, and knows, sees and
perceives all things. He knows the most secret thoughts and actions of all
men, both good and; he told the woman of Samaria, who had been a bad and evil
woman, all that ever she did, even the Man Christ Jesus, as she her self did
acknowledge, and went and preached him to others, Come, said she, and see a
man, that told me all that ever I did, is not this the Christ? But to say, he
told this as knowing it by revelation from the Father, and not as the Man
Christ Jesus* is to equal other Prophets unto him, who knew the thoughts of
men by revelation, and indeed to weaken the argument, that she brought, to
prove, that he was the Christ, because this man told her all: but seeing this Man
knew all her deeds and thoughts immediately, and needed not Divine revelation,
to know them, therefore he was indeed the true Christ, for no other man had
such a privilege, and certainly he told her much more inwardly, then outwardly,
and therefore he was in her, to wit, by his Life, Light and Spirit. And how
could the woman, that was cured of her bloody-issue, by touching the hem of his
garment, have touched him, Luk 8. if his Spirit and Soul or Life had not
extended into her, for her touch was not a bare outward touch, nor did she
touch his body, but only the hem of his garment, and although many touched him
beside, in the great press of people, yet he felt her touch, that was another
sort, then all the other touches; even a spiritual touch, so that her spirit
reached unto his Spirit, and drew from it, out of his body, and he feeling
this, said, who touched me? (...); albeit it was a woman, that touched him, and
he did ask the question in the masculine article; and indeed a masculine and
vigorous touch it was; her spirit being raised by faith, into a masculine and
Heavenly vigor, touched his Spirit, and drew virtue from him, and therefore
his Spirit reached unto her, that did both so draw forth her Spirit toward
him, and also did convey unto her that healing virtue. And surely many
thousands have as really touched him, as she did, by the spiritual touch of
faith, who never had his outward body, or external person present to touch it,
and have drawn virtue from him, whereby their Souls have been cured, and some
also have found their bodies cured and restored to health.

SECTION XIII.
1. If by [common] be understood, that Christ is Gods free Gift, we acknowledge
him so [common.] 2. The Life and Light otherwise in the Son of Mary, then in
us. 3. Christ (...) truly Mediator, in the Saints, as without them, in heaven,
proved out of John 17: 23. and Romans 8. 4. The Seed of regeneration is sown by
Christ the Son of Man. 5. God the Father is greater then Christ as M^n. 6. The
Omnipresence of the Manhood of Christ in all creaturs does not confound his
Godhead with his Manhood. 7. That Scripture Luk 2: 49. opened. 8. The 6, 7, and
8* charges utterly false. 9. The Presbyterian Teachers make the Devil greater,
and of a larger extent then the Heavenly Manhood of Christ, to the great
dishonor of our Blessed Savior. 10. The Quakers put not their Prophets and
Teachers in Christ's room, but acknowledge him exalted above all creatures, more
then the Presbyterians. 11. The blindness and darkness of the Author of the
Postscript, that denies the Saints to have any measure of that Light that was,
or is in Christ. 12. How furr the Author of the Postscript has outshot
himself, in denying Christ to be in the Saints.

ANd thus having by many Scripture testimonys, and arguments builded thereupon,
together also with the testimonys of others, and some of the Presbyterians own
Prophets, so fully proved, that Christ is in the Saints, yea and in a true
sense, in all men, and in all things, as God is. Before I close this particular
head, I shall a little more narrowly consider the Author of the Postscript his
words in in the 5 charge. He says, we affirm Christ to be a common sort of
thing. His design is easily to be seen here, as if we undervalued Christ, but
it is no undervaluing of him, to call him a thing, seeing the Angel called him
that holy thing, Luk 1: 35. That holy thing which shall be born of thee, shall
be called the Son of God. And this holy thing we say is in all men.

1. But if by common he mean, either that it is of men's nature, or that all men
have the enjoyment of it, in that sense I deny that it is common, for it is not
of men, but it is in the nature of it, a most rare, divine, and singular thing;
and though it be in all, yet it can be enjoyed by none, but them who are
Saints. But to understand by common, that it is the free Gift of God unto all,
whereby all may be saved, in that sense we do not deny it to be common: nor
does its being common derogate any thing from its excellency, for, bonum quo
communius, co melius, a good thing the more common it be, the better it is. Is
not God a common Creator, and yet he is not the less good or exce^lent; so nor
is Christ the less good or excellent, that he is a common Savior, in so far
that he does put Life and Salvation within the reach of every man in a day of
visitation, that they may be saved.

2. But the sum or substance of this his 5 charge is false, namely that we
affirm, that Christ is in every man, as he was in the Son of Mary, for we say.
The Son of Mary is Christ himself, and though his Light and Life, and Spirit or
Soul be in ^s and in all men, yet not so as in the Son of Mary, for it is in
him in the fullness, and in us only by emanation from him. It is he, the Son of
Mary, that gives us this living water, who is th Fountain and Spring of it:
whereas the stream of it is but in us, and God who is Light is otherwise in the
Son of Mary, or Man-Christ, then in us, or any other men, for he is in him by
an immediate union and communion: whereas he is in us but by the Man Christ, as
in regard of union and communion; so that our union and communion with God is
but mediat through him.

3. And this wonderful mystery Christ himself does clearly hold forth, Ioh.
17. verse 23. I in them and thou in me, that they may be made perfect in one.
Observe here, an excellent order; Christ in the Saints and God in Christ, So
that as in respect of union God is not immediately in us, nor immediately united
with us, nor we with him, but God is in Christ and Christ is in us. And so God
through Christ is in us, and thus Christ does declare himself to be the
Mediator betwixt God and Man, as he is in them, Thou in me and I in them, here
Christ is the midle-man or Mediator as being in the Saints, which confuts the
gross and most comfortless doctrine of the Prebyterians and others, who affirm
that Christ as Mediator is only without us, in heaven, and is not Mediator in
us, whereas he himself in this place has declared the contrary, thou in me and
I in them, that they may be made perfect in one; So that of all things visible
and invisible, Christ is next unto God, and most near unto him, as in regard of
union and communion, and then the Saints by their union with Christ are united
also unto God, and he unto them. And if Christ be mediator in the Saints, then
he is Man, or the Word incarnate, in them, for the Word or Logos simply
considered, is not mediator, becaushe is of a nature as remote from us, as the
Father, being one essence or substance with him, and indeed it is the Man
Christ, that spoke these words in prayer unto his Father, for the Logos simply
considered is God himself, and cannot be supposed to pray unto God, for that to
which one prays is greater then he that does pray: and it is the Man Christ,
or Word incarnate, who said, my Father is greater then I, so that Christ as Man
is inferior to God, and this is the same Spirit of Christ, as Man, that
prays and makes intercession unto God in the Saints, Rom 8. and has done so
from the beginning, and by whom the children of men in all ages have received
grace from God.

4. For the seed of Gods Grace, which is the true ^^^d of regeneration that
has been sown in all ages of the world, as well before as since Christ did
outwardly come in the flesh, was sown by the Son of Man, to wit, the Man Christ
Jesus, as he has expressly taught himself, Math. 13. 37. He that sows the
good seed, is the Son of Man, who is the good and friendly Man, and therefore
he has been in all ages and places of the world, because he has sown his seed
in the world, and not in some corner of it only; and the seed which he has
sown is the i^grafted Word, even a measure of the same divine and Heavenly
Nature, Light and Life that is in himself, as he is the Heavenly Man, or Lord
from Heaven.

5. Whose nature as Man, is Heavenly and Divine, all though it be inferior to
the God head, for he said, my Father is greater then I, nor will his
^mnipresence and omnipercipiency prove, that, as Man, he is as great as the
Father for the whole universe of created beings of Heaven and Earth, visible
and invisible, are as the dust of the balance, and drop of the bucket, in
comparison of God.

6. And therefore that the Heavenly Man Christ Jesus, his Spirit, Light and
Life, does every where extend it self into all things, will not prove that
Christ, as Man, is equal unto God; nor yet confound his Godhead and Manhood,
it only proves that the Man Christ Jesus is a great and mighty and most
excellent being, far above all, and excelling all men and Angels, and all
other angelical and heavenly powers, and principallitys; which is a most
certain truth, and therefore do all the Angels worship him* as they are
commanded.

7. And this universal presence of his in all things he declared himself, when
Mary his Mother according to the flesh, with her husband Joseph did seek, him;
among the multitude, why did ye seek me (said he) did ye not know that I must
be (...), in the things of my Father. Luk* 2. 49. and verse 50. They understood
not that saing which he spoke unto them, and indeed many at this day do not
understand it, which place of Scripture Dionysius of Alexandria, brought
against Paulus Samosatenus to prove, that Christ was before Mary, and if Christ
was before Mary, he was not only God, but Man, for it is the Man or Word
incarnate, that is the Christ, or Anointed of the Father and not the Word or
Godhead simply considered.

His 6, 7, and 8, charges are, that we affirm Jesus, the true Christ the Son
of Mary, to be onley an ordinary vessel, which contains ^his Light, as the
Spirit of every other Holy Man does, and so not only pulling down our exalted
Prince from his Throne of Glory, but putting our false Prophets (as he calls
them) in his place, clothing them with the glory of his proper titles, as
being Christ as well as he, because containing the same Light with his.

8. Answ. That these charges are exceeding false and unjustly laid upon us will
abundantly appear, from what is already said, in answer to the former, and
therefore I need say the less, only to let the Reader know that we are so
far, from affirming Jesus the true Christ, the Son of Mary to be only an
ordinary vessel etc. that we both believe and affirm him to be a most
Wonderful and extraordinary Vessel, and that both in respect of his Soul and
body, as having the Center and Spring of that Divine Light, Life and Nature,
whereof we have but the ray and stream. And though the Vessels of other men
have the Light in them, yet they contain it not, but it rather contains them,
for the greater is not contained in the lesser, but the lesser in the great^r.
And thus we do not pull down our exalted Prince from his Throne of glory, but
acknowledge ^im more exalted, then our adversarys do, who ^ould confine and
limit him to one place, and ^^ltogether exclude him, as Man, from having any
^^rone in the hearts of his people: whereas they do ^^knowledge that the Devil
is in all wicked men, (...) and good men also, and yet they will not
ac^nowledge Christ to be in all, nay not in any, good ^en upon Earth.

6. And thus they make the Devil greater then (...), which is no small
dishonor to our Blessed Sa^iour: and they who deny him to be in men, even
(...) the Saints, seeing he is really in them (conform (...) to the testimony
of Scripture and the experience of them who know and witness him revealed in
them) are denyers of him, as really as they who denied him when he came in the
flesh.

10. Again, that we put our Prophets (whom he falsely calls false Prophets) in
the place of Christ, clothing them with the glory of his proper titles, as
being Christ, as well as he, because containing the same Light with his, is such
a gross and manifest lie and forgery, that a greater can not be invented, for
we do exalt him both with our hearts and mouths, above, not only, all men of
our own profession, but above all men and Angels, and that beyond all
comparison; yea we exalt him more then this our acc^ser, or any of his
brethren, even as Man, as having a substantial dignity and excellency,
belonging to him as Man, above all men and Angels whatsomever: nor will it in
the least follow from our principles, that because we have a measure of his
Light and Life in us, that therefore we put our selves in his place, or room,
as is already cleared: for he has it in the fullness, in whom the fullness of
the Godhead dwells bodily; and GOD gave not the Spirit unto him by measure;
whereas whatever Light, or Life, Virtue or excellency we or any Saints, or
Angels have, is derived from him, and is but a measure of his fullness: and God
the Father dwells in him immediately, but in us ^mediately through him, as is
above declared and opened, from John 17: 23.

11. And what a blind and dark man is this, that will not acknowledge that the
Saints have any thing of that Light in them, which Christ has in himself! Let
him tell us, and prove it from Scripture, if he can, that Christ puts any
other Light, or Spirit in his people then that which is in himself. But the
contrary is manifest from Scripture, that it is one and the same Spirit, Light
and Life, both in him, and in them. But if some, more sober then this Author,
will acknowledge, that Christ is really in the Saints; albeit they do not
understand how he is in all men; to such I say, viz, who affirm Christ to be
in the Saints, that, by this man's argument, to ^it, the Author of the
Postscript, they deny the true Christ, the Son of David, and Mary, and set up
the Saints in the place of Christ, as being Christ, as well as he, because, as
he says, containing the same Light.

12. Let them consider how far the Author of the Postscript has outshot
himself in this particular, and in stead of pleading for the true Christ, has
in effect denied him, and robbed all the Saints of God, of having him in them,
express contrary to the Scripturs. And I have often wondered how ^hese men
will so freely acknowledge, and plead for ^he devil his being in all wicked
men, and yet de^y that Christ is in all good men: yea seeing they ^lead, that
all good men, while they live on earth, have sin, and sin daily in thought,
word and deed; yea continually: they must also acknowledge, that in so far as
sin is in them, the devil is in them, who is the father of all sin: and yet
they will not have Christ to be in all, no not in the Saints; which shows
them to be extremely blind and inconsiderate. And I would ask them this one
question, Do they think that the Devil is a Spirit of a larger and greater
extension, then the Soul or Spirit of Christ as Man? If they say, nay: then
Christ is in all men. If they say, that the Devil is a greater Spirit, then the
Spirit of Christ, as Man; then they plainly declare, that the Devil is greater
then Christ, which is horrid and detestable blasphemy.

SECTION XIV.
1. That the Presbyterian Teachers set themselves in the place of Christ. 2.
They go back to the church of Rome, and her Popes, to prove their call. 3.
They labor to turn people from Christ in th^mselv^s. 4. That they may keep up
their trade and gain. 5. Who love to hear Christ in themselves, love to hear
him in others. 6. The Author of the Postscript his blasphemy against the true
Christ of God in men's hearts. 7. He is better skilled in the art of railing,
then in the way of disputing. 8. The Christian Quakers love and honor all true
Ministers of Christ Jesus. 9. An old policy of Satan, to call the ministers of
Antichrist, ministers of Christ, as among Papists and Presbyterians. 10. Why
we cannot join with Presbyterian Teachers.

1. ANd whereas he falsely accuses us, as putting any of our Prophets in the
place of Christ; This may be justly retorted back upon him and his brethren,
who deny the immediate presence, and immediate revelation, and teachings of
Christ in his people; and so they set themselves indeed in the place of Christ,
crying up the necessity of men's teachings, and crying down the necessity of the
teachings of Christ in peoples ^earts. And they tell the people, that they must
hear them, and learn of them, else they can not be saved, and if any refuse to
hear them, and learn of them, they accurse them.

2. And yet they can not give any sufficient account of their call from Christ
to preach, but do generally in these days go back to the Apostate Church of
Rome, and her Popes and Bishops, whom they have so often called Babylon and
Antichrist, to derive their call, as even James Durham a great Presbyterian
Teacher has done in his book on the Revelation. But if people come to hearken
to the t^achings of Christ in them, and believe in the same, hey turn
desperate enemies against them, and do all they can to stir up the Magistrate,
to persecute them; as indeed it is the Presbyterian Teachers, especially the
mongrell sort of them, that are the great occasion of our present persecution.
And in effect, this is their language upon the matter, hear us, and learn of
us, but hear not Christ within you, learn not of him, as he teaches you in
your hear^s, as the Quakers tell you ye ought to do, for there is no true
Christ in you at all: that which reproves you for sin in your hearts, is not
the true Christ, but a false, nor is it the least measure of that Light, which
was in him, that shines in your hearts, and lets you see your sins* this Light
in you can not teach you the saving knowledge of God, nor lead you unto God,
although ye should follow it never so faithfully, but we can teach you the true
and saving knowledge of God, and if ye do what we ^id you do, ye shall
certainly be saved, we can pawn our souls for you, therefore hear us, and ye
shall be saved.

3. But if ye hear not us, ye can not expect Salvation, we are the alone
Ambassadors, that God has sent unto you to teach you, and lead you into the
Kingdom of GOD; you need no other immediate Teacher, or Preacher, nay, ye need
not that Christ should be in you at all, you need no immediate teachings of
Christ or of God at all: immediate revelations are ceased since the Apostles
days, and there is no use of them, means are so plentiful. I appeal to all
sober and impartial men, if this be not to set up themselves in the place of
Christ.

4. And what is the cause that these men are so great enemies to the immediate
teachings of Christ in the hearts of people, but that they fear that if people
come to receive the teachings of Christ in their hearts, they will deny them as
false Teachers, and so their trade and gain will down.

5. But all true Preachers, they preach not themselves, but Christ Jesus, as the
Apostles did, and they preach him not only ascended into Heaven, and as being
in heaven, but they preach him also as being in the hearts of people, saying,
The Word is near thee, in thy mouth and in thy heart, Romans 10: Deuteronomy. 30. And
all true Preachers are glad, that people come to know Christ, and learn of him
in their hearts: and they are assured that they who are come to learn of
Christ immediately, will never despise or reject the ministry of those whom
Christ does send, and in whom he speaks, for the sheep of Christ hear his
voice, wherever it sounds, and they who love to hear Christ in themselves,
love also to hear him in others, and receive the Word, not as the Word of Men,
but as it is indeed the Word of God. And thus I have gone through the eight
particular Charges, wherewith he has so falsely charged us; and in plainness
and simplicity of heart, declared our belief concerning them, and how that we
own the true Christ, as true and perfect God, and as true and perfect Man,
who, as concerning the flesh, was the Son of David, and of Mary, but yet was
before Mary and David, and all men; who is the Son of God, blessed for evermore.

6. And seeing these 8 false charges are the only foundation, on which the
Author of the Postscript builds all his other calumnys, and his whole
discourse, his sandy foundation being removed, his building falls with shame
upon his own head: and I wish his eyes may be opened by that Light, he has so
maliciously reproached, that he may see, what that Spirit is, that has led him
so to blaspheme the true Christ of God in men's hearts: for certainly it is not
the Spirit of Christ, but of Satan, seeing no man speaking by the Spirit of God
calls Jesus accursed, as Paul declared. O that he may be made to look upon
him whom he has pierced (in his tender Life, and Seed in his own heart, by
such malicious and envious speeches) and mourn bitterly for so doing, and do
so no more, that he may find mercy of the Lord!

7. It were a needless labor to follow him* in all the rest of his discourse,
or to give a particular reply to every sentence, the whole containing no
arguments, to prove us guilty of such things; he had done more as a man, and as
a Christian, to have charged us with some things that we did truly hold, and
if he did suppose them to be errors, to have endeavored to refute them with
solid arguments, brought from Scripture and sound Reason; nothing of which he
has done, but raileth on from the beginning to the end. It seems verily that
he is better skilled in the art of railing (which is a black art, to be sure,
too familiar to the tribe of black-coats) then in the way of disputing. But I
shall take notice of one thing before I leave him, as where he says.

Page 12. from line 15. As the ministers of Jesus Christ are the men in the
world, against whom they have the most pure and perfect hatred, so it is
against those ministers more particular^y, who are most tender and ^difying,
and by whose laboring among the people, their Lord and Master who sent them,
sees of the travel of his Soul, and is satisfied, that they as the ministers of
Satan set themselves, very fit messengers are they, if any were caught up to the
third heaven, to b^ffe^ him, I appeall in this matter to the experience and
observation of all, who take notice of their way, and how little they trouble
others, their Master fearing little, or finding little damage to his dominion
and kingdom, by these lazy lie-byes, and idle loyterers.

8* Answ. This is like the rest of his false accusations: we hate no men's
persons, but their vices, and far be it from us, to oppose any of the true
ministers of Jesus Christ, nay, we love them, and honor them, for their works
sake, and we judge ourselvs bound in conscience, at all occasions to hear
them, and countenance them, but such men as call themselves the ministers of
Christ, and after trial, are found not to be his ministers, or sent of him, we
find ourselvs called of God to deny them, and witness against them, as Christ
did against the Pharisees of old, and as the Prophets did against the false
prophets, who taught for gain and rewards.

9. This has been an old policy of Satan, which many have used in former
times, to call themselves with such splendid names, as Ministers of Christ, and
of the Gospel, when they have been rather ministers of Satan, and of
Antichrist. The Popish priests and bishops do the same, and the Pope calls
himself Servus servorum Dei, a servant of the servants of God. And indeed this
is one of the great stumbling blocks, that the Popish Clergy and priests lay in
the way of the people, to keep them in blindness and superstition, and beget a
prejudice in them, against the Protestants, and dissenters from the Popish
Church. Oh! say they, these men are abominable heretics, who deny our holy
mother Church, and her holy priests and bishops, and our holy father the Pope,
whom Christ has appointed, and set up as his Vicar upon Earth. And then they
reckon up so many holy priests, and bishops, and so many holy Fathers, as have
been, and are in their Church. And thus they seek to deceive the people, and to
speak freely, I do not question it, but there have been some in the Popish
Church, who had as great pretenses to holiness, and looked as like holy men, as
any to be found of the Presbyterian Teachers. And I judge, the Presbyterians
themselves will not generally conclude, that for these many hundreds of years,
there have been no holy men in the Church of Rome, which yet has been an
Apostate Church, for many hundred years, and yet all this will not prove, that
we ought to join to the Church of Rome, because of some men that have lived in
it, or may as yet be in it, that may be really as holy, and of as good a life
and conversation, as any the Presbyterians can name among themselves. And the
like may be said of the Lutheran Church, and Church of England, which is
Episcopal, I suppose this Author and his brethren will not be so uncharitable,
as to conclude there are no holy men in the Episcopal Church, or that no Bishop
is a holy man: and I question not, but they can instance some among Lutherans
and Papists also, that have taken and do take as great pains to preach, as any
Presbyterian Preacher ever did, and greater also. Some of the Popish priests
have traveled into the remotest parts of the world, to preach, and they
allege they have preached Christ, as much as the Presbyterians allege they
preach him at home. Xaverius a Papist preached to the Chinese, and was at
greater pains, then any Presbyterian that ever I heard of, for they commonly
nest themselves at home, and enjoy as much bodily ease and pleasure, as other
men, they seldom preach out of their own parishes: but I never heard of any of
them go and preach to heathens, where the Name of Christ has not outwardly
been mentioned, as many in the Popish Church have done. Nor will it solve the
matter to say, that though there have been some holy Preachers in the Popish
Church, yet they preached many errors with some truths, and therefore since the
Light is broke up more clearly, they are now to be turned away from, although
in these dark times it might have pleased God to make some of them instruments
of salvation to peoples souls, which may as yet be, where a further
manifestation is not given of God. For the same answer will as well serve us
against the Presbyterians, as it will serve them against the Papists. Admit
then that there may be some holy men among the Presbyterian Teachers, and that
at times the Spirit of God has breathed through them (when they did little
notice it, and had not that care to attend his breathings, and movings, so as
only to speak by them) and that when the Spirit thus breathed through them,
they have been isntrumental to the Salvation of some souls; yet because these
men did also preach many errors, and did not regard the inward call and
movings of the Spirit of God, as they should have done, but spoke more
frequently without them, then with them; and in their own will, beginning and
ending with the houre-glasse: as also because they laid too great weight on the
bare outward call of men, and on mere natural and acquired abili^ys, and have
affirmed, that Grace or piety is not essential to a minister of Christ, and
have not preached the pure Truth, as it is in Jesus, but for most part, gross
errors, as namely, that Gods Grace is not Universal, that Immediate Revelation
is ceased, that we must sin for term of Life, that men may committ murder and
adultery, and yet be in a justified state, and perfectly justified at that
instant.

10. I say, for these and many others causes, we can not own them, as
ministers of Christ according to the pure order of a Gospel Ministry, and
especially because they take hire and wages, as much as any, they are
hirelings. Yet we do really make a difference, betwixt those who are more
tender and conscientious, and others; and are glad to meet with any such, for
they are very thin scattered at this day. And if we take more pains on such,
then upon others, and some times give them a sound thresh, it is in love to
them, and in hope to find corn among them, which we expect less to find among
the profane, whom he calls lazy lie-byes, and idle loyteres, and yet such men
were the far greaters part of the Presbyterian Ministry in its most
flourishing time.

SECTION. XV.
1. Many unsound and unsavory expressions in S. R. his Epistles. 2. Yet he both
experienced and declared of Immediate Revelation, and the Spirits immediate
teachings. 3. He confessed there was a gate of finding Christ, that he had
never lighted upon. 4. The Christian Quakers know this gate, which is to wait
upon him in the shinings of his Divine Light in their hearts, being retired
unto the same in pure silence. 5. Silent waiting proved from many Scriptures.
6. An observable confession of S. R. that the Presbyterians have stinted a
measure of so many ounce weights upon holiness, and no more. 7. Some very
observable Testimonys out of the book called, The fullfilling of the Scripturs
(highly commended by the Presbyterians) to some of the chief and main
principles, experiences and practices of the people, called, Quakers. 8. A
great out-leting of the Spirit in the West of Scotland about the year 1625. 9.
Called by the profane rabble the Stewarton Sickness: That caused a strange
unusual motion on the hearers, that some were made to fall over in the place
and were carried out. 10. The same Life and Power of God, and out-letting of
his Spirit, but more clearly, is now among the Christian Quakers. 11. Many
Presbyterians now join with the profane rabble, to call these unusual motions
(the real effects of Gods Spirit among us) the signs of some diabolical
possession. 12. The Author of the Postscript guilty of this impiety. 13. Many
Presbyterians, like the Scribes and Pharisees, who profeffed to own the Spirit
of God in Moses and the Prophets and denied the same Spirit in Christ and the
Apostles. 14. That glory that s^ined forth among them, disappeared, when they
turned persecuters of others. 15. An objection answered. 16. The Author of the
fullfilling of the Scripturs affirms, that there was an Apostolic Spirit
let out upon the first Reformers, which is inconsistent with their doctrine
that immediate revelation is ^eased. 17. That Robert Bruce had an extraordinary
call to the Ministry. 18. That he kept silence for a considerable time before
he preached, as the Preachers among the Christian Quakers do. 19. He had the
Spirit of discerning to know when a man preached not by the Spirit of God, and
when he did, which is our experience also. 20. The Author confesses it is
something else to be a Minister of Jesus Christ, then to be a knowing and
eloquent Preacher, which is contrary to the Presbyterian doctrine now, and
according to the doctrine of the Christian Quakers. 21. Robert Bruce, his
Prophecy, that the Ministry of Scotland would prove the greatest persecuters,
that the Gospel ^ad, fullfilled. 22. A wonderful influence that Robert Bruce
his prayer had not only upon those present but on some absent, that heard not
his words. 23. The said Author confesses, that the Presbyterians, are grossly
mistaken concerning some Scripture truths, and promises, that after shall be
made clear. This we know fullfilled. 24. A loving exhortation to professors.
25. He does acknowledge Immediate Teachings. 26. He calls their own prayers many
times a piece of invention rather then a matter of earnest with the Lord. 27.
He commends it in Robert Bruce, that he would not go to preach without the
Lord, which is contrary to the Presbyterian doctrine in our days. 28. He
commends many things in th^se men that Presbyterians now condemn and reproach
under the name of Quakerism.

HAving in my answer to the Postscript refered unto some places in S. R. his
Epistles, and also unto that other book, called the fullfilling of the
Scripturs: I shall in this last Section, cite some passages that do
sufficiently answer unto those referrs.

1. In my first Section, I say, that I do find very many unsound and unsavory
expressions in S. R. his Epistles, that the Life and Spirit of Christ in my
heart does not only not bear witness for, but against, and indeed the Scripture
also does bear witness against them. Of this sort I shall cite a few of many,
1 part. Ep. 12. The Bible beguiled the Pharisees. Surely this is a very unsound
and unwary expression, and I dare say, had such an expression dropped from the
penn of any called a Qua^er, it would have been called blasphemy. The Pharisees
beguiled themselves, in wre^ting and misunderstanding the Scriptures, as the
Priests do in our days; but the Bible, or Scripture is altogether innocent of
this. Again, 1 part. Ep. 88 I am sure Christ has by his death and blood ^asten
the knot so fast, that the fingers of Devils and hell-fulls of sins can not
loose it. This is expressly contrary to the Scripturs testimony, that says,
your iniquitys have separated betwixt me and you. Surely such sin-pleasing
doctrine, although it be sweet in the mouths of Professors, yet it is most
unwholesom for their Souls, as sweet poison: why did the Lord threaten the
Romans, the Ephesians, the Laodiceans, to cut them off, remove their
candle^ick, and spue them out of his mouth, for their sins* if this man's
doctrine be true, that hell-fulls of sins ^an not loose the knot? Is not this
to embolden people in all manner of sin, to tell them that hellfulls of sins
can not separate them from Christ? If he had said, Those that are come to
witness the indissolvible bond, or knot, betwixt Christ and them, are
preserved pure, and free from all great and gross ^ins, at least; he had said
more according to the truth, and the Scripturs testimony, which says, he that
abides in Christ, sins not. And, if the righteous man turn from
righteousness, it shall be forgotten. Again, 1 part. Ep. 181. We have need of
a Savior to pardon the very diseases and faul^s and weaknesses of the New man,
and to take away (to say so) out godly sins, or the sins of our sanctification,
the dross^ and scumme of spiritual love. This is very un^ound to charge sin
and filthynesse upon the work of the Spirit of God in the hearts of his people:
whereas the Scripture says, his work is perfect. And indeed how can any impure
thing proceed from the Spirit of God, that is altogether a most pure and holy
Spirit? Again, 2 part. Ep. 7. He who is woer and suitor, should not be an
house-hold-man with you, till ye and he come up to his Fathers house together.
This is contrary to the Scripture, which says, I will dwell in them, and walk
in them. And if any man will keep my commandments, my Father and I will come
and make our abode with him. Hence the Saints on Earth are called Gods Temple
and house. Again, 2 part. Ep. 48. The fruits that grow here, are all seasoned
and salted with sin. A gross, unsavory expression! are the fruits of the
Spirit, aslove, joy, peace, gentleness, goodness, faith, long-suffering,
meekness, temperance, etc. all salted and seasoned with sin? How then could
the Lord relish and accept them? Again, 3 part. Ep. 9. Howb^it we be but
half-hungered of Christ here. This is contrary to the promises of the Lord, and
experience of the Saints: Did not David say, My cup overfloweth? And is it not
said in the Song, Eat, O friends, drink abundantly, O beloved? And is it not
promised in the New Convenant, they shall not hunger and thirst, etc.? And said
Paul, that ye may be filled with the fullness of God. And of Barnabas it is
said, he was a good man, and full of the holy Ghost. It Is true all that is
received in this life, is but as a first fruits, and earnest of that to come;
yet there is a very blessed and large enjoyment of Christ to be attained here,
so that the faithful can say, they want no good thing, and although they
hunger, yet it is not for famine or want, but to sharpen their appetite. Yea in
contradiction to himself he ^aith, 1 part. Ep. 128. Pray for me his prisoner,
that he would be pleased to bring me among you again, full of Christ, etc. And
1 part. Ep. 140. O thirsty love, will thou set Christ the well of Life to thy
head, and drink thy fill, drink and spare not, drink love, and be drunken with
Christ. But does this agree with his former expression of being half-hungered
of Christ here in this life? Again, 1 part. Ep. 62. he says [Reprobats are not
formally guilty of contempt of God, and misbelief, because they apply not
Christ, and the promises of the Gospel to themselves in particular, for so they
should be guilty because they believe not a lie, which God never obliged them
to believe.] But this is to make God guilty of hypocrisy, that reproves the
world of unbelief, and offers faith and Salvation unto all; nor does God
obliege them to believe a lie, because Christ has given himself a ransom for
all, and dyed for all, as the Scriptures expressly declare. Again, see 1 part.
Ep. 3. Except a man mar^yr and slay the body of sin, in sanctified
self-denial, they shall never be Christ's martyrs and faithful witnesses. And
yet in contradiction, he says within 20 lines in the same Epistle, Howbeit we
can not attain to this denial of me and mine, that we can say, I am not my
self, my self is not my self, mine own is no longer mine own, yet our aiming at
this in all we do shall be accepted. This is another sin-pleasing doctrine,
plain contrary to the Scripture, which faith, unless a man deny himself, etc.
it does not say, if he aim at it, he shall be accepted. Surely this is to ^ue
pillows under men's arme-holes, and to embolden them in sin; for who will not
say, they aim at self-denial, although they attain not unto it? Again, see 1
part. Ep. 14. Some are partakers of the holy Ghost, and taste of the good Word
of God, and of the powers of the life to come, and ye^ have no part in Christ
at all: cit^ing Heb. 6: 4. But this is a gross contradiction, seeing none are
partakers of the holy Ghost, but by Christ. But these mentioned Heb. 6: 4. are
such as having a part in Christ, may fall from him. Again, see 1 part. Ep. 50.
The best regenerate have their defilements, and (if I may speak so) their
draff-pack, that will clogg behind them all their days, and wash as they will,
there will be fil^h in their bosom. A most unfavoury and unsound expression!
contrary to the promises of God, and the experience of many that witnessed a
cleansing from all filthiness and sin. Again, 1 part. Ep. 27. All Christ's good
bairns go to heaven with a broken brow, and with a crooked leg. Contrary to
Scripture, which faith, Thou shall walk in the way safely, and thy feet shall
not stumble, Prove. ^: 23. And Christ is a perfect Physician, who, as he cured
the lame bodies of those that believed in him, perfectly, so does he cure the
lame ^ouls of all his people, even perfectly; for no imperfect thing can enter
into heaven. Again, see 1 part. Ep. 20. We are fools to be browden, and fond of
a pawn in the loof of our hand, living on trust by faith, may well content us.
This he speaks as reproving such, who seek after spiritual feelings, and
sensible enjoyments of Christ, which is according to his brethrens doctrine,
that teach We should not seek to live by sense, (to wit, spiritual sense) but
by faith; a gross and unsound doctrine! as if faith and sense spiritual were
opposite: whereas faith does always, in some measure, imply some one spiritual
sense or other, for unless we spiritually hear, or feel Christ in some
measure, we can not believe in him, faith comes by hearing, says the Apostle;
and is not faith a laying hold on Christ with the hands of our Soul? and how
can we do this, without all sense or feeling of him in a spiritual way?
Surely the natural and outward senses are no more necessary for the
preservation of the natural life, then the inward and spiritual senses are
necessary for the preservation of the Spiritual Life of the Soul.

Also he has frequently in his Epistles, too airy and frothy expressions, no
wise beseeming the weight of the matter those expressions relate unto, as 1
part. Ep. 120. Christ see^eth to leave heaven (to say so) and his Court, and
come down to laugh and play with a daft bairne. Again, 1 part. Ep. 91. Will not
a Father take his little dated Davie in his arms, and carry him over a ditch
or a mire? Again, 1 part. Ep. 121. O if I could dote (if I may make use of that
word in this place) as much upon himself, as I do upon his love.

This is a hint of some of these many unworthy, unsound and stumbling
expressions, which are to be ^ound in his Epistles, which I had not meddled with
to discover, but because many, and especially the Publisher, do so idolize this
book of S. R. his Epistles, as if there were none beyond it, except the BIBLE.

2. In my second Section I say that S. R. in his more pure times both
experienced and declared of Immediate Revelation, and the Spirits immediate
teachings, as his Epistles abundantly witness: also that he plainly declares,
he had the counsel and mind of God in some things not to be found in
Scripture. See for this, besides the testimonys I have already cited in the
answer, these following, 1 part. Ep. 2. It was not without [Gods special
direction] that the first sentence, that ever my mouth uttered to you, was that
of John 9: 39. Again, 1 part. Ep. 9. It is little to see Christ in a book, as
men do the World in a card, (...) of Christ by the book and the tongue, and no
more; but to come nigh Christ, and hausse him, and embrace him, is another
thing. Again 1 part. Ep. 9. O his perfumed face, his fair face, his lovely and
kindly kisses have made me a poor prisoner see there is more to be had of
Christ in this Life, then I believed, we think all is but a little earnest, a
four-houres, a small tasting we have, or is to be had in this life (which is
true compared with the inheritance) but yet I know it is more, it is the
kingdom of God within us. Again, 2 part. Ep. 2. O blessed Soul, that can leap
over a man, and look above a pulpit up to Christ, who can preach home to the
heart, howbeit we are all dead and rotten. Again, 2 part. Ep. 8. And sure I am
it is better to be sick, providing Christ come to the bedside, and draw by the
curtains, and say, courage, I am thy Salvation, then to enjoy health being
lusty and strong, and never to be visited of God. Again, 1 part. Ep. 35. But at
other times he will be messenger himself, and I get the cup of Salvation out of
his own hand. Again, O how sweet is a fresh ^isse from his holy mouth, his
breathing, that goes before a ^isse upon my poor Soul, is swe^t, and has no
fault, but that it is too short. But that he ^aith, that Christ drinks to
him, is a froathy and un^avoury expression, used by him in that same Epistle.
And 3 part. Ep. 22. anent his transplanting he ^aith, what God says to me in
the ^ussinesse* I resolve (...) do. And 1 part. Ep. 85. Now and then my
silence burns up my Spi^t, but Christ has said, Thy stipend is running up
with interest in heaven, as if thou (...) preaching, and this from a Kings
mouth rejoices my heart. And, 3 part. Ep. 37. Christ has said to me, mercy,
Grace and peace for Marjon (...). Again, 1 part. Ep. 154. We but stand beside
Christ, we go not unto him, to take our fill of him, but if ^e should do
(...) things, 1. draw the curtains and make bare his holy face, and then 2.
clear our dim and bleared eyes to see his beauty and glory, he should find many
lovers. This place is remarkable, for it holds forth both immediate subjective
and objective revelation, according as the national teachers do themselves
define it, and indeed his words in all these testimonies import no less. Again.
1. part. Ep. 201. O that ^e would strick out windows and fair and great Lights
in this old house, this fallen down soul, and then set the soul near hand
Christ, that the rays and beams of Light and the Soul delighting glances of
the face, fair Godhead might shine in at the windows and fill the house.
Again. 1. part. ep. 32. now he is pleased to feast a poor prisoner, and to
refresh me with joy unspeakeable and glorious, so as the Holy Spirit is
witness, that my sufferings are for Christ's truth, and God forbid I should deny
the ^estimony of the Holy Spirit, and make him a false witness. Again. 1. par.
ep. 120. Lord let me never be a false witness to den^ that I saw Christ take
the p^n in his hand and subscribe my writs. And part. 3. ep. 27. In private, on
the 17 and 18 of August, I got a full answer of my Lord to be a graced
minister, and chosen arrow hidden in his own quiver but know this assurance is
not keaped but by watching and prayer. These are but a small part of much more
might be cited out of his Epistles, as testimonys to immediate revelation and
the immediate teachings of the Spirit, yea to new revelations not to be found in
Scripture, and yet, as I have above observed, after all this he joined with the
assembly at Westminster to cry down all such immediate revelation, and to
affirm that God had committed his Counsel wholly to writing.

3. And although many of those called Presbyterians cry up S. R. as a man of so
great experience in the things of God, yet I find himself ingenuously confess.
1. part. ep. 46. that there is a gate yet of finding out Christ, that he has
never lighted upon, and says he, O if I could find it out!

4. Now this gate (blessed be the Name of the Lord, and to his eternal praise
we can declare it) many thousands in this day do know, and by it they find
Christ and do enjoy his living presence daily, who is the bridegroom and
husband of their souls, and this gate is, to wait upon him, in the shinings of
his divine Light in their hearts, being retired and gathered unto the same, out
of all their own thoughts, words and works, all their own willings and runnings
in the self-will, all selfish motions, desires and inclinations of self, in
pure silence and stillness of mind, waiting to feel his heavenly breathings and
movings, which do rai^e up in us the true desire, and prayer that we may find
him, and enjoy him, and as we have sought him by this gate, or after this
manner, we have never missed in some measure, more or less, to find him.

5. This silent waiting to enjoy the presence of the Lord, is a mystery, and as
a sealed book to Professors generally, and seems to have been little or
nothing known to this great Seer, as the Author of the Postscript does call
him, for I find nothing of it in his Epistles, and yet it is one of the most
needful and most profitable lessons and instructions for people to be
instructed in, and the Scripturs Testimony is plain and clear concerning it,
even of silent waiting. Lament. cap. 3. 26, 27, 28. It is good that a man
should both hope and quietly (or in silence) wait for the salvation of the
Lord. It is good for a man that he bear the yoke in his youth, he sits
alone and keeps silence, because he has borne it upon him. Psalm. 46. 10. Be
still (or silent) and know that I am God, Psalm. 62. 1. Truly my soul is silent
unto God, from him comes my salvation. Eccles. 5. 2. Be not (...) with thy
mouth, and let not thine heart be hasty (...) utter any thing before the Lord.
Zach. 2. 3. Be si^ent O all flesh before the Lord. And many more ^cripturs may
be brought to prove this so needful and profitable instruction. As also here
are manifest ^xamples of this silent waiting in Scripture, both together and
apart, Ezekiell 3: 15. The Prophet (...) with them of the captivity seven
days, and then (...) Word of the Lord came unto him. And Esdras sat silent
with the people until the evening sacrifice: Esdra 9: 3, 4, 5. And the Prophet
Elijah sat in a si^ent posture alone upon the top of mount Carmell waiting for
the Word of the Lord, and the accomplishment thereof, casting himself down
upon the earth, and putting his face betwixt his knees. King. 18: 42. This is
such a posture that if a man should use it in our days, people would say, he
were mad, or possessed with the Devil, such is their ignorance of the way and
work of God. And again. 1 King. 19. verse 2. The Lord appeared unto Elijah
neither in the wind, nor Earthquake, nor fire, but in the still or silent
small voice, to wit, that is heard in the stillness or silence, of the Soul.

6. There is one particular more that I find in S. R. that I cannot omit to
take notice of, in the same epistle 46. which I have above mentioned, either I
know not (says he) what Christianity is, or we have stinted a measure of so
many o^nce weights, and no more, upon holiness and there we are at a stay. It
were good for the Professors to consider this and be convinced of their error;
whereas they say the holiest Man on earth does sin daily in thought word, and
deed, yea every moment and cannot but sin continually; Is not this to stint a
measure of so many ounce weights, or rather of a few grains upon holiness, yea
altogether to annihilate it? For I know not how that can be called holiness,
which cannot keep the soul one moment from sinning. However S. R. although here
convinced of this error, yet afterward did fall foully into it, when he
joined with the divines, so called, at Westmunster, in that unchristian
assertion that no man by any grace given of God, can perfectly keep the
commandments of God, but does daily break them in thought, word and deed. This
is a bold and presumptuons stinting and limiting the power and powerful grace
of God, in the hearts of his children, without all ground from Scripture, yea
contrary to it, which says, his commandments are not grievous, and his yoke
is easy, and his burden Light.

7. Moreover, in my fourth Section, I referred to some thing related by the
Author of The fullfilling of the Scripturs, concerning John Welsh, Robert
Bruce, and some others in those days, which I said, will not a little make for
the present Testimony of the people called Quakers. Now for proof of this, I
shall give a few instances out of many more, which may be brought out of the
said book.

8. First. The said Author tells us (page 416. 2 edition) of a very solemn
and extraordinary outletting of the Spirit in the West of Scotland, about the
year 1625. and there after, which began in the parish of Stewarton (whiles the
persecution was hat from the Prelatick party.)

9. Which by the profane Rabble of that time, was called the Stewarton
Sickness, and spread through much of that country particularly at Irvin,
through the Ministry of David Dickson; of which he writes that few Sabbaths
(meaning first days) did pass without some evidently converted, and some
convincing proofs of the power of God accompanying his Word, yea that many were
so choked and taken by the heart, that through terror, the Spirit in such a
measure convincing them of sin, in hearing of the Word, they have been made to
fall over, and thus carried out of the Church, who after proved most solid and
lively Christians. And says he, this great springtide of the Gospel was not of
a short time, but for some years continuance, yea thus like a spreading
Mooreburne, the power of godlyness did advance from one place to another, which
put a mavelous Luster on these parts of the country, the savor whereof
brought many from other parts of the land to see the truth of the same. Again
he tells page 417. at the Kirk of the shots 20 of June 1630. that there was
so convincing an appearance of God and down pouring of the Spirit; even in an
extraordinary way, especially at that sermon, Juny 21. the day after their
communion, with a strange unusual motion on the hearers, who in a great
multitude were there conveened of diverse ranks, that it was known (which he
says he can speak on sure ground) near five hundred had at that time a
discernible change wrought on them, of whom most, proved lively Christians
afterward. Now that there was a true and real appearance of God, and breaking
forth of his power and out letting of his Spirit, upon many at that time, I
verily believe, and my soul has unity with the testimony hereof, and diver
other testimonys of this nature in the said book.

10. And certainly this was an immediate sensible appearance and revelation of
the power and presence of God, accompanying the Ministry of that time, which
produced such effects, and in truth the very same power and presence of God,
with the very same and the like effects, is now again broken forth in our day,
among the despised people called, Quakers, and that in much greater clearness,
so that more sound principles are made known unto us, and many things, which
were letts and snares unto them, are discovered unto us from the Lord.

11. And yet is it not a most sad and lamentable thing that Professors who cry
up the appearance of God in that time, will not own the same appearance of God
in the nature and kind of it, although more clear, and glorious as to the
measure, among us now: but join with the profane rabble, to call those unusual
motions, which are the real effects of Gods power and Spirit powerfully
seazing upon both souls and bodies of many among us, in great trembling, cries
and tears, the signs of some Diabolical Possession, whereas the same persons,
by sobriety of life and conversation, and by a walk as Christian-like as any of
these a fore mentioned, and in many things exceeding them, and also by the
savor of the life of Christ in them, have evidenced that they were led by the
Spirit of God.

12. Yea the Author of ^he Postscript is not afraid to impute these unusual
and extraordinary motions that some times appear in the bodies of some of our
friends, to a possession of Satan, which if he did as knowingly as
maliciously, might truly be called a blaspheming against the Holy Ghost. But
they are judged here by some of their own prophets, for seeing it was the
Spirit of God that raised these unusual motions in them abovementioned, why
should the like now be imputed to the Devil?

13. O how like is this generation of hypocritical professors to the Scribes,
and Pharisees and Jews of old, who professed to own the Spirit of God in
Moses and the prophets, and yet rejected and resisted the same Spirit in Christ
and the Apostles?

14. And it is observable, that this glory of God that appeared among them at
that time, which was a time of persecution, although it continued for some
years, yet afterward when the Presbyterians got into the sadle themselves, and
turned persecuters of others that dissented from them, this glory did
disappear, and in stead thereof, great complaining of deadness, as it is at
this day, among them who have most ingenuity. This does plainly show that they
did not follow the Lord in his further leadings, but rather went back,
otherwise this glory would not have departed, b^t continued, yea and increased
among them.

And if some object, that this glory appeareing unto that people at a
communion, to wit; at that; called the Sacrament of the Supper, it seems to
be no small argument to prove that God did own that external action, as his
ordinance, although the people called Quakers deny it to be a standing
ordinance to the world and do not practice it.

15. To this I answer, that it is observable that by the Authors own account
the greatest outleting of the Spirit was not on their communion day, but on the
day after, but that God did at times of that external action of breaking
bread, condescend unto them; regarding their sincerity, and gave manifestations
of himself, will not prove that he commanded that thing unto them, or that
their minds were not in an error, in laying too great weight upon that
external action, which was but a figure of the true communion; for the same
Author does acknowledge that the Spirit of God did also wonderfully accompany
Luther in his Ministry, and yet Luther did most grossly err; as in other
things, so in the matter of the Sacrament, teaching that the body of Christ was
consubstantiat with the bread and that the o^^ward mouth receives the body of
Christ. And I believe, such as are sober and ingenuous of the Presbyterians
will not deny, but that the Lord did pour out of his Spirit, upon those Bishops
in England that dyed martyrs, that were both for Episcopacy and the
Service Book; yet this proves not, that God did own these things, as his
ordinances. It is the sincerity and earnest desires of men's souls after God,
that he regards, although they be in error in some things which he winketh
at, but does not own. Yea did not Christ wonderfully appear to Saul, while he
was going to Damascus, to obtain an order to persecute the Saints, a very
unl^wfull action, but this proves not that God allowed (...) in the same. Many
other instances could be given to show the weakness of that objection, and
certainly in the darkest times of Popery, God raised up some to be ministers of
his Spirit that yet continued to hold many Popish errors; as not only Bernard
and Thauler, but even John Huss who dis^ented little from the Papists in matter
of doctrine, but mostly blamed their ungodly life.

16. A second instance I shall bring out of the aforesaid Author, is, page
422. where he gives as a sixth witness, etc. the convincing appearance of an
extraordinary and Apostolic Spirit on some of these instruments, whom the Lord
raised up in these last times, who as he says had special revelations from
the Lord of his mind anent things to come, etc. But how does this agree with
their confession of Faith, that says, the former ways of Gods revealing
himself to his people are ceased since the Apostles days, and that there are
no new revelations of the Spirit, but that God has committed his counsel
wholly to writing? And of such special revelations he mentions diverse, which
I refer the Reader to find in the said book.

17. A Third instance shall be that which the Author mentions of Robert
Bruce, where I take notice of diverse weighty particulars, as 1. that his call
was extraordinary page 429. to wit, by an inward motion and pressing of the
Spirit, and such a call I confess is extraordinary, as in respect of the
greatest part of those, called Teachers, which yet is most ordinary, yea and
most necessary to every true teacher and minister of Christ.

18. 2. He tells page 431. that it was the manner of Robert Bruce, for a
considerable time to keep (...) before he preached. And yet how do the
Professors now blame our silence, when even such among us as the Lord has
given a true ministry unto, do find it at times their place to be silent a
considerable time before they speak, and sometimes for a whole diet to be
silent, as Ezekiel was of old? Now I beseech them to consider what did this
silence of R. B. mean, or what was his intent in being si^ent so long? was it
not he waited to receive, that he was to speak from the Lord? Or at least to
(...) the Spirit and power of the Lord to assist him in what perhaps was in his
heart to speak? and truly this is the very cause of our silence also, for we
know that no preaching nor praying can avail to quicken or reach the souls of
men, or profit either speaker or hearers, but that which is in the immediate
moving and assistance of the Spirit of God.

19. 3. He tells plainly page 431. that he had the Spirit of discerning in a
great measure in so much that having heard a sermon preached by Robert Blair
(it being the first he had preached) and he being desired by the said Robert
Blair to give his judgment concerning the same, did give it, in these words I
found, said he, your ^ermon very polished and disgested, but there is one thing
I did miss in it, to wit, the Spirit of God, I found not that; This (as the
Author says) took a deep impression upon him and helped him to see, it was
something else to be a minister of Jesus Christ, then to be a knowing and
eloquent preacher. Page 453. But the professors generally in this day, deny any
such Spirit of ^iscerning, as whereby one knows; supposing him to be never so
spiritual, when he hears another preach, whether he does preach by the
Spirit of God, or no: and when we affirm that the Lord has given such a
discerning unto us they cry out many of them, as if it were blasphemy to assert
any such thing. Again, whereas this Author says, it is some what else to be a
minister of Jesus Christ, then to be a knovving and eloquent preacher: we say
the same. But how far does this contradict the Presbyterians doctrine that
grace or piety is not essential or necessary to the being of a minister of
Christ, as James Durham expressly affirms in his book on the Revelation?

21. 4. The Author tells us that the said Robert Bruce was deeply affected
with the naughtiness and profanity of many ministers then in the Church, and
the unsuitable carriage of others to so great a calling, and did express much
his fear that the Ministers of Scotland would prove the greatest persecuters,
that the Gospel had; And so in this we have found his words to be true, for
the said Ministry of Scotland, even Presbyterian as well as Episcopal are the
greatest persecuters of the Gospel in this day, as formerly. And their
doctrine, that Grace or piety is not essential to a Minister of Christ, nor an
inward call by the Spirit, opens a door to such a naughty and profane Ministry.

22. Page 432. 5. He tells that on a certain time when Robert Bruce was at
prayer in his chamber in Edinburgh, there was such an extraordinary motion on
all present, so sensible a down-pouring of the Spirit, that they could hardly
contain themselves, yea which was most strange, even some unusual motion on
those, who were in other parts of the house, not knowing the cause at that very
instant: and one being occasionally present, when he went away said; O how
strange a man is this? for he knocked down the Spirit of God upon us all; this
he said, because R. B. did diverse times knock with his fingers on the table And
yet when such motions and effects are now witnessed, when the Servants of the
Lord pray in our meetings, they will not believe, but in the same Pharisa^call,
Antichristian spirit, as the Jews said of Christ, they say of us, that we
have a devil, for which I heartily wish that the Lord may forgive them, and
open their hearts to understand and receive the Truth.

Many more observable passages might be cited out of the same book, to convince
Professors, how these men, whom they have such an esteem of, did both in
principle, practice and experience, in many things agree with us, the People
called Quakers, against themselves, who boast to be their Successors and
children, as the Jews boasted, that they were the children of Abraham. But
surely seeing the Professors of this day, stop their ears at the inward voice of
Gods Spirit in their own consciences, and also at so many plain and clear
testimonys of the Holy Scripture, that make so abundantly for the Testimony of
Truth owned by us. I little expect that the testimonys of these men will
prevail with many of them, yea although even they should come from the dead,
and witness for the Truth, against them, as Christ said in the (...), If they
will not believe Moses and the Prophets, neither will they believe, if one
should be raised from the dead. Yet for the sake of many others among them, of
whom I have hope that God will in due time effectually reach them and open
their eyes, I have found my heart moved and drawn by the Lord to be at this
pains, for the good of whose souls I could willingly by the Grace of God
endure much labor, suffering and affliction both inwardly and outwardly, that
they might see and own the glorious work and appearance of God among us, and
be brought to enjoy the same with us.

23. And here in the close of all, I shall cite a passage of this Author
himself, which may be of service to some who are willing to understand, how
that the Presbyterians, even the most knowing and experienced of them, did not
know all that was afterward to be revealed.

Page 35. He says, We wait and believe the further accomplishment of this
promise (to wit, the words, Dan. last: ver. 4. Many shall run to and fro, and
knowledge shall be increased) to the Church, beyond all we have yet seen, that
many Scripture truths now dark and abstruse, shall be made so clear, as shall
even cause us to wonder at the gross m^stakes we once had thereof, yea that
after generations shall have a discovery and uptaking of some prophecys now
ob^cure, which shall as far exceed us, as this time goes beyond former ages,
which comparatively we must say were very dark.

24. Now I earnestly obtest and beseech such among them, as have any measure of
true tenderness and ingenuity, and do believe these words of this Author, to
consider in the cool of their minds if possibly these principles and doctrins
among us, which they have called gross errors and delusions of Satan, may not
be these Scripture truths, whereof the Author speaks, and that their
condemning such principles were but their gros^e mistakes, yea surely we know
it to be so, and many of us that were formerly Presbyterians, are now made to
wonder at our gross mistakes, which we then had. But this I understand of such
as are really owned by us, not of those which they do falsely allege and impose
upon us. I shall cite one or two passages more of this Author, and then leave
it to the impartial and ingenuous judge, if they do not arrive, upon the matter
at the same, which many of his Brethren reproach and nickname with the Profane
rabble under the terms of Enthusiasme and Quakerism.

25. Page 112. He says -- There is a demonstration within, which goes further
then the judgment, and passes natural understanding, whence we feel, we taste,
we enjoy, yea his voice is heard in the Soul, which we surely know to be his.

This is a plain testimony to inmedtat Revelation, which is our main principle,
and is so greatly opposed in this day, by Presbyterians, as much as others.

Again, page 229. He speaks of an immediate teaching of the Spirit, and of a
mighty power of God that can witness (in many young ones) ere they can well
speak, or exercise Reason, the power of Religion.

Again, page 120. speaking of Prayer, he says, It may seem strange, how
easily we can step out from the world and the noise thereof, in before the
Lord, without the least pause or time interveening.

26. And again, he says, Alas! It Is sad, this seems rather a piece of
invention many times, then a matter of earnest with the Lord. ^ to what a
class can such a piece of Atheism be reduced, as appears (says he) in our
nearest approaches unto God?

27. And lastly, as concerning preaching, he commends it in the said Robert
Bruce, that at a certain time wrestling earnestly with the Lord by prayer,
before he came into the assembly, he was heard say in his prayer, Unto the
Lord, I protest I will not go, except thou go with me. How far are the
Presbyterian Teachers now gone from this, that say, Grace is not absolutely
necessary to a minister of Christ, and plead both for preaching and praying
without the Spirit) and after that, be went forth and preached in such evidence
and demonstration of the Spirit, that by the shining of his face, and that
shower of divine influence that the word spoken was accompanied with, it was
easy for the hearer to perceive that he had been in the Mount with God, and
that he had indeed brought that God, whom he had met with in private, into his
mothers house, and into the chambers of her that conceived him. Page 444.

28. These and many other passages in that book can not but force an
acknowledgment from any, that read it, and are ingenuous, that it does greatly
commend and Justify that, which Presbyterians now greatly condemn, under the
termeof QVAKERISM.

FINIS.
A POSTSCRIPT.
To my beloved Relations, Friends and Acquaintances in the Shire and City of
Aberdeen, ALEXANDER SKEIN wishes all happiness, and the sound and saving
knowledge of the Truth, as it is in JESUS.
IT is no small matter of regrete, that so many persons of all ranks and
conditions are so little concerned with the public work of God, and the
matters of his Kingdom at this time. If their own affairs go well, they matter
little how it go with Religion. It was a great ground of the Prophets
complaint, Ier. 5. 1. That there were none that sought the Truth, or were
valiant for the Truth on Earth, Ier. 9. 3. This is not only the guilt of the
body of the Nation, but also the sin of these that pretend to a piece of more
seriousness: but they should know, the eyes of the Lord are upon the Truth,
Ier. 5. 3. And the neglect of it ^ath occasioned great wrath, upon a people,
and a hand from the Lord, ver. 3. Whereupon the Prophet said, ver. 4. Surely
these are poor, they are foolish, for they know not the way of the Lord, nor
the judgment of their God. This very thing has with weight come near my heart,
when I have observed such an indifferency amongst many, that they have been at
little or no pains to search for the mind of the Lord amidst all the disputes
and debats anent his Truth in their day, and being thus exercised, the Lord
has in a measure manifested this to me, that there are some special
obstructions that stand in the way, why people have not a desire to search
after the Truth.

1. One is, that Truth is mostly the object of reproach and scorn to the
multitude of the world, and the owners of it are hated, despised and
persecuted, and upon this account many are content to be without the conviction
of it, yea to hearken rather to anything that may strengthen them to stand out
against it, then that which would incline them to come under subjection to the
yoke thereof. Wherefore it was upon good ground that Christ said; If any man
will be my Disciple he must deny himself, and take up his cross daily and
follow me: this is a necessary condition and qualification of a Disciple they
may as well renounce to be a Christian, as refuse to take up the cross which is
entailed on all that will be followers of Christ, for if any love Father or
Mother, husband or Wife, houses or lands, etc. better then Christ he is not
worthy of me, says Christ, there must be a complete resignation of all that is
nearest and dearest to us in the world if we mind to be real Christians, and
to encourage all to make this choice there want, not many sweet and precious
promises of rewards both in time and eternity, though few believe them.

A 2. obstruction is that people have a persuasion, they may be eternally
saved, whether they embrace the Truth or not, seeing it is acknowledged upon all
hands, that many have been saved that have lived and dyed in the same
Profession they stand in; and upon this ground they suppose they need not
embrace any thing that will disquiet their rest, or interrupt their ease and
render them obnoxious to the cross. But if this have any weight in it, it
might have as well excused the Scribes and Pharisees and unbelieving Jews, for
refuseing the Gospel, and the doctrine of Christ and his Apostles, that taught
them to forbear circumcision and the Ceremonys of the Law, because Moses and
the Prophets, and all the godly for many generations walked in the way of their
profesion, yea this might have excused the Papists at the reformation to have
rejected the Light the Lord held forth to them, because it is acknowledged that
the sincere and single hearted amongst them in preceding generations were
saved. But who amongst the Protestants will say that this was a sufficient
ground to remain still in Popery? for had any of them that walked up rightly in
the way of the Mosaicall Ceremonys been living when these things became deadly,
and had opposed the Light of the Gospel, which repealled them they could not
have been safe. Neither any professing Popery that had occasion to embrace the
Light of reformation, and yet in opposition to that Light would needs continue
to defend that idolatry and superstition, and refuse to receive that Light,
after these waters were turned into blood, Rev. 16. 3. So it is now, though
they believe that many good Men, that were faithful ^o what they knew, and
walked uprightly acording to their measure in former times; yet if they shall
upon that pretense presume to resist, reject, or refuse, the Light that the
Lord is further manifesting at this day, such cannot have any ground to expect
salvation. See Io^. 15. 22. If I had not come and spoken unto them they* had
not had sin, but now they have nocloake for their sin; But may expect to be
numbered amongst the enemies of Gods Work. It was the commendation of good Men in
all ages, that they walked sutably to the dispensation of the Lord in their
day, and this is the great duty the Lord calls for from his people, to follow
the Lamb wh^thersoever he (...), this will be their commendation before the
Lord, as Rev. 14. 4. When the life, Light and power of God removes from one
dispensation to another, to be always a follower of that which is our duty,
for it is not to be expected that Moses or David, if they were alive now would
look to find that life in their sacrifices and external rites which they
found, when they were upon Earth, no this is only to be waited for in the
spiritual way of the Gospel worship. And to come nearer, if Cranmer, Hooker
and Ridly who were Martyrs for the Protestant faith in beareing witness against
the Idolatry of the Mass, and thought it no small mercy to have the use of a
common prayer book in English, and no doubt in that day might feel life in it;
yet when the Light of reformation increased, it discovered that to be a
limiting of the Spirit of God in Prayer, and consequently had in it self a
tendency to deaden the heart by remaining in that formality. If they were
living now, the Lord would require of them to seek after a more Spiritual Way
of worship, where the pure life of Christ was more to be found and felt then in
read prayers. Even so now when the Lord is poynting forth a more spiritual
way, which is by following the pure motions of the Spirit of life in an
immediate way upon the heart in all religious dutys, the Lord will have all his
people to own that way both in practice and profession, and they that will
reject this, or refuse or oppose it. He will no less reckon them as his enemies
now, then these, that have been refusers, or opposers of his work in former
generations.

A 3 Obstruction is, Truth has been for most part loaded by its opposers with
many heavy slanders, calumnys and lies, and traduced with the nicknames of
error, Heresy, blasphemy and delusion, yea called devilisme, and what else
malice can invent, so Paul's religion was called heresy; Acts. 24. 14. and
Christians were a sect every where spoken against, Acts 23. 22. Yea Christ
himself was said to have a Devil, Ioh. 8. 48, 53. And what wonder then that the
opposers of Truth in this day speak so of Truth, as it is now manifested? The
Professors thereof are said to deny Jesus Christ that was borne of the virgin
Mary, where as they have often testified they own no other Christ, but him to
be the Savior of the world, that was crucified at Jerusalem, and this we can
say in the uprightness of our hearts, as in his sight, that searches hearts.
Our opposers say we deny the Scriptures of Truth* whereas we own all things
therein (being rightly translated) to be the dictate of the Holy Spirit and
that they contain all the substantialls of true religion, and whatsoever is
contrary to them, to be but delusion; yea we are content to have all points of
controversy betwixt us and our opposers to be determined by the Scriptures of
Truth. We are said to deny the Ministry and ordinances of the Gospel; whereas
we own all the true and faithful Ministers, that are called of God, and that
function and are not merely men-made Ministers, that are made to be Ministers
in the mere will of men, only endued with some measure of natural and acquired
parts, and feel not the power and virtue of the life of Jesus Christ dwelling
in their hearts, without any sense of which power and life they can pray and
preach. But we own all Spiritual and living preaching and prayer. As for the
ordinances called Sacraments we own them only according to Scripture sense,
viz. that Baptism which is by the Holy Ghost, for John Baptized with water,
but Christ's Baptism is with the Holy Ghost and with fire, Math. 3. 11. Act. 1.
4. This is that one baptism, Ephesians. 4. 5. The Bread and Wine that is Elementary
we deny, as being but a carnal ordinance, which are all repealed at the time of
reformation under the Gospel, Heb. 9. 10. as all rites are, which stand in
meats and drinks, washings, or Baptismes, as the Greek has it. But we own the
Communion of Christ's body and blood according to Luke 6. 53. compared with
verse 63. Our opposers say we lay the whole stresse of justification and
remission of sins upon our own righteousness, and we declare we own no
meritorious cause of the remission of sins, but the righteousness, blood and
sufferings of Jesus Christ, that was crucified at Jerusalem, and as it was done
and performed by the Man Christ, born of the virgin Mary, and yet we profess
none are justified, but such as are in a measure sanctified, and actually
cleansed from sin, so as none are justified in their sins. These and many more
of the like slanders asserted with boldness and impudence by malicious
opposers, are no small obstruction to many simple-hearted people, who are but
too ready to take things, of this nature, upon trust, without trial and
proof, especially if the assertors be in any repute for a piece of
seriousness, as the Scribes and Pharisees and high Priests, who were in great
authority and esteem with the people, and thereby did influence their slender
followers to prefer Barrabas a murderer and a robber, to Christ Jesus.

A 4 Obstruction is, that Truth, when it comes first abroad, is at several
great disadvantages in the eyes of the world, as first, it seldom has the
countenance of Civil authority, but mostly is persecuted, and laws and statutes
made in opposition to it, this is universally known in all ages, and throughout
these Nations, where it first appeared. Secondly, it has the opposition of the
National Clergy, so called, and of the most learned of that sort of men, who
have the greatest advantages of authority to influence the body of the Nation;
see Ioh. 9. 22. For the Jews had agreed already, that if any men did confess
that he was Christ, he should he put out of the Synagogue. Thirdly, Truth being
a witness against the abuse and superstitions which have through length of time
and long custom, been rooted and strengthened so in a Nation, that it needs no
less the the power of God to extirpate, people can hardly admit to hearken to
any testimony against these things whether they be personal or national
customs, see Mark. 7. 9. and he said unto them, full well ye reject the
commandment of God, that ye may keep your own tradition.

It Is not an easy thing to forsake old Customs, this has been a cause, why
men in all ages have stumbled at the simplicity of truth, because it was not
decked with the trimmings and ornaments of the whore. I need not enlarge on
this, the application is so plain. Fourthly, education and breeding in wrong
glosses and mistakes of Scripture proofs, has been none of the least
hindrances of the progress of truth, or of its reception, and for this let the
many diverse reasonings of the Jews against Christ in his descent, doctrine and
miracles be considered, and men may then as in a glass see the image of that
spirit, that is in opposition to truth in this day: and for this I referr the
sober inquirer after Truth, to Isaac Pennington his book, (called The outward
Jew a looking glass for Professors) this is such a person, that none acquainted
with his writings, but will allow him a good character, if he be not a
prejudicated opposer.

5. Another great Obstruction, which keeps people from the search after Truth,
is a light and (...) mind, which predominats in the most of Men and Women in
the world. This hinders Truth in the very power and life of it, and permits
none to be serious in the search of it: it is not the conviction of judgment
in matters of truths, that the Lord calls for only, or that his faithful
servants endeavor, as if it were satisfaction to them to see many owning it,
or professing the form thereof, these are but at best like the stony or thorny
ground, that receive the seed with joy, and yet in a day of the heat of
persecution, turn from it, and so may become a discredit to the Truth. 't Is
only these that labor not only to know the Truth, and espouse it in their
understandings, but also endeavor to feel the power and life of it reach their
hearts, and this not only for a touch at a time, but to live and feed upon that
life and power, which flows forth from the fountain and spring of it, I say
these only it is, that will be true witnesses of the Truth. Hence Christ spoke
many parables to this purpose, as that of the wise merchant that sold all and
bought the pearl: and the treasure that was hid in the ground, etc. Let all
persons that are of this light and airy spirit, consider their danger; how
incapable they are not only to come to the knowledge of the Truth of God in
their day and generation; but also utterly unfitted for being heirs of the
kingdom, when time shall be no more. If they did mind the care of their
precioussoules, and consider their mortality, how uncertain their time is, and
of what concernment it is to them to be truly serious, they would not make too
light of the matters of God and of the Truth, which concern their everlasting
salvation, but would find them of far greater moment, then these temporal
pleasures, profits and recreations, wherewith they are so intentively taken up.

Wherefore, my desire to all, is that they would seriously consider these few
obstructions mentioned, and apply their mind, to search after the ways of the
Lord, and beware to take matters of so great concernment upon trust from any
Man, or company of men; but impartially weigh and ponder by the Light of the
Lord in their own hearts, what is Truth, and what is error by what doctrine
the free Grace of God will be most esteemed, and the pride of Man most abased,
beware of an implicit faith, for the just shall live by his faith. Hab. 2. 4.
And not by the faith of another. They are most to be suspected as deceivers,
that do most hinder inquiry and trial, as many Preachers at this time are
doing. It is a known Popish imposition to forbid searching, and is now
renounced, and abominated by all sound Protestants, therefore they are yet
drunk with the Whores Cup, that would obtrude their doctrine to be believed
without trial, or to hinder from trying the Spirits, and from trying all
things, that what is best may be kept to. If any object that word Prove. 19. 27.
Coase to hear the instruction that causes to err from the words of
knowledge. I answer this presupposes a clear and well grounded faith, of the
Truth, from an inward principle, which few ordinary Professors can lay claim
to, otherwise this might have excused the Jews in not harkening to Christ and
his Apostles, in saying, we know God ^pake to Moses, but for this fellow we
know not whence (...) is. Joh. 9. v. 26. Yea we and our predecessors should
have remained in Popery without trial. Wherefore friends, if ye will truly
join and be united to the power and life, which the Lord is ready to reveal in
your hearts, it will not only help you to discern Truth from error, but to
overcome your lusts, and get victory over your idols that stand up to make
distance and separation betwix^ Gods peace and favor, and your souls. That
place is considerable, Romans 12. verse 2. be not conformed to this world, but be
ye transformed by the renewing of your mind that ye may prove what is that good
and acceptable and perfect will of God, and thereby ye shall come to get your
hearts established in the love of God and get all these straying^ and wanderings
in your hearts reformed, by w^^ch your best dutys are corrupted and defiled,
which is the earnest desire and travel of my soul, that all my beloved (...)
and acquaintances every where may, truly and sensibly come unto.

A real lover of your eternal welfare and Peace. ALEXANDER SKEIN.
From the Tolbooth of Aberdeen the 1 of the 5 Month 1676. where I am a
prisoner for my testimony.
Printed in the Year 1677.


