DIVINE Immediate Revelation AND INSPIRATION, Continued in the True CHURCH,
Second Part.

In Two TREATISES: The First being an Answer to Io. W. Bajer Doctor and
Professor of Divinity, so called, at Iena in Germany, Published first in
Latin, and now in English. The Second being an Answer to George Hicks, styled
Doctor of Divinity, his Sermon Preached at Oxford, 1681. and Printed with the
Title of, The Spirit of Enthusiasm Exorcised; where this pretended Exorcist is
Detected.


Together, with some Testimonies of Truth, Collected out of diverse Ancient
Writers and Fathers, so called.

By G. K.

The Second EDITION.

London, Printed in the Year, 1685.

A PREFACE To the Friendly and Well-wishing READER
THE thing which I principally treat of in this my Answer to John W. Bajer,
etc. is of Divine Immediate Revelation and Inspiration, its continuance in the
Church of God in all Ages, and of the good Consistency and Harmony of it, with
the frequent and diligent use of the Holy Scriptures, and all other true means.
The which is a Theme or Subject very necessary and profitable to be handled.
And therefore I have somewhat more largely treated of many things belonging to
my intended purpose, than a particular Answer to the foresaid Writer did
require, regarding herein a more general profiting of the people, into whose
hands, by Divine Providence, this Treatise may come. Although nothing, I hope,
is omitted, which shall seem needful to a particular Answer. But the common
Advantage and Benefit of many, to whom I might be serviceable by this kind of
Writing, was more before myeyes, than a striek Method of answering to every
particular. For to overcome an Adversary in particulars, does little contribute
to the Victory, or gaining the Cause that is in Controversy; if at any time he
be overcome, it will be said, that he has badly defended his Cause; and
nevertheless of his fall or overthrow, the Cause is still judged to stand, and
remain untouched. I have therefore more regarded the Cause or thing in
Controversy, than the Adversary. And therein, by the Grace of God assisting
me, I have labored to show and demonstrate the good and excellent consistency
and Harmony of Divine Immediate Revelation and Inspiration, with the frequent
and diligent use of the Holy Scriptures, and of all other true means. For I did
observe, that this was the greatest and almost the only prejudice and
impediment that did prevail in the minds of many against Divine inward and
Immediate Revelation and Inspiration, that this principle being once granted
and believed, the use of the holy Scripture, and other means shall be abandoned
and laid aside, and so by this stratagem or device, the people, under the
pretense of Spiritual Illumination and Revelation, shall be led into gross and
extreme ignorance. This is that therefore, for which I chiefly labor in this
Treatise, that I may remove, and lay aside, and quite take off that great
prejudice of mind that is in many people, and that both Divine Immediate
Revelation and Inspiration may be established, and the frequent and diligent
use of the Holy Scripture, whether in Reading, or Hearing, or Preaching, or
Meditating, or Praying, or Thangksiving, and of all other true means truly
appointed of God, may be Confirmed. And indeed true Divine Immediate Revelation
and Inspiration of the Holy Spirit is so far from making void, or rendering
useless and unprofitable the use and exercise of the Holy Scriptures, or of any
other true means, that on the contrary, it is the only thing that makes the use
of them effectual and profitable. For why is it, that so much Reading,
Preaching, Hearing, Praying, etc. in the use and exercise of the Holy Scripture
is so altogether unprofitable unto the greatest part of men, but because they
have departed from that Divine and Holy Spirit of God, that where it is
received does inwardly and immediately Inlighten and Inspire them, and have
rejected it as unnecessary and unprofitable? And hence it is that such gross
ignorance of God, and Divine things, even in the daily use and exercise of the
Holy Scriptures, does almost every where reign and prevail among those called
Christians. But on the other hand, they who embrace this principle of Divine
Inspiration, and inward Immediate Revelation, with true and sincere faith, and
according unto their faith duly and carefully attend and watch unto, or wait
for the Holy Spirit to inlighten and inspire them, and sincerely do study in
all things chastely and purely to obey his holy Precepts, and Admonitions, and
Divine Motions, they do abundantly witness the said Holy Spirit to open, and
inlighten their understanding, to understand the Holy Scriptures when they hear
them, or read them, or meditate upon them, and exercise their reason, or
rational faculties in a sober and moderate way, under a due subjection to the
Spirit of God, in these or any other profitable things: and also they feel and
perceive their hearts and affections led and drawn by the Holy Spirit, yea
kindled and inflamed thereby to love the Testimonies and Oracles of the Holy
Scriptures, and to value or esteem them above all the Riches, Delights and
Honors of the World, whereby it comes to pass, that in reading or hearing
them, and meditating on them; when they are not reading nor hearing, they find
great delight, and profit themselves very much in the frequent and diligent use
of the Scripture, the Holy Spirit leading them unto the same, and inlightning
them, in order to the increasing and promoting holiness of life. Now many fall
into dangerous and damnable extremes, some on the right and some on the left
hand. On this hand these fall, who seem to embrace the letter of the Scripture,
but reject and cast off the Spirit of God, which only and alone makes it
effectual and profitable, and on this side, most of these called Christians at
present do miserably transgress, and deceive themselves, and are miserably
deceived by their blind Teachers and Guides; who depreciate and cry down this
most holy and most profitable gift of the Divine Spirit and Light; and labor
to render it among the People as a vile and hurtful thing. But woe, woe, to these
blind Guides and Teachers, whosoever in the day of the Lord, unless they timely
and seriously repent. And on the other hand, too many (although fewer in number
then the former) under a pretense of following the Spirit inwardly, do either
altogether, or at least too much neglect and lay aside, and cast off the use
and exercise of the Holy Scriptures; and of other good and true means appointed
them of God. And this neglect does not at all proceed from the Holy Spirit, as
if that could or did in the least move them unto the same, but comes from
their ignorance and want of knowledge, and also from loftiness of mind, and
Spiritual Pride, of all which they must also repent, that they may be saved,
and come to walk in the way of Salvation; but they who under the specious
pretext of the Spirit neglect and lay aside the reading of the Holy Scripture,
and Meditation thereon, and the use and exercise of other good means, as
Preachings or Declarations of Truth in the Assemblies of the Faithful through
Holy Men, who speak by the Holy Ghost, and also prayers and supplications, and
giving of thanks unto God, both in public and private, or the Pious and
Christian Admonitions, Exhortations, and Reprehensions of their Brethren and
Elders; where they are needful, how much sover they make a pretext of the
Spirit, yet they live not in the Holy Spirit of God, and they may pretend to
have a name to live, with those of the Church of Sardis, but they are very
dead, carnal, rude, and ignorant; whereas the humble, meek, and faithful
Servants of God in the first place, they embrace, love and receive, with great
respect the Holy Spirit of God, and watch, and attend unto the same, and then
duly and chastely they regard the Holy Scriptures, as the Instruments, means,
organs and vessels of the Holy Spirit, as the same uses them, and appears in
them, and so frequently and daily make use of them and of all other means
ordained and appointed of God; and in their so doing find their great profiting
to the praise of God, and to the increasing in them Divine knowledge and
virtue; for they do well know, and consider, that it is a peculiar work and
office of the Holy Spirit, to expound the Holy Scriptures unto them; explain
and unfold their mysteries prophecies, and hidden things, and reveal their deep
sense, and that sometimes by the means of others preaching unto them, and at
other times, by silent and solitary meditation within themselves, which does
not hinder the immediate operation and communication of the Holy Spirit, but is
altogether made effectual thereby; as is showed at large in this following
treatise. And how can they reject the Holy Scriptures, or their use, to read
and hear them, and meditate upon them, who believe that the Holy Spirit is
given them, for that very cause that he may expound unfold and reveal the
Scriptures unto them; the Holy Scripture therefore is not to be rejected, nor
laid aside by any, however so much enlightened and replenished with the Holy
Spirit, but greatly to be esteemed and improved according to their great worth.
The Apostle Paul exhorted Timothy, who had that excellent gift of the Holy
Spirit to read the Holy Scripture, and praised him that from his Childhood he
had known them, and been exercised in them, his faithful parents, to wit, his
Mother, and Grandmother procuring and moving him unto the same; also the
Apostles did exercise themselves in reading the Scriptures of the Prophets, and
did bring many excellent places out of them, (as the Holy Spirit taught them
and opened them) in their Preaching Christ, and his Gospel, and Faith, to
convince the unbelieving, and in their Epistles unto the faithful they did
frequently cite the Scriptures of the Prophets and did also meditate in them,
for the nourishing their hope and consolation, as Paul has expressly affirmed,
Whatever said he, is written for our cause, it was written, (whereby he
includes, both himself and all the Apostles, as well as other Saints) that we
through patience and comfort of the Scriptures may have hope; and if they be
writ for the Saints, as well as for others, therefore they are to be read, and
heard, and meditated upon, by the Saints as well as others, by Men, and Women,
Old and Young, and by young Children also, that as it were with their Mothers
Milk they may draw and suck in the most wholesome precepts, institutions and
examples of the Scripture, and the most profitable Histories thereof, for the
begetting and forming them unto a good life, by the assistance of the grace of
the Holy Spirit, which shall not be wanting to them who sincerely wish and
desire it, for all Scripture Divinely inspired, and is profitable for doctrine
for reproof, for correction, for instruction in righteousness, that the Man of
God may be perfect, thoroughly furnished unto every good work, 2 Timothy 3.16.17.
Daniel who was a great Prophet of God, understood some things out of books and
especially out of Jeremiah his Prophecy, as he himself did testify. John
says, the things he did write concerning Christ, were writ unto men, that they
might believe and by believing may attain everlasting life, John 20.31. and
therefore the Scriptures are given also in order to work or beget faith into
Christ, in men's hearts, to wit, as a means or instrument thereof in the hand of
the Spirit, and finally Paul says, that the mystery (to wit, of the Gospel of
Christ) which was kept secret, since the World began, but now is made manifest,
is by the Scriptures of the Prophets according to the Commandment of the
everlasting God to be made known to all Nations, for the obedience of faith,
Romans 16.25, 26. And although neither in the age of the Apostles; nor unto this
day the outward Testimony of the Scripture, in the declaration of the Gospel is
come to all and every one of Mankind, yet it shall most certainly come into all
before the end of the World and the Gospel (as Christ has declared) shall be
preached to all Nations both inwardly, and outwardly, for a Testimony; to the
Salvation of them that believe, and to the greater condemnation of these who
believe not. And surely the time is near wherein God is to visit all Nations,
with his Spirit, Light, Life, and Grace, in a larger measure, than in many ages
bygone, and by the virtue and efficacy of his Spirit he will sanctify and
bless unto the people the outward testimony of the Scriptures, that with
spiritual fruit and increase they may read them, and hear them, and meditate
upon them diligently, and this my testimony as concerning the worth and use of
the Scriptures and of all other true means, appointed of God, the Holy Spirit
assisting, I desired to have published.

ERRATA.
PAge 18. line 4. read taste, p. 20. l. 27. r. airy, p. 29. l. 24. r. where p.
41. l. 26. r. is Christ, p. 75. l. 10, 11, r. Books which they contain in so
many words, p. 78. l. 10. f. primitive r. intimate, p. 78. l. 28. r. implanted
and ingrafted, p. 79. l. 9. r. worthy of belief, p. 81. l. 17. r. at least, p.
82. l. 14. r. ancient writings, p. 84. l. 29. r. refuted.

The Second Treatise. Page 89. l. 16. r. was induced, p. 93. l. 8. r.
restricted, p. 95. l. 23. f. acknowledge r. actually, l. 24. r. absent, p. 97.
l. 6. r. to the Holy Ghost, p. 98. l. 1. r. assentiendi, p. 104. l. 9, 13, 18,
r. Students, l. 12. r. them, p. 105. l. 2. r. pretend, p. 109. l. 25. r. does
only conclude, p. 110. l. 10. r. inspired, l. 21. r. supposed, p. 114. l. 13.
r. inspiration, p. 138. l. 19. r. Revelations, p. 139. l. 4. r. within, p. 145.
l. 6. r. at most, l. 26. r. partly, p. 160. l. 24. r. Logia, p. 170. l. 16. r.
and yet I love, p. 206. l. 2. r. Antoninus.

OF DIVINE Immediate Revelation AND INSPIRATION.
CHAP. I.
MY Friend and Brother in the Truth, and Country Man R. B. being much taken up
with another affair, when the dissertation of Io. W. Bajer, against his Apology
came to his hand, did earnestly desire me to answer it, as God should give me
freedom, and assistance so to do, unto which I found great Liberty and
clearness of Mind given me of God; in defense of the truth of God and while as
I was reading, and weighing the things I had read in the said dissertation,
many things did occurr unto me one after another, wherewith to answer. And here
I give the Reader to Understand, that I delayed my answer, for some small time,
until I should see, if any other dissertations of the same Author should be
made Public, and come out against us, as the title of this his first
dissertation, gave us occasion enough to expect more shortly to follow. For I
thought it would be best, to see his other dissertations, that so either I or
R. B. might answer them altogether; then to spend the more time and Labor in
answering now one, and then another; but as yet I have heard of no other
dissertations of his Published against us. As to the matter it self, I propose
this Method in answering, so as to observe whatever is said by the Adversary
whether well or ill, that touches the main thing, and hinge of the
controversy (passing by other things Superfluous or less Necessary,) and to
every one of those to answer distinctly.

In the first place, this Writer is to be Commended above many of our
Adversaries, for his greater Moderation of style and Mind, and because he
writes soberly and fairly of those things, which he imputes to us as false
and Erroneous, I shall in Charity impute these his mistakes not to flow from
Hatred, or Malice of Mind, which is but too frequent in many others, but from
some defect of right reason and judgment, and an Error of humane weakness.

That in his first Paragraph, and title of his dissertation he calls us
Enthusiasts, I would know, whether this Name or term Enthusiasts be in all
respects rejected by him, and these of his profession? or what Crime or Vice,
or thing unworthy of a Christian Name is contained therein? For having searched
both Greek and Latin Dictionaries and Vocabularies, I can find nothing, to
make me or any other true Christians justly ashamed of the same. For
Enthusiast, if we consider aright the Etymology, or English Signification of
the word, is one divinely Inspired, or Breathed upon, moved, and acted. Or one
in whom God is, in whom God speaks, whom God teaches, enlightneth,
instructs, leads, moves, and acts; and what I pray is unworthy of a
Christian Man, in all these things? yea what can befall to a Christian, that is
more worthy or desirable? for I am greatly Mistaken if our Adversary, will not
allow all those things to belong to a true Christian in a sound and sober sense
agreeable to Scripture. And although some Heathens abused this term in their
false Inspirations received from unclean Spirits, as they did also abuse the
name of God, this ought not to hinder, but that it may be at last turned to a
right use. We know how the Papists did throw this same term upon Luther, and
other well minded Men, for preaching up the necessity of the Spirits teachings
and leadings in those days, by way of derision, and made it a crime. I have
also observed, that the Socinians, and such as they, call all others in
derision Enthusiasts who in any wise plead for the grace and Illumination of
the holy Spirit, its being necessary, to the begetting in Men true Faith, Hope
and Charity. And I have both read and often heard, the teachers of the Episcopal
Church here in Britain brand the Presbyterians and Calvinists with the same.
Let any sober Man therefore be ashamed to impute that as a crime to another,
which is no crime, (if taken in a right sense, in which only we take it) and
which may be as well imputed to him, as unto us, according to his own
Concessions laid down by him, in his dissertation, as may be afterward seen,
in its due place. But because this term Enthusiast is not contained in the
Scripture (although I find it used by Clemens Alexandrinus and Origin in a
right sense, viz. for true divine inspiration) we shall not contend for it, nor
affect to have it given to us, yet we would not have it in derision cast upon
us, for affirming that all true and sound Christians are inspired and endued
with the holy Spirit, according to their several Measures and degrees.

Moreover, that he says in his first Paragraph, the chief controversy betwixt
us, and our Adversaries lies, in that of inward and immediate Revelations, is
very true; for this most noble Principle of inward and Immediate Revelation,
being once received and acknowledged, many other excellent Doctrines and
Principles of Christian Religion are by necessary consequence deduced there
from, and all things belonging to the Christian Religion, whither of Theory or
Practice, by the Light and virtue of the said Principle of inward and Immediate
divine Revelation do shine, and become clear, and receive their native and
lively beauty and luster. But the said Principle being denied, many other
excellent Principles are denied also, and all things belonging to the Christian
Religion, and Church of God and Christ are obscured and clouded, and as it were
involved in most thick night darkness. And hence it is that we confidently
affirm, that the one only true Foundation of the Christian Church is God and
Christ by the Holy Spirit speaking and shining in the hearts of the Faithful,
and inspiring them, and communicating unto them his inward and Immediate divine
Revelations, and by the same opening the Scriptures, and Mysteries of the
Christian Religion, and sanctifying all the means both outward and inward, as
of Reading, Hearing, Meditation, and Prayer; and of our whole obedience unto
God in all our services, whether inward or outward. Upon this Rock, which flesh
and blood has not revealed, but the Heavenly Father has made Manifest in the
hearts of the faithful, the true Church is built. And whatsoever Society or
Congregation of People is not built upon the same, is not the true Church of
Christ but false and Antichristian, because it is not built upon Christ, as
well inwardly revealing himself in their hearts, as appearing in Heaven, before
the Father, and interceeding for them.

What he adds in the same Paragraph needs much Correction. Although (says
he) they have many and diverse errors, yet it is manifest by experience, if
that one error of Immediate Revelation be admitted, it is to no purpose to
dispute against their other errors, for men being once persuaded that they
have within them, a divine and Immediate Light of Revelation, they will most
pertinaciously adhere to all things, which they think to be immediately revealed
unto them by God, whatever can be objected to the contrary. For first, that we
have many and diverse errors, he says it, but does not prove it: but
secondly, suppose that any of us did err in some one thing or another, which is
possible, if we be not duly watchful, (for we are Men, and do not judge our
selves above the reach or possibility of tentation) yet it is not manifest by
experience that a Brother who erreth, may not be reclaimed from his error unto
truth, yea the Contrary is manifest by experience. For we have at diverse
times, seen our weaker brethren, (if at any time they have through humane
frailty, been tempted and overcome by the spiritual adversary, and have fallen
into Error) happily reclaimed and restored by the pains and labors of others
more perfect, and more enlightened, the grace of God assisting and concurring
with the same. And supposing that any one should Imagine his error to be the
Truth, and under the Notion of Truth, should impute it to inward divine
Revelation (for no man who has the least degree of a sober and sound mind,
will impute error as such to the holy Spirit) yet very good and seasonable
means and arguments shall not be wanting to reclaim him unto Truth. For we can
readily suggest unto him, that it is not always divine inward Revelation, which
has an appearance so to be, for Satan does often transform himself into a false
likeness of an Angel of Light. Therefore he who so erreth is to be admonished,
that neither lightly, nor carelessly, but weightily and with great diligence he
prove and examine that which is presented unto him, under a show of truth, and
that he use all means both inward and outward, and especially apply his mind,
to the true divine Illumination of the spirit of God which never errs, that is
in him, to discover the said error. For no Man has any error, if he has the
least grain of Piety; but frequently an inward divine Illumination, or
Revelation, contrary unto the said error, does present it self unto his
understanding, revealing it, and expelling it, if duly attended, even as the
Light expels or drives away the Darkness, or as the day does the Night. Nor
are Men at this day exposed to greater danger, who profess to follow inward
divine Revelation then those of Old, in the days of the Prophets and Apostles.
Now we read in Scripture of a certain Young Prophet, who was deceived by an
Elder: I ask our Adversary, could he not be undeceived. Again let him tell me,
why are they more in hazard to be deceived, who profess to follow inward divine
Revelation, then others are who profess to follow the outward divine Revelation
of the Scripture? for he will not deny that many do foully err, who confidently
boast, that they follow the outward Revelation of the Scripture. Many also
embrace error for Truth, in natural things professing to follow the guidance of
sound natural reason; can they not therefore be convinced of their error? and
yet no man will confess that he has erred in that, wherein he believes that
he has followed the conduct of right reason.

What the Adversary writes in his second and third Paragraph, concerning the
things in the controversy agreed on by both sides, I have little to answer, or
which seem to need any answer. This only I take notice of, that our a dversary
does grant that, that divine Revelation, whereby God and the things of his
worship, are sufficiently and savingly known, does come unto men, not by the
natural power of humane understanding, but by the supernatural operation of
God. for so (says he) our Men do profess, on Luthers lesser Catechism on the
third Article of the Creed. I believe (say they) that I cannot confide or trust
in the Lord Jesus Christ my Lord, or approach, or come unto him any away, by
the power of my own reason, but the Holy Ghost by his Gospel has called me,
with his gifts has enlightened me, etc. The which words if some Socinians or
Pelagians did read, it is a wonder if they should not put on them the brand of
Enthusiasm, yea of Quakerism. For the foresaid words, seem to differ little or
nothing from our Faith, who in scorn are called Quakers, which may be more
clearly made apparent afterward.

CHAP. II.
IN his fourth Paragraph he propounds the state of the question thus. Whether
inward and Immediate Revelation be the common and ordinary way, which God used
not only to some men of old, but which he does always use, even to our very
times, unto all men, Manifesting unto them the things which are necessary for
them to know, in order to their Salvation. And a little after, he mentions a
twofold divine Revelation, the one inward and Immediate, for which we contend,
the other outward and mediate, viz. the Scripture by which he says, men attain
to the knowledge of things Necessary to Salvation, the holy spirit working in
them by that very Doctrine. But yet he seems not to me to state the matter of
the controversy clearly enough; for in the former Paragraph, as it seems he
called the supernatural operation of God and the holy Spirit, which is
necessary unto all believers and that absolutely, Divine Revelation the which
because it is distinct from the outward and mediate, (as he calls it) of the
Scripture, although not contrary unto it, I know not, how he can refuse to
acknowledge that the Revelation, Illumination, and Operation of the Holy
Spirit, in the hearts of the faithful, is both inward and Immediate. For first,
that it is inward he will not deny: secondly, nor will he (as I judge) deny
that it is Immediate, in that sense, wherein both he and all sound and right
thinking Christians contend against the Socinians and Pelagians, or any other
adversaries of Gods grace, that the holy Spirit does Immediately, most nearly
and identically, by a Supernatural Operation concur, in every holy man as well
to the forming of every good thought or conception, within man's heart as to the
bringing forth every good work outwardly or without. Yea and all the most sound
teachers in the Schools do affirm against Durandus, that not only in
supernaturals, but even in all natural Productions of effects, God Almighty
does concur with all his Creatures, Immediately, most nearly, and as many say,
identically, or in the sameness of operation. Nor does this Immediate concourse
of God the first Cause, hinder or stop the influence, operation, and use of
second Causes, or of the means, but does rather establish, Corroborate and
confirm them. For Example, When a Man is cured, and restored to health out of a
Fevour, or any other Sickness, by the application of certain outward means, God
has wrought Immediately with those means; but if the immediate operation of God
had been wanting, the man had not been cured: it is therefore piously believed
by all pious men, both according to Scripture and Right reason, that God in
whom we live and move and have our being is most present in all his Creatures,
in Heaven and Earth, and below the Earth, and that he does impart unto them
all, his Immediate concurrence, and influence, according to the exigence of
every one of them. In the Mineral and Metallin region, he works immediately with
the minerals and metals, in the vetegable, with the herbs flowers and trees,
and in the Animal, he works immediately with all the living Creatures to feed
and nourish them. Also he feeds and nourishes man, not with Bread alone, but
with every word that comes out of his Mouth. And if this be true, in respect
of the natural, and animal life, how exceedingly true is it, in respect of the
Spiritual and supernatual, which after a peculiar manner is called in Scripture
the life. I do not therefore understand how our adversary can reject this term
Immediate from the inward divine Illumination or light of God that operates in
the hearts of the faithful. But parhaps he will say, he does not reject the
term Immediate, as the said Immediate concurse and influence of God, is joined
with the means, having an excellent consistency, harmony and concord with them,
but that he denies such an immediate concourse of God, as excludes all means,
and the use and necessity of them, in regard of the common and ordinary way of
Gods working, or at least does not require them as necessary. Now if this be
the mind of our adversary, he ought to have explained it in his dissertation,
and not to have rejected the term Immediate, without all distinction and
limitation. But I answer moreover, that we are so far from rejecting any true
Means in order to the attaining the true and saving knowledge of God, that we
most gladly receive all means both inward and outward; and both the book of the
Scripture, and the book of the Creatures, as blessings and gifts of God. We do
also acknowledge, that in respect of the more special Heads and Doctrines of
the Christian Religion, the Scripture is necessary, both by necessity of
precept and also of means, and in what cases, the Scriptures are not absolutely
necessary, yet they are very profitable unto all, even unto the most spiritual
and perfect. And therefore the use of the Holy Scripture is not to be rejected
or laid aside by none so long as this Mortal life endures; and this upon the
matter, R. B. has sufficiently granted, and that it may be the better known,
in what special Doctrines of the Christian Religion we hold the use of the
Scripture to be necessary unto us, we grant, first, that the whole History of
the Creation, and of all the ages from Adam unto Christ; and of all the great
works of God, in building, preserving, nourishing, and increasing his Church in
all those ages, unto Christ and unto the end of the age of the Apostles is made
known unto us, by benefit of the Scripture of the Old and New Testament, the
inward divine Revelation, and Illumination of the Holy Spirit, working together
with the Scripture, and begetting in our minds and hearts the saving knowledge
and faith of all these things. Secondly, all these most excellent Prophecies,
both, and that especially, concerning Christ, his coming in the Flesh, and his
Spiritual Kingdom in the hearts of the faithful, and also concerning many other
things very necessary to be known and believed, are made known unto us by the
help of the Scripture, the foresaid inward divine Revelation, and Illumination
of the Holy Spirit, working with the Scripture, and begetting in us the saving
knowledge and belief of those things, and here the holy Spirit is the principal
cause, and the Scripture a means and instrument. Thirdly, the knowledge of
those most excellent examples, of the virtues, and virtuous and holy living of
the Saints, that greatly conduce, by the working of the Holy Spirit, to frame
and fashion us, after the same Manner, and to ingraft and implant in us the
same divine virtues and graces. Fourthly, the knowledge of many mysteries, as
of Christ, his being both God and Man, his being born in the Flesh of a Virgin,
his being crucified and becoming a Propitiatory sacrifice for our sins, his
Resurrection, Ascension, and Glorification, and pouring out of his Spirit, and
the fulfilling of all these things, many ages ago, as they were foretold, also
the Mysterys of Election, Vocation, Justification, and of the Regeneration of
the Saints, and of their spiritual ingrafting into Christ through the same, and
the Mystery of the Resurrection of the Body, and its Glorification at the last
day, with many other secrets and hidden things of the Christian Religion.
Fifthly, the knowledge of diverse Gospel precepts, leading and carrying on the
true travelers into a Gospel and Spiritual Life, until he arrive at a perfect
Man. Sixthly, the knowledge of diverse Gospel promises, whereby we become
partakers, not only of the divine life and nature, in this World, but shall
enjoy most abundantly, everlasting Happiness and felicity in the World to come.
I say the knowledge of all these things, and of many more, (which to recite all
one by one were too long) is conveyed unto us, by the Scriptures Testimony, as
we are exercised in reading, and hearing, and meditating on them; the foresaid
inward divine Revelation, and Inspiration, working, as is said, together with
the Scriptures, which can only beget in us the saving knowledge and belief of
all these things.

It may now be asked, what remains to be revealed by the Holy Spirit,
inwardly inspiring and Illuminating us, the Scriptures not concurring so much
as means and instruments, at least immediately, and formally, in the very act of
knowledge, as touching the things revealed. I answer, The experimental and
sensible knowledge of God, that is no ways obvious to the outward senses, but
to the inward and spiritual; whereby God himself in Christ, and Christ himself
in his Life, Light, Virtue and Spirit, is most inwardly felt, seen, and heard,
and a most sweet taste of him is received, above all that the natural man can
conceive of him, and this is that most inward Magisterie or teaching of the
inward Master, of which Augustine makes mention, lib. 14. de Trinit. cap. 15.
And it is that also of which the Apostle Paul said, Eye has not seen, nor Ear
heard, nor has it entered into Man's heart to conceive the things which God has
prepared for them who love him, but God (says he) has revealed them to us by
his Spirit: This is that hidden Manna, and white-stone, which no Man knows,
save he who has it.

And for the more full and clear understanding of this thing, let the Reader
take notice, that there is a twofold knowledge of things whether natural and
visible, or of spiritual, divine and invisible. There is one knowledge of
things, which is not received by the things themselves, but by the signs of
them, and such a knowledge is abstractive, remote, and mediate, and therefore
is very obscure, another knowledge there is which is not obtained by the signs
of the things, but by the things themselves immediately perceived; and this
sort of knowledge is intuitive, most near, and immediate, and therefore much
more excellent and pleasant than that other. Note secondly, that all words and
names of divine things, and consequently all the words and names of the
Scripture, are not the divine things themselves, the words and names of God and
Christ are not God and Christ, are not the Light, Life, and power of God; to
speak properly, they are not the spirit of God, the love of God, the peace and
joy of God, the righteousness, and holiness, and Kingdom of God, if we will
speak properly, and without a figure. And even in Natural things the words and
names of them, do not give us an intuitive, clear, and immediate knowledge of
them, but abstractive, remote, and mediate, as when one hears or reads of
the Kingdom of Italy, of the City of Rome, or Jerusalem, not having seen that
Kingdom or these Cities, his knowledge of them is only abstractive, or
discursive, obtained by the signs of their names and words. But when
afterward, by the reading and hearing of those places, his desire is kindled
to see them, and that he travelleth into them; when he is come thither, he now
sees, what only before he read or heard of, and he converseth face to face
with the Citizens of those places, he tastes of the delightful fruits of the
Country, and eats and drinks abundantly of them, this last sort of
knowledge is intuitive, most near and Immediate and so more excellent, more
clear, and more pleasant, then the former, only by hearsay and report. Now if
it be a more excellent and desirable knowledge to know a natural thing, and
that which is visible, by seeing and perceiving the thing it self, without and
beyond all signs of words, and names whatsoever, than only to know it by the
external signs of words, in reading, hearing and meditating on them; how much
more desirable, and clear, and more delightful shall that knowledge be of God
and Christ, whereby God and Christ is seen and heard, smelled, tasted and felt,
yea touched and apprehended, by the most inward parts of the Soul, in smost
Sweet embraces. And let none object unto me that such a knowledge of God
belongs not unto the saints, in this mortal life, but is reserved for Heaven,
and the World to come, for I answer, that a first fruits, pledge and earnest of
it are communicated to the Saints, in this mortal life by the Lord which is
abundantly clear, both out of many places of Scripture, and also from the many
experiences of many Thousands of the Saints in all Ages, for the places of
Scripture see but these few that follow, Psalm. 34.8. 1 Pet. 2.3. Matthew. 5.8. 2
Cor. 3.18. Ephesians. 1.17, 18.

Again the inward Operations, Inspirations, and Illuminations of the Holy
Spirit, when they are present in the hearts of the faithful, without any
outward teacher or signs of words whatsoever, make evidence unto themselves,
and by their own self-evidence beget a most certain and clear knowledge of
themselves in the Souls of those who have them, even as if one does take Honey,
Milk or Wine, he needs not to use the signs of words and names, to perceive
them, but rather in quietness and silence, without the noise or whisper of
words he does better perceive those things, and enjoys the sweetness, virtue
and benefit of them. And so indeed God in Christ, and with Christ in a deep
silence as well inward as outward of all words, (the discursive thoughts, and
reasonings of the mind being also excluded for some time,) is much better, and
more clearly and delightfully felt and known then by all the words, that the
tongues of men and Angels ever did Utter. But is therefore the use and exercise
of the Scripture Words, in reading, hearing and meditation of them to be
rejected and laid aside? Nothing less, only the faithful Soul following its
inward guide, the Holy Spirit is led from that exercise of useing the Scripture
words, for some time, unto another kind of more noble exercise and life, as it
were from labor unto rest, and as it were from the six days working, it is led
into this pleasant Sabbath, yea from all its other exercises whether outward or
inward, (where the Scriptures have a good place and service) it is brought into
this rest and Sabbath, and spiritual sleep so to speak, where, with Jacob, it
sees the Heavens opened, and as it were the Angels of God ascending and
descending. Nor is this to reject the Scripture or its use and exercise, if at
any time, the soul is led from that unto another exercise, wherein the
Scripture has not Immediate place. As he does not reject preaching, who* from
preaching passes unto prayer, nor does he reject prayer, who from that passes
unto singing and blessing or praising the blessed name of God. Nor does a man
reject his studies, who leaving them at certain times, goes to rest and sleep,
or to refresh himself with meat and drink, and many such examples may be
brought. But if it be further enquired, what the use of the Scriptures can be
to a man, who has received, such an Immediate knowledge of God, as does not in
many things depend Immediately upon the use and exercise of the Scripture. I
answer, the powers or faculties of the Soul are various, some inferior, as the
Imaginative, and discursive, and some superior, as the intuitive, and from the
good and right use of the inferior powers, whose proper object are the words of
Scripture, or any other words proceeding from the same spirit, the Soul is
carried, unto the use and exercise of its superior, or most supreme power,
which is the intuitive, whose proper object is God and Christ, with his divine
riches and gifts, without and beyond all words. Now it is the will of God, that
not one only power of our Souls be exercised in the knowing and worshipping of
him, but all the powers and faculties or abilities of our Souls both the low,
and high, yea and our whole man, inward and outward. And therefore the most
bountiful and gracious God has provided suitable and fit objects, unto every
power of the Soul; unto the highest he has prepared himself in his son Christ,
to be seen and enjoyed by the Soul, without those veils and coverings of words,
but to the inferior and lower powers of our Souls, he has provided the words
without which they could not reach to that knowledge or apprehension of God.
And moreover by reading and hearing these most sweet and excellent Testimonies
of Scripture, our outward man is piously and holily employed, the holy Spirit
concurring, and when the words pass or extend into outward good works and
deeds, then not only the tongue and ears, but the hands and feet, and whole
body is duly and fitly exercised in the service of God. And by these inferior
exercises, (the Holy Spirit leading and assisting,) because of the connection
and union of the powers of the Soul, we are brought into the divine vision; for
the things which we read and hear in the Scripture, (the Holy Spirit
cooperating) excite our attention, attention exciteth memory, memory exciteth
the imagination ( viz. not the vain every imagination, but that which is a
natural faculty of the Soul given it of God) the imagination exciteth the
reason, or reasonable and discursive faculty, and reason exciteth in us the
love and desire of seeing; and lastly, this love and desire exciteth vision it
self or the intuitive faculty and power of the Soul, whereby God himself, that
most desirable good, and most delightful object is seen (as he is pleased to
reveal himself, and not otherwise) and enjoyed, yea and as it were with both
the arms of the Soul is held and embraced, for some space of time, but this
intuitive power of the Soul, whereby God is seen, is blinded and shut up in all
unregenerated and unsanctified men. And thus the Soul is led, as it were,
through those six days, or steps of labor, of its inferior powers, in
reading, hearing, and meditating on the Scriptures, and practicing, what it
reads of the practical part, in the leadings and enablings of God's Holy
Spirit, until it comes unto the sweet Sabbath and rest of the divine fruition.
And this is that state, of which Augustine seems to speak, lib. 1. de
Doctrina Christiana, cap. 39. saying, A man that is endued with Faith, Hope,
and Love, and holds them firmly, needs not the Scriptures, but to instruct
others; that is, as I understand, in respect of that supreme power of his Soul,
whereby he reaches unto God, and apprehends him, with Faith, Hope and Love,
far beyond and above all manner or measure of words, he needs not the
Scriptures, although he needs them in regard of his inferior powers, as well
for his own instruction, as for the instruction of others. And in his first
Book de consensu Evangelistarum cap. 5. discoursing of the active and
contemplative virtue, he says thus, In this mortal life, that, to wit, the
active virtue, is in the work of a good Conversation, but this, to wit, the
Contemplative is more in Faith, and with some darkly as in a Glass, and in
part, in some vision of the unchangeable truth. These two virtues are
figuratively understood in Jacob 's two Wives, for Lea signifies laboring,
and Rachel signifies the beginning of Vision: Thus Augustine, than which what
can be more clear as belonging to the present question. And Luther also, (as
appears out of a Book published in High Dutch, Anno 1618. called the Harmony
or Concord) did assert, Such an inward Illumination and Inspiration immediate
of God, which did teach the faithful above all Books and outward hearing, by
virtue of which they needed not the Books of the Scripture, but to prove unto
others, that it is so written. And he said, That a man, so taught, and
enlightened of God, was above all Law, to wit, outward in a Sermon of his on
Pentecost. And in the same Sermon he describes the second Law, not to be of
the Letter, but of the Spirit, not pronounced with the mouth, nor writ with Pen
and Ink, but to be the holy Spirit Himself, or at least his work, which he
works in the heart. And in a Sermon of his upon the Magnificat, he says, No
man can know God or his Word aright, who does not receive it immediately from
the holy Spirit. Note here, that the term Immediate is used by Luther. Again,
on the fourth Psalm he says, Faith is well called the light of God's
countenance, because it is an Illumination divinely inspired into our mind, and
a certain Ray of the Divinity infused into the heart of the Believer, whereby
every one who is saved, is directed and saved. Again in his Postill. dom. 8.
Sermon. 2. speaking of Faith as aforesaid, he says, the Preached Word is to be
ruled by Faith, and not Faith by the Preached Word. And after, All Doctrines
are to be grounded on Faith, (to wit, that Divine Illumination inspired into
the Mind) for Faith is the Touchstone, Measuring Line, Rule, and Balance,
wherewith all Doctrines are to be weighed, proved, and judged. And on the 11 th
Psalm, The words of the Lord are pure words.; he says, The Prophet David here
does not speak of the Scripture, but specially of the Word of God, and they are
then the words or speeches of the Lord, when he speaks them in us, as he did
in the Apostles: And in his Sermon on Pentecost he says, It is necessary that
God speak to thee in thy heart, and that is Gods Word, otherwise the Word of
God remains unspoken. What can be more clearly said for immediate
Inspirations and Illuminations, or who can be a greater Enthusiast than Luther,
according to the aforesaid words. I know indeed that Luther spoke and writ many
things against false Enthusiasts, who did vaunt and boast of their Revelations
and Inspirations that were false and contrary to Scripture, which yet does not
hinder but that Luther might be a true Enthusiast, even as he may be a true
Christian, who Writes against false, or Christians falsely so called.

CHAP. III,
IN his Fifth Paragraph he finds fault with R. B. his words, for saying,
where outward means are wanting, God himself infinitely good and merciful, is
present to supply their defect, as to the salvation of Souls; and that Gods
immediate help is present unto all, and that God does prevent the use of means;
by the inward and immediate motions, influences, and illuminations of his
Spirit. This is that (says our Adversary) in which we dissent from him: To
whom I answer, If in this ye dissent from him, ye also dissent from your
Ancestor Luther on the same Question: For he, in his Commentary upon the
Epistle to the Galatians, cap. 3. Enquiring of Infants and dumb persons how
they believe; does answer with Jerome, that nothing is deaf unto the Word of
God, nor void of hearing, which speaks not unto the outward ears, but these,
of which it is said, He who has ears to hear, let him hear. Again, that the
Adversary denies, that God does prevent or go before the use of means, by his
inward illumination and operation; he dissenteth from Augustine (as well as
from Scripture) lib. 4. de consensu Evangelist. where he thus expounds the
words of Christ, Matthew. 26.32. I will go before you into Galilee. This saying
is to be taken (says he) prophetically. For Galilee signifies either
Transmigration, or Revelation: According then to its first signification of
Transmigration, what other thing does occur to be understood than this, that
the Grace of Christ was to pass over from the People of Israel into the
Gentiles, to whom the Apostles when they should Preach, if the Lord had not
prepared the way in their hearts, they would not have believed the Gospel
Preached by them, and this should be understood by these words, He shall go
before you into Galilee. But according to the second interpretation of the word
Galilee, its signifying Revelation, it is to be understood of Christ not in the
form of a Servant, but in that wherein he is equal to the Father, which he
promised in John to such as loved him, when he said, I shall love him, and show
my self unto him: to wit, not according to what they then saw, and as after his
Resurrection, he appeared with the prints of his wounds, both to be seen and
touched; but according unto that ineffable light, whereby he does enlighten
every man that comes into the World, according to which he shines in
darkness, and the darkness does not comprehend him. Where let the Reader
notice, how that Augustine believed that Christ did go before the outward
Preaching of the Gospel, with his Divine Grace and Revelation in the hearts of
the Gentiles: And if God be not present to his Creature to supply the defect of
outward means, and yet damn the Creature; is not this to render God unmerciful,
and a hard Master, and unjust, who is yet most merciful, meek, just and
benevolent to all his Creatures? I thought these called Lutherans, who are so
zealous against the Calvinistical decree of absolute Reprobation; had been more
humane and merciful toward Mankind; but now so far as I can gather from the
words of our Adversary, they are fallen into the same pit with the Calvinists*
or at least as bad: For if so many thousands, who want the outward means, be
damned eternally for the want of them; this so miserable a case should seem to
proceed from want of Love in God toward them, and because he did not love
them, therefore he did reprobate and reject them. I know not how the Adversary
can save himself from falling into the deep ditch of the Calvinistical Doctrine
of Absolute Reprobation. But has not Christ died for all men? If so, he has
then dyed for those who want the outward means, and what has Christ gained for
them by his death, if nothing of his Grace either already given them, or
afterward to be given, has he not then dyed for them in vain? But does not
the Scripture say, that God has his Elect ones in every corner and part of the
whole world, whither he is to send his Angels to gather them together, even the
children of God every where dispersed. And yet the outward Preaching of the
Gospel is not yet gone to all the parts of the earth: And what shall become of
these good and honest Gentiles, such as Cornelius was before Peter Preached the
Gospel outwardly to him? For do not Peter's words plainly imply that there were
many such good and honest men, fearing God and working righteousness, who were
acceptable unto God through Christ, although they had not heard of Christ as
yet outwardly. Again, what was to be done with that good ground which was good
before the seed was cast into it; and whence was it, that the ground was good,
before the outward Preaching of the Gospel? And what did Christ signify by
that good ground in the Parable, but men of a good and honest heart? Suppose
then, that some of these were prevented by death, long before the outward
Preaching did come to their ears, which is to be supposed in many, by reason of
the shortness of humane life; shall therefore all these good men, together with
the bad and wicked, be damned eternally? Let every pious and sober man be
ashamed so to conclude.

In his Sixth Paragraph, he seems in part to acknowledge R. B. his
distinction, between Divine General Revelation and Special; but he differs
herein, that he will not have that General Revelation made to the Gentiles to
be supernatural but natural, nor immediate but mediate, beside the inward or
ingrafted notions of truth importing also an acquired knowledge by the things
created, and outwardly presented, and the information and teaching of others
concurring. But as concerning the latter, it follows not that that Revelation
was not immediate, because these Gentiles had also an acquired knowledge by the
things created, etc. For these two are not contradictory, to wit, one Knowledge
immediate and implanted in them, and another acquired; but they both consist
very well together. And concerning the first, he does indeed affirm, that the
said General Revelation is only natural, and not supernatural; but he has not
so much as essayed to prove it. Now as to that Question, whether that General
Revelation be natural or supernatural; it may be answered, that in a different
respect it is both natural and supernatural: Natural in respect of the Subject
of its Inherence; for many things receive their denomination from the Subject
of Inherence, as some Vessels are called golden, others silver, others brass,
according to the diversity of their subject matter. Now God has planted or
sown this General Divine Revelation or Law in the very nature of Man, and it is
therefore called by James (...) the innate Word, or the Word planted in our
Nature, which is as the Ark unto which God has committed this Divine Law to be
preserved. But it is Supernatural in respect of its Original Author, and
Efficient Cause: For from whence comes this Law placed in all souls, but from
that Supreme Lord and Father of all souls, and therefore it is called by Philo
the Jew, An infallible Law and incorruptible, Printed in the immortal Mind by
an immortal Nature: And by Plutarch, A Faith ingrasted or innate into every
reasonable Creature, living in the Soul, and never leaving the Soul destitute
of Guidance. Again, this Law or Revelation is deservedly to be reputed
Supernatural, because it is the Law of God, and whoever does transgress it, he
does transgress the Will of the most High God: This Law therefore is above the
Soul, and the Souls nature, which ought to be subject unto the said Law, and
consequently it is Supernatural. And Lastly, because Man's whole Nature in the
Fall is corrupted, but this Law does remain in the Soul uncorrupted; therefore
it proceeds not from Man's Nature, but from a more noble Original and
Fountain: For who can bring such a clean thing as this Law is, out of that
which is so unclean as Man's corrupted Nature? And indeed Augustine does well
discourse on this same purpose, lib. 14. de Trinit. cap. 15. Man (says he) is
admonished to turn to the Lord, as unto that Light, with which he was touched,
when he was departed from him. For hence it is, that even the wicked think upon
eternity, and do both reprove and commend many things in the manners of men.
But by what rules judge they of those things, but such as in which they see how
every one should live, although they themselves do not so live? When do they
see them? not in their Nature, seeing they see them with a mind, but it is
manifest their minds are changeable, whereas they see that these rules are
unchangeable, which every one may see in them. Nor yet do they see them in the
habit of their mind, because these are rules of righteousness, but it is
manifest their minds are unrighteous, (note) where then are these rules writ
where he who is unjust, knows what is just, where he understands that he
ought to have that which he has not? Where are they therefore writ, but in the
Book of that Light which is called the Truth, whence every just Law is
described, and is transferred into the Heart of Man, who works Righteousness
not by motion, as from one place to another, but by impression, as the Image
passes from the Seal into the Wax, and yet leaves not the Seal. Thus
Augustine,

Again, In this same Paragraph he blames R.B. for saying, That the General
Revelation does suffice unto Salvation, although the Special does not come, nor
be adjoined thereunto. But granting that he who has faithfully obeyed and
followed the General Revelation, be in a safe state, as to the present, and
has a firm and sure hope of future happiness; yet this does not hinder but in
order to obtain a more perfect state through Christ, of Eternal Life, the
Special Revelation is necessary, as is plain in the example of Cornelius, to
whom the Apostle Peter behoved to be sent, who was to Preach unto him words
concerning Christ, by which (as the Angel said, Acts 11.14.) He and his House
were to be saved.

CHAP. IV.
IN his Seventh and Eighth Paragraphs, he says little or nothing more, than
what he had formerly delivered concerning the state of the Controversy, to
wit, whether Immediate Divine Revelations be the Principle of knowing God, and
Divine Things, in respect of all men, and for all times. But diverse other
things remain as necessary to be opened, for the more clear stating the
Controversy: First, as to the Principle of Knowledge, which is either Primary,
or Secundary; or which is to the same effect, Principal, or Subordinate. Now as
concerning the Subordinate and Secundary Principle, we deny not, but that the
Scriptures are a subordinate and secundary Principle of knowing Divine
Doctrines and Truths, as concerning God and Christ; but still we contend for
the Holy Spirit, Inlightning, Inspiring, and by its Life giving Vigor, and
Virtue, effectually working in the souls of men, as the Principal or Primary:
And let the Adversary tell me, seeing he does acknowledge that the inward
illumination and operation of the Holy Spirit, is absolutely necessary to the
obtaining any Saving Knowledge of God; whether he does not believe, that the
Holy Spirit inwardly operating and inlightning the Minds of Believers, is the
Primary Principle of Divine Knowledge? Or will he say, that the Scriptures are
the Primary Principle, and that the Holy Spirit is but the secundary and
subordinate, which last, as being too absurd and offensive to Christian ears, I
hope, he will abhor to affirm. Secondly, As concerning the term of inward
Revelation, the strife or controversy is to be removed; for why should we
contend in mere words, if we be agreed in the same sense as to the verity of
the thing: First, he does acknowledge, that the inward Illuminations of the
Holy Spirit are absolutely necessary to beget the saving knowledge of God, and
Divine Things in Men's minds. Secondly, He grants that these inward
Illuminations of the Holy Spirit, are not only effective, but also that they
are objective, as being real objects proposed to the Mind, and moving it to the
assent of Truth: For so he does in his Thirty Second Paragraph expressly affirm,
That God, or the Spirit revealing, does not only work efficiently on the
Intellectual Faculty, to bring forth or produce the Act of Believing; but does
also move the Mind objectively, or by a formal representation of an object,
determine the Understanding to assent., Thus He. Wherein, so far as I can
understand, or reach, he does acknowledge that the inward Illumination of the
Holy Spirit, is Revelation properly so called. For by inward Revelation we do
not understand any other thing, than that the Holy Spirit works not only
efficiently, or as an Efficient Cause upon our Understanding, to beget in us
True Divine Knowledge and Faith; but that he also moves objectively, or by a
formal representation of the Object, determines our Understanding to Assent.
For what is it in general to Reveal, but to propose the Object revealed to our
perceptive Faculty, and so in particular, he who does propose the outward
visible Objects to my sight, he is properly enough said to reveal unto me these
Visibles, and the same is to be understood of the Objects of the other outward
Senses. And surely according to Scripture phrase, the inward illustrations and
illuminations of the Holy Spirit, produced in the hearts of the faithful, are
called Revelations; in respect of which, the Holy Spirit in Scripture is
called, The Spirit of Wisdom and Revelation, Ephesians. 1.17. as he does illustrate
and illuminate the hearts of the Faithful: And Paul, writing of the state of
his Conversion, affirms; that God had revealed his Son in him, the which in
some manner and degree, may be said of every converted man. As yet therefore we
agree well enough, as I suppose, in forming the state of the Controversy. It
remains then, Thirdly, that we discuss or consider this term Immediate a
little more fully, wherein alone almost the strife of the Controversy seems
to be placed; the which, although at first view it may seem great, yet
afterward laying aside prejudice, it may appear to be little, if any. That it
may therefore be more clearly understood, what is signified by this term
Immediate, I desire the Reader to take notice, that Immediate does signify two
very different things: One is, the absence of all means or medium's in the
producing any effect. Hence, God the Great Creator, is rightly said to have
produced or created his creatures immediately, because there was no medium or
mean, existing (save only his Word and Spirit) whereby to create them. But this
signification of the word, or term, Immediate, is too strait and narrow; and
perhaps agrees to no other operation, than to the Creation and Conservation of
the World by God, that infinite and supreme Cause, unless we add those Divine
Miracles, and other mavelous things which God did of old, and yet does,
without the use or concurrence of means. The second, or other signification of
the word Immediate, does not import the absence of the mean, or medium; but the
intimate application, or concurrence of the principal and primary Cause, unto
the secundary; together with the mean, or means, in the operation. Again, the
medium, or mean, is either continued or discontinued: The continued mean, I
call that mean which is continued, or continually and closely is conjoined in
working with the Cause, both principal and subordinate: But the discontinued
mean is that which is not continued, or conjoined in the working, with the
primary and principal Cause; but either works nothing at all, or works only
with the secundary Cause; while as the principal and primary Cause works
nothing with the said mean, but suspendeth and withdraws its concourse and
influence, that is requisite to the producing the effect aright. Now the
continued mean, or medium, hinders not, that the action or operation of the
principal and primary Cause, be said to be immediate: Hence Immediate is as
much as to be in medio, i. e. in the mean, and therefore when God is said to be
in the midst of the faithful, so that by his presence in the midst of them, or
he mediating and intervening, they perform all their works; he is rightly and
properly said immediately to work in them, and to inspire and inlighten them.
Now that the continued mean hinders not the immediate operation of the
principal Cause, many examples might be produced to show it: I shall give an
instance in some few which follow. The Sun does immediately inlighten our eyes,
and shine upon the visible objects, and yet it does this by means of the Air,
and sometimes by means of the Crystal, or Glass of the Window. But because the
Air, and Glass, or other diaphanous and transparent mediums are continued with
the Suns illumination, the said illumination is immediate, and is commonly
acknowledged so to be. Again, when the Husbandman labors in his field, using
many means, as Ploughing, Digging, Sowing, Watering, or Reaping and Gathering
his Corn, the Sun does immediately inlighten him, and shine upon his labors;
by virtue and assistance of which illumination, he still labors. Here we
see, the making use of many means, does not hinder the immediate illumination
and operation of the Sun upon the Husbandman and his labors, but all these
means, and the use of them, does very well agree with the Suns immediate
illumination, and as it were, Revelation, and the one is perfited and
established by the other: For as the laboring and using these outward means,
cannot be rightly performed, and do not profit or avail, without the Suns
influence and operation; so unless the said Husbandman does labor in his
Field, Plow, Dig, Sow, and perform other necessary actions for the laboring
his ground; the Suns illumination, or operation, although immediate, shall
little avail him. Another example I shall give, in the daily mutual
conversation of men one with another. When one man speaks to another face to
face, they both hear and see each other immediately, and yet this hearing and
seeing of one another, is not without the use and intervening of many means, or
mediums; for both the voice and image of those men immediately so conversing,
are conveyed from one to another, not only by means of the Air, but also of
many Organs of the Eyes and Ears. It now remains to apply these examples, or
similitudes, to the present purpose of Immediate Revelation, and the
Illumination of the Holy Spirit. Do not our Adversaries grant, that God does so
inlighten the minds and inward eyes of the Faithful, with his Light and
Illumination (who is the inward, spiritual, and invisible Sun of the Soul) as
the outward and worldly Sun does inlighten our outward eyes? I suppose, this
they will grant. Again, Is not God, who is the light and life of the Faithful,
as closely and intimately present, or rather indeed much more present with his
people, as the outward Sun is to our Body and outward Man? Does not the Spirit
of God, which is of a most subtle and penetrating nature, and his Light, Life,
and Virtue, more perfectly go through and penetrate all means; than the outward
illumination of the Sun can penetrate or pierce through the Air, or most clear
and transparent Glass or Crystal? Is not God most inwardly present in all his
Creatures, and most near and close unto them? Is he not more near unto us, than
all means however so near? But it may be answered, that God works in us,
using many and various means, as reading of the Scriptures, Preaching, Hearing,
Meditation, Prayer, sometimes one and sometimes another, and at other times
diverse joined together. This is granted, but all this hinders not, that the
operation and illumination of God in the use of those means, is immediate: For
if the use of all means in every respect be taken away in Gods instructing,
teaching, inspiring and inlightning men; I know not, if it can be proved
clearly, that any man, whether Prophet or Apostle, was immediately enlightened
or inspired by the Holy Spirit, with special Revelation: For besides that many
of the Prophets were taught of God by the means and ministry of Angels, and
that John the Apostle had his Visions of the Revelation, when he was banished
into the Isle of Patmos, by means of an Angel sent by Christ unto him; what
Prophet or Apostle ever was of God, or of Christ, but made use of means? Was
not Prayer (sometimes both Mental and Vocal, sometimes only Mental) a general
and universal Mean, which both Prophets and Apostles used, and that frequently,
to obtain their Divine Inspirations and Revelations? Do we not read, how Moses
besought the Lord, that he might see his glory? the which most sweet and
blessed Vision he obtained by means of his prayer, and the same is to be
understood of the other Prophets. And did not the Apostles continue with one
accord in prayer, at a certain place, betwixt the time of Christ his ascending
into heaven, and the giving of the Holy Ghost on the day of Pentecost. And did
they not obtain that most excellent gift of the Holy Spirit by means of their
prayer? And did not Cornelius and his Friends receive the Holy Spirit, by means
of Peter his Preaching? and the like did frequently come to pass to the
Primitive Disciples, by means of the Apostles Preaching, and laying on of their
hands? Did not Christ inspire the Apostles immediately, before his Ascension,
by means of his outward Preaching unto them, and laying his hands on them? Did
not the Apostles Minister one to another (after they had received the Holy
Spirit) of the word of Life, and did edify and build up one another? Had not
the Prophets of old, Schools; and there did Prophecy, and Preach, and Pray,
and by using these means, the Gift and Spirit of Prophecy came upon many
Hearers immediately? Surely few or none of the Prophets or Apostles, but at
times were outwardly taught: Adam, the first Prophet, instructed Abel and Seth;
Seth instructed his Children, and they again their children, at least some of
them, until Noah; and Noah instructed some of his Posterity, and they again of
theirs until Abraham; for without all controversy both Abraham and Moses
learned some things by outward teaching, from their Forefathers, of God, and
Divine Things; which yet did not hinder, but that they also were immediately
inspired and taught of God themselves; yea, the outward teaching did further
them, and, by its virtue, did prepare their minds to receive their Divine
Inspirations. But put the case, that some of them did not hear any thing taught
them outwardly, by man's voice, as in the case of Adam, when he was alone? Did
he or they therefore use no means, to obtain their Revelations? Or did God use
no means, when he did communicate unto* them those Revelations and
Inspirations? Did he not always use their Souls and Minds, at least, as means
and instruments, when he did inspire them; as he did use their Tongues and
Lips, to speak forth, and their Hands to bring forth, in writing their
Prophecies, Vissons, and Revelations? For that the Souls and Minds of the
Prophets, and their Intellectual Faculties or Powers, were not altogether
passive (and suppose they had been passive altogether, yet they might be
accounted passive means) but were partly active; is clearly enough manifest
from the diversity of style and phrase of speaking and writing, that does occur
both in the Prophets and Apostles? For Isaias does after another manner of
style, express his Visions and Revelations, than Amos: And among the Apostles,
Paul, and Matthew, and John, do differ in their style and manner of expression.
The which diversity of style and manner of speech, did proceed from the
different qualifications and endowments of their minds: for as the spirit of
God finds any man furnished or endued with gifts, whether natural or
acquired; so he works upon him accordingly, sanctifying those gifts, and
making use of them as means, in his work and service. Again, that the Souls and
Minds of the Prophets might be rendered apt and fit, to be used by God as his
instruments and means, both to receive and convey the Revelations of his Will;
how many, and how great preparations and purifications did they require; all
which might be called means? Yea, with what watchings, fastings, prayers, and
wrestlings, against all inward impurities, and evil and unclean suggestions and
temptations of the Devil, did they labor both day and night? How soberly, how
holily, how chastely, how purely, how obediently, behoved they to walk, and have
their conversation, in all Gods commandments, both in respect of the inward and
outward Man, that they might be approved Ministers and Prophets of God? And
therefore, never any Prophet of God, who was true and faithful, whom God
inspired immediately, but used diverse sorts of means: And did not some of the
Prophets under the Law, make use of Minstrels, as means, to fit or dispose them
to prophecy, in that legal and shadowy dispensation? And David, at sundry
times, when he considered the Heavens, and the Stars, and other excellent works
of God; did fall into most excellent and noble Visions and Prophesies, as may
be seen, Psalm. 8.104, 107, etc. And therefore the right and lawful use of
means, whether of Scripture in reading or hearing, preaching or praying,
meditating or waiting, singing or thanksgiving, or any other appointed of God;
does not in the least hinder, that the illumination and revelation of God in
the hearts and souls of his people, be immediate, and properly so to be
accounted. For the Sun shines as immediately, while the Husbandman does labor
in his Field, using many sorts of means, as when he does nothing; and
oft-times, the Divine Sun of Righteousness, which is in Christ, does as
immediately shine in the hearts of the faithful, and inspire and inlighten
them, when they are exercised according to the Will and moving of God, in the
use of means, as reading, hearing, meditating, and the like; as when they are
not so employed, but only silently waiting upon God, which also may be called a
mean.

CHAP. V.
WHat does now remain of Controversy or Debate, betwixt our Adversary and us,
in the matter of inward and Immediate Revelation and Inspiration? Perhaps he
will say in this: That we affirm that God does in many things inlighten and
inspire us, without making use of the Scripture Means: But he pleads, that
none of the Faithful is enlightened or inspired in any particular, without the
concurrence of Scripture. To this I answer, First, the Controversy of
Immediate Revelation is more large and general, than to be restricted to that
without Scripture: For it is one question, whether Divine Revelation be
received without all means; and another question, whether without the means of
Scripture. But secondly, If it were granted (which yet I do not grant) that no
man has any inward illumination, or Inspiration, or Revelation, in our days,
without the conveyance and concurrence of Scripture, used either in reading and
hearing, or meditation; all this should not hinder the said Illumination, or
Inspiration, to be immediate; because the Scripture, in that case, is a
continued mean, or medium, most closely and nearly conjoined with that
Illumination, as does sufficiently appear from what is above said. Moreover, it
may be affirmed, that as to those, who, from their Infancy and Childhood, or
from their first Conversion, have been instructed and exercised in reading and
hearing the Scriptures, and meditating upon them; that they have been a remote
means at least, and continue so to be, in respect of their knowledge of Divine
Things, to wit, by disposing and fitting or preparing their Minds and Hearts
(through the secret operation of the Holy Spirit) unto true Piety, Purity, and
Holiness; and to the begetting those Divine Virtues in them, whereby at length
the Soul and Mind may be raised up to behold Divine Things, and God and Christ
himself, far beyond and above the reach and measure of words, which, as is
already said, are not the Divine Things themselves, but the signs and shadows
as it were, of them; and so to see God in Christ, without these veils and
coverings of words. We do therefore greatly esteem and value the use of the
holy Scripture, when it is joined with the inward operation and illumination of
God; but if the use of the Scripture be separate from the said inward
illumination and operation, as it happens most frequently among the most of
these called Christians, it does nothing profit, but is only a killing Letter.
And seeing the Adversary does acknowledge that the Gentiles know many things of
God, and some things that are Divine by General Revelation, and these inward
notices of Truth planted in them by God without Scripture, whereby that which
may be known of God is manifest in them; therefore many things are also
revealed unto Christians, of God, and Divine Things, by General Revelation: For
the said General Revelation is as large, or indeed more large, and full in true
Christians, who have the Scriptures; as in those Gentiles which have them not,
because the General Revelation, commune to us with the Gentiles by virtue of
Special Revelation, and the doctrine of the Scriptures is much improved, and
perfected, in true Christians, yet retaining its Nature of General Revelation:
Even as Natural Reason, and other Natural Gifts of the Soul, are much improved
and perfected by the operation of the Holy Spirit, and yet retain their Nature
as such. And if we except these Doctrines, and Heads of General Religion common
to us with the Gentiles, which are revealed both to them and us without
Scripture, of all which notwithstanding the Scripture does abundantly testify;
all other Doctrines and Heads of the Christian Religion (which is a special
Religion, more perfect and excellent than the General, and perfiting the said
General Religion in true Christians) are made known unto us by the Scripture
means, the Holy Spirit inwardly inlightning and inspiring us, that we may
understand the Doctrines declared in the Scripture, and may savingly apply
them, with true and sincere Faith, to the salvation of our souls. And what more
any can require of us to establish the due use of the Scripture, or of any
other means, I do not understand. And as concerning the aforesaid experimental
and sensible knowledge of God, that is only manifest or obvious to the inward
and supreme senses and powers of the Soul, as they are opened and awakened in
us by the work of Regeneration, and Renewing of the Holy Ghost; although the
Scripture words do not immediately concur, in the formal act of such a Divine
and Intuitive Knowledge, as the words of a man's name do not make me see the
man; yet the Scriptures do witness abundantly concerning such an experimental
and spiritually sensible knowledge of God, which is perceived in a most inward
union and communion of the Soul with God, and in a certain Intellectual, or
spiritual contact or touch, of which, not only Plato and Plotin, and others
among those called Philosophers; but the Apostles, among the Christians have
largely made mention: And after the Apostles, Athanasius, Gregory Nazianzen,
Clemens Alexandrinus, Origin, and many others among the Grecians, and Augustine
and Jerome with many others, many Ages ago among the Latins, and in latter
Ages, Bernard, Thauler, and Thomas a Kempis, and the Author of the German
Theology, unto whose Book Luther did write a Preface, and did much commend it.
All these, and generally these called Mysticks, and Writers upon Mystic
Divinity so called; do Preach, and hold forth a certain Knowledge of God, which
is received without all words, by a certain inward gust, taste, and touch, and
inward feeling of God, and Divine Things, in the souls and hearts of those who
have attained unto that due state and degree of purity and holiness, requisite
in order to such a knowledge and enjoyment. And hence it is, that they
distinguish Theology, or the knowledge of God, into discursive on the one hand,
and mystic, or intuitive and contemplative on the other, and they say the
former is had or received by words, and verbal discourses, syllogisms,
propositions, premises and conclusions, gathered and collected from Scripture,
which yet, without the Spirits inward illumination and operation, is not
effectual to the salvation of those who have it, but that this latter is
obtained by a naked and simple perception and intuition of God, and Divine
Things, as the mind is purified and cleansed, and denuded, as it were, from all
images and similitudes, or signs of words, or outward things whatsoever. That
we may therefore put a conclusion to the forming the state of the controversy
aright, which is the most principal thing, if the question be made concerning
doctrinal and discursive Theology, or knowledge, which require words,
propositions, definitions, reasons, arguments, and conclusions; we shall
readily grant that the Scriptures are a General Principle of the same, but
Secundary; the Holy Spirit inwardly inlightning and inspiring men's souls and
hearts, being still the Primary and Principal, and that by means of the
Scriptures, in reading, and hearing, and meditating upon them, and as they are
preached, and opened, and used by men spiritually gifted and fitted of God, we
attain to the knowledge of the said discursive and doctrinal Theology, and most
especially the Scriptures are of service unto us, when we turn or convert the
words of them (that do most nearly respect Holiness of Life and Manners, such
as the precepts and examples of Christian Virtues) into good works and deeds,
and into a good and Christian Life. But in the experimental and mystic, or
intuitive and contemplative Theology, not the Scripture words, but the things
themselves signified by the words, to wit, God, Christ, the Holy Spirit, the
Life, Light, and Power of God, the Love, Peace, and Joy of God, and the Kingdom
of God, which Christ did testify to be within us, reveal and demonstrate
themselves to the souls and hearts of the faithful, by themselves, nakedly in
their own proper and native light, glory, and evidence, without words; even as
the outward things and riches of this visible world, and the beauty, glory, and
virtue of them, reveal and discover themselves unto our outward senses without
words, and far beyond the force or reach of words. And if outward things
without words are continually presented to our outward senses; it follows,
that inward things, to wit, the things of the Divine and Heavenly Kingdom,
which is in us, are presented to our inward and spiritual senses without words;
seeing these inward and spiritual things are as near to our souls, yea, much
nearer' as those outward things are to our bodies. And thus the state of the
Controversy being rightly framed, and brought to a period, I shall have little
difficulty to answer the following Paragraphs, or Sections, of the Adversary;
seeing in all things, almost, he goes without, or beyond, the state of the
Controversy, and so contendeth not so much against us, or R. B. as his own
shadow or thoughts.

CHAP. VI.
WHat the Adversary says in his Ninth and Tenth Paragraphs, are of the same
tendency with the things he had formerly mentioned belonging to the state of
the Controversy.

In his Eleventh Paragraph he says, the Controversy is not of any sort of
Revelation, but that of Immediate: And in his Twelfth he affirms, that
Revelation considered in it self, does prescind or abstract from that which is
Immediate, and Mediate. And he assenteth unto R. B. his five Propositions, page
9. of his Apology, and that Divine Revelations remain to be the formal object
of the Saints Faith, but he denies them to be Immediate. To whom I answer,
that he grants with us, That he inward illuminations and operations of the
Holy Spirit are altogether necessary to beget true and saving Faith in men, and
that these inward illuminations are objective, or by way of Object, Par. 32.
and Par. 34. So that the act of Faith is occupied or exercised, and does
finally stay in God himself, revealing as the Object. And what he subjoyneth,
That God revealing, as the formal Object, in whom the Understanding stays or
rests, and the Divine Revelation consisting of the external signs; are not to
be opposed: Because when God the revealer, by outward words Preached, or Writ,
moves the Understanding to acknowledge them to be as a Divine Revelation; it
cannot be denied, that the Understanding does so rest in God revealing, as the
formal Object: So that it does also regard these signs depending on God, by
which that Revelation does consist, meaning the words. All this is granted both
by me and R. B. yea, that is it, for which R. B. pleads, viz. that God
inwardly illuminating and moving the Understanding to the assent of the
Doctrine, declared by the external words or signs; is the formal object of the
Saints Faith: To which, seeing the Adversary does plainly consent, I know not
how he does affect to show himself here opposite unto us, when in the thing it
self I see no difference betwixt both; unless he means, that the outward
words, or signs, does also pertain to the formal object of Faith, as he seems
to explain himself, Parag. 22. The which also R. B. has granted, after a sort,
having brought a distinction of the formal object, into quod, i. e. which, and
quo, i. e. by, or for which, or betwixt that which is believed, and the formal
principal cause, or reason of believing; the which distinction, the Adversary
ought to grant, as applicable to the present matter, if he will firmly stand to
his first concessions: For he does acknowledge, that the outward Revelation (as
he calls it) of words and signs, is not simply believed by the faithful, for
it self, but because of God inwardly inlightning and moving; and therefore God
thus inwardly inlightning and moving, is the formal object Quo, i. e. by or for
which they principally believe: And yet we deny not, but that the words are the
formal object, Quod, i. e. which is believed, or as some perhaps would rather
say, the material object. But if any controversy does here remain, it does
consist rather in a logical subtlety, or ambiguous signification of words and
terms; than in the truth of the thing or matter it self, which ought to have no
place among sober men, professing the simple and plain Truth of Christ. There
remains only one difficulty with the Adversary, whether these inward
Illuminations are to be called Immediate? which I judge R. B. has sufficiently
proved in his Apology, and I also in this my answer. We grant indeed that this
term, or expression, of Immediate Revelation, is no where to be found in
Scripture; and therefore it would be hard to prove, against a froward and
wilful Adversary, that any of the Prophets or Apostles had Immediate
Revelation: For it did suffice unto the Prophets and Apostles to express the
word or term Revelation, simply so called; and that God revealed himself and
his mind and will unto them, that he did inlighten and inspire them, that they
had the Spirit of God and Christ inwardly teaching and instructing, and moving
them. Those simple and plain Men did not think of that subtle and nice
distinction of Immediate and Mediate Revelation, feigned and invented by the
Schoolmen and Sophisters of this world, whereby the truth of this mystery is
veiled and darkened. For to speak plainly, and in propriety of speech, following
the common Phrase of Scripture, all Divine Revelation is Immediate, even as all
Vision is immediate; and all outward sensation is Immediate, and does regard
and respect its immediate object, and as it is immediately proposed: Which yet
does not hinder, but that the outward words, by a metonimy, or figure of the
sign for the thing signified, may be called Revelations or Visions. But there
is often a great hurt in that, when figurative Speeches are once allowed, that at
length it comes to that, that they are thought proper. John his Treatise is
called his Revelation, when yet it is most certain, that that Book, or
Treatise, was not the Revelation it self; which he had in his Mind and Spirit,
but only a sign and outward declaration of it. Also the Prophets at times,
called the words which they published by voice or writing, their Vision, when
yet they were not the Vision it self, but a sign and declaration of it, as any
man of a sound Judgment, as I believe, will easily grant. Moreover, as to the
outward Apparitions made by God at times to the Fathers and Prophets, if they
be granted to be Revelations, they were also in their kind and manner
Immediate, either to the outward Senses, or Imagination. But that is most
properly the Revelation of God, which is presented to the Mind, Spirit, and
Understanding of Man: For seeing God is a Spirit, he is not to be seen by the
outward eyes, nor is he perceptible by any outward or mortal senses, but is
only seen and known in Spirit; and therefore only by the Spirit is he properly
revealed to the alone Spirit, and spiritual Eye, and Sense of Man. But it is
not to great purpose, to dispute much of those outward Apparitions made unto
some of old, seeing they do not touch the thing that is mainly in controversy,
which is of Gods inward appearances, for which only we contend, as necessary
for the begetting true and saving Faith and Knowledge in men's hearts. We do not
plead for outward Apparitions: And it is plain enough they did not properly
reveal God himself, but rather were a Veil wherewith God covered himself
because of humane weakness; For if any had judged the outward Apparition to
have been God himself, certainly he should have fallen into grievous Idolatry.
But that R. B. did affirm, that there were diverse Administrations, under which
the Spirit of God revealed himself, does not prove what the Adversary would,
that God only did mediately reveal himself unto some men; for the diverse
Administrations are well enough to be considered, as well in the Inward and
Immediate Revelations, as in those which are outward: And also that God spoke
unto the Fathers by the Prophets of old, proves not that God revealed himself
only to them outwardly and mediately; for this does contradict our Adversary
his own belief, who does equally contend with us, that all the believing
Fathers were inwardly Enlightened by the Holy Spirit, and that Inward
Illumination is Immediate where ever it is found, as I have above sufficiently
made appear.

Again, That in his Fourteenth Paragraph (citing R. B. his words, Parag. 13.)
he says, he denies, and not without cause, That which R. B. thought no man
would deny, viz. That God all along from Adam to Moses, had revealed himself to
his Children inwardly by his Spirit. I think strange the Adversary should deny
this, for by so doing he does openly contradict his former concessions: For did
he not grant that God does always inwardly Inlighten his Children, and that
with an Illumination both effective and objective, and that no outward
Revelation or Preaching does suffice unto Salvation, without a Divine inward
Operation and Illumination: And therefore why he should now deny it, I do not
understand, but that he has forgot himself. Nor does it hinder (which he
labors much to prove in this whole Paragraph) that some were outwardly
instructed by Preaching, but that they were also gifted and endued with inward
Inspiration and Revelation; for these two do not fight one with another, but
very well agree. But it will be too hard an undertaking for him to prove, that
most men in all those Ages were taught by outward Preaching: For although Enoch
Preached the doctrine of Truth, he could scarce do it to the whole world; and
the like is to be said of Noah, who only with these of his small Family was
found just upon earth: For how many thousands of mankind lived then on earth,
far separated asunder? And how unlikely is it, that this one man could
sufficiently instruct the whole world? Surely we no where read in all the
Scripture, that Noah Preached to all mankind in the old world, but we find
expressly that God, by his Spirit, did strive in those men; which most plainly
shows, that they had some inward teaching given them from the Spirit of God:
For against what did they sin, but that Law published by the Spirit of God in
their hearts, seeing they had no written Law; nor can the Adversary ever prove,
that they had it delivered to them all by word of mouth. But they had that
inward Law, which as Paul affirmed, the other Gentiles had, Romans 1. For Paul
did not recur to outward Teachers, speaking of the Gentiles, but to that which
was known of God, which he had revealed to them, the Book of the Creation
assisting or concurring with the said inward Teacher. But surely in many Ages,
outward teachers were but few, and the Word of God was rare in respect of its
being outwardly Preached, yet it was near and within, in the hearts both of
Jews and Gentiles, as Paul did affirm, Romans 10. compared with Deuteronomy. 30.

CHAP. VII.
IN his Fifteenth Paragraph, the Adversary does wrest some words of R. B. unto
a sense far differing from his Mind, whose words were, that in the time of the
Law, God did no other way speak unto his Children, than he spoke unto them in
that time, from Adam to Moses: From thence the Adversary concludes, that R. B.
denies that God used the outward Preaching of his Servants unto his People,
all the time of the Law, which surely never came into R. B. his mind so to
think: For he does plainly acknowledge, that there were outward Ministeries of
Preaching unto the People, in the time of the Law; but R. B. did understand
this, that God who is faithful and unchangeable, did never change his way or
manner of Teaching, and Inlightning his People and Children by his Spirit
inwardly working in them; but that he continued the same, in all Ages, as well
before the Law as after the Law, and also after the coming of Christ, whether
the outward Preaching was much, or little, or none at all: For to some it was
much, to some little, and to some none; but always the inward Preaching,
Speaking, and Illumination of God, by his Spirit, did remain in some degree,
more or less, in the true Church, and in all its members. For if at any time
the outward Preaching was little or none, as might happen to some; God did
supply that outward defect inwardly by his Spirit; and when the outward
Preaching was much, God did sanctify it to the Faithful, and made it effectual
by the inward operation of his Holy Spirit: For the inward presence and
assistance of the Holy Spirit is no less necessary, that one Preach aright,
than it is necessary unto the Hearers, that they may know and believe aright
what is Preached unto them; and indeed men both Preach and Hear aright, when
both Preachers and Hearers are touched by the same Spirit, and are both
together Enlightened and Inspired: For even as when a Philosopher discoursing
unto his Hearers, of the things of Natural Reason, requires that there be a
Spirit of Natural Reason, or a Reasonable Spirit in them as necessary, whereby
they may understand his Reasons; so the Theologue, or Minister of Divine
Things, while he Preaches those Divine Things unto the Hearers, does no less
require a Divine Spirit in them as necessary, whereby they may understand the
said Divine Things, for there is the like Reason in both. And therefore if in
all Ages, from Adam unto Moses, and from Moses unto Christ, God raised up some
excellent Prophets and Preachers, whom his Spirit inspired and moved to Preach,
with the same Spirit he did inspire and endue the faithful to hear: For the
Holy Spirit is equally necessary both to teach, and to hear, or learn
profitably and savingly what is taught; the Teacher and Learner being united or
joined together in the same mind and hearty affection, through the effectual
working of the same Spirit. And hence it was, that R. B. in his Apology, cited
Nehem. 9. v. 20. Thou gave thy good Spirit to instruct them, or give them
understanding; to prove, that the people of Israel was in some measure endued
with the Spirit of God. To which our Adversary does answer, If (says he) we
say that the Spirit of God was so given unto them, that it did exert or show it
self forth by Moses, who did enjoy immediate converse with God, and Preached to
them by word of mouth, and sometimes did write to inform the People; it does
not appear what R. B. has to object or bring against it. But such an answer
might rather be expected from some Socinian or Pelagian, than from any coming
out of Luther's School, or professing the Spirit of Grace to be necessary to
every one of the faithful: For were there not many faithful and true children
of God among that people? Had they not therefore the same Spirit with Moses,
because they had the same Faith? Seeing Paul says, that as there is one Faith,
so one Spirit, of which all the faithful are partakers unto salvation, and even
they who are unfaithful, by the same Spirit are inwardly admonished and
convinced. But how far (as it seems) has our Adversary forgot himself, and
his Doctrine, who did formerly grant, that all the faithful had the Holy Spirit
given them, to inlighten and assist them savingly to know God, and believe in
him, and consequently all the faithful among the people of Israel had the same
Spirit with Moses as well as he, which Spirit was one both in him and them, and
was as necessary unto them to learn what he taught, as it was unto Moses for to
teach: And therefore it is worthy of observation, what was said Nehem. 9.20.
that God gave his good Spirit unto them, to give them understanding; which is
as much as to say, that the people might understand the things which Moses and
the other Prophets did Preach unto them; for the same spirit is of equal
necessity both to the Teachers, and to them who are taught.

In his Nineteenth Paragraph he answers to the words of David, cited by R. B.
Psalm. 51.13. Cast me not away from thy presence (or face) and take not thy holy
Spirit from me: And Psalm. 139.7. Whither shall I go from thy Spirit, and
whither shall I flee from thy presence. The words (says he) do not say, take
not away the holy Spirit from me, which is immediately given me, nor whither
shall I go from thy Spirit that does immediately speak unto me; but they only
make mention of the Spirit, and do not define or determine the manner of its
communication, or way of speech. But if this his answer has any force against
the immediate communication of the Holy Spirit, given commonly to the Saints,
it shall also exclude David himself, (an excellent Prophet) who said these
words from the immediate communication of the Spirit. Then as seems unto me,
the Adversary wonderfully forgetting himself, within a few lines he confesses,
that David was immediately enlightened by God, and gifted with the Spirit of
Prophecy. Lo, how he has mortally wounded and killed his own cause, as it
were, with his own hands: For, because the words of David above cited, do not
say, take not away thy holy Spirit immediately given me, therefore he argues,
that these words of David do not prove an immediate communication of the
Spirit. But I no where find it said in the whole scripture, that the Holy
Spirit was immediately given to David, or to any of the Prophets and Apostles;
for the scripture has not the term Immediate, which is enough to demonstrate,
that when it is said, the Spirit was given to any man, does sound or signify
as much, as that the Spirit was given him immediately. But for that distinction
of the Spirits being given immediately to some, and only mediately (or
remotely) to others, the scripture is wholly silent of it, neither can it be
gathered from scripture by any good consequence: And let this answerer tell me,
if some stubborn and cross grained Adversary should deny, that any of the
Prophets or Apostles were immediately inspired, how could he convince him of
his error? For whatever places of scripture he shall bring to convince him, he
shall be ready to answer with this our Adversary, that all these places of
scripture say nothing of the Holy Spirit his being immediately given to any,
either of the Prophets or Apostles. But if he answer, that the scripture-words
which say, that the Prophets and Apostles had the Spirit of God inwardly
teaching, inlightning, leading, moving, and acting them, although they do not
express the term immediate, yet they do sufficiently signify and import the
immediate communication of the Holy Spirit; therefore it shall be equally
lawful unto us to conclude, because all the faithful, and true children of God,
are said in scripture to have the Spirit of God which dwells in them, does
inwardly teach them, inspire, inlighten, lead, move, and act them; and that it
is one spirit which is in all the faithful, whether they be Prophets or
Apostles, or any other true members of Christ, because the phrase of the
scripture is the same, concerning the communication of the Holy Spirit, as well
to all the faithful, as to the Prophets and Apostles; therefore it has the
same sense in both, to wit, that both the Prophets and Apostles, and all the
faithful servants and children of God, have one and the same Spirit of God
immediately communicated unto them. Nor is this to make all Prophets or
Apostles; for although the communication of the Spirit be immediate unto all,
yet it does not produce in all the same gifts and functions; but one sort in
the Prophets and Apostles, and another sort in ordinary Christians: Even as the
same soul, or spirit of man is immediately communicated to the whole body, and
all its members, yet it does not follow that every member is the Head or Eye;
for notwithstanding that the same spirit is immediately communicated to all the
members; yet there remains a clear distinction of the members, and of their
offices one from another. Again, whereas he affirms Parag. 19. that the
Prophets and Apostles received the Spirit immediately, but all others of the
faithful but only mediately: He says his without any proof, and plays on the
ambiguous, or various signification of the word, or term immediate and mediate,
which I have above explained, and so he departs and goes aside from the true
state of the controversy altogether: For although it be granted, that many
received the Holy Spirit by means of the outward preaching, that does not
hinder, but that they had it immediately and most nearly communicated unto them
of God; for beside other reasons and examples formerly brought by me, cap. 4.
the following example shall demonstrate the thing abundantly. We see by how
many various means a Husbandman, or Gardener, does ingraft a Twig or Branch
upon the stock of a Tree, the using of which means notwithstanding does not
hinder, but on the contrary does greatly conduce and further, or help, that the
said branch may cleave immediately unto the stock on which it is ingrafted, and
may draw and derive life, and a vital influence from the said stock or root
immediately, and most closely, no less than if it had been a natural branch of
the said Root. Again, Herbs and Trees are planted in the earth by using many
means, which afterward taking root in the earth, do derive from it immediately
life, and a vital, or lively influence and virtue. Granting therefore that the
faithful are commonly ingrafted into Christ by means of the outward Preaching,
do they therefore derive nothing of the Spirit of Christ immediately? Are not
the Faithful as immediately joined or united to Christ, as the branches are to
the Vine, or the Twigs to the Stocks on which they are ingrafted? Shall they
not therefore immediately partake of the spirit of Christ, seeing, as Christ
himself has said, He is the Vine, and the faithful are the Branches grafted
into him? Moreover, How can the Adversary prove, that the Prophets and
Apostles, who (as he confesses) had the Spirit immediately, had it not derived
and given unto them commonly, by means of outward Preaching? For the younger
Prophets did commonly, and for most part, hear the elder Prophets preach unto
them, and by means of their Ministry and preaching, they also received the same
Spirit which dwelt in them immediately, and moved them immediately to speak, as
it did the Elder Prophets. Hence it is, that we read of the Schools of the
Prophets, and of their Sons and Disciples in the scripture: And did not Elisha,
the Disciple of Elijah, by means of his Master, immediately receive the Holy
Spirit? And the Apostles also received the Holy Spirit, in some degree,
immediately, before the day of Pentecost, by means of Christ's preaching
outwardly unto them: Nor can it be questioned, but that when they received the
same Spirit more abundantly on the day of Pentecost, they were much helped, and
assisted, or prepared for such an excellent dispensation, by means of Christ's
doctrine which he preached unto them, while he was yet conversant with them in
the flesh upon Earth. And the faithful did commonly receive the Holy Spirit,
and many excellent gifts of it immediately, and yet by means of the Apostles
preaching, and laying on of their hands. I spoke before of Cornelius, who
received the Spirit immediately, and yet obtained it further by means of
Peter's preaching. Timothy also received that excellent gift which was in him
by Prophecy, with the laying on of the hands of the Eldership. If therefore it
be said, that some of the faithful received the Spirit immediately, and others
only but mediately, beside that such a distinction cannot be proved from
scripture, being altogether a mere invention, and fiction of man's brain; they
who had the Spirit immediately, did oftentimes obtain it by means of the
preaching of others unto them: And the gift of Prophesying or speaking
immediately by the Spirit, was continued in the Church in the times of Justin
Martyr, and Tertullian, as they themselves do testify, the which continuation
of so excellent a gift was by means of preaching, so long as the Preachers did
preach purely by the Spirit, and also did purely and chastely live, and walk in
the Spirit. But when the Preachers left off, or ceased to preach by the Spirit,
and to live in the Spirit, and to put their own spirit in the room and place of
the Spirit of God, and of Christ; that Spirit and gift of Prophecy (the which
is greatly to be lamented) did cease in great part.

What the Adversary disputes against R. B. in his following Paragraphs to the
end of his dissertation, and answers to R. B. his solid and firm arguments
taken from scripture, does altogether lean upon that false foundation,
sufficiently refuted by me, to wit, that because the faithful, both under the
new and old covenant, received the Holy Spirit by means of outward Preaching,
ordinarily and commonly.; that therefore they were not immediately endued and
inspired with the same; the which consequence I have already over and over
again showed to be most false, although it were granted, that all the faithful
had always received the Spirit by means of outward Preaching, or using of the
scriptures, the which I will never grant unto him. And if I shall grant unto
him, that the faithful received the Spirit of Christ, in some degree, by means
of the doctrine outwardly preached, while as yet they were as children and
Infants; he can never prove from this, that when they were more advanced into a
spiritual, and holy life, and come unto the state of men, that they did always
receive the further measures and degrees of the Spirit, by means of outward
Preaching: For it does not follow, that because at sometime they received the
Spirit by means thereof, that they always did so receive it in the fuller and
larger measures and degrees thereof; even as it does not follow, that because a
Child, or Infant, needs the ministry or means of a Nurse or Servant to feed
it in that weak state, that therefore it always needs the help of that Nurse
or Servant, when it is come to a man's Age and growth. I shall not therefore
stay to answer to every thing of his Dissertation, by giving still new answers,
seeing one answer does suffice to them all; and if I should still repeat that
one Answer, I should both lose my time and labor, and also should weary the
Reader, and beget a loathing in him; and therefore with this one Answer I reply
unto all he has objected against R. B. That he departs from the state of the
question, and still beggeth the thing in controversy; and so falls into that
error, commonly called in the Schools, Petitio principii, i. e. a taking for
granted the thing in controversy, while he does continually oppose, and set at
variance, the immediate communication of the Holy Spirit, and the means of
outward Preaching, and other the like helps which are not to be opposed, but do
well agree. And it is so far otherwise, that the Spirits immediate
communication does not only not hinder, or make void the use of any means
appointed of God, as of Preaching, Reading, and Hearing the scriptures, and
meditating upon them; that on the contrary, it does truly and solidly establish
them, sanctify them, and makes them all effectual. But that the Adversary
does continually bind up, or tie the operation of the Holy Spirit, to the
outward letter of the Scripture, either as read, or heard, or meditated upon,
is too rashly done in him; and he has not in all his Dissertation, so much as
once essayed to prove it: And however his common, and too credulous, Hearers
and Disciples in the School, may easily receive his bare Affirmations without
Proof; yet they cannot find place with us, nor with others, we know better
things, and whose inward and spiritual eyes, God, out of his abundant Grace,
has opened to discern the Truth. But suppose, (which yet is not at all to be
granted) that the Illumination of the Holy Spirit, is continually bound up, or
tied to the outward Sign, or Letter; yet it does not thence follow, even upon
that absurd principle, that the Illumination of the Holy Spirit is not
immediate, or is not immediately perceived by us: Even as if it were granted,
that the outward Illumination and Light of the outward and visible Sun, is
never seen by the eyes of men, separated from all other visible objects; but
always joined and united with them, and always shining upon some one or other
of the visible objects, and reflecting its beams upon them (though such who
have Eagles eyes, can look strait upon the Sun himself) yet it will not from
thence follow, that the outward Illumination or Light of the outward Sun, is
not immediately received, and seen or perceived by us.

CHAP. VIII.
ANd here I might well enough, by right, make an end of my Answering; but
because he does affirm diverse things in his other Paragraphs following, which
partly need correction, and partly conduce to manifest the truth; therefore I
shall not be unwilling to take notice of them in a few particulars.

In his Twenty Second Paragraph he erreth, in saying (universally, and without
making any distinction) that there is no substantial difference, but only
accidental and circumstantial, betwixt mediate and immediate, outward and
inward Revelations, according to the different kind of the signs under which
God does manifest himself. For, although this may be granted in those inward
Revelations made in the Imagination, yet not in these which have place in the
highest faculty or power of the Soul, which is the intuitive aforementioned:
For the Revelation which is given to this supreme or highest power of the soul
that is intuitive (and which is opened and awakened only in those who are
sanctified, and spiritually renewed) does not consist of signs, but God
himself, and the Divine Things of his Kingdom in their own proper light and
evidence, discover themselves in the souls and hearts of the faithful, without
all signs: And therefore however the outward Revelation may be called
accidental, because it does but contain the signs, which are accidents; yet the
inward Revelation, which has place in the Souls intuitive power, and
respects the Divine Things themselves without signs, is to be called
substantial.

In his Twenty Fourth Paragraph he has these notable words: When our men
(says he) affirm, that at sometimes the outward Revelation is the formal
object of the Saints Faith, the meaning is not, that the Faith of the Saints
does precisely lean, or rely upon that which is outward, in that Revelation, or
which reaches to the outward Senses; but that it leans or does rely upon God
himself, inwardly exerting or showing his power in the Mind, by an inseparable
or undivided operation, through that which is outward, and determining (or
moving) the Understanding to elicit, or bring forth the act of knowledge, whence
we deny not, (says he) the inward testimony in the hearts of those who have
the outward Revelation: Thus he. But let the impartial Reader judge, if he does
not here act the Enthusiast, and plainly give up unto us the chief thing in
controversy, for which we contend: For this concession of his being once
granted, the controversy betwixt him and us, so far as concerns Immediate
Revelation, (as seems unto me) is almost none at all.

In his Thirty Second Paragraph he does again plainly act the Enthusiast,
agreeing with us, and saying, That God, or the Spirit, which reveals (note)
does not only work effectively upon the intellectual Faculty, to produce the
act of believing; but also does move objectively, or by way of object and
formal representation of the same, does determine the Understanding to assent.
And a little after in the same Paragraph, That God, when he says, or reveals
any thing by the outward voice of the Preacher, or by the holy Scriptures, does
concur with that saying or Revelation, and as the principal moving cause, does
effect it, that men from an inward and supernatural motion, or witnessing, made
within their minds, but which does exert it self by the outward act of Divine
Revelation, and reflecteth on God the speaker as its cause; may understand,
that it is God himself who says it, whether by the voice of the Preacher, or
the Scripture, what that Revelation says or manifests. But this is it, which
the Teachers and Preachers in Britain, and many other places among the
Protestants, do commonly object unto us for Enthusiasm, because indeed we say,
that this objective Illumination (or that which is by way of object) no less
than the effective, is given to all the faithful, for which principally we
believe the Scriptures. Now there is this only difference betwixt the Adversary
and us, that he does continually tie, or bind up, the operation of the Holy
Spirit to the outward signs, but we do not so, although we do affirm, that the
Illumination of the Holy Spirit is frequently joined by an undivided operation
with the holy scripture, and that it does exert it self in the hearts of the
faithful through the same: And whether the inward operation of the Spirit be
continually tied to the holy scripture, or left free (though we do still affirm
it is not so tied) it is all one as to the state of the Controversy,
concerning Immediate Revelation; for in both cases the Illumination and
Communication of the Spirit is immediate, as I have often already made appear.

In his Paragraph Twenty Three, he seems to blame R. B. that he does render
the outward Revelations to be fallacious and uncertain, and more liable to
delusion than the inward. But R. B. has not affirmed that outward Revelations
are fallacious; for these which are true and come from the God of Truth, cannot
deceive; but R. B. does plead, that the outward Revelations, however true and
certain they are in themselves, yet they are not clear and evident of
themselves to be Divine Revelations; but that they principally derive their
clearness and evidence from the inward Revelations witnessing to them; and
therefore these inward Revelations are more clear and evident, having a
self-evidence and clearness in themselves. And there is this difference betwixt
our outward Senses, which perceive the outward Revelation, and those Divine
inward Senses, supernaturally formed in us, that our outward Senses may be
deceived at sometimes and in some cases; but these inward Divine Senses,
Divinely begot and formed in us, can never be deceived: For although a man's
imagination and inward thought may deceive him, yet that Sense, which a man
has inwardly begot in his heart, by the Lord, can no wise deceive him.

In his Twenty Fifth Paragraph, he alleges, that R. B. does contradict
himself, while he teaches, that the outward Revelation of the Scriptures is
the formal object of the Saints faith, and yet not the formal cause, or reason,
of believing. But if the Adversary had carefully considered R. B. his words
following in his Apology, he had not imputed unto him such a contradiction: For
R.B. says, that the secret testimony of the Holy Spirit is the principal
object of the Saints faith, and the original, and consequently unto this, that
the Scripture is the secundary and subordinate: And therefore when R. B. says,
that the outward Revelation of the Scripture is not the formal cause or reason
of believing, he did clearly enough signify his mind, to wit, that the
Scripture was not the principal and original cause of believing: and therefore
if it be granted, that the outward Revelation of the Scripture does contain in
it self some secundary reason of believing; for this cause it may be called a
secundary formal object of faith, but the primary formal object is the inward
Revelation, which distinction of the formal objects is expressed by R. B. in
other words, into the formal object quod, i. e. which, to wit, the secundary,
and the formal object quo, i. e. for, or by which, to wit, the primary. But
because these terms of the formal object into quod, i. e. which, and quo, i. e.
for which, are borrowed from Logicians, and the simple and plain truth can be
easily enough explained without these terms; I shall not stay any more to
explain or defend them: For the substance of the thing is clearly enough
confessed by the Adversary, to wit, that Saving Faith does not stay, or rely on
the mere naked outward Revelation of the Scripture, but reaches beyond that
unto God himself inwardly moving, and objectively, or by way of object,
witnessing by his Spirit to the truth of the Scripture. And because that inward
objective testimony of the Spirit is somewhat really distinct from the outward
testimony of the scripture, although not contrary unto it, nor separate
therefrom (as the Adversary says) therefore he holds of necessity a twofold
object, to wit, the one outward, the other inward, and whether of these he
holds to be the primary, he has not in words expressed; although it may be
said consequentially enough to his Principles, that the inward object is the
primary, and the outward secundary, wherein he does very well agree with R. B.
and us. Moreover, Seeing he grants a twofold object of Divine Faith and
Knowledge, one outward of the Letter, another inward of the Spirit, joined
together and inseparate, because they are really distinct; I suppose he will
not deny, but they may be separate one from another, if God so pleased: Let it
then be supposed, only upon a possible supposition, that the inward be separate
from the outward, so that the outward being removed, the inward object may
remain, which is proposed by the Holy Spirit alone to the Heart and Soul of the
Faithful; I inquire if in this case, the inward presentation of the object were
not to be called an Immediate Revelation: The which if he grant, therefore I
say it is now immediate, when the outward object is adjoined to it; for that
inward illumination and Revelation does not change its Nature, in the absence
and presence of the outward object (having all entirely in it self that belongs
to an Immediate Revelation) but remains the same, whether it be joined to the
outward, or separated therefrom. Even as the soul of man, whether joined to the
Body, or separated therefrom, yet it still retains its own Nature, that it is
the immediate Principle of its operations, both in the Body and out of the
Body. And indeed, by a certain Analogy, as the Soul is to the Body, so is the
Spirit of God inwardly operating and illuminating to the outward testimony of
the Letter: And because the Soul does many things by the means of the Body, yet
that does not hinder, but that it is the immediate principle of its operations.
But the Soul does many things in respect of its most inward and intellectual
operations, without the means and help of the Body, even when it is in the
Body; and therefore why may not that Divine Spirit, as it does many things in
the Saints, by means of the Letter of the scripture, do or work some other
things, and not use the means of the Letter: Yea, how many things does the Holy
Spirit reveal and open in Men (as belonging to the special and particular acts
of Virtue and Vice) that do far transcend, and go beyond the straitness, and
narrow compass of words, of which Seneca the Gentile, and an Heathen so called,
does Write well, Lib. 2. De Ira. How narrow Innocence is that (says he) to be
good according to the Law? (He understands a Law writ or contained in words)
How much more does the Rule of Duties extend, than that of Law? How many things
does Piety, Humanity, Liberality, Justice, and Faithfulness require, which are
not in the public Tables or Records, to wit, all written Laws. Thus Seneca.
For as he who describes some Kingdom, as of Germany, or England, with Words,
or Mapps, cannot describe it in as great largeness, as it does contain in it
self, but in much narrower bounds: And although he describe all the Cities,
Towns, and Villages of the said Kingdom, yet he does not describe all the
houses of every City and Village, or all the Fields and Orchards belonging to
it, much less all the Rooms and Chambers of each House, or all the Acres and
Roods of the Corn Fields, or all the particular Ears of Corn that grow in those
Fields, or all the Trees and Fruits of these Orchards, particularly one by one.
And even so they who describe the Kingdom of God which is within us, to wit,
the Writers of the Holy Scripture, they could not describe all the particulars
contained in that Kingdom, the which particulars are yet very necessary to be
known unto the Saints; and therefore the Holy Spirit reveals unto them those
particular things, which are not contained in the Scripture: And the same is to
be understood of the Kingdom of Vices, and of Satan, that it contains many
more particular vices and sins, than can be described by any words. And as
concerning the glory of Gods Kingdom in the Saints, it may be well said in the
words of the Queen of the South, concerning Solomon's Glory, that the same or
report of the Glory was true, but the half of it was not told, the which cannot
be told by any words: And therefore the Scripture it self calls the joy of
the Lord in the Saints, a joy unspeakable, and that the Peace of God which is
in them, does not only surpass all words, but all (to wit, discursive)
understanding. Moreover, R. B. shows in his Apology, from page 39. to page
43. (to which the Adversary has answered nothing) that there are many
particular things very necessary to be known, unto every one of the faithful,
which are no where revealed in the Scripture, and are therefore immediately to
be revealed unto them by the Spirit, such as especially concerning the Souls
inward state, and those inward calls of God unto the soul, to the discharging
or performing of its particular services.

In his thirtieth parag. he says, it is one thing that the Spirit is within a
man, and another thing, that the said Spirit is given, not mediately, but
Immediately, by a mere inward operation, without an outward mean, surely (says
he) the habits of arts and sciences are within in the mind of man, and yet for
most the part they are given to men not Immediately, but mediately, or by means
of the outward teaching of the Master; and a few lines after he says, we not
only grant, but we earnestly plead for the indewlling of the Holy Spirit as
altogether necessary to Christians. That he does acknowledge and plead for the
indwelling, and inbeing of the Holy Spirit, to be altogether necessary to
Christians it is well, but that he does absolutely deny the Immediate Operation
and Revelation of the indwelling Spirit of God, he does badly; for although
that this inward teacher and Master does frequently teach his Disciples, by
means of the Scripture, shall he therefore teach them nothing by word of mouth,
or his own living voice Immediately? shall he not expound open to them what
they read in the Scriptures, with his living voice? or shall he sit and remain
in them always, as one dumb (which God forbid that we should so imagine)
speaking or saying nothing, nay not so much, as one small sentence, but what is
in express words contained in the Scripture, and borrowed from them? surely
such an assertion is too rash, and without all ground from Scripture, and is
most unworthy of God immortal, our most excellent Master and Pastor, yea our
Bridegroom and Husband, to fain any such things of him, which no Mortal or
Earthly Schoolmaster would do to his Disciples, and if he did so, all would
judge him a Fool, and unfit for such an affair; if (to wit,) he should say
nothing unto them, but what is contained in the Book, which they became in so
many words, and which he takes out of the Book, and should speak nothing to
them Immediately by word of mouth. What disciple would bear such a
Schoolmaster, or rather would not turn him off, and choose another, more
friendly and familiar unto him; or what woman would not take it very unkindly
and unworthy, if her Husband did not speak to her any one small sentence
immediately and by word of mouth, but did leave all that is to be said, to
letters or epistles writ by him of old? or what servant would willing serve
such a Master, who being presently with him, in the same house, did not speak
to him at any time, not one word, by word of mouth immediate; whither he did
well or ill please him. Surely this adversary does fain or devise a wonderful
strange sort of indwelling of God, and the Holy Spirit in the Souls of the
faithful, without all Immediate speech, or concern. Certainly to speak after
the manner of men, it is hard to think how two intimate Friends can dwell
together in one house, and follow the same manner of life in many things, and
yet the one speak nothing to the other immediately or by word of mouth, all the
whole time of their living so nearly. But indeed the indwelling and habitation
of God, and Christ by the Holy Spirit, in the hearts of the faithful, is a
thing far more sweet, and joyful then this adversary does imagine, the which as
it is most inward, or Primitive and Immediate in them, so it does import
likewise an Intimate and Immediate familiarity, converse and communication. And
as concerning the habits of arts and sciences, whereof he made mention, which
are in the minds of men, and yet are given not Immediately but by means of the
outward teaching of the Master, I say, the seeds and principles of all these
arts and sciences are Immediately planted and sowed in our minds as the purest
and truest Philosophy does teach, and all arts and sciences do Immediately
sprout and spring forth from these seeds and principles Immediately planted in
us, as the Flouers and fruits of Herbs and Trees do spring and grow from their
Seeds and Roots. Nor is such an Immediate production hindered, but rather much
helped, by the external culture of means applied both to the Seeds and Roots of
the Earth, and also to these unplanted and ungrafted notices and principles of
natural knowledge; and of this the aforesaid Seneca does discourse very well
lib. 4. de benef. cap. 6. The seeds of all ages, and of all arts are implanted
in us (says he) and God the inward or secret Master brings forth Engines or
knowledges, and cap. 7. thou will say, nature does these things unto me. Do
thou not understand (says he) when thou say this, that thou changest the
name of God, for what else is nature, but God; and Divine reason infused into
the whole World, and all its parts, and Tertullian discoursing of the innate
witness in the Soul, worthy of behalf, some calling it natural, the more
natural (says he) the more divine.

In his 34 parag. Because R. B. did argue from the nature of the new Covenant,
that all the faithful under the Gospel, were Immediately taught of God, the
adversary does infer against him, that then it does follow that the faithful
under the Old Covenant were not Immediately taught, which is against his first
assertion. But this is easily answered in few words, that all the faithful
under the Old Covenant were Immediately taught of God, yet not by virtue of the
Old Covenant, but of the New; which New Covenant in some degree had place in
the time of the Old, and was to be further revealed in Gospel days, after the
coming of Christ in the flesh, and I think strange that this Doctor or Teacher
did not advert to this, being so obvious a thing. Again that he thinks R. B.
understands by the phrase of Scripture in those Gospel promises of God, his
putting his Spirit in his people, and his words in their mouths, as that Isaiah
59. that all using of means is excluded, he is much described, for R. B. does
not understand an exclusion of means, but does abundantly acknowledge a
necessary use of them. Only he does plead that over and beside the outward
testimony of the letter, God has promised to speak himself to the Soul, which
two things are not to be opposed, but both are to be granted. Again that he
affirms, God his putting words in the mouths of his people, to design that
the word is outwardly to be preached, we grant it is but so that those words be
put in the mouths of those speakers by God himself Immediately as he put words
in the mouths of the Prophets and Apostles Immediately to preach unto others,
and outwardly to instruct them. But if God put not his words, in the mouth of
any, since the Apostles days, certainly the Church ever since should be in a
worse and more abject condition, now under the Gospel, then it was under the
Law, for in all ages under the Law, God raised up some Prophets and Ministers
to whom he spoke Immediately, and in whose mouth he put his words Immediately
to speak them forth. And if nothing of this kind now be given to the Church,
instead of her being nearer unto God, and more familiar, and partaking more
abundantly of the life and light of God and Christ, she shall be further
removed, and more estranged from him and receive much less of these his Divine
Gifts and blessings now under the Gospel, then formerly under the Law. Moreover
as to what he writes of the Scripture being a Canon so filled up, as if
nothing since the days of the Apostles to the end of the World, either by Word
or Writ, it to proceed Immediately from the Spirit of God, conform to the
Doctrine of the Scripture already delivered and declared in Scripture, he
affirms this indeed very confidently, but proves it nothing at all; and the
authority of Iustine Martyr, Ireneus and Tertullian does contradict him, who
expressly writ, that the gift of prophesying, or speaking in the Church by
Immediate Inspiration were continued unto their times.

In his 35 Parag. he says, the Christians are the more happy, viz. then the
Jews, although the Christians want altogether Immediate Revelation, which some
of the Jews at last had, because the Christians may know the mind of God out of
the Scripture, that is made public and obvious unto all, whereas the Jews were
to take long Journeys from home to consult the Priests; and to solicit and
wait for the respouses of the High Priests, which were rare to be obtained. But
what for a refuge and evasion is this, instead of answering, more becoming some
Socinian, or Pelagian, then our Adversary; who at other times does so much
profess the indwelling and inward Illumination of the Holy Spirit, its being
necessary to all the faithful? But was it not a great glory and ornament to the
Church of the Jews, and which was greatly to the advantage of it, to have their
Prophets to whom God spoke immediately? and were they not in this more happy
than other Nations, that the gift of Prophecy did flourish among them, and when
Devils and unclean Spirits gave forth their Oracles unto the Nations, God most
Holy and most Pure, gave his Immediate Oracles unto the Jews, and his Holy
Spirit unto the Prophets, that they might declare them, and unto the People
that they might believe and understand them; without which holy Spirit its
being given to the people, the Oracles themselves could not be understood; as
is manifest in the Jews at this day, who although they have these ancient
Preachers, to wit, the Scriptures of the Old Testament; yet they do not
understand them, because they have departed and Apostatised from that Holy
Spirit, given of old unto their Fathers. And therefore was it not also a great
glory and honor to the ancient Christian Church, to have in it the gift of
prophecy or speaking by Immediate Inspiration? and would it not be now a great
glory and honor to the Church if that gift of prophecy, which did anciently
flourish in the Church for some Ages, after the Apostles days, should flourish
and spring forth again? was not this gift with many others lost by the apostasy
of the professors of the Christian Religion? and therefore, when the apostasy
goes out, and people does return to the sincere worship and obedience of God,
shall not this excellent gift be restored together with many others? Had not
the ancient Christian Church, after the Apostles days all the Books of
Scripture of the Old and New Testament as well as we? The Jews also had the
Scriptures of the Old Testament, which contained all the heads of Christian
Doctrine, in respect of the substance of Religion, a people therefore having
the Scripture, but wanting the Spirit Immediately teaching, leading and
inspiring them, which both the Jewish Church had, and also the Christians after
the Apostles days, shall be more happy then both these, because they want the
said Holy Spirit Immediately inspiring, teaching and leading them? This is a
wonderful paradox, but most false, for the Christians are not more happy than
the Jews, because out of the Scripture barely they could know the will of God,
for the Jews had the Scripture also containing all the heads of the Doctrine of
their Religion clearly enough. But for this cause true Christians are more
happy than those Jews, that whereas the Jews (for all their having the
Scripture) did need to take long Journeys to consult the Priests; and to
solicit and wait for the respouses of the High Priests: all true Christians
because they partake more largely of the Holy Spirit, they need not make these
Journeys or travels to consult either Priests or High Priest; because they have
a most excellent Priest, yea an High Priest, more high then the Heavens, or the
Angels that dwell in them, to wit, Jesus Christ, dwelling in their hearts who
by his Spirit teaches them all things, and does clearly and without all
doubtfulness answer them, i^ all things needful to be known by them, and who
does also clearly and infallibly expound the Scripture unto them. And therefore
true Christians have no need to run to these Jewish Priests and High Priests,
nor unto these Doctors so called, and preachers at this day, who do not so much
as profess to have any thing of the Divine Inspiration, and inward Revelation,
with which the Prophets and holy men of God were of old endued, and do not
pretend to have any infallible sense or understanding of the holy Scripture; or
to have received any infallible Judgment of its meaning. And so true Christians
may spare both their labor, and their money, and not spend it nor give it away
to such Doctors and Preachers, but leaving them all behind as unprofitable, let
them go unto Jesus Christ the Lord, the eternal Priest who lives for ever, by
whom they shall be well and sufficiently taught and instructed, and that freely
without either labor or money. And lastly, as to these notable testimonies of
the ancients, and reformers in Luther's times cited by R. B. in his Apology,
because the Adversary endeavors to elude or evade the form of them, after
the same manner as he does the testimonies of the holy Scripture, therefore he
is the same way refused in both, and the answers given in the one will serve in
the other, the which if I have effectually given, I leave unto the ^qual and
impartial Reader, for to Judge.

THE Pretended EXORCIST DETECTED In a Brief REPLY TO A SERMON PREACHED BEFORE
The University of Oxford, by George Hicks styled Doctor of Divinity, in the
Month called July 11. 1680. the which Sermon is called, The Spirit of
Enthusiasm Exorcised
CHAP. I.
UPon my reading of this Authors Printed Sermon, which is called, the Spirit of
Enthusiasm exorcised, I find the said Author very unskilful, and unacquainted
with the true notion of Enthusiasm, as it is owned and received among the
People called in derision Quakers; with all possible moderation. And though he
has been pleased to cite my Book of Immediate ^evelation, and R. B. his
Apology and Theses, yet I can hardly believe he has been at any pains to read,
and consider thoroughly, what is said by us on that Subject; for had he but read
and well considered, what we have said or writ in that matter, he would have
^^^^e fairly and genuinely stated the controversy betwixt us, and our opposers,
as to this particular.

In my answer to Io. Bajer, the Lutheran Doctor in Iena, so much is already
said, as less needs be added, for a reply to what this Author has brought
against us. As for the word or term Enthusiasm, as I have already said in my
answer to the Lutheran Doctor, we do not plead for it, or affect such a name or
title, for it being no Scripture phrase or expression, we can and do very well
declare our Faith in the thing, we intend without it. Yet we cannot altogether
reject the term, when thrust or cast upon us, by opposers, on purpose many
times to render us odious, because the Etimology of the word Enthusiasm,
according to the best and most approved Greek Lexicons signifies Divine
Inspiration. And whereas it has been used by heathenish writers to signify
the inspirations, or inward suggestions of Demons and evil Spirits, yet this
has rather been an abuse, and improper signification of the word, then a true
and genuine acceptance of it; and notwithstanding of this abuse of the word
among heathenish writers and Poets, yet diverse of the Fathers, use^ it in a
good sense, and as applicable to good and sincere Christians. Yea this Author
himself, with respect to the Prophets and Apostles, and others their successors
for 3 or 4 hundreds of years owneth the term Enthusiasm, and that in the
Apostles times, and downwards to the 4 or 5 Century, there were some real and
sincere Christians who had Enthusiasms, and were enthusiastically acted and
moved by the Spirit of God, for thus he says, Page 12. Edit. 3. of this sort
of Enthusiastical confidence, with which the Spirit filled the minds of men is
that place to be understood Math. 21. verse. 21. and Page 14. he says, prophecy
may be taken as it is often in the Old and New Testament, for praising of God
by inspired Hymns and Psalms, for inspired persons did usually spend their
Enthusiasm in composing of Hymns, and Spiritual Songs. And Page 16. he says,
the groanings wherewith some inspired persons prayed, in the Apostles days,
according to Romans 8. were the effect of those supernatural raptures and
Enthusiasms, with which the Spirit filled the souls of those inspired Orators;
so we see how this Author owneth the words Enthusiasm, Enthusiast, and
Enthusiastical; as applicable to some Persons, who were true and sincere
Christians, and divinely inspired. And yet the Title of his Printed Sermon,
presumes to Exorcise the Spirit of Enthusiasm without making any distinction,
as if the said Spirit were some Devil, or unclean Spirit universally. But if he
say he means not the Spirit of Enthusiasm, as it was in the Primitive times,
but as it is now in the following ages, since the true Divine Spririt of
Enthusiasm did universally cease or expire. To this I answer, it is more than
he has proved or can prove; that the true Spirit of divine Enthusiasm has
universally ceased among Christians, and as for his reasons, or proofs, I hope
with Gods assistance sufficiently to discover their weakness and invalidity,
and that he lays a too weak and unsteddy foundation, for so great and weighty
superstructure? But how this Author presumes to Exorcise the Spirit of
Enthusiasm, without the least measure of the Spirit of Divine Enthusiasm, I am
at a loss to understand, for if the Spirit of Enthusiasm be such a Devil, as he
supposes it generally to be, how can it be Exorcised or cast out but by a
measure of the Divine Spirit of Enthusiasm? for the Author will readily (as I
suppose) acknowledge that all the Exorcists in the Apostles times, who had
power to Exorcise and cast out evil Spirits^ were Enthusiastically inspired, so
that by the Spirit of God and Christ inspiring them, as being the stronger they
did cast out evil Spirits who were the weaker. But if the Author think that
without some divine Enthusiasm or inspiration, he can cast out or Exorcise any
devil or unclean Spirit, only by the strength of his parts, or humane Spirit;
or barely naming the words of Scripture, and of Jesus and Paul; let him call to
mind and consider what happened unto them, who presumed to Exorcise a certain
unclean Spirit, with the names of Jesus and Paul without having that divine
Spirit, which was in Jesus and Paul. To whom the Spirit answered, Jesus we
know, and Paul we know; but who are Ye? and the Man in whom the evil Spirit
was, leapt on them, and overcame them, and prevailed against them, so that they
fled out of that house naked and wounded, read Acts 19.13, 14, 15, 16. I no
where find in Scripture, or any credible History that any ever had power to
Exorcise the Devil or any unclean Spirit, unless he was in indeed with the
Spirit of God, for the weaker must be overcome by the stronger? but whither the
Author thinks himself by his mere natural parts and humane Spirit, stronger
then the Devil, let him see to it. Another thing he should greatly advert to,
lest he has called the Operation of the Spirit of God and Christ in his
Children, the work of the Devil, which to do is a great iniquity, and yet is
pardonable through repentance, if not committed knowingly and wilfully, which
I hope this Author has not done, therefore I can heartily pray unto God that
he may be forgiven, and his eyes may be opened to see and acknowledge the Truth.

But to pass from the name of word Enthusiasm for which being no Scripture
word, we shall not contend; let us come to the thing it self, to wit, true
divine inspiration, Vision and Revelation, and true divine inward teaching, and
leading and moving of the holy Spirit Immediately, whither in some measure or
degree, it be not the common privilege of all Gods people, and of all sincere
and true Christians.

I take notice of the Authors distinction page 4. of two sorts of spiritual
gifts, Common and Special. By the common gifts of the Spirit (he says) he
means all those that all Christians are bound to pray for, and expect, and
that are given by God in common to all those, who sincerely desire them, and
labor after them, and that are necessary for the Salvation of the Soul; and of
this sort, he says, are all the saving gifts and graces of the Spirit, called
in the Schools, gratiae gratium facientes, which the Spirit helps to work in
men's hearts, as Faith, Hope, Charity, Purity, Humility; and all other gracious
habits of the Mind, which the Apostle calls the fruit of the Spirit, and
wherein the image of God, the power of Godliness, and the Spirit of
Christianity truly do consist. By special gifts he understands those, which
men are not ordinarily bound to expect, and which unless it be in some few
circumstances that seldom happen, would be vanity and presumption to beg of
God, and which by consequence are not necessary for the Salvation of the Soul:
Of this sort, he says, are all the Miraculous unctions of the Holy Ghost,
called by the Schoolmen gratiae gratis datae, such as the gift of tongues,
power of working Miracles, signs and wonders, the Spirit of prophecy, etc. But
these sorts of gifts (says he) agree in this, that they are supernatural and
freely given by God to men.

This distinction brought by the Author, I willingly own and acknowledge; But
the thing that remains for him to prove, is, that no sort of Immediate divine
Revelation and Inspiration, and Immediate divine teaching is any of those
common and ordinary gifts, given freely of God, to all true and sincere
Christians. Now that the inspiration of the holy Spirit, is one of these common
gifts of the Spirit, does plainly appear, from the Common Prayer of the Church
of England, according to this very difinition of a common saving gift of the
Spirit given here by the Author, to wit, that it is such as all Christians are
bound to pray for and expect, but such is the inspiration of the Holy Spirit;
according to the Common Prayer of the Church of England, for thus she prays,
in the Collect on the first Sunday after Easter. Lord from whom all good things
do come, grant us thy humble Servants, that by thy Holy Inspiration we may
think those things that be good, and by thy merciful guiding, may perform the
same through our Lord Jesus Christ, Amen. Again in the first prayer at the
Communion, immediately after our Father, etc. it says, Almighty God, unto whom
all hearts be open, cleanse the thoughts of our hearts by the inspiration of
thy holy Spirit, that we may perfectly love thee, and worthily magnify thy
name, etc. Again in the 4 Prayer which has this Title, for the whole state of
Christ's Church Militant here on Earth, it says thus, beseeching thee to
inspire continually the universal Church, with the Spirit of Truth, Unity, and
Concord: Thus we see how at three several times, the Church of England prays
for the inspiration of the Holy Spirit, and if she pray for it, she ought
certainly to expect it, and not believe it is ceased or expired; which makes me
think it the more strange, that one of her own members, and that a Do^tor also
should deny this so excellent and precious a gift, and condemn it as some Devil
or evil Spirit, and undertake to Exorcise it (before the face of the University
of Oxford, where Common Prayer is so frequently read) and that without any
distinction. But possibly he may say, he is not against divine inspiration, as
it is a common saving gift of the Spirit, necessary to all the Church, and
every member of it, but as it is some peculiar and extraordinary thing, as the
gift of tongues, power of working Miracles, signs, and wonders; the Spirit of
prophecy, etc. To this I answer, 1. He ought then in the first place, to have
told so much, what sort or kind of Enthusiasm, or divine inspiration, (for both
these words are of one signification) he was for, and what sort he was against,
and not have promiscuously condemned Inspiration, or Enthusiasm altogether in
the Lump. 2. The people called in derision Quakers, do not plead for those
extraordinary Enthusiasms or Inspirations, which the Apostles and some others
had in the primitive times, as the gift of tongues, the power of working
Miracles, etc. and as the Spirit of Prophecy is restructed to signify a
peculiar gift of forfeiting future events, we do not plead for its absolute
necessity in the Church, far less do we Judge it necessary to every true
Christian: And this I did sufficiently declare in my Book of Immediate
Revelaion, cited by the Author, the which Book if he had taken a little pains
to read and consider, might have saved him the labor of saying so much against
the Quakers; without any just ground or provocation. It is like that we and our
Books are esteemed so meanly of, by such as this Author, as that they think it
not worth their time or labor, to read our Books. But in case it be so, that
we are so mean in their eyes, yet they ought not to judge, or condemn us, until
they have good knowledge or information of what we hold, which they are not
likely to have, without taking some time and pains to read or hear what we say,
for to condemn any principle we hold, before they do well know it, is as unjust
as to condemn a man, before he be heard.

CHAP. II.
BUt there are other two or three things, which I suppose this Author, or some
other, may answer in the Case. The first is, that the Inspirations which the
Church of England does hold, pray for and expect, are subordinate to Scripture,
and do acknowledge the Scripture, as superior and more noble; and that they
are to be tried by the Scripture, as the greater and more principal rule, and
not the Scripture by them, whereas some of the Quakers have writ, and
particularly R. B. in his Theses, that this Spirit of Immediate Revelation is
not to be tried by the Scriptures and reason, but that both of them are to be
tried by it, for so does the Author cite R. B. his Theses, as so affirming page
38. To this I answer, the Author does manifestly wrong R. B. in his Citation,
for R. B. no where says in his Theses or Apology, that the Spirit or its
Inspiration is not to be tried by the Scripture or Reason simply. Only he
says, that those inward divine Revelations are not to be examined and tried by
the Scriptures as the more noble and certain rule. Yea in the 3 Thesis R. B.
does plainly acknowledge, that the Scriptures are and may be esteemed a
secondary rule, subordinate to the Spirit, from whom they derive the excellency
and certainty they have, it is not therefore affirmed by R. B. as this Author
(upon his own mistake as seems) does allege, nor yet by any Quaker so
called, that I know of, that the Scripture or right reason in no respect are a
rule, and may not be profitably and safely used as a rule, whereby to try
inward Divine Revelations, as the Scripture or right reason is used or applied
for a rule, by the help of the Spirit, and in subordination unto the Spirit.
But the state of the question lies here, whither the external testimony of the
Scripture, used and applied as a rule without the Spirit, as too many do, be a
more noble and greater rule, and more certain, or giving to the mind of man
more assurance of truth, than the inward Immediate Testimony of the Spirit of
God, in the soul or mind, which as a ray of the Sun shines with its own Light,
and has a self evidencing power and virtue in it, as every other true light
has. This is one branch of the state of the question: Another branch is this,
whither when both the Spirits inward testimony, and the Scriptures outward
testimony do acknowledge, cooperate, and concur, to produce or work a
persuasion or essent to some Gospel doctrine or principle of Christian
Religion, in the soul or heart of a true Believer, I say, whither in this case
the inward testimony or witness of the Spirit is not the greater, the stronger
and more clear and certain as to us, and the more effectual, and as having the
greatest stroke and share, in the begetting or producing the said assent to
truth, or persuasion of it in the mind of man. Now the pople called in derision
Quakers are not ashamed, but bold in the Lord to say, that the Inward
Testimony, Operation, and Revelation, or Inspiration of the Spirit of God is
the greater, and has the greatest stroke and efficiency in this work; and that
the holy Spirit is not the subordinate instrument or rule of the Scripture, but
the Scripture is the subordinate rule and instrument of the Spirit: And this I
prove; first, from the express words of the Apostle John, 1 John 5.9, 10. If we
receive the witness of men, the witness of God is greater: for this is the
witness of God, which he has testified of his Son; he that believes on the
Son of God, has the witness in himself. Now it is clear, that John by the
witness of men, does mean the Scripture, as being the witness of the holy
Prophets and Apostles who were men; and by the witness of God, the inward
witness of the Spirit, which he who believes has in himself; not as if the
Scripture were not also the witness of God, and a divine witness far above all
bare humane Testimony, but yet the Scripture being compared with the inward
Immediate witness of Gods Spirit in the soul, may be without any derogation
called the witness of men, to wit, of the Prophets and Apostles, who were holy
men, for what other men John does mean, I do not understand, but faithful and
holy men, who did bear a true record to Divine Truth, as they had it inwardly
revealed unto them. And to this same effect the Apostle Paul declared, that his
Gospel came unto the Thessalonians not in words, or speech, or discourse only,
but in power, and in the Holy Ghost, and in much Assurance; where he annexeth
the much assurance to the Power, and at the Holy Ghost; and not simply nor
principally to the words: and elsewhere he said, The Kingdom of God stands
not in words, but in power. And seeing a Christians Faith is a part of Gods
Kingdom in his Soul, the said Faith stands not in the words even of the
Apostles, by Paul's own Testimony, but has a greater, and more noble and
excellent Foundation, to wit, the Power and holy Spirit of God in the Heart of
the Believer, as that does inspire, and inwardly operate, move, and act upon
the intellectual Faculties of the Soul. And here possibly some will grant, that
the Spirit has the greatest efficiency, or stroke in working this spiritual
assent, or Persuasion to the Doctrine of the Gospel, as an efficient Cause in
the Souls of Believers; but perhaps they will say as this Author says of the
common saving Graces of the Spirit, that they are Moral Virtues insensibly
wrought in our Hearts by the Holy Ghost; and that therefore any Divine Assent
or Persuasion which the Holy Ghost works in our Hearts, is wrought insensibly;
and that the Holy Ghost in his Inspiration and Operation, is incognitum quid,
as some Popish Schoolmen and others have affirmed the Spirits operation to be
medium incognitum assentiendum, i. e. an unknown medium or mean that works in
us insensibly, or without all perception on our part, whose footsteps this
Author seems to follow. And seeing the Spirits Influence or Operation is
altogether unperceptible to the Soul, as having no objectve evidence whereby to
make it self known, as they affirm, and that the Soul or Mind of man cannot
assent to Truth, without some objective evidence of truth: The Scripture
therefore is that medium, or mean, which alone, as they say, gives this
objective Evidence of truth to the Soul, and moves it objectively to assent to
the truth. Hence they distinguish betwixt subjective and objective
Illumination, and the Subjective and objective Influence and Assistance,
saying, that the Spirit indeed gives us the Subjective illumination and
Assistance, but the Scripture only gives us the objective Illumination and
Assistance. But this distinction I have sufficiently at length refuted in my
Book of Immediate Revelation above cited, so that I need not insist to make a
new Refutation of it here, until the Author, or some else disprove the
Arguments I have brought there to evince, that the Holy Spirit works sensibly
and perceptibly in the hearts of Believers, and gives unto them an objective
Assistance and Illumination (as well as subjective or effective) that both can
be known, and is known to be a divine assistance, and to proceed from the Holy
Spirit in them who have it, and whose minds are well prepared and disposed to
receive, and observe it; for the Spirits inward Operation, and Inspiration, or
Influence is sufficiently observable, and reachable enough by the inward and
spiritual Senses of the Soul, when excited and awakned by the power of the Holy
Spirit, as I can appeal to all who have the least measure of experience in the
case, and whose spiritual senses are awakned and duly exercised to discern
betwixt Good and Evil. Such by an inward spiritual divine sensation, are able
to discern and distinguish betwixt a good motion and Inspiration that comes
from the Spirit of God, and an evil motion and Inspiration that comes from the
Devil, or some evil Spirit. Again, seeing by the Inspiration and Illumination
of the Spirit of God, we are principally inclined, moved, and persuaded to
assent to the truth of the Scripture-Testimony, and are made to believe, that
the Scriptures are no cunningly devised Fable, but the Holy Oracles and Sayings
of God, by men divinely inspired, as all good and sound Protestants do
acknowledge, we must needs consequentially affirm, that the spirits
illumination is the more noble Rule, and preferable to the Scripture. And thus
we evite that fallacious Circle that some run into, and for which they are
derided by some of the Church of Rome, because they say, they believe the
Scriptures for the spirits inward Testimony; and to go round again, they say,
they believe the spirits inward Testimony for the Scriptures. This, say the
Romanists, is a fallacious Circle, and not to be allowed, according to the
Rules of right Disputation. But, say we, as we own the Scriptures Testimony as
a good secondary Confirmation, to induce or move us to believe the spirits
inward Testimony, so we believe the Spirits inward Testimony, being chiefly
moved or induced so to do by the spirit of God himself inspiring us, and
inwardly moving and inclining us thereunto; and we principally believe the
Scriptures for the spirit, but the spirit we principally believe for himself,
or his own immediate Testimony in our hearts, which is secondarily confirmed to
us by the Scriptures Testimony. And I see not how any true Protestant, or sober
rational man, who owneth a necessity of the spirits Inspiration to produce
saving faith in the soul, can blame us for so doing. And thus the Romanists
have no occasion to deride or blame us for running into a vicious Circle, in
giving the reason of our Faith. And we judge it no derogation to the Scripture,
to prefer the spirit of God and Christ, as he does immediately bear witness in
our Hearts to the external Testimony of the Scriptures. For as John and all the
Prophets and Apostles gave the preference to Christ, as more worthy, so no
doubt the Scriptures which are their Words and Writings prefer the holy spirit
of Christ, whose servants and Instruments they are. And here I give the Reader
a necessary Caution, which I desire him well to observe, that when the Question
is stated betwixt the inward and immediate Testimony of the spirit in the soul
of a true Christian, and the outward Testimony of the Scripture, we affirm, the
inward is the more noble, the greater, and the more preferable, even as the
soul is the more noble part of a man, and of greater value than the Body,
however so excellent or beautiful, as being that which gives life to the Body:
for as the soul quickneth the body, and uses it as its Instrument, so the holy
spirit inspiring the Heart of a true Christian, quickneth the Scriptures
Testimony, and makes it to live, and bring forth Fruit in the soul: yet when
the Question is stated betwixt the Scriptures and any Revelation, Vision or
Inspiration externally brought forth in Words or Writing, that in this case we
most willingly prefer the Scripture words and writings to any words and
writings of ours, how much soever inspired, or proceeding from Inspiration, and
do most willingly submit all our Words and Writings to the public standard,
Test, and Touchstone of the Scriptures to be tried by them, and not otherwise
to be received, than as agreeing with them. A second thing, which possibly this
Author, or some other may answer in the case, is, That though the Church of
England (according to the Common Prayer) owneth the Inspiration of the holy
spirit as necessary to saving Faith, and to the begetting a saving and
spiritual knowledge of God and the Scriptures, yet this is such an Inspiration
as is commonly obtained in the use of the ordinary means of salvation; as of
reading the Scriptures, hearing them preached, expounded and opened; also
meditating upon them with frequent Prayer unto God to give the Understanding of
them, and his gracious Assistance rightly to use and improve them, and so is
not an immediate Inspiration or Revelation that comes unto the Saints, without
the use of the means, as it did come unto the Prophets and Apostles; whereas
the Inspirations and Revelations which the people called Quakers pretend unto,
are immediate, and come (as they say) unto them immediately, as unto the
Prophets and Apostles of old, without all use of the means. But this I have so
abundantly answered to the Lutherian Doctor in the aforesaid Treatise, that
little here needs to be added, where I have sufficiently showed, That though
we own and plead for immediate Revelation and Inspiration of the Spirit, yet
this Revelation and Inspiration is ordinarily obtained by us, and all true
Christians in the diligent and frequent use of all the true means of Salvation,
appointed of God, according to the direction of Gods Holy Spirit. And we
readily grant, That reading and hearing the Scriptures, also true and right
Preaching and Prayer, with Meditation, are special means, in the right use
whereof the spirits Inspirations and Revelations are ordinarily obtained. Nor
does this hinder the Inspirations of the spirit to be immediate, because they
are conveyed and given to true Christians in the use of these aforesaid means,
or any other not named, as I have in the above named Treatise largely made
apparent, which I need not here repeat. And it is a great mistake in them, who
think that the Inspirations and Revelations of the holy spirit, which came unto
the Prophets and Apostles, were commonly obtained by them, without all use of
means; the contrary whereof I have also clearly proved in the aforesaid
Treatises. And indeed, this Author himself does save me the Labor of further
insisting upon the Proof of so clear an Assertion: For in the last page of his
Printed Sermon he says, Among the Jews themselves there were Schools of the
Prophets in which, as the Jewish Writers agree, the Youth were trained by study
and discipline for the reception of the Prophetical Spirit; which according to
Maimonides, whom the Jews call the second Moses, rarely came but upon persons
so qualified and prepared. Thus we see, according to this Authors
acknowledgment, the Prophetical Inspirations which were immediate, came
ordinarily unto the Prophets, being prepared and qualified by the use of means,
in study and discipline. And thus indeed, Christ prepared his Apostles
beforehand for the more abundant reception of the holy spirit, by his Preaching
and Laboring among them, during the time of his Ministry and Preaching, before
his Crucifixion, which continued about three years and a half. But whereas the
Author adds, That he dare boldly say, were it not for the two Schools of the
Prophets in our Israel the Nation would soon be overrun with Ignorance, etc. I
suppose the Author knows, that the Schools of the Prophets (whose Masters)
were divinely inspired) and the Schools of Oxford and Cambridge are very
unlike, and have little in common, but the name. In the Schools of the Prophets
by study and discipline, and especially by virtuous and godly Education in a
holy Life; the minds of the Studients were prepared and qualified to receive
the spirit of Prophecy, and the divine Influences and Inspirations thereof, and
accordingly so did receive they; which the Studients in your Universities are
not like to receive, while they are taught to believe, that all such
Prophetical Inspirations are expired, and that the spirit of Enthusiasm or
Inspiration wherever it is now found, is the Devil, or some unclean spirit:
But surely the Studients in the Schools of the Prophets were of another belief.

A third thing, which possibly this Author, or some may allege, is, That the
Inspirations or Revelations, which the People called Quakers own, pretend to
discover and introduce new Doctrines into the World, and impose them on people
as new Articles of Faith, and as a new Rule of their Belief and Manners; for so
much the Authors words imply, when he says, And lastly, when with all this,
they (to wit, the Quakers) shall Preach no other Doctrine than what the Apostle
has Preached, and the Catholic Church received, then we will believe, if they
be lawfully Baptized, that it is the Spirit which is speaking in them. But in
Answer to this, I say we pretent to no new Doctrine, nor do we believe, that
any Doctrine not already delivered in the Scriptures, and sufficiently Preached
by the Prophets and Apostles, is revealed to us by Divine Inspiration, nor do
we expect the Revelation of any new Doctrine, or any other Articles of Faith,
or Precepts of holy life, but what are already declared in the Scriptures of
the Old and New Testament; only we say, that we need the Inspiration of the
holy Spirit to work in us a right Faith and Understanding of the Doctrines and
Precepts declared in the Scriptures, and to enable us rightly to use and apply
them; the which is according to the Common Prayer of the Church of England, as
is sufficiently made apparent from what is abovesaid. What the Author says of
our being lawfully Baptized, as one of the Conditions requisite to have us to
be believed that we have the spirit of God, I shall not insist upon, seeing it
tends to lead us into a new Controversy, only this much in short by the way.
I query, 1. Why may we not have the spirit, supposed not Baptized with Water,
seeing Cornelius and his Friends received the spirit before they were Baptized
with Water?

2. Whether in the Primitive Church, when many delayed their Baptism with
Water, till death or old Age, they were deprived of the spirit all that time,
wherein they were not baptized with Water, and whether all who have died
without Water Baptism, have died without the spirit, and so without salvation?

3. Whether many of us have not been as lawfully Baptized with water, as the
Author himself, if that did, or could contribute any thing to the receiving the
spirit?

4. Whether he can prove from Scripture, That Infant-sprinkling with Water, is
the Lawful Baptism, or ever was?

5. Whether he can prove, that Christ has commissioned all, or any of those
who sprinkle Infants on the Forehead, so to do? or why some more than others?
why the Teachers of the Church of England, more than Papists or Presbyterians?
But there are other two Conditions he requires, in order to our being believed
that we have the spirit; the one is, That we work Miracles, and together with
the gift of Tongues, have all other miraculous Gifts. But surely this Condition
is very unreasonable and unequal; for by the same Law he would have excluded
John the Baptist, who was a great Prophet, and yet as it is said expressly of
him, he wrought no Miracle, nor do we read that he spoke any Tongue, but that
which was common to the Jews. And it is yet more unreasonable and unequal not
to believe us, unless we have all the miraculous Gifts of the spirit, as if
some were not sufficient, if so we had them. Surely few Churches or Persons had
all the miraculous Gifts of the spirit, even when they were most common. And
though we pretend not to those miraculous Gifts of the spirit, such as speaking
with Tongues, healing the sick, raising the dead, etc. yet the absence, or not
having any of these miraculous Gifts, cannot prove that we are not otherwise
divinely inspired; for there are common divine Inspirations, necessary to all
true Christians, which are of a saving Nature, where they are received in Faith
and Love, whose peculiar and proper quality is to sanctify those who are
inspired with them, and consequently are of a moral Nature; the which sort of
Divine Inspirations being of a different kind from these which were Miraculous,
that is easy to understand, how the miraculous and peculiar sort of
Inspirations ceasing, those other of a Moral consideration do remain; the which
though outwardly they are not Miraculous, yet inwardly they are as performing
the greater Miracles; for to raise the soul from Death to Life, and to heal the
Diseases of the soul, is a greater Miracle, than to raise or heal the Body. A
third Condition he requires of us before we can be believed to have the
spirit, is, That we receive what the Apostle has written (in particular, that
a Woman should not speak in the Church) as the Commandments of God. To this I
answer, that we do receive what the Apostle has written, as the Commandments
of God, when it does appear that what he writes is such. See Cor.
But some things he said he wrote by permission and not by commandment. And as
concerning Women's speaking in the Church, he does not deliver it as an
Universal Commandment that did admit no Restriction or Limitation, otherwise he
had contradicted his own words elsewhere, in prescribing an Order to Women,
that their Heads be covered when they did Pray or Prophecy, which to be sure
was in the Church; for as to private or mental Prayer, no such Order is
required, 1 Cor. 11.5. And whereas Paul said, I permit not a Woman to speak in
the Church; it is easy to be understood in what case that was, viz. to dispute
or ask Questions in the Church, which was permitted unto Men, and Children,
both among the Jews and primitive Christians, but not unto Women; yet did not
this restrain Women to speak either in Prayer or Prophecy, when they were
divinely inspired so to do; for both the Scripture and Church History informs
us, how Women did Prophecy and Pray in the Church. But this being a
digression, which the Author introduces to little purpose, here I shall not
insist on it.

CHAP. III.
AND now as to his Arguments, or rather one bare Argument to prove that Divine
Inspiration, which he calls Enthusiasm, is ceased in the true Church, and
among true Christians. I shall first produce what he says in his own words,
page 21, 22. which is the sum of all he has said in his whole Sermon. Now this
reason (says he) is to be taken from the wants and necessities of the
Primitive Church, whose Infant-state required, that God should assist her with
the Miraculous Gifts of the Spirit, till the Gospel was sufficiently Preached
about the Empire, the Scriptures of the New Testament completed, the
Temple-worship abolished among the Jews, Idolatry destroyed among the Gentiles,
and both were united together under Christ into one Communion, or Catholic
Church. And this is the sum of all the Reasons, or Reason he gives, why Divine
Inspirations were given to the Church in the Apostles days, and for some time
after, and why they are ceased since, as being necessary to the Churches of
former times, but not to the Churches of the later.

Now the whole force of all this Argument, if all were conceded which he lays
down in the Premises, does not conclude as concerning the Miraculous kind of
Divine Inspirations wherewith they who were so miraculously inspired, did spoke
with strange Tongues, cure Diseases, and the like. But nothing of all this
Authors Reasons does conclude against the other sort of Divine Inspirations,
which were not for working any outward Miracles, but were of a Moral Nature,
whose direct Tendency and service was to beget the true Knowledge, Faith and
Love of God, and other Evangelical Virtues in the hearts and souls of the
Ispired, and also to preserve and nourish them, in order to a perfect growth.
And that there were such Inspirations of the Spirit of God, which were of a
Moral Nature, is clear, not only from the Scripture-Testimony in abundant
places, but also from the Common Prayer of the Church of England already cited.
And seeing the Author himself grants the necessity of saving Gifts and
Operations of the Spirit in all true Believers, how can these Operations of the
Spirit be understood, without Inspiration? for how can the Spirit be suppose to
operate or work any Divine effect in the Souls of Believers, but as he
inspireth them with his Light, and Life, and other divine Virtues? To Inspire,
signifies nothing else but to in-breath, or to breath into the Soul any Divine
Virtue whatsoever; and therefore that Operation or Motion of the Divine Spirit
whereby he quickens the Soul that once was dead, and makes it alive unto God,
is very properly called Inspiration, or In-breathing; yea, from this sort of
operation it is, that the Spirit has its name, whether in Latin, Greek, or
Hebrew, and signifies a Breathing; so that Spiration or Inspiration may well
deserve to be the common and general name of all the various kinds of the
Spirits Operations in the Souls of men, and especially in Believers according
to the words of Christ, John 3.8. The Spirit breaths (or inspireth) where he
wills; for so the words may be translated, and so did the Fathers (so called)
generally understand them. And we know, that the occasion of Christ's speaking
these words, was his Discourse with Nicodemus about the Regeneration, or
spiritual new Birth, as intimating plainly unto us, that the Spirits
Inspiration or in breathing into the Soul, is necessary unto its Regeneration.
This is that breath or breathing of the Spirit which Ezekiel saw come upon the
dead and dry bones, which made them to live, the same that made Adam a living
Soul, of whom it is said, that God breathed into him Nismah Chaim the Breath or
Inspiration of life, and he became a living soul: and indeed it is the
Inspiration of life that makes the Soul of any man that truly lives unto God
a living soul, and is as necessary to the Souls spiritual Life, as the
breathing of the Air is unto the Life of the Body. And as the Breath or
Inspiration of the Spirit of God and Christ quickneth the dead Soul, and
raises a new and spiritual Life in it, so is that which slays Antichrist,
whom (as the Scripture says) Christ shall destroy or slay with the Breath of
his mouth, and the brightness of his coming. I need not be at pains, I hope, to
prove, that the Breathing and In-breathing of the Holy Spirit, which is to say,
his Inspiration is all one thing; for all the breathing of the Spirit on men is
within in the Hearts and inward parts of men, and therefore is properly
Inspiration. And according to Solomon's words in the Song, it is the Breathing
or Inspiration of the Holy Spirit, which like the South Wind blowing upon the
Garden, makes the spices thereof to send forth a sweet and fragrant smell: The
which Spices are nothing else but the Christian Graces, wherewith God indueth
his Church, which he makes as a Garden, and which Graces are made to operate,
and send forth-their Divine Smell, as the Spirit of God does breath or inspire
upon the Souls of those, in whom these Sacred and Heavenly Spices grow: and
according to Elihu in Job, the Inspiration of the Almighty gives
understanding. And thus in brief we see the great necessity of Divine
Inspiration, both to the Church in general, and to all the Members of it in
particular, though not in respect of those Miraculous and extraordinary Gifts
of Tongues, and Healings of bodily Diseases, yet in regard of more Noble and
Divine Effects, as the Souls Regeneration and quickening, and both for the
planting and nourishing the Divine Graces of Gods Holy Spirit in the Hearts of
all true Believers. And notwithstanding of all this, as it seems the Author
of this Sermon has a mavelous prejudice and antipathy at the word
Inspiration, as not applicable to any sort of the Spirits Operation in our
days: For though he grants the necessity of the Spirits Operations, yet I no
where can find, that he owneth the Word or Term Inspiration in any respect, as
applicable to any Operation of the Spirit, at present, in any Believer. And the
same prejudice he seems to have against diverse other Phrases, and Terms; all
which are either expressly found in Scripture, or fully agreeable to the sense
of Scripture, which yet he has the confidence to call invented, and uncouth
Terms, as the Spirit of Preaching and Prayer, the In-comings, Out-lettings, and
In-dwellings of the Spirit. How like is his Discourse in this particular to the
Socinians, and Pelagians, who deny the necessity of any Supernatural and Divine
aid or Assistance of the holy Spirit, to perform our acceptable Service and
Obedience unto God? He says further, That the Spirit of Preaching or Praying
ought to signify no more, than the skill or habit of Preaching or Praying. But
if he mean only a natural and acquired habit he joyneth with the Socinians, and
contradicts his own former Concessions, wherein he did acknowledge the
necessity of the saving Gifts of the Spirit, and that these were Supernatural,
such as Faith, Love, Humility. Now every one that Preaches and Prays either
acceptably unto God, or profitably for himself or his Neighbors; he must
Preach and Pray with Faith, and Love, and Humility; so that these, and other
Divine Graces must be exercised in his Preaching and Praying, which require
more than even a spiritual habit, to wit, a present actual assistance of the
Divine Spirit, otherwise a man who has the habit of Preaching and Praying
according to this Author, needs not any dependence upon any new assistance of
the Spirit; and so it is in vain for him to pray for the same, which yet is
contrary to the common practice of most Preachers. But whereas the Author
taxes some for pretending to the Spirit of Preaching and Praying, and make as
if their extemporary Prayers were the effect of Ispiration; I acknowledge they
are worthy to be blamed, when in the mean time these very persons deny all
Inspiration, or Preaching and Praying by it, in our days; and are as great
Opposers to the Principle of Immediate Revelation and Inspiration, as any men
in the World. And it is indeed a great Error to imagine, that all extemporary
Prayers are the Effect of Divine Inspiration, for some are, and some are not;
and they who pretend to pray extempore by the Spirit, and as with the same
breath deny the very Principle of Inspiration, fall into a great inconsistency,
which yet very many do, for which they are justly taxable. But to return to the
Author, he confesses, That in the Primitive Church, in the days of the
Apostles, many Preached, and Prayed, and did sing by Inspiration, and being
Enthusiastically moved or acted; and that this did continue in the Church for
some time. And first as concerning singing, and praising God by inspired Hymns
and Psalms: He says page 14. For inspired persons did usually spend their
Enthusiasm in composing of Hymns and spiritual Songs. And again concerning
Preaching and Praying, he says, page 15. In the Apostles time there was a
miraculous Gift of Praying, as well as Preaching, when the spirit used to seize
upon the souls of men in Public, and affect them in such an extraordinary way,
as to make them Pray for such things, and in such a due manner, as in those
times, when as yet the Church had composed no Liturgies, Persons not inspired
could not do. And here he cites a Testimony out of Chrysostom, Ep. ad Romans
cap. 8. hom. 14. which I thought worthy to translate into English, and here
insert; Moreover, together with all these Gifts, there was the Gift of Prayer,
the which was called the Spirit, and he who was endued with it, he did pray for
the whole multitude: for seeing we are ignorant of many things which are
profitable to us, and that we ask things that are no wise profitable, the Gift
of Prayers did come unto one of them, who standing for all the rest, did pray
for what was usually convenient to the whole Church, and also did teach others.
Therefore he ( viz. Paul Romans 8.) calls the Spirit both such a Gift, and also
that Soul which did receive it, and which did intercede with God, and sigh. For
he who is favored with such a Grace, standing with great compunction or
Contrition of mind, and with many sighs, being humbled in mind before God,
asks the things which are profitable unto all; of which now is a Symbol, the
Minister offering Prayers unto God for the people. Therefore Paul feeling this,
said, The Spirit himself intercedeth for us with groans unutterable. To the
same purpose speaks Theoph. and Oecumenius, upon the place.

But now the thing which the Author of this Sermon should have proved, is, That
this Gift of Preaching, and Praying, and Singing by Divine Inspiration, was of
the same sort and nature with the Miraculous and extraordinary Gifts of the
Spirit, and equally Miraculous and Extraordinary with them, which he not having
done, nor so much as once essayed to do from any Scripture Authority, he had as
good done nothing at all. And the words of Chrysostom cited by him, do not
say, That the Gift of Praying by the Spirit was expired in his time; and though
Chrysostom had said so, I suppose the Author himself does not think that all
Chrysostoms words are infallibly to be believed. Yea, the reason given by
Chrysostom why God was pleased to give that Gift of Prayer, does still remain
( viz. Because without the spirit we know not what to pray for, as we ought)
and therefore there is as great necessity for the spirit of Prayer now, as then.

But it has no weight what the Author says Page 29. That the Christians might
learn what to pray for, and how out of the Scriptures, which are an excellent
Rule of Devotion, as well as Faith; and since that Gift was also rendered
useless by the early general use of Liturgies. I say this has no weight to
prove, that the spirit of Prayer, or praying by Divine Inspiration is expired:
for in the Apostles days the Scriptures were extant as much as now; and
therefore if the spiritual Gift of Prayer is made void by having the Scriptures
in the room of it, that Gift should have ceased in the Apostles days. Surely it
was not Gods design to give us the Scriptures, that he might take away his
spirit from us, and leave us only the Scripture-words in his room, but he
promised that his spirit should remain or abide with his people for ever, whose
abiding and presence was necessary unto all true Christians, to give them the
inward and spiritual sense and understanding of the words of Prayer contained
in the Scripture, and to teach them what words to use at one time, and what at
another, seeing they could not use them all at once. And as for the early
general use of Liturgies, which this Author says was in the Church, to be sure
there was none in the Apostles times, as the Author confesses; and if there
had been any need of them for the succeeding Ages, the Apostles had been the
fittest persons to have composed them, which yet we do not find that ever they
did. It is too apparent, that when the spirit of Prayer began to be lost,
composed Liturgies came to be set up, and that the loss and decay of this
spirit, or spiritual Gift of Prayer was caused by the carnality and apostasy of
the far greatest part of those called Christians, though we have cause to
believe it remained in the Hearts of a remnant all along.

CHAP. IV.
BUT whereas the Author says, as for the Gift of Praying and Preaching by the
Spirit, there is no mention made of it in the Ecclesiastical Writers, even
where they enumerate the rest of the spiritual Gifts, unless Irenaeus
comprehended it under the Gift of strange Tongues, with all sorts of which, he
says, many of the Brethren spoke in his time by the Holy Ghost. Surely this
the Author does too confidently affirm: for as concerning Praying by the
Spirit, Tertullians Testimony is clear, who lived about the end of the second
Century, who discoursing of Prayer, and the manner how the Christians used it,
said expressly, That they prayed, ex pectore sieve monitore, per spiritum
sanctum; i. e. out of the Heart, without one to go before them, and by the Holy
Ghost. And both Tertullian, and Iustine Martyr, and Eusebius make mention of
the Gift of Prophecy by the Spirit, remaining in the Church in their time. And
the Author himself acknowledges, that under Prophecy, Preaching, and praising
God by the Spirit, is understood frequently in Scripture; and why not also in
the Ecclesiastical Writers? Yea, even Bernard, who lived above a thousand years
after Christ, did say, tepida est omnis oration, quam non prevenit inspiratio,
i. e. All Prayer is dead, or lukewarm, which Inspiration does not prevent. But
it is easy to apprehend why, when the Ecclesiastical Writers did mention the
miraculous Gifts of the Spirit then remaining in the Church, they said nothing
commonly of Preaching and Praying by the Spirit, because they did not reckon
Preaching and Praying by the Spirit, any of that sort of miraculous and
extraordinary Gifts, but judged it as a common and necessary Gift, and
therefore did not mention it among those that were miraculous and singular,
which is an argument rather against the Authors assertion, than in favor of
it. And since the Author does acknowledge, that diverse miraculous Gifts of the
Spirit did remain in the Church for some hundreds of years after the Apostles,
it is strange he should suppose the Gift of Preaching and Praying by the
Spirit, to have expired before the rest; but his prejudice against the
Principle of Inspiration makes him to fall upon such an absurd supposition.
Now when I say, the Gift of Preaching and Praying by the Spirit, was none of
the miraculous and extraordinary Gifts of the Spirit, I mean it had nothing of
any external or outward Miracle in it any more than Faith, Love, Hope, or any
other of the Evangelical Virtues, all which being supernatural were internally
miraculous as much, or rather more than the outward. And whereas the Author
pleads, that none of these miraculous Gifts were of a moral consideration, as
having any immediate influence to sanctify the persons so inspired, and
consequently not necessary to remain in the Church. If then it can be proved,
that Preaching, and Praying by the Spirit are of a moral consideration, and
have a sanctifying Influence upon the persons inspired, it will necessarily
follow, that they do, and must remain in the true Church. And first, as to
Praying by the Spirit; that is a Moral Duty, and of a moral Consideration,
which is a Gospel-precept, but Praying by the Holy Ghost is a Gospel-precept;
see Ephesians. 6.18. Praying always with all Prayer and Supplication in the Spirit:
and Iud. 2. Praying in the Holy Ghost. And as concerning all true Worship,
which is to be given to God, Christ has expressly taught, that it is to be
performed in Spirit, and in Truth. And I ask the Author, whether he does not
think, that David's Prayers and Psalms, which were by the Inspiration of the
Holy Spirit, had not a sanctifying Influence upon David himself? And also
whether the Prayers of those in the primitive times, who prayed by Inspiration,
and brought forth such deep inward sighings with great contrition of Heart, by
the help of the Holy Spirit, had not a sanctifying Influence going alone with
them? and were not those Prayers holy Prayers, and those sighings holy
sighings, which left some holy Impressions both upon the Speakers and Hearers;
the which if they did, as most certainly they did unto all sincere Christians
who heard them, then Prayers by Inspiration have a moral and intrinsecal
excellency in them, and consequently were to remain in the true Church to the
end of the World. Next as to Preaching by the Spirit, it is clear, that it had
a sanctifying and converting power going alone with it, so that many thousands
were converted unto the Lord, and became truly sanctified by means of such
Preaching. But if the Author say, it was the Preaching, simply considered, that
had the saving efficacy in it, without the Spirit, so that the Spirits
operation added nothing thereunto, I suppose few will believe so gross an
assertion; for if so, then the Minister of the Letter is as good as the
Minister of the Spirit; and he who has only the words, is as good a Preacher,
as he who has the Spirit and Words both; but how contrary is this to the mind
of Paul, who said, I will know not the words of them, who are puffed up, but
the power. And our Gospel came not in words only, but in power, and in the Holy
Ghost; and he has made us able Ministers of the New Testament, not of the
Letter, but of the Spirit; for the Letter kills (by the Letter, he does
understand the words which any preach without the Spirit) but the Spirit gives
life. And surely that which gives life has a sanctifying Virtue in it, and is
of a moral and holy nature. And does not sad experience prove it sufficiently,
that men who preach barely from the Letter of the Scripture, have not success
in their Ministry, to the Conversion of Souls; else why is it, that so many
having the name of Christians, yet want the true nature of Christianity, and
come short of many Heathens? and when God shall be pleased to pour out his
Spirit more abundantly, and to inspire men to be Preachers of his holy Mind and
Will, shall not Christianity more prevail in the World, than now it does? is
not the great want, the want of the Spirit among the greatest part of those
called Christians, or rather indeed, a want of a right belief concerning the
necessity of the Spirits help, and of the great bounty, and Grace of God, how
willing he is to bestow plentifully of his Spirit upon men, if they would not
reject and resist it, and with their prejudice against so excellent a Gift,
exclude themselves from the enjoyment of it? And whereas the Author says, But
thou can cry, Abba, Father, without Inspiration and thou may make Prayers,
and Supplication, and Intercession, and giving of Thanks for all men, without
Inspiration, which if thou had, it would not make thy Prayers more excellent
in themselves, or more acceptable in the sight of God. These are such gross
assertions, that as seems to me to have repeated them, is Refutation enough
to any spiritually minded man. Were not David's Prayers the more excellent, that
they were inspired? Do not all Christians value and esteem of David's Prayers
and Psalms, and the Prayers and Psalms of other Saints recorded in Scripture,
as being Divinely inspired? Do they not favor of that sweet and precious Life
and Spirit which inspired them? Or have the made and conceived Prayers of
others, without all Divine Inspiration, the same excellency and worth with
David's Inspired Prayers and Psalms? This were to equal the Words and Writings
of men no wise inspired, with the Scriptures; a Crime, which our Adversaries
but unjustly seek by consequence to fix upon us. But the Author still
supposes, that men may preach and pray by the help of the saving Graces of the
Spirit, without Inspiration, which makes him conclude, from all which (says
he) it appears how much more excellent and desirable are the saving Graces of
the Spirit, than all these pompous miraculous Gifts, in which there is no
intrinsecal excellency. But I say the Author still beggeth the great thing in
Controversy, viz. That there are any saving Graces of the Spirit, without
Inspiration, which we altogether deny: For we affirm, that saving Faith, Hope,
and Love, and all other Evangelical Virtues are wrought in Believers by the
Spirits Inspiration. Nor can we reach the Authors subtilty, to distinguish the
inward saving operation of the Spirit, from Inspiration, as if they were
distinct things. For suppose all sorts of Inspirations be not saving, or
necessary to Salvation, it does not follow that none are necessary in that
respect: and although all Inspirations be not saving Graces, yet all saving
Graces are Inspirations; even as though all animals be not men, yet all men are
animals. Or let the Author, if he can, clearly distinguish betwixt these two,
and prove them to be so distinct, from some better authority, than his bare
affirmation, viz. That no saving Grace is any Divine Inspiration, but of a
differing nature therefrom: the which, if it were true, then none of all the
Saints had any saving Graces inspired into them, in any age of the World,
which, I judge, is contrary to the belief of most Christians, who generally
believe, that the Prophets at least, had the saving Graces of the Spirit
inspired into them. To conclude, this Authors whole Discourse tends only at
most, to prove, if all his Premises were granted, That the miraculous Gifts of
the Spirit are not necessary to Salvation, and consequently are not of a
necessary continuance in the Church; which we do not affirm: and I know not
any, who do so affirm; so that the Author had better saved his Labor than
spend his Breath, and his Time to prove an assertion, which I know not any that
does call it in question: for who is it that says, he has the Gift of
Tongues, or other miraculous Gifts of that sort? I know not any. Or who
pleads for the absolute necessity of them? But as we do not plead for such
Gifts, so we cannot be so peremptory to conclude, that all these miraculous
Gifts have universally ceased or expired since the primitive times; or that
none of them at any time hereafter shall again appear. And I judge diverse of
his Premises, on which he builds his Conclusion, of the Universal Expiration
of those miraculous Gifts are defective, and none of them sufficient to
demonstrate his assertion, it would require too much time and Paper to examine
every thing he says, but something I cannot well let pass. His first and main
Reason he takes from the Infancy of the Church, which required these
miraculous Gifts during her Infant-state: and to this he applies these two
following Scriptures, Ephesians. 4. from v. 8. to v. 14. and 1 Cor. 13. from v. 8. to
the end. But surely these two Scriptures seem to me to be very impertinently
brought, to confirm his assertion, and his Application of them I believe is
contrary to the mind of most Teachers. And first, that he supposes all these
Gifts which God gave to the Church at Christ's Ascension, to have been the
miraculous and extraordinary Gifts of the Spirit, and not one of them the
ordinary and saving Gifts of the Spirit. But why are not the saving Gifts of
the Spirit common to all true Christians, as really the fruit and effect of
Christ's Death, Resurrection, and Ascension, as those miraculous and
extraordinary? Surely this is a very unnatural separation, and seems very
injurious unto the purchase of Christ; as if all the saving Graces of the
Spirit were excluded from being any of these Gifts, which Christ has purchased
to his Church; and the contrary does plainly appear from the words themselves,
for they were such Gifts as were given to the Rebellious, that God might duel
among them, as signifying the sanctifying and renewing Gifts of the spirit most
especially. Again, they are such as were given for the work of the Ministry,
the perfecting of the Saints, the edifying of the body of Christ, till we all
come in the Unity of the Faith, and of the Knowledge of the Son of God, unto a
perfect man unto the measure of the stature of the fullness of Christ. And
whereas this Author will have, that the Church was come to her full stature in
the primitive times, and that consequently there was no more need of any of
those Gifts mentioned in that aforecited place, being all miraculous; it
seems to me wonderfully strained this his assertion. And to be sure is far
from the mind of many of his Brethren, who from this very place of Scripture,
use to argue, That there will be a Ministry, and Office of Teachers in the
Church, till the Worlds end; because however so perfect the Church was in those
days, by reason of new Converts, and others in the present and succeeding Ages,
who were to be converted, Ministers and Teachers are still necessary; for
granting that some are come to the full stature, yet many more are not so far
advanced, and so long as the World stands, there will be Children as well as
young men and Fathers in the Church. But it is strange, that he thinks, not
only the Apostles, Prophets and Evangelists, but also Pastors, and Teachers, or
Doctors, to have ceased or expired with these miraculous Gifts. Whence then
have these, who are now called Pastors and Doctors, their Gifts and Authority?
it seems verily unto me, that the Author has here far out-reached, and done
a great disservice to his Brethren, instead of thinking to do them a great
service; and how the University of Oxford can let this pass without a censure,
I do not well understand. And whereas he says, From whence it is evident (
viz. from the afore-cited place, Ephesians. 4.8, 9, 10, etc.) that as the Gospel
increased, and the Church grew up, God, like a wise Nurse, weaned her by
degrees from these miraculous Gifts, till at last having arrived at her full
stature in Christ, he left her as Parents leave their Children, when they are
grown to be men, to subsist without extraordinary helps and supplies. But has
God left her without Pastors and Teachers, and all the Gifts of Christ's
purchase, when he ascended? or are Pastors and Teachers these extraordinary
helps? how much better were it to say, that the Gifts here mentioned are some
extraordinary and miraculous, and some ordinary; and however that the persons
of the Apostles, or their bodily presence be removed from the Church of God on
Earth, yet their Testimony, Words, and Writings remain together with a measure
of the same life and spirit that was in them, for the spirit is one in all, and
therefore that very Gift of God his giving the Apostles to the Church, and
Evangelists and Prophets, has still its service in the Church, and will to the
Worlds end; and so in respect of that Service does still remain; and the
Pastors and Teachers with all the common and ordinary Gifts of the Spirit
necessary to Salvation do actually remain. Again, whereas the Author will have
it, that when the Church was in her more Infant-state, the miraculous and
extraordinary Gifts of the Spirit did most abound; and when she was come to her
most adult and perfect state, they did wholly cease. This also may be called in
question, viz. Whether the Church in the Apostles days, when those miraculous
Gifts did most abound, was not in a more perfect state, than in the succeeding
ages? and whether the Author thinks in his conscience, that the Church in
these latter ages, since these miraculous Gifts have generally ceased, viz.
from about the beginning of the fifth Century till this time, has been in the
most perfect state? or rather have we not good ground to believe, that the
Church that was in the Apostles days, and the ages immediately succeeding for
the first three hundred years was in the purest and most perfect state of all,
and that the Churches of the succeeding ages have not arrived at her
perfection? Is not the Apostolical Church worthily reckoned the Patron of all
other Churches? has not a great Apostasy come upon the far greatest part of
that called the Church, which began about that very time, when these miraculous
Gifts did cease, in great part? and though the Lord knows best, why these
miraculous and extraordinary Gifts did cease, yet may it not be judged a better
reason, than any given here by the Author, that these so excellent Gifts were
taken away, because of the Apostasy that was coming on apace upon the visible
face of the Church, and that the Unfaithfulness of Professors, who did abuse
both the ordinary and extraordinary Gifts of God, provoked the Lord to take
both sorts away from the greatest number in a great part, if not altogether.
But whether, when the Church shall Universally recover her former purity and
sincerity, it may please God to restore unto her those very extraordinary
Gifts, I leave to his infinite counsel and good pleasure to determine. Again,
as to the other Scripture alleged and applied by him, for the ceasing of these
extraordinary Gifts, he seems to have as far missed the mark, as in the
former, as if, forsooth, Paul did reckon not only all those miraculous and
extraordinary Gifts of the Spirit, wherewith he was so richly endued, but also
all his Visions and Enjoyments he had of God by Inspiration and Immediate
Revelation, but as childish things, and as belonging to a Child's state, in
comparison of more perfect seize of Believers in the succeeding ages,
when all Divine Inspiration, and Immediate Revelation should cease, as this
Author supposes: and if so, then the Author may think himself, and such as he,
as men in respect of Paul and the other Apostles, who were but as Children to
him and his Brethren: for thus he expounds Paul's words. 1 Cor. 13.9, 10, 11,
12. Even as when I was a Child, I spoke as Child, I understood as a Child, I
thought and conceived things as a Child, but when I become a man, and to the
full use of my Reason, I put away childish conceptions and things, for now we
see Divine Revelations (thus he glosseth upon Paul's words) as the Prophets did
of old in a dark Enigmetical manner, and by symbolical Representations of
things upon the fancy, as in a Glass, but in the adult state of the Church we
shall see them after the Mosaical manner in a more rational way, and more
accommodate to human Nature, as it were face to face. Now I know them
imperfectly, but then I shall know them clearly, even as I am known. Now I
appeal to the Impartial Reader, if he does not prefer himself and his other
Brethren, to Paul and all the other Apostles, as if the Apostles, because of
their Inspirations and Revelations knew but in part, and as Children, having
little use of their rational Faculties; whereas this Author having attained to
the adult state, he is become perfect in Knowledge; and like Moses converseth
with God face to face, and that without all Revelation or Inspiration
immediately from God. But how did Moses converse or speak with God face to face
(to whom the Lord said, Thou can not see my face and live) was it without all
manner of immediate Revelation or Inspiration? I trow not, but rather after a
more noble and higher sort of Divine Inspiration, than was commonly given to
other Prophets. But how much more suitable and agreeable to truth is that
exposition of Paul's words that is commonly given, that Paul compares his
highest seize in this Life even by Vision and Revelation or Inspiration,
with what he did expect and wait for after death, so as the highest seize
of Divine Knowledge by Revelation or Inspiration belonging to this life, are
but as the seize of Children, in comparison with what the Saints are to
expect after death in the life to come. But whereas the Author thinks, that
the highest Revelations given in this life, are but by symbolical
Representations upon the fancy, as in a Glass, he is much mistaken. There is
a Revelation of God, which God pleases at times to give to his Children, far
beyond all symbolical Representations, or Similitudes of things, whereby God in
Christ, and the pure Glory of God is seen and enjoyed by the highest and
noblest faculty of the Soul, which is an earnest and first Fruits of Eternal
Life. Nor is the Author more dexstrous in expounding all that diversity of
Gifts mentioned 1 Cor. 12.4, 8, 9, 10. to have been the miraculous and
extraordinary Gifts of the Spirit; for why might not some of them have been the
common and ordinary, and others of them miraculous and extraordinary? By common
and ordinary, I mean not here such as were given to all and every one in
particular* but such common ministerial Gifts as God gave in common to all
ordinary Teachers, and Preachers, and Ministers of the Lords fitting and
sending; for of these ministerial Gifts the Apostle is here principally to be
understood. And whereas the Author here does argue, that the Gifts mentioned in
this place cannot be the saving Gifts of the Spirit, because these God
bestows jointly on those who have them, or not at all; whereas the Gifts
mentioned here, are given some to one, and some to another. But to this I
answer, although the Gifts here mentioned in the foregoing Verses be not the
saving Universal Gifts mentioned by him, which are given to every one of the
Faithful, yet it does not follow, that therefore they are all miraculous and
extraordinary, for some of them might be of a third and middle sort, to wit,
given in common to all Teachers and Preachers, and may be called saving in such
a sense or respect, as the Preaching of the Gospel, and distinct Offices of the
Ministry, may be called saving, as being instrumental to the Salvation of
Souls, as it is said in Scripture, That it pleased God by the foolishness of
Preaching to save them that believe. And, if according to the Author, all the
Gifts here mentioned be miraculous, and all ceased within some few ages after
the Apostles days, then according to him, there is no word of Wisdom, nor of
Knowledge in the Church, which how harsh it will sound to Christian ears, I
leave the spiritual to judge. But that the Author takes this place of
Scripture, viz. 1 Cor. 12.4. for his Text and Foundation of his whole
Discourse, to prove that all the Gifts here mentioned were miraculous, and
consequently expired within some few Ages to the Apostles times, is merely
asserted by him, but not at all really proved. And he might as well say, that
Faith, Hope, and Charity were miraculous Gifts of the Spirit, and consequently
expired with those other; for of them also he discourses a little after, and
compriseth them, with the other sorts, under the diversity of Gifts, mentioned
v. 4. whereas the Spirit is one. So that in this whole Discourse of Paul's,
concerning the diversity of Gifts, Chap. 12.13, 14. he mentions no less than
three several sorts, one miraculous and extraordinary, another sort common and
ordinary to the Teachers in the Church, and peculiar unto them; a third sort,
viz. Faith, Hope, Charity, common to all true and sincere Christians; so that
this diversity of Gifts extends it self to all the Church one way or another,
all having some, although every one had not all, even as the precious Ointment
that ran down from Aarons beard unto the lowest skirts of his Garments. And
though when the Apostle does treat of Faith, Hope, and Charity, it is in the
thirteen and fourteenth Chapters, yet the Discourse is still one and the same,
as one entire piece; and all the Gifts mentioned in all the three Chapters are
contained under the diversity of Gifts, viz. Spiritual Gifts mentioned, v. 4.
of Chap. 12. and all proceed from one Spirit, so that it may, and ought to be
said of them of all. Now there are diversities of Gifts, but the same Spirit;
and the best of these Gifts are Faith, Hope, and Love, and the greatest of
these is Love or Charity. And thus I have answered to every thing that seemed
material in his Sermon, to prove that Divine Inspirations, which he calls
Enthusiasms, are ceased in the Church; and though I have not observed strictly
the method of his Sermon, so as to answer to every thing in his order, because
the Nature of my answer required to put several things together that lay
scattered in his Sermon, and sometimes to take that last, which he puts
first; yet I hope the diligent and impartial Reader will find, that the whole
substance of his Sermon against Divine Inspirations is sufficiently answered.
And now in the Close I shall only take notice of some Reflections of his on the
people called Quakers, and some few other particulars, and then make an end.

CHAP. V.
IN his page 37. Edit. 3. he undertakes to show what a dangerous, damnable, and
precarious Principle that is, which asserts, that Immediate Revelation or
Inspiration is not ceased, etc. But the Instances he brings to prove what he
says, are wholly precarious and false; as 1. That it differs only from the
Popes Infallibility in this, That that makes only the Bishop of Rome, but this
makes every private Christian a Pope. This, I say, is altogether a false charge
as to us. For we place not an absolute Infallibility upon any person or persons
whatsoever; but we say the Spirit of God in all his Leadings, Teachings, and
Motions is infallible, and men only conditionally so far as they receive, and
are in unity with these Leadings and Teachings, are Infallible. We say further,
That every true Christian has an Infallible Knowledge and Faith of all such
things as are absolutely necessary to Salvation. But as to other things he may
err, if he be not duly watchful to follow the infallible Guidance of Gods Holy
Spirit. But if this Author thinks he has no infallible Faith or Knowledge of
any part or Doctrine of Religion, he is a mere Sceptick and Unbeliever; for all
true Faith is Infallible, that which is fallible is but mere opinion and
conjecture. His second Instance is as weak and impertinent as the former, viz.
That the Principle of Immediate Revelation and Inspiration utterly overthrows
the authority of the Scriptures, and makes them an useless Rule of Faith. But
to this I answer nay, but on the contrary the Doctrine of Inspiration and
Revelation its remaining in the Church does not overthrow, but establish the
authority of the Scriptures, and makes them most useful both for a Rule of
Faith and Manners in subordination unto the Holy Spirit. And surely had this
Author well minded his former concessions, he would not have made such an
absurd Inference; for he has granted, that Inspirations and Revelations did
remain for several ages in the primitive Church after the Apostles days, and
that the Scriptures were written before that time; and yet I suppose he will
not say, that the Revelations and Inspirations which the Christians then had,
did overthrow the Scriptures, or render them useless. He might with the same
absurd way of Reasoning say, That the Scriptures of the Old Testament, their
authority was overthrown by the Writings of the Evangelists and Apostles under
the New Testament; or that one Prophets writing did overthrow the Writing of
another Prophet that did go before him, which is most absurd. Paul who had
abundant Inspirations and Revelations did not despise the Scriptures, but
regarded their authority, and used them both to his own, and his Brethrens
comfort and edification. His third Instance is, That it has cashired the use
of the Sacraments. But this is like the Papists way of proceeding against the
Protestants, who to render them more obnoxious to the malice of the Ignorant,
cry out against the Protestants for cashiring no less than five, or rather six
of the holy Sacraments of the Catholic Church. For whereas the Church of Rome
holds, that there are seven Sacraments, she blames the Protestants for cash
ring five of them totally, and the sixth almost, if not altogether also, to
wit, that of the Eucharist so called, the Protestants making that which the
Priest or Minister gives to the people, but a figure or sign, which to be sure
is not any Gospel mystery; for the figures belonged to the Law, and ceased with
them, and the substance is come in the room of them, which we acknowledge. And
whether it is more dangerous and hurtful to say, that a Figure, Sign or
Ceremony is ceased, which was not appointed to continue till the end of the
World, or to say, that Divine Inspiration, whereby the Soul lives unto God,
and Divine Revelation, whereby it only knows God aright, is ceased, let all
sober and impartial men judge? But as to this debate of the Sacraments, because
it is a digression, I shall not enlarge. His fourth Instance is, That it has
annulled the Ministerial Orders. But this is as unjust a charge as any of the
former, and does much more justly reflect upon the Author himself, who has
plainly said, that not only the Orders of Apostles and Prophets, but also of
Evangelists, Pastors and Teachers, all which were Ministerial Orders mentioned
Ephesians. 4. are ceased in the Church. The which, if so, it may be fairly quered,
according to this Authors Hypothesis and Doctrine, that all Inspiration is
ceased, which yet the Church of England and the Common Prayer allows, whether
this Author has not excluded himself from all the Ministerial Orders mentioned
in Ephesians. 4. because he says, They are all ceased? And that he cannot find any
Ministerial Order mentioned in the New Testament, but what was accompanied with
Inspiration, whereby they both Preached and Prayed. And seeing he has denied
Inspiration, which the Liturgy of the Church of England owneth, and she prays
for, whether this Authors manner of Preaching and Praying be not more contrary
to the Liturgy of the Church of England in this very respect, than that of the
people called in derision, Quakers, and so whether he has not brought himself
and his Hearers more deservedly under the censure of the Law, than the Quakers
in this respect have done? These two Queries I desire the Author plainly, and
without all shifting or subterfuge, to answer? But to the matter in hand,
Divine Immediate Revelations and Inspirations cannot any more annul (but indeed
they do confirm all) the Ministerial Orders appointed of God, than they did in
the primitive times. For when Immediate Revelatiations and Inspirations did
greatly abound in the Church, as this Author confesses, the Ministerial Orders
remained, and were the more confirmed, and therefore they are so still. Next,
his Instances failing, he proceeds to sinistrous and unjust Insinuations
against us, as that the principle of Inspiration can effectually convert the
Professors of it into downright Popery, consequently with their own Principles;
for they have nothing more to do, than to say, that the Spirit has told them,
that the Church of Rome is the only true Church. To this I answer: It is
impossible, the Holy Spirit (whom with all true Christians we profess to guide
us into all truth, according to the Scriptures) can ever tell us any such
thing; because both the Holy Spirit wihin, and the Holy Scripture without, does
plainly tell us, that no Church holding such corrupt Doctrines and Practices,
is, or can be a true Church; and the Spirits testimony cannot contradict it
self, and as Paul said, is not yea and nay, but remains the same. How much more
justly may this be retorted upon many, who are Enemies to Inspiration, and have
pretended, the Church they were of, was the true Church; and yet by some motive
of Gain or Fear, have changed to another Church and way, pretending that their
Reason, or Scripture has told them their former way was wrong, which yet is no
just Reflection either on Reason or Scripture. For as a false pretense to
Reason and Scripture does not make void their true use, so no more does a false
pretense to the Holy Spirit, if any should so do, render the use thereof void
or ineffectual. His last Insinuation is as unfair and unjust as any of the
former. As this Doctrine (says he) was first privately sowed among us by
Popish Emissaries, so has it been published in our, and other Countries, by
those who were Papists, as by To. Barclay, who was bred in the Scottish Covent
at Paris, and Labbade a Jesuit defrocquet. That the Doctrine of Immediate
Revelation was first privately sowed in England by Popish Emissaries, we know
to be a false Insinuation: and as for his Proof, which is a mere citation of
the bare name and title of a Book called Foxes and Firebrarnds, page 15. etc.
printed 1680. What ground of Proof can such a bare citation be, without naming
the Author, or giving a sufficient Evidence of his Fidelity? How many Lies are
to be found in printed Books? If bearly to name the Title of a Book, without
regarding, or giving sufficient Evidence of the Authors Fidelity, be proof
enough against a Doctrine or Person, who shall, or can escape Innocent? It were
easy to show how the Jesuits are as great enemies to Immediate Revelation and
Inspiration, as necessary to every true Christian for the foundation of their
Faith, as any people in the World, or as this Author, as does clearly enough
appear out of Bellarmin a great Jesuit, who disputes against this way of
resolving or building our Faith, and pleads for the Tradition of the Church,
in opposition to all inward Inspiration, and calls them mad men, who lean to
any Spirit within them, which he says is often fallacious, and ever uncertain.
Nor were it a hard thing to prove, that the Doctrine of Inspiration has been
preached and believed both in England and elsewhere, before either the Name or
Order of Jesuits was in the World. And as to his Insinuation concerning R.
Barclay, unless he can prove, that he remained a Papist when he did publish,
among many others, that Doctrine, he says nothing to the matter. It can easily
be showed, that diverse Bishops and Teachers in the Protestant Church have had
their Education at Popish Schools; yea, Luther himself was a Popish Monk, and
bred at a Popish University; and some of the present Bishops and Teachers in
Britain have had a Popish Education, which yet will not argue they are still
Papists. How many are quite of other Persuasions, than what they had by
Education? And as for R. B. what Education he had among Papists was but when a
Child or Boy, where he learned only some Latin, and Grammar, and what he
received of their Leaven, even in his young and tender years, while yet but a
youth, he renounced: and the Lord opened his Eyes to see and acknowledge the
Truth; whereof I can give better Testimony (having well known him from that
very time) than this Author can against him. And I ask the Author, Was it any
prejudice or derogation to the Christian Religion, that Paul, a zealous
Preacher of it, was bred among the Pharisees? if not, the Authors Argument
being of the same sort, evanisheth. As for Labbade as he was no Quaker so
called, so whatever formerly he was, to be sure he was then no Jesuit, but
hated and persecuted by them. In page 40. he falls on with a fresh assault to
accuse the Doctrine of the Quakers so called, concerning a Spiritual Ministry
and Spiritual Worship for being blasphemous (but if this be blasphemy to own a
spiritual Ministry and Worship) at this rate he may accuse the Apostles, yea,
Christ himself as blasphemous, which is most absurd and blasphemous so to
affirm who were for a Spiritual Ministry, John 4. and Spiritual Worship; but it
seems by this, that the Author himself is only for a carnal or literal
Ministry and Worship. And he says, they, viz. the people called in derision,
Quakers, pretend, that the Holy Ghost now comes down upon their Assemblies, as
it did in the Apostles time, and moves them to Preach and Pray by Inspiration,
without any regard to Condition or Sex. But here he does not fairly nor truly
represent our Doctrine, for we distinguish betwixt the ordinary and miraculous
Inspirations, with both which the Apostles were endued; and we say, Although
the miraculous and extraordinary be ceased, yet the ordinary remain, as being
necessary to all right effectual Preaching and Praying. Again, it is false that
he alleges we say the Spirit inspireth us to Preach or Pray without any
regard to Condition; for a regard there is had unto the Condition of persons,
so that the Spirit inspireth none to Preach or Pray, but such as are first
brought into some measure of a sanctified State and Condition. As to other
things he mentions here, and especially that about calling for Signs and
Miracles, I have already answered him above; and here I would have him to
consider how Christ called them an evil and adulterous Generation, that sought
after Signs. And what if we could show Signs, and perform all the other
Conditions he requires of us, that he may believe us to be truly inspired?
would he then in good earnest believe us to be divinely inspired? has he not
called the very principle a blasphemous Doctrine? And whereas he says, page
38. he denies not but that God is free to send Prophets when he pleases, and
that he may do so when the exigence of the Church does require it. Is not this
a manifest contradiction to his calling the Doctrine of Inspiration and
Immediate Revelation, blasphemous? Or is God free to send when he pleases, any
blasphemous Doctrine or Principle into the World, as this Author terms
Immediate Revelatiation and Inspiration? And suppose that God did send Prophets
or men immediately inspired, which this Author supposes he may, Can God send
any thing that would overthrow the Authority of the Scriptures, and annul the
Ministerial Orders, would not this be inconsistent with his Divine infinite
Wisdom? But thus we see what inconsistences this Author falls into, while he
is carried with such a preposterous zeal against this so excellent a principle.

In page 40. he scoffingly taunts the people called Quakers, with their
Groanings in their Meetings, saying, that they groan sufficiently, we grant;
for sometimes in their Meetings they do nothing else. But if their Groaning, or
vocal Devotion be from the Spirit, how comes it to pass that the Spirit never
moves them, as it did in the Apostles days, to Pray and Prophecy in unknown
Tongues? To this I answer: Many have both Groaned and Prayed by the Spirit, who
never spoke with unknown Tongues, as I think the Author will confess; for the
Prophets prayed by the Spirit before Christ came in the flesh, and yet all had
not the Gift of Tongues. But by this it plainly seems, he disowneth all
Groaning and Praying by the Spirit, as applicable to him, or any of his
Brethren; this I say again is far contrary to the Liturgy of the Church of
England. And how knows he, that sometimes in their Meetings, the people,
called in scorn, Quakers, do nothing else? I must tell him, they do more in
every Meeting (although to groan from the Spirit is of more value, than all
that the Author, or any else can do without the Spirit) viz. they meditate,
they wait, they watch, they sing, and make a melody in their hearts unto the
Lord. But here he seems to scoff at our silent Meetings, where we wait to
hear what God will speak unto us, though perhaps no man at that time does
speak, which is well enough consistent with our Principle of Divine
Inspiration; for if God inspire his people now as formerly, they are well
employed and exercised, who attend to his inspirings, and find advantage in so
doing, much more than by all the much prattling of men, who presume to Preach or
Teach without the Spirit.

In page 37. he says, The Popes Infallibility must be resolved into this
Enthusiastical Principle of immediate Inspiration. I answer not, but a most
into a false pretense thereunto, which yet argues nothing against the true
Principle itself. And though some of the Popish Schoolmen resolve it into a
pretense of Immediate Revelation, yet many more do otherwise, and particularly
the University of Paris, as I have showed at more length in my Book called
Quakerism no Popery. They resolve it only into a blind, insensible assistance
of the Spirit, which they call subjective or effective illumination, but not
objective; the which Popish distinction, many Protestants, and as it seems
this Author apply to their Faith with this difference, that these Protestants
make the assistance of the Spirit, fallible; but the Papists make it, as in the
Pope and his Council, infallible.

Page 29. he says: The Churches Hieroms, Augustines, Chrysostoms like us were
not inspired, but studied Divines. I answer why might not Hierom, Augustine,
and Chrysostom, and such as they, be both, to wit, parley inspired, and partly
studied, as he terms it, seeing there is no inconsistency (as he supposes)
betwixt the Inspiration of the Holy Spirit, and the frequent and diligent use
of all right and lawful means, such as reading the Scriptures, Meditation and
Prayer, with other Religious Exercises, which this Author calls studying. But
studying without all Divine Inspiration, makes but poor Divines, or rather dead
and dry Vines. And here I give the Reader to understand, that in the very
beginning of his Sermon, this Author, for all his prejudice at Enthusiasts,
distinguishes betwixt them and Impostors, saying, Impostors on one hand, and
Enthusiasts on the other, etc. What then? are the Enthusiasts no Impostors? One
thing I like well in the Author, as to what he says, and do therein
cordially-agree with him, page 39. The first Apostolical Ages of Wonder were
utterly ignorant of killing, impulse and zeal, which I could not but observe to
the utter detestation of Christians Assassines, etc. I could here cite diverse
Testimonies of the Ancients for the verity of Divine Inspiration, as still
remaining among, and in the true Christians; but to avoid prolixity, I shall
only cite two Testimonies, one of Augustine, another of Origene.

Augustine says, Tract. Epist. Ioh. 3. There is an inward Master who teaches:
Christ teaches, his Inspiration teaches; where his Inspiration, and Anointing
is not, the words outwardly make but an empty sound.

Origines contra Celsum lib. 7. circa med. (...). ( viz. Mat. 11.) Verbum autem
Dei, divina quadam gratia non athea existente anima, sed cum quodam Enthusiasmo
demonstrat cognosci Deum.

The word of God (citing Mat. 11. No man knows the Father, but the Son, and
he to whom the Son reveals him) demonstrateth that God is known by a certain
divine Grace, the Soul not being Atheistical, but endued with a certain
Enthusiasm. Where note, that he sets in opposition Atheism and Enthusiasm,
or the Atheist and Enthusiast, as if whosoever is not Enthusiast, or endued
with a Divine Enthusiasm, were a downright Atheist; which is very agreeable to
a Title of a Friends Book, called Enthusiasm above Atheism, writ some years ago
by G. W.

There is one passage more in this Authors Sermon, which I cannot well let
pass, page 32, and 33. Suppose, says he, thou know the Gospel like the
Apostles, by Inspiration, what then? another Minister who knows, it by reading
and study is as capable to edify the Church as thee. And besides, if thou art
like a vain Corinthian, ambitious of Inspiration, know that it will add nothing
to the Reputation of thy parts: for an inspired man is but the Vessel to the
Treasure, the very Instrument and Machine of the Holy Ghost, who can ordain
strength out of the mouths of Babes and Sucklings, and make a Child or an Idiot
preach as well as thee. To the first I answer, according to this Authors
assertion, the bare Minister of the Letter is as good a Preacher, and as useful
in the Church, as Paul, or any of the Apostles, which is so gross, as nothing
needs to be said unto the spiritually minded for its Refutation. Did then the
Scribes preach with the same Authority that Christ did? is it not said
expressly, that Christ preached as one having Authority, and not as the
Scribes? and what was the Reason of this so great a difference? was not a main
Reason of it, that the Scribes preached barely from the Letter, without Divine
Inspiration? but Christ preached by Divine Inspiration, wherewith he was
exceeding richly endued above all other men. And if it should please God to
send Preachers, who should preach with Divine Inspiration, should they not
better open and expound the Scriptures, and the Mysteries of the Christian
Religion, being inspired divinely so to do, than those who presume to expound
them merely by the strength of their natural parts, and human Learning. Or why
is it, that great Scholars, so accounted, give so contrary Expositions to the
same places of Scripture so frequently, but that they want the Inspiration of
the Spirit that gave them forth? For as Hierome says, Epist. Paulin. 103. The
Law is Spiritual, and needs Revelation, that it may be understood.

To the second I answer, it is not Pride nor Vanity to desire the saving
Inspirations of the Holy Spirit; for Christ has encouraged us to ask the Holy
Spirit, which is the same to our Souls, as bread is unto the Body, or the most
nourishing Food. And whereas he says, that Inspiration will add nothing to the
Reputation of a man's parts who has it. I answer: yea, the Divine Inspiration
that we plead for, which is of a moral and saving Nature, does add exceedingly
to a man's parts, whether acquired or natural; and consequently to their true
and just Reputation for Grace (which is a Divine Principle) inspired and
infused into the Soul, does sanctify both the Soul of man and all its
faculties, and parts, and heals all the Souls Diseases and Disorders, and
consequently does greatly improve, assist, and enlarge the man's parts and
rational faculties, who is so inspired, as abundant Experience can be given
both of latter and former Ages. And though Inspiration of the Spirit of God may
make Children and Idiots, such as some of the Apostles were, to preach or speak
well, yet it leaves them not still to be Children and Idiots, but by degrees
does largely replenish them both with spiritual, and sometimes with a great
natural understanding. And does not the Author think that Paul had a greater
and nobler enlargedness of his rational faculties, and the use of them in
Preaching, Disputing, and Writing, on the account of his being divinely
inspired? and although the inspired Man is but the Vessel to the Treasure, yet
he is not a dead Vessel or Machine, but is a living sensible, rational Vessel,
and is quickened, strengthened, and beautifyed, yea, and perfected thereby, as
the Body is by the Soul that is lodged in it. So that however others, who are
declared Enemies to Divine Inspiration, may judge, we have cause to conclude,
That men indeed Divinely inspired, are the most truly Rational Men in the
World, and have the truest and noblest use of all their Rational and
Intellectual faculties, if duly improved.

Several Testimonies of Ancient Fathers so called, and other Ancient Writers,
to the Spirits Inward and Immediate Teachings, and the preference of the Spirit
of God, in his Divine Illuminations, and Operations, and Inspirations to the
Letter of the Scripture, also the Universality of Divine Illumination, and of
the benefit of Silence, and other things of Truth of the like Nature, as owned
by the People called in Derision Quakers.
Ignatius (who lived in the first Century, or within a hundred years after
Christ, and is thought that he might have seen Christ in the flesh, who died a
valiant Martyr for the truth of Christ) in his 9th Epistle, writing to the
Church of Philadelphia, says expressly thus.

1. I have heard some saying, unless I find the Gospel in ( Archeis) public
Records or Writings, I believe not. Unto such I say, Jesus is unto me for
public Records or Writings: again, he says the public Records or Writings
ought not to be preferred unto the Spirit.

Observe, It Is plain that by the Archea or Public Records he means the
Scriptures, in which sense Tertullian uses the word Archia, lib. 3. against
Marcion.

II. And in his 14th Epistle writing to the Ephesians he says unto them
expressly these words; using the Holy Spirit the Rule, in Greek thus, (...), the
Greek word signifies a measuring Line, Rule, or perpendicular.

III. Athenagoras (who lived in the 2d Century) legatione pro Christianis,
pleading for the Christians that they lived a pure life, he says expressly of
them, whose life is directed unto God as the Rule, the Greek words are, (...),
the word (...) most properly signifies a Rule, Amussis, Regula.

IV. Clemens Alexandrinus (who lived in the beginning of the 3d Century)
admonitione ad Gentes says, But that holy man Moses speaks truly, Deuteronomy.
25.13, 14, 15. Thou shall not have in thy bag a weight and a weight, a great,
and a small, but thou shall have a true and a just weight, judging the weight,
and the measure, and the number of all things to be God; for the unjust and
unrighteous at home and in the bag are the Idols that are hid in the unclean
soul, but there is one just measure, who is the only true God, ever equal, and
ever the same, measuring and weighing all things, in the balance, which is
righteousness.

V. The same Clemens 1 b. 1. Stromatum toward the end says expressly thus.

It is evident, that Moses calls the Lord the, Testament (greek (...))
saying, behold I my Testament with thee; for before he said the Testament (or
Covenant) was not to be sought in the Scripture: again he says in the
preaching of Peter, thou shall find the Lord called the Law, and the Word or
Reason.

VI. The same Clemens, in his forecited admonition to the Gentiles, expressly
declares, that in all men simply or universally, and especially in them who
are exercised in Doctrines, there is instilled a certain divine influx or
influence (gr. (...), by the grace or gift of which they acknowledge (even they
also who are unwilling) that God is one, incorruptible, and unbegotten, or
uncreated.

VII. Again in the same, he says, for as that divine Apostle of the Lord
says; The grace of God that brings salvation has appeared unto all men,
etc. this is the New Song, the appearance of the word, which has shined in us,
which was in the beginning, and was first of all.

VIII. And in his Poedagagus lib. 1. cap. 3. he says, there is a lovely or
amiable thing in man, which is called the inspiration of God, gr. (...).

IX. And writing to the unbelieving Gentiles, he speaks expressly of the
inward witness, which was in them, calling it (...) innatum testem fide dignum,
the innate witness worthy of faith, and what is that, but the same, which James
called (...), i. e. the innate word, born, or inbred in us.

X. The same Clemens in his Stromata, cites testimonies for the truth out of
Matthias, Barnabas, Clement the Apostle, and out of Hermes the Pastor, yea he
is so far from thinking, that only the Prophets and Apostles writ by Divine
Inspiration, that he plainly* declares, that not only Plato, but also many
others preached and declared the only true God by his inspiration, gr. (...)
admon ad Gentes: and in the same speaking of the followers of Pythagoras, he
says, and these things suffice, unto the acknowledging of God, which are
written by them, by the inspiration of God.

This Clemens Alexandrinus was the Scholar of Pantaenus the Martyr, the which
Pantaenus taught School at Alexandria in Egypt, and is said to have been the
first Christian Schoolmaster, in that famous School of Alexandria, to whom did
succeed Clemens Alexandrinus, and to him Origin, and others successively.

XI. The forecited Ignatius, writing to the Ephesians ep. 14. says expressly
thus: Let Christ speak in you as in Paul, let the Holy Ghost teach you to speak
the things of Christ like unto him: and in his 13th Epistle, writing to Heron,
Deacon of Antioch, he says, Thou art the Temple of Christ, the Instrument of
the Spirit.

XII. Tertullian, who lived about the beginning of the third Century, lib. 2.
carminum advers. Marrion, says Atque adeo non verba libri, sed missus in orbem
Ipse Christus Evangelium est, si cernere vultis.


In English thus, Not the words of the Book, but Christ, who is
Into the world sent, the Gospel is.


If ye will understand; this he wrote against the Marcionists, a gross sort of
Heretics.

XIII. The same Tertullian, a very approved Author (in what he writ before he
was leavened with the Doctrines of Novatus and Montanus, and famous among the
Christians for his Writings) a great defender of the Christian faith, against
the Infidels. In his Book of the Testimony of the Soul against the Gentiles,
proves that there is in the souls of all men a testimony concerning God, the
judgment to come, the immortality of the soul, the punishment of the wicked
after death, the resurrection of the body, etc. he says moreover thus; I bring
forth a new Testimony more known than all literature, or letter-knowledge: and
cap. 5. he says thus, These testimonies of the soul, how much true, so much
simple, how much simple so much vulgar, how much vulgar so much common, how
much common, so much natural, how much natural, so much divine: and a little
after, Nature is the Mistress, the Soul is the Scholar, whatever the one has
learned, or the other taught is delivered from God, who is the Master or
Teacher of the Mistress: and again after, surely (says he) the soul was before
the letter, and the word was before the book, (note) and the sense was before
the style, and man himself was before Philosopher or Poet, must we therefore
believe, that before letter-knowledge men lived dumb, or without testimonies of
this sort. And the same Tertullian in his Apology against the Gentiles,
treating of this inward testimony of the souls of all men, concerning the
oneness, truth, goodness, greatness, and justice of God, cries out with an
exclamation: O testimony of the soul naturally, Christian. cap. 17. Apol.

XIV. The same Tertullian in his Book of the Soul cap. 7. says, Because we
acknowledge spiritual gifts, we are counted worthy to receive the gift of
Prophecy after John.

XV. Eusebius, a greek Father, and writer of the Ecclesiastic History for the
first three hundred years after Christ came into the flesh, in his history
writes of Justin Martyr, that in his Dialogue with Tryphon the Jew he
affirms, that the gifts of Prophecy continued in his Church unto his time.
The words of Justin Martyr in the said Dialogue are these: and again in another
Prophecy, and it shall come to pass, that I will pour out my Spirit on all
flesh, and on my servants and handmaids, and they shall exercise the office of
a Prophet. Among us also (says he) are to be seen both women and men, who have
these gifts from the Spirit of God. And the same Eusebius, lib. 5. cap. 7.
cites Ireneus, writing to the same purpose, that the gift of Prophesying and
Expounding Divine Mysteries, yea and speaking with Tongues and revealing the
secrets of men, continued among the Christians to his time; this Ireneus lived
toward the end of the second Century about the year 180.

XVI. Justin Martyr (a Greek Father, and greatly approved among all Christians)
in his first Apology for the Christians unto the Senate of Rome, writes thus;
that Christ was in part known unto Socrates; for (says he) the reason, and the
word was and is in all men, even the same, which foretold by the Prophets,
things that were to come to pass. And in the same Apology he speaks expressly
of the Innate Word or Reason, which James declared Iam. 1.21. greek (...),
calling it both Divine Reason and Innate, which was in the Philosophers, Poets,
and Historiographers, saying thus expressly, every one of them when by the
impulse of that measure of Divine Reason, (the seeds of which they had in them)
did contemplate that which was of the same kind, they spoke some things
excellently. Again, what things are said by all which are well and excellently
said, they are ours who are Christians, for we reverence, adore and love the
word, which proceeded from God, which is without beginning and is unexpressible.

And in his second Apology to the Emperor he writes thus,

We have learned that Christ is the first born of God, and we have declared
that he is the Reason or Word, of whom all mankind is partaker, and who lives
with, or according to the Word are Christians, although esteemed Atheists, as
among the Grecians, Socrates and Heraclitus, and many others. But they who were
before, and followed not that divine reason the guide, were evil men, and
enemies of Christ, and killers of them who lived according thereunto.

Note, that whereas Iustine Martyr called Socrates and others who lived in
conformity to the Divine Word in them -- Christians, it is to be understood in
part, even as he said before, that Christ was in part known to Socrates, viz.
as that Divine word and Reason, and according to that general Revelation, which
it gave, although we find not that Socrates had the knowledge of Christ, as he
was to come in the flesh, and suffer death for the sins of the world, nor had
he any knowledge of many other particular mysteries of the Christian Religion;
and therefore cannot equally, and in all respects be accounted a Christian,
with these who have a true knowledge of, and belief in Christ, in respect both
of his inward and outward coming, and whose conversation and life answer their
profession.

XVII. Athanasius the Great (so called) a man reputed of great authority,
especially for his opposition to the Arian Heresy, in what he writes of the
life of Anthony, whom he greatly commends for his piety and wisdom. Among
other instances of his great wisdom, gives this for one, that whereas some
learned men or Philosophers came unto him, thinking to make sport with him,
being ignorant of Letters, Anthony asked them which was first, whether the mind
or letters, and whither did the mind come from letters, as the cause, or
letters from the mind, they answered that the mind was first and the Cause or
Inventer of Letters; Anthony replied, therefore he who has a sound mind
needs not Letters, at which saying, both they and others present were
astonished, and went away admiring so great wisdom in an Idiot, or unlearned
man.

XVIII. The forecited Justin Martyr, in his Dialogue with Triphon the Jew,
declares, that a certain old man commending to him the Scriptures to read
them, said unto him these words, But first of all, pray God that the gate of
the Light may be opened unto thee, for the Scriptures cannot be known nor
understood by all but only to whom it is given by the grace and gift of God,
and his Christ.

XIX. Theodorus Abucara in Opusculis Bibliotheca Patrum, a Greek Writer,
denies, that the Scriptures are ogia Dei, i. e. the Speeches of God or the
Word of God, which is but one only, yet that they may be called so
tropologically or figuratively. Augustine lib. 15. de Trinitate cap. 11. says,
the word that sounds outwardly is a sign or signification of the word that
shines within, or inwardly, unto which, the name of the word does rather or
more agree, for that which is expressed with the fleshly mouth is the voice of
the word, and it is called the word, because of that, of which it is assumed,
that it might outwardly appear.

And whereas we are blamed and greatly accused by some, because we say the
Scripture, viz. the letter of it, is not the incorruptible living and abiding
word that remains for ever; but Christ is that living incorruptible word and
seed mentioned by Peter, for that evil men may not only wrest, but corrupt some
places and passages of Scripture, and accordingly have so done, not only with
the translations, but even with the Hebrew and Greek; although we believe, God
by his gracicous providence has preserved the Scriptures testimony entire and
without corruption, as to the main, so as to be a sufficient testimony of all
necessary truth, let us hear what the aforesaid Iustine Martyr says in the
case: In his Dialogue with Triphon the Jew, he expressly affirms, That the
Jews have corrupted the Scriptures in diverse places; as first, that they have
taken out of Esdras, where he declares the Law of the Passover, these
following words, and Esdras said unto the people, This Passover is our Savior,
and our refuge, and if ye think and call to mind to restore him, being cast off
in a sign, and then shall place your hope in him, this place shall not be
forsaken for ever, says the Lord of Hosts, but if ye shall not believe nor
hear his words, teaching and preaching, ye shall be a derision to all Nations:
and out of the 96th Psalm, whereas he says it was written, say among the
Nations, the Lord has reigned from the tree ( viz. the tree of the Cross
mentioned by Peter, on which Christ was crucified) they have left out, or taken
away these words from the tree, leaving only these other words, the Lord has
reigned; he mentions also a third place in Jeremiah corrupted by them.

XX. Athanasius in his Synopsis Sacris Scripturis, acknowledges that many
Books of the Prophets are lost, as the Book of Nathan, Addo, Achias the
Silonite, Semei and Iehu, and of three thousand Psalms of David, only an
hundred and fifty now remaining; also there were five thousand Parables of
Solomon, and five thousand Songs also he wrote of Trees, from the Cedar of
Libanon, to the Hysop on the Wall; and of Beasts, Fouls, Creeping-things and
Fishes, which are not now to be found in the Hebrew: and Josephus declares
that Ezekiel writ two Books of Prophecy. It is manifest, says Athanasius,
that all these are lost by the madness and sloth of the wicked Jews.

XXI. Tertullian in his Book de Virgini Velandis, cap. 1. says: The Law of
faith remaining, the other things belonging to discipline and conversation
admit the newness of correction, the grace of God working and promoting unto
the end: for what sort of thing is it, that while the Devil is always working,
and daily adding unto the engines of iniquity, that the work of God should
either cease, or leave off to profit, seeing for this cause he sent the
Comforter, that because man's weakness could not receive all at once, by degrees
the discipline should be directed, and ordered, and brought to perfection, by
that Holy Spirit, the Vicar of the Lord.

XXII. Gregory Nazianzen in his Oration concerning Athanasius, says expressly
thus, What the Sun is to things sensible, the same is God unto things
intellectual; for the Sun enlightneth the visible World, and God enlightneth
the invisible World; and the one makes us see the Sun, the other makes us see
God. Again the same Author says thus, ibid. Whosoever breaks through the
matter and this fleshly body (whether says he) it may be lawful to call it a
Cloud or a Vail) and obtains to be conversant with God, unfolding (or
revealing himself) and to apprehend that most pure or supreme light, fo far as
is lawful to the nature of man; such a man is blessed, both because he has
ascended from what is here below, and also because he has obtained that
oneness with God or deiformity (gr. (...)) which the true Philosophy gives.
These things (says he) have been the care and study of some few, both of old,
and now in this present time, and among such he reckons Athanasius, as
equaling some, and excelling others, and falling little short of some others,
to wit, even the Prophets and Apostles.

XXIII. Clemens Alexandrinus (already cited) admon. ad gent. As the true Sons
of the Light let us behold the Light, and look upward, lest the Lord find us to
be but Bastards, as the Sun discovers the Eagles. And lib. 5. Stromatum he
says, he who neither makes use of his sight, nor any other of his (bodily)
senses, in his contemplating, but by the pure mind it self applies to things
obtains the true Philosophy.

XXIV. The same Clemens lib. 1. Stromatum, directs men in general, to go to
the Light, and Water that is within themselves. But he who has the eye of his
soul dimmed or made dull with evil education and doctrine, let him go into his
Domestic Light, or the Light that is in his own House (gr. (...)) the truth,
which graphically manifests things that are not written. Ye who thirst, go
unto the Waters says Esaias; and Solomon admonishes, saying, drink Water out
of your own Cistern, Prove. 5. therefore Plato, who is a Philosopher out from
among the Hebrews (as having learned much from them) in his Laws, commands
the Husbandman not to pour Water upon the Land, nor to take Water from others
to water it, but that they first dig by themselves, even unto the earth which
is called Virgin-earth: and in the same Book he says, the Scripture exciteth
or stirs up that which is within us, which he calls the fire of the Soul,
igniculum animae.

XXV. In his admonition to the Gentiles, he says, The Savior has many voices
and ways for the salvation of men, threatening, he admonishes them; and
reproving, he converteth them, etc. also he terrifieth them by the fire,
kindling a flame out of a Pillar, which is both a signification of grace and of
fear, if thou obeyest, it is light, if thou do not obey, it is fire.

And in the same Admonition to the Gentiles (who were unbelievers) he says, It
is not difficult to come unto the Truth, nor impossible to apprehend her, for
she is most near in our Houses, even as the most wise Moses declares living in
our three parts, the Hands, the Mouth, and the Heart (for so the Septuagint
renders these words) this, says he, is a true symbol of the Truth, which is
fulfilled universally in three, viz. Counsel, Action and Speech.

XXVI. Athanasius (whom I formerly mentioned, as one greatly approved among the
Fathers) in his Oration against the Gentiles says, As God who is over all, so
the way which leads unto him, is not far off, nor is it forth without us, but
it is in us, and the beginning of it may be found out by us, even as Moses
taught in these words, the word of Faith is within thy heart, which our Savior
also signified and confirmed, saying, the Kingdom of God is within you: for
because we have in us Faith ( viz. the word of Faith) and the Kingdom of God,
therefore we may speedily understand and contemplate the King of the
University, to wit, the saving word of the Father. Neither can the Heathens
pretend any cause, who serve Idols, nor let any man vainly deceive himself, as
if he wanted that way or method, and therefore find out a pretext of his
impiety, for we all stand upon that way, and have it, although all do not
endeavor to walk in it, but transgress it, being drawn aaway by the outward
pleasures of this life.

XXVII. Origin (reputed by many, inferior to none of these called Fathers,
both for his great piety, and great knowledge of the Scriptures) who lived
before Athanasius, and was a Disciple of Clemens Alexandrinus, writes clearly
to the fame purpose, homilia 13. in Genesin. The word of God (says he) is
present, and this now is its operation to remove the earth from every one of
our souls, and to open the living Fountain; for it is within thee, and comes
not from without even as the Kingdom of God is within thee. And that woman
which losed the piece of Silver, did not find it without, but in her own House,
after she had lighted her Candle, and cleansed her House from the filthiness,
which the sloth and dullness of a long time had gathered, and there she found
the piece of Silver. And thou therefore, if thou shall light thy Candle, if
thou receive or take unto thee the illumination of the Holy Spirit, and in his
light see light, thou shall find the piece of Silver in thee: for within thee
is placed the Image of the Heavenly King -- The Fountain of Knowledge was
placed in thee, but it could not run or stream out, because the Philistines had
filled the place of it with earth, and made in thee the Image of the earthly.

XXVIII. Again, Origin lib. 1. contra Celsum, says, The simple (or perfect)
words of Sacred Scripture have made the sincere Readers of it to be
Enthusiastically moved (gr. (...)) who nourish that light with the Oil which
the five Virgins are said to have in their Lamps, as in the Parable.

Note, how Origin here again uses the word Enthusian, as properly applied to
every sincere Reader of the Scripture.

And near the beginning of the said 6th Book, he says, The Divine Word
teaches us, that it does not suffice what is spoken (although it be ever so
true in it self or worthy of credit) to overcome the soul, unless a Divine
Virtue or Power be given to the Speaker, and that the grace of God blossom
forth in the words spoken, the soul not being without a Divine Assistance in
them, who speak effectually: for the Prophet says in the 67th Psalm v. 11. God
shall give the word to them who Preach it, with great Power.

XXIX. Hierom (otherwise called Ierom) who lived about 400 years after Christ,
says, (as Lucas Osiander in his Ecclesiastical History does cite him cent. 4.
lib. 4. cap. 19.) The knowledge of God is in all men by nature, nor is any man
born who is without Christ, and who has not in him the seeds of Wisdom and
Righteousness, and the other Virtues, whence many without the faith and evangel
of Christ (meaning as outwardly preached) do many things wisely or holily. And
that he mentions nature, it is clear he understood it not in Pelagius sense,
but of Paul, who said the Gentiles did by nature the things contained in the
Law, so as nature is not the cause but subject of this knowledge.

An observable passage that happened at the Counsel of Nice.

XXX. A certain Philosopher that trusted much to his Logic, did dispute with
diverse Bishops against the Christian Religion (without the Synod, where was a
great concourse of people) but the Bishops could not at all prevail to convince
him, at last comes an old man, altogether ignorant of his sort of learning,
and bids him hear the truth in the name of Jesus Christ, and recites the
sum of the Christian Faith before him, saying thus, Do thou not believe these
things O Philosopher, he answered I do believe, and confessed himself to be
overcome by that old man; also he exhorted these of his Profession to embrace
the Christian Faith. Being asked, why he could not be convinced by the Bishops,
he replied, so long as they contended against me with words, I opposed words to
words, but a virtue went forth out of this old man's mouth, which I could not
resist. Osiander hist. eccles. cent. 4. lib. 1. cap. 5.

XXXI. Augustine (who lived about the middle of the 5th Century) in his Book of
Confessions, cap. 10. And being upon this admonished to return unto my self, I
entered into my inwards, thou leading me, and I was able to do it, for thou
becamest my helper; I entered in to my self, and with the eye of my soul (such
as it was) I saw, over the eye of my soul, over my mind, the unchangeable light
of the Lord. And again, a little after, he that knows the Truth, knows that
Light, and who knows that, knows eternity, love knows it. O eternal
Truth, and true Love, and dear Eternity, thou art my God, to thee do I sigh
night and day: when I first knew thee, thou did lift me up, that I might see,
there was something, which I might see, and that, that was not I, who did see,
and thou did beat back the infirmity of my sight, powerfully shining in me,
and I trembled both with love and horror, etc.

Again Augustine in his 10th Book of Confessions, cap. 6. not with a doubtful,
but with a certain Conscience, do I love thee, O Lord; thou have stricken my
heart with thy word, and I have loved thee. And after, What now do I love, when
as I love thee? Not the beauty of my body, not the order of times, not the
brightness of the light, which is so friendly to these eyes, not the pleasant
melodies of all kinds of Songs, nor the fragant smells of Flowers, and
Ointments, and Spices, not Manna and Honey, nor any members acceptable to
fleshly embracements: I love not these things, when as I love my God, and I
love a certain light, and a certain voice, and yet a certain fragrancy, and a
certain meat, and a certain embracement, when as I love my God, who is both the
Light, and the Voice, and the Sweet Smell, and the meat, and embracement of my
Inner Man, where that Light shines unto my soul, which no place can receive,
that Voice sounds, which time does not take away; that fragrancy smells,
which the wind scatters not; and that Meat tastes, which eating devours not;
and that Embracement cleaves unto me, which satiety breaks not off. Again,
cap. 7. What is this therefore which I love, when as I love my God, who is he,
that is above the head of my soul. By this very soul will I ascend unto him, I
will soar beyond that faculty of mine, by which I am united unto my body, and
by which I fill the whole frame of it with life, I cannot by that faculty find
my God. Again, Augustine, lib. 10. cap. 40. of his Confessions, Sometimes, O
Lord, thou let me go in, into a delight, very unusual, a sweetness, I know
not of what kind, which if it were perfected in me, I know not what it shall
be, but it shall not be in this life: but by certain cumbersom weights, am I
tumbled down again, and am swallowed up by old wont, and held by it, much do I
lament, and I am much held, etc.

Again, Augustine, lib. 7. cap. 17. of his Confessions, And thus by degrees, I
passed from bodies, to the sensitive soul, and from that to the imagination:
and again, from that to the reasoning faculty, unto which it belongs to judge
of things received by the bodily senses: which finding it self in me to be
changeable, it lifted up it self unto its understanding or (mind) and withdrew
its thought from custom, separating it self from the contradicting multitudes
of phantasms, that it might find the Light wherewith to be besprinkled. Observe
here, 1. How Augustine distinguishes, not only betwixt imagination and reason,
but betwixt reason and the understanding (or intelligence, which is the mind)
wherein he contradicts the common doctrine of the Schools at this day, and of
the Priests and Teachers, who deny that there is any higher faculty or power of
the soul of man, than reason, therefore they know no other inward actings or
exercises of mind, but what are simply rational, or discursive, and that by the
phantasms, or inward forms, which it has borrowed from the bodily senses.
Observe, 2ly How Augustine declares, that he passed not only from the
imagination, but from reason, or the rational faculty it self, that he might
find the Light, wherewith to be besprinkled. Observe, 3ly How he calls the
inward phantasms, which are Images received from the bodily senses as of
seeing, hearing, etc. contradicting multitudes, or throngs, and that he
declares how he did separate his mind from them to find the Light.

Again, Augustine speaking of this inward Light, lib. 9. cap. 11. of his
Confessions, Nor indeed (says he) was my goods without me, nor were they
sought by the eyes of flesh under the Sun. For they that will take joy in any
thing without themselves do easily vanish, and spill themselves upon visible
and temporal things, licking their Images with their hungry thoughts: and oh
that they were once wearied with hunger, and did say, who will show us the good
things: and we should say, let them hear the Light of thy Countenance is sealed
in us, O Lord, for we are not the Light which lights every man, but we are
enlightened by thee, that we, who were once darkness may be Light in thee. O
that they did see the inward Eternal Light, which because I had once tasted, I
gnashed my teeth at them, because I could not show it unto them, although they
should bring me their heart in their very eyes, which are turned away forth
from thee. Observe here 1. how Augustine calls the Light, an inward Eternal
Light. 2. How he wished that men, whose eyes are so much abroad might see it;
therefore it was inwardly visible, and consequently objective. 3. How he
calls it, the Light of Gods Countenance, which is sealed in us, according to
the words of the fourth Psalm, as the Septuagint, and the old Latin has them.
4. How he affirms, that we are not that Light that lights every man, but we
(to wit every man) are enlightened by the Lord, that who were once darkness, may
be light in him, therefore it was saving. 5. How Augustine understands this
inward Eternal Light to be the true Good, which many are saying, who will show,
so as the words of the Psalm, the Light of the Lord is sealed in us, are a
plain answer unto the former words, there be many who say, who will show us any
good: as if he had said, the true Good is not any visible or temporal thing,
but the Light of the Countenance of God, which is sealed in all men; and that
men may see and enjoy this Good, they must turn away the eyes of the mind, from
things that are outward, outward, which are but visible and temporal, and look
inward within themselves, where the true Good is only to be found. Surely
Augustine was not of the mind of the National Priests, who say, there is no good
thing in evil men, and that any light that is in them is but darkness, and
insufficient to give true satisfaction to the soul: which if Augustine had
thought so, he would not so heartily have wished that they might see it; and
surely, the reason he gives why they did not see it, was not that it was not in
them, but because the eyes of their mind were abroad, and gone forth to outward
objects: yea his words, that he calls it the Internal Light, do plainly hold
forth, that he did understand it was in them, according to the words of the
Psalm before cited.

XXXII. Bernard who lived about five hundred years ago, Tractatu de Praecepto,
and Dispensatione, as concerning what you ask of the contrariety, which seems
to be in these two sentences of Paul, our conversation is in the heavens, and
while we are in the body, we sojourn from the Lord, to wit, How can the soul at
the same time sojourn in the body from the Lord, and also be in the Heavens
with the Lord: the Apostle himself loses it, when elsewhere he says, we know
in part, and we propheise in part, in so far indeed as we know, as
contemplating things present, now we are with the Lord, but in so far as we
prophecy of things to come, believing what we understand not, hoping what we
see not, we sojourn from the Lord, and in the body.

Again, Bernard in his 106. Epistle to H. M. But thou Brother, as I have heard,
art reading the Prophets, think thou that thou understandest what thou
read, for if thou understandest, thou perceivest that the sense of the
prophetical reading is Christ, whom if thou desire to obtain, thou shall do
it sooner by following him, than by reading -- and a little aster. O (says he)
if thou did but once a little taste of the fatness of the Corn, whence
Jerusalem is satisfied, how willingly would thou leave unto the litteral
Jews, their Crusts to be knawn upon. O that I might obtain at any time to have
thee a companion in the Schooll of Piety, under the Master Jesus.

Again, Tractatu de Interiori Domo, cap. 13. The chief and principal
Looking-glass to see God, is the rational soul finding it self: for if the
invisible things of God be understood, being seen through the things which are
made, where, I pray, are the footsteps of his knowledge more expressly to be
found imprinted then in his Image. Whosoever therefore thirsts to see God,
let him dress his Looking-glass, let him cleanse his Spirit: Blessed are the
pure in heart, for they shall see God: and cap. 14. The Looking-glass therefore
being well dressed or cleansed, and diligently long looked into, there
begins to shine in it a certain clearness of Divine Light, and an immense
Beam of an unaccustomed vision to appear unto the eyes of the heart: out of the
vision of this Light, the mind being inflamed, begins with the pure eye of
the heart, to behold things supernatural and internal, to love God, to inhere
in God; it considers all things present, as if they were not, it renounceth
its whole affections, and wholly it applies it self to love alone, knowing
that he is only happy who loves God: but into so great favor the mind never
reaches by its own industry, this is the gift of God, not the merit of man,
but without doubt he has received such, and so great favor, who has deserted
the care of the world (or age) and takes care of himself; and cap. 18. who is
so continually delighted in the love of God, frequently does suffer excesses of
mind, and being ravished from all things present and earthly, is presented
before the Lord; and while he considers his beauty, being astonished with the
greatness thereof, he is wholly suspended in its admiration; he admireth the
glory of the King, the magnificence of the Kingdom, the nobility of the
Supernatural City, and the happiness of the Citisens, the sweetness of the
Inward Swavity, and the tranquillity of the Eternal Rest; he meditateth on the
power of the Father, the wisdom of the Son, the bounty of the Holy Spirit, and
the happiness of the Angelical Nature, he is delighted of God, into God, while
he admireth his Piety, and beholds his Beauty. O what a sweet ravishment is
felt, if it were not so short: he is ravished while he beholds only heavenly
things, and by beholding them he is delighted: but when he endeavors to stand
there longer, he suddenly slideth, and returning unto himself, he cannot
intimate to any, what he has seen above himself, and cap. 70.

It is necessary therefore to ascend unto the high heart, and in the excess of
mind, by Divine Revelation, to learn what that is unto which it ought to
aspire, and unto what condition of sublimity he ought to compose and accustom
his mind; for if once a man were admitted into that luciferous glory of
Angelical Sublimity, and did obtain to enter into that sight of the Divine
Rays, with what most inward desires, what profound groans, what unutterable
sighs, do we think, that he insisteth, with what assiduous remembrance, what
delightful admiration, do we believe, considers he, and remembers the
brightness that he has beheld, desiring it, sighing after it, contemplating
it, until at length sometime he be transformed into the same Image from Glory
to Glory, as by the Spirit of the Lord: but when we return from that state of
sublimity unto our selves, these things which we first saw above our selves, in
that truth and clearness with which we first saw them, we cannot at all call
them to our remembrance; and although from thence we hold something in our
memory, and as it were through a middle Vail, and as in the midst of a Cloud,
we are not able to remember the manner of our seeing, nor the quality of the
Vision: and after a strange manner, remembering, we do not remember; while
seeing, we do not see thoroughly; and beholding, we do not thoroughly behold; and
being intent, we do not pierce thoroughly, until again by Meditation, we rise up
into Contemplation, by Contemplation into Admiration, by Admiration into
Alienation (or excess) of mind.

Again in the same Treatise, cap. 17. Who does so gather the evagations (or
wanderings) of his mind into one, and fixes all the motions of his heart, in
the alone desire of Eternity; surely now he has returned unto his heart, and
now willingly he stays there, and is marvelously delighted: and now when he
cannot contain himself for joy, he is led above himself, and by an excess of
mind, he is lifted up unto the hights, and so by himself above himself, by the
knowledge of himself, he ascends unto the knowledge of God, that he may learn
to love God alone, and to think on him continually, and in him to rest
delightfully: when so the love of Christ has swallowed up the whole affection
of man, that being negligent and unmindful of himself, he feels nothing but
Jesus Christ; then at length, as I understand, is the love of God perfected in
him. To him, who is so affected, poverty is not burdensome, he feels not
injuries, he laugheth at reproaches, he despises losses, he counts death
gain; yea, he does not think that he dies, when rather he knows; that he
passes from death to life: whom the love of God does so hold inwardly bound,
he cannot go forth in a little, but inwardly burns in his desire, the more
largely, how much the more familiarly, and the more vehemently, how much the
more frequently.

Again, cap. 70. of the same Treatise. The Contemplation of Truth is begun in
this life, but in the future it is celebrated in a continual perpetuity: by the
Contemplation of Truth man is instructed unto Righteousness, and perfected unto
Glory. The grace of Contemplation does not only cleanse the heart from all
worldly love, but sanctifies it, and inflameth the mind unto the love of
heavenly things; who by Divine Inspiration and Revelation, is carried on unto
the Grace of Contemplation; he receives some earnest of that fullness that is
to come, where he shall be continually fixed in the everlasting Contemplation.

Observe, 1. How this Author does plainly hold forth Divine Revelation and
Inspiration, as the means by which the Grace of Contemplation is attained.
Observe, 2. How he affirms, that this Grace of Contemplation does cleanse and
sanctify the heart, far contrary to the National Teachers, who say such an
attainment, as the contemplation, or beholding of God by Divine Revelation in
this life, is not necessary unto the Saints, and it were dangerous, lest they
should be puffed up. But that the seeing of God does of its own nature
exceedingly humble the Creature is clear from the 6th Chapter of Isaiah, where
the Prophet declares, after he had seen the Lord, how he cried out, Woe is me,
for I am undone. Note, whether the Author of the Treatise above cited, de Domo
Interiori, by Bernard or any other; if some question it, it is not much
matterial, seeing all that I have cited out of it, is fully conform unto
Bernard in his other Writings.

Again, Bernard in his Sermon of the threefold manner of Contemplation.

But (says he) there is is a place where God is seen truly resting and quiet,
a place not at all of a Judge, not of a Master, but of a Bridegroom, and which
to me, indeed (for of others I know not) is indeed a Chamber, if at any time it
comes to pass, that I be brought into it: but alas ( rara hora and brevis mora
lat.) it is a rare hour, and a small stay; there the mercy of the Lord is
clearly undestood from everlasting to everlasting, upon them that fear him, and
happy is he who can say, I am a partaker with all that fear thee, and keep thy
Commandments.

Concerning the Necessity and Benefit of inward Silence, in order unto the
Conversing with God, and the Contemplating and Beholding of him; also of
silence in Meetings, and how it is profitable. Moreover, concerning the
necessity of turning in, to our own minds and hearts, (othervise called
introversion) that we may find the Lord, and of waiting upon the Lord, as thus
turned inward, or inwardly retired in our minds.
NOW that an inward silence of mind (wherein the mind is silent, and ceased
from its thoughts or imaginations conceived whether by the images or phantasms
it has received by the ministry of the outward senses, or those of its own
making) is necessary unto the attaining the fruitive or intuitive knowledge of
God, as aforesaid, and the conversing with him, nearly and intimately.

This I prove, first from the testimony of Scripture, Psalm 46.10. Be still,
and know that I am God: and as the Septuagint has it, (...) otiamini vacate,
vake ye.

Psalm 4.4. Speak in your heart, upon your Bed, and be silent, so the Hebrew
does carry it. Observe, here by the Bed is signified the inward rest of the
mind, which when it attaineth, it is fittest to speak unto God, and verse. 8. I
will both lay me down in peace, and sleep, etc.

Psalm 23.2. He makes me to lie down in green pastures, he leads me beside
the still waters.

Eccles. 5.1, 2. Keep thy foot, when thou go to the house of God, and be
more ready to hear, then to offer the sacrifice of fools, for they consider not
that they do evil. Be not rash with thy mouth, and let not thy heart be hasty
to utter any thing before God. Observe, in that he says, let not thy heart be
hasty to utter any thing before the face of the Lord (so the Hebrew) he lays
a restraint, not only upon rash words of the mouth, but upon rash thoughts also
of the heart, which it may utter before the face of the Lord, which face of the
Lord is the Light of the Lord, that shines in man's heart, according to the
words of the fourth Psalm, called the light of his Face or Countenance. Now
which thoughts may be called rash, or hasty thoughts? Surely all such as are
its own, as proceeding simply from the heart it self, without the Divine
Instinct and Inspiration of the Spirit of God, for says the Apostle, not that
we are sufficient to think any thing as of our selves, 2 Cor. 3.5.

Canticles of Solomon, 5.2. I sleep, but by heart waketh, how Bernard
undestandeth this place I shall show afterward, and Cant. 2.3.

Cant. 2.3. I sat down under his shadow with great delight, and his fruit was
sweet to my taste. Observe, this whole speech being allegorical, the sitting
down must needs signify, the quiet and still condition of the mind, and then
(to wit in this inward quietness of mind,) the fruit of her beloved, is sweet
to her taste. Again,

Cant. 1.7. Tell me, O thou, whom my soul loves, where thou feedest, where
thou make thy flocks to rest at noon.

Isaiah 26.23. Thou will keep him in perfect peace, whose mind is stayed on
thee: and as the Hebrew has it, the thought being stayed.

Isaiah 66.2. And on whom will I look, but upon the humble, and the silent, and
who tremble at my words. So do the Septuagint translate the place. And,

Isaiah 41.1. Keep silence before me, O Islands, and let the people renew their
strength. And,

Isaiah 30.15. In returning and rest shall ye be saved, in silence, and
expectation shall be your strength.

Lamentations 3.26. He shall wait, (and be silent) for the salvation of the
Lord. Observe, here the Scripture expressly mentions silent waiting, or
waiting in silence: let the Opposers and Adversaries of Truth consider this,
who speak so much against silent waiting, or waiting in silence; and who say,
they read not of such a thing in Scripture, and they acknowledge no waiting
upon God, but as they are exercised in somewhat, as reading, or hearing, or
speaking, which they call waiting in Ordinances: but here is a waiting in
silence, which is as real an Ordinance, or appointment of God as any other,
which they utterly deny, and are ignorant off. Again,

Lamentations 3.28. He sits alone, and keeps silence.

Hosea 2.14. I will persuade her, and bring her into a solitary place (remote
from all speech) and I will speak unto her heart.

Zechariah 2.13. Be silent, O all flesh, before the Lord, for he is raised up,
out of his holy habitation.

Moreover, notwithstanding all the disdainful language, which the opposers of
Truth use against silence, yet see what the Prophet says of it, in the Psalm.

Psalm 65.1. Unto thee, silence, praise, O God in Zion, so does the Hebrew bear
it, and so does Arias Montanus translate it, Tibi silentium laus, Deus in Sion,
which may be understood either, 1. That silence is praise, as well as words
unto God, or. 2. That silence is due or belonging unto God, as where he said,
Psalm 62.1. My soul is silent verily unto God: or, 3. That silence is necessary
as a preparation unto praise, all which are true. Now that silence mentioned so
frequently in Scripture, is not a bare outward silence, but a silence of the
mind or soul, from its own thoughts, whether arising from corrupt, and
inferior nature, or from the active part of it self, as it can act, so much as
in thought, without the Divine Inspiration of the Spirit of God: for without
this all thoughts of man's heart, touching Divine and Spiritual things, are but
barren and hurtful, but such as are conceived in the mind by virtue of a Divine
Instinct, and Inspiration of God, are profitable and fruitful, and sweet unto
the soul, above honey, or the honey comb, even as David said, how sweet are thy
thoughts unto me, O God. For as I have already showed out of Bernard, such
thoughts are the words or speech of God, as he speaks in us by the Spirit.
Now when we speak of being silent from thoughts, we do not understand these
thoughts, which are conceived, or formed in us by Divine Inspiration; for they
are not inconsistent with the true silence, but arise out of it, and remain or
spring up therein.

Secondly, I prove the same from Antiquity.

I. Clemens Alexandrinus, lib. 5. Stromatum, he who neither makes use of his
sight, nor any other of his senses in his thinking, (or contemplating) but by
the pure mind it self applies to things, obtains the true Philosophy. Also
Pythagoras his five years silence, had this signification, that he commanded
his disciples, that they should turn away from sensible things, and behold and
Contemplate God with the pure mind: observe by the pure mind he understands
the mind not only cleansed from its lusts, but separated from the sensible
Images of sensible things.

II. Augustine, lib. 9. cap. 10. of his Confessions, If to any the tumults of
the flesh were silent, and the fantasies of the Earth, Water and Air were
silent, and the Poles of Heaven were silent, and if the soul were silent unto
it self, and should pass beyond it self, not thinking on it self: and if Dreams
and Imaginary Revelations were silent, and every Tongue, and Sign, and whatever
is made, passing from one to another, if to any it can be silent; for if any
hear, all these things speak, we have not made our selves, but he has made us,
who remains for ever. Having said this, if now they be silent, because they
have roused or awakened up the ear to him who made them, let him speak alone,
not by them, but by himself, that we may hear his word, not by the tongue of
flesh, nor by the voice of an Angel, nor by the noise of a Cloud, nor by the
dark riddle of a Similitude, but let us hear him whom we love in them, without
them, as we now stretch after it, and by a most swift cogitation are arrived
unto a touch of that Eternal Wisdom which is over all: if this were continued,
and all visions of a far other kind were removed, and this one should ravish
its beholder and swallow him up, and hide him in its inward joys, as that his
life must be for ever like unto this moment of understanding, after which we
have breathed, were not this, enter into the joy of thy Lord.

III. The Author of the Treatise de Spiritu and anima, bound up among Augustins
Works, who is thought to be Hugo de Sancto victore, cap. 32. The reasonable
soul (says he) is above all these things, which are created of God, and
therefore it is most near unto God, when it is pure, and how much it cleaves
unto him by love, in so much, being well besprinkled and enlightened by him,
with intelligible light it beholds God, not by the bodily eyes, but by its
principal part, to wit, the understanding, in whom is most perfect beauty, and
a most blessed vision, by which it is made happy: let it therefore remove from
its cogitation all knowledges, which are received by the bodily senses; and
cap. 2. yea, surely the soul withdrawith it self unto it self from all bodily
senses, as hindering and resisting with their noise that it may see it self in
its self, and may know it self, and when it would know God, it lifts up it
self above it self, with the eye of the mind, and cap. 34.

Let the mind therefore return to it self, and collect, or gather it self into
it self, that without bodily images it may consider it self, and the invisible
nature of God Almighty: let it reject the phantasms of earthly Images, and
whatever earthly thing presents unto its thought, and let it consider it self
such, as it is created under God above the body: then let it rise above it
self, and forsake it self, and let it come in a manner into a forgetfulness of
it self, and subject or bow down it self humbly and devoutly to the
comtemplation of God: for when the mind begins to exercise it self by the
pure intelligence (or understanding) and in whole to behold that glory of the
incorruptible Light, and to draw, out of the things, which it sees inwardly a
taste of most inward sweetness, and thereof to season its understanding, and
turn it into wisdom in this so great an excess of mind, that peace is found and
obtained, which passes all sense, so that there is silence in Heaven, as it
were half an hour, so that the mind of the beholder is troubled with no tumult
of contending thoughts, finding nothing that it seeks by desire, or blames
by loathing, or accuses by hatred, but within the quietness of the
Contemplation is wholly gathered, and is let in, into a certain affection, or
delight very unusual, to a sweetness, of I know not of what kind, which if it
were always felt, surely it would be a great happiness. Here sensuality does
nothing, imagination does nothing but all the inferior powers of the soul are
made destitute of their proper Office, but the more pure part of the soul is
led into that secret of most inward quiet, and that mystery of the greatest
tranquillity, in a happy joyfulness.

IV. Antiochus a Greek Author, homilia 103. How good and seasonable a thing is
silence, the mother of the wisest thoughts, for the good Spirit flees
multitude of speech, as remaining without all perturbation and imagination:
therefore silence is a good Mother of all virtues. Again also the Prophet Amos
instructing us by his Oracle says, in that time, the understanding shall be
silent, for it is an evil time, and Isaias, to whom shall I look, but unto the
humble and the silent, and who tremble at my words, so the Septuagint also,
Isaias 66.

V. Bernard in his 52d Sermon on the Canticles.

Blessed is he who can say, behold I have gone far away in fleeting, and have
remained in a solitude.

Psalm 54. He was not content to go forth, unless he should go far away, that
he might be at rest; have thou passed beyond the delights of the flesh, that
thou do not obey the desires thereof, neither art thou held with its baits,
thou have profited, thou have separated thy self, but have not gone far away,
unless that by the purity of thy mind, thou can flee beyond the Phantasms or
images of bodily similitudes, that rush in from every hand, until thou come
hither, promise not rest to thy self, thou art in an error, if thou being short
of this, thou think to find the place of quiet, the secret of solitude, the
clearness of light, the habitation of peace.

And in the Treatise of the degrees of humility.

There (to wit, in the Bedchamber of the King) for a little space, as it were
for half an hour, silece being made in Heaven, sweetly reposing in the desired
embracements, she indeed sleeps, but he heart waketh or watches, whereby
verily in the mean time, she searches into the secrets of the truth. Observe,
Here it is plain how Bernard understands this sleeping to be the silencing or
quieting of the thoughts and imaginations, and all the workings of the
inferior powers of the soul, at which time the heart waketh or watches, and
is in the fittest condition to converse with the Lord, and to search into those
inward secrets, which he reveals only to those, who are brought in thither.

And in the Treatise of the inward house, cap. 70.

But he who would vake unto the contemplation of truth, it is necessary that he
learn to rest, not only from evil works, but also from superfluous thoughts:
for many although they know how to vake in body, yet they cannot vake in the
heart, not knowing to make a Sabbath of a Sabbath, and therefore they cannot
fulfill that which is said, vake ye, and see that I am God, for vaking in body,
but vaging in heart every where, they are not worthy to see how sweet the Lord
is, and how good unto Israel to them, who are of a right heart.

Again, in the same Treatise, cap. 5. he often visits, and willingly
inhabiteth the tranquillity of the heart, and the rest of the quiet mind: for
he is peace, and his dwelling place is in peace.

Again, Bernard in his 341. Epistle. The discipline of silence (says he)
seems burdensome unto some, but the Prophet considering, that it was rather
a strength than a burden, says in silence and in hope shall be your strength,
in silence he says and hope, for it is good to wait for the Lord in silence;
for the consolation of present things weakneth the soul, but the expectation of
future things does strengthen it. Observe what a testimony Bernard gives to
silent waiting, whereas he says, it is good to wait for the Lord in silence.

2 As touching silence in meetings, that there has been silence in the
religious meetings of Gods people.

This I prove, first from the testimony of Scripture.

Job. 2.13. So they sat down with him upon the ground, seven days and seven
nights, and none spoke a word unto him, for they saw that his grief was very
great.

Esdras 9.3, 4. Then were assembled unto me every one that trembled at the
words of the God of Israel, because of the transgression of those, that had
been carried away; and I sat astonished until the evening sacrifice, but the
seventy Interpreters translate it thus, And I sat silent until the evening
Sacrifice.

Ezekiel 3.15. Then came I to them of the captivity at Telabid, that dwelt by
the river of Chebar, and I sat where they sat, and remained their astonished
among them seven days; and it came to pass, at the end of seven days, that the
word of the Lord came unto me saying.

Observe, It is plain from these words, that the Prophet waited in silence
seven days, for the word of the Lord to open his mouth. Oh how the mockers of
the Spirit of God, who mock at our silent meetings, would have mocked at this
holy Prophet: and as these mockers use to say to us (when we sit silent
together, perhaps for the space of one hour or two, not daring to speak, until
it be given us by the Spirit of God.) The Spirit is long a coming; surely such
atheistical mockers would have said the same to him, if they had lived in his
day, or he in theirs; although no doubt, that good man had the Spirit of God,
and the word of God in his heart, all the time well exercising him, albeit
nothing was given him to speak unto others, even as we who wait upon the Lord
in silence, do find the Spirit of the Lord present with us, and in us, even in
our silence; and the reason of our silence is not that the Spirit of the Lord
is absent, but that we find it our place to be silent, that we may the better
attend to his inward teaching in our hearts, and may be guided by him, when,
and what to speak.

Mat. 5.1, 2. And seeing the multitudes, he went up into a mountain, and when
he was sat, his disciples came unto him, and he opened his mouth, and taught
them saying. Observe, after he was sat, he opened his mouth, this sitting does
spiritually or mystically signify the inward composure and silence of the
mind, (that both speakers and hearers should be brought unto before that any
thing be spoken that will edify.) So Beda.

Acts 2.1, 2. And when the day of Pentecost was fully come, they were all with
one accord in one place, and suddenly there came a sound from Heaven, etc.
Observe, It is plain from this, that while they were sitting silent, the Holy
Ghost was given, neither did they speak before they received the Holy Ghost;
but after they had received him, then they spoke as the Spirit gave utterance.
And it is clear, that the very end of their assembling together at this time,
was to wait upon the Lord, for the fulfilling of his promise, who commanded
them, Acts 1.4. that they should not depart from Jerusalem, but wait for the
promise of the Father. So there they waited, and without all words, or outward
ministry of any creature the Spirit was poured forth upon them. It is worth the
observing, that while they were neither Exhorting, nor Preaching, nor Praying
outwardly, but silent, this came to pass.

Secondly, I prove the same from antiquity.

Athanasius in the Life of Anthony, shows that Anthony would often sit silent
with them who came to him, (as it is written in Daniel 4.19.) and sometimes he
would walk, and after the space of an hour he would speak to his brethren who
were present, and would declare unto them the things which had been revealed
unto him. And at one time he was sitting, and was in an ecstasy, or in an
excess of mind, and while he was in the contemplation he groaned exceedingly:
and after an hours space, turning unto them who were present, he sighed and
trembled, and rising up, he kneeled down and prayed for some considerable
space; and all the brethren that were present with him trembled also, and
having desired him to declare unto them his Revelation, he yielded unto their
desire, and showed them what had been revealed unto him. This is that Anthony
whom Augustine mentions so honorably in his Confessions, and so does Eusebius
in his Ecclesiastical History.

Moreover, because I find people generally, and even them, who suppose they
have skill in Learning and Philosophy, to think so strangely of our silence in
our meetings, and some have not stuck to say, that silent meetings are
altogether a new conceit of the Quakers, the like whereof was never known among
wise men. I judge it not amiss, to let them understand, how Plato in his Book
de Sapientia, declares concerning his Master Socrates, that his Scholars or
Familiars, were sharpened or quickened by him, even when he was silent, upon
which Marsilius Ficinus, a great Platonist, has these words, lib. 7. cap. 5.
Theologica Platonica de Animae Immortalit. Moreover (says he) Socrates
declares, how that some who used his company, and were near unto him, became
more quick or sharp in understanding, even when he was silent, and when they
departed from his company and converse, they became duller, as if that virtue
of understanding belonged unto a certain divine influence from God, conveyed by
the spirit and mind of Socrates unto the minds of his familiars, thus Marsilius
Ficinus. Now this Socrates is generally esteemed by the learned, to have been
the best of all the Philosophers: yea, Justin Martyr affirms plainly that he
was a Christian, and that he knew Christ, as he is the word; also Clemens
Alexandrinus expressly declares, that the idea of Socrates and Plato, (in the
comtemplation of which they placed only the true Philosophy) was the word
mentioned, John 1.1. lib. 5. Stromatum, from which it is plain, that Socrates
had meetings with his Friends in silence, and they profited by him, even when
he was silent. Therefore let all such who reckon themselves wise men and
Philosophers be ashamed, any more to speak against silence in meetings, as if
it were an unprofitable thing, lest in so doing, they declare themselves to be
rather Fools, than true Philosophers, such as Socrates.

Again, Plutarch in his Morals, Tom. 1. cap. 13. so highly commends silence,
that he calls it a profound wisdom, and full of high mysteries, and he says,
we learn from men to speak, but from the Gods to be silent; for in the
Sacrifices and holy Ceremonies of the service of the Gods, we are commanded to
be quiet, and to keep silence: and the saying of Cato is excellent, he is next
God, who knows in reason to be silent.

And that you may see how suitable and agreeable the things which I have already
declared concerning Divine Inspiration, (as being absolutely necessary for the
attaining of the true knowledge of God) are unto the principles of Socrates and
Plato, whom Augustine in his Books de Civitate Dei, commends as the best
Philosophers. I shall give you a sum of their Doctrine out of Marsilius
Ficinus, his argument in Euthydemum Platonis, that wisdom is not acquired so
much by humane study, as it is divinely infused into purified minds: yea,
Socrates in his discourse with Theages denies that ever any men learned ought
from him, neither would he acknowledge himself to have any further use unto
men, than to be as a Spiritual Midwife unto them, to help to bring forth that
wisdom or knowledge which God himself had put in them. And concerning the
necessity of inward silence, and unmoveableness of mind, in order to converse
with God, how agreeable it is to Socrates and Plato: let us further hear
Marsilius Ficinus, Theol. Platon. lib. 9. cap. 3. love God alone (says he) O
soul, love the Light alone, the infinite Light of the bountiful God love thou
infinitely; now thou shall shine, and be delighted infinitely; I pray thee
therefore seek his face, and thou shall rejoice for ever, but I pray thee be
not moved, that thou may touch that Light, because it is stability, be not
scattered through diverse things, that thou may apprehend it, for it is Unity.
Stay the motion, gather together the multitude, immediately thou shall find
God, who has already found thee. In this search, Oh how repugnant is the mind
unto all bodies, how much does it despise their Images, and deceits? How much
does it condemn the fantasy, and bodily senses?

Thirdly, As concerning that great duty of returning, or turning in, into the
heart, which our opposers, who deny Immediate Revelation and Inspiration, do so
much speak against, as nonsense, and the like, that it is a thing required of
God and commanded.

This I prove first from the testimony of Scripture, Deuteronomy 4.39. and know
this day, and return unto thy heart. So the Hebrew.

Deuteronomy 30.1. And shall return to thy heart, Hebrew. 1 Kings 8.47. if they
shall return unto their heart, so the Hebrew, and 1 Kings 8.48. and shall
return unto thee in their whole heart.

Isaiah 46.8. Return O ye transgressors unto the heart, so the Hebrew, and the
Old Latin.

Lamentations of Jeremy, Therefore, or for this, will I return unto my heart,
that so I may wait: cap. 3.21.

Secondly, I prove the same from antiquity.

I. Augustine quinquagena 2 a Psalm 57.10. citante Beda. The written Law, what
cryteth it unto them, who have forsaken the Law written in their hearts; return
O ye transgressors unto the heart.

Observe, it is worth your observation, that all along the Translators have
otherwise translated all these places of Scripture, which expressly mention this
great duty of returning unto the heart, because, as seems, they were ignorant
of it, as people generally now are, who when they hear us bidding them turn
into their hearts or minds, are ready to gnash their teeth at us, and to say
(as I have heard them) there is no good in our hearts, what should we turn in
unto them for; and surely, if there were no Divine Revelation in the heart, it
were in vain to turn in unto it.

Again, Augustine in his Confessions, lib. 7. cap. 10. And being upon this
admonished to return unto my self, I entered even into my inwards, thou (O Lord)
leading me, and I was able to do it, for thou becamest my helper; I entered into
my self, and with the eye of my soul, I saw, over the eye of my soul, over my
mind, the unchangeable Light of the Lord. Observe how Augustine first turned in,
to his heart, that he might see the Light of the Lord; but they who believe not
that there is any Light of the Lord to be seen in their hearts, think it in
vain to turn into their hearts. And verily most men are so turned (or
extraverted) unto outward objects, that for them to be turned inward, unto an
invisible object of Light and Life from God in their hearts, is to make them
change their element, which they are as unwilling to do, as the Fish is to
leave the water. And on the contrary, one that is truly an inward liver, and is
come to converse with the inward Light, and Life, and Word of God in his heart,
is an unwilling to leave this place, and go forth unto outward things, which
are but as shadows, in respect of that inward substance, which is to be found
and enjoyed in the heart.

II. The Author de Spiritu and Anima, joined with Augustine, cap. 34. Let the
mind therefore return unto it self, and gather it self into it self.

III. Bernard de Conversione ad clerum cap. 2. as yet wisdom cries in the
streets, return unto the heart, O ye Transgressors: for this is the beginning
of the Lords speech, and it appears, that this word has gone before unto
all, who are turned unto the heart. Observe how Bernard understands it to be
one of the first things which God speaks to the heart, to return unto the heart.

Again, Bernard in Sermon de verbis Habakkuk, super custodiam meam Stabo. But
he calls back sinners unto the heart, and reproves them for the error of the
heart, because he dwells there, and there he speaks.

Again, Bernard, Tractatu de Precepto and Dispensatione. Surely to seek the
Kingdom of God and the Righteousness thereof, ye shall endeavor rather to
enter within your selves, than to go sorth, or to ascend above.

Again in his Epistle 108. I pray thee return unto the heart.

Again, e Sermon parvo de tribus panibus.

A Friend comes unto me, off the way, when forsaking transitory things, I
return unto the heart, as it is written, return unto the heart ye
Transgressors, Isa. 46.8.

Again, in the Treatise de Domo interiori. cap. 14.

But now (says he) perhaps, thou have ascended. Now thou have returned unto
thy heart, and have learned there to stand; neither let this suffice thee,
learn to dwell there, and to make it a mansion, and by whatsoever wandering of
mind, thou be drawn from thence, hasten always to return thither again. Without
doubt by much use at some time it shall become a delight unto thee, insomuch
that without any difficulty of labor thou may be there daily: yea, it will
be rather a pain unto thee, to make a stay any where else but there.

And as touching waiting, or watching for the Lord, in the inward retiredness
or recollection of the mind, see what Bernard says.

Bernard, Sermon de visitationibus Domini.

Who is among us so vigilant and observant of the time of his Visitation, and
diligently searching after the coming of the Bridegroom at all moments: so that
when he comes and knocks, it is opened unto him. -- and after, Surely our
want does argue us of neglect and carelessness: for if any of us, uprightly and
perfectly (according to the word of the Wise man) would deliver up his heart to
watch for the Lord early who made it, and would pray in the sight of the Most
High, and also by all endeavors study, according to the Prophet Isaiah, to
prepare the ways of the Lord, and to make straight the paths of his God. Who
has to say, with the Prophet, my eyes are ever unto the Lord, and I have had
the Lord always in my sight, shall not he receive a blessing from the Lord, and
mercy from the God of his Salvation. Surely he shall be frequently visited,
neither shall he ever be ignorant of the time of his Visitation however so
secretly, and as a thief he comes, who visits in Spirit, who is a modest
lover, and while he is yet afar off, he well watching soul, with a sober mind
shall perceive him.

Now that silent waiting is according unto Scripture, I have above showed out
of the Lamentations. Also the words of Habakkuk do plainly hold forth the same,
I will stand on my watch, and I will hear what the Lord will speak in me.

Moreover, that Socrates and Plato taught this doctrine of the converting or
turning in of a man to himself, to within himself, to behold the innate idea of
virtue in him, see Plato his Charmides.

And as concerning profiting by silence in the company of good men, Seneca that
renowned Philosopher says thus, Epistola 94. est aliquid quod ex magno viro
vel tacente proficias, there is somewhat that thou may profit by a great man,
(to wit who is great in virtue) even when he is silent.

And concerning retiring unto a man's self, to converse with the Divine Spirit
that is within him; that famous Emperor and Philosopher Marcus Aurelius
Antoninus, in his Books of Meditation concerning himself, lib. 4. number. 3. says
thus, A man cannot any whther retire better than to his own soul. And again, he
says, afford then thy self this retiring continually, and thereby refresh and
renew thy self: and lib. 2. number. 11. It is sufficient (says he) for a man to
apply himself wholly, and to confine all his thoughts and care to the tendance
of that Spirit which is within him, and truly and really to serve him: his
service does consist in this, that a man keep himself pure from all violent
passion and evil affection, from all rashness and vanity, and from all manner
of discontent, either in regard of the Gods or men. Note that by the Gods,
Antonius, Seneca, Socrates, Plato and others of the best Philosophers,
understood Angels and Immortal Spirits (which the Scripture at times calls
also Gods) for they did believe there was but only one supreme and infinite God
the Creator, and upholder of all things, who is over all, blessed for ever.

THE END.

