The ARGUMENTS OF THE QUAKERS. More particularly, Of George Whitehead. William
Penn. Robert Barclay. John Gratton. George Fox. Humphry Norton,
And my own, AGAINST Baptism and the Supper Examined and Refuted. ALSO Some
clear Proofs from Scripture; showing that they are Institutions of Christ under
the Gospel. WITH An APPENDIX, Containing some Observations upon some Passages,
in a Book of W. Penn, called, A Caveat against Popery. And on some Passages of
a Book of John Pennington, called, The Fig Leaf Covering Discovered.

By George Keith.

1. John 4.1 Beloved, believe not every Spirit, but try the Spirits whether
they are of God.

Chrysostom. Homil. on Matthew. If thou had been without a Body, God had given
the things naked, and without a Body, but because the Soul is planted in the
Body, he gives thee intelligible things in things sensible.

London, Printed for C. Brom at the Gun at the West End of St. Paul's
Churchyard. School.

TO THE READER.
Diverse Weighty Reasons have induced me to this Undertaking. One whereof
chiefly is; that whereas most of these Men, have not only run out with bitter
Invectives against these Divine Institutions; but have Fathered their Bold
Opposition to them upon the Holy Spirit, (as they commonly do their other Gross
Errors) a Witness whereof, is W. Penn, in his Book against Thomas Hicks,
called, Reason against Railing; who says in p. 109. concerning these
Institutions, We can testify from the same Spirit, by which Paul Renounced
Circumcision; that they are to be rejected, as not now required. Now if upon
due Trial, their Arguments they have used, and still use against them are found
to be Vain and Invalid, Grounded upon gross Wrestings and Perversions of Holy
Scripture; and that it be proved by sound Arguments, that they were, and are
true Divine Institutions under the pure Gospel Dispensation; not only their too
Credulous Followers; but the Teachers themselves, such of them as are alive,
may have occasion to reflect upon the Spirit, which had acted their first
Leaders to oppose those things, as well as other great Truths of the Gospel;
and thereby discern that it was not the Spirit of God, but a Spirit of Untruth,
and may judge it forth from among them, and be humbled before the Lord for
entertaining it. Another Reason is, (which is indeed my chiefest Reason) That
whereas I had formerly been Swayed and Biased by the undue Opinion I had of
their chief Teachers and Leaders, who had Printed Books long before I came
among them, as being greatly endued with Divine Revelations and Inspirations;
and that I too Credulously believe their Bold and False Asseverations; that
what they had said and Printed against the outward Baptism, and outward Supper,
was given forth from the Spirit of Truth in them; by means whereof, I had been
drawn into the same Error, (as many other well meaning, and simple Hearted
Persons have been, and still are by them) to oppose these Divine Institutions,
and have in some of my Printed Books used some of the same Arguments which they
had used; I having in a Measure of Sincerity (I hope) Repented, and been
humbled before the Lord, for that my said Error; whereof I have given a Public
Acknowledgment in Print, in my late Book, called, George Keith's Explications
and Retractions; and wherein I have not only Retracted my Errors in Relation to
outward Baptism and the Supper; but in Relation also to diverse other
Particulars therein mentioned (but withal holding close to my Testimony in all
Principles of Christian Faith and Doctrine, delivered by me in any of my former
Books) I judged it my Duty, (besides my Public Acknowledgment and
Retracttation of the Error) to endeavor according to the Ability given me of
God, of a better Understanding, to undeceive and reduce from the said Error,
any into whose Hands my Books have come, Treating on that Subject; who have
been deceived, or hurt by them. For as the Law of God requires Restitution for
any Wrong done to a Neighbor in Worldly Matters; so I judge it no less
requires the like in Spirituals. And as the Law required an Eye for an Eye;
the Gospel requires, that whom we have in any degree been accessory to Blind,
or Misinform their Understandings, we should labor to our outmost Ability
(after we are better Enlightened our selves) to Enlighten and duly Inform them;
so far as God shall be pleased to make us his Instruments in so doing, to whom
it chiefly belongs. Know therefore, Friendly Reader; that what Arguments I have
used in any of my Books against the outward Baptism and Supper, particularly in
that, called, Truth's Defense; and in another, called, The Presbyterian and
Independent visible Churches in New England, and elsewhere brought to the Test,
Cap. 10. and in another, called, The pretended Antidote proved Poison; and in
another, called, A Refutation of Pardon Tillinghast, who pleads for
Water Baptism, its being a Gospel Precept. As I hereby declare them to be void
and null; so I do in this following Treatise show the Nullity and Invalidity of
them; by answering not only them, but diverse others of other Persons (together
with them) as above named in the Title Page of this Treatise. And so far as the
Arguments are the same, which both they and I have used; one Answer will serve
to both; though I never was so blind, as not to see the Weakness of diverse
Reasons of some of their Great Authors against these Institutions. But the
Truth is, diverse of their Weakest and most Impertinent Arguments. I never heard
nor read, till of late, that Providence brought to my hand some of their Books
I never heard of before.

The CONTENTS.
SECT. I. Contains a Correction of R.B. his great Mistake; That the Eating
Christ's Flesh, John 6. has no Relation to Christ's outward Flesh. The
Quotation of Augustine vindicated from his Mistake. SECT. II. Contains a
Vindication of B Jewel's words, on Jos. 6.1, 2, 3. from the Great
Misconstruction that W. Penn has put on them, contrary to B. Jewel's intended
Sense. R.B. his Arguments to prove that the Flesh of Christ, John 6.53. has no
Relation to his outward Flesh, Answered. SECT. III. Contains a Correction of
two Unsound Assertions of R.B. concerning Christ's Flesh and Blood. SECT. IV.
Shows R.B's Mistake, in saying that both Papists and Protestants tie the
Participation of the Body and Blood of Christ to the outward Sign of Bread,
etc. And his other Mistake; that the whole end of the Paschal Lamb, was to
signify the Jews, and keep them in remembrance of their Deliverance out of
Egypt. The true Sense of Paul's words given; The Bread which we break, etc. 1.
Cor. 10.16. SECT. V. Shows R.B. his Mistake; as if the Cup of the Lord, and
Table of the Lord, 1. Cor. 10.21. did not signify the use of Bread and Wine,
etc. His Reasons against it proved invalid. His Argument from the Custom of the
Jews using Bread and Wine at the Passover, Answered. His other Arguments, from
the supposed difficulties about the time of practicing it; the sort of Bread
and Wine to be used, etc. Answered. SECT. VI. Shows R.B. his Mistake, that
the Eating in these Words, Take, Eat, etc. do this in remembrance of me, was
their common Eating. The continuance of the Supper, Argued from 1. Cor. 11.23.
etc. That the coming of Christ, meant in these Words, until he come, is his
outward and last coming at the end of the World. SECT. VII. Contains three
Reasons, That by his coming, 1 Cor. 11.26. is meant his outward coming. SECT.
VIII. Contains three other Reasons for the same. R.B. his Argument from the
Syriack Translation, in 1. Cor. 11.26. etc. Answered. SECT. IX. Contains R.B.
his last Argument against the outward Baptism and Supper, Answered, respecting
the Power to Administer them; as whether Mediate or Immediate. The Collective
Body of the Protestant Churches, may by Allusion, or an Hypothesis, besaid to
answer to the Church of Sardis; which was not blamed for Idolatry, but
otherwise. An Advice to all sincere Christians, agreeing in Fundamentals, to
own one another as Brethren. SECT. X. Shows, that many in the Protestant
Churches, can give greater Evidence of their true inward Call to the Ministry,
than many of the Teachers among the Quakers. Want of due Administrators, no
Argument against Baptism and the Supper. An Advertisement, concerning W. Del's
Book against Baptism. Good Advice to the Quakers, concerning those
Institutions. SECT. XI. Contains some Arguments of G. Fox, and Humphry
Norton, with their Answers, and some dreadful Words of Humphry Norton, against
our Savior's last coming; though the Man was highly commended by E. Borough
and F. Howgil. Great Teachers among the Qaukers. SECT. XII. Contains some
Scripture Proofs, showing that Baptism and the Supper are Institions of Christ.
PART I.
SECT. I. An Impartial Examination, and Refutation of their Arguments against
Water-Baptisme.
IN a Book of George Whitehead's, whose Title is, The Authority of the true
Ministry in Baptizing with the Spirit, and the Idolatry of such Men as are
doting about Shadows and Carnal Ordinances; [here note his severe Charge] p.
13. he brings three Reasons or Arguments to prove that in the Commission
which Christ gave to his Discipless, in Matthew. 29.19. Mark 16.18.
Water-Baptisme was not intended, but the Baptism of the Spirit.

His first Argument is, If the Baptism which Christ commanded in Matthew. 28.19.
Mark 16.16. was a Baptism, without which a Man cannot be saved; then it was
not the Baptism of outward Water, ( for Water-Baptisme is not of necessity to
Salvation, neither is there any stress for Salvation laid upon is) but it was
that Baptism, without which Men cannot be saved, which Christ commanded,
Matthew. 28. therefore not Water-Baptisme, I prove (says he) the Minor
Proposition thus: No man can be saved without being Baptized into the Name of
God, and his Son Christ Jesus, for his Name is the Word of God by which
Salvation comes, and by no other Name, and the Lord is one, and his Name one,
and it was into his Name, that the Disciples were commanded to Baptize People.

Ans. Here G. Whitehead would appear to be some body in Logic (though it is
judged by many of his Brethren to be little better than a piece of the black
Art) but he has in this sufficiently discovered his Ignorance, both in true
Divinity and true Logic. The Fallacy of his Argument is in this apparent, that
in his supposed Proof of that he calls the Minor Proposition, he confounds
Baptism into the Name, and the Name it self, for says he, his Name is the
word of God by which Salvation comes. But though Salvation comes by the word
of God, and none can be saved without that Word, yet it does not follow, that
none can be saved without such a Baptism as the Apostles did Baptize with into
the Name of that Word; for as they were to Baptize into the Name of the Lord
Jesus Christ, and in the Name of the Father, etc. So they were to Teach in that
Name, but this proves not that they were not to teach outwardly, and they were
to work Miracles in that Name; it does not therefore follow that they were not
to work outward Miracles visible to Men's outward sight. Again, G. Whitehead
uses the Name word of God, in a too narrow and limited Sense; for the full
Name of Christ is not the word only, but the word made Flesh, or the word
having assumed the true Nature of Man, and that by the Name of Christ here is
understood the Name of the Man Christ who was Crucified, is clear from Paul's
words to the Corinthians: Was Paul Crucified for you, or were ye Baptized into
the Name of Paul? Signifying, that they were Baptized into the Name of Christ
Crucified, which has a necessary Relation to the Man Christ, and to Christ
considered as truly as Man, as God, and thought the word is a Name proper to
the Son, yet it is not the Name either of the Father, or of the Holy Ghost, for
that were to confound, and wholly to destroy the distinction of the Relative
Properties of Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, which was the Sabellian Heresy* The
Minor thereof of his Argument is Fallaciously proved by him, and his Assertion
is false, viz. That the Baptism without which Men cannot be saved was the
Baptism which Christ Commanded to the Apostles, if by the words cannot be
saved, he means, absolutely impossible; for he has not in the least proved
that it was not Water-Baptisme which Christ Commanded; but whereas his Argument
seems to depend on this, that becomes Water-Baptisme is not absolutely
necessary to Salvation, therefore Christ did not Command it. But he should
learn better to distinguish things absolutely necessary to Salvation, and
things necessary in some respect, and very profitable, though not of absolute
necessity, and the like distinction G. Whitehead must allow with respect to his
and his Brethrens Ministry, Preaching, and Writing which they suppose Christ
has Commanded them, and yet he will not say his and their Ministry Preaching
and Writing is absolutely necessary to any Man's Salvation. Besides it does
absolutely contradict G. Whitehead's declared Principle concerning the
Sufficiency of the Light within every Man to Salvation without any thing else;
to affirm that Men could not be saved, unless the Apostles had Baptized them
according to Christ's Command, even supposing it had been the Baptism of the
Spirit, which the Apostles had been Commanded to Administer, for this World
have made the Salvation of Men depend upon the Ministry of Apostles, and their
Successors in the outward Exercise of their Spiritual Gift of Preaching and
Prayer; now before the Apostles Administered this Baptism (suppose it be that
of the Spirit) the Men to whom they were sent had the Light in them, which was
sufficient to Salvation without any thing else, according to G. Whitehead's
Doctrine, and consequently without all Ministry of the Apostles; and had they
never heard or seen the Apostles, or any other Men, had they given due
Attendance and Obedience to the ^ight within, that that would have saved them
(according to G. Whitehead's Divinity) without any other Baptism, outward or
inward, that the Apostles could Administer unto them.

SECT. II.
Next, as to his second Argument from that in Mark 16.16. He that believes and
is baptized shall be saved; these words do not prove that this was not Baptism
with Water; for its a true Assertion, he that believes and is Baptized with
Water shall be saved; but it will not prove, that therefore Baptism with Water
is of absolute necessity to Salvation, the most it proves, is, that Baptism
with Water, when and where it can be duly had is a means of Salvation, as
outward Hearing, and Reading in the Holy Scriptures are means of Salvation, yet
not of such absolute necessity, but that Men may be saved without them; even as
it may be truly said, he that believes, and frequenteth the Meetings of the
Faithful shall be saved, and yet in diverse Cases Men may be saved without
frequenting such Meetings, as when they are hindered by Sickness, or
Imprisonment, or some other Restraint, as when living in a Country where no
such Meetings are to be found, and that the Baptism mentioned, Mark 16. is not
that which is of absolute necessity to Salvation, is evident from the following
Words, where the word Baptized is omitted; for Christ did not say, he that is
not baptized shall be damned, but he that believes not shall be damned; the
varying of the Expression sufficiently proves that he did not mean the inward
Baptism, but the outward; and whereas not G. Whitehead, but W. Penn, and R.
Barclay, argue from the Particle in Greek, that signifies in English into,
that therefore it must be the Baptism with the Spirit, it is indeed very
weakly and fallaciously argued, for the same Greek Particle is found Acts,
8.16. where it is said, that these of Samaria, who were Baptized into the Name
of the Lord Jesus had not received the Holy Ghost, when so Baptized, till for
some time after, that Peter and John came unto them, the Greek Particle, (...)
is the same here, and in Matthew. 28.19. And any who have but a little skill in
Greek know, that the Greek Particle (...) has often the same signification,
with the Greek Particle (...), and signifies as well in, as into, so that
their so arguing is built on a Grammatical Quibble that is altogether
groundless. And for them to argue, that it was not Water-Baptisme, which Christ
commanded to the Apostles, Matthew. 28.19, because of the words Baptizing into
the name, etc. with as much color of reason they might argue, that when in
James 5.14. It is said anointing them with Oil in the name of the Lord, that
the anointing there meant was not an outward anointing but an inward, and that
the Oil was not outward but inward.

Again, whereas G.W. says on this second Argument, for the Saints were saved
by that Baptism, which was not the putting away the filth of the Flesh, but
the answer of a good Conscience, 1. Pet. 3.21. Therefore it was not
Water-Baptisme which Christ commanded in Matthew. 28. etc. I answer, that does no
wise follow that therefore it was not Water-Baptisme*

SECT. III.
AND because I find that Robert Barclay in that Chapter of his Printed Apology,
reprinted by his Son Robert Barclay at London, 1696, does much insist upon this
place in Peter, as if it did effectually prove that Water-Baptisme is no Gospel
Institution, and it is a common Text the Teachers among the Quakers bring to
oppose Baptism with Water; therefore I think fit the more fully to examine the
Arguments brought by him from this place against it. But in the first place, I
do apologize for my meddling to answer or correct any Passages in the Books of
R. Barclay, whom as I did greatly love and esteem, and who, I believe, was one
of the foundest Writers* among the People called Quakers, so I do truly honor
his memory, believing that as to the main, he was a true Christian, though in
diverse things, he was biased and misled, as I also was, by the too great
esteem that he had, and too great credit he gave, (as I also did) of those
called his Elders, whose gross perversions and misinterpretations of Holy
Scripture, we both did upon their Authority take for Divine Inspirations, and I
hope it may be a just Apology to me, and defense against the injurious Clamours
of some, that may and will object it against me, as a breach of Friendship, to
censure or correct any thing of that my deceased Friend: That I do no otherwise
in this Case; than I would be done by; for, if after my decease, (as well as
before) any Friend of mine should censure and correct any Passages in any Books
of mine that did justly need such Censure and Correction, I and all that love
me should take it, as a true act of Friendship; it being the best way to cover
the Faults of our Friends, or were it of our Parents, to correct them, and
though Men may be dear to us, yet Truth ought to be more dear; nor do I thus
censuring and correcting what I judge amiss in R.B. on these Heads, do any more
wrong to him, than I do to my self, whom I have impartially censured, and now
again do, freely declaring* whatever I have said, or writ any where against
Baptism with Water, and the Outward Supper, as being no Gospel Institution was
erroneous, and which therefore I retract and correct. And where I have used
diverse of the same Arguments, which G.W. and R.B. has used, which I find R.B.
has been more large upon than I have any where been in any of my Books;
therefore I shall rather consider these Arguments as brought by him, than by
me, especially for this cause, that he is jugded by many of the Quakers to have
writ more forcibly against these matters than most have, or then I have done.

R.B. thus argues from 1 Pet. 3.21. (see page 16. of his Sons Edition called
Baptism and the Supper substantially asserted) The Apostle (says he) tells us
first negatively, what it is not, viz. not a putting away of the filth of the
Flesh, then surely it is not a washing with Water, since that is so.

Answer, That the Baptism there described is not a putting away the filth of
the Flesh is granted, but it does not follow, that therefore it is not
Water-Baptisme, for though ordinary washing with Water is a doing away Bodily
filthiness, yet Baptism with Water is not, not ever was, nay not John's
Baptism with Water; for John did not say that he baptized his Disciples to
wash away the filth of their Bodies, but unto Repentance. The description of
Baptism here given by Peter, is taken from the end, as is very common both in
Scripture and elsewhere, to describe a thing from its end; now the end of
Water-Baptisme, as it was commanded by Christ,. Matthew. 28.19. was not to put
away the filthiness of the Flesh, but to signify the inward washing by the
Blood and Spirit of Christ upon the Soul and Conscience, the which when so
washed is a good Conscience, and the effect of that inward washing is the
answer of a good Conscience, and indeed to me it is evident, that Peter in this
description of Baptism first negatively, what it is not, does refer by way of
comparison to the legal purifyings under Moses Law, by Blood, and the Ashes of
an Heiser with Water sprinkling the Unclean, which as the Author to the Hebrews
says, sanctified to the purifying the Flesh, Heb. 9.13. and yet even this
washing was not to cleanse the Body from natural filth, but from the legal
uncleanness that Men had on diverse occasions, as when they touched a dead Body
they were legally unclean, and because of that they were not to come into the
Tabernacle, until they were cleansed with this Water of purifying sprinkled on
them. But the Baptism with Water under the Gospel, had not that but a greater
signification, and being duly received had a greater and more noble effect)
viz. to signify the spiritual cleansing by Christ, and to be a means of Grace,
far greater than under the Law.

Again p. 17. He thus argues, If we take the second and affirmative
definition, to wit, that it is the Answer or Confession of a good Conscience,
etc. then Water-Baptisme is not it, since as our Adversaries will not deny,
Water-Baptisme does not always imply it, neither is it any necessary
consequence thereof.

Answ. This Consequence also is not good, because though Water-Baptisme in the
literal sense strictly taken, without any Metonymy is not the answer of a good
Conscience, as the Lamb was not the Passover, but a signification of it, yet
the Lamb is called in Scripture the Passover, by a Metonymy of the Sign put for
the thing signified, that is very common in Scripture, as in other Authors, so
the Baptism with Water, metonymically may be called, the answer of a good
Conscience, being the thing signified thereby. That he says, their Adversaries
will not deny, that Water-Baptisme does not always imply it, neither is it any
necessary consequence thereof; in that he was under a mistake, for they will
say, and do say, that Water-Baptisme does always imply it, to such as duly and
worthily receive it; and that it is always a necessary consequence or
concomitant thereof upon due and well qualified Receivers. And if nothing
appear to the contrary by words or actions, but that the receivers are duly
qualified (though some of them be not such really) yet in the judgment of
Charity, even according to Scripture rule, they are called such, as Paul
calls these of the Churches to whom he writ Saints, and yet no doubt all were
not real Saints in the Churches, though by Profession they were such.

Again, whereas page 18. he argues thus: Peter calls this here which saves
the Antitypos, the Antitype, or the thing figured, whereas it is usually
translated, as if the like figure did now save us, thereby insinuating, that as
they were saved by Water in the Ark, so are we now by Water-Baptisme, but this
Interpretation (he says) crosses his sense.

Answ. His Argument from the Greek word used by Peter, viz. Antitypos (he
should have said (...) in the neuter gender) is indeed altogether weak and
groundless, as if it only signified the thing and could not be understood of
the Figure of the thing, the contrary whereof appears from Heb. 9.24. where
the holy Places made with hands are called (...), i. e. the Antitypes of the
true, which are truly translated the Figures of the true holy Places made
without hands.

Again, whereas he argues, that Water-Baptisme is not meant (p. 19.) in 1 Pet.
3.21. that the Baptism there mentioned, is said to save us; but Protestants
deny it to be absolutely necessary to Salvation.

Answ. Nor has this Argument any force, for though it is not absolutely
necessary to Salvation, yet that it is in God's ordinary way, where it can be
duly had, and by whom it is duly received one of the ordinary means of
Salvation; it is truly said to save as the Doctrine of the Gospel outwardly
Preached by the Ministry of Men, is saving by way of means, and as the Holy
Scriptures are said by Paul to be able to make wise unto Salvation, through
Faith in Christ Jesus, and said Paul to Timothy, 1 Timothy 4.16. Take heed unto
thy self, and unto thy Doctrine, continue in them, for in doing this, thou
shall both save thy self and them that hear thee: And as concerning the means
of Salvation, though all of them, when really given of God, are very
profitable, yet all are not alike necessary, nor alike given, nor afforded unto
all; some, yea, many never perhaps heard the Gospel truly Preached unto them by
the Voice of Man, yet having the Scriptures read unto them, that has proved an
outward means of their Salvation, the Lord working inwardly by his Grace and
Spirit, to make the same effectual to them. And as at times the Book of the
Holy Scriptures supplieth the defect of a Vocal Ministry, so at times, a Vocal
Ministry does supply the want of the Book of the Scriptures; and thus, though
Baptism and the Supper outwardly administered are means of Grace and Salvation,
when duly received, yet they are not so necessary, as the Doctrine of the
Gospel, as outwardly delivered by Men, and the Books of the Holy Scripture.

If any shall object, that it is better to keep to the literal Sense of the
words in Peter, than to run to the Metonymy, which ought not to be done, but in
case of necessity; I answer what way soever, the Baptism in 1 Pet. 3.32. be
taken, as suppose for the Baptism of the Spirit, yet such whosoever take it must
run to a Metonymy, for the inward Baptism of the Holy Spirit, is not the
Answer or Confession of a good Conscience, otherwise than by a Metonymy of the
Cause, for the effect. The Answer or Confession of a good Conscience, being the
effect of the inward Baptism and operation of the Spirit, and not the inward
Baptism it self. And indeed such Figures and Metonymycal Speeches are very
frequent in Scripture, to which for not well adverting, many are drawn into
most false Interpretations of Scriptures, and most hurtful Errors, as the
Papists by taking the words of Christ, this is my Body, in a mere literal
Sense, without any Metonymy. To conclude upon this Argument, the most that with
any color or shadow of Reason can be inferred from this place, in 1 Pet. 3.21.
is that Water-Baptisme alone, neither does, or can save any without the inward
Baptism, or operation of the Spirit; all which is readily granted, nor yet
does the inward Baptism, though joined to the outward save, without any thing
else, but both the inward Baptism, and outward do save us, as Peter plainly
declares by the Resurrection of Jesus Christ from the Dead, nor need the
inward and outward Baptism be strictly called two Baptisms, more than England,
and a Map of England, are called two England's, or the Law writ in the Heart,
and the same writ in Paper, are two Laws. And thus I hope I have fully examined
and answered to the Argument, both of G. Whitehead, and R.B. from 1 Pet. 3.21.
as the impartial intelligent Reader may perceive.

SECT. IV.
THE third Argument used by G. Whitehead, is the same for Matter that is used
by R.B. in the Treatise above cited, p. 30. which they bring from Paul's words,
1 Cor. 1.17. where Paul said, that Christ sent him not to baptize, but to
preach the Gospel. The reason of that Consequence (says R.B) is undeniable,
because the Apostle Paul 's Commission was as large as that of any of them. And
whereas it has been answered to this, by them who holds that Baptism with
Water is a Gospel Institution, from Matthew. 28.19. that the Sense of Paul's
words is, that he was not sent principally to Baptize, not that he was not sent
at all, as where it is said, Hos. 6.6. I desired mercy, and not sacrifice. But
this parity R.B. does except against, because this place is abundantly
explained by the following words, and the knowledge of God more than
burnt-offerings. -- But there is no such words added in that of Paul. And
against this manner of interpreting Paul's words, he thus argues, else we
might interpret by the same rule all other places of Scriptures, the same way,
as where the Apostle says, 1. Cor. 2.5. That your faith might not stand in the
wisdom of men, but in the power of God, it might be understood, it shall not
stand principally so. How might the Gospel by this liberty of interpretation be
perverted?

Ans. As we are not to Interpret all other Places of the like Phrase so, else
great harm would follow in giving false Interpretations of Scripture, so we
ought to Interpret diverse places of Scripture, so, to wit, by adding the word,
only, or more, or principally, otherwise the like harm would follow, as where
it is said, 1. John 3.18. -- Let us not love in word, nor in tongue, but indeed
and in truth, and Romans 2.13. For not the hearers of the law are just before
God, etc. John 14.24. The word which you hear is not mine, but the Fathers
which sent me. Matthew. 15.24. I am not sent, but to the lost sheep of the house
of Israel, John. 4.42. We believe not because of thy saying. Matthew. 10.20. It
is not ye that speak, etc. In these and diverse the like places of Scripture,
the word principally, or more, or rather, though not expressed, is understood,
and there is a good Rule whereby to know when any such word, when not
expressed, is necessarily understood, as when without any such word understood,
or employed, when not expressed, it would contradict some other place of
Scriptures, or any true consequence from Scripture, or true Reason, as is
manifest in the present Case, for Paul tells, in the same Chapter, that he
Baptized some of the Church of Corinth, which he ought not to have done without
a Commission; for as to what is alleged, that he and others did Baptize by
Permission, and not by Commission, as when he Circumcised Timothy, it was by
Permission, and not by Commission, which conceit I grant I had formerly
entertained as well as R.B. being swayed by the assumed Authority of them we
esteemed our Elders, pretending they did so Interpret the Scriptures by Divine
Inspiration. But finding their Pretenses to be palpably false in many other
things of greater weight, occasioned me to examine their pretended Inspirations
in this also, which (I desire to praise God for his true Illumination) I found
to be false. Now that Paul's Circumcising Timothy was not by Commission, is
certain, because sometimes afterward he did earnestly oppose the practice of
it, but we never find that he, or any else in Scripture opposed the practice of
Baptism with Water, or spoke so slightly of it, as he did of Circumcision; he
did not say, if any of you be Baptized, Christ should profit you nothing, as he
said, if any of you be Circumcised, and he submitted to Baptism himself, and
received it. Acts 9.18. compared with Acts 22.16. Though I find that W. Penn
calls it in question, whether this was Baptism with Water, which bespeaketh
as great inadvertency in him, as when he had printed in his Christian Quaker,
that Jesus Christ was born at Nazareth. And as for Paul's saying, he thanked
God he Baptized none of the Corinthians, but such and such, it only proves
that he judged Preaching to be his principal work, as indeed it was; for had he
Baptized all to whom he Preached, and who were Converted by his Ministry, it
would have been too great a hindrance to his Preaching; and as Paul Preached to
many whom he did not Baptize, so did the other Apostles; therefore we find not
either Peter, or John, or any of the other Apostles after our Savior's
Resurrection, Baptized all to whom they Preached, but left it to be done in
great part by others; and whereas some have argued, that if Baptism had been a
Gospel Precept, Paul would not have said, he thanked God he had Baptized so few
of them: This Argument has no force, for he did not thank God, simply that he
did not Baptize, but that he had Baptized so few of them, lest they should say,
he had Baptized in his own Name, which shows, that the occasion of the
Division that was among the Corinthians at that time was about Baptism, and
that they had too much an eye to those who had Baptized them, so as to
denominate themselves after them. And whereas, R.B. says, p. 32.33. Let it
from this be considered how the Apostle Excludes Baptizing, not Preaching,
though the abuse (mark) proceeded from that, no less than from the other; for
these Corinthians did denominate themselves from those different Persons, by
whose Preaching (as well as from those by whom they were Baptized) they were
Converted; as by the 4, 5, 6, 7. and 8 Verses of the third Chapter may appear.

Ans. But that the Preaching of these different Persons was the occasion of
this Division among the Corinthians, does not appear from the Verses Cited, nor
any where else, for Paul, and Apollo Preached the same Doctrine to them; but we
no where find that there Preaching occasioned any Division; but suppose it had,
on the supposition, that some of the Corinthians might esteem the Preaching of
the one, more powerful than the Preaching of another; yet that proves not that
Paul Excluded Baptizing; the most it proves, is, that he preferred, his
Preaching to his Baptizing, as being the greater and more principal Work
enjoyed to him.

Page 33. And yet for to remove that Abuse (says R.B.) the Apostle does not
say, he was not sent to Preach, nor yet does he Rejoice that he had only
Preached to a few, because Preaching being a standing Ordinance in the Church,
is not because of any Abuse that the Devil may tempt any to make of it, to be
forborne by such as are called to perform it by the Spirit of God.

Ans. All this is exceeding weak Reasoning, and proceeds upon a false
Supposition; that because Baptism was abused, therefore it was simply to be
forborne, or laid aside; no such thing appears mentioned in Scripture; for
though Paul Baptized but a few of the Corinthians, he did not tell them that
few were Baptized by any others. But the contrary appears from his words, that
all the believing Corinthians were Baptized, though not by him, yet by some
other, 1 Cor. 1.13. If some of them had not been Baptized at all, it had been
improper for him to ask them were they Baptized in the Name of Paul? And though
Preaching be the greater Ordinance, as practiced by the Apostles, and is not
simply to be forborne, yet occasions might and may happen that might cause it to
be forborne at some certain time and place: As suppose, some had certainly
informed Paul, that if he Preached at such a place, and at such a time, some
that did lay wait for him, would lay hands on him and kill him; on this
Advertisement, who will say, but Paul might feel in himself, not only a Liberty
to forbear going to Preach at such a place, and at such a time, but even a
Necessity laid on him not then to go; for we find, that not only Paul, when he
understood that some sought his Life, did seek to escape; but our blessed Lord
himself for a certain time did withdraw from such as sought his Life, because
his time to suffer was not then come. And as in that case, upon such certain
Information, Paul might have lawfully forborne to have Preached to People at
that place when his Life was in danger; so the Report being confirmed, that
such a Design was laid against him, he might have lawfully rejoiced and thanked
God, that he did not go to Preach at that place, at that time. And many the
like Examples might be brought to prove, that Preaching it self may Lawfully be
forborne, though not simply, yet at some occasion which might render the
forbearance of it at some certain place and time, both Lawful and Necessary;
and suppose a Preacher did foresee that his Preaching at such a place, at such
a day, should occasion by accident some Schism or Division among sincere
Professors of the Christian Faith, he might very lawfully forbear to do it at
that time, yea it were his Duty to forbear, and he might very justly rejoice
and thank God, that he did not Preach to them in that place, and at that time;
this needed not to have been so largely insisted upon, but for their sake, who
through their great Ignorance and Prejudice) lay so great stress on this sort
of Argument; as because Paul thanked God, he had Baptized but a few of the
Corinthians, therefore Baptism is no Gospel Institution; the weakness of which
consequence, I suppose is sufficiently manifest: On the contrary a good
Argument may be brought for Water-Baptisme, that seeing the abuse of it at
Corinth, or any where else, was no cause or occasion of laying it aside to any,
but that it was universally practiced on Believers in the Apostles Days,
insomuch that it cannot be instanced where any Church, Family, or Person that
did believe was not Baptized, that therefore it was practiced by Divine
institution, and not by Permission, such as Circumcision was; for neither
Circumcision, nor any other Jewish Rite was universally practiced, as Baptism
was; the abovesaid Argument, taken from Paul's words, he thanked God he
Baptized none but such and such, I find used by W. Penn, in his Book, called
Reason against Railing, p. 110. to which let the above mentioned Answer serve.

But I find some new Arguments used by G. Whitehead, in his Antidote, to prove
that Baptism with Water was not commanded to the Apostles, Matthew. 28.19. p.
120. Lo I am with you always, to the end of the World (says he) what for? to
enable them to Baptize with Water? No that many can do without him, or the
least sense of his Presence.

Ans. Of all the Arguments I ever heard against Baptism with Water, this is
one of the weakest, and too much favoring of Profanity, that ( says he) many
can do without him, but can they do it in Faith without him, and in true
Obedience to his Command? This Scoff of his, has equal weight against John's
Baptism, when in force, which he grants was with Water; and thus, as G.
Whitehead argues, John could, and did Baptize without Christ's inward
Presence, and the least sense of it, and it has the like force against all
External Acts of Religion commanded of God, both under the Law and Gospel; for
all External Acts simply considered, as such without regard to Faith, or the
inward Frame of the Mind, can be done as much without Christ, as Baptism with
Water; but none of them can be done as they ought without him. Has G.
Whitehead forgot Christ's Saying to his Disc^^les; without me ye can do
nothing; that he has so boldly contradicted him, to say, they could Baptize
with Water without him. This is more Profane and Scandalous, than what Samuel
Jennings said at a Monthly Meeting in Philadelphia, for which he was reproved
by diverse in the Meeting, and of which there is an account in Print. To do our
own Business as Men, we need not the help of the Spirit, but to do God's
Business we need it: But here according to G. Whitehead, when John Baptized
with Water, which was God's Business, it being commanded of God, he could do
that without him.

Another Argument of his in the same Page, is, It is not go Teach, and then
Baptize them with Water, but go teach all Nations, Baptizing them; and there
was a Divine and Spiritual Baptism immediately attending and present with
their Ministry.

Ans. This Argument is also weak, and grounded upon a Quibble, because it is
not said, go Teach, and then Baptize, but go Teach, Baptizing, etc. Because the
word Baptizing is a Participle; but this has not the weight of a Feather, it
is so light, and yet with such light airy Stuff have deceived many: For as the
word Baptizing is a Participle, both in the Greek and English; so the word
Translated go, set before Teach, in the Greek is a Participle (...) going (or
having gone) Teach. Now by the like Argument, because it is not said, first go,
and then Teach, but going, Teach; therefore every foot of their way, where ever
they went through, though they were not in sight or within hearing of any People,
before they came to them, they were to Preach; and by the like Argument, where
it is said, Mark. 1.5. And, were all Baptized of him in the river of Jordan,
confessing their sins. It is not said, they first Confessed, and then were
Baptized, or they were first Baptized, and then Confessed, according to G.
Whitehead, in the very first instant art of Baptizing, they confessed their
Sins, and neither before nor after. But that there was a Divine and Spiritual
Baptism that attended their Ministry to some, will not prove that they did
Baptize them with the Divine and Spiritual Baptism, which was the Work of God,
and of Christ, and promised by Christ to the Apostles and other Believers; but
was never commanded them to give it to others.

His Third Argument, is from Gal. 3.2. Received ye the spirit by the works of
the law, or by hearing of faith, etc. he therefore that ministers to you the
spirit, and works miracles among you; does he it by the works of the law, or
by the preaching of faith?

Ans. He takes it for granted; that by him that works Miracles among them,
and Ministers the Spirit unto them, is to be understood, Paul, or some other
Man, by whom they were Converted? But Paul it could not be, for the words being
in the Present Tense, implies a present Ministration of the Spirit, when Paul
wrote that Epistle unto them; but Paul was then at Rome, as the end of the
Epistle shows; nor was it any other Man, because they were already Converted,
and had received the Spirit, before he writ that Epistle unto them. Therefore
it is most proper to understand this; he to be Christ, who is the only
furnisher and supplyer of the Spirit, together with God, unto the Faithful; the
Greek word (...), is rendered Prebens Suppeditans, by Pasor, and does properly
signify the Principal Efficient from (...) dux chori the Captain of the
Chorus; but this is Christ who supplyeth and gives the Spirit to the Saints,
and neither Paul, nor any other Man. And that the Apostles were Ministers of
the Spirit, does not signify that they gave the Spirit, or Baptized with the
Spirit, but that they were assisted and guided by the Spirit in their Ministry;
and that God accompanied their Ministry with his (not their) giving the Spirit
unto such who believed their Doctrine.

SECT. V.
I Proceed in the next place, to examine all the other Arguments I find used by
W. Penn, and R. Barclay, against these Divine Institutions that seem to have
any shadow of weight.

The First Argument I find used by W. Penn, in his Reason against Railing, in
p. 107. is, first, says he, we know, and they confess that they were in the
beginning used as Figures and Shadows of a more hidden and Spiritual Substance.
2. That they were to endure no longer than till the Substance was come. Now the
time of the Baptism of the Holy Ghost, Christ's only Baptism therefore called
the one Baptism, has been long since come, consequently the other, which was
John 's, was fulfilled, and as becomes a forerunner ought to cease; the like
may be said of the Bread and Wine; for as there is but one Baptism, so there
is but one Bread. This same Argument for Matter, but in different words, is
used by R.B. in the above said Treatise, p. 7.8.

Answ. The Conclusion they both draw, viz. that John's Baptism is ceased, may
be granted, and yet it will not follow that Water-Baptisme, as it was practiced
by the Apostles and other Ministers after Christ's Resurrection and Ascension
is ceased; seeing there is great ground to distinguish betwixt John's
water-Baptisme, and the Apostles, in diverse weighty respects; as first the Man
Christ, after he rose from the Dead, having all Power given him in Heaven and
in Earth, Commissioned the Apostles to Baptize, and that with Water, as shall
be afterward proved more fully, but John had not his Commission from the Man
Christ, etc. 2. John did only Baptize them of his own Nation, and was only sent
to Israel, but the Apostles Commission reached to all Nations. 3. John though
he taught them to believe in him who was to come, to wit, Christ; yet he
required not Faith in Christ, as any condition to qualify his Disciples to
receive his Baptism; but the Apostles required Faith in Christ Jesus in all
the Men and Women, as a condition qualifying them to receive their Baptism. 4.
We do not find that the Holy Ghost was given or promised, to them who received
John's Baptism, but the promise of the Holy Ghost was given to such as did
duly and worthily receive the Apostles Baptism, therefore John's Baptism was
called the Baptism of Repentance. 5. It seems greatly probable, that some who
had received John's Baptism were again Baptized with the Apostles Baptism,
Acts 19.3.4, 5, 6. But whereas they both argue, from John's Words, I must
decrease, but he must increase; it has a further understanding, than barely as
in relation to John's Baptism, for it is said, John 4.12. that Jesus made and
Baptized more Disciples than John, though Jesus himself Baptized not, but his
Disciples; thus, John decreased, and Christ increased, when both
Water-Baptismes were in force, that Christ had more Disciples than John, even
when John was living, at which he rejoiced; and as the number of Christ's
Disciples increased above the number of John's, before John's decease, so still
after, and will increase; and so will the Glory and Honor of Christ increase
above John, to the end of the World. But whereas they both argue, as they think
so strongly both against Water-Baptisme, and the outward Supper, because of the
Scripture Phrase, one Baptism, and one Bread, which I confess did formerly
carry some weight with me, and I have so argued in some of my former Books; but
I have sufficiently seen the weakness of that Argument, as well as other
Arguments brought both by them and me, against these Divine Institutions. But
let it be considered, how things are said to be one in diverse senses and
acceptations. God is one in the highest sense, yet this does not infer that
there is no distinction of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, in their relative
Properties, which are incommunicable; and Christ is one, and yet this does not
prove that Christ has not two Natures, one of the Godhead, another of the
Manhood most gloriously united. 3. Faith is one, yet there are diverse true
significations of Faith in Scripture, as 1. the saving Faith, 2. the Faith of
Miracles which every one had not who had the saving Faith, 3. Faith objectively
taken for the Doctrine of Faith, either as it is outwardly Preached or
Professed, as in Romans 1.5. Gal. 3.2. Acts 24.24. Now if one should argue,
because the Scripture says, there is one Faith, Ephesians. 4.5. that consequently
there is but one Faith, and that is the Doctrine of Faith outwardly Preached
and Professed, and consequently deny Faith as it is an inward Grace and Virtue
of the Spirit in the Hearts of true Believers, his Argument would be false, so
on the other hand, if another should argue, true saving Faith, that is, of
absolute necessity to Salvation, is an inward Grace or Virtue of the Holy
Spirit in the hearts of true Believers; and therefore there is no Doctrine of
Faith to be Preached or Professed, his Argument should be also false, and as
false is this way of reasoning, that because the Baptism is one, therefore
that one Baptism is only the inward of the Spirit, excluding the outward
Baptism of Water, or as to say therefore it is only the outward Baptism of
Water, excluding the inward Baptism of the Spirit. Now, as the one Faith
mentioned Ephesians. 4.5. Suppose is meant the inward Grace or Virtue of Faith in
the hearts of all True Believers, does not exclude the Doctrine of Faith,
outwardly Preached and Professed; so nor does the inward Baptism of the
Spirit, suppose there meant, Ephesians. 4.5. exclude the outward Baptism of Water,
both being true and one in their kind, as the inward Grace of Faith is
specifically one in all true Believers, but numerically manifold, even as
manifold as there are numbers of Believers, so the Doctrine of Faith is one in
its kind, though consisting of many parts; therefore to argue as W. Penn does,
that Baptism is one in the same sense as God is one is very inconsiderate,
which would infer that though God is one in specie, yet that there are as many
Gods numerically as Believers. And notwithstanding that in Ephesians. 4.5. it is
said there is one Baptism, yet it is not said there or elsewhere, that there
is but one Baptism; for another place of Scripture mentions Baptismes in the
Plural Number, Heb. 6.2. And indeed as weak as their Argument against
Water-Baptisme is from the Scripture words one Baptism; no less weak is their
Argument against the outward Supper, practiced with Bread and Wine, in
commemoration of our Lord's Death, because of the Scripture words, one Bread, 1
Cor. 10.17. for in that same verse, Paul tells of one Bread in a very different
signification, even as far as the Church of Christ is not Christ; we (said he)
being many are one Bread; but does it therefore follow that there is no other
Bread than the Church; nay, for they are all partakers of that one Bread, which
is Christ, and there is a third Bread that he mentions in the same Chapter,
which is neither the one nor the other, one Bread, and that is the outward
Bread that they did eat, v. 16. the bread which we break, is it not the
Communion of the body of Christ? Even as Christ said concerning the outward
Bread; that it was his Body, to wit, Figuratively (so by the like Figure it was
the Communion of his Body) but not the Body it self, which too many have been
so foolish, as to imagine, that the outward Bread was Converted into Christ's
real Body, and as if Paul had foreseen that many would become so foolish and
unwise, as so to imagine; therefore to caution against any such folly, he had
said, I speak as to wise Men; judge ye what I say. But whereas, many of the
People, called Quakers, by Bread, in that part of the Verse; the Bread which we
break, is it not the Communion of the Lord's Body? Will have to be meant, not
the outward Elementary Bread, but the Body of Christ it self, in this they are
under a great mistake; for that would render the words to have a most absurd
Sense, as to say, the Body of Christ is the Communion of his Body; but the Body
is one thing, and the Communion of that Body is another, and it were as little
sense to understand it thus; the Body of Christ is a Figure of the Communion of
his Body; therefore the true sense of the words is the outward Bread which we
break is a Figure, or Sign of the Communion of the Lord's Body: But these Men
are under another great Mistake, as if by the Lord's Body, here were not meant
his outward Body that was Crucified, and Raised again; but the Life, which is
the Light in them, and in every Man, whether Believer, or Unbeliever. But of
this great Error, I shall have occasion hereafter to take notice, only at
present let it be remembered, that by the Body of Christ, in these
abovementioned words, is to be understood the Body of Christ, that was
outwardly Crucified, Dyed, and rose again, and is a living Glorious Body, which
is the Body of the second Adam, the quickening Spirit, of the Virtue of which,
all true Believers partake; and by their having the Communion of his Body
(whether when eating the outward Bread, so that they eat with true Faith, or
when they do not eat, yet believing; for the Communion of his Body is not
confined to the outward eating) they have the Communion of his Spirit also, and
enjoy of the manifold Spiritual Blessings of Grace, Life, and Light, sent and
conveyed into their Hearts, by and through the glorified Man, Christ Jesus, who
has a Glorified Body; and though this Communion of Christ's Body is hard to be
expressed, or to be demonstrated to Man's reasonable understanding, yet by
Faith it is certainly felt and witnessed, with the blessed Effects of it,
causing an increase in Holiness and Divine Knowledge and Experience in all true
Believers; nor is there any thing in this Mystery, or any other Mystery of the
Christian Religion, that is contradictory to our reasonable understanding. But
yet a little further to let them see the folly of that Argument from the
Scripture Phrase, one Baptism, and one Body; when Paul says, Ephesians. 4.4. There
is one Body and one Spirit; it does not bear this Sense, as if the Church were
but one numerical Body, or one single Man, or as if there were no Body of the
Man, Christ in Heaven, though some of their Teachers have so falsely argued;
that because the Body of Christ is one, therefore Christ has no Body but his
Church, and as false should their Arguing be; there is but one Spirit, and that
Spirit is the Holy Ghost; therefore the Man Christ has no Soul or Spirit of
Man in him, and therefore Believers have no Spirits or Souls of Men in them
that are Created Rational Spirits, both which are most false and foolish
consequences; also when the Scripture says, there is one Father, and one is
your Father; it would be a very false consequence to infer, that therefore we
have never had any outward or visible Fathers, and as false a consequence it
is, from one invisible Baptism of the Spirit, to argue against any outward and
visible Baptism, or from the outward visible Baptism, being one in its kind
to argue against the invisible and inward Baptism, which is one in its kind
also; this is an Error called by Logicians, a Transition from one kind to
another, as because there is one kind of Animal on Earth, called a Dog,
therefore there was not any thing else so called; whereas, there is a Fish that
has the same Name, as also a Star in Heaven.

SECT. VI.
BUT whereas W. Penn, in his above mentioned Argument says, first we know, and
they confess, that they were in the beginning used as Figures and Shadows of a
more hidden Spiritual Substance.

Ans. In this he is very short and defective in his Expression, they were both
appointed and used in the beginning, I mean from the time of Christ's
Resurrection and Ascension, to be Figures and Signs of Christ's outward Body
that was broken for us on the Cross, and his Blood that was outwardly shed. In
the first place, and consequently of the inward Graces of the Spirit, and
Benefits coming to Believers by his outward Body and Blood, and by the Man
Christ wholly considered, both in Soul and Body; and whereas he says, 2. They
were no longer to endure, than till the Substance was come: All this shows W.
Penn's great Misunderstanding of the Nature of these Institutions, both of
Baptism and the Supper, as if they only signified some inward hidden Virtue,
which he calls a more hidden and spiritual Substance that was to come; and so
were only as he calls them in his Defense of his Key, called, a Reply to a
pretended Answer, etc. Prenuniative and forerunning Signs, but were not
commemorative Signs, as well of things past, as of things present; for this is
utterly false, that Water in that Baptism which the Apostles, used after
Christ's Resurrection and Ascension was prenunciative, and not commemorative;
for on the contrary it was not simply prenunciative, but commemorative, as
commemorating and signifying the Blood of Christ, that had been shed outwardly
for the Remission of our Sins, and the same commemoration and signification had
the Wine, in the practice of the Lord's Supper, and the Bread that was broken
in the Supper, signified (after Christ's Death and Resurrection) his Body that
was outwardly broken on the Cross, and that outward practice was Instituted by
Christ for a Memorial of his Death and Sufferings, which all true Believers in
Christ ought to have fresh and lively in their Minds; to which the outward
practice both of Baptism and the Supper is of great use; and the more frequent
the practice of the Supper is, being duly used, as with Faith, Reverence, and
Devotion, the more profitable it is. Therefore said Christ, as often as ye eat
this bread, etc. As if one did say, as often as ye Pray with true Faith and
Fervency, it turns the more to your Spiritual Advantage. And though the Spirit
of Christ in true Believers is the great and principal rememberer unto them,
yet he often does remember them, in the use of that outward Practice, using it as
a means, and blessing it unto them, even as the Spirit uses the frequent
outward Institutions and Exhortations that Ministers give to Believers as a
means, and blesses that outward means unto them also, the more to quicken and
enlighten them; and as Peter said, to stir up the pure mind in them, by way of
remembrance, which was the end of his Epistles, and also of Paul's Epistles
unto the Churches; and therefore it is but weakly and falsely argued by many of
the People, called Quakers, and their Teachers; the Spirit in them is their
remembrancer, and they have the more hidden and invisible substance in them;
and therefore there is no use of these outward Signs to them; for this Argument
has the same force against all outward Teaching, and External Acts of Worship.
And indeed, as I have often observed and considered the chiefest Arguments used
by these Men, against these outward Practices of the outward Baptism, and the
Supper may be as much brought against all outward Teaching, and External Acts
of Worship, and against all use of Books, yea, of the Holy Scriptures
themselves; and the like may be said of these Arguments, that are commonly in
the Mouths of the People, called Quakers; that Bread, and Wine, and Water are
carnal things, and visible, which may be touched, tasted, handled; whereas the
Scripture says, touch not, taste not, handle not, which are all to perish with
the using, and the kingdom of God is not meat and drink, but righteousness,
peace, and joy in the Holy Ghost? Again, we look not at things seen, for they
are temporal, but at the things unseen, which are eternal; and Col. 3. If ye be
risen with Christ, seek the things which are above, and set your affection on
things above, not on things on the earth; but Water, Bread and Wine, are things
on earth; and let no man judge you in meats and drinks, Col. 2.17. which are a
shadow of things to come, but the body is of Christ? All these, and the like
Scriptures (I say) may with as great show of reason be brought against all good
Books, and outward Teachings, Instructions, Exhortations, yea, against the
Books of the Holy Scriptures, which G. Fox has called the Carnal and Earthly
Letter, that he touched, and handled, as much as Water, Bread, and Wine, and is
visible; and consequently by their Argument, is not to be looked into, nor is
the Scripture, nor the best of words uttered in Speech, or Written, the Kingdom
of God, or the hidden invisible Substance, as neither Water, Bread and Wine,
yet all these have their use, when duly used on a Spiritual Account; for as
words signify, and hold forth Christ, and the inward and spiritual Benefits
that Believers have by him, to the outward hearing, so do these other hold
forth Christ, and his spiritual Blessings to their Sight, Taste, and Feeling;
for which reason, ancient Writers did call the outward Baptism and Supper,
verbum visible, i.e. the visible word. God having so appointed it in his
Wisdom, that the Knowledge of Divine and Spiritual things, after a sort should
be given to us by outward Signs and Symbols, that affect our Senses, and by our
Senses, as by so many Doors and Windows should be let into our Souls, by means
whereof, through the inward Operation of the Holy Spirit, the inward and
Spiritual Faculties of our Souls and Minds are awakened and enabled to
apprehend the Spiritual things themselves, whose Symbols and Emblems these
outward Elementary things are. And none of these Scriptures above mentioned,
have any relation to the outward Baptism and Supper, which were the
Institutions of Christ, but to such outward things, the observations of which
were after the Commandments and Doctrines of Men, as not only the Jewish Rites,
but Gentile Customs and Traditions, also were touching Meats and Drinks, and
other things, which the Apostle calls, Col. 2.20.21, 22. the Rudiments of the
World, which as they are of a perishing nature, so the use and service of them;
but so is not the use and service of the outward Baptism and Supper, which is
a holy Commemoration of our Lord's Death and Sufferings, and of the great
benefits we have thereby, tending to excite our ardent Love and Affections to
him, and to raise them up to ascend to him in Heaven; therefore though true
Believers at Christ's command use the outward things, yet neither their Minds,
nor Affections are set on them, but on him, and the heavenly Blessings they
have by him; which holy Commemoration we should not let dye or perish in us,
but keep alive for our spiritual Benefit and Advantage; and as concerning,
Colos. 2.17. The things there mentioned, are called shadows of things to come,
such as the Types of the Mosaical Law were; but Water-Baptisme, and the Supper,
which the Christians were enjoined to practice, were simply, not shadows of
things to come, but are commemorative Signs of Christ, as he has already come
in the Body that was prepared for him, and of his Body and Blood which he has
given for us, together with the spiritual blessings of Grace, Life, and Light
that we have by him, to make us comformable to him in holiness, as well as to
give us the pardon of our Sins, and to justify us, and give us a right to
eternal Life. But it bewrays still great in consideration in W. Penn, to
argue against the outward Baptism and Supper, as he does in his Defense of his
Key, abovementioned, p. 154. They that personally (says he) enjoy their
dearest Friends, will not repair to their Pictures, though drawn never so much
to the life, to quicken their remembrance of them. His similitude of a Picture,
to which he compares the outward Baptism and Supper is a good Argument
against him, the Saints on Earth have not the Man, Christ, personally present
with them, they have not his Body that suffered Death for them, and rose again
a present object to their outward sight; therefore did he in his great love
appoint these outward Signs to be a Memorial of him, until they should have
himself Personally present with them, as they will certainly have in the time
appointed, and to as little purpose is his arguing in that same page, That the
true Believers were come to Mount Zion, Heb. 12.22. and sit in heavenly places
in Christ Jesus, which must be an attainment above signs of invisible grace,
being the life and substance of Religion; and so the Period and Consummation of
Types, Shadows, and such sort of Signs or Significations as are in question.
Answer, It is a great Misrepresentation of the State of the Question in W.
Penn, so to place it as well as a weak Argument, as because true Believers are
come to Spiritual Seize above Signs of invisible Grace; that therefore
there is no use of Signs in Religious Matters. Why then does he speak and writ
so much in Religious Matters, for all his Words and Writings are but Signs; and
he thinks that his Brethren are come to higher Seize than these Signs,
yea, why does he kneel in Prayer, and discover his Head when he Prays; what
are these but Signs? And why so much strife and contention about G. Fox's
Papers of Church Orders, and Women's Dresses? Are not his Brethren come to
higher Seize than these outward things? But it is an observation of many,
that after G. Fox had taught his Followers to throw down the outward
Institutions of Christ, he set up among them his own, and so did persuade them
to exalt them; that whoever did not comply therewith, were to be judged by his
zealous Admirers to be Apostates; thus Pharisee like, setting up Humane
Traditions above Divine Precepts, and in so doing, W. Penn has had no small
share, who has as eagerly promoted G. Fox's Institutions about outward things,
as he has labored to throw down the Institutions of Christ.

SECT. VII.
TO avoid the Argument for Water Baptism, it being an Institution of Christ
from Matt. 28.19. Go teach all Nations, Baptizing them into the name etc. he
says, but no water is mentioned page 106. Reason against Railing; and
therefore he concludes in the next p. that Christ commanded the Apostles to
Baptize with the Holy Ghost, and the like evasions is made by R.B. in the
abovesaid Treatise p. 26. where he puts them who understand it of
Water-Baptisme to prove, that Water is here meant since the Text is silent of
it.

Ans. As Water is not mentioned, so nor is Baptizing with the Holy Ghost
mentioned, and at this rate of arguing used by them, nor must Baptizing with
the Holy Ghost be understood, which yet they so inconsiderately affirm must be
meant here.

But R.B. thinks to prove, that Baptism with the Holy Ghost is here meant,
arguing from the literal signification of the Text, which we ought not to go
from, except some urgent necessity force us thereunto; but no such urgent
necessity forces us thereunto.

Ans. The literal signification of the Text, is not Baptizing with the Holy
Ghost; but on the contrary, the word Baptizing literally signifies to Wash
with Water or Dip into Water; Yea R.B. grants p. 49. If the etymology of the
word should be tenaciously adhered to, it would militate as well against most
of their Adversaries as the Quakers. When it is transferred from the literal
signification to a Metaphorical, as to signify the Inward and Spiritual
Baptism with the Holy Spirit, it is never when so transferred applied to Men,
as having any command so to Baptize, but wholly and only to God and Christ. I
challenge any Man to give but one instance in all the Scripture, where
Baptizing with the Spirit is ever referred to Men, either by way of Precept or
Practice, as if ever any Man but the Man Christ, did Baptize with the Holy
Spirit, or were commanded so to do; the quibble from the Greek Particle (...)
is answered and refuted above, as also his arguing from the word one Baptism;
and whereas he says the Name of the Lord is often taken in Scripture for some
thing else than a bare sound of words or literal expression, even for his
Virtue and Power. I answer and so is it often taken otherwise, as the Name of God
in Scripture signifies himself, so the Name of Christ signifies Christ, and
that both considered as he is God and Man, and yet one Christ, and that to be
Baptized into the Name of the Lord Jesus did not signify the Baptism of the
Holy Ghost; I have proved already out of Acts 8.16. Besides the Name of the
Father is not the Holy Ghost, as neither is the Name of the Son, for as the
Father is neither the Son, nor the Holy Ghost; so, nor is the Name of the
Father, nor the Name of the Son, the Name of the Holy Ghost, as they are
distinguished by their relative properties, so by these Names, though the Name
God belongs to each of them, and who are one only God blessed for ever. But
that he further contends, that the Baptism commanded here in Matthew. 28.19. is
Christ's own Baptism. I answer, Christ's own Baptism whereof John makes
mention, and of which he is the author and giver, is indeed the Baptism with
the Holy Ghost, which he promised unto the Apostles to give them, and
accordingly did perform; but we no where find that ever he promised to give
them Power, to give it to others, or commanded them to give it, that is wholly
an unscriptural Phrase, and scandalous. if not Blasphemous, to say, that poor
mortal Men hoever so Holy could give the Baptism of the Spirit, this is to
give to them what was proper only to God and Christ: why did John say, he that
comes after me shall Baptize with the Holy Ghost: he did not say, they who
should come after me, but he, intimating none had that Power and Dignity but
Christ, who was God as well as Man, and as he was God had this power belonging
to him, and which did belong to no Men nor Creature whatsoever; and thus indeed
the Baptism with the Spirit is Christ's Baptism, not which he commanded Men
to do, but which he promised to do, although the Water-Baptisme which he
commanded his Apostles to practice in his Name is also his, in a secondary
sense, as the Apostles teaching is his, because commanded by him; yet when we
speak of Gods teaching according to the sense of that Scripture, they shall all
be taught of God, it is not meant the outward teaching of Men, but Gods inward
teaching in Men's hearts; As touching his third Reason to prove that Baptism
with the Holy Ghost is meant Matthew. 28.19. The Baptism which Christ commanded
his Apostles, was such that as many as were therewith baptized, therewith did
put on Christ, but this is not true of Water-Baptisme.

Ans. As concerning that place of Scripture, Gal. 3.7. from which this Argument
seems to be taken, the place it self restricts it to the believing Galatians,
as v. 26. For ye are all the Children of God by faith in Christ Jesus, and all
such as beings Baptized with outward Water, put him on by a public Profession,
so by true Faith they inwardly put him on. To make a public Profession of
Christ by Baptism of Water is to put him on, in a common Phrase of speech, as
when a Man is said to put on the Soldier, the Magistrate, by putting on the
Garment of a Soldier or Magistrate in which sense Jerome said, Romae Christum
indui, i.e. at Rome I put on Christ, signifying that he was there baptized, and
it is to be noticed how Paul generally in his Epistles to the Churches he wrote
to, calls them Saints, they being so by profession, though there might have
been Hypocrites among them, and as by outward profession Men are said to be
Saints, so they may be said to have put on Christ, when nothing by Word or Deed
can appear to the contrary in a judgment of Charity.

As to his 4th. Argument that Baptism with Water was John's Baptism, I have
above shown, that John's Water-Baptisme, and the Water-Baptisme commanded to,
and practiced by the Apostles after Christ's Resurrection, diflered in many
respects, and though both required Repentance as a condition in order to receive
the Water-Baptisme, yet the later required Faith in Christ Crucified and Raised
again, as a condition in order to receive Baptism, but the former did not
require that Faith. Again his arguing from their not using that form of
Baptism, In the Name of the Father, of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, who did
Baptize with Water in those days of the Apostles, is as defective as his
otherways of arguing on this Head.

But how does he prove that they used not this Form? Why because in all these
places, where Baptizing (with Water) is mentioned, there is not a word of this
Form, and in two places Acts 8.16. and 19.5. that it is said of some that they
were Baptized in the Name of the Lord Jesus. But it ought to be considered,
that often in the Scriptures what is not expressed, is understood, yea that very
Form expressed 8.16. is comprehensive of the other, and if no more be expressed
by him that is the Administrator, if he be sound in the Faith, and that the
person to be Baptized has a sound Faith, that Form is sufficient, it is not
expressed that the Eunuch gave any other confession of his Faith before he was
Baptized, but that Jesus Christ is the Son of God; but will it therefore
follow, that he believed no other Article of the Christian Faith but that, and
confessed no other. In his further Essay to defend his assertion, that Christ
commanded the Apostles to Baptize with the Spirit, he says, Baptism with the
Spirit, though not wrought without Christ and his Grace, is instrumentally done
by men fitted of God for that purpose, and therefore no absurdity follows that
Baptism with the Spirit should be expressed as the action of the Apostles; for
though it be Christ by his Grace that gives Spiritual Gifts, yet the Apostle Romans
1.11. speaks of his imparting to them Spiritual Gifts, and he tells the
Corinthians, that he had begotten them through the Gospel, 1 Cor. 4.15. To
convert the heart is properly the work of Christ, and yet the Scripture
oftentimes ascribes it unto Men, as being the Instruments, and Paul 's
commission was to turn Men from Darkness to Light.

Ans. I acknowledge such like answers I had formerly given in some of my former
Books to the like Objection; but I am come to see the weakness and defect of
it; in order therefore to detect the fallacy of this assertion, that the
Apostles might be as well said to Baptize with the Spirit, as to Beget, to
Convert, to Impart some Spiritual Gift, etc. Let it be considered that Baptism
with the Holy Spirit, is not only another thing than Conversion, or imparting
some Spiritual Gift, etc. that it is incomparably greater; for Baptism with
the Spirit is equivalent to the mission of the Spirit, and his Inhabitation in
Believers, and his being given to them; all Spiritual Gifts of Faith,
Conversion, Regeneration, however so true and real, are but works and effects
of the Spirit, with whom Men may be said Instrumentally to work; but the giving
the Holy Spirit, to which Baptism with the Holy Spirit is equivalent, is of a
higher Nature, than any or all these Spiritual Gifts, differing as much as the
Giver differs from his Gifts: For as to Create is only proper to God and
Christ, and the Holy Ghost: to Redeem by way of Ransom and Satisfaction to
Divine Justice is only proper to Christ, without any concurrence of Men or
Angels, so to Baptize with the Holy Ghost or endue therewith, or give or send
the Holy Ghost, is only proper to God or Christ and not to Men so much as
Instrumentally, there is no such Phrase to be found in all the Scripture, as
that any Man did Baptize with the Holy Ghost, in any case or sense, we ought
not to allow such odd Phrases so foreign to Scripture, otherwise the greatest
absurdities might follow, and a Power of Creating and Redeeming might be given
to Men at this rate, by adding the word Instrumentally, but as we are to allow
no Instrumental Creators or Redeemers, so no Instrumental giver of the Holy
Ghost or Baptizers with the same. The Holy Ghost is God himself, and it is too
arrogant and wild to say, that Men who in respect of God are as Worms, can give
their Creator and Maker. The Scripture indeed tells us, that the Holy Ghost was
given through the laying on of the Apostles hands, Acts 8.16. and sometimes in
Preaching, and sometimes in Prayer, the Holy Ghost was given; but it was never
said, that Men gave it or Baptized with it. Besides, at this rate, they may
say, the Teaching that Christ commanded Matthew. 28.19. was not outward Teaching
but inward, and then call it Instrumental; but what sense would be made of such
an assertion, the Apostles were sent not to Teach outwardly but inwardly, by
Instrumental Teaching; and one might argue as strongly, that it was not outward
Teaching that Christ meant, Matthew. 28.19. why, not the least word is mentioned
of outward Teaching, therefore it is not understood but only inward Teaching.
If it be fit to answer, this wild inference thus, the Teaching there commanded
must needs be outward, because its only Men's work to Teach outwardly, and Gods
work to teach inwardly; the like answer is as proper to be given in relation to
Baptism, as it is Men's work to Baptize outwardly with Water, so it is the work
of God and Christ to Baptize inwardly with the Spirit. And if Men be resolved
to quibble and embrace any wild notion, rather than the simple Truth, had there
been express mention made of Water, Matthew. 28.19. that quibbling Spirit would
have made a new objection, and still argued it was not material or outward
Water, but inward and Spiritual, because in many places of Scripture, Water
signifies not outward material Water, but inward and Spiritual.

SECT. VIII.
THERE is yet another Argument used both by W. Penn and R.B. against both
Water Baptism and the Supper in common. I shall recite it in W. Penn's words
(being the same in effect with these of R.B.) Thirdly says W. Penn, they were
but the more noble among the Meats and Drinks, and diverse Washings that the
Apostles said, were but shadows of the good things to come; for I would not
that any should be so sottish as to think that Christ came to abolish those
shadows of the Jews, and institute others in their room, by no means. He came
to remove, change and abolish the very nature of such Ordinances, and not the
particular Ordinances only, to wit, an outward Shadowy and Figurative Religion;
for it was not because they were Jewish* Meats and Drinks, and diverse
Washings, but because they were Meats and Drinks, and outward Washings at all,
which never could nor can cleanse the Conscience from dead Works, nor give
eternal Life to the Soul, else wherein would the change be? A continuance of
them, would have been a judaizing of the Spiritual Evangelical Worship, the
Gospel would have been a state of Figures, Types and Shadows, which to assert
or Practice, is as much as in such lies to pluck it up by the roots.

Ans. This whole way of Arguing proceeds upon a supposed Foundation that is
false, and because the Foundation is false, therefore is his Superstructure
also; both which I shall briefly show: First, His supposed Foundation is false,
viz. No Signs that is no outward things that are Symbolical, or Significative
of greater and more excellent things do by any means belong to the Gospel, and
Christian Religion, otherwise (as he argues but very weakly) there would be no
change, and no difference betwixt the Jewish Religion and the Christian, or
betwixt Law and Gospel; but this does by no means follow. For allowing that
some Signs belong to the Gospel, yet there is not only a change and difference
betwixt them two, but a very great change and difference, even as much as
betwixt the Light of the Twilight, and the clear Light of the Sun after he is
risen, or betwixt the Sun in the Morning, and the Sun when he is high in the
Firmament; and if he will have the outward Baptism and Supper, called Shadows
as well as Signs; is there no difference betwixt the Shadow that the Sun casts
early in the Morning, when he is but low above the Horizon, and when he is
high; we know that the higher the Sun rises, the Shadow is the less, yet still
there is some Shadow; however high the Sun rises until he come to the Zenith,
or Vertical Point, at which Point there is no Shadow, but this never happens
to us in these Northern Parts; and to apply the similitude of the Sun and
Shadow to the case in hand; admit the Sun to be Christ, as he enlightenth the
Christian Church, or the best Christian Congregation that ever was on the
Earth; did any such Church or Congregation know that Divine Sun to be risen
upon them so high as the Vertical Point in this Spiritual Sense? Is not that
rather the State that is reserved to the future Life? When the Shadows shall
flee away, Cant. 2.17. and 4.6. What was the State of the Church in the
Apostles days, after they had received plentiful Illuminations of the Holy
Ghost? Did not Paul say concerning himself and them, now we see darkly as in a
Glass, tanquam in aenigmate the seeing Face to Face, being reserved to the
future State after Death; and as he said again, we walk by Faith, not by Sight,
which is to be understood comparatively; for though it is granted that the
Saints while living in the mortal Body have often sweet and precious sights and
tastes of the glory of God and of Christ; yet it is not so always with them and
their highest Illuminations of Knowledge do admit of some defects and
obscurities, and the condition of a mortal State, as it implies somewhat of
Shadow, with reference to their defects and shortness, in respect of the much
higher and more full and perfect Seize of glorified Saints and Angels. So
in this State of the mortal Body, Shadows and Symbolical things may be, and are
really of that Service to them, as the Shadow of a Curtain is, that is
interposed betwixt the brightness of the Sun, and the frail sight of our mortal
Bodies; And what are all words but Signs, verba sunt signa rerum and
conceptuum; words are Signs of Things and Thoughts: So are words properly
defined by Logicians and Philosophers. Now if the Gospels Dispensation under
Christianity be all life and substance, and nothing else; then not only all
Books and Letters, but all words possible to be uttered by the Mouths of Men,
must be rejected from having any use in Gospel Worship, and instead of silent
Meetings at times, there must be not other Meetings but silent Meetings; nay,
nor any Meetings at all of Bodies of Men and Women outwardly Assembled; for by
W. Penn's way of Arguing, there is no use of them; such Meetings of Bodies
reach but to the sight, and all that is or can be seen is but Carnal, and
cannot reach to the Soul; all Meetings must be only within, and all Teaching
within, and all Prayer and Worship within, and nothing without. But if it be
granted that outward words, though Signs may be useful for the increase of
spiritual Knowledge, by the same reason the outward Signs of God's appointment
may be useful also; yea, in some sort they are more useful, when the
signification of them is understood; for Example, Water in Baptism has a
nearer resemblance to the thing signified by it, than any words whatsoever; for
words signify only by humane Institution, but visible Signs that are not
words, bear some Similitude and Analogy to the things signified, and are as it
were so many Hieroglyphics of Divine Mysteries. In short, the difference
betwixt the Judaick and the Christian Dispensation stands not, as W. Penn would
have it, that the Judaick Dispensation was an outward Figurative and Shadowy
Worship, and Religion, and that the Gospel has nothing of outward in it,
nothing of Figure, Sign, or Shadowy; for in both these Descriptions he is under
a great mistake, the Judaick Religion had Substance, Life and Virtue, and an
inward Glory belonging to it as really as the Christian, yea, the very same in
Nature; and therefore it is not a fit Definition he gives of the Judaick
Dispensation and Religion; that it was an outward Figurative and Shadowy
Worship and Religion, the outward part of it was the Shell and Cabinet, but it
had an inward part that was as the Kirnel and Jewel, as all the Faithful did
know, who were under that Dispensation, while it stood in force. Again, it is
as really an Error on the other hand to define the Christian Dispensation to be
all inward, all Life and Spirit, and Substance; that is, too Chemical and
Subtle, and no wise Saits with a mortal State at least; for as our natural
Bodies cannot Eat and Drink all Spirit, but require a Food more Bodily, so our
Christian Religion requires a Bodily part as well as a Spiritual. And such who
through an ignorant Presumption throw away the Bodily part of the Christian
Religion, lose the Spiritual, or rather never find it, but in place of the true
Spirit of Christianity embrace an inward Shadow and Imagination, and often an
Antichristian Spirit, and such, I have known who had been once very Zealous in
the Quakers way, who upon such ignorant Presumption, would come to no Meetings,
hear no outward Teaching, nor join in any External Act of Worship; alleging
all was inward, and they needed no outward thing, and God was only to be
Worshipped in the inward, which are the true and proper Consequences of W.
Penn's Reasonings here; His Distinction of Prenunciative and Commemorative
Signs I have above examined, and showed that Water-Baptisme, and the outward
Supper are not merely Prenunciative but Commemorative, as commanded to be
practiced after Christ's Resurrection. The true distinction betwixt the Judaick
and Christian Dispensation and Religion, consists in these following
Particulars: That the Judaick Dispensation and Religion had much more of
outward Figurative and Shadowy things than the Christian, the former had much,
as best suited to that Time and State, the latter had but little in comparison
to the former. As for Example, the Figures and Shadows of the Law were indeed
many, perhaps some hundreds there were of the Mosaical Laws, commonly called
Ceremonial, relating to Meats and Drinks, Washings or Baptisms, Persons, Places
and Times, as Days, Weeks, Months and Years, but the Symbols and Signs under
the Gospel are but few, as Water in Baptism, and Bread and Wine in the Supper,
kneeling or standing up in Prayers, and the Men uncovering their Heads may be
called Decent Religious Signs of our Worship. Secondly, The Typical and
Mosaical Precepts were not only many, but considerably chargeable and painful;
the multitude of their Sacrifices were a great charge, and the Males coming
there every year to Jerusalem, very Laborious, Circumcision of the Male
Children painful, but Water-Baptisme and the Supper very easy, and with very
little charge, and little or no pain; which chargeable and painful Service of
the Law among other things, occasioned Peter to call it a Yoke; which neither
they nor their Fathers were able to bear, Acts 15.10. And God in his wisdom saw
it meet to put that yoke upon them, as suiting to that legal and typical state;
and our deliverance from that Yoke is a great blessing of God. Thirdly, These
Signs and Shadows of the Law did not near so clearly and plainly hold forth
Christ, and the Spiritual Blessings of Remission of Sins, Justification,
Adoption, Sanctification, and Glorification through Christ; as these few plain
Signs and Symbols of Water in Baptism, and Bread and Wine in the Supper do;
the words in the Form of Baptism do plainly express that Great Mystery of the
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, and how these three are concerned in the things
signified by the outward Baptism; as namely, in the Pardon of our Sins; the
Father gives it, the Son purchases it, the Holy Spirit in our Hearts
persuadeth us of it: Again, the form of words in the Institution of the Supper,
take, eat, this is my body, etc. and this cup is the new Testament in my blood
shed for the remission of the sins of many; drink ye all of it. There are no
such plain and clear Forms of Speech holding forth Christ and the spiritual
Blessings we have by him, that were annexed to, or used with any of the Figures
and Shadows of the Law. Fourthly, The Figures and Shadows of the Law in the use
of them, had not that Plenty of Grace, and Divine and Spiritual Influence of
the Holy Ghost, accompanying them generally to Believers under the Law, as does
generally accompany Believers under the Gospel; for as Paul declares, it was
reserved unto the days that were to come after the Judaical Dispensation was
ended, wherein God was to show the exceeding Riches of his Grace; and in the
latter Days, viz. under the Gospel the Spirit was to be poured forth, as was
accordingly fulfilled; and on these Accounts, especially the two last, it is,
that Baptism with Water, and the outward Supper ought not to be numbered among
the Carnal Ordinances of the Judaick Dispensation; for though the material
things in some part be the same, yet the manner so differing, and the Grace and
Spirit more plentiful abundantly, as is above declared, gives just cause, that
the outward Baptism and the Supper, when duly Administered, as they ought to
be, and were in the Apostles Days, should not be numbered among the Carnal
Ordinances, nor yet so called, but rather Spiritual; for things receive their
denomination from the greater and better part: Holy Men in Scripture are called
Spiritual though having Bodies of Flesh; and why may not things be called Holy
and Spiritual, that are used and practiced by Holy Men, wholly for a Holy End;
although the things themselves be Material and External: All which being
considered, it will plainly appear how weakly and rawly, both W. Penn, and R.B.
have argued in this Point, and what an Impertinent Consequence W. Penn has
made, to infer, that to allow Water-Baptisme, and the outward Supper to belong
to the Gospel, is to make the Gospel a State of Figures, Types and Shadows,
which does no more truly follow, than to allow, that because W. Penn has a
Body of Flesh and Blood; that therefore he is a Carnal and Bloody Man; or
because the Quakers have Flesh and Blood as other Men; therefore there Church
is a Carnal and Bloody Church; and as raw and defective is R.B. his way of
Reasoning, p. 25, 26, 27. of the above said Treatise; that where the Author is
the same, the Matter of Ordinances is the same, and the end the same; and
having the same effect, they are never accounted more or less Spiritual,
because of their different times. For all this is not a sufficient enumeration,
to prove the one not to be more Spiritual than the other; there are diverse
other great Considerations or Arguments, besides these mentioned by him so
generally and overly; as in the respects above mentioned, relating to their
Form and Manner, and greater Efficacy, because of the greater plenty of Grace,
accompanying the latter than the former, and having greater and more excellent
Effects; for who that knows, what a true Christian is, but will say he is far
beyond an ordinary Religious Jew that had some degree of Faith in the promised
Messiah; the Scripture comparing the Jew and the Christian, as the Child and
the Man. And who but will say, that the true Gospel way of Ministry, as it was
in the Apostles Days, and wherein they were exercised in Preaching and Prayer,
did far excel the Ministry of the ordinary sincere Jewish Priests and Scribes,
although they had one Author, and one Doctrine for Substance, and one end in
their Ministry at large and in general, and also one effect in general and at
large, viz. to instruct in Righteousness such as heard them. And though in one
sense the Jewish Baptisms, and that practiced by the Apostles after Christ's
Resurrection had one Author, viz. God, yet in another sense there was a
considerable difference, it being God or the word Incarnate, or Christ God Man
that was the Author of the latter, but not of the former. And though the Jewish
Water-Baptisms, and the Christian Water-Baptisme, which is but one, do agree in
relation to their end in some sort, yet there is a great difference in that
very respect; for though the remote end of the Jewish Baptisms was to signify
Remission of Sin through Faith in Christ; yet the proximate, or next end of
those Baptisms was to make them legally clean, so as to be allowed to come into
the Congregation of the Jewish Church; but the end of the Christian
Water Baptism, even proximately and nextly considered, is to signify Remission
of Sins, and the spiritual Cleansing by Christ, and also to indicate such
Baptized Persons, and recognize or acknowledge them to be Members of the Church
of Christ, that is more excellent and honorable as far as the Christian
Dispensation excelled the Judaick. But that they farther argue, that
Water Baptism cannot reach the Conscience to cleanse it from Sin; that
therefore it ought not to be practiced; and because Bread and Wine in the
Supper cannot nourish the Soul; therefore ought it not to be used in the
Supper; they might as well have argued against the brazen Serpent, that the
Jews at God's command should not have looked to it when they were poisoned with
the Serpents in the Wilderness; because there was no inherent Virtue in that
piece of Brass to effect any Cure; and they might argue as well against
Naaman's going to wash in Jordan to be cured of his Leprosy. I know none that
plead for Water Baptism, and the outward Supper, that think there is any
inherent Virtue in these outward things, either to wash or feed the Soul; the
Virtue is wholly in Christ, whose Grace, Power, and Spirit does accompany the
due and right use of these things, as they are practiced in Faith, and in
Obedience to Christ's command. And the like way they might argue against all
vocal Ministry which abounds among the Quakers; for no words have any inherent
Virtue in them to Cure or Cleanse the Soul, or profit any more than Water, or
Bread and Wine; it is only the Grace and Spirit of Christ, when it goes along
and accompanies these outward things, whether Words, or those outward
Elements, that is effectual, and makes the use of them effectual; without
which they are all but as empty Cisterns that can hold no Water.

SECT. IX.
ANother Argument of W. Penn against the outward Baptism and Supper is, that
therefore they are to be rejected now the false Church has got them; yea the
Whore has made Merchandise with them, and under such Historical Shadowy and
Figurative Christianity, has she managed her Mystery of Iniquity unto the
beguiling thousands, whose simplicity the Lord will have a tender regard to.
Ans. In this way of Arguing also he is very inconsiderate, for his Reason is of
equal force against the Holy Scriptures, and all the Doctrinal and Historical
part of Christ's coming in the Flesh, his Death and Sufferings, etc. Why! the
false Church has got all this, and makes Merchandise therewith, and therefore
the Bible and the whole Historical and Doctrinal part of Christ's coming in the
Flesh, and his Death and Sufferings must be rejected; also all Preaching, and
Praying, and Meeting together, and all external Acts of Worship must be
rejected, for the same reason, because the false Church has got them all. Though
I think it may be said, the false Church has not got either Baptism or the
Supper, in the true Administration of them; but rather a false show and
likeness of them: But what hinders that the true Church may not Practice these
things aright, though the false Practice them amiss? Should the abuse of any
thing commanded by God, take away the use of it? Must Meat, Drink and Clothing
be rejected, because that many abuse them?

But he continues to argue against them p. 110. Reason against Railing. Let it
be considered that no other Apostle recommends these things, nor Paul himself
to either the Romans, the Corinthians (in his first Epistle) the Galatians,
Ephesians, Philippians, Colossians, Thessalonians, Hebrews, nor to Timothy,
Titus and Philemon. Ans. If so it were that in none of these Epistles Paul had
mentioned them, nor any other of the Apostles, which yet is not so, for I have
answered it at large, what was objected from Peter, 1 Pet. 3.21. as that
Water-Baptisme is not there meant; and in the Epistle to the Romans, Galatians,
Ephesians and Colossians, and in that to the Hebrews, Baptism is mentioned,
and he has not proved that it is not Water-Baptisme that is there meant, yet
it will not follow, that therefore they are to be rejected, seeing other places
of Scripture mention both the command and practice of them, so that he cannot
instance one, professing Christianity, that was not Baptized, any where in the
Scripture, after the command of Baptism was given by Christ to the Apostles;
suppose there were but one Text in all the Scripture, that clearly proves some
Doctrine of the Christian Faith, were not that enough for its proof? As that one
Text, that God is a Spirit is it not sufficient to prove the truth of it? And
we find but one Text of Scripture, and that is in John 6. that mentions the
eating of Christ's Flesh, and drinking his Blood, in order to eternal Life, is
not that one place enough to prove that Truth?

Another Argument he uses is, p. 110. Reas. etc. That the Gentile Spirit has
trodden them under foot so long, being part of that outward Court of Religion
given to them, which were left out at the measuring of the Evangelical Temple
of God, Rev. 11.1, 2.

Ans. It was not the outward Court, but the Holy City that the Gentiles did
tread under feet: The outward Court indeed, is with respect to that time, was
not to be measured, but left unmeasured, towit, during the time of the great
Apostasy. But this argues, there was an utter Court; the not Measuring of it
seems to signify, that it was short and defective of the just Measure, that
was originally belonging to it, as it was in the Apostles days and for a long
time afterward, until the great Apostasy began, at least for the space of
three Hundred Years and upwards from our Saviors Resurrection; But this is so
far from proving, that outward Baptsme and the Supper, suppose they were a part
of the outward Court, were no Institutions of Christ under the Gospel, that it
proves they were, for the outward Court was a part of the Temple, under the
Law, and signified that the Church of God under the Gospel was to have that
which by way of Analogy answered to it, as accordingly it had till the great
Apostasy came in, that made it to be for a time to be left unmeasured. But we
find that in Ezekiel, the Temple, there described, Chap 42, is described with
its outer Court, and is measured; which Temple there described, it not any
material Temple, but the Church of God as it shall be raised up after the
Apostasy, which shall have her outward Court in its just measure; and seeing
the Quakers take themselves to be the Church come out of the Wilderness, and
got free from the Apostasy, and that Water-Baptisme and the Supper belongs to
the outer Court, as W. Penn will have it; by the same, or like Argument, they
ought to restore the true and due practice of them. But why may not their
Ecclesiastic Discipline be reckoned as much belonging to the outer Court, as
Water-Baptisme and the Supper? and if so, why have they set up that, (that is
as much outward as Baptism and the Supper) and not the other, which has far
less show of warrant than the other?

SECT. X.
THE last Argument W. Penn uses, or at least the last that I shall bring, and
I think I have omitted none, either of his, or of R. Barclay, that I could
find, that seemed to require an Answer, is taken from Christ's washing his
Disciples Feet, and commanding them to wash one another Feet; and James
commanding to anoint the Sick with Oil; and the Apostles commanding to abstain
from blood and things strangled; and that the believers sold their Possessions,
and had all things common, p. 111. Reason against Railing; from which he
infers; that seeing they who plead for the continuance of Water Baptism, and
the Supper, do not practice those things; therefore, nor should they practice
the other. And the like Reasoning does R.B. use in the above said Treatise,
called by his Son, Baptism and the Supper substantially asserted; insisting
upon that of Christ's washing the Disciples Feet, in several Pages of that
Treatise, from p. 94, to 99, and on that of anointing with Oil, p. 115.

Ans. Upon a due consideration of things; this last Argument will have as
little force as any of the former against the outward Baptism, and the Supper.
That Christ commanded the Disciples to wash one another Feet, giving them an
Example from his own Practice; as it was an Act of great Love and Humility in
him so to do by his Example, he did enjoin to his Disciples to practice the
like Acts of Love and Humility one to another; so that what was here enjoined
the Disciples by Christ, was not any commemorative Sign of his Death and
Sufferings, but a real Act of Love and Humility which is not tied or confined
to that particular Action that was peculiar to that County, and an ordinary
practice among the People of that Country; for the Country being hot, they used
Sandals on their Feet, by occasion of which, their Feet; who used to Travel (as
Christ and his Apostles frequently did) needed washing, not only for making
them clean, but for refreshment; and when they came to lodge or stay at a place
after Travel, it was usual for Travelers to have Water brought, and their Feet
to be washed; as in Genesis 18. and 19. and what was done to them in bringing
Water, and having their Feet washed; was a real Act of Love and Kindness in
them that received them into their Houses, though they performed not that
Office themselves, but caused it to be done by their Servants, which was a
servile Act, and more usual to Servants than to Masters. But if done by the
Master of the House, or by one that was not a Servant, was an extraordinary Act
of Love and Humility; so here was nothing in all this of Ceremony, Sign or
Figure, but all a real Act and Office of excessive Love, and most profound
Humility in our Blessed Lord toward his Disciples, and by this exemplary Act
of his, he both taught and commanded them to perform both that, and also other
the like Acts and Offices of Love and Humility toward one another, which they
were to do simply as Acts of singular Virtue after his Example; and not as any
Symbolical or Commemorative Sign of Christ's Death and Passion; and accordingly
we find it numbered among the Virtuous Acts of ancient Christian Widows and
Matrons, 1 Timothy 5.10. If she have washed the Saints Feet. And the like was that
Custom of giving a Cup of cold Water (or of cold, as the word is best
Translated) to Travelers, which was a great Act of Kindness and Hospitality in
those hot Countries; but none of these Actions, the one of washing the Feet,
the other of giving a Cup of cold, is any ordinary Act of Friendship, Love, or
Humility, hereaway in cold Countries, where there is either no such ordinary
occasion, or usual Custom: For to do any such thing hereaway, would be rather a
Ceremony, than any substantial Act of either Love or Humility. But in all
cases, when occasion is found for one Christian to perform the equivalent Acts
of Love and Humility toward another, or others, the Command of Christ is no
doubt obligatory. But to make a Ceremony of that which was then no Ceremony,
but a substantial Act of Love and Humility were altogether improper and
impertinent. Next, as that in James, recommending the Anointing the Sick with
Oil; nor was this commanded to be done as any symbolical Act, or commemorative
Sign, but as a mean that Christ had appointed his Disciples to use toward the
Sick, when he gave them power of healing them miraculously, Mark 6.13. The
abstaining from Blood and things strangled, was certainly a part, if not of the
Ceremonial Law; yet of the positive and Judicial Laws given by the Jews, which
the Apostles thought fit to enjoin to the believing Gentiles at that time, to
prevent the giving of Scandal to the believing Jews, who would have taken
offense at the Gentiles for so doing. And that the practice of abstaining from
eating Blood, continued among the Christians until Tertullian's time, is
clearly evident, out of his Apology for the Christians; where answering that
abominable Charge against the Christians, that they did eat the Blood of
Infants, showed that they were so far from that, that they did abstain from the
Blood of Beasts. Now this abstaining from the Blood of Beasts, and things
strangled, belonging to the positive Judicial Laws given to the Jews; the
Apostles might, and no doubt did see cause to enjoin that Abstinence to the
believing Gentiles for a time, to prevent the Scandal of their Brethren who
believed of the Jews. But notwithstanding the Apostle Paul does plainly teach,
that whatever was sold in the Shambles might be eaten; and that nothing was now
unclean (provided it be not unwholesome and prejudicial to Health, as some
things are) for said he, every Creature of God is good, being Sanctified by the
Word of God, and Prayer, and to be received with Thanksgiving. And lastly, as
to that of having Community of Goods, it was only practiced at Jerusalem, and
was a voluntary Act, not enjoined to them, or any others; and therefore does
not oblige Christians to practice it; nor do the Quakers practice it more than
any others. But when it was practiced, it was not any symbolical Act; or
commemorative Sign of Christ's Death and Sufferings, and of the spiritual
Blessings that Believers have thereby; such as Baptism and the Supper was; and
therefore to argue from the ceasing of that, or any other of the
abovementioned things, their ceasing is altogether impertinently and
groundlesly argued. Before I close this Head of Baptism, I think fit to take
some notice of this Title given by the Son to his Fathers Treating against the
outward Baptism and the Supper, Baptism and the Lord's Supper substantially
asserted. A Man might as well having writ a Book against all outward Teaching
and Ministry, and against all vocal Prayers, and all external Acts of Worship,
and against all outward Meetings of the Bodies of Believers, give it this
Title; True Teaching and Ministry, true Prayer and Worship, true assembling
together, substantially asserted; and all this by throwing aside all outward
Teachings of Men, however so well divinely Gifted and Qualified, and all
outward Ministry, and all external Acts of Worship and outward Assemblies of
Persons, and telling us the true substantial Teaching and Ministry is only
inward; the true substantial Worship is inward; and the true substantial
Assemblies and Congregations of Believers is only inward in the Heart and
Spirit; which manner of dealing, as it would not a little tend to the decay, if
not rather the total destruction of the inward and substantial parts of all
these things; so it is against the Practice of the People called Quakers, who
are as much for outward Teaching, and an outward Ministry after their own way,
and external Acts of Worship in outward Meetings and Assemblies, and other
outward Forms of Church Discipline and Government, set up by their Leaders, and
especially by G. Fox, as any other People, diverse of which outward Forms set up
by them, and greatly contended for against others of their Brethren, who said,
they saw no need of them, but thought the inward Principle abundantly
sufficient without these outward things, have less ground from Scripture than
the practice of Water Baptism, and the outward Supper have. And if only the
substance of things must be regarded, and all useful and convenient adjuncts
and accidents of them rejected and thrown off; then all the Quakers (at this
odd way of arguing) may throw away their Clothing and go naked; pretending
they are no substantial Parts of them, but only accidental; and by the like
Reasoning they may throw away their Estates and worldly Goods, as being no
substantial Parts of them as they are Men, or rational Creatures. But what hurt
Religion would suffer, by throwing off, and laying aside all outward Teaching,
and all outward Acts of Worship, all sober and intelligent Persons, that have
the least true sense of Religion, do know. And though the true Christian
Religion may consist without these External Things of Water Baptism, and the
Supper, as in respect of its Essentials, and Men and Women may be true
Christians without them, and they may be more tollerably wanted at certain
occasions, than outward Teaching, and other External Parts of Religion, as
where they cannot be practiced without great mixtures of Superstition and
Idolatry, as in Popish Countries, or other Places where they cannot be duly had
and practiced according to their due Institution, or where fit and due
Administrators are wanting to Administer them; yet all this is no Argument
against their being divine Institutions, and really serviceable to all, who can
have the due and right use of them; they being proper and useful means to
preserve the Christian Doctrine Faith and Religion in the World, as duly
practiced as useful Appendices and Concomitants to the outward Ministry and
Preaching of the Word; and it is not to be questioned, had the right and due
practice of them been continued among Professors of Christianity, and a due
regard had been preserved among them, chiefly and primarily to the things
signified by them, and secondarily to the outward Signs, so that all possible
care had been used, that Power and Form had gone along together, and all
scandalous and unworthy Persons plainly known to be such, as well as ignorant
Persons, not duly instructed in the Essentials of Christian Religion had been
excluded and debarred from the use of them; that the continuance of them in the
manner, as above described, would have been of singular use to have preserved
the Christian Doctrine, Faith and Religion, sound and free from the great
Corruptions that have crept in to the great Corrupting and Adulterating both
the Doctrine and Worship as it has been for many Ages past among Professors of
Christianity; as it has been already proved, and yet may be further proved
against them.

SECT. XI.
AND it is morally impossible, that any People practicing these things duly,
having their true and proper Signification truly and faithfully taught them,
and inculcated into them on all occasions when they are used, as well as at
other convenient Seasons, ever could or can lose the Doctrine and Faith of
Christ Crucified, or that that Doctrine and Faith can ever be made as an
indifferent thing among them, as it is made by many of the People, called
Quakers; yea, not only so, but by some of their chief Teachers and Leaders, now
bearing great Sway among them; as a thing not only, not very necessary, but
contrary to the Apostles Doctrine, Romans 10. Witness some very express Passages
in a Book of G. Whitehead's, and George Fox the younger; called, Truth
defending the Quakers and their Principles -- Writ (say they) from the Spirit
of Truth in G. Whitehead, and G. Fox the younger. (Judge, Christian Reader, if
these Men have not belyed the Spirit of Truth, to father such gross Untruth,
and Antichristian Sayings upon the Spirit of Truth as are contained in these
Passages, hereafter to be quoted, and many others of the like nature that might
be produced out of that vile Pamphlet, above named) Printed at London, for Tho.
S^mmons, at the Bull and Mouth, near Aldersgate, 1659.

In p. 65 of that Book, they bring in one Christopher Wade, saying, Christopher
Wade affirms that our blessed Savior does instruct Men to lay fast hold of,
and to abide in such a Faith which confideth in himself, being without Men To
this they answer.

Ans. That Is contrary to the Apostles Doctrine, who Preached the Word of Faith
that was in their Hearts, and the Saints Faith stood in the Power of God, which
was in them. Note Reader, this Assertion of C. Wade, blamed by them, as being
contrary to the Apostles Doctrine, is so far from being contrary thereunto, that
there can be nothing more agreeable, as appears in the words of the Apostle
Paul in the very next verse following; where after mentioning the word of
Faith, in Verse 8, which was nigh in the Mouth and in the Heart; he adds in the
9th and 10th verses. That if thou shall confess with thy mouth the Lord Jesus,
and shall believe in thy heart that God has raised him from the dead; thou
shall be saved; for with the heart man believes unto righteousness, and with
the mouth confession is made unto salvation.

Again, They bring in C. Wade (see there page 66) saying, C. Wade, p. 14. has
affirmed that the Lord has bought us, and Redeemed us with the precious Blood
of his Humanity; and says, your imagined Christ being a mere Spirit, never had
any Humane Blood to Redeem you with; and to prove it, he brings 1 Pet. 1.19.
now see their Answer.

Ans. That Scripture, 1 Pet. 1. Have thou perverted, as thou have done other
Scriptures, to thy own destruction; for there he witnessed to the blood of the
Lamb, which redeemed them from their vain conversation; but does not tell of
humane Blood to Redeem them with. For that which is Humane is Earthly; but
Christ whose Blood is Spiritual, is Lord from Heaven; and he is not an imagined
Spirit, but a true Spirit. And what say thou to this? Was that Humane Blood,
which Christ says, except a man drink he has no life in him; and which
cleansed the Saints from all Sin, who were Flesh of Christ's Flesh, and Bone of
his Bone? Note, Any intelligent Reader cannot but know that Christopher Wade by
the Blood of Christ's Humanity, meant the Blood of the Man Christ that was born
of the Virgin; and by the Humanity, he meant the Manhood of Christ, which of
late years G. Whitehead has in Print owned, even the words Humanity of Christ;
and yet never to this day has retracted his vile Doctrine in this and other his
Books, whereof I have given some account in my first and second Narrative, etc.
at Turners-Hall. Nay, it is below him to retract any Errors that would reflect
upon his Infallibility; he is not changed, as God is the same, and Truth is the
same, so the Quakers are the same, and by consequence so is G. Whitehead the
same, as John Pennington has affirmed in one of his late Prints.

Again, In p. 23. of that above mentioned Book, they answer a Question thus?

Q. 43. When you tell us that you have Faith in Christ; do you mean Christ
whose Person is now ascended into Heaven above the Clouds; or do you mean only
a Christ within you?

Ans. Here thou would make two Christ's, a Christ whose Person is above the
Clouds, and a Christ within, but how provest thou two such Christ's? We have
Faith in that Christ that descended from the Father, who is the same that
ascended far above all Heavens, that he might fill all things; and this Christ
we witness in us who is not divided. Note, I need not make any Commentary on
these words; the Man that asked the Question did not in the least insinuate
that there were two Christ's, but it is plain it was G. Whitehead's Sense; that
to own Christ, whose Person is now Ascended unto Heaven above the Clouds, and
to own Christ within, is to make two Christ's: But seeing there is but one
Christ, that is, only (according to G. Whitehead's Notion) within, and not a
Person now Ascended above the Clouds; it is plain, he does not own any such
Person Ascended into Heaven above the Clouds, nor Faith in any such Person; and
no wonder that he oppose Faith in Christ's Person without us, when he opposes
the Being of any such Person; for the object of Faith being destroyed or
denied, the Act of Faith must be destroyed or denied also; both which we see he
has plainly done in this Book; and if in some of his latter Books he seems to
be of a better Faith; yet who can believe him to be sincere, until he retract
and comdemn the vile Errors in this and other of his former Books which have
infected thousands of the poor ignorant People, called Quakers, whom he has
led into this Ditch of Unbelief? and yet for danger of loosing his Reputation
of Infallibility, and of being sound from the beginning; he will not do any
thing to confess his former Ignorance and Unbelief, which might be a great
means to lead that poor People out of that Ditch, into which he had formerly
led them. And how he will answer it at the great Day of Judgment for this great
Sin and Neglect, to make amendment, so as to correct his former gross Errors,
and labor to undeceive those whom he had formerly deceived; he has great need
to consider it; and I sincerely wish that a Heart may be given him to do it,
and that by true Repentance he may be humbled before the Lord, and obtain
forgiveness. But he has given us a very late Instance that he is not changed
really in his false Faith and Persuasion from what he was when he wrote that
Book, near 40 years past, which instance is this. He has blamed G. K. for
undervaluing the Light within, as not sufficient to Salvation, or not
sufficient without something else, that is Christ Jesus without us, Suffering
and Dying outwardly for us, as in his late Antidote, Printed 1697. p. 28.
compared with p. 27. ad finem. Judge Reader, of what little necessity or value
he makes of the Man Christ without us, and of his Death and Sufferings,
Resurrection and Intercession in Heaven, by this most unsound Notion of his,
for which he has got a late Patron and Assistant, a Clergy Man of the Church
of England formerly, though not in present Office, one that calls himself
Edmund Ely's, who has Printed lately two half Sheets in Vindication of G.
Whitehead's vile Error, and blaming my Christian Assertion: The Title of one of
his half Sheets being this; G. Keith's saying that the Light within is not
sufficient to Salvation without something else proved to be contrary to the
Foundation of the Christian Religion. These two half Sheets are printed and
sold by T. Soul the Quakers Printer, next door to their Meeting House in
White-heart Court in Grace Church Street, 1697. By which it appears they are
very fond of this Patron to their Cause, and particularly that G. Whitehead is
so, by the Commendation he gives of him in his late printed Antidote.

However this may seem to some an improper Digression; yet if they well
consider the occasion of it, they will (if Impartial) acknowledge it both
proper and convenient.

SECT. XII.
AND hereby it may easily appear what Spirit has Acted the first Teachers that
appeared among the Quakers, as chiefly G. F. and G. W. to oppose so keenly and
earnestly the practice of those two Divine Institutions of Water Baptism and
the Supper; namely, to draw People into a forgetfulness of all Faith in Christ
without us, as he dyed and rose again, and is Ascended into Heaven; for the
proper Memorials of Christ Crucified, being rejected and laid aside as well as
the Doctrine it self not only, not Preached but opposed, as contrary to the
Scripture, the drift and aim of that Spirit that has Acted them both against
the one and the other, is plainly manifest, and how its opposing the Doctrine of
Faith in the Man Christ without us, is the great cause of its opposing these
external Practices which are such proper means, together with the Doctrine to
propagate and preserve the true Christian Faith in the World. And indeed upon
that Hypothesis, or Foundation laid by their principal Teachers, that there is
no need of Preaching Faith in the Man Christ without, for Remission of Sin, and
eternal Salvation; but the only thing needful is the Light within, as it
universally enlightenth all Mankind, either to be Preached, or Believed, as a
late Writer against them has well observed, these outward Practices of
Water Baptism, and the outward Supper are useless and insignificant
Formalities, for they were never appointed to signify Remission of Sin,
Justification, and Salvation, only by obedience to the Light within; excluding
the necessity of Faith in the Man Christ without us; whose alone Obedience unto
Death for us, is the only meritorious Cause of the Remission of our Sins, of
Justification, and eternal Salvation; and of all that inward Grace and Virtue
of the Holy Spirit whereby we are inwardly Sanctified, and made meet to receive
that eternal Inheritance. But though the Spirit that first appeared to Act in
these Men, the first Teachers and Leaders of that People, did prove it self to
be Antichristian, by opposing the Memorials of Christ without us; yet many
simple and honest hearted People knew nothing of this design, and however in
part leavened with that Spirit in respect of its opposition to these outward
Institutions of Baptism and the Supper; yet by God's great Mercy were preserved
from being prevailed upon by it, to oppose the Doctrine and Faith of Christ as
he outwardly Suffered, Dyed, and Rose again, and is in Heaven, our Intercessor,
among whom I can justly and uprightly number both R.B. and my self; both of us
having been preserved sound in our Faith, as touching the Faith in Christ
without us, however otherwise hurt and biased by them, in relation to these
two outward Institutions of Baptism and the Supper; and my Charity leads me to
believe that, if R.B. had lived in the Body to this day, to see the ill effects
that his Writing against these Divine Institutions have had, and the bold
opposition that many have of late, more than formerly made to the necessity of
the Faith in Christ Crucified, and the Preaching of it even here in
Christendom, since the Question has been more distinctly stated betwixt my
Opposers and me, touching the necessity of the Faith asserted by me, and
opposed by them, he would have plainly seen and readily acknowledged his Error
in Writing against these Divine Institutions.

There is yet another of their Teachers, who is of late years become a Person
of no small Note among the Quakers, viz. John Gratton, whom I cannot well pass
without observing his Ignorant and Inconsiderate way of Arguing against these
Divine Institutions, especially as touching one of his main Arguments he has
framed from a most false and perverse Understanding of that place in Heb. 6.1,
2. Therefore leaving the Principles of the Doctrine of Christ, let us go on to
Perfection; where in his Book called John Baptist decreasing, Printed many
years ago, and Reprinted in the year 1696, he lays the Foundation of his
Argument against Water Baptism, upon the word in that place LEAVING, which he
has caused to be Printed more than once in his Book in Capital Letters (for a
Monument it will be of his gross Ignorance, and yet bold Presumption thus to
pervert the Holy Scripture) from thence inferring that Water Baptism is to be
left off and laid aside; for thus be argues, p. 47. of the last Edition, 1697.
If they had been commanded by Christ to have been used to the Worlds end; then
why should Paul for so I call that Author) have been so earnest at that day,
which was soon after Christ's Ascension, to have had them then to leave them,
and to go on to a more Manful, Powerful, perfect State? Ans. At this rate of
Arguing, not only Water Baptism, but the Baptism of the Holy Spirit is also to
be left; for the Author mentions the Doctrine of Baptisms in the Plural Number;
which John Gratton most unfairly and falsely quotes in the Singular; Baptism for
Baptisms: Also by the same Argument, Repentance from dead works and faith
toward God, the resurrection of the dead and eternal judgment, are all to be
left off from being Preached or Believed: But the true Sense is obvious, of the
word leaving, i.e. not to Treat, or Write upon these first Principles further
at present, but to Treat of other things; as when a Man has laid the
Foundation of a House, he goes on to Build a Superstructure upon it.

And as Ignorant and Impertinent does he discover himself to be in his other
Treatise (preceding the other) of Baptism and the Supper; where from the Word
Elements, used in Gal. 4.3, 9. he concludes that Water Baptism is one of these
beggarly Elements Paul opposed; because Water is an Element; and after this
rate diverse others of their Teachers have Argued; but the Word Translated
Elements there, Gal. 4.3, 9. has no relation to the Water Baptism, nor to the
Element of Water; but to Principles and Doctrins of the Jews, relating to the
Jewish Rites and Ceremonies; the Greek Word, (...), is applied no less to the
Principles of the Christian Doctrine of Christ and Oracles of God; which
therefore by his Argument, being Elements, are to be thrown aside. As for his
other Arguments in those two Treatises against the outward Baptism and the
Supper; they are no other that I can find, but such as are above mentioned in
my Reply to those of William Penn, and Robert Barclay, and therefore one Answer
will serve both to them and him.

PART II.
SECT. I. The Arguments against the outward Supper examined and Refuted.
THus having finished my Examination, and Refutation of the Arguments of the
above mentioned Persons against Water Baptism, and the outward Supper in
general, I think fit to bring to the like Examination, what R.B. has more
particularly Argued against the outward Supper; as being not any longer to
continue, but until Christ's inward coming, to arise in their Hearts, and give
a plain Refutation of the same.

In the beginning of the Chapter, or Head, wherein he discourses concerning
the Body and Blood of Christ, although he says truly, that the Communion (
i.e.) the Participation thereof is inward and Spiritual; yet he was under a
great mistake, to affirm that the said Body and Blood of Christ, whereof true
Believers do participate, is only inward; which he afterward explains to be
that Light and Seed in every Man; as he expresses plainly in several places,
as p. 61, of the above said Treatise, and p. 65, where he says -- and that
Christ understands the same things here, ( viz. John 6.) by his Body, Flesh,
and Blood, which is understood, John 1. by the light has enlighteneth every
man, and the life, etc. And p. 77. he charge it to be an Error to make the
Communion, or Participation of the Body, Flesh and Blood of Christ, to relate
to that outward Body, Vessel, or Temple that was Born of the Virgin Mary, and
walked and Suffered in Judea, whereas it should relate to the Spiritual Body,
Flesh and Blood of Christ, even that Heavenly and Celestial Light and Life,
which was the Food and Nourishment of the Regenerate in all Ages, as we have
(said he) already proved.

Ans. In this he was in a great Error, to make the Eating, or Participation of
Christ's Flesh and Blood to have no relation to Christ's outward Body of Flesh
and Blood that was Born of the Virgin, and Suffered Death for our Sins on the
Tree of the Cross. For the Regeneration of Believers, and Justification, with
all the Spiritual Blessings of Life and Light, and inward Divine Virtue and
Might, wherewith they are inwardly Refreshed and Nourished by Christ, has a
most near and immediate Relation to Christ's outward Body and Blood, and to his
coming in that outward Body; because that most Holy and Perfect Obedience of
Christ which he performed in that Body, and became Obedient to the Death of the
Cross, was and is the procuring and meritorious Cause of all that inward Grace,
Virtue, Light and Life, whereby Regeneration was wrought in any, in any Age of
the World, either before or since Christ came in the Flesh, as well as it was
and is the procuring and meritorious Cause of their Justification, and the
Remission of their Sins. For Christ Died as well for the Sins of those who
lived in the Ages before he came in the Flesh, as since, and they had the same
Benefits by his Death, and by his Body and Blood, that we have; the same inward
Grace and Light to Regenerate them, as the same Mercy and Favor to Justify
them, and give them the Remission of their Sins, which they received through
Faith in Christ, as he was to come in the Flesh without them; and whole Christ
is the Food of true Believers; I mean Christ, not only considered as the Word
simply, but as the Word made Flesh. And having taken or assumed the Seed of
Abraham, and the true Nature of Man into such a high Union, as that the Godhead
of the Word, and the Manhood assumed thereby is but one Christ; and as such is
the Food of all true Believers, both as he outwardly came in the Flesh, and as
he is inwardly come the Light and the Life in them; and Believers Eating of
Christ, is their Believing in him, and by their Faith being United to him, and
he to them; so that he dwells in them, and they in him. And though it may be
owned, that Believers Feeding upon Christ's Light and Life, Metaphorically and
Allegorically speaking, that Light and Life may be called according to
Scripture, Meat and Drink, and Flesh and Blood of Christ, as it has many other
such Metaphorical Names; such as, Milk, Honey, Wine, Marrow and Fatness, Oil,
etc. All which Names are given, because of Men's Weakness; and that they have
not proper Words to express Divine Things by; yet that ought not to make us
reject and lay aside Christ's outward Body of Flesh and Blood from having any
Relation to the Saints feeding upon him. Nor do the Arguments brought by R.B.
here, prove in the least what he intends, as the following Examination of them
will sufficiently (I hope) manifest. He begins with a Quotation out of
Augustine, in his Tractat, Psalm 98. The words which I speak unto you are
spirit and life, understand spiritually what I have spoken; ye shall not eat of
this body which ye see, and drink this blood which they shall spill that shall
crucify me. I am the living bread which have descended from heaven; he called
himself the bread which descended from heaven, exhorting that they might
believe in him, etc. Ans. It is evident from these last Words; that by Eating,
Augustine meant in one Sense Corporal Eating, and in another Sense Believing as
elsewhere Tract. 25. ad cap. 6. Johan. Hoc est opus Dei, ut quid paras dentem
and ventrem? creed and manducasti: Credere enim in eum, hocest, comedere panem
and vinum, qui credit in eum manducat eum; in English thus, why preparest thou
thy Teeth and Belly? believe and thou have eat; for to believe in him is to eat
the Bread and Wine; who believes in him eats him. Both these Quotations are
good against the Papists; who hold that Believers eat the Body of Christ
Corporally with their Mouths; but say nothing against this Spiritual Way of
Eating Christ's Body, but plainly confirm it: The plain Sense therefore of
Augustin's Words, Quoted by R.B. is this; Ye shall not eat Corporally with the
outward Mouth, the Body of Christ which ye see, but ye shall eat it
Spiritually, that is, believe with a sincere Faith, which the Spirit of God
works in you; that Christ shall give his Body that ye see (speaking then to
the Jews) to be broken for you, and his Blood, even the Blood of that Body to
be shed for you. And in so Believing ye shall eat my Body, and drink my Blood,
that is, ye shall be united to me, and I to you, that I shall abide in you, and
ye shall abide in me; which Sense does evidently agree with our Savior's
Words, John 6.29, 47. And indeed to Exclude Christ's outward Body of Flesh and
Blood, from having any Relation to this place of Scripture, as no way concerned
in the Sense of these Words of it, John 6.53. is plainly to Exclude Christ as
he outwardly came in that outward Body, from being the Object of our Christian
Faith; for seeing Eating here signifies Believing by Agustine's Quotation,
approved by R.B. if this Spiritual Eating, which is our Believing, respects not
the Body of Christ that was outwardly Slain; then Christ as he came and
Suffered in that Body, is no Object of the Christian Faith, which is most
absurb; and none that is in the least acquainted with Augustin's Writings, can
say it ever was his meaning, to deny the Body of Christ that was outwardly
Slain, to be any wise Concerned in the Christian Faith; for Augustine was a
most zealous Asserter of the Necessity of Faith in Christ, as he came in that
Body, in order to our Salvation, against the Heresy of Pelagius who denied it,
and Writ many Books against that Heresy, now Revived by many of the Quakers
Teachers; tho what R.B. has Writ here, I impute to his Inadvertency, and do
not charge him with the Pelagian Heresy for the same, because from other
Places of his Writings, I can prove that he made the Faith of Christ's giving
his Body to be Slain for us, necessary to our Salvation, and a part of the
Christian Belief.

SECT. II.
AND as Inadvertent and Mistaken as R.B. was in his Quotation of Augustine,
concerning Christ's Flesh and Blood; no less has W. Penn been, [p. 314. of his
Rejoinder to J. F.] in his Quotation of Bishop Jewel, in his Sermon upon Jos.
6.1, 2, 3. Who speaking of what Christ was to the Jews in the Wilderness, says
thus: Christ had not yet taken upon him a Natural Body, yet they did eat his
Body; he had not yet shed his Blood, yet they drank his Blood? St. Paul says,
all did eat the same Spiritual Meat; that is, the Body of Christ, all did drink
of the same Spiritual Drink, that is, the Blood of Christ; and that as truly as
we do now. And whosoever did then so Eat, lived for ever, I think (says W.
Penn) a Pregnant and Apt Testimony to Christ's being the Christ of God before
his coming in the Flesh. Ans. But this does not prove that by Christ here, B.
Jewel meant only the Light within in these Jews, and by his Body and Blood
only, that Light within, or Seed or Principle, as W. Penn would have it. All
that are in the least acquainted with the Doctrine of the Church of England, of
which B. Jewel was a Zealous Defender, as in his Apology for the same
appears, or with B. Jewel's Writings, know well that the Sense which W. Penn
has here put on B. Jewel's Words, never came into his Remotest Thoughts; but
it is no wonder that he should so misunderstand and misconstrue B. Jewel's
Words, when he does so use the Scriptures themselves. B. Jewel's Sense is
Obvious; Christ had not taken upon him a Natural Body, yet they did Eat his
Body, viz. by Faith, believing that in the time appointed of God, he would take
a Body, and give up that Body to be Slain for their Sins; he had not yet shed
his Blood, yet they drank his Blood, viz. By faith believing, that after he
should take flesh and blood in the fullness of time, he would give his blood to
be shed for the remission of their sins; and by this faith all the faithful
among them had Christ dwelling in them by his spirit; and did know and witness
his spirit to regenerate and sanctify them, to quicken and refresh them, and
nourish them, as meat and drink does refresh and nourish the body of man. As
for his Quotations out of Joshua Sprig, and others; its no wonder he does so
Magnify them, seeing its but too evident the Quakers have sucked that
Poisonous Milk out of the Breasts of such Men who have been in the same Errors
before them. But to return to R.B. his Arguments, whereby he labors, but to
no purpose, to prove that the Flesh there mentioned, John 6.53. etc. has no
Relation to his outward Flesh. First, says he, (p. 63) because that it is
said, both that it came down from Heaven; yea that it is he that came down from
Heaven. Now all Christians at present, generally acknowledge that the outward
Body of Christ came not down from Heaven; neither was it that part of Christ
which came down from Heaven.

Ans. 1. By Himself that came down from Heaven, who is called by Paul the
second Adam, the Lord from Heaven, Heavenly, the quickening Spirit, cannot be
meant the inward Principle of Light in Men, abstractly considered from the
Fountain of it, which dwelt in the Man Christ, but chiefly the Light as in him;
and consequentially that which Men receive out of his Fullness, according to
their several Measures: And as our Regeneration and Salvation have a necessary
Dependence on that fullness of Light, Life and Grace that dwells in him, out of
which we receive our several Measures; so they have a necessary respect to the
Man Christ, both Soul and Body, in which that Fullness dwells; because the
Soul and Body of Christ (even his outward and visible Body) was concerned in
that great Work of our Redemption, in what he did and Suffered for us.
Therefore God has Exalted the same Man Jesus Christ both in Soul and Body, in
Unity with his Godhead, to be a Prince and Savior to give Repentance and
Remission of Sin, Grace and Glory, and all Spiritual Blessings to all that
shall be saved. This, ancient Writers have explained by the Example of a red
hot Iron exceedingly burning and shining; the Fire and Light in the same
answering to the Godhead, and the Iron answering to the Manhood. Now when this
fired Iron burns, or lightens any Stick of Wood that is applied to it; it is
not the Fire only without the Iron, nor the Iron only without the Fire; but
both jointly that have an Operation upon the Wood to Kindle and Lighten it;
even so, it is the Godhead of Christ in Unity with his Manhood (consisting of
Soul and Body,) that wrought that outward Redemption for us, and does inwardly
produce in us the blessed Effects of it by his Spirit, in Renewing and
Sanctifying us, Justifying us, and giving us Eternal Life and Glory.

Ans. 2. Because Christ's outward Body of Flesh was Miraculously Conceived by
the Power of the most High, and in that respect had a Heavenly Original, as
well as that it was really the Woman's Seed, and part of the Virgins Substance;
therefore it may be said to be from Heaven, and to be Heavenly as well as
Earthly, as Wheat and Barley, and other Grains that Grow in America, which come
Originally from England, are called English Grain, even in America, though they
are also American Grain, being produced out of the Soil of American Earth.
Secondly, says he, p. 63. and to put the Matter out of doubt, when the Carnal
Jews would have been so understanding it, he tells them plainly, v. 63. It is
the Spirit that quickneth, the Flesh profits nothing. Ans. Nor does this prove
his Assertion; the Error of the Carnal Jews was, that they supposed Christ
meant they were to eat his Body Corporally with their Bodily Mouth; but if they
had understood that he meant not a Corporal Eating, but a Spiritual and
Metaphorical, they had not erred in so thinking; his Quotation approved by him
out of Augustine, proves that by eating here, Christ meant believing in him, as
he was to Dye for the Sins of the World, and as he was to give his Body to be
broken for them, and his Blood to be shed for the Remission of the Sins of all
that should believe in him, and for the giving Eternal Life to them both in
Soul and Body. Thirdly, (Says he) p. 63.64.) This is also founded upon most
sound and solid Reason; because that it is the Soul, not the Body that is to be
Nourished by this Flesh and Blood; now outward Flesh cannot Nourish nor Feed
the Soul; there is no Proportion nor Analogy betwixt them; neither is the
Communion of the Saints with God, by a Conjunction and mutual Participation of
Flesh, but of the Spirit; he that is joined to the Lord, is one Spirit, not one
Flesh; for the Flesh (I mean outward Flesh, even such as was that wherein
Christ lived and walked, when upon Earth; and not Flesh, when transposed by a
Metaphor, to be understood Spiritually) can only partake of Flesh, as Spirit of
Spirit; as the Body cannot Feed upon Spirit, neither can the Spirit Feed upon
Flesh. Ans. Here also he Argues very Weakly and Fallaciously; that which
deceived him, and occasioned his great Mistake, which he embraced as a solid
Reason; was by Arguing from the strict literal Sense of Nourishing and Feeding,
to the Metaphorical and Figurative; which all true Logicians, and Masters of
solid Reason will say is unlawful; as also to Argue from the natural Feeding or
Nourishing to the Spiritual. To his Argument then I answer; outward Flesh
cannot Feed the Soul Naturally, I grant; Spiritually and Metaphorically, I
deny; now the Eating, Feeding, and Nourishing meant, John 6.53. is not Natural,
but Spiritual and Metaphorical; the Word Eating signifies Believing. And
whereas he speaks of the Feeding of the Spirit, or Soul of Man, that it
cannot be the Flesh of Christ that can Feed it, but the Spirit, so as to be its
Food; by Food here we must understand it Metaphorically, even as R.B. has
confessed; that the Spirit of Christ is not properly, but Metaphorically called
Flesh. So the Souls of Believers Feeding upon the Spirit of Christ, is also
Metaphorical; for if by the Spirit of Christ, he meant the Godhead; how can the
Godhead, which is an Infinite Being in all respects be the Food f the Soul or
Spirit of Man that is Finite, strictly or literally understood without a
Metaphor? much more may I use his Argument against his own Assertion; there is
less Proportion or Analogy betwixt the Infinite Creator, and the Soul that is
a Finite Creature, than is betwixt the Flesh of Christ and the Soul. Besides,
if we argue from the strict and literal Nicety of the Words Food, Feed, and
Nourishment; that which is the Food and Nourishment of a Body, becomes a part
of its very Substance and Being; shall any therefore conclude that because God
is the Food and Nourishment of the Souls of the Saints; that therefore he
becomes a part of their Souls? We know George Fox was blamed for saying the
Soul was a part of God, or of the Divine Essence; surely it is as justly
blameworthy for any to say that God is a part of the Soul; therefore when God
or his Spirit is said to be the Souls Food, it is not to be understood Strictly
and Literally, but Metaphorically and Figuratively; as when David says, my
Soul thirsts after God. But if it be said, that not the Godhead, but that
which R.B. calls the Vehicle of the Godhead, is the most proper and immediate
Food of the Souls of Believers, as a certain Divine Emanation, or Efflux; nor
can that Strictly and Literally, without a Metaphor be called the Souls Food;
for that Divine Emanation, or Efflux, does not become any part of the Souls
Substance, but is more Noble than the Soul, of any Saint, upon the Hypothesis;
that there is such a thing, (which to dispute, is foreign to the present
Question) for the Soul of Man in its own Nature is capable of Sin, and sinful
Defilements, which this Divine Seed, or Principle in the Soul is not; therefore
it can never be Convertible into the Souls Substance. The Feeding of the Soul,
therefore in whatever Sense we take it is Metaphorical, and not to be measured
or determined by the Feeding of the Body, yet bears some Analogy or
Similitude thereunto, as all Metaphors do to the things, from which they are
transferred; for as what Feeds the Body, does Refresh and Comfort it, makes it
Lively and Vigorous, Fat and Beautiful, and does strengthen it, and is united
with it; So the Spirit of Christ, and his Divine Influences in the Souls of
Believers have the like Effects in them, they do wonderfully Refresh and
Comfort them (and that most sensibly) make them Lively and Vigorous, Fat and
Beautiful, and do mightily strengthen them, and make them Fruitful in Divine
Virtues and Fruits, and are United with the Soul.

SECT. III.
BUT there are two other things that need Correction, in these foregoing Words
of R.B. the first is, that he says it is the Soul, not the Body that is to be
Nourished by this Flesh and Blood; this is a great Mistake; though the Bodies
of the Saints are not to be Nourished by Christ, as with natural Food that is
Corruptible; yet seeing it is by him that the Bodies of the Saints shall be
raised up at the Resurrection of the Dead to partake of Life Everlasting;
therefore he is truly said to be that Food that Perishes not, that Feeds
both the Souls and Bodies of the Saints to Life Everlasting; and though their
Bodies Dye, yet because by the Power of Christ's Resurrection (as his Body was
Raised from the Dead, so on the account of his Resurrection) their Bodies shall
be Raised to Eternal Life. Therefore their Bodies as well as their Souls are
truly said to be Nourished by him. The second is that he says, neither is the
Communion of the Saints with God by a Conjunction, and mutual Participation of
Flesh, but of the Spirit; he that is joined to the Lord is one Spirit, not one
Flesh. Ans. The Communion indeed of the Saints with God, is not by any natural
Conjunction, or Union of Christ's Body that was outwardly Slain with the
Saints, yet a Mystical and Relative Union there is, as really, or rather more
really, as is betwixt the Husband and the Wife, who are said to be one Flesh.
This is a great Mystery, said Paul, but I speak concerning Christ and the
Church; who according to Paul's Doctrine, as they are one Spirit, so they are
one Flesh: And as elsewhere he said, we are of his Flesh, and of his Bone; and
forasmuch as the Children were partakers of Flesh and Blood, he took part of
the same; wherefore he is not ashamed to call them Brethren. Now in this R.B.
was in a great Error; that by his thus excluding the Flesh of Christ's outward
Body from being any means of the Saints Communion with God, he excludes the
said Body of Christ from being any necessary part of the Mediator; and at this
rate of his Arguing, only the Divine Light or Seed in Men is the Mediator
betwixt God and Men; but according to the Doctrine of the Apostle Paul, the
Mediator of God and Men (who is one) is the Man Christ Jesus, and by the Man
Christ Jesus, is understood in Scripture, not the Spirit only, nor the Soul of
his Manhood only, but the Body also, together with the Soul, even Jesus Christ
made of the Seed of David, according to the Flesh: And as really as there is a
Relative Union betwixt Brethren, and near Kindred with respect to their Flesh
and Blood; on which account it is said, Concerning Joseph, Genesis 37.27. He is
our Brother and our Flesh, and 2 Samuel 5.1. The Tribes of Israel said unto
David, behold we are thy Bone and thy Flesh: So believing Gentiles, as well as
believing Jews may say concerning the Man Christ, who is the Seed of the Woman;
of whom, to wit Eve, we are all descended, we are his Bone and Flesh; and
because he has taken Flesh and Blood like unto us, therefore in that very
respect, he is completely qualified and fitted to be our Mediator, and High
Priest with God, by whom (because of the true Nature of Man, consisting of a
true reasonable Soul, and true and real Body of Man, which the Eternal Word is
united unto) we have Communion with God. His fourth and last Argument has the
like Defect with the former. That which Feeds upon it shall never Dye, but
the Bodies of all Men once Dye. Ans. Men are said in Scripture to Dye; though
the Soul Dies not, yet Men are said to Dye, because the Vital Union of the
Soul with the Body is Dissolved; which being but for a Time, and that a very
small Time, as a Moment, in respect of Eternity, and after that their Bodies
shall be raised up again, and Vitally be United to their Souls; therefore by
the contrary Argument, by the Flesh of Christ, that the Saints Feed upon, must
be meant in part his outward Body of Flesh, now Glorified, which is a Glorious
Spiritual Body; because the Resurrection of Christ's Body, is the Ground of the
Saints Hope wrought in them by the Spirit of Christ, that their Bodies shall be
raised up, and shall together with their Souls inherit Eternal Life. And to
conclude this whole Matter; when Christ said, it is the Spirit that Quickneth,
the Flesh profits nothing. His meaning is, that according to their Carnal and
Fleshly Sense; it does not profit; as if he had said, it would profit you
nothing to Eat my Flesh, as ye imagine by the Bodily Mouth, but to Eat it
Spiritually, and by Faith, this does profit; but to take the Words, the Flesh
profits nothing in the Sense that some take them, is most Blasphemous; as to
say, Christ's outward Body of Flesh profits nothing to our Salvation; for this
would make his Coming and Death for us in the Flesh to have been in vain; and
also would render our Faith Vain, that he did so come; yea, so necessary was
Christ's coming in the Flesh for our Salvation; that it is by his Flesh and
Soul, Constituting his Manhood, that we have his Spirit; the Man Christ is that
Olive Tree (consisting of Soul and Body, United Personally to the Godhead of
the Eternal Word) which gives us the Oil of the Holy Spirit, and pours it
into our Hearts; and as in the Natural Olive Tree, it is by its Body that we
have of its Oil, or Spirit; and when we Eat of its Oil, we are said to Eat of
the Tree; because the Tree yields us its Oil; even as when we Eat of an Apple,
or Drink the Fruit of it, or of the Vine; we may be said to Eat of the
Apple Tree and Vine-Tree; the Fruit being what the Tree naturally yields; so
the Man Christ, consisting of Soul and Body, is that Precious Olive Tree, and
Vine-Tree, that yields us the Oil and Wine of the Holy Spirit, and pours it
into our Hearts who Believe in him, and Love him, and as Effectual as his Soul
and Flesh of his Manhood is now to Believers for their receiving the Spirit by
the same, since he came in the Flesh, no less Effectual it was to Believers
before he came in the Flesh, even from the beginning of the World, according to
B. Jewel's Words, he was not come in the Flesh, yet they Eat his Flesh; to wit,
by Faith; he had not Shed his Blood, yet they Drank his Blood, viz. by Faith;
and both his Flesh and his Blood, before it had any visible Being, or
Existence, together with his Soul was Effectual to Believers in all Ages, for
their Reception of the Spirit, and all Spiritual Blessings of Justification,
and Sanctification, etc. as well before he came in the Flesh as since: And thus
he was the Lamb Slain from the Foundation of the World, whose Death was of the
same Efficacy from the beginning, and will be to the end of the World, to all
that believe in him. And as God is the giver of the Spirit, and of all the
Graces of the Spirit; so he gives it to Believers by and through Christ, even
the Man Christ, who is both the Procurer, and Dispenser of all that Grace that
God gives unto them; and though Men most properly Eat the Meat, and Drink the
Drink that is bought with Money; yet in ordinary Speech, by a common Metonymy,
they are said to Eat and Drink the Money that buyeth it; as the Poor Widows two
Mites were called her Living; so after some sort, though the inward Life and
Spirit of Christ, be the most immediate Food of the Souls of Believers; Yet
because the Flesh of Christ, as it was broken for us, and his Blood as it was
Shed for us, is the Price and Purchase Money which has procured to us the
inward Life and Spirit of Christ, with the various Graces and Gifts thereof;
therefore we are said, to Eat his Flesh, and Drink his Blood, by the Like
Metonymy. But there is much more in this Great Mystery, than can be
demonstrated by these Similitudes and Examples, or any others of the like
Nature.

SECT. IV.
P. 77. R.B. charge it as another Error, which he calls a General Error,
wherein he says, they all agree, viz. both Papists and Protestants, in tying
this Participation of the Body and Blood of Christ to that Ceremony used by him
with his Disciples in the breaking of Bread, etc. As if it had only a Relation
thereto, or were only enjoyed in the use of that Ceremony; which it neither
has, nor is.

Ans. For any to tie the Participation of Christ's Body and Blood to the outward
Eating in the Supper, as above mentioned, is indeed a great Error. But it was a
great Mistake in him, and too rashly charged in general by him, upon both
Papists and Protestants, their being guilty of that Error. For it can be shown,
that some of the Popish Writers have affirmed the contrary, and delivered it as
the common Faith of their Church; that true Believers partake of Christ's Flesh
and Blood, although they Dye before they receive the outward Supper; for which
Lombard, Lib. 4. Did. 9. cites Augustine, saying, Lib. de med. paen. Nulli
ambigendum est, etc. No man ought to doubt that any Man is then a partaker of
the Body and Blood of the Lord, when he is made a Member of Christ; nor is he
Alienated from the Communion of that Bread and Cup, although before he Eat that
Bread, and Drink the Cup; being Constituted in the Unity of the Body of Christ,
he depart out of this World; for he is not deprived of the benefit of that
Sacrament, when he is found to have that which that Sacrament signifies. And
as for the generality of Protestants, I know not, nor ever knew any that so
tied the Participation of Christ's Body to the outward Supper, as he mentions.
They say indeed, it is a Means of Grace, and of our Communion of the Lord's
Body; but not the only means, or so absolutely necessary, as without it, none
have that Communion.

Another great Mistake I find in R.B. p. 81. of that Treatise, where he says;
as for the Paschal Lamb, the whole end of it is signified particularly, Exodus
13.8.9. to wit, that the Jews might thereby be kept in remembrance of their
Deliverance out of Egypt. Ans. That is indeed mentioned as an end of it, but
not the whole end of it; for the end of the whole Law was Christ; whereof that
Command of the Passover was a part; but that the Passover was a Type of Christ,
particularly as he was to be Slain for their Sins; is plain, out of Paul's
Words, 1. Cor. 5.7. Let us keep the feast, etc. for our passover is slain for
us. Now as the Jews were to Eat the Flesh of the Passover; so the Believers in
Christ are to Eat his Flesh; even that Flesh that was Slain; to wit, by Faith,
as is above declared; but not by any Corporal Eating; and why did John the
Evangelist apply these Words of the Passover to Christ's Body; a bone of him
shall not be broken? This plainly proves that the Passover was a Type of
Christ; and therefore one great end of it, was to hold him forth to their Faith.

In p. 87. R.B. says, let it be observed, that the very express and particular
use of it, according to the Apostle, is to show forth the Lord's Death, etc.
But to show forth the Lord's Death, and partake of the Flesh and Blood of
Christ, are different things; from whence he infers, as his following Words
show that this Practice of the outward Supper, has no inward or immediate
Relation to Believers, Communicating, or Partaking of the Spiritual Body and
Blood of Christ; or that Spiritual Supper, spoken of, Rev. 3.20.

Ans. This Consequence does not follow, that Practice of the outward Supper,
had not only that end, to Commemorate and show forth the Lord's Death, but had
other great ends also; as another was to signify their Communion of Christ's
Body, as not a bare Sign, but as a means of that Communion; though not the only
means, or such a means, as if the said Communion were tied thereto; another end
was to signify their Union and Communion one with another; both which ends are
plainly held forth in these Words; The bread which we break is it not the
Communion of the Lord's Body; etc. and we being many, are one bread, and all
are made partakers of that one bread. And though R.B. denies that by Bread in
those Words, the bread which we break is it not the communion of the Lord's
body; is to be understood the outward Bread; yet I have above proved it to be
the outward Bread that was used in the Supper; for to understand it of the
Lord's Body, were to make it Nonsense; as to say the Body of Christ is it not
the Communion of his Body? Whereas the true Sense is Obvious, taking it for the
outward Bread. The Bread which we break, is it not a Sign of the Communion of
the Lord's Body, etc. And such a Sign that is a means, whereby our Communion of
the Lord's Body, and of the Spiritual Blessings we have thereby, is confirmed
to us, and an increase of Grace is Exhibited unto us, as it is duly Administered
and Received.

SECT. V.
PAge 83. He puts a very false and strained Sense upon these Words; ye cannot
drink the cup of the Lord, and the cup of Devils; ye cannot be partakers of the
Lord's table, and of the table of Devils, 1 Cor. 10.21. which shows (says he)
that he understands not here the using of Bread and Wine; because those that do
Drink the Cup of Devils and Eat of the Table of Devils (yea, the Wickedest of
Men) may partake of the outward Bread, and the outward Wine.

Ans. By the Lord's Table, is not meant, barely and simply the Signs of Bread
and Wine; but as they do signify, and are Means Exhibitive of the Spiritual
Blessings understood thereby. The Wickedest of Men may indeed receive the Bread
and Wine; but they are not to them any Significative, or Exhibitive Signs and
Means of these Spiritual Blessings, which are the things signified and
intended; and are the Kirnel, without which the bare outward Signs are mere
Shells, and broken Cisterns. Again, Let us distinguish betwixt what is de jure,
i.e. of Right, and what is de facto, i.e. in Fact. Wicked Persons, though in
Fact they may receive the outward Part, yet they have no Right to it. The
manner of Speech used here by Paul, is like that of James; does the same
fountain send forth sweet water and bitter? How then can the same tongue bless
God and curse men? My brethren, these things ought not to be. And when as Paul
said elsewhere; no man can say Jesus is the Lord, but by the Holy Ghost; he may
outwardly say the Words, but he has no Right to say them, nor can his saying
them profit him without the Holy Spirit. But that by the Table of the Lord, and
the Cup of the Lord here, are to be meant the outward things of Bread and Wine;
as above described, is evident from the Antithesis, or Opposition he makes
betwixt the Table of Devils, and the Table of the Lord, and betwixt the Cup of
Devils and the Cup of the Lord. Now the Table of Devils, and the Cup of Devils,
were outward things, to wit the outward Offerings of Meats and Drinks, that the
Heathens offered to their Idols, and to Devils. Therefore also by the Table of
the Lord, and the Cup of the Lord, were meant the outward things of Bread and
Wine; not barely and simply as such, but as Signifying and Exhibiting the
Spiritual Things, abovementioned. His Arguing against this Institution, from
the one Bread is answered above, Part 1. Sect. 5.

Page 87. and 89. He gives a most jejune and strained, as well as false Sense
upon these Words, the Table of the Lord, as (says he p. 89.) he that esteems
a Day, and places Conscience in keeping it, was to regard it to the Lord, and
so it was to him, in so far as he was to Dedicate it unto the Lord, the Lord's
Day; he was to do it worthily. Ans. We find no Day called the Lord's Day, upon
any such account; nor did Paul call the Cup in the Supper, the Cup of the Lord,
on any such Supposition of Men's esteeming it to be commanded, when it was not
really commanded; but it is plainly apparent, Paul called it the Cup of the
Lord, because he commanded it as the House of the Lord, the Law of the Lord,
etc. and the Command is extant; drink ye all of it, Matthew. 26.26, 27. Besides
in this he palpably runs into a contradiction to what he had said a little
before, in p. 83. For there he will not have the Bread and Wine to be the Table
of the Lord, and Cup of the Lord; because wicked Men cannot partake of the
Table of the Lord; and yet now here he grants they may, and thereby Eat and
Drink Damnation. And as jejune and strained, as well as false is the Gloss he
puts on these Words, he that eats and drinks unworthily, eats and
drinks his own damnation, and is guilty of the body and blood of the Lord; as
if they signified no more than what these Words import, Romans 14.23. He that
doubts is damned, if he eat, because he eats not of faith; which had only a
Relation to Meats that might lawfully be Eaten; but if he that did Eat them,
did think them forbidden, he Sinned, and so was Condemned in his own
Conscience. For the Word Damned and Damnation, in both places do not signify
any Final Sentence of Damnation; but only both being Sins, they incurred the
Guilt of Judgment, or Condemnation. But does it therefore follow, that the Sin
and Guilt is the same in both Cases? Is he as Guilty of Damnation that Eats
Swines Flesh Doubting (...) that Eats and Drinks Unworthily at the Lord's
Table? We read in James 3.1. of a greater Condemnation; the Greek Word is the
same in both places, viz. James 3.1. and 1 Cor. 11.29. Seeing therefore there
is a greater and lesser Damnation; it will not follow, as ^. B. would have it,
that the Eating of Meats that are lawful, doubtfully, is as great a Sin, and
deserves the same Condemnation that unworthy Eating at the Lord's Table: One
might argue after the like manner, that to make a Lie about a Trifle, brings as
great Guilt and Condemnation, as downright Atheism, and denying the Lord that
bought us.

Page 91. We find (says R.B.) this Ceremony only mentioned in Scripture in
four places, to wit, Matthew, Mark, and Luke, and by Paul to the Corinthians --
Matthew and Mark give only an account of the Matter of Fact, without any
Precept to do so afterward; simply declaring that Jesus at that time did
desire them to Eat of the Bread, and Drink of the Cap; to which Luke adds these
Words, do this in remembrance of me.

Ans. That he calls it a Ceremony, I know no Warrant he has, the Scripture
gives it no such Name; they blame the use of the Word Sacrament, because it is
not a Scripture Word; but to be sure Ceremony is no Scripture Word; they who
are well Skilled in the Greek Language, say, that the Greek Word (...), is well
enough Translated Sacrament, as the vulgar Latin Translates it in that place,
hoc est magnum Sacramentum. They further say; there ought to be no prejudice
against it, because some Heathen Authors had formerly used it; for so had they
used the Word Mystery, and had applied the same to the External Rites, and
Symbols used by them in their Sacrifices to their Idols. When Paul would have
himself and other Ministers of Christ to be accounted Stewards of the Mysteries
of God, 1 Cor. 4.1. They plead that by the Mysteries of God there, are to be
meant, not only the Doctrins of the Christian Faith, but the Observation of
those Institutions of Christ, of Baptism and the Supper; which none will deny
who believe them to be his Institutions. But that he says, Matthew and Mark,
give only an account of the Matter of Fact, without any Precept to do so
afterward. Ans. Though the Precept is not expressed, it is employed; and Luke
does express it plainly, intimating they were commanded to do it afterward.
And if it were no where to be found, but in Luke; seeing it is acknowledged
that Luke is of the same Authority, with the other Evangelists; it is
sufficient, as well as that one place in John 6. concerning the Eating Christ's
Flesh, and Drinking his Blood, that is only expressive of that Mystery, is
sufficient to prove the Truth of it.

Page 92. Now this Act (says he) was no singular thing, neither any solemn
Institution of a Gospel Ordinance; because it was a constant Custom among the
Jews (as Paulus Ricius observes at length in his Celestial Agriculture) that
when they did Eat the Passover, the Master of the Family did take Bread, and
bless it, and breaking of it gave it to the rest; and likewise taking Wine, did
the same, etc.

Ans. This Consequence will not follow; for it is as Idle and Groundless, as if
one should argue, the Jews in the Time of the Law had their Religious Meetings,
where Preaching and Prayer were used; therefore Religious Meetings, and
Preaching, and Prayer are no Gospel Institutions. But as his Consequence is not
good, so the Antecedent is not true, viz. That it was no singular thing; for
though it was not singular in respect of the Material Part; yet it was
altogether singular in respect of its Formal Part. None of the Masters of the
Families among the Jews said, Take, Eat, this is Christ's Body which is to be
broken for you; and this Cup is the New Testament in his Blood, etc. It was the
great Love and Wisdom of Christ, to establish his Institutions under the
Gospel, relating to the external part of Religion, as near to the Jewish Forms
as possible; excepting what might seem to favor their Superstitions, and other
Shadowy Things that were to be Abolished. All the moral Part, as well as diverse
things of Instituted Worship that were among the Jews, being commanded under
the Gospel. That of Christ's washing the Disciples Feet, which he insisteth on
for several Pages, is fully Answered to in the first Part. As also that of
Anointing the Sick with Oil; so that no more needs be said to it here.

As for these Objections that he raises about the Time of the natural Day,
when this Institution should be practiced; as why not at Night, and what sort
of Bread, whether Leavened, or Unleavened? and whether other Drink may not be
used as well as Wine? which he calls Difficulties, out of which it is
impossible, he says, (p. 101.) to extricate themselves, but by laying it
aside; another of which Difficulties is to understand, as he alleges, that
these Words, Take, Bless, and Break the Bread and give it to others, are to the
Clergy, meaning the Pastors, but to the Laity only, meaning the People, Take,
Eat, etc.

Ans. I do not find that he proves in the least any such Difficulties; they
may be all easily extricated, much more than in many other Cases, where far
greater Difficulties occur. But this is too Rash and Preposterous; because of
some seeming Difficulties, therefore to lay aside a Divine Institution, or to
conclude it is no such thing. This is to cut the Knot, instead of loosing it,
and to Kill, instead of Curing. At this rate, because in Paul's Epistles, and
in many other places of Scripture, there are things hard to be understood and
resolved, therefore all such places of Scripture are to be rejected; Who does
not see the Impertinency of such Consequences? And the like may be said in
Answer to his Objection, from the great Contentions that have happened betwixt
Papists and Protestants about the Supper (and betwixt the Protestants one with
another) and the much Blood that has been shed, occasioned by these
Controversies. All which say nothing against the Institution it self, more than
against Christ and his Gospel, about which more Blood has been spilt than about
that. He should have better considered the distinction betwixt a causa per se,
and causa per accidens, and the use of a thing, and the abuse of it.

SECT. VI.
PAge 104. For would they take it as it lies, it would import no more than that
Jesus Christ at that time did thereby signify unto them, that his Body and
Blood was to be offered for them, and desired them, that whenever they did
eat or drink, they might do it in remembrance of him, or with a regard to him,
whose Blood was shed for them.

Ans. If this Supposition be true, as he would have it; that whenever they
did eat or drink, they were to do it in remembrance of him; then why has he
pleaded so much for the ceasing of it? Surely if they were to do it, whenever
they did Eat or Drink, they were to do it to the end of the World; because as
long as the World continues, Eating and Drinking will continue. But we do not
find that our Savior's Words import any such Sense; he does not say;
whenever ye eat or drink, etc. But as often as ye eat this bread, and drink
this cup; where the Word this Imports it to be another Eating than their common
Eating, and the like is Imported by these Words; let a man examine himself, and
so let him eat, etc. whosoever eats this bread unworthily, etc. 1 Cor. 11.28, 27.

But to this Sense that he has given, I find a Passage a little after p 111.
that as I judge is a plain Contradiction to the former. He says there the
Apostles Words, For as often as ye eat this bread, and drink this cup, ye do
show the Lords death till he come, Imports no more a command, than to say, As
often as thou go to Rome, see the Capitol, will infer a Command to me to go
thither. Now if they were to obey this Institution, whenever they did Eat or
Drink; then surely they were to do it very often; and that by a Command which
plainly contradicts this last Assertion of his; butth Words As seen as thou
go to Rome, see the Capitol, implie neither a Command, nor any frequent
Practice of going, therefore this Example is very improper and impertinent in
this respect as well as in others.

Page 110, 111. As to that passage 1 Cor. 11. from 23. to 27. He says, There
is no Command in this place, but only an account of matter of Fact. He says
not, I received of the Lord, that as he took Bread, so I should Command it to
you to do so also; there is nothing like this in the place.

Ans. Be it so, that there was no new Command given in the Case either to Paul,
or by him to the Corinthians. It sufficed to Paul to give an account of the
matter of Fact, as it was delivered to him from the Lord by Divine Revelation,
as he plainly affirmed; That (says he) which I received of the Lord, that also
I delivered unto you, that the Lord Jesus, the same night in which he was
betrayed, etc. Now, as all Divine Revelations are for some great end, we may
safely argue, that since what the Lord did that night, was Revealed to him by
the Lord, it was not an indifferent thing either to be Believed or Practiced,
since it had a Command in it, This do in remembrance of me: Here was a positive
Command that Christ gave unto his Apostles, alleged both by Paul, 1 Cor.
11.24. And also by Luke 22.19. There was no need of renewing the same
Commandments, as the Law of the Ten Commandments once given at Mount Zinai did
oblige the twelve Tribes of Israel, without any other giving them; though what
was then given them, was often taught them, both by Moses and the succeeeding
Prophets; so what Christ the great Lawgiver under the New Testament, gave
forth to be his Command, wherever that Command is made known to any People,
Nation, or Country, it ought to be obeyed, without the requiring or expecting
any new Sanction. And to show a little further how improper his Example, of one
saying As often as thou go to Rome, See the Capitol, is to the present Case;
If one that has the Command of another, should first say, go to Rome, and then
add, As often as thou go to Rome, go to the Capitol this would imply, a
Command. Now Christ said first to his Disciples, This do in remembrance of me,
as both Luke and Paul testify; and then Paul adds further, v. 25. As often as ye
drink it, this do in remembrance of me; and v. 26. for as often as ye eat this
bread and drink this cup, ye do show the Lord's death, till he come, the Greek
word (...) translated ye show, may be translated, ye declare, or ye preach, for
so is the same word translated, Acts 15.26. Acts 13.38. Acts 17.13. which
signifies some Public way of showing it forth in Religious Meetings, that
proves it was not Men's private Eatings, which may often happen when they are
alone; and for this, and the like Reasons, some of the Ancients, and
particularly Augustine, called it Verbum visibile, the visible Word; which when
joined with the Word that is founded in Men's Ears, has a double force upon the
Minds of devout Believers: To which does well agree that saying of Chrysostom,
in his Homilies on Matthew, cited in the Title Page, If thou had been without
a Body, God had given thee naked and incorporeal Gifts; but because the Soul is
planted in a Body, he gives thee Intelligible things in Sensible things. And
it was well observed by the Ancients, that all obsignatory Signs, have some
words of God or Christ added unto them, to make them effectual, according to
which Augustine said, Accedat verbum ad rem, and fit Sacramentum, i.e. let the
word be added to the sign, and it becomes a Sacrament; and therefore we find in
Ephesians. 5.26. the washing of Water joined with the Word -- That he might sanctify
and cleanse it, with the washing of water by the word. I know some will have
the Water here to be meant, the inward Water, and the Word to be inward also;
but such a Sense would be not only strained, but unintelligible, as to say with
the washing of the Word by the Word, for they make the inward Water and Word to
be the same thing here; but the Apostle distinguishes them as two things, both
which have the Efficacy by the inward working of the Holy Spirit, Titus 3.5.

Page 111. He undertakes the Answering of the Argument for the Institution of
the Supper, and its continuance until Christ come at the end of the World, from
those Words, Ye show forth the Lord's death till he come. To this he p. 112.
Answers. They take two of the chief parts of the Controversy here for granted
without proof; First, that as often imports a Command, the contrary whereof is
shown, neither will they ever be able to prove it. 2ly. That this coming is
understood of Christ's last Outward coming, and not of his Inward and
Spiritual, that remains to be proved, whereas the Apostle might well understand
it of his Inward coming and appearance. -- And a little after he says -- Now
those weak and carnal Corinthians might be permitted the use of this, to show
forth, or remember Christ's Death, till he come to arise in them. For, though
such need those Outward things to put them in mind of Christ's Death, yet such
as are dead with Christ, and not only dead with Christ, but burried, and so
risen with him, need not such Signs to remember him.

Ans. That as often, together with the foregoing words, import a Command, I
have already proved, and it was rashly said in him, that he had shown the
contrary, and that they will never be able to prove it. And whereas some argue,
had it been a Command, some certain times would have been mentioned, how often in
a Week, Month, or Year it should have been Practiced. To this it is Answered;
that it follows not more than to argue that, because it is not mentioned how
often in a Week, Month, or Year, Public Prayer is to be used; that therefore
they are not Institutions of Christ; for as Public Preaching and Prayer is to
be used as frequently as can stand with the Ability and Conditions of both
Preachers and Hearers; so this Practice as frequently is to be used; which, as
the time of those, is to be left to the Discretion of the Persons, as God shall
inwardly Guide them, and outwardly afford them the Convenience; so is the Time
of this to be left to the like Discretion, Guidance, and Convenience; which as
it seemed to be the Practice of the Church in the Days of the Apostles; each
Lord's Day, being the first Day of the Week, so it is clear from Justin Martyr,
and other ancient Writers; that it was the constant Practice of the Christians,
Solemnly to Celebrate the same every Lord's Day; besides what other times they
might have done it.

As to the second, which he calls together with the other, the chief thing in
Controversy, it is indeed so, even the chief thing; and therefore if this be
effectually proved against them, that those Words, until he come again, are
understood of Christ's last outward coming, the Cause is gained. But first, let
us examine what Proof he brings, that they are not to be understood of Christ's
last outward coming. First, he says, the Apostle might well understand it of
his inward coming and appearance; but what Proof does he give of this? None at
all, but his simple Affirmation.

Secondly, He says, these Weak and Carnal Corinthians might be permitted the
use of this, to show forth, or remember Christ's Death till he should arise in
them. But what Proof gives he of this, that this was, or might be a Permission?
for no such Permission is any where expressed in the Scriptures; the things
that simply were permitted, as Circumcision, were used but by a few, and not
long; Paul severely opposed them after some time; but so he never did either
Water Baptism, or the Supper. Thirdly, That he said* though such need th^se
outward things to put them in mind of Christ's Death; why then, seeing there
are now in all Churches and Christian Societies, some that are as weak as those
Corinthians were, do not they allow the use of them to such as need them?
Fourthly, That he says, such as are Dead and Buried with Christ, and Risen
again with him, need not such things to remember him. Answer, Here, as
elsewhere, his Argument is faulty, by arguing; that because such things are not
absolutely necessary, therefore they are not useful, or necessary in any
respect. Besides, as I have above shown, his Argument has the same force
against the use of the Holy Scriptures, and all Books, all Preaching of the
best Men, and all External Parts of Worship, viz. They that are Dead and Buried
with Christ, and Risen with him, need none of these outward things. But the
best Men, and such are the most humble, will and cannot but acknowledge, that
all outward Helps and Means that God has afforded them, are very useful to
them, and help to stir up the pure Mind in them. Nor are any so Risen with
Christ, as the Raised Saints shall be at the Resurrection; therefore till then,
they may be helped with outward Means of God's appointing. It is very Unwisely,
as well as Irreverently Argued; we need not those things, therefore they are
not commanded. The contrary is the better Argument; they are commanded,
therefore they are needful, at least in some respect; God better knows what
we need, than we do our selves; and therefore in his great Love and Wisdom,
has provided outward Helps for us, as well as inward. But seeing they will
needs understand the Words, until he come; not to mean Christ's last outward
coming, but his inward; then with the same Pretext, they may as well understand
his Death, of an inward Death of Christ in them; and the showing his Death of
an inward showing; and then all Remembrance of Christ's Death, as he Dyed
outwardly may be forgotten. But if by the Lord's Death, is understood his
outward Death, by as good reason, by his coming is understood his outward
coming.

SECT. VII.
HAving thus shown the Invalidity of his Proofs, that by the Lord's coming, is
understood his inward coming into their Hearts, and not his outward coming. I
shall give some clear Reasons, why it must be understood his outward coming at
the general Judgment. The first Reason is; because the Reason of the Command
continuing to his last outward coming, the Command does also continue; for so
long does any Command continue in Force, as the Reason of it continues; but
the Reason of the Command, Do this in remembrance of me, etc. does continue to
Christ's last outward coming; which Reason is this; that by that Practice they
might remember the Lord's Death; and not only remember it, but show it forth,
Publicly Declare and Profess, it, and the inestimable Benefits they have by
it. Now put the case, that any had so good and living Remembrance of it; that
they needed not the outward things to put them in remembrance thereof; yet that
is not enough to Answer the Reason and End of the Command, which is by this
outward Practice to show it forth, and declare it by a public Profession, that
they owe Remission of Sin, and Salvation to the Crucified Jesus, and that they
are not ashamed to own and confess him their Savior, their King, their Priest
and Prophet, and in Token thereof they give Testimony of their Obedience to
these his peculiar positive Laws and Institutions of Water Baptism, and the
Supper; for if these be rejected, by the same Method Men may reject all other
his positive Institutions, relating to External Practice of Religion, and so
turn the Christian Religion into mere Deism, and Pagan Morality. The second
Reason is, that the end of this Institution, being a solemn Commemoration of
Christ's Death and Sacrifice which he offered up to God for our Sins above
sixteen hundred Years ago, and of the great Spiritual Blessings we have
thereby; there is the same Cause and End for it to continue to our Day, and to
the end of the World, as when it was first appointed. Had it been indeed only a
Prenuniciative Sign of some things to come, or of the hidden invisible
Substance, as W. Penn terms it, meaning thereby the Spirit of Christ within, at
the coming of the Spirit within into their Hearts; the Sign might have ceased,
as the Prenunciative Signs of Christ's outward coming in the Flesh were to
cease after his outward coming, and accordingly did cease. But the Signs of
Water Baptism, and the Supper, as commanded by Christ, and Practiced by the
Apostles; were not such Prenunciative Signs of the coming of his Spirit within
them, but were chiefly Commemorative Signs of him as he had come; for both of
them were appointed by him when he was come, and the Institution of Baptism was
appointed by him after his Death and Resurrection, the Institution of the
Supper, so near to his Death, that it was in the very Night when he was
Betrayed, and at which time he had the great Sense and Weight of his Sufferings
upon him, and as then in great part begun; and because the use of those Signs
of Bread and Wine, the Bread being broken, and the Wine poured out, was a
Solemn Commemoration of his having given his Body to be broken for them, and
his Blood to be shed for them; therefore he said, Take, Eat, this is my Body
that is broken for you; he did not say, this is my Spirit, or this is the
inward visible hid Substance that ye shall afterward receive; but this is my
Body; Take, Eat; and though they were not to eat his Body with the Carnal
Mouth, but only the Bread which signified it; yet by Faith they were to eat his
Body, that is to say, they were to partake of a Mystical Union with his Body,
and to have their Right and Interest in him confirmed to them by that Symbol,
by means whereof they were to receive plentifully of his Grace and Spirit, as
the Consequent and Effect of that Union with him. Therefore they were not so to
mind the Effect, as to neglect the great Cause of that Effect; which great
cause was his giving his Body to be broken for them, and his Blood to be shed;
for to mind only the Effect, and neglect the Cause, were like the Hogs that
greedily run after the Acorns, or Nuts; but are unmindful of the Tree that
bears them. But as the Spiritual Eyes of Believers, are to be to the Graces
and Gifts of Christ; so especially, and chiefly to him, from and by whom they
have them, and their Faith and Love ought chiefly to act upon him, and upon God
the Father, in and through him, as also upon the Holy Spirit as principally
residing in him, from and by whom we derive our several Measures of the same.
The Third Reason is this; when Christ gave the Cup, he said; this Cup is the
new Testament in my Blood, shed for the remission of the sins of many. Now how
is that Cup the New Testament? surely no other ways but as an Obsignatory Sign
of the New Testament, obsignating to Believers* remission of Sins by his Blood
outwardly shed; which New Testament has in it the Force and Essence of the
Covenant of Grace, which God ^^keth with Believers, through Christ the Mediator
of it; and as Christ has confirmed this Covenant of Grace and Testament with
his Blood that was Shed once for us; so he has given to Believers this
obsignating Pledge of it, by way of Investiture; as when a Man has an Estate of
Land conveyed to him, and gets the Investiture of it, it is by some outward
Sign, as here in England in some Places, by delivering to him Twig and Turf;
and as Kings were Invested with their Kingly Power, by having Oil poured on
them; and as Aaron was Invested into the Office of Priesthood. And indeed all
Covenants that ever God made with any People, have always been by some outward
obsignatory things, as in his Covenant he made with Noah, he gave the Bow in
the Cloud for the Token of that Covenant; in the Covenant with Abraham, he gave
the Sign of Circumcision, which by a Metonymy is called God's Covenant in
Scripture. Also the Sacrifices under the Law, were Signs of obsignatory of
God's Covenant with them who offered those Sacrifices. And in all the Covenants
that we read of in Scripture, that any of the Fathers made with the
Neighboring Princes, or Inhabitants, there were obsignatory Signs and Pledges;
so that who rightly understand the Nature of a Covenant, Transacted after any
public manner, must acknowledge it cannot be without some obsignatory Pledge,
or Sign outwardly to be seen, given by the one Party to the other; insomuch
that it seems to be a general Instinct in Mankind, or at least the Equivalent
of it, an universal Custom received and practiced even among Heathens, as to my
certain knowledge it is among the American Heathens; who in all their Covenants
make use of Signs for the greater Security and Confirmation. Thus in the 50th
Psalm, it is said, gather my Saints together, who have made a covenant with me
by sacrifice, v. 5. And if any should be so Stiff and Pertinacious, as to deny
that outward Signs are necessary to the Confirmation of Covenants universally;
yet the Case is plain here, as to the Supper; for Christ himself has said it,
this Cup is the new Testament in my Blood, etc. Which must have this meaning;
that the Cup was Christ's Testament, as Circumcision was God's covenant with
Abraham and his seed; for so it was called in Scripture; that is to say, the
Cup is a sign of Christ's Testament, and of the covenant of grace that God has
made with believers, through Christ the Mediator of it. But if any object, this
would seem to make the outward Baptism, and Supper, of so great necessity, as
that it cannot be said, that the Covenant is duly confirmed without them,
betwixt God and Believers. Ans. It shows inded a great necessity of them, as
in respect of any People being in Covenant with God, in a visible way of a
Church, and as Members of a visible Church or Society, well and duly
constituted; for all the Members of a visible Church, as they are in Covenant
with God inwardly by the Faith and Obedience of their Hearts, so they are in
Covenant with him outwardly by the Confession of their Mouths, and other
External Acts of Religion, whereby they declare their professed Subjection to
him, and to his Laws. Hence we find in Scripture, that not only Faith is
required in order to Salvation, but Confession also; and that Confession is not
only with the Mouth, but by External Works of the Body, proceeding from a
living Principle of Faith in the Heart, among which Works are the External
Practices of outward Baptism, and the Supper, where they can be duly had,
whereby they declare their Subjection to the positive Laws and Institutions of
Christ, and thereby distinguish themselves from either Jews or Pagans, who may
be Moral Men, and Profess Faith and Religion toward God, as a Creator, and yet
be professed Enemies to the Christian Faith, such as many Jews and Heathens
were in the Apostles Days, and are in our Days. And therefore the outward
Baptism, and the Supper have been not unfitly called and esteemed Badges of
Christianity, peculiarly distinguishing Christians from Jews and Pagans; though
not the only Badges, but when they are accompanied with a good Conversation of
Sobriety, Justice, and Piety, they do make the distinction betwixt true
Christians, and Jews, and Heathens, much more apparent; for if these External
Practices, Instituted by Christ, be laid aside, whereby shall it outwardly
appear that Men and Women are Christians? If it be said, by the Sobriety,
Justice, and Piety of their Conversation; But these are no positive
distinguishing Marks of Christianity, because Men and Women that are no
Christians, may have as much of the outside of Sobriety, Justice, and Piety
toward God, as many true Christians have. If it be again said, their frequent
Prayer to God, in the Name of Christ, and calling on the Name of the Lord Jesus
Christ in Prayer, is a Badge of their Christianity. I answer in part it is so,
but not in full, or in the whole; for he that not only Prays to God in the
Name of Christ, and confesses him in Words, but also shows his Obedience and
Subjection to all the Commands of Christ, the least as well as the greatest,
whereof the outward Baptism, and the Supper are some, is the most Accomplished
Christian, and bears the most complete Badge of Christianianity. And though
Men's Ignorance in their not knowing them, or not being persuaded concerning
them, that they are the Commands of Christ, being darkened by the Prejudice of
Education, or fasly persuaded by Seducers and false Teachers, does in part
excuse them, or at least where Sincerity is, as to the main gives ground of
Hope, that God will forgive them the Omission of these Practices; yet where
Obedience is not given to every Command of Christ, even the least as well as
the greatest, though the Omission be through Ignorance, or false Persuasion,
yet it is a Sin, and renders the Persons found in that Omission defective and
incomplete Christians.

SECT. VIII.
THE 4 th. Reason is this, These outward practices of Baptism and the Supper,
are not only visible Signs and Pledges of our being in Covenant with God through
Christ, and that as he is our God, so we are his People; but they are also the
visible Signs and Pledges that we are in the Unity and Communion of the Church,
as Children of one Family, begot of one Father, having one Faith and Hope, one
Lord, and being Members of one Body. And though the Communion of Believers
consists chiefly in the Spirit, and the inward Graces thereof; yet, as they are
a visible Body and Society, they are to have some outward and visible Signs and
Pledges of the same, that carry some distinguishing Character, to distinguish
them, not only from professed Infidels, but also from loose and scandalous
Persons, professing the Christian Faith with them: Therefore as in the Jewish
Church, God had appointed, that whoever did not obey the Mosaical Precepts,
were to be excluded the Congregation, and debarred from the external Privileges
that they had as a Church, even so Christ has appointed, that whosoever
professing him in Words, deny him in Works, and walk disorderly and
offensively, as well as who err concerning the Faith, so as not to hold the
Head, that they ought to be rejected and disowned; in token whereof, they are
to be debarred from the external Signs of the Saints Communion with God and
Christ, and one with another. Otherwise, what can be meant by rejecting,
casting out, and purging out, in the Scriptures of the New Testament? Also by
the word separating, and withdrawing, so as to have no Fellowship with them?
Surely it was more than a verbal denial of them, or giving forth a Paper
against them. Does not Paul tell us what it was, when he says 1 Cor. 5.11. If
any man that is called a brother be a fornicator, etc, with such an one no not
to eat. This not to eat cannot be meant the common Eating, but such as that 1
Cor. 10.21. to wit, at the Lord's Table. And therefore the Lord did see it
meet, that as the Outward Baptism should be a Sign declarative of the Persons
Baptized taking or putting on the Profession of a Christian, so the Eating at
the Lord's Table should be a Sign, that they did remain Faithful under that
Profession, and did continue in the Unity and Communion of the Church, as
Paul's words declare, We being many are one bread, and are all made partakers
of that one bread, etc. Even as under the Law, the receiving of Circumcision
was the Sign or Badge of their being Members of the Jewish Church, and their
Eating of the Passover, and of the Sacrifices, (such as were allowed to them to
Eat) was a Sign of their being still owned as such; and if any by their
offensiveness and disobedience did occasion the Church to debarr them from the
external Privileges of that Church, when upon their Repentance and
Reconciliation, they were again received, they needed no second Circumcision;
so nor do professed Christians, having committed any thing that occasion their
casting out, being again received by Repentance, need a second Baptism. Now if
Baptism had been the alone obsignating token of the Covenant, and Badge of
Christian Communion, how should Persons be received into Communion, without a
new Baptism? but to have a new Baptism, is as improper as for a Woman after
some just offense against her Husband, that he has put her from him, if upon
her Repentance he receive her again, to need a second Marriage with the same
Husband; but though she need no second Marriage, yet that her Husband give her
some token and pledge of his Favor, and Acceptance is very suitable. And now
seeing these external Practices have so many necessary uses in the Church, so
that the Church cannot, in all respects, be duly constituted, and have all
things in order without them, it is evident, that as long as the Church was to
continue on Earth, in its due Constitution, so long should these external
Practices remain; and seeing Christ enjoined this of breaking Bread to remain
to his coming, it is evident, that it is his last outward coming.

The Fifth Reason is, that Christ's Inward coming was then in and among the
Disciples when he did Institute these Outward Practices. The Church was never
without the Inward Presence of Christ, and of God, and of the Holy Spirit: It
is true, that Christ promised his Inward Presence to be with them and in them;
but this was not so to be understood, as if the Faithful had him not present
formerly, in all Ages, as well before, as after his Outward coming; for without
the Inward Presence of God, and Christ, and the Holy Spirit, there can be no
true Faith nor Holiness. We find that the Faithful are called Saints, as well
in the Old Testament, as in the New, and therefore they had as true Inward
enjoyments of God then as since, the difference at most is but in degree,
betwixt the Divine Enjoyments of the Faithful, before Christ came in the Flesh,
and since as to the general. And if it be said, that though Christ was Inwardly
come to some, yet not to all in the Apostles times, so as to Answer to the full
extent of the fulfilling of the Promise of his Inward coming; It may be
answered, nor is he so come now; for as Christ said, the Poor ye have always
with you; so until the end of the World there will be in the Church Babes and
little Children as well as young Men, and Fathers; and therefore on the account
of such by R.B.'s Confession, that are weak, as some of the Corinthians were,
that needed those Outward things to put them in Remembrance of Christ's Death,
they are still to be continued, even to Christ's last Outward coming; but there
are too many among the Quakers that think there is no need to Remember Christ's
Death, as he dyed at Jerusalem, abusing and perverting Paul's words, henceforth
we know Christ no more after the flesh, and so there is no need or use of
Remembering Christ's Death; that they say is but History, but Christ within is
the Mystery, whereas Christ within is not the whole Mystery, but in part, and
the lesser part too; the whole Mystery of Christ is Christ both Outwardly come
in the Flesh, and Inwardly come by his Spirit into the Hearts of the Faithful.

The Sixth Reason is, that to understand by the coming of Christ in these words
-- until he come, 1 Cor. 11. His Inward coming, and not his coming Without us
at the day of Judgment, by the same pretext and method of Interpretation, All
the other Scriptures every where that mention his coming throughout the whole
Bible, and especially throughout the New Testament, shall be understood only of
his Inward coming: And thus we shall have not one proof left us in all the
Bible, to prove that there is any other coming of Christ to be expected, than
his Inward coming in Men's Hearts. And accordingly indeed we find, that too many
of the Quakers have by this manner of perverting this place of Scripture, been
led to understand all these other places of Scripture in the New Testament that
mention his coming since he came in the Flesh, to be only understood of his
Inward coming in Men's Hearts* and on this account have denied any other coming
of Christ to be expected, but only his Inward coming, being persuaded into this
False and Antichristian Belief, by some of their great Teachers, witness what
William Baily, a great Teacher among them, has plainly declared in this
matter, p. 306. of the Collection published by the 2d. days Meeting of the
People called Quakers, at Grace Church Street. I never read in all the
Scripture, says he, ( as I can remember) of a 3 d. coming of Christ,
personally in his own single person, or of a personal Reign besides what shall
be in his Saints. But I have read of his coming the 2 d. time, without Sin unto
Salvation, etc. which the Apostles in their days did witness. Witness also
Rich. Hubberthorn, another great Teacher, in his Collection published after his
death also by the 2d. days Meeting, p. 56. in answer to his Opponent. -- How
many Souls have thou led into that Pit of Darkness and Blindness, as to believe
that Christ is yet to come in Person? Now the Scripture which thou bring
proves no such thing, Matthew. 24.27. And a 3d. witness is G. Whitehead in his
Nature of Christianity against R. Gordon, who p. 29. says, Do thou look for
Christ, as the Son of Mary, to appear Outwardly in a bodily Existence to save
thee, according to thy words, p. 30. If thou do, thou may look until thy
Eyes drop out before thou will see such an Appearance of him. And p. 41. (Where
does the Scripture say, he is Outwardly and Bodily Glorified at God's right
Hand? Do these words express the Glory he had with the Father before the World
began, in which he is now Glorified?) This and the two foregoing Quotations are
to be found more large in my Two Narratives of the Proceedings at Turners-Hall;
all which sufficiently prove that they believed no Outward coming of Christ, as
a thing to come; therefore it is no wonder that they meant only Christ's coming
Inwardly into Men's Hearts by these words, ye show forth the Lord's death until
he come; for from the same Unbelief they have construed all the other places
that mention Christ's coming after his Resurrection, of his Inward coming, and
all this in prejudice of his Outward coming, which these Men did not believe,
which places of Scripture are many, as Matthew. 24.27. This very place G. W.
denies to be meant of his Outward coming at the Day of Judgment, as also 1 Thessalonians. 4.15. In his Book called Light and Life, in Answer to W. Burnet, and
Heb. 9.28. Now by the same Method whereby they deny any of these four places
now mentioned, to be understood of any other coming of Christ than his Inward
coming, they must deny all other places that mention his coming after his
Resurrection, to be meant of his Outward coming in the true Nature of Man,
because they have declared they own no such thing, as Christ's being in Heaven
without us in a Personal and Bodily Existence; and that which is not in Being,
they cannot believe will come.

But no such Error I charge as this on R.B. who I know did own that Christ had
the true Being and Nature of Man in Heaven, and that he would come and appear
without us in that Nature to judge the World in Righteousness. But to prosecute
the Argument, that by the words -- until he come must be understood his Outward
coming; it has the more force against R.B. because he believed that Christ was
Outwardly to come, and that there were sufficient proofs of Scripture for it,
as indeed many there are besides those already named, as Acts 1.11. 1 Cor. 4.5.
Joh. 14.3. Mark 8.38. Luke 12.37, 43. 1 Cor. 15.23, 24. Jude 14. Rev. 17. 1
Cor. 1.7. 1 Thessalonians. 2.19. 1 Thessalonians. 3.13. 1 Thessalonians. 5.23. 2 Thessalonians. 2.1. 2 Pet.
3.12. 1 Pet. 5.4. 1 John 2.28. 1 John 3.2. Now seeing R.B. did believe that all,
or Many of these places were to be understood of his Outward coming, how could
he have convinced his unbelieving Brethren, that any of these places were to be
understood of his Outward coming more than that, 1 Cor. 11.26. -- till he come,
seeing from the reasons above given, as much evidence appears, that by his
coming, 1 Cor. 11.26. is meant his Outward coming, as from any other places
above cited, or any that can be brought, his Outward coming can be proved? And
so indiscreetly Zealous have some of their great Teachers been for Christ's
Inward coming (which is a Truth very great and necessary to be believed rightly
and duly understood, but ought not to be proved by perversions of Scripture
that mean not so, whereas sufficient proofs can be brought for it, without all
such perversions,) that diverse of the Prophecies of the Old Testament,
concerning Christ's coming in the Flesh, they have turned to Christ's Birth
within them, as that in Isaiah; -- Unto us a Child is born, a Son is given: And
that in Isaiah 53. concerning his Death and Burial without us in his real Body
of Flesh, He made his grave with the wicked, etc. Rich. Hubberthorn turns it to
Christ's being buried in the wicked, contrary both to the true translation, as
well as to the true sense of that place. And thus by this presumptuous Liberty
they take, to expound the Scriptures falsely, contrary to all reason and common
Sense, they seek to disarm the Christians from bringing proofs out of the Old
Testament against the Jews, to prove that the promised Messiah is already come
in the Flesh, or that he has suffered in the Flesh. And though I was so far
blinded by them, that I did understand 1 Cor. 11.26. -- till he come, of his
Inward coming; yet I had always a firm Belief, both of Christ's being in Heaven
in the glorified Nature of Man, and that he would come in that glorified Nature
of Man to judge the World. And now I plainly see, that his coming, 1 Cor.
11.26. is as really his Outward coming, as any where else in all the Scripture;
and I hope I have sufficiently proved it to all impartial and intelligent
Persons, who shall read my Reasons I have brought to prove the same.

Page 113. His Quotation of the Syriack translation does no ways favor his
Sense, as that the Eating 1 Cor. 11.26. was only by Indulgence, and not by
Command. The Quotation is this. In that concerning which I am about to Command
you (or Instruct you) I Commend you not, because ye have not gone forward, but
are descended into that, which is less, or of less Consequence. From this he
infers, that Paul judged the Bread and Wine to be beggarly Elements: But the
Syriack translation says no such thing; he might well have blamed them, that
they were not gone forward in the Life of Christianity, but rather backward,
because of the corrupt and irregular manner of their practicing that
Institution, that some were drunk; surely this was to go back, but this is no
proof against the regular Practice it self. And what he further quotes of the
same Syriack Version, is as improper and invalid to his purpose, v. 20. When
then ye meet together, ye do not do it, as it is just ye should do in the day
of the Lord, ye eat and drink; thereby showing to them, to meet together to Eat
and Drink outward Bread and Wine, was not the Labor and Work of that Day of
the Lord. But nothing appears from this, that he blamed the regular Practice
of it, but their undue and corrupt manner of doing it; so that their doing of
it, as they did it, was not the Work of the Day: And therefore he might well
say, as it is v. 20. of 1 Cor. 11. When ye come together therefore into one
place, this is not to eat the Lord's Supper, because they had turned it into a
profanation; But R.B.'s observation on these Words, p. 109. is of no force at
all to prove his purpose: He says not, this is not the right manner to eat,
but this is not to eat the Lord's Supper, because (says he) the Supper of the
Lord is Spiritual, and a Mystery. Ans. But the right manner of a thing in many
cases is so essential to the thing, that the want of the right manner destroys
the thing it self. As the right manner of a Circle is to have all the straight
Lines drawn from the Center to the Circumference equal, and if this be wanting,
the Figure is not a Circle. Yea, If the right manner of Prayer be wanting, so
that it be directed to God, yet not in true words, it is not true Prayer, and
if not in truth and sincerity of Heart, it is not true Prayer. His other
Arguments from Romans 14.7. Coloss. 2.16. Heb. 9.10. are all answered above
sufficiently, Part 1. Sect. 6.

SECT. IX.
PAge 121. His last Argument is general against both the Outward Baptism, and
the Supper. It remains (says he) for our Adversaries to show us how they come
by Power and Authority to Administer them. -- Their Power must be derived from
the Apostles, either mediately, or immediately; but they have no mediate Power,
because of the Interruption made by the Apostasy: And for an immediate Power or
Command by the Spirit of God to Administer these things, none of our
Adversaries pretend to it.

Ans. 1. The Argument is unduly worded in the former part of it; for Men may
have a Power that is neither from the Apostles mediately nor immediately; not
mediately, as he thinks he has proved, nor yet immediately from the Apostles,
because not their immediate Successors. But, why may they not have a Power
mediately from Christ, after some true manner, and yet in some sort immediate
also? If we consider the several significations of the Words mediate and
immediate, none of which are Scripture words, any more, or scarce so much, as
other words they reject, because not Scripture words; and because of the
ambiguous and doubtful signification of the Words mediate and immediate, they
may be omitted, and other Words used to as good, or better effect. But if we
may be allowed to use the words mediate and immediate; one Sense of the word
immediate is a Call from Christ's Person, speaking with an audible Voice to the
outward Ear; such as the twelve Apostles had, and Paul also. This I know none
now pretends to. Another Sense of the word immediate is, a Call by the Holy
Spirit in the Hearts of them who are so Called, in the same way and manner, as
the Prophets were both taught their Prophecies, and called to deliver them, and
commit them to Writing, which was by a Prophetic Spirit that did Infallibly
guide them, in every Sentence and Word of their Message, without the least
possibility of Error or Mistake; and as so Taught and Called, without the need
or use of any outward means whatsoever. If some of the Teachers among the
Quakers have pretended to any such Inward Teaching or Calling, as it can be
easily proved they have, it can be as easily proved, that they have not been so
taught nor called, because in too many things, wherein they have pretended to
such Teaching and Calling, they have Bewrayed themselves miserably, and laid
themselves open to the Judgment of the weaker sort of Sincere Christians, who
have been able to prove, that in too many things they have delivered as Divine
Revelations, they have contradicted the Holy Scriptures, and so have grossly
Erred. A Third sort of immediate Teaching and Calling, is by taking the
Etymology of the Word immediate, to signify not without all Means, but in and
with the Means; as when it is generally acknowledged, that there is an
immediate Supernatural Divine Concurrence of the Spirit of God, that assisteth
the Faithful in all truly holy Actions; yea, in all holy Thoughts and Desires,
Words and Works; yet not without the use of outward Means, but in the due and
frequent use of them; as in Reading, Hearing, and Meditating upon what has
been Read, or Heard. Now this sort of inward Teaching and Calling by the
Spirit, as it is not without means altogether; so is it not without all
possibility of Erring, or Mistake; for though no Error can proceed from the
Spirit of God, nor can the Spirit Err; yet a Man that has the Spirit of God
working in his Heart, both to illuminate his Understanding, and move and
incline his Will to good Things, may through Humane Weakness and Inadvertency,
or by some Prejudice of Education, or wrong Information of his Teachers,
misapply, and misunderstand the Spirits inward Illuminations and Motions, which
he is the more likely to do, if he do not duly and diligently apply his Mind,
as to the Spirits inward Illumination, so to the Directions and Instructions,
given to us in the Holy Scriptures, to examine and find the agreement of the
inward with the outward; for certainly if the Persuasions that any Man has,
contradict the plain Directions and Institutions given in the Holy Scriptures,
they are not of the Spirit of God, whatever appearance they may seem to have of
Power or Evidence; the joint concurrence of the Spirit of Truth within, and the
instrumental and subordinate help of the Scripture without, given us to help
our weakness, may be compared to the natural Light of the Sun, or Candle that
we read with (in some sort) though this, and all other Similitudes fall short
of a full Illustration; for as we cannot Read without the Light, though the
Book lie open before us; so when the Light Shines, yet it will not teach us
what is in the Book, unless we look on it, and also be taught to Read in it.
Even so the Light of the Holy Spirit, shining upon the Ideas, and Perceptions
of our Minds, as conveyed to us by what we have heard or read out of the Holy
Scriptures, opens to us the true hidden Sense and Truth of them, with Life and
Power, and great inward Clearness and Evidence, Joy and Satisfaction; and thus
if we find that the Spirits Illumination, works in our Hearts and Minds an
Assent to the Truth of what is Recorded in the Holy Scriptures; we can with all
readiness receive it. But if what we suppose to be a Divine Illumination,
discord from the Truth of the Scriptures; we ought to reject it, and by no
means to receive it, for it is not Divine, but Humane; or which is worse,
Diabolical. Now according to this last Sense of the Word immediate, i.e. inward
Teaching, and Call of the Spirit, in the use of outward Means and Helps, and
especially the Holy Scriptures, I see not, but it may be granted that Men may
be found, and are to be found, that have a true immediate Call from the Spirit
of Christ in their Hearts, both to Preach, and Administer these Divine
Institutions of the outward Baptism and Supper; and all this well consisting
with the mediate orderly Call, where there is a Constitute Church, though not
every way so rightly and duly Constitute, as was in the Apostles Days, and in
the purest Times succeeding the Apostles. There is ground to believe, that God
raised up many such in the beginning of the Reformation from Popery; and though
since that beginning, too many Particulars have rather gone backward than
forward; yet the Success of the Ministry, and excellent Books that have come
forth, time after time, of many Worthy Persons, however in some things
mistaken, and the truly Christian Lives and Conversations of many, through all
the Protestant Churches, though in comparison of the great multitude that are
Profane and Scandalous, they are but a few, may be a good Ground of Evidence,
that God is truly among them, and does own the Remnant that are Sincere, and
their Ministry; to whom an Allusion may be made of what was said to the Church
of Sardis, (the Greek Word Sardis, is in the Plural Number) thou have a few
Names in Sardis, who have not Defiled their Garments; they shall walk with me
in White, for they are Worthy. I know there are some, who do more than make an
Allusion in the Case, and think that by the Church of Sardis, is really meant
the collective Body of the Protestant Churches, throughout the several Parts of
the World; which I will not here be positive, either to affirm, or deny, but
either by way of Allusion, or by Hypothesis, let us conceive that the
Collective Body of the Protestant Churches, answers to Sardis, and not this or
that particular spot or part of the Earth, or this or that particular Country,
Province, or City, but the Collective Body of the whole, that by the Harmony of
their Confessions already extant, may be allowed to hold the Fundamentals of
the Christian Faith, however many are under great mistakes in other things. Now
we do not find this Church of Sardis blamed for Idolatry or suffering it, as
some of the other Seven Churches we find so blamed, and particularly that of
Pergamus and Thyatira, that may allude to the Dark and Idolatrous Times of
Popery, for diverse Ages foregoing. The great things of the Sardis Church that
are blamed are, that her Works were not perfect before God; that she had more a
Name of Life, than the possession of it, which seems to paint out to the Life,
the Collective Body of the Protestant Churches, who yet have a few Names, who
have not defiled their Garments, and who are worthy; which few Names are not
confined to this or that particular Denomination, but scattered and dispersed
through the whole, as so many Grains of pure Silver or Gold through a great mass
or Lump of Oar, where is much more Dross and Refuse.

And because things receive their denomination from the better part frequently,
therefore I judge that the Protestant Churches are, with a respect to, and on
the account of these few Names that have kept their Garments clean, to be
reckoned a true Church, and is so reputed of God. And therefore it were very
advisable, that all that sincerely Believe in God, and in Christ, and love God
and Christ, and agree in Fundamentals, as they generally do, that they would
Love one another, and Repute one another as Brethren, walk together, and
worship God together in Spirit and in Truth; the Stronger condescending to the
Weaker, and becoming all things to all Men, and in every thing that is not
manifestly sinful, yielding one to another, endeavoring to be of one Heart and
Soul in true Christian Love and Affection, however differing in some lesser
matters, both as to Judgment and Practice. This I hope God in his own time will
bring to pass; and for this, as many (I believe) sincerely pray, so do I
cordially join my earnest Supplications with them. And let this suffice at
present for an Answer to that last Argument, about the Call, as whether mediate
or immediate.

SECT. X.
IT is not to be doubted, but many in the Protestant Churches can give as great
evidence, and far greater, of their true Inward Call to the work of the
Ministry, than many, or most of the Teachers among the People called Quakers;
and that not only by the conformity of their Doctrine and Conversation to the
Holy Scriptures, but the real success and good effect of their Ministry by the
Blessing of God upon their Labors: And if the noise of boldly claiming to
themselves the only Privilege of being the Church of Christ, and their Teachers
and Ministers the only Ministers of Christ, having only the Inward Call, and
furnishing of the Spirit, be laid aside, and the Question fairly and calmly
stated, it will not bear great Dispute to make it appear which of the two sorts
have the best Marks of the true Church and Ministry. Would the Quakers less
value themselves, for some singular things, which at best are but as the Cummin
and the Mint, and some of them not so much, they might easily find themselves
equalled, and far excelled in great part by many others in the greater things
of true Divine Knowledge, Piety and Virtue. Only, for a Conclusion, let this be
added; that suppose present Administrators could not be readily found, so
qualified, as to silence all the scrupulosities of Objectors, this will not
prove that Baptism and the Supper are not the Institutions of Christ, as it
will not prove that Preaching the Gospel is not a Divine Institution, because
in many parts of the World true Preaching has been wanting, and yet is; yea,
according to the Quakers narrow and scanty Charity, true Preaching was
generally lost in the World, until the Quakers were raised up about the year
1648. Does it therefore follow, that it was no Institution of Christ to the
Apostles, and their Successors to Preach the Gospel? And here let it be
noticed, that I put a distinction betwixt a Power given to a Man to use the
Gifts that God has given him, in teaching others less knowing, and a Pastoral
Gift, of not only Teaching, but Administering these Divine Institutions of
Baptism and the Supper, and doing diverse other things relating to the
Discipline, Order, and Government of the People, over whom, by God's
appointment, and the Peoples consent, he is set to be their Pastor and Watchman.

Here Note Reader, that what is said in this small Treatise, in Answer to the
Arguments of the principal Teachers of the Quakers above named, will also serve
for an Answer to W. Dell's Book, against Water Baptism; for there is nothing
Material in his Book, but what is in their Books, upon that Subject, though
they borrowed his Arguments, and have so great a liking to his Book, that they
have Printed it often, again, and again; and indeed, as they borrowed from him,
so the most of his Arguments he seems to have borrowed from Socinus, who has
used the same Arguments for the most part, long before W. Dell, or the Quakers
appeared in the World. Only please Reader to take notice of that great piece of
Ignorance in W. Dell, to affirm so bold an Untruth; that Zacharias, John the
Baptist's Father was High Priest. The more particular Questions about Baptism,
relating either to the proper Subjects of it, or manner of it, are not needful
to be handled here, the design of this Treatise being to Convince such of the
Quakers as are willing to read it, that Baptism, and the Supper are Divine
Institutions; till they own this, it would be Preposterous to persuade them
about those other. Were the People, called Quakers, convinced of this great
Truth; that the outward Baptism by Water, and the Supper, are Divine
Institutions, and ought to be practiced by them, as becoming true Christians,
there are some thousands of them who are at Age, and have Children at Age, who
never had any manner of outward Baptism; if these have true Faith in Jesus
Christ, and can sincerely say, as the Eunuch did, Acts 8.37. I believe that
Jesus Christ is the Son of God, and do renounce all those Errors that are
contrary to the true Faith in the Fundamental Doctrins thereof; there is no
question but they may be Baptized, they are proper enough Subjects of it; and
when they are thus well Prepared and Qualified to Receive it, it may be hoped
that they will be Directed and Guided by the Lord, where, and how to find the
Persons that may be fit to Administer it unto them. Such among them who
scruple, or question the manner of Baptism by Sprinkling, may receive it by
Dipping; for all Christendom own that that Form may be used Lawfully; and that
Adult Persons having Faith in the Lord Jesus, after their giving the Confession
of the same, may, and ought to be Baptized. And such among them who might
scruple to receive it from Persons of another Denomination, might find some of
their own Way to Administer it unto them. For it were strange, to suppose, that
among so many hundreds of Men, professing to have an immediate, or inward Call
to that part of the Ministry by Preaching, and Prayer, there should not be some
found among them, who might apprehend that they are as immediately called to
the other part of the Ministry, of Baptism, and the Supper, after they are
truly convinced that they are Gospel Institutions. There is some Ground of
Hope, that many among them will be brought to some good Consideration, and
better Understanding, so as to see the great hurt and loss that it has been
unto them, to reject those things, and also to come to that good and solid
Discretion and Judgment of the great Profit and Advantage it would be to them,
to receive the Practice of them among them, for their Spiritual Good and Honor
of their Christian Profession (thereby declaring, as well as by their Christian
Lives and Conversations, that they are the Disciples of Christ, by this
Testimony of their Love to him; that they keep these his Commandments, as well
as the others that he has enjoined; remembering that he that breaks the least
of his Commandments, and teaches Men to do so, shall be least in the Kingdom
of Heaven) and also for the removing the great Scandal and Offense of many
Tender People, who are greatly stumbled at their Way, in not only omitting, but
speaking Reproachfully against those Sacred Institutions. It will be no
occasion of Dishonor to them, nor Argument of their declining, or going
backward from the Truth, to own and receive the Practice of these things, that
they have needlessly, and for want of due Consideration, dropped, and lost; more
than it would be to a Man that had dropped some piece of Money, or Jewel, to
return, and stoop to take it up again. That which adds to my Ground of Hope
in this thing, is, that some among them have privately acknowledged, that they
are sensible of the Hurt and Disadvantage that they have been at, as a Body of
People, for laying those Practices aside.

SECT. XI.
HAving finished my Answers to the Arguments of the four Persons, above named,
against the outward Baptism, and the Supper, I think fit to take notice of the
Arguments of George Fox, (the greatest Person among the Quakers, when living,
and whose Words are still as Oracles unto them) against these Divine
Institutions; to which indeed little more Answer is needful, than what is given
to those other, for his Arguments are Included in theirs, and so may the
Answers be in the Answers to them. His Argument against the outward Baptism, I
find to be but one, in a Book of his, called, Something* in Answer to the Old
Common Prayer Book, Printed at London, 1660 p. 18. And does not that in Matthew.
28. say, Baptize into the Name; and is not that more than in the Name? This the
Reader will find Answered above, in Reply to some of their Arguments; but to
Baptize into the Name, Acts 8. they grant not to be the inward Baptism; and
therefore, nor is that Matthew. 28. the Particles in, and into, being frequently
the same in Signification, both in English and Greek, yea, and in Hebrew also,
and Latin, and generally in other Languages.

His Arguments against the outward Supper, are as follows, p. 26. They that
received the Bread and Wine in remembrance of Christ, showing his Death till he
come, which the Apostle had received of the Lord, and delivered to the
Corinthians, which they were to examine, and Eat, and Drink in remembrance of
Christ's Death, till he come. This was in, 1 Cor. Then he wrote again to the
Corinthians, and bids them examine themselves, and prove their own selves; knew
they not that Christ was in them, except they were Reprobates? So they may see
that this was not a standing Form; but as often as they did it, they did it in
remembrance of Christ, till he come; and then examine your selves, prove your
selves, If Christ be not in you, except ye be Reprobates; so if you have him
within, what need you to have that which puts in remembrance of him? And so if
ye be risen with Christ; seek those things that are above; for now Bread and
Wine is below, which is the remembrance of his Death, so that part dies with
him; which must have a Sign to put in remembrance of him. For the Apostles
forgot, who said, that they thought that that Man should deliver Israel.

Ans. The substance of this is replied unto above; only I thought fit to take
notice, how impertinent and idle his Argument is, from his comparing the first
Epistle to the Corinthians, with a passage in his second Epistle to them; as if
in his first Epistle Paul had delivered the Command or Practice of it unto
them, because Christ was not then come in them; but when he wrote again, he was
come in them. Which reasoning of G.F. is built on a most false Foundation; for
Paul did believe that Christ was as truly come in the Corinthians, at his first
writing, as at his second; for as he said unto them in his second Epistle, know
ye not that Jesus Christ is in you, etc. 2. Cor. 13.5. So he said in his first
Epistle, 1 Cor. 6.19. Know ye not that your body is the Temple of the Holy
Ghost, which is in you, which ye have of God, etc. And surely, when they had
the Holy Ghost in them, they had Christ in them; from which it appears, that
this Argument of G.F. is exceeding impertinent, and built on a gross and
manifest untruth. But it was the way of G.F. What he neither did nor could
prove from Scripture, he would boldly persuade by his Authority and Stamp, with
saying, This is the word of the Lord unto you, and then it was no more to be
questioned; and if any did, they were reckoned bad Spirits, like Corah, etc.
Also his saying, Bread and Wine is from below, and they who have Christ in them
need not the Sign; all this is answered above; and had he not been very weak in
his understanding and inconsiderate, he might have easily observed, that this
way of his Reasoning was equally against all Outward Ministry, Words, and
Writings, which are not Christ, more than Bread and Wine. And are not his many
Papers, about Orders, and Women's Dresses, from below, seeing they are visible
things, and therefore by his Arguments, they should be rejected?

There is yet one Argument behind, which I have found in a Manuscript having
Humphry Norton's Name to it, a Preacher of great Name formerly among the
Quakers, and in extraordinary repute with Edward Borough, and Francis Howgil,
as appears by their Epistles of Recommendation concerning him, they both sent
with him to Friends in Ireland, contained in the said Manuscript; unto you all
(says Edward Borough) I do him recommend, as a faithful Labourer, to be
received by you in the Name of him that sends him, in tender pity for you all,
and the Blessing of the Lord upon his Faithfulness I doubt not, etc. Dated
London 19. 3d. mo. 1656. And says Fr. Howgil, receive Humphry Norton in the
Lord, whom the Lord has moved to come unto you, who is a Brother, and Faithful
in the Lord's Work, and be Subject unto him in the Lord, all unto him; for I
much desired that he might come unto you, and so the Lord has ordered it; and
as you receive him, you receive me, F. Howgil.

This Man, Humphry Norton, after his Arrival in Ireland, in the year 1656,
writ, and spread about several Papers among the People, called Baptists, and
others; of which I have seen diverse contained in a Manuscript, all Writ by one
Hand, and having his Name to them.

His Argument against Baptism, is in the following Words. Q. 15. And now ye
Baptists, seeing that Christ is come, and has Baptized us, and all Men come
unto him, tell me, whether there be any Baptism but one; seeing the Apostle
says, one Lord, one Faith, one Baptism, Ephesians. 4.5, 6. And whether Baptism be
not a Doctrine, yea, or nay? If you say an Ordinance, whether it be not
Abolished; yea, or nay; seeing the Scripture says, having abolished in his
Flesh the Enmity, even the Law of Commandments contained in Ordinances; for to
make in himself of Twain, one new Man; so making Peace, Ephesians. 2.15.

Ans. That concerning one Baptism, is fully Answered above: To the latter
concerning Ordinances, the Word in the Greek (...) is not properly Translated
Ordinances, but rather Opinions, or Persuasions. But let it be Translated
Ordinances; how does this prove, that therefore Water Baptism is Abolished,
unless the Argument be built upon this Supposition; that all Ordinances are
Abolished, and consequently Baptism with Water, and at the same rate, Preaching
and Prayer must be Abolished, which are no less Ordinances.

And in the same Parcel of Queries, the fifth Querie is; now Answer in plain
Words; From whence must this Christ ye wait for come, and in what Generation,
and of what Family, and out of what Country, and of whom must he be Born? that
they may no longer be deceived by you, who have kept them gazing after a false
Christ; well may it be called Gazing; but leave it, and mind these in white
Apparel, which Reproves you for it, Acts 1.10, 11.

This Humphry Norton, after some Years went into New England, and after his
Return, Prints a Book at London (which I find Quoted in another Printed Book)
having the like, or the same Queries for Substance; the Words are these. Is not
Christ God, and is not God a Spirit? you look for a Christ without you; from
what Coast or Country shall he come? What Countryman is he? You stand Gazing
up in the Clouds after a Man, but we stand by in White chiding of you. Reader,
are not these dreadful Words, enough to make all Christian Ears to tingle? it
is no wonder that they have so generally Construed these Words; ye show forth
his Death until he come, to be only his inward coming; when the chiefest
Teachers among them had no Faith of his outward coming to Judge the World. And
it is but too likely, that E. Borough, and F. Howgil, were as great
Unbelievers as he in that great Fundamental Article of the Christian Religion;
and if they were not, they were miserably deceived, and did miserably deceive
themselves by their supposed Gift of Discerning; to give such high
Recommendations and Praises of a Man, that deserved not to be numbered among the
lowest Rank of Christians, who has dared thus openly, like one of the Heathen
Opposers, to Scoff at our Blessed Lord's coming without us to Judgment; but
never any Christian gave him occasion for such a Scoffing manner of
Questioning, it being universally believed by all Christians, that our Lord
will come from Heaven in the same Body wherein he Ascended, and is not to be
Born again of a Woman. Again, In another Paper that has his Name to it, there
are these Words; and whereas he Accused us for denying Christ's Merits; I say,
that which can be Merited, is of Self; and that which is of Christ is freely
given. But such a word is not in Scripture, as Christ's Merits, but is fetched
from the Whore a at Rome by them. Behold the Man, whom E. Burrough's called a
Faithful Labourer, and F. Howgil called a Brother Faithful in the Lord's Work,
to whom he would have all the Quakers in Ireland to be Subject! How can they
who follow such blind Guides, but fall into the Ditch with them? Is there any
greater, or so great Blindness to be found in the Blindest, and most Ignorant
of the Papists?

In a Book of mine, called, Truth's Defense, p. 140. I find an other Argument I
have used against the Supper; the Effect of which is contained in these
following Words; What Christ did at that time; and bid his Disciples do until
he come, is no Gospel Ordinance, because it was done in the Night, or Evening
of the old Covenant Dispensation, and consequently was to come to an end with
it. Ans. I freely acknowledge this Argument is Weak and Unsound, and the way to
Answer it, is by denying the Consequence to be True and Just; for mostly what
Christ Taught was in the Evening, or latter part of the old Covenant; but it
does not therefore follow that it was to end with it. As also where I have said
in my Book, called, Presbyterian and Independent Churches, etc. P. 185. That
which ye now use is neither Substantial Dinner nor Supper, being only a Crumb
of Bread, etc. I acknowledge, was unadvisedly said, and as weakly Argued; for
the end of that outward Institution, was not any outward Substantial Dinner or
Supper, as neither was that of the Paschal Lamb. And also where, p. 184. of the
same, I have argued, that the use of the outward Signs of Baptism and the
Supper, did suit most with the Ages and State of Children, for they suit well
enough with the most grown Christians, while remaining in the Mortal Body.

SECT. XII.
AND thus I have Answered to all the Arguments brought against the outward
Baptism and the Supper, by their several Writers, and chief Teachers that I
have found in their Books; not omitting any to my best Remembrance, of any
Note; where though I have brought in G. Fox among the last, because I had not
found the particular Book where his Arguments were, until I had finished my
Answer to the other four preceding; yet he was the first among the Quakers,
that led them, as into diverse other great Errors, so into this of rejecting the
outward Baptism, and the Supper, grounding all upon a pretended Divine
Inspiration; and as by that Pretense he did throw down the Institutions of
Christ, leading many thousands into the Ditch with him; So by the same
pretended Authority, he set up outward Orders and Ordinances of his own,
particularly that of Women's Meetings, giving them Rule and Government in the
Church, and appointing all Marriages to come before the Women's Meetings,
before they could pass, or be allowed by the Community; which has no Footstep,
or Warrant from the Holy Scripture. And when it could not be proved from
Scripture, though Essayed by him and others, miserably straining the
Scriptures, contrary to their true Sense; the Result was, that it was commanded
by G. Fox, and whoever did not Obey, were judged by him and his Followers,
Apostates, and Enemies to Truth.

In the next place, I shall bring some clear Proofs from Scripture; showing
that outward Baptism and the Supper, are the Institutions of Christ under the
Gospel. And first, as to Baptism with Water. That is an Institution of Christ,
which he did command his Apostles, and their Successors, to Practice to the end
of the World.

But he commanded them to Practice Baptism with Water, etc. Therefore,

That he commanded them to Practice Baptism with Water, is proved from Matthew.
28.19. And from what is above Discoursed in Answer to their Objections, it is
apparent that Water Baptism is there meant.

And that the Apostles, and all the Churches of Christ did understand that
Water Baptism was an Institution of Christ, is clear from the universal
Practice of Believers in the Apostles Days; so that it cannot be instanced
where any came under the Profession of Faith in Christ; but they received
Baptism with Water, either by the Apostles, or other Ministers of Christ.

Again, That which is declared in Scripture to be a means of Grace and
Salvation, and which has Gospel Promises annexed to it, is a Divine
Institution.

But so is Baptism with Water, as the following Scriptures prove, Mark 16.16.
Acts 2.38. Acts 22.16. Romans 6.3. Gal. 3.27. Col. 2.12. 1 Pet. 3.21. And though
these Quakers will not allow that the Scriptures abovementioned, are to be
understood of Baptism with Water; yet by what is above Discoursed, in Answer to
their Objections; it is evident, that they are to be understood of Baptism with
Water, the Sign being accompanied with the thing signified, in all that duly
received it.

Again, That which is made a Ground of Unity among the Faithful, together with
Faith and Hope, and Calling, is a Divine Institution; but one Baptism, as well
as one Faith, one Hope, one Calling, is made a Ground of Unity among the
Faithful, Ephesians. 4.5.

And that the one Baptism there, is the Baptism with Water (the thing signified
going along with the Sign) is above proved in the Answer to the foregoing
Objections. And thus much briefly, for Proof of Water Baptism, its being an
Institution of Christ under the Gospel, to continue to the end of the World;
because he promised to be with his Ministers to the end of the World, in their
doing what he commanded them.

Next, That the Supper by breaking of Bread, and the use of the Cup is an
Institution of Christ, until his last coming, is proved by the like Arguments,
that Water Baptism is proved to be an Institution of Christ; for first it was
commanded by Christ; Do this in remembrance of me; as often as you Eat this
Bread, and Drink this Cup, ye show forth the Lord's Death till he come. And
that this is his outward coming to Judge the World, is above proved.

Secondly, it is a Means of Grace; the Bread which we break is it not the
Communion of the Lord's Body? The Cup which we bless is it not the Communion of
his Blood? That is, are they not, both Signs and Means exhibiting to us the
Communion of his Body and Blood, and the Spiritual Blessings that come to
Believers thereby? For indeed all the Signs that ever God appointed to his
People, were Means of Grace, and not bare Signs or Symbols.

Thirdly, the Bread and Wine in the Supper, is made a ground of Unity among the
Faithful, as well as Baptism; we being many are one Bread, and all are made
partakers of that one Bread. The Objections made against the Sense of these and
the like Scriptures, are above fully Answered; so that I see no occasion to say
any more at present, by way of Argument on this Subject.

An APPENDIX.
Containing some Observations upon some Passages, in a Book of W. Penn, called,
A Caveat against Popery; and on some Passages of a Book of John Pennington,
called, The Fig-Leaf Covering Discovered.

IN a Book of W. Penn, called, A Seasonable Caveat against Popery, Printed in
the Year 1670. I find the following Passage, p. 18. But if there be some Virtue
signified by the Wine, more than by the Bread, it is horrid Sacrilege to Rob
the Sign, much more the thing signified. It is a Supper, and at Supper there
should be to Drink, as well as to Eat; there can be no Body without Blood, and
the Drinking of his Blood, shows a Shedding of his Blood for the World, and a
Participation of it. Besides the Sign is incomplete, and the end of that
Sacrament, or Sign, not fully Answered, but plainly maimed, and what God has
put together, they have put asunder; so that the Falseness and Inscriptural
Practice of these Men are very manifest.

Obs. Reader: Would thou not think by these Words, that W. Penn was in good
earnest, Pleading for the Sacrament (as he calls it) or Sign of the Supper? And
had thou not known that W. Penn was the Author of that Book; would thou
not have concluded, whoever was the Author was rightly Principl'd for the
Supper, completely Administered under both Signs, by the Arguments he brings for
it? as first, If there be some Virtue signified by the Wine, more than by the
Bread, it is horrid Sacrilege to Rob the Sign, etc. The Antecedent is true, by
W. Penn, otherwise his Argument is vain; and therefore the Consequence must be
true, which is this; It is horrid Sacrilege to Rob the Sign. Now if it be
horrid Sacrilege in the Popish Priests and Teachers, to Rob the Sign of Wine
in the Supper; is it not as horrid, or rather more horrid Sacrilege in W.
Penn, and the rest of the Teachers of the Quakers to have Robbed both the
Signs, the Bread as well as the Wine? and under the Guilt of this Robbery and
Sacrilege they still continue, I wish they may Repent of it, that they may
find Mercy and Forgiveness. His second Argument is this. It is a Supper, and at
Supper there should be to Drink, as well as to Eat. But how is it a Supper,
when there is neither to Eat nor to Drink: If the Popish Teachers have maimed
the Supper, which he blames them for; how much more is he and his Brethren
Blameworthy, who have quite Abolished it? His third Argument for the Cup is,
the Drinking of his Blood, shows a Shedding of his Blood; but how does it show
it among the Quakers, who have totally Abolished the Bread as well as the Cup?
His fourth Argument is, the Sign is incomplete, and the end of that Sacrament
or Sign, not fully Answered. But how is the end of that Sacrament, or Sign any
wise Answered among the Quakers, who have Abolished both Signs? His fifth
Argument is, what God has put together, they have put asunder; so that the
Falsness and Inscriptural Practice of these Men is very manifest. Now to
Prosecute and Retort his Argument upon himself; If it be a heinous Sin to put a
sunder what God has put together; is it not as heinous, or rather more, to put
away, or Abolish both things which God has put together? If they do Evil that
separate Man and Wife, whom God has joined, or put together; do not they worse
who kill them both?

If it be said, W. Penn's Arguments are only on Supposition, and used against
the Papists, ad hominem. I Answer, first, This does not appear by his Words,
which are Positive. Secondly, If here he only Argues on Supposition, and ad
hominem; how shall we know when he Argues Positively, and is in good earnest?
Thirdly, His Arguments seem to me and; I think they will seem to many others,
not only Positive, but more valid and strong, than any Arguments he has
brought against them.

Again, In the same Book, p. 20. concerning the Sacrifice of the Altar, he
says -- notwithstanding the Scripture expressly tells us, that we have our High
Priest, that needs not Sacrifice once a year, but who has offered one
Sacrifice, and that by the will of God we are Sanctified, through the Offering
of the Body of Jesus Christ, once for all and that by one Offering he perfected
them that are Sanctified, Heb. 10.10, 11, 14. Yet do they daily Sacrifice him a
fresh, As if his first were insufficient, or their daily Sins required a new
one.

Obs. Do not these Arguments of W. Penn, against Christ, his being daily
Offered up a Sacrifice in the Mass, prove as effectually, W. Penn, and G.
Whitehead's Doctrine to be false, in their Defense of W. Smith, who said, in p.
64. of his Primmer, second Part; we believe that Christ in us does offer up
himself a living Sacrifice unto God for us; by which the Wrath and Justice of
God is appeased toward us. This W. Penn Confirms in his Rejoinder to J. Faldo,
p. 285. saying, that Christ offers himself in his Children, in the nature of a
Mediating Sacrifice; and that Christ is a Mediator, and an Attoner in the
Consciences of his People, at what time they shall fall under any Miscarriage,
if they unfeignedly Repent, according to 1 John 2. 1, 2. and G. Whitehead is
very large in the Defense and Confirmation of it, in his Book, called, The
Light and Life of Christ within, p. 44. And Quotes at least seven several
places of Scripture to prove it, viz. That Christ in them does offer up himself
a Sacrifice unto God for them, by which the Wrath and Justice of God is
appeased toward them. All which Scriptures, and many more, respecting the
Sacrifice of Christ without us, and his Blood outwardly Shed, they have most
grossly Perverted and Misapplyed to a supposed Daily Offering of Christ by way
of Sacrifice in them to Appease the Wrath and Justice of God. Now let W. Penn
Answer to his own Arguments which he had used against the Sacrifice of Christ
in the Mass; for any that are not wilfully blind may see, they are of equal
force against his supposed and invented Sacrifice of Christ, daily offered in
every Quaker when they Sin, to Appease the Wrath and Justice of God.

And here I think fit to repeat some Questions I Proposed to W. Penn, by way of
Argument, against this false Notion of his, (and of G. Whitehead, which they
Originally received from G. Fox, and he it is very probable from Familists and
Ranters, who had the same Notion, as I can easily prove) that Christ offers up
himself in them, to Appease the Wrath and Justice of God, in the Nature of a
Mediating Sacrifice. (Note Reader, these Words bespeak their Sense to be a
Sacrifice, really and strictly so taken; yea, the Sacrifice within, to be the
only real and strict Sacrifice; for the other without, of Christ's Body and
Blood without the Gates of Jerusalem, was the Type, the History. The Lamb
without, shows forth the Lamb within, said W. Penn, one outward thing cannot be
the proper Figure, or Representation of another outward thing). These Questions
are in my Book, called, Gross Error and Hypocrisy Detected in G. Whitehead,
and some of his Brethren, p. 20. And I have just cause to propose them again,
to his and his Brethrens Consideration; because I have not to this Day received
any Answer to them, either from W. Penn, or George Whitehead, nor from Tho.
Elwood, who has Writ a pretended Answer to this very Book, called, Gross
Error; etc. who has passed by, not only these Queries containing so many
Arguments as there are Queries; but the other chief things in that Book; and
yet he and his Brethren Glory, how they have Answered all my Books, when in
effect they have Answered none of them to purpose, and some of them not at all;
as my second Narrative of the Proceedings of the Meeting at Turner's- Hall,
that has been above a Year in Print; (as no more have they Answered to Satan
Disrobed; done by the Author of the Snake in the Grass; being a Reply to Tho.
Elwood's pretended Answer to my first Narrative, which saved me the Labor of
Replying to it.) And indeed, the Book, called, Gross Error, etc. has been in
Print near three Years, and yet no Answer has been given to these Queries;
which are as follow. 1. If Satisfaction be totally Excluded (as W. Penn has
Argued against the Satisfaction of the Man Christ Jesus without us; and by his
Death and Sufferings on the Cross, Reason against Railing, p. 91. because a
Sin, or Debt cannot be both Paid and Forgiven; what need is there of a
Mediating Sacrifice of Christ within Men, more than without them? 2. Seeing it
is the Nature of all Sacrifices for Sin, that they be Slain, and their Blood
Shed; how is Christ Slain in his Children, and when? For we Read in Scripture,
that Christ lived in the Faithful, as he did in Paul; but not that he is Slain
in them. 3. If any Slay the Life of Christ in them by their Sins; does not that
hinder the Life to be a Sacrifice by G. Whitehead's Argument; that the Killing
of Christ outwardly, being the Act of Wicked Men, could be no Meritorious Act?
4. Where does the Scripture say, Christ offers himself up in his Children a
Sacrifice for Sin? 5. Is not this to make many Sacrifices, or at least to say,
that Christ offers himself often, yea, Millions of times, contrary to
Scripture, that says, Christ offered up himself once? 6. Why could no Beast
under the Law, that had a Blemish, be offered; but to signify that Christ was
to offer up himself in no other Body, but that which was without all Sin? 7.
Why was it Prophesied of Christ; a Body have thou prepared me, why not Bodies
many, if he offer up himself in the Bodies of all the Saints? 8. Is not this to
make the Sacrifice of Christ of less Value and Efficacy in his own Body, than
his Sacrifice in W. Penn's Body? because the Sacrifice of Christ, in that Body
that was offered at Jerusalem, was the Type, this in W. Penn's Body, the
Antitype; That the History, This the Mystery. 9. Does not this strengthen the
Papists in their false Faith; that Christ is daily offered in the Mass, an
unbloody Sacrifice? I desire that W. Penn, and G. Whitehead, will give a
positive Answer to these Queries; and show, wherein my Arguments against their
Notion of Christ's being offered a Sacrifice in Men, are not so strong against
them, as W. Penn's Arguments are against the Papist's Notion; that Christ is
offered up daily in the Mass.

I. Note, Reader, Whereas my Adversaries, Tho. Elwood, and J. Pennington, in
their Books against me, have brought several Quotations out of some of my
former Books, particularly The Way cast up, p. 99. and The Way to the City of
God, p. 125. on purpose to prove that I was of the same Mind and Persuasion
with W. Penn, and George Whitehead, concerning Christ being a real Sacrifice
for Sin in Men, to Appease the Wrath and Justice of God; and his being the Seed
of the Woman in them, having Flesh and Blood, etc. to be understood without any
Metaphor, or Allegory, or other Figurative Speech, is what I altogether deny,
can be inferred from my Words; for as I have showed in my Book of Immed. Revel.
p. 14.15, 16. (which John Pennington has perversely applied in his Book,
called, The Figg-Leaf Covering, p. 5.4.) The Spiritual Discerning of the Saints
(in Scripture) is held forth under the Names of all the five Senses; -- In like
manner the things of God themselves, are held forth in Scripture, under the
Names of sensible things, and which are most Taking, Pleasant and Refreshing
unto the Senses; as Light, Fire, Water, Oil, Wine, Ointment, Honey, Marrow and
Fatness, Bread, Manna, and many other such like Names, which I expressly grant
are Metaphors; yet that hinders not (said I) but that the Spiritual Mysteries
Represented under them, and signified by them, are real and substantial things;
to wit, God's Power and Virtue, Spirit, Light, and Life, and the wondrous sweet
and precious Workings and Influences thereof (which I expressly mention, p. 14.)
and indeed these outward things are but Figures of the Inward and Spiritual,
which as far exceed and transcend them, in Life, Glory, Beauty, and Excellency,
as a living Body does the Shadow. Now all this I still firmly hold and believe
as much as formerly, when I Writ those Words; for indeed, because we have not
proper Words, whereby to signify Spiritual and Divine Enjoyments and
Refreshments in the Souls of the Faithful; therefore Words are borrowed, and
transferred from their common Signification, to a Metaphorical, and
Allegorical; whereby to signify the Spiritual Enjoyments and Refreshments of
the Saints, from what they Witness and Experience of the Power, Virtue, Light,
Life, and Love of God and Christ in them. So that I still say, the outward
Light of Sun, Moon, Star, or Candle, is but a Shadow, or Figure, campared with
the Divine Light of God and Christ within; the outward Bread, Wine, Flesh,
though ever so excellent that the outward Man tastes of, is but a Figure and
Shadow; being compared with that inward Bread of Life, inward Wine and Flesh,
Oil, and Honey, that is inwardly tasted and received by the inward Man. But
behold the wretched perversion that my Prejudiced Adversary, John Pennington,
puts upon my sound Words, and the wretched Conclusion that he draws from
thence; as if therefore I did hold then, that the outward Death of Christ was
but a Shadow, or Sign of the inward Death of Christ in Men, and his outward
Sacrifice and Blood outwardly Shed, was but a Figure and Shadow of his being a
Sacrifice within Men, and his Blood inwardly Shed; which as it has no Shadow
of Consequence from any Words, so it never came into my Thoughts, so to
imagine; for in that place of my Book, of Immed. Rev. above quoted by him, I
did not compare Christ's Death without, and his Death within, or his Blood
without, to his Blood within; making That the Shadow and Figure, and This the
Substance, as they do: But I was comparing the outward Meats and Drinks, as
Bread, Flesh, Wine, Marrow and Fatness, with the Divine Enjoyments of the
Saints, which borrow the Names of these outward things, and whereof they are
but Figures and Shadows.

II. And when I said in some of my former Books, that Christ was the Seed of
the Woman, that bruised the Serpents Head in the Faithful in all Ages; I did
not mean that Christ, as he was born of the Virgin Mary, was a Figure, or
Allegory of Christ's Birth, or Formation in the Saints. But on the contrary,
Christ inwardly Formed, is the Allegory and Metaphor; yet so that Christ
inwardly enjoyed in the Saints, is a real Divine Substantial Enjoyment and
Participation of Christ, his Life, Grace and Virtue, in measure which they
receive out of the Fullness of the Glorified Man Christ Jesus in Heaven; for
though to Call Christ inwardly the Seed Born, or Crucified, is Metaphorical;
yet the inward Life of Christ is Real and Substantial that the Saints Enjoy;
and being a Measure out of the Fullness that is in the Glorified Man Christ
Jesus in Heaven, it is of the same Nature therewith; and it is one and the same
Mediatory Spirit, and Life of Christ in him; the Head dwelling in Fullness, and
in them in Measure, as Paul said, to every one of us is Grace given, according
to the Measure of the Gift of Christ.

And whereas he quotes me in his 55th p. saying; This is the promised Seed
which God promised to our Parents after the Fall, and actually gave unto them,
even the Seed of the Woman, that should bruise the Head of the Serpent. But
does this prove, that Christ being inwardly Formed in the Saints, was more
properly (and without all Allegory Metaphor, or Synecdoche) the Seed of the
Woman, than as he was Born of the Virgin? I say nay; though he would strain my
Words to this, to bring me into the same Ditch with him and his Brethren; who
make Christ without, the Type and History, and Christ within, the Substance and
Mystery.

That the promised Seed was actually given to Believers, immediately after the
Fall, has this plain Orthodox Sense. That the Power of Christ's Godhead or the
Eternal Word that was in the beginning, and which was in the Fullness of Time,
to take Flesh and Blood, like unto the Children, did actually break the Power
of Sin and Satan in the Faithful; and this Power was the real Power of the Seed
of the Woman that was Born of the Virgin Mary; and what that Power effected and
wrought in the Faithful, in the Ages before Christ came into the Flesh, it was
with Respect to his coming in the Flesh, and to what he was to do and suffer in
his Body of Flesh for their Sins. And what I said, as Quoted by him, page 35.
out of my Book, Way to the City of God, page 125. Even from the beginning, yea,
upon Man's Fall, God was in Christ Reconciling the World to himself, and Christ
was manifest in the Holy Seed inwardly, and stood in the way to ward off the
Wrath of God, from the Sinners and Unholy, that it might not come upon them to
the uttermost, during the Day of their Visitation. All this, or what ever else
of that sort, I have said, in any of my Books, has a safe and sound Sense,
rightly understood; though this Prejudiced Adversary, seeks by his own
Perversion to turn them to the contrary: The Word Reconciling, Redeeming, has
a twofold Signification; the one is to satisfy Divine Justice, and pay the
Debt of our Sins; this was only done by Christ, as he Suffered for us in the
Flesh; the other is to Operate, and Work in us, in order to slay the Hatred and
Enmity that is in us, while Unconverted; that being Converted, we may enjoy
that inward Peace of Christ, that he has Purchased for us by his Death and
Sufferings, Now that the Light, Word, and Spirit, gently Operates and Works in
Men, to turn and incline them to Love God, to Fear him, and Obey him, to
Believe and Trust in him; that is, to Reconcile Men to God, and to ward, or
keep off the Wrath of God from them: And thus, God was in Christ, Reconciling
the World to him in all Ages. But this is not by way of Satisfaction to Divine
Justice for Men's Sins; but by way of Application, and Operation; inwardly
Inviting, Persuading, and as it were Entreating Men to be Reconciled unto God;
that so the Wrath of God that hangs over their Heads, may not fall upon them;
for while God by Christ, thus inwardly visits the Souls of Men, inviting and
persuading them to turn and live; saying, why will ye Dye? the Wrath is
suspended, and delayed to be Executed upon them; yet it is not removed, but
abides upon them, until they Repent and Believe, as the Scripture testifies;
he that believes not, the Wrath of God abides on him. And though this inward
Appearance, and Operation in Christ in Men's Hearts, stays the Execution of
Divine Wrath and Justice; yet that inward Appearance, is not the Procuring and
Meritorious Cause of Men's Reconciliation with God; but the Means whereby, what
Christ by his Death and Sufferings has Purchased, is applied; for though
Christ made Peace for us by his Blood outwardly Shed; yet that Peace cannot be,
nor is obtained, or received by any, but as the Soul is inwardly Changed and
Converted, and so Reconciled unto God.

III. And the like twofold Signification, has the Word to Atone; for as it
signifies to Atone, or Reconcile God and us, that wholly is procured by
Christ's Obedience unto Death, and Sacrifice that he offered up for Men on the
Cross; but as it signifies the effectual Application of that great Atonement,
made by Christ for Men at his Death; that is wrought by his Spirit, and inward
Appearance in their Hearts. And I might well say, at Man's Fall, the Seed of
the Woman was given, not only to bruise the Serpent's Head, but also to be a
Lamb or Sacrifice, to Atone and Pacify the Wrath of God toward Men; as he
Quotes me in my Book, Way to the City, p. 125. For taking Attoning in the first
Sense, the Virtue, Merit, and Efficacy of Christ's Sacrifice on the Cross, did
as really extend to the Faithful for Remission of Sin, and bringing into
Reconciliation and Peace with God, from Adam's Fall, as it now does; which this
Prejudiced Author seems wholly ignorant of, as well as his Brethren: Again
taking it in the second Sense, for the effectual Application of the Attonment
made by Christ's Death, through his Meek and Lamb-like Appearance by his Spirit
and Life in Men's Hearts, it has a Truth in it: And Christ may be said to be
the Lamb of God that takes away the Sins of the World; both by his outward
Appearance in the Flesh, as he Dyed for us, to Procure and Purchase the Pardon
of our Sins, and our Justification before God; and also by his inward
Appearance, to Renew and Sanctify us; for as by our Justification the Guilt of
Sin is taken away; so by our Sanctification is the Filth of it removed: Both
which is the Work of Christ, the Lamb of God respecting both his outward and
inward Appearance; in his outward, being a Sin-offering for us, and a Sacrifice
in a strict Sense; in his inward Appearance of his Divine Life in us, being as
a Peace Offering, and Sacrifice of sweet smelling Incense before God; not to
Reconcile God and us, as is above said; but to apply effectually to us, the
Reconciliation made for us by his Death on the Cross.

IV. And that I said (as he again Quotes me) the Seed has been the same in all
Ages, and has had its Sufferings, under, by, and for the Sins of Men in them
all, for the Removing and Abolishing them; This I still hold, that there is a
tender Suffering Seed, or Principle in Men, that suffers by Men's Sins, and by
its gentle Strivings, prevails and gains the Victory at last in all the Heirs
of Salvation. But this suffering Seed, or Principle, I never held it to be God,
nor was I ever of that Mind, that God did really and properly Suffer by Men's
Sins; although I have known diverse to hold such an absurd Opinion, as G.
Whitehead has plainly declared to be his Opinion in his Divinity of Christ, p.
56. which is as really Repugnant, both to Scripture and sound Reason, as to
hold that God has Bodily Parts and Members; because the Scripture in many
places, in condescension to our human Capacities, speaks of God's Suffering,
Repentance, being grieved; as it does of his Face, Eyes, Ears, Hands and Feet;
all which ought not to be properly, but Allegorically understood. And though I
hold that this tender Seed suffers in Men by their Sins, that so by its gentle
Strivings with them, it may overcome them, and Slay and Crucify the Body of
Sin in them; Yet I hold not that Suffering to be the Procuring and Meritorious
Cause of our Justification, and Pardon of Sins before God; nor do I remember
any where that I have so said or writ; if any shall show me where, I shall
readily Correct and Retract it, or any thing in any of my Books that looks that
way: And if any Query whether I hold that Seed to be Christ, that does so
suffer in Men by their Sins; I Answer, It is not the Fullness of Christ, but a
Measure proceeding from the Fullness that was, and is lodged in the Man Christ*
and because the Fullness is not in us, and never was, or shall be in any Man,
but in the Man Christ Jesus alone, that was Born of the Virgin; therefore he,
and he only, because of the Fullness of Grace and Truth that was and is in him,
was Ordained and Appointed to be the Great, and only, and alone Sacrifice for
the Sins of the World, being the Head of the Body, which is his Church, it was
only proper that the Sufferings that should be in the Head only; should be that
complete, only, and alone Satisfactory, and Propitiatory Sacrifice for the Sins
of Men; As the Arguments above mentioned in my Queries to G. Whitehead, and W.
Penn, do plainly demonstrate: And though in Christ when he Suffered for the
Sins of the World at his Death, his Godhead did not Suffer, yet all that was in
him (the Godhead excepted) did Suffer.

Note again, Reader, That although I find no cause to give an Answer to the
Book of John Pennington, abovementioned, called, The Fig-Leaf Covering, etc.
Because I had said in my second Narrative, p. 33. that very Book, (being a
pretended Answer to my Book of Explications and Retractations) is such a plain
and evident Discovery of his Unjust, and Unfair Proceedings against me (whereof
the whole second Days Meeting, who has approved his Book is Guilty) and of his
Ignorance and Perverseness of Spirit, in Perverting my Words; that I see no need
to give any other Answer to him, or direct to any other Answer, (either to his
Fig-Leaf, etc. or his Book Keith against Keith, or any other his Books) but his
own very Book, and Books compared fairly with my Books, Quoted by him; and
particularly that of my Explications and Retractations; yet because I find
diverse Passages in that Book of his, plainly prove him and his Brethren of the
second Days Meeting extremely Erroneous in the great things of the Christian
Doctrine, some of them being Fundamental; therefore I shall take notice of the
following Passages; partly to give the Reader a taste of his Unfair Dealing
toward me, and partly to show his being still Erroneous in some great
Fundamentals of the Christian Faith; together with his Brethren of the second
Days Meeting, who have approved his Fig-Leaf.

In his 19 and 20 Pages, he will needs fasten a Contradiction on me: That one
time, by the Flesh of Christ, John 6. I mean an inward invisible Substance, and
the Eating an inward invisible Eating. But now in my Retractations, I Assert,
that to believe in Christ, as he gave his Body of Flesh outwardly to be broken
for us, is the Eating of his Flesh, as well as the inward Enjoyment of his Life
in us. And to confirm the Contradiction, he Quotes me, saying, Immed. Revel. p.
258. This Body of Christ, of which we partake, is not that which he took up
when he came in the Flesh outwardly, but that which he had from the beginning.
Ans. First, It is no Contradiction, to say, the Eating of Christ's Flesh, John
6. is to believe (not by a bare Historical Belief, but by a living sincere
Faith Wrought in us by the Spirit of Christ) that Christ gave his outward Body
to be broken for us; and also that it is the inward Enjoyment of his Life in
us; as it is no Contradiction, to say, Christ is our Entire and complete
Savior; both as he came outwardly in the Flesh, Dyed and Rose again, etc. And
as he comes inwardly by his Spirit into our Hearts, and dwells in us by
Faith. And as concerning that Quotation, Immed. Rev. p. 258. by this Body, in
that place; I did mean that which is only Allegorically called his Body, to
wit, that Middle of Communication, above*mentioned; that is indeed a Spiritual
and invisible Substance, owned by R.B. as well as by me, and many others. And I
say still, this invisible Spiritual Substance in the Saints, is not that
visible Body of Christ which he assumed when he came in the Flesh outwardly;
yet this is not to make two Bodies of Christ; because the one is called his
Body, only in a Metaphorical Sense. Ans. 2. In my Book of Retractations, p. 25.
I had plainly Retracted and Corrected that Passage, in p. 25. Recor. Corr. That
by Christ's Flesh and Blood, John 6.50, 51. He means only Spirit and Life;
acknowledging, that it was at most an Oversight in me; but how does this prove
me a Changling in an Article of Faith? As he infers very Injurously: May not a
Man change his Judgment concerning the Sense of a particular place of
Scripture, without changing an Article of Faith? That such a Change may be,
without a Change in an Article of Faith, is acknowledged by all Sober Writers
and Expositors of Scripture. Yea, there are many places of Scripture, that some
understand one way, and others not that way, but another, and others a third
way; and yet all have one Faith in point of Doctrine. Ans. 3. What a Man
Retracts in one Book, or part of a Book, he ought to be understood to Retract
the same Passage, where it can be found in another Part, or Book of his; nor
ought he to be Charged with Contradiction, in what he has Retracted. For as I
have formerly said in Print, they are only Chargable with Contradictions that
without Retractation, holds Contradictory Assertions, simul and semel, i. e.
both together.

Page 22. He will not permit me to use that Distinction, to say, I had not my
Knowledge from them, ( viz. The Scriptures) as being the efficient Cause, but I
did not deny that I had my Knowledge by them Instrumentally; to wit, the
Doctrinal Knowledge and Faith I had of Gospel Truths; he Quibbles upon the Word
from, as if it could not signify sometimes the efficient Cause, and sometimes
the Instrumental; whereas a School Boy knows that it has these several
Significations, and more also. And seeing what I then Writ in my Book of Immed.
Rev. was owned by the Quakers, it plainly follows, That according to J.P. the
Words of Scripture are not a Means so much as Instrumentally to our Knowledge
of the Truths of Christian Doctrine. But how will he Reconcile this to W. Penn;
who does acknowledge that the Scriptures are a Means to know God, Christ and
our selves? See his Rejoinder, p. 115. where he expressly says; We never denied
the Scriptures to be a means in God's Hand, to Convince, Instruct, or Confirm.
By we, its plain* W. P. meant all the Quakers; and consequently G. K. being
then owned to be one of them.

Page 39. He will not allow, that what I have Quoted out of my Immed. Revel. p.
243. to p. 247. proves that I did then hold the Man Christ without us in
Heaven, to be the Object of our Faith; though he grants my Words that I said,
The Man Christ who Suffered in the Flesh at Jerusalem, is the Spring out of
which all the living Streams flow into our Souls, and that he is to be Prayed
unto, which he says none of us deny. And yet with the same Breath as it were
he denies it; for if the Man Christ is to be Prayed unto, being the Spring out
of which all the living Streams flow unto our Souls; surely as such he is the
Object of our Faith; for how can we Pray to an Object in whom we believe not?
But seeing he will not allow me, that I then owned the Man Christ without us to
be the Object of Faith (wherein he is most unjust unto me) and that I Writ then
as a Quaker, and my Doctrine was the Quakers Doctrine; It is evident, that
according to him, it was not the Quakers Doctrine, that the Man Christ without
us, is in any Part or Respect the Object of our Faith; why then does he, and
many others Accuse me, that I Belly them, for saying they hold it not necessary
to our Salvation, that we believe in the Man Christ without us? And it is
either great Ignorance, or Insincerity in him, to say, that none of them deny
that the Man Christ without us in Heaven, is to be Prayed unto; Seeing a Quaker
of great Note among them, William Shown, has Printed it in his Book of
Thoughts, p. 37. Not to Jesus the Son of Abraham, David and Mary, Saint or
Angel; but to God the Father, all Worship, Honor and Glory is to be given,
through Jesus Christ, etc. This etc. cannot be Jesus the Son of Abraham, but
some other Jesus; as suppose the Light within; otherwise there would be a
Contradiction in his Words; so here he Asserts two Jesus's with a witness; what
says J. Pennington to this?

Page 41. In Opposition to my Christian Assertion, that the believing Jews,
before Christ came in the Flesh, did believe in Christ, as he was to be Born,
Suffer Death, Rise and Ascend; and so the Man Christ, even before he was
Conceived, Born, etc. was the Object of their Faith; He thus most Ignorantly
and Erroneously Argues. -- Could that be the Object of theirs, (viz. The
believing Gentiles) or of the Jews Faith, which our Lord had not yet received
of the Virgin, which was not Conceived, nor Born, much less Ascended? Ans. Yes,
That can be an Object of Faith and Hope, which has not a present Existence, but
is quid' futurum, something to come; though nothing can be an Object of our
Bodily Sight, or other Bodily Senses, but what is in Being, and has a real
Existence in the present Time. But so Stupid and Gross is he, that he cannot
understand this, that the Faith of the Saints could have a future Object, in
any Part or Respect; this is to make Faith as low and weak a thing as Bodily
Sense. Is it not generally acknowledged through all Christendom, that the
Saints of old, as Abraham, Moses, David believed in Christ, the Promised Seed
as he was to come, and be Born, and Suffer Death for the Sins of the World,
according to our Saviors Words, Abraham saw my Day and was glad; which is
generally understood by Expositors; that as he saw Christ inwardly in Spirit,
so he saw that he was to come' outwardly, and be his Son according to the
Flesh; and by what Eye did he see this, but by the Eye of Faith? And that Eye
of Faith had Christ to come in the Flesh, to be Born, etc. for its Object as a
thing to come.

And in the same Page 41. He Quoteth me falsely, saying, Immed. Rev. p. 132.
agreeing with both Papists and Protestants, That God speaking in Men is the
Formal Object of Faith. This Quotation is False in Matter of Fact, as well as
his Inference from it is False and Ignorant. I said in that p. 132. That both
Papists and Protestants agree in this; That the Formal Object of Faith is God
speaking; but quoth the Papist, it is the Speaking in the Church of Rome; no,
quoth the Protestant; God Speaking in the Scriptures, is the Formal Object of
Faith. Here I plainly show the difference of Papists and Protestants, about the
Formal Object of Faith; though they agree in one Part, that it is God Speaking;
yet in the other Part they differ; the Papists making it, God Speaking in the
Church; that is, not in every Believer, but in the Pope and his Counsel. And
there in that, and some following Pages, I Plead for Internal Revelation of the
Spirit; not only Subjectively, but Objectively Working in the Souls of
Believers; to which Testimony I still Adhere* But what then? Does this prove
that Christ without us is no Object of our Faith? Will he meddle with School
Terms, and yet understand them no more than a Fool? Does neither he, nor his
quondam Tutor, T. Ellwood, understand that the res credendae, i. e. The things
to be believed, are Ingredients in the Material Object of Faith; as not only
that Christ came in the Flesh, was Born of a Virgin; but all the Doctrins, and
Doctrinal Propositions set forth in Scripture, concerning God and Christ, and
all the Articles of Faith, are the Material Object of our Faith; but the Formal
Object of Faith, is the inward Testimony of the Spirit, moving our
Understandings and Hearts to believe and close with the Truth of them? All
which are well consistent, and owned by me.

Page 43. He Rejects my Exposition of the Parable, concerning the lost piece of
Money, in my late Retractation of my former Mistake, p. 15. Sect. 1. p. 10.
That by the lost piece of Money, is to be understood the Souls of Men; as by
the lost Sheep, and the lost Prodigal. To this he most Ignorantly and Falsely
opposes, by saying: First, The Lord can find the Soul without lighting a
Candle in it. I Answer, By finding, here is meant Converting the Soul; thus the
Father of the Prodigal found him, when he Converted him to himself; this my Son
was lost, and is found, i. e. was departed from God, but now is Converted, Luke
15.32. And ver. 6. I have found the Sheep that was lost. Now, can this be
wrought; or does God Work this Work of Conversion in a lost Soul, without his
Lighting a Candle in it? Secondly, He says, the very design of the Parable,
was to set forth, not what God had lost, but what Man had lost; the Candle
being used by Man who needed it, not by God and Christ who needed it not. How
Ignorantly and Stupidly does he here Argue? How can Man use the Candle, unless
God light it in his Heart; and does not God use it in order to bring, or
Convert Man to himself? It Is true, though there were no Candle lighted in Man's
Heart, God sees where the Soul is, even when it is involved in the greatest
Darkness; but in order to the Souls Conversion, which is principally God's Act,
it is God that lights the Candle in it, and causes his Light to Shine in it.
And whereas I have said; they who Expound the lost Piece of Money, to be the
Light within; will find difficulty to show what the nine Pieces are, which are
not lost. -- His Answer to this is, as Similes seldom go on all four; so
neither must Parables be pursued too far. I Answer, Though every Circumstance
of a Parable is not to be pursued, yet every necessary part of it is; whoever
Expounds the Parable, is bound to Expound what the nine Pieces are, as well as
what the tenth was. But he thinks to pinch me with great Difficulties in my
Exposition. As first, He demands whether there be no difficulty to find who the
Woman is that had ten Souls, kept nine, and lost one. Ans. There is no
difficulty in this, more than in finding who the ninety nine Sheep were that
were not lost; and who the Elder Brother was in the other two Parables: And who
they were; I had formerly shown, but that his Prejudice blinds him, that he
will not see: Many Angelical, Created, Rational Spirits did not Sin, so were
not lost; but the Souls of Men did Sin, so were lost.

And the number nine in the one Parable, and ninety nine in the other, answer
one to another; the Definite Numbers being put for Indefinite, as is ordinary
in Scripture. But he thinks it a mighty difficulty according to my Exposition,
to tell what the House was, which in effect has no difficulty at all; the House
where the Soul is, as Buried under a great heap of Filth and Sin, is the Body
wherein the Soul is Lodged; and the Animal and Natural Faculties, with which
also the Soul is Defiled; so the House, to wit the Body, and Animal and Natural
Faculties, being Swept and Cleansed by him who has his Fan in his Hand, purely
to Purge his Floor, to wit, Christ, (signified here by the Woman) he finds the
lost Soul; for as he said himself, he came to seek and to save, (i. e.) that
which was lost. For Christ had not lost Christ, nor God had not lost God; but
they had (in a Sense) lost the Souls that had Sinned, as the Souls had lost God
and Christ.

Page 45.46.) In Opposition to me; he will needs have all these Places, 1 Cor.
2.2. Romans 66. Gal. 2.20. Heb. 6.6. To be understood of Christ's being Crucified
in Men; else why does he oppose me with his Queries? and at this rate we shall
not find any place in the New Testament, where Paul Preached Christ Crucified
without Men, but only within; for by the same Liberty he may Expound all other
Places, only of Christ Crucified within. But there is no reason, why any of
these places should be understood of Christ's Crucifixion in Men; the
Crucifying the Old Man is so far from being joined with the inward Crucifying
of Christ, that it is rather a Sign and Effect of Christ's Power, Triumphing
Victoriously in Man, than of his being Crucified in Man. The Crucifying Christ
afresh, is not so much the Crucifying him within Men, as its Men Acting so
Unworthily; as if they did Act over again the Jews Part, in Crucifying him
outwardly.

Page 47. His base Reviling me, for my Retracting some things in my Book of
Universal Grace, used by way of Argument unduly by me, ing, Thus in him is
verified the saying of the Apostle, James 1.8. A double minded Man is unstable
in all his ways. By this means he will allow no Man to Amend or Correct his
Faults, or Retract his Errors, however truly convinced of them; if he does, he
is Condemned by J. Pennington, (and not by the Apostle James) to be a d^uble
minded Man. But what if perhaps G. Whitehead, or W. Penn, should find cause to
Retract, or Correct some Passages in their Books, which formerly they thought
Divine Openings; must they also be judged double Minded Men, etc. Is it not
more an Evidence of Sincerity to Retract an Error, than to persist in it? Have
not many good Men done it? Yea, have not the Quakers commended some for
Retracting and Condemning some things, which formerly they reckoned to be
Divine Openings? Must all that Retract from their Errors, be Reputed double
Minded Men? Oh unfair Adversary, full of deep Prejudice and Spite! I pray God
give him Repentance and Forgiveness.

Page. 50. He is so Ignorant and Blind, as not to understand my distinction
betwixt Essentials of true Religion Indefinitely, and Essentials of the true
Christian Religion in Specie. Cornelius's Religion (being Gentile Religion) was
true in its kind, before he had the Faith of Christ Crucified; but I say, the
Faith of Christ Crucified, in some degree is Essential to the Christian
Religion, and otherwise to Assert its plain Deisme; yet that Faith may be,
where the knowledge of the Circumstances of Times, Places and Persons may be
wanting.

Page 52. He blames my saying, upon Supposition that any suchh thing can be
found in my Books, I Retract and Renounce it, ( viz. That any are saved without
all Knowledge and Faith of Christ, Explicit or Implicit) this he says is
Childish all over. And for a Proof he Querieth; Can a Man Retract and Renounce
a Passage upon Supposition, and not know what the Passage is?

But his Query is Impertinent, and hits not the Case; a Man may Retract a
Saying upon Supposition, that he had said it; yet not knowing that ever he said
it; as if he were accused, that he had said, B. is a Dishonest Man, and
replyeth, I know not that ever I so said; but on Supposition that I so said, I
Retract it. This is not Childish* but Manly and Christian; if he had no cause
to say, B. is a Dishonest Man. It seems, J. Pennington never Repented of his
Sins of Ignorance; he thinks that is Childish all over: I pity his Childishness.

Page 54. His blaming me for saying in my Retractations; The breaking of the
Union betwixt Soul and Body; is more properly a Death, than the breaking the
Union betwixt the Life and Spirit of Christ, and the Soul of Man, is the Death
of Christ in the Soul. For of that I was Tr^a^ing, and at this rate of his
blaming me; when Christ Dyed upon the Cross; that was not so proper a Death, as
when he is Crucified in Men by their Sins; and consequently his Death in Men is
the only proper Sacrifice, for that Man's Sins. His Death without, being not so
proper a Death, is not a proper Sacrifice, by his most Ignorant way of
Reasoning. But my Reason for my Assertion holds good, and which he has not
touched; for when a Man Dies, his Soul leaves the Body, and cease to Act in
it, nor is the Body any more sensible; but Christ Acts in a Dead Soul, and
the Soul, though Dead, is often made in some degree sensible of the Spirit of
Christ Acting in it, in order to its being further quickened; as frequently
comes to pass in Thousands and Millions of Souls. Besides, as I Argued; the
Union of Soul and Body, is a Personal Union, whereby what the Body does, is
chargable upon the Soul; but the Union betwixt the Spirit of Christ and Men, is
not a Personal Union; otherwise when those Men Sin, their Sin would be
chargeable upon Christ.

Page 61. He Ignorantly thinks he has caught me in a Contradiction, about
owning a Condition in one Sense, in Reference to God's Willing all Men to be
saved; ex part Objecti, and denying a Conditional Election. But this is no
Contradiction at all; because the Will of God is Conditional Objectively, or ex
part Objecti, i. e. Men that are the Object of God's Will, and yet not
Conditional Subjectively, i. e. on God's Part; if he understand not this
Distinction, I ought not to suffer for his Ignorance; he should not meddle with
School-Terms, except he understand them; the distinction of Volition,
Conditional Objectively, and not Conditional Subjectively; and yet the same
Will is common and ordinary in all Authors that Treat on such Subjects.

Page 69. He is Guilty of great Injury against me, in Matter of Fact, by an
Unfaithful Reciting of my Words, and thence taking occasion against me. -- In
all places in the New Testament, where the Word Gospel is used, it signifies
the Doctrine of Salvation by the promised Messiah, that was outwardly to come,
and did come in the true Nature of Man, etc. He quite leaves out my Words, and
did come in the true Nature of Man, that were necessary to perfect the
Sentence, and if he had brought them, would have taken away his occasion of his
Quarelling with me so Unjustly; he says, here he is out again; for the New
Testament being Written, not when Christ was outwardly come, but after he was
outwardly come; the Word Gospel there, when it signifies the Doctrine of
Salvation by the promised Messiah, must needs respect him, as already come, not
as to come. Ans. Where the New Testament says, the Gospel was Preached to
Abraham, and to the Children of Israel in the Wilderness; Gospel there
signified the Doctrine of Salvation by the promised Messiah that was then to
come, and not already come; but at other times it signifies the Doctrine of
Salvation, by Christ already come, as my Words Cautioned it; therefore he is
Guilty of Abuse and Forgery, like his quondam Master, Tho. Elwood, as elsewhere.

Page 70. He most ^mpertinently opposes my sound Assertion, by Quoting Paul,
mentioning another Gospel, as 2 Cor. 11.4. and Gal. 1.6, 8, 9. For by Gospel I
understand the true Gospel of Christ, and not a false Gospel; as when I say,
every Man is a Rational Creature; and J. Pennington, should Object, a Man
Pictured on a Board or Wall, is not a Rational Creature. Is not this a rare
Disputant!

But his following Opposition is the most observable, and is a new effectual
Proof of my Charge against him and his Brethren of the 2d. Days Meeting, who
have approved his Book, he says by way of Opposition. Also when the
Everlasting Gospel was again to be Preached after the Apostacy (for it seems
by the word again, it had been discontinued to be Preached; although the
History of Christ's Birth, Death had not) does that place, Rev. 14.6, 7.
mention any thing of the Doctrine of Salvation, by the promised Messiah? There
is not a word of that said there; but saying with a loud voice, fear God, and
give Glory to him, etc. (Being Preached with Commission from on high,) is
called Preaching the everlasting Gospel. Did G. K. (says he) in his diligent
search overlook this? if not, how could he say in all places in the New
Testament, where the word Gospel is used, it signifies the Doctrine of
Salvation by the promised Messiah; he adds to this two other places, as Romans
1.16. and Colos. 1.23. in both which, he will not have the Gospel to signify
the Doctrine of Salvation by Christ Crucified, with respect to that clear and
bright Dispensation the Apostles were under (which was the Sense I gave of the
Gospel, in Col. 1.23.) And he says in Romans 1.16. That the Gospel cannot be
said to be the Power of God unto Salvation, to the Believer, in any other
Sense, than as it is a Powerful, Energetical inward Principle; for as it is
barely Historical, the Ungodly have that Belief, though they want the Power.
This I say effectually proves again my Charge against them, That they hold it
not necessary, for us to believe that Christ Dyed and Rose again for our
Salvation; why, the Gospel that Paul Preached, Romans 1.16. and Col. 1.23. Is not
the Doctrine of Salvation by Christ Crucified, the promised Messiah, and when
the everlasting Gospel was to be Preached, Rev. 14.6, 7. (Which the Quakers
think they have given them to Preach (with Commission from on High) the Doctrine
of Salvation by Christ Crucified, was not that Gospel; the Consequence is
plain, that therefore the Faith of Christ Crucified, is not necessary to their
Hearers for Salvation. It is not the Everlasting Gospel that is given them to
Preach; If they Preach it, they go beyond their Commission, they do a needless
Work. But says J. P. Fear God and give Glory, to him is called Preaching the
Everlasting Gospel. But is not that also a Doctrine? yes, surely; so then the
Doctrine, Fear God, etc. being Preached, is a Preaching the Everlasting Gospel;
but the Doctrine believe that Christ Died for our Sins, and Rose again, being
Preached is not Preaching the Everlasting Gospel; according to John Pennington,
and his Brethren of the Second Days Meeting.

This Sufficiently shows, that those Quakers are semper idem, always the
same; they are the same still, as formerly; though many that hear them of late,
say, their Way of Preaching is changed; they had wont formerly, before the
Difference arose betwixt them and G. K. to Preach only the Light within, and
Obedience to it; but now they Preach the Man Christ, and his Death and
Sufferings without, and how beneficial they were to Mankind; and that the Faith
of it is Beneficial. Yet by J. P. his Affirmation approved by the Second Days
Meeting of the Friends of the Ministry, in and about London, whereof G. W. and
W. Penn are Members, and where frequently they are present, The Doctrine of
Salvation by Christ Crucified, is none of the Everlasting Gospel that is given
them to Preach; but fear God, and give Glory to him, etc. But how comes it,
that believe in the Light within, obey the Light within, and that shall suffice
to your Salvation, is not mentioned in the Angels Commission to Preach the
Everlasting Gospel, no more than believe in Christ Crucified without you?
Perhaps J. P. will reply, though not mentioned or expressed; yet it is employed,
and understood. But how prove they it is employed; that believing in the Light
within alone, and obeying it, is sufficient to Salvation, without Faith in
Christ Crucified? Is not the Blindness of these Men (for all they talk of Light
within) exceeding Great, and the Darkness that is over them, like the Darkness
of Egypt* that might have been felt? John ( Rev. 14.6, 7.) did not say the
Angel had nothing else to Preach, but fear God, and give Glory to him; that
Doctrine being a general Doctrine, common both to Law and Gospel, and both to
true Gentile Religion, as well as true Christian Religion. The Apostacy having
been so great, that many called Christians were Degenerated below the Heathens,
and their Religion scarce so good, as that of some Heathens that did fear God,
and Worship him only; the Angel might Preach that general Doctrine, as being
very proper and necessary to call Apostate and Degenerate Professors of
Christianity, from their Idolatry and Profanity, as a necessary Introduction to
the Everlasting Gospel; as well as in one Sense it is a necessary part of it,
but not the whole Doctrine of the Gospel; for Faith and Love are as necessary
Doctrins of the Gospel, as Fear, though neither of them are expressly mentioned,
yet employed, together with all the other Christian Virtues. But J. P. in his
Words above Cited, will have it, That the Gospel cannot be said to be the Power
of God unto Salvation, to the Believer in any other Sense, than as it is a
Powerful energetical inward Principle; for as it is barely Historical, the
Ungodly have that Belief. I Answer, How Foolishly does he here Argue, and
Impertinently? whoever said, that the bare Historical Relation, or Report of
Christ Crucified, is the Power of God unto Salvation? Or if any have said it is
the Gospel, I am sure I never said nor thought it. But what has J. P. against
this Sense of the Gospel, Romans 1.16. That it is the Doctrine of Salvation, by
the promised Messiah, accompanied with the Spirit of God and Christ inwardly
Revealed, making it effectually to be Believed and Obeyed, in all that shall be
Saved by it; and thus the Gospel that Paul and the other Apostles Preached, is
not a bare Form of Doctrine without the Spirit and Power, nor the Spirit and
Power without the Doctrine. And how Non-sensical is he to Argue; that as it is
barely Historical, the Ungodly have that Belief? But they have not the Saving
Belief of the Doctrine of Christ Crucified; for that only is wrought in the
Godly, by the Power and Spirit of Christ. And though the Ungodly may have the
Gospel Preached unto them; yet while they remain Ungodly, they receive it not,
neither do they truly believe it, nor obey it. A bare Historical Faith, is no
more a True Faith, than the bare Picture of a Man, is a Man. Therefore he is
Idle to Argue against the Saving Faith of Christ Crucified; because the Ungodly
may have the bare Historical Belief of it; which differs as widely, as a Dead
Body from a a Living Man.

But it is not enough for J. P. to Pervert my Words; but he will be bold to
Pervert the Words of the Scripture, and not only put a false Gloss on them; but
allege that to be said in Scripture, which is not said, but is his own
Addition. For as I have above Cited him, he says, also when the Everlasting
Gospel was again to be Preached; and he adds in Parenthesis; for it seems by
the Word again, it had been discontinued to be Preached; although the History
of Christ's Birth, Death had not. Now, Reader, open the Bible, and Read that
place, Rev. 14.6, 7. and thou will find the Word again is not there to be
found; (but in G. Fox's Some Principles, p. 22. it is found) and yet he Grounds
his Argument upon this Pillar, again; by which he infers, that to his
seeming, the Everlasting Gospel had been discontinued to be Preached, although
the History of Christ's Birth, Death had not. And this discontinuing of the
Preaching the Everlasting Gospel, he and his Brethren think did remain, until
G. Fox and the Quakers began to Preach it. For says G. Fox and his Brethren,
in the Book, called, Some Principles of the Elect People of God, Printed it
London, 1671. In p. 48. But many People speak after this manner; Have we not
had the Gospel all this time till now? Ans. We say no, you have had the Sheeps
Clothing, while you are Alienated from the Spirit; and so not living in the
Power, which is the Gospel, etc. But as in Rev. 14.6, 7. The Word again is not
to be found, nor will the Greek bear it; so nor is it employed, that there was a
discontinuing of the Preaching of it altogether; for had the Gospel ceased, the
Church had ceased also, and Faith and Salvation had ceased. The most that can
be inferred, is, that the Preaching of it was not so common and frequent, as
formerly; it had met with a great Stoppage and Opposition in many parts of the
World, even under a Christian Profession, because of the Apostacy; which had
it not come, the Gospel would have spread much more than it yet has done; but
as the Apostacy goes out, the Everlasting Gospel, the same that the Apostles
Preached, will be Preached to every Nation and Kindred, and Tongue, and People,
John 14.6. That is, universally; this does not prove the discontinuing of it,
as J. P. falsely Argues; but that the more General, and indeed the* Universal
Spreading of it, has not hitherto been as yet. His Argument, That the Gospel
that Paul Preached to the Colossians, was not the Doctrine of Salvation, by the
promised Messiah, Christ Crucified; because the Gospel he was speaking of, was
Preached to, or in every Creature under Heaven. Therefore (says he) it could
not be meant of the Doctrine of Salvation, by Christ Crucified, -- but of that
Gospel which had been Preached to, or in every Creature under Heaven. I say
this his Argument is Vain and False; but it is a good and effectual Proof to
confirm my Charge against them. These Quakers Preach not any Gospel for
Salvation, but that which is Preached to, or in every Creature under Heaven;
but (says J. P.) that is not the Doctrine of Salvation, by Christ Crucified;
therefore that is none of the Gospel these Quakers Preach; what can be required
more, habemus Confitentem reum; we have the Guilty Confessing Matter of Fact.
But surely the Gospel that Paul Preached to the Colossians, was the Doctrine of
Salvation, by Christ Crucified, as appears plainly from 1 Col. v. 14. to the
end of the Chapter. And his Arguing from the Words to, or in every Creature
(which sort of Argument has deceived many) is no more valid to prove that the
Gospel, either then, or formerly had been Preached to every Man and Woman, in
the full and adequate Sense of the Word every, as it signifies every
individual; than that because Paul said, v. 28. of that same Chapter whom we
Preach, Warning every Man, and Teaching every Man in all Wisdom, that we may
present every Man Perfect in Christ Jesus, that Paul and his Brethren, then
living, did Teach every Man, that ever lived, or is now living on Earth. If
yea, then surely John Pennington, and all other Men now on Earth, were then
living; and this will be the Doctrine of the Revolution, or Transmigration of
Souls with a witness, (which he so frequently would cast upon me, though he has
no just ground so to do, nor any other Man;) if nay, then he must quit his
Post, and cease any more to Argue from his place of Scripture; that the Gospel
that Paul Preached, was not the Doctrine of Salvation, by Christ Crucified; but
the true Sense of that place, Col. 1.23. I had formerly given, as he Quotes me,
p. 71. Saying, though it was not at the same time actually Preached to all Men,
yet it was begun to be Preached, and after the Prophetical Style, that which
was to be done, is said to be done: He Quibbles against this, saying, Where
that Prophetical Phrase is, or how it is used, he Assigns not. Indeed it was
not necessary to show to any but a little Skilled in the Letter and true Sense
of Scripture, where that Prophetical Phrase is; for it is so general in
Scripture Prophecies, that no Man that is not Brutish, but must be sensible of
it, when he Reads them. When Isaiah Prophesied of Christ's Death and
Sufferings, and Birth, yea, and Burial, it is all said in praeterito; as if it
had been, which yet was not some hundred Years after. And so it is almost in
the whole Prophecy of the Book of the Revelation, and particularly that 14.
Rev. 6.7. brought by him, which yet he applies, not to John's Time, but to his
and his Brethrens Preaching (not the Doctrine of Salvation, by Christ Crucified;
if we must believe J. P.) (behold your Patron, all Sober Persons among the
Quakers) but the Light in every Creature under Heaven.) And p. 22. Some
Principles of the Elect People. And now says G. F. the Gospel must be Preached
again to all Nations; and this says J. P. is not the Doctrine of Salvation, by
Christ Crucified, but the Light or inward Principle in every Creature, and his,
and his Brethrens Argument is Weak; that because Paul called the Gospel the
Power of God to Salvation; therefore it is nothing else but the inward
Principle; for he called the Preaching of the Cross the Power of God, 1 Cor.
1.18. And yet that Preaching was an outward Preaching, and he called it the
Power of God because it was made Effectual to many that heard it, by the Power
of God that accompanied it.

Thus Reader, I have given thee a Taste of this Man's Ignorance and
Antichristian Doctrine, which is the same with that of his Brethren of the
Second Days Meeting, who have approved his Books against me. I shall not
nauseate thee with his other many Impertinencies, and Extravagancies, as well
as his Gross Errors in other Particulars of Doctrine; nor take notice of his
Base and Scurrilous Revilings, that are equally Unjust and Malicious; As his
calling me not Sincere, but a Belly-Convert, and his insinuating; If I be
disappointed among Protestants, I may seek a Living from the Papists, which is
like his and his Brethrens other false Prophecies.

Note, Reader, That having some Years ago seen a Book of Thomas Lawson, a
Quaker, against Water Baptism; I have made search for it, but cannot find it
any where, to have it; however, I suppose it has nothing of Argument in it,
but what in effect is contained in those above, Examined and Answered; and I do
not think that any of their Books on that Subject, will be found to have any
other Arguments in them against Baptism and the Supper, but what is in effect
contained in those abovementioned.

FINIS.
The ERRATA.
P. 2. l. 18. for thereof, r. therefore, p. 2. l. 24. for becomes, r. because,
p. 3. l. 30. after. Whitehead, r. only, p. 5. l. 17. r. judged, p. 13. l. 18.
before have, r. they have, and l. 29. for art, r. act, p. 30. l. 38. for there,
r. thrice, p. 68. l. 13. for visible, r. invisible.


