An Account of the Great Divisions, Amongst the QUAKERS, IN Pensilvania, etc.

As appears by their own Book, here following, Printed 1692. and lately came
from thence, Entitled, viz.

The Plea of the Innocent, against the False Judgment of the Guilty.

Being a Vindication of George Keith, and his Friends, who are joined with him
in this present Testimony, from the False Judgment, Calumnies, false
Informations and Defamations of Samuel Jenings, John Simcock, Thomas Lloyd, and
others, joined with them, being in Number Twenty Eight.

Directed, by way of Epistle, to faithful Friends of Truth, in Pensilvania,
East and West-Jersey, and elsewhere, as occasion requires.

John 7. 50, 51. Nicodemus said, Does our Law judge any Man before it hear him.

Acts 25. 16, 17. It is not the manner of the Romans, said Festus, to deliver
any man to die, before that he which is accused, have the Accusers face to
face, and to have License to answer for himself, concerning the Crime laid
against him.

Psalm. 58. 1, 2. Do ye indeed speak Righteousness, O Congregation? Do ye judge
Uprightly, O ye Sons of Men? Yea, in Heart you work Wickedness, you weigh the
Violence of your Hands in the Earth.

London, Printed for, and are to be Sold, by John Gwillim, in Bishopsgate
street, and Rich. Baldwin. in Warwick Lane, 1692.

The Plea of the Innocent, etc.
Directed, by way of Epistle, to faithful Friends of Truth, in Pensilvania,
East and West-Jarsey, etc.
Dear Friends and Brethren every where, to whom this may come;
WE dearly Salute you in the Love of God: The occasion of this present Writing
is in Vindication of the Truth, and Us, the defamed Witnesses of it, and
particularly of George Keith, from the false Judgment, Calumnies, false
Informations and Defamations of S. Jennings, John Simcock and Thomas Lloyd,
Pretended Preachers, and others, joined with them, being in Number Twenty
Eight, in their late Epistle sent to the Monthly and Quarterly Meetings in
Pensilvania, East and West-Jarsey.

First of all whereas they pretend to give an Account to these Meetings of the
Tedious Exercise and Vexatious Perplexity they have met with in their late
Friend George Keith, for several Months past. In this they have dealt most
unfairly and unjustly with him, in that they have given no account of the
Occasion of that called by them the Tedious Exercise and Vexatious Perplexity,
etc. which because they have not given, we see fit to do the Truth, and all
Friends of it, to whose hands this may come, that Justice, as to give you a
true Information of the Cause and Occasion of the late Difference that has
happened betwixt diverse of them, that has signed their Epistle, and these the
chiefest among them, and G. K. which was this, viz. About fifteen Months ago,
Wiiliam Stockdale, an Ancient Preacher, having accused G. K. of preaching Two
Christ's, because he preached Faith in Christ within, and Faith in Christ
without; the which G. K. hearing, after he had privately dealt with him, laid
his Complaint first before about twelve of the Friends of the Ministry met at
the House of Robert Ewer, who having done nothing in the said Meeting to bring
W. Stockdale to due Coviction or Condemnation for his said Error, but rather
for the most part did excuse and defend him, as can well be proved by diverse
Credible Witnesses then present, only two of the said Friends of the Ministry
then present, viz. John Heart and John Delavall dissented from the rest; then G.
K. did again lay his Complaint before Friends of the Ministry at the last
Yearly Meeting at Philadelphia, in the first week of 7 mon. 1691. and soberly
desired to have their sense and judgment, Whether he was guilty of preaching
Two Christ's? or whether W. S. was not guilty of Blasphemy, for saying Christ
within and Christ without are Two Christ's? and no less than six several
Meetings were had about this Matter in that time of the Yearly Meeting; and the
first Meeting continued about ten hours, viz. from about nine in the fore-noon,
to the time that Candles were lighted in the Evening. And it must need, be
granted. That it was a time of tedious Exercise and vexatious Perplexity in all
the six Meetings; but who was to be blamed for it, deserves your serious
Examination. Is it not matter of Astonishment, that such an easy Question
being proposed to so many men called Ministers of Christ, all highly pretending
to the Spirits immediate teachings and leadings, and to be in a degree of
Christianity above all other Professions in Christendom, (there being assembled
of these called Ministers cut of these three Provinces about forty or fifty, if
not more) six Meetings could not determine it, viz. Whether to preach Faith in
Christ within us, and Faith in Christ without us, was to preach Two Christ's, or
One? Whereas G. K. had many Witnesses to clear him, that he always said, when
he treated on that Subject, that Christ within us, and Christ without us, was
but one Christ, the Measure of the Gift of Christ within us, and the Fullness
without us, in the Man Christ Jesus, being one Lord Jesus Christ: a sincere
Christian, though in the lowest degree, and but a Babe in Christ, could have
easily determined and resolved this Question, and given judgment against W. S.
being guilty of Blasphemy against the Son of Man, (though not against the Holy
Ghost) for his blasphemous Assertion, That to preach faith in Christ within,
and Faith in Christ without, was to preach Two Christ's; for according to him:
Christ without is a false Christ, he being a great Owner in Pretense and words
of Christ within; and yet which will be matter of Admiration to all Impartial
Persons that hear it, who have the least true Knowledge in the Mystery of
Christ) this great and solemn Assembly of so many high Pretenders to be
Ministers of Christ, were at a great stand and demur to determine, and in the
conclusion of the sixth Meeting gave but a very slender and partial
determination and judgment concerning it; which yet, such as it was, was not
intimated by any Order of the Meeting, as themselves have acknowledged. And
indeed such was the Partiality, as well as the Ignorance and gross Unbelief
that openly and manifestly appeared in these Meetings, whereof sufficient Proof
can be given, and that of diverse owned and esteemed great Preachers among us,
that is scarcely credible, a hint whereof we think necessary to give for your
true Information. In one of these six Meetings, T. Fitzwater, in Prayer, said,
O God, that dyed in us, and laid down thy Life in us, and took it up again,
etc. After he had ended his Prayer, G. Keith, G. Hutcheson and J. Hampton (but
few or none others) greatly blamed T. F. for his Prayer, for it appeared to
them as Blasphemy; and surely it is not only contrary to Scrripture, but to the
express Testimony of Friends, That God is Immortal, and cannot die; yea, G. W.
in his Book called Judgment fixed, expressly says, God cannot be imprisoned or
imbondaged, with other words to that effect, and so cannot die: Another called
Rob. Young, a great Preacher among them, openly said, as many can bear witness,
in one of these Meetings, That he did not find Christ without in all the
Scripture, further positively affirming, That Christ, when he ascended into the
Cloud was separated from his Body, and though one or two checked him a little, for
his assertion, yet no further notice was taken of it to bring him to any
Condemnation for his Blasphemy. Also, Arth. Cook, in one of these Meetings
accused G. K. for saying, at the Meeting at R. Ewer's House, That Christ's Body
that was crucified and buried, is gone into Heaven, and was and is in Heaven,
oven the very same Body; which G. K. most freely acknowledged he had so
affirmed, and that Christ's body was not changed in Being or Substance of Body,
but in Manner and Condition. And whereas at one of these Meetings G. K. had
complained against J. Simcock, that he had questioned G. K. at the Meeting at
R. Ewer's, saying, Did Christ's Bones rise? which G. K. affirmed, and proved
from Scripture; but the said J. S. boldly denied that he asked any such
Question, until J. Delavall, and W. Bradford, affirmed they heard him question
it. And not only J. Simcock, and Arth. Cook, and others, did openly blame G. K.
both at the Meeting at R. Ewers, and at others Meetings at the Yearly Meeting,
for imposing a Novelty upon his Ancient Brethren, but more especially and
principally T. Lloyd, who was the great Attorney for W. Stockdale, and the
great Mouth of all these that opposed G. K. in his Testimony to these sound
Fundamental Principles and Doctrines of the Christian Faith, did often object
against G.K's. Imposing an Unscriptural Faith on his Brethren, all which is so
openly known to many, that we judge, they scarce have the Confidence themselves
to deny it; but what was this Unscriptural Faith that they did blame G. K. for
imposing on his Ancient Brethren? even no other but this, That we ought to
believe in Christ without us in Heaven, as well as in Christ within for
Salvation; and That Christ is in Heaven, having the true Nature of Man, both of
Soul and Body, the same he had on Earth for Being, but wonderfully and most
gloriously changed in Condition and Manner, and is not only God in Heaven, but
both God and Man, and yet one Lord Jesus Christ; and many are Witnesses, how at
the School-house Meeting, as well as at these other Meetings aforesaid, T.
Lloyd argued, That Faith in Christ without us, as he died for our sins, and
rose again, was not necessary to our Salvation, which his Son-in-law, I.
Delavall openly contradicted, bringing for his Proof Romans 10. 9, 10. And at one
of these Yearly Meetings, T. Lloyd said, Christ within did all; which J.
Wilsford contradicted, saying, That he did not believe, for Christ without did
somewhat when he died for us. And at another of these Meetings Samuel Jenings
having rudely and uncivilly stopped G. K. in his Testimony, when he was
recommending to them, seriously to consider, whether it was not their Duty to
preach Christ outwardly more than they did, said, If thou preached Christ
without less, others might preach him more; whereof diverse present took great
notice, and was very offensive to them, as well as to G. K. and did signify
that S. Jenings was too much a Preacher at his own will, as well as prejudiced
against G. K. that because he would not seem to follow G. K. he and others
would not preach what G. K. preached, though true. And this is but a hint of many
more things that could be mentioned, as Instances of their gross Ignorance,
Unbelief and Blasphemy that some of them showed themselves openly guilty of at
these Meetings, and others their being guilty of gross Partiality and
Hypocrisy, laboring to cover these men in their Impious Blasphemies against
Christ Jesus the Son of Man. Was it therefore any matter of Wonder or Crime,
that G. K. being zealous and servent for the true Faith, and Doctrine of
Christ, so much openly contradicted by some of them, and questioned by others
at these Meetings aforesaid, was stirred in spirit to use sharp words against
them, which yet were all true, and therefore no Railing, nor yet blameworthy;
even as it is said of Paul, That his Spirit was stirred in him when he saw the
City (viz. of Athens) wholly given to Idolatry. And suppose that G. K. did
exceed at times, the due bounds, by great provocations on their side: Is it not
great Hypocrisy and Partiality of these men so severely to judge him, and
wholly to conceal, nor only their own Ignorance, Error and Blasphemy, but the
extreme Passion, the rude, uncivil and unmannerly Speeches they uttered against
him, both in these Meetings, and often since, calling him, Reviler of his
Brethren, Accuser of the Brethren, Brat of Babylon, One that always endeavored
to keep down he power of Truth, drawing from the Gift of God; calling him also,
Pope, Primate of Pensilvania, Father Confessor, accusing him of Railing, Envy,
extreme Passion, and a Turbulent and Uusubdued Spirit, and not only so, but
most uncivily and unchristianly, yea, inhumanely, otherwise treating him in
these Meetings, often six or ten, all at once, speaking to him, and some
pulling him by one sleeve, and others by the skirts of his Coat, more like Mad
men than Sobet; and some bidding him go out, and when he essayed to go out, and
prayed them to let him go, others pulling him back, and detaining him; so that
greater Confusion was scarce ever seen in any Meetings pretending to
Christianity; and why do they conceal all this their rude, and base, and
inhumane Carriage, as well as uncivil words toward G. K but to demonstrate
their Partiality and Hypocrisy, at least to give us a fair occasion to
demonstrate it; and what Partial and Hypocritical men they are, whom GOD has
in great measure already discovered, and we doubt not will further discover in
due time.

And many of these men have discovered no less Ignorance and Error in the late
Difference that has happened betwixt G. K. and J Fuzwater who has openly in
the face of a Monthly Meeting accused G. K. for denying the sufficiency of the
Light; and the rhing at last is come to this Issue, that by the Act of a
Monthly Meeting, held ad Philadelphia, the 26. 3. mon. G. K. is condemned for
saying, The Light is not sufficient without something else; and at the next
Monthly Meeting following, T. Lloyd did acknowledge, in the open hearing of all
present, whereof many are ready to bear Witness, and which we judge they will
not deny, That by that something else they knew that G. K. did hold (as he has
often declared, both in public Testimonies, and other occasional Discourses) The
Man Christ Jesus without us, and what he did and suffered for us on Earth, and
what he now does for us in Heaven: Whereupon G. K. said, If this be a
Guiltiness, That the Light within does not save us, or is not sufficient
without the Man Christ Jesus, and his Death, Resurrection, Ascension and
Mediation for us in Heaven, I own my self guilty; but by their thus condemning
G. K. for his sound Doctrine, and clearing T. F. they have declared openly
their being no Christians, and therefore it is no Railing nor Ungodly Speech to
call them Ignorant Heathens, for it is their proper Name due to them, seeing
they will not own any thing else, not the Man Christ Jesus, but only the Light
in them to be sufficient and necessary to their Salvation; but for a more full
account of their thus publicly renouncing the Man Christ Jesus we refsr to two
Papers of Minutes writ by G. K. of what passed at the last Quarterly and Monthly
Meetings about this matter. But whereas some of them say. They have not cleared
T. F. let all impartial men, who read their act recorded in their Monthly
meeting Book, (a copy of which with great difficulty we have at last obtained)
judge whether their words in the said Act does not clear him, when they say,
The Meeting saw no Reason to give Judgment against him, in this particular
abovementioned, as much as when the Grand Jury brings in their Verdict of an
Ignoramus into the Court, does not clear the Person accused for that time? and
whether this their clearing of him, is not further confirmed by their allowing
and countenancing him to preach and pray in their Meetings, and the last clause
of their Paper, concluding that T. F's Charge in it self was true.

2dly. Whereas, in their Epistle, they use a great many words in Commendation
of what formerly G. K. was, and how once he walked in the Counsel of God, and
was little in his own Eyes, and his Brethren honorable in his esteem, and that
he was lovely in that day, when the Beauty of the Lord was upon him, and his
Comeliness covered him; and other high words of Commendation, scarce given to
many far more worthy than he. It is very apparent, that all this is but on
purpose, first to raise him up as it were on high, that they may seem the more
to throw him down into their deep Pit of Infamy and false Judgment they have
given against him, together with their deceitful and hypocritical Lamentation
over his Fall from the kigh places of Israel, as a man slain in his high
places; this is not unlike to their Predecessors, the Persecuting Clergy of the
Church of Rome, who before they burnt that worthy Servant of Christ John Huss,
they caused be put on him his Priestly Robes, and then afterward stripped him of
them, on purpose the more to defame him, and render him vile before the People;
the which as they were doing, that worthy Servant of Christ called to
remembrance that White Vesture which Herod put upon Christ to mock him withal,
as Fox does relate it in his Book of Martyrs, page 739. Tom. 1. But we would
have these men to know, that G. K needs none of their hypocritical and mock
Lamentations, but rather let them in good earnest weep for themselves, and for
their great Ignorance, Error and Unbelief, that some, if not all of them have
sufficiently discovered themselves guilty of; and most of them of their great
Prejudice and Hypocrisy, and all of them of their Folly, and rash and false
Judgment, which will be their own burden, and for which we wish them true
Repentance. And seeing their Accusations against G. K. lie much in bare
generals, we see no cause further to take notice of them, as they contain bare
generals, as his being guilty of Anger, Envy, Cruelty, Treachery, and other
false and reproachful Speeches they give out against him; but to show, that for
want of particular matter against him, they thus labor to defame him so much
in bare Generals, a way common to all Sophisters and false Accusers. And for
the hard words they alledg, he used to call some of them, as Fools, ignorant
Heathens, Infidels, silly Souls, Liars, Heretics, Rotten Ranters,
Muggletonians, etc. G. K. says, and that in the uprightness of Heart, that he
never gave such Names to any of them, but to such as he can prove did deserve
them, and for which he can appeal to all impartial men that profess
Christianity, whether they to whom he gave such Names did not deserve them; as
when one of them said to him in his own house, in the hearing of some present,
That seeing to preach Faith in Christ without, did give Offense to his
Brethren, and was like to make a Division among Friends, it was best to let it
alone, as Paul said concerning eating of Flesh, if it did offend his weak
Brother; this W. Gabitas said to him, whereupon G. K. said (as he solemnly
declares, and as some do witness) Thou silly Soul, or little Soul, do thou
compare the preaching of Christ Crucified to eating of flesh? And to call Men
Fools and Sots, yea, blind and dark Sots, that deserve it, has been the
practice of some very eminent Friends, for no greater cause than some have
given, who have openly renounced the Faith of Christ without them, as necessary
to their Salvation, as we can sufficiently prove some of them have done, who
deservedly may be called Ignorant Heathens, Infidels and Heretics; and if G.
K. did call some of them Liars, he can prove they were such, and that is no
Railing to call a Liar by his true Name; so did Christ call such as deserved
it, and so did Paul; and diverse of them that have signed that Epistle, have
called G. K. openly in a Meeting, Liar, and other unworthy and base Names,
without all just ground; and therefore it is base Partiality in these men to
condemn G. K. for that which they are guilty of themselves, some of them having
not only called him Liar, but Apostate, and worse than Profane, as
particularly S. Jenings, in the hearing of diverse credible Witnesses; and
Arthur Cook, (who is of their side, though his hand is not at their Paper, being
absent) at the School-house-Meeting did openly call him Muggletonian for
affirming, That Christ had the true Body of Man in Heaven, the which Body was
not every where; of this many can bear witness; and at the same time the said
A. C. would not acknowledge that Christ's appearance to Paul, mentioned 1 Cor.
15. 8. was without him, alleging it was Only within, and put G. K. to prove,
Where we read in Scripture of Faith in Christ within, and Christ without, as
also to prove, that Cornelius was faithful to the Light within, or had the
Light within. And T. Lloyd has used very uncivil Expressions to G. K. in some
of those Meetings, one time saying, No Man could differ with G. K. but he was
in danger of the Life of his Soul by him, which G. K. was greatly offended
with, and judged the most uncharitable saying that ever any of his greatest
Enemies gave him, this T. L. knows himself guilty of, and has labored since
to put a cloak upon it, but that could not cover it; and at another time said,
G. K. had been a more vexatious Adversary to Friends, than Hicks or Scanderer,
or the greatest Enemies; and at other times he has said to G. K. Must I
truckle under thee? which seemed very strange to G. K. and some others, and
seemed to proceed from great Pride and Self-conceit, to which G. K. answered,
As thou art not to truckle under me, so nor am I to truckle under thee, but let
us both truckle under Truth. And it is but too apparent that T. Lloid, S.
Jennings, J. Simcock, A. Cook most especially, and others of them concerned in
Government and Magistracy, take occasion on that account to exalt themselves,
and lord it over G. K. and his Friends, and seek to oppress and run him down,
because of their worldly Power and Greatness, and of this many are sensible,
that these places of worldly Government have done them much hurt, in other
respects, and especially that of late they countenanced the use of the carnal
Sword, and some -- hired men to fight, for recovering a Sloop from the
Privateers, and all this is allowed and countenanced by the Authority of these
men, who have joined in false Judgment against G. K. but if they had known
their own state aright, they would rather and in the first place have judged
themselves for that which has brought our Profession under such great
Reproach. And for calling them Ranters who deny Faith in Christ without, as
necessary to Salvation, and only profess Faith in Christ the Light within them,
as we can prove diverse of them do, G. K. has for his Example G. F. whom he
has heard call such Ranters, who say, They believe only in Christ the Light in
them, and not in the Man Christ without them; also he has the Example of G.
Whitehead, who says to Jeff. Bulleck, Thou who can not see the consistency
of Salvation by the Light within. AND by the Man Christ Jesus, are gone from
the Light into Imaginations; and by this (Censure of G. W.) it does manifestly
appear that the Monthly Meeting of the other side here at Philadelphia, who
meet apart from us, is gone from the Light into Imaginations (and what is that
but Ranterism?) for they have declared by their late Act of their Monthly
Meeting, the 26. 3. mon. 92. That they see no reason to give Judgment against
T. F. for accusing G. K. that he denied the Sufficiency of the Light, seeing
four Credible Evidences gave Testimony, That they heard him say, he did not
believe the Light was sufficient without something else; and at their last
Monthly Meeting it was confessed by T. L. as the Month of the Meeting, That by
that something else, they knew G. K. meant the Man Christ Jesus without us, and
what he did, and suffered for us on Earth, and what he now does for us in
Heaven, to wit, his intercession for us, etc. Wherein they have declared
themselves exactly to be of the mind of J. Bullock, (a great Adversary to Truth
and Friends, and whom G. W. has well answered) who do not see the consistency
betwixt Salvation by the Light within, and by the Man Christ Jesus; and
therefore by the Judgment of G. W. they are gone with J. B. from the Light into
Imaginations, and may be justly reckoned Adversaries to Truth and to Faithful
Friends, as well as J. B. And notwithstanding of their accusations against G.
K. as if he were not in unity with Truth and faithful Friends, G. K. has many
hundreds to bear him witness, that he is in unity with Truth and faithful
Friends, not only in Old England, but in all places where they are; and they
have heard him on all occasions earnestly to declare his being in unity with
all faithful Friends every where, and that he does believe that there are many
that are faithful, and have had the true Christian Faith from the beginning,
and that they still continue in it, and that the Faith and Doctrine he does
preach, is the same that Ancient Friends had from the beginning, and which all
sound and faithful Friends at present have. And as for his giving hard Names
and Words to any, it was but conditional, upon supposition of their holding
such Errors, which they did seem to favor and argue for, except to two or
three, to whom he was more positive, because of their boldly asserting these
Errors, some of which are now boldly and openly asserted by them generally.

Thirdly, whereas they say, That G. K. charged by their Meeting with being come
to cloak Heresies and Deceit, and that there were more Doctrines of Devils, and
Damnable Heresies among the Quakers, than among any Profession of the
Protestants. In this they are very unfair, and give a false Relation, as can be
proved by credible Witnesses, he did not charge the whole Meeting, but a Party
or Faction of them, that swayed and influenced others; for there were diverse of
that Meeting that stood for G. K. at that time, which was the Meeting held at
Burlington last, tho J. Delavall, and W. Byles, are now declined; and G. K. did
say, That no such Damnable Heresies and Doctrines of Devils were tolorated in
any Protestant Sosciety, as these here did among them; but he never charged the
body of Friends with these things, but always made a distinction; and G. K.
might well say so concerning them that have opposed him here, who have
exceedingly labored to cloak that damnable Heresy of W. S. That to preach
faith in Christ within and without, as to preach two Christ's; and with the like
industry have they labored to cover T. F. whom they heard utter Blasphemy in
his Prayer, and never brought him to conviction for it; and tho T. Bud, at the
last Meeting of Ministering Friends at Burlington, charged him with saying, That
he owned no Man Christ Jesus as Mediator in Heaven without him, but the Grace
of God within him, yet they gave him no check for it; and at the last Yearly
Meeting, in the presence of diverse Friends he argued against G. K. That Christ
was only a Spirit in Heaven, and had nothing of the Body of Man in Heaven, this
is he also who said to G. K. at another Meeting, He had not learned that
lesson, whether it was the Godhead or somewhat else that Christ took of the
Virgin, that was nailed to the Cross. And at a late Monthly Meeting that party
had cleared the said T. F. and told, That the Light is sufficient without any
thing else, excluding the Man Christ Jesus, and his Obedience, Death,
Resurrection, Ascension and Mediation for us in Heaven, all which are something
else than the Light; and G. K. might well say, no Protestant Society would
tolerate these damnable Heresies, nor indeed would the Church of Rome. Also
some of their chief Members are guilty of denying the Day of Judgment, and any
Resurrection but what they have already attained, owning no Resurrection but
Christ, and having attained to Christ, they reckon they have attained to all
the Resurrection they expect, as Rob. Owen, one of the false Judges, and Will,
Southbe. one of the Evidences against G. K. And J. Wilsford, another of the
false Judges, said lately on a first Day Meeting, That Christ was a Mediator
for no Drunkards, nor Wicked Persons, but for his own Disciples, expressly
contrary to Scripture Testimony; in many places, Isa. 53. 12. Psalm. 68. for it
is by the Merits and Intercession of Christ that all men, even wicked men of
all sorts have a day of Visitation, and are inwardly enlightened by Christ, and
such who improve it not, but live and die in their Sins; hinder not but that it
is a benefit in it self. Also, the same Person, some time ago at a Meeting in
East Jarsey, said in Prayer, Lord that we may not dote on the Body, to neglect
the Life; which was very offensive, and is an unsavory irreverend expression
to every Pious Christian; for to dote on it, is too much to love it, but this
none can do: for we cannot too much love the Lords glorious Body, nor any thing
of him, but the more truly we love his Body, the more we enjoy of his Life
inwardly, and the more we enjoy of his Life in us, and love it, we love his
Body, and prise and esteem still more and more all the Sufferings of his Soul,
and his Bodily Sufferings, Death, Resurrection, and Asscention in that Body,
hoping that he will change our low Body, and fashion it like to his glorious
Body. All which, and other gross Errors, being considered: some denying Gods
Prefence in all his Creatures, arguing If God be in Herbs and Grass, than who
trample on Herbs and Grass, trample on God. Horrid Blasphemy! as one argued,
and charged G. K. of Blasphemy at a Mo. Meeting, for saying. God was present in
all his Creatures, even Grass, Herbs, etc. Hence a new dispute has risen among
some, Whether God be present in -- some arguing, they are no part of the
Creation. Are not these things enough to make sober Ears to tingle; by all
which, and much more that can be proved, it may sufficiently appear, what great
reason G. K. had to say, No such damnable Heresy, etc. are tolerated in any
Christian Society, as are among many here-away, called Quakers. Another
preaches, That Christ cures men's Souls perfectly at once, and makes them free
of all sin; and when we are perfect we are Kings, and are not to beggar pray to
God for themselves. And openly in a Meeting at J. Goodsons, S. Jenings, accused
G. K. as also did J. Simcock, for preaching Faith in Christ without us, calling
it the Professors Faith, and the Faith of all Christendom, that did not profit
them. And T. Ducket, another great Statesman (then) and Preacher, declared at
the Meeting at Rob. Ewers, when G. K. made the first Complaint to them against
W. S. that he could not determine, whether that Body that was crucified, was in
Heaven or not; but, said he, let the Church determine it, if the Church
determine it, we shall, I hope, submit, which was more like a blind
Mass-Priest, than a judicious Protestant Minister. And S. Jenings has
sufficiently discovered his great Ignorance, as in some other things (and
joining with them that say, the Light is sufficient without something else, and
requiring G. K. to give an absolute Submission to their judgment, which G. K.
calling Rank Popery; S. J. took out his Pocket Book, and writ it down before G.
K. had ended the sentence) so in openly declaring in a men's Meeting, That to do
Gods Business, we needed Gods Wisdom and Power, but to do our own Business, as
men, we needed it not; which G. Keith, Geo. Hutcheson, Rob. Turner, J. Heart,
and several others publicly testified against, but the Meeting gave no
Judgment against him. And notwithstanding that this S. J. has severely blamed
G. K. that he refused to submit to him and his Associates, who were joined in a
Faction against G. K. for his faithful Testimony, yet he has refused to submit
to the Judgment not only of the Men's Meeting here at Philadelphia, in a small
worldly matter betwixt T. B. and him, but refused to submit to the Judgment of
a Meeting of the most eminent Friends, viz. G. F. G. W. and others, appointed
at London, to hear the difference betwixt Edw. Billinge and him, concerning the
Trust committed to him by E. B. as his Deputy Governor; the which, though he
refused to submit to their Judgment, yet they judged him guilty of betraying
his Trust, and he came away for England in disunity with the most faithful
Friends at London, on that very account; and had he had his due, Friends here
would scarce have suffered him to preach and pray in Meetings, far less to have
ruled in their men and women's Meetings, as since he has done first in West
Jersey, of whose too severe Government People in that Province were generally
weary, and of other his proud and lofty Carriages, and now here in Pensilvania,
who has already shown himself too high and imperious, both in Friends Meetings
and worldly Courts, as is but too well known to many, and yet this ignorant
presumptuous and insolent man has been one of the main Opposers and Threatners
of G. K. threatening him, That they will let him know, that though he deny their
Judgment, yet they shall judge him. But seeing they have given false Judgment
against him, as G. K. could expect no better from his declared Opposers, and
Adversaries both to Truth and him, it is no cause of Offense for G. K. to say,
he trampled there Judgment as Dirt under his feet; for Dirt is good for
something to fatten the Land, but false Judgment is good for nothing, except to
discover what ignorant and prejudiced men these are against the Truth. Another
of the false Judges is one W. Walker, a Novice, who began to preach before he
had the outward sober carriage of a Friend, known to be a prejudiced person
against G. K. for reproving his false Doctrine, first in private, then more
publicly, he having said in a public Meeting, That a man might speak unsound
words in the life; and at another time in a public Meeting, he bid us wait,
that the Scepter might depart from Judah, and c. that Shilo might come; and
many other most gross and impertinent things he has spoke in Meetings,
fathering all upon the Spirit. And as for J. Delaval his declining from G. K.
and turning most severely against him and his Doctrine of late, but formerly
preached by him, is sufficiently known to many, as well as his accusing of G.
K. in a thing he could not prove, but essayed to do it with a dreadful Oath,
saying, As God was in Heaven it was true, which to be sure is as real an Oath
as that was under the Law, The LORD lives. Another of the false Judges is Paul
Saunders, very lately a great pretended Friend of G. K. and who has greatly
owned in words G. K's Doctrine, and came to that called our separate Meeting,
at least one first day, as joining with us, and yet now has joined with these
false Judges against us, and yet but a few days before, he told G. K. That he
believed e're long they would thrust him out from among them, for it lay on him
to preach among them, what that something else was, that was necessary to their
Salvation, besides the Light, to wit, the Man Christ Jesus without us. Let none
be offended that we name these men's Names, for seeing they have named G. K. in
their Paper containing false Judgment, and put their Names to it, we hope none
can justly blame G. K. or us that love him, to name their names to things we
can prove sufficiently against them; besides, some of them have complained that
in our Book, Some Causes of Separation, we named not Names, and therefore
seeing it is desired, we have named some; and it were an easy matter to give
such a Character of every one of them that have signed that Paper of false
Judgment, as may render them unqualified men to give Judgment in such a weighty
case, not only for the Ignorance of most of them, as well as their Prejudice,
but for the great suspicion that some of them lie under of a scandalous Life,
as Drunkenness, Uncleanness, etc. and as for W. Yardly and N. Walne, as we can
prove them both very ignorant men, so they are not of a very good Fame among
their Neighbors, and for that distaste, some stay from Meetings, as we are
informed. And one George Gray from Barbados, almost wholly a stranger to these
matters of difference, taking all no trust from them, except what has lately
happened in some late Meetings, has showed himself too foolish and rash, as
well as ignorant: And the like may be said of H. Willis of Long Island, wholly
a stranger to our Differences, but what he had by report, and who lately before
diverse Witnesses at the House of W. Bradford, openly declared himself an
Unbeliever, as concerning Christ's coming without us to judge the quick and the
dead, which is a great Article of the Christian Faith.

4thly, As concerning their blaming G. K. for objecting against their
Discipline, and his preparing a Draught, which he presented them, G. K. gave no
just cause to be offended at this; hundreds here-a-way of the more sincere sort
of Friends, do object, as well as G. K. against the too-great laxness of
Discipline amongst us, and that there is but little inspection into the good
Lives and Manners of them that profess Truth among us, far less into their
Faith, so that men may almost believe any thing, and yet be owned, if they come
to Meetings, and use plain Language, and plain Habit, and be not grossly
scandalous. And as to his Draught that he prepared and presented to the Yearly
Meeting, 1690. he was very moderate in it, and did not press it on them; and he
is so far from being ashamed of it, that he has now sent it to Friends in Old
England, to consider of.

5thly, Their blaming G. K. for his earnest desiring that they and we might
agree to draw up some Principles and Doctrines of Faith in the most necessary
things, to qualify our Church Members, and distinguish Believers from
Unbelievers, has no just ground, but is rather worthy of commendation; for
hundreds see the necessity of such o thing among us, especially here-a-way. And
for his saying, That he knew none given forth by the body of Friends, it is
true, he has so said, and if they know any entire Confession or Declaration of
Faith in all necessary things, and sufficient to end the present Differences,
let them produce it; we know that particular accounts of Principles and
Doctrines have been given forth by diverse particular Friends, as G. F. G. W. E.
B. J. C. and diverse others, but not by the Body of Friends, or any yearly
Meeting, so far as we know, except the Rhode Island Sheet, which they do so
much oppose. For their offering to give a Confession in Scripture-words, when
they have given us to know they have a sense contrary to Scripture, no more can
satisfy us, than when Papists, Socinians, Muggletonians, etc. say they will
give us a Confession of their Faith in Scripture-words: They have greatly
blamed G. K. for imposing unscriptural words and terms on them; and yet when
asked, what these terms are, they never did, or can show, unless that some of
them have said, to preach faith in Christ within and without us, is
unscriptural. And what else can it be but gross Unbelief and Pagauism, to find
fault so much with preaching Faith in Christ without us and his being in Heaven
in the same Body that suffered, being necessary to our Salvation; for though the
words [without us] or [the same Body] be not express Scripture-words, yet
seeing they are according to the true sense of Scripture, who can blame G. K.
or any other, to preach them, viz. That Faith in Christ, as he dyed for us, and
rose again, is necessary to our Salvation, and that Christ's Body that was
crucified, and buried, rose again, and is gone into Heaven? Surely none but
Infidels and Ranters, but no sincere Christians will deny these things; and yet
all the Imposition they can allege on G. K. is, That he did preach Faith in
the Man Christ without them, as well as Faith in Christ the Light in them; and
that Christ has the true Body of Man in Heaven, and in that Body he will come
and appear without us, to judge the quick and the dead. And the 27. 4th Mo. at
Frankford Mo. Meeting, in discourse without door, before many Friends, T. Lloyd
blamed G. K. for imposing unscriptural words on them, G. K. pressed him again
and again to show in any one particular, but he would not give one instance;
then G. K. desired him to answer one Question, viz. Whether to believe that
Christ died for our Sins, and rose again, was necessary to our Salvation? but
T. L. waved it, saying, I will prove out of thy Books thou wast not of this
Faith some time ago; which G. K. denied, well knowing what is in his own Books.
And it may be noted, that T. Lloyd, S. Jenings, J. Delavall, and S. Richardson,
came to the said Meeting to countenance the reading of their Paper of false
Judgment against G. K. and his Friends, having put it into the Hands of W.
Preston to read, who offering to read it, the far greatest part of the Meeting
forbad the reading of it, declaring, That nothing ought to be read in their
Meeting, without the general Consent of the Meeting; but this unruly and
disorderly man, (who has otherwise showed his Prejudice against G. K. and
particularly that when G. K. was declaring at another Meeting, W. P.
interrupted him and called him Liar, when yet it was proved that he was the
Liar himself at that very time) did presume to read the Paper against the mind
of most of the Friends present; and T. L. S. J. S. R. J. D. and A. M. were so
far from giving any check to this disorderly Proceeding, and Imposition upon
the true Liberty and Right of the Meeting, that they encouraged it, and one of
them, without the least occasion given, did threaten to bind an honest Friend
to the Peace, S. Jenings calling out for a Constable This J. S. and Arth. Cook
are not only Preachers but also Justices.
. Thus these, who by their Place should be good Examples of Justice and good
Order, are Transgressors of it.

6thly, For their proffering to refer the Differences in matter of Doctrine
either to the Yearly Meeting here, or to the Yearly Meeting at London, by their
drawing up a Confession, and transmitting it to them, which they blame G. K.
for refusing; G. K. says, that he told them he had good cause to refuse
referring it to the Yearly Meeting here, there being a Faction that prevailed
in the last Yearly Meeting, to hinder Justice to be done to the Truth, but he
did not refuse to refer the Difference to Friends in England, as having any
fear that they would condemn his Doctrine, but if he had promised any such
Referrence or Submission as was required, it would have been called a Breach of
his Promise, if he had preached any of these Doctrines disputed betwixt them
and him, and if God had moved him to preach them, he should either have
disobeyed that Motion, or seemed to break his Promise; and therefore he refused
to come under any such tie, especially seeing it could not be expected that an
Answer could come from England in less than a years space: And by a mavelous
Providence of God, within a few days after this debate, Friends Letters came to
us, confirming G. K's Doctrine in every particular than in Difference betwixt
him and them, and since that they cry our, Who denies these things? when it ^s
well known, and can well be proved, many did deny them. And whereas they
further say, That they would have given a Confession out of a Book of G. K 's
concerning the main matter in Controversy, is but a deceitful Cover, like to
others; that Book gives them no strength in the matter of Controversy; but if
they think it does, they should have mentioned it; for nothing is more
deceitful than bare Generals; However, let it be well noticed, they grant there
is a main matter of Controversy in Doctrine betwixt us; but they should have
told what that main Matter of Controversy is, to wit, Faith in Christ without
us, as he died and rose again, being necessary to our Salvation, according to
Romans 10. 9, 10. but this they dare not openly do, fearing the People, as the
Pharisees feared the Jews of old, in the case of John.

7thly, Whereas they say, This Meeting having tenderly and orderly dealt with
him for his abusive Language, and disorderly Behavior, etc. There cannot be a
thing more falsely, hypocritically and impudently alleged; for they did not so
much as call him before them at that time, so far as he can understand, although
one of them lately told G. K. that they sent W. Byles for him, but nothing of
this was intimated to any of his Family, and he being absent from the Town, and
knowing nothing of their further intention against him, did not purposely
absent himself, it was unchristian, and short of Heathen Justice, to condemn
him and his Friends without hearing them, they never yet having had any fair
hearing to clear themselves; for even Nicodemus could say, John 7. 51. Does our
Law judge any man before it hear him? And did not our Friends at London blame
the Baptists for clearing Tho. Hicks, and condemning W. P. and others, without
a fair hearing of them; nor was that enough that they sent for them, for they
being then absent, was a sufficient excuse, and so it was to G. K. if they had
sent for him; nor was he ever brought upon Trial, in order to any Conviction,
before these of the Ministry, but that mock-Tryal that they had at Burlington
last, where A. Cook accused him of being Guilty in two particulars, viz. That
four or five Years ago he heard him blame Friends of the Ministry at the yearly
Meeting at the Center, for misquoting the Scripture. To which G. K. answered,
he did not blame them, so far as he can remember, but caution them, not to
misquote the Scripture, as many can witness, which was seasonable and
necessary, seeing too frequently Scriptures are both misquoted and
misinterpreted, as particularly not long ago in a public Meeting, A. Cook did
expound these words, Isa. 53. 5. By his stripes we are healed, not of Christ's
stripes that he suffered without us, but of the stripes that he gives us in
our Hearts; and when T. Fitzwater prayed in a pub. Meeting, Lord Jesus, who art
still crucified without the gates of Jerusalem; and at another Meeting, told,
That men crucified Christ without the gate, when their minds went from the
Light in them; and according to this perverse Exposition, when the Scripture
says, Let us go forth therefore unto him without the Camp, Heb. 13. 13. the
sense would be, Let us go forth from the Light in us; which to be sure is very
false and absurd Doctrine. And further, G. K. did expostulate with them against
A. C. that he should so many years conceal this, and now bring it forth, was
contrary to Gospel Order. The next thing whereof A. C. accused G. K. was, That
he heard him revile his Brethren of Pensilvania, to Friends of Rhode Island,
calling some of them Heathens, etc. To which G. K. answered, that he denied
that he reviled any of them, but if he had, A. C. had no witness to prove it,
and the Scripture says, Receive not an Accusation against an Elder, but before
two or three Witnesses: A. C. said, Friends, ye know the Scripture says, the
ear tries words, as the mouth tastes meat; if I speak from a true Spirit, ye
have a discerning, and then what need of Witnesses? To which G. K. replied,
This is a great Abuse, for at this rate one might accuse A. C. of Adultery; and
if he can get but some men pretending to a spirit of Discerning, say, that he
speaks true, though the thing be false, he shall be condemned: This is an
Invention that A. C. has hit upon, which the Priests that accused Christ had
not found out, or had they found it out, it would not have done, for the Law
required Witnesses, and so does the Gospel; but the prevailing Party in the
Meeting was so far from giving check to this most unjust and unchristian way of
accusing G. K. without Witnesses, that they suffered S. J. to assault him with
a new Charge, which he could not prove. And therefore their usage and dealing
with G. K. at this said Meeting was most unfair and unjust, in that G. K. was
the first Complainer, and they had delayed doing Justice to Truth, in bringing
W. Stockdale to Condemnation for his Blasphemy, for about ten Months, and now
they permitted any Accusation to be made against him, without Witnesses, which
gave him just cause to tell them he declined their Judgment, because they had
manifested themselves to be his opposite Party, and prejudiced against him. And
yet after all this, for them to abuse Friends, by writing to them such a gross
falsehood that they had tenderly and orderly dealt with G. K. is abominable
Hypocrisy.

8thly, Nor are they more fair and just in accusing G. K. for traducing and
villifying the two Old Engl. Friends, T. W. and J. D. But they cannot prove,
that G. K. either said or did any thing but what was just and christian
concerning them; and it is too manifest that they were abused, deceived and
biased by them of the other Party, with Flattery and false Insinuations they
gave against us, letting us have scarce any of their Company; and they being
thus deceived concerning us, used many indirect Reflections, mentioning Haman,
Baal, Saul and Aaron, which the Hearers generally understood, they did intend
G. K. and when he asked them, If they did mean him, and in pronouncing Woes,
etc. they were not positive to clear him, yet G. K. was exceeding sparing
toward them, until after they had openly blamed him and his Friends, for the
Separation, and prophesied against us, which caused G. K. to tell them they
were deceived concerning us, and for their better understanding, desired them
appoint a meeting for that end, which they not embracing, and J. D. comparing
our Differences here, which are as great as ever any was among any professing
Christianity, to Childrens falling out about trifles, caused G. K. and some
others, to go away to their own Meeting, but G. K. put not on his hat till he
was out of the Gallery, and out of the hearing of J. D.

9thly, Whereas they say, they would have G. K. cease to offer his Gift among
them. What great Nonsense, Confusion, and Contradiction is this in them, to
suppose that G. K. has a Gift to offer, after they have rendered him as bad as
the worst of men possibly can almost be, as fallen on the sorring Mountains,
slain in his high Places, gone into a spirit of enmity, wrath, self-exaltation,
etc. and as a Person without the Fear of God before his eyes, in his Anger and
Envy, being Cruel against them, with much more. Surely if all this be true, G.
K. cannot be said to have the least grain of true Piety; for he who hates his
Brother is a Murderer, and no Murderer has eternal Life abiding in him; and
according to Friends Doctrine and Principle, No Impious or Wicked man has any
ministerial gift to offer, as this Paper supposes or allows him to have:
This Confusion and Self-contradiction of their Paper, shows (with many other
things in it) what a false Spirit it has come from: And many hundreds have a
true judgment and sense of G. K. that he continues in a living sense to God,
and has a living Ministry, which has a living Seal from the Spirit of God in
the Hearts of hundreds, and that he is no such man as they in their Prejudice
and Ignorance describe him to be. And for their blaming us for the Separation,
in that they have given false Judgment against us, for it lies at their Door,
as appears by our Book, Some Causes of the Separation, etc. which they have
not taken notice of, nor can they contradict; for all the matter therein is
truth, only there was a mistake of one man's name, viz. Simercy Adams, who was
not at the Meeting, but we could have set down many others to make them up
sixty, at least, and the matter in that Book lies at their door to answer, if
they be able.

10thly, Whereas they say, G. K. at Meetings since the Separation, like an open
Adversary, has reviled several Friends, by exposing their Religious
Reputations in mixed Auditories of some hundreds, etc. This is altogether false,
for it is no reviling to speak the Truth; and they cannot prove that G. K. has
spoke any thing of them but what is true, although they have reported, both
publicly and privately, many false things, and among the rest, their late
defamatory Paper of Condemnation; and it is but just and reasonable he should
defend himself, and his Testimony.

And now, in the Conclusion, we do first solemnly Appeal to God, the Righteous
Judge of all men, from the false judgment of these prejudiced men against us,
and next to all faithful Friends and Brethren here in America, and in Old
England, Scotland, and Ireland, or elsewhere, to judge betwixt us and them, as
the unerring and infallible Spirit shall be found and known to give then a true
judgment and discerning; and with great Assurance, Peace, and Joy in the Lord,
to him we commit our Righteous Cause.

G. K. T. B.

Some brief Observations on their seeming Condemnation of Will. Stockdale,
which is rather, as to the main, a clearing of him, and condemning him only as
to some Circumstance, and more severely and unchristianly, and most falsely
condemning G. K.
First, WHereas they say, They being prevented in their Meetings of late to
proceed orderly in business, by reason of a turbulent and unsubdued Spirit,
(meaning without all doubt in G. K.) but having respite at this time, have
considered, etc. This is great Hypocrisy and Deceit in them; why were they
prevented in their Meetings of late? did G. K. by his Spirit lay violent hands
either on their Tongues or Pens, that they might not have given true judgment
against W. S. in a case so plain, that a company of Children well instructed in
the first Principles of Christianity (the eldest of them not exceeding 15
years) could have given a just decision in less than one quarter of an hour?
But hew could G. K's. Spirit hinder them at the Yearly Meeting, when he went
out at their desire, though there was no cause for his so doing, more than for
any of them; for it was not G. K. but Christ Jesus that was mainly concerned in
this Affair, for whom, and for his Glory, (if they had any Zeal for him) they
ought to have been as much concerned as G. K. but it is fulfilled in them what
is writ in Scripture of some, that loved the praise of Men more than the praise
of God. But why did they take no time since the Yearly Meeting? Why did they
not take a quiet time to do it in G. K's. absence, when he was almost six Months
absent in N. England, betwixt his first Complaint, and that Meeting at
Burlington last first Month, having gone twice into N. England, and was each
time absent about three Months? And why did they nothing at the Meeting at
Burlington against W. S. but heard false Accusations, without all Proof,
against G. K.? Why are they so partial and hypocritical to pretend they had not
time till now the 41. 4. mo. 92. for about 15 Months past? Why did they not
call and appoint an extraordinary Meeting of Friends, as they have formerly
done upon a far less occasion, as when they presently called a Meeting at the
House of Sam. Carpenter, to pass Judgment against the Publishing of the
Rhode-Island-Sheet, called The Christian Faith, and against William Bradford
for Printing it, tho he was warranted to print it by the desire of the mo.
Meeting of Rhode Island, which has as great Authority to Print without them,
as they here have to Print without those, unless they here will say, that
Philadelphia is the Church of Rome, in America, as Sam. Jenings called it the
Metropolitan, little considering that the Apostasy came in by such means.

Secondly, Whereas they say, The Friends then present concluded of a Judgment
in this matter, but were prevented of publishing the same by reason of G. K 's.
unruly Behavior, and extreme Passion, which corruptly broke up the said
Meeting. But this is another place of their Hypocrisy, they should have said,
if they would have said truly, what Judgment was given, ye were prevented of
publishing of it by the unruly Behavior, and proud and insolent Carriage, as
well as unjust proceedings of Sam. Jenings and Arthur Cook, who would not
suffer the Judgment given to be published, after G. K. was called into the
Meeting, until G. K. should be tried for reviling his Brethren, which G. K.
fervently and earnestly contradicted, crying out against their Injustice, and
Arbitrary Method, contrary to the way of worldly Courts, in the like case,
though some time after S. J. was pleased to say, That Courts allowed of
Discount; So that according to S. J. the Blasphemy of W. S. shall be discounted
for, and set off, against G. K's. reviling his Brethren, if he had been guilty
thereof, which they can never prove. And whether A. Cook was not guilty of
extreme Passion, who did in a Quarterly Meeting, whereof many can bear witness,
pronounce a Curse against G. K. saying, George, thou have made this Breach, and
Woe be to thee from the Lord, and yet none of that Party reproved him for so
doing?

Thirdly, Whereas they give their Judgment, That W. S. is reproveable, and
blame worthy, for uttering the said words, viz. (That G. K's. preaching Christ
within and Christ without, was preaching two Christ's) they being an Offense to
many sound and tender Friends, and that he condemn the same. It does plainly
appear, that their Judgment is but a bare shadow, or formality of Judgment,
rather than any substantial, effectual, weighty and sollid Judgment against
him, which if it had been, they would have aggravated it with other words and
expressions, and principally blamed him for his words of Unbelief and Blasphemy
against the Son of Man, greatly offensive to God, but instead of that, they
say, They being offensive to many sound and tender Friends: Why are they so
severe to G. K. against whom they cannot justly charge any thing, either in
Doctrine or Life, saying of him, He being a Man without the Fear of God before
his Eyes, etc. Is it a greater Offense to them, that they are dishonored, or
that the worthy Name of Christ is dishonored by an open denial of him, as W.
Stockdale did, by saying, To preach Faith in Christ within, and Faith in Christ
without, is to preach Two Christ's; for at this rate, Christ without is to him
but a false Christ, and this to them is so small a fault, that to deny Christ
without us, they will not say in their Judgment, it is an offense to God, but
they say, It is an Offense to many sound and tender Friends; Oh! great
Hypocrisy, and want of Zeal to the Glory of God and Christ, though they are
full of Zeal to their own Honor, that will stink, and does already stink for
this their great Partiality and Injustice, as well as their great Ignorance,
Error and Unbelief?

Fourthly, But why do not the words of their Judgment run thus, That W. S. did
say, to preach Faith in Christ without, and in Christ within was to preach two
Christ's, etc. but that they are guilty themselves of not having this Faith; for
not long ago, A. Cook questioned G. K. at a Men's Meeting, which many can
witness, Where we did read in Scripture, that we are to believe in Christ
within us, and in Christ without us? And though of late, some of them say, they
have a reverend esteem of Christ without, of his Death, Sufferings,
Resurrection and Ascension, yet none of them preach it as a necessary matter of
Salvation, to believe it, that ever we heard of, except John Delavall who has
of late changed his Faith, and got a far worse. And it cannot be supposed, that
they hold Faith in Christ without them to be necessary to their Salvation,
seeing many of them that belong to the Monthly Meeting, have given their
Judgment, That the Light is sufficient to Salvation without something else,
which is a plain excluding the Man Christ Jesus from having any part in our
Salvation, and leaving him only the bare Name or Title of a Savior; and if so,
then they had as good have wholly cleared W. S.

Fifthly, It is great Confusion and Contradiction in these of that side, to
condemn W. Stockdale, if they were in good earnest, and to clear Tho.
Fitzwater; for if the Man Christ Jesus be our real Savior, and that his Death,
Resurrection, Ascension and Mediation for us without us in Heaven, has any
part in our Salvation, then the Light does not save us without somewhat else;
and therefore T. F. is guilty of Condemnation: But if T. F. be cleared, then
the Man Christ without us is no real Savior at all, and ought not to be
preached, nor Faith in him, but only the Light within, and W. S. at this rate
is in the right of it, and they have done ill to pass Judgment against him. I
know no way to reconcile this, but to say their Judgment against W. S. is a
Mock Judgment or show, without any Reality.

Sixthly, They unjustly blame G. K. for not giving W. S. Gospel Order, and take
no notice how W. S. gave him no Order at all, either of Law or Gospel, accusing
him falsely behind his back, without speaking to himself; whereas G. K. gave him
good Gospel Order, but that their Prejudice blinds them that they see it not.
W. Stockdale gave not Offense to G. K. alone by himself, but to him in the
presence of two others, that were with him; and for what he had by hearsay
from another, was no just grounds of Offense to him, until it was confirmed by
W. S. himself, as it then was; and therefore not being to him alone, it was no
Transgression of Gospel Order, that he did not speak to him alone afterward.
But why should Sam. Jenings blame G. K. for not giving Gospel Order to W.
Stockdale, when he knows in his Conscience, he never spoke to G. K. in
private, by way of Admonition, before he again and again accused him to Friends
of the Ministry for Reviling his Brethren, which is a false Accusation.

Seventhly, That they blame him for calling W. Stockdale an Ignorant Heathen,
he being, as they say, Elder in the Truth, and in Years. Then according to
them, a man may be in the Truth, and a good Christian, and say, Christ without
is not the True Christ, -- but why is Heathen a bad Name? for if every honest
Heathen be a true Christian, as he is, according to that Principle held by
their Monthly Meeting, That the Light is sufficient without the Man Christ; and
without the Faith of his Death, Resurrection, Ascension and Mediation, which is
that something else than an honest Heathen is a true Christian; and therefore
by their own Principle, to be called a Heathen is no Reviling, and to be called
Ignorant, is no Reviling, when a Man is so; also, T. Lloyd has argued much,
both at the Yearly Meeting, and at the Mo. Meeting adjourned to the
School-House, Than an honest Heathen was a Christian. And seeing harder Names
have been given by some of best Note among Friends, to them that denied Women's
Meetings, etc. and other lesser things belonging to the Skirts of Religion,
having called them Incarnate Devils, Wretched Apostates, Wolves, Dogs, see
George Whited.
Judgment fixed, Pref. let all sincere Christians judge, whether they who deny
the Lord, that bought them, deserve not much more sharp Reproof? and yet no
such Hard Names did G. K. give them.

Given forth in Behalf of Themselves, and their Friends concerned with them in
this Testimony; and by Order of our Meeting, By George Keith, Thomas Budd

THE END.
ERRATA.
PAge 10. line 9. for month, read mouth. l. 34. put out by. p. 11. l. 8. f. as,
r. is. p. 13. l. 10. f. for, r. from. p. 14. l. 25. f. no, r. on. p. 21. l. 28.
f. sorring, r. soaring. p. 23. l. 9. f. quiec, r. quiet. l. 16. f. 41. r. 4. l.
29. f. corruptly, r. abruptly. l. 30. f. place, 1. piece. p. 26. in the Margent
f. Whited, r. Whitehead.


