A SEASONABLE Information and Caveat Against a Scandalous Book of Thomas
Elwood, CALLED, An Epistle to Friends, etc. By GEORGE KEITH.

Isaiah 5. 4. -- Wherefore when I looked that it should bring forth grapes,
brought it forth wild grapes? Verse 7. -- He looked for judgment, but behold
oppression: for righteousness, but behold, a cry. Jerem. 5. 3. O Lord, are not
thine Eyes upon the truth? Jerem. 20. 9. But his word was in mine heart as a
burning fire shut up in my bones, and I was weary with forbearing, and I could
not stay.

Verse 10 For I heard the defaming of many, fear on every side. Report, say
they, and we will report it: all my familiars watched for my halting, saying,
Peradventure he will be enticed: and we shall prevail against him, and we shall
take our revenge on him.

Verse 11. But the Lord is with me, as a mighty terrible one; therefore my
persecutors shall stumble, and they shall not prevail: they shall be greatly
ashamed, etc.

London: Printed for R. Levis, 1694.

ADVERTISEMENT.
WHen this my Answer to Th. Elwood, was well nigh, wholly Printed, there came
out a scandalous Book of Samuel Jennings against me, stuffed with many gross
Falsehoods, Perversions, false Accusations, and Forgeries, whereby they both
discover themselves to be Brethren in Iniquity, and acted by the same Spirit of
Falsehood; his Book having this Title, The Case of the State, etc. to which I
intend, God willing, to Print an Answer, with the first Convenience, to a
further discovery of the Spirit of Falsehood and Persecution, that does set him
on work.

A Loving Epistle TO ALL The Moderate, Judicious and Impartial, among the
People called Quakers in London, England, and elsewhere.
Dear Friends and Brethren,
NOtwithstanding that I find some (of whom with Respect both to my former
labor of Love and Service in the Truth, toward them, and to my present
service in the Truth, in my bearing my sincere zealous Testimony to the true
Doctrine and Faith of Christ, and against the gross ignorance, and vile Errors
of some that go under the same Profession, I might have expected better things)
so deeply prejudiced against me, that they have neither Ears to hear, nor Eyes
to see what I have to offer in the just Defense and Vindication of my innocence
and Christian Testimony; yet I find others more Christianly minded and
disposed, who have a better sense of me, and are in Love and Charity with me,
and I with them; and we are in true Unity both of Spirit, Doctrine and Faith;
and as I have experience of a considerable Number thus Christianly disposed to
me, some belonging to the City of London, and some to the Country, so I cannot
but in Charity hope there are many more than I have experience of by verbal
Communication, that are Christianly minded and disposed, in relation to the
late Religious Differences that have passed betwixt some and me in America, and
that have begun betwixt some and me here in England, and in the City of London,
who retain a free and unbyassed Judgment in themselves, and are resolved to see
with their Own Eyes, and hear with their Own Ears, and to judge with that
enlightened Understanding and Judgment that God gives them: And to such I
recommend my Answer to Thomas Elwood, called, A Seasonable Information, etc.
earnestly entreating them to excuse this my Just and Necessary Defense, first
of the Truth, and next of my innocence, and Christian Reputation and Testimony,
which this prejudiced person T. E. does labor to take from me, by a sordid way
of Sophistical Wrangling, Perversion, Forgery, and false Accusations, which he
has heaped up against me, so that one would almost wonder that so many false
Accusations, Perversions and Forgeries, as amount to the Number 50 and upwards,
should be contained in so little bounds as less than 5 sheets of Print; 50 of
which I have particularly noted and answered; and I earnestly request all the
moderate, as abovementioned, not to be offended with me, nor to take it as any
evidence of my want of true love to Truth, or faithful Friends, but on the
contrary, as an Evidence of my true love both to Truth and to faithful Friends,
that I am thus constrained to appear in the Necessary Defense of Truth, and my
innocence and Christian Testimony, which this prejudiced Adversary seeks to
destroy: but I hope God will blast his evil endeavors, and disappoint him and
all that are joined with him in this evil Work. But I wish no evil to him or
them, my desire being (if it be the Will of God) that they may repent of it,
and all other their evil ways, and be ashamed, that so they may obtain mercy
and forgiveness of God. And I appeal to all such moderate, judicious and
impartial persons, called Quakers, Whether T. E. has not showed himself as a
man hurried and carried away as with a Tempest and impetuous Current of
Prejudice against me, not only to heap so many Perversions,
Mis-representations, Forgeries and false Accusations against me. But when he
cannot heap up so many as he would, he goes about, by an Art of Wrangling and
Sophistry of Words, to prove me guilty, when his Evidence in matter of Fact
does utterly fail him, even as a man would go before an Assize to prove one
guilty of Theft or Felony, by false Syllogisms, when his Evidence is short in
matter of fact, thus arguing against an innocent person, Some man is a Thief,
but A. B. is some man, therefore A. B is a Thief. I appeal to all that know the
Truth, whether this sort of sophistical arguing does agree to that simplicity
of Truth and Plainness, both of Doctrine and Practice, that we generally have
professed. Have we warned Friends so much to beware lest any spoil them through
Philosophy and vain Deceit, and impose upon them by the wisdom of words; and
has it come to this issue at last, That a Book shall come out authorized or
allowed either by the Second Days Meeting at London, or at least by a leading
or prevailing party of them; and without all Gospel Order or Church Discipline
used toward me, or the least intimation to me, from any Meeting, that I am
disowned as a Member of their Society, and also contrary to the mind and
declared sense of some of their chief Members, and diverse of the Ministry in
and about London, not owning it. Yea, George Whitehead has declared himself to
me, passive, neither approving nor disapproving, not knowing how things may be
duly or unduly charged, in matters of Fact. And for Doctrine, G. W. seems to
agree with me in diverse of his late Testimonies, tho publicly contradicted by
some, the which book is stuffed and filled with a sort of so, histical arguing
and wrangling, and also with many Perversions, diverse Forgeries in matter of
fact, and many false accusations, as my Answer, when published, shall, I hope,
sufficiently discover to such as are willing to read, consider and judge
impartially, and have not plucked out their Eyes, and given them away to such as
would deceive them, as some have done. And must all this be fathered upon the
Spirit of God? it being their constant pretension to have the Spirit of God
directing and counselling them in all their Chamber-Affairs and Meetings. May I
not well cry out, as one did in another case, O Times! O Manners! Or rahter
with the Prophet, Jer. 2. 12. Be astonished, O ye Heavens, at this, and be
horribly afraid; be ye very desolate, says the Lord. May not that complaint
and lamentation be justly taken up against the Publishers and Promoters of this
scandalous book of T. E. The wisdom of the Wise is perished, etc. But that
which most of all seems strange to me, and I believe will to many, when duly
considered, that T. E. says, by way of Reply to my Defense, the printed paper
called, The Causeless Ground, etc. which was, That notwithstanding the
Objections, and severe Accusations that some have made against my late Books,
and a strict Examination of them, by some that have so complained, there is not
any Line, or Sentence, in any of them, that they have made to appear to contain
any untruth or falsehood in their, either in matters of Doctrine or Faith. See
his book, p. 49. This (says he) has nothing of Note in it. Yea, he says
farther supposing it were true, in fact, That no untruth or falsehood had been
discovered in my books, ^et it has Nothing of Note in it, viz to excuse me; he
saying, it was not the proper business of the Yearly Meeting (which he
alleges I strike at here, as elsewhere) to judge of the matters of fact
contained in my books, which were alleged to have been done in America, by
Persons not here to answer or give Account of them. Is it not strange to blame
a man for some things in his Books that are neither matter of Doctrine nor
matter of Fact; for what else can be contained in any books, I know not. And
it is strange, that the Yearly Meeting should take up six Days, and Two Meetings
each Day, to hear and examine matter of Fact altogether (for in nothing they
meddled with my Doctrine), and yet be so judged here by T. E. That it was not
their proper business to judge of the matters of fact: for by his Judgment
against the Yearly Meeting, they both meddled and judged in that which was not
their proper business. But the Paper laid to be given out by the Yearly
Meeting, called, A true account of the proceedings, etc. says expressly, And
this Meeting agreed, that after all the other public affairs should be over,
as many Members of the yearly Meeting as could attend the Service, together
with all public faithful Friends, that are free should remain and continue the
yearly Meeting, to hear, judge and determine, and endeavor to quiet all the
differences betwixt G. K. and others concerned therein. Where it is plain, that
he calls, the Yearly Meeting did judge it their proper business to judge of
matters of Fact; and therefore T. E. has given a contrary Judgment against
them, tho deceitfully he seems a great Patron in the case, for which it may
be supposed they will not give him thanks, for this his so boldly contradicting
them. Now what the infallible consequences of this his so large and liberal
concession, are, I leave to impartial and understanding persons to judge.
Nothing either in matter of Doctrine or Fact, being supposed (by his liberal
allowance, as the thing is true in it self) to be discovered in my books, of
untruth or falsehood; it is contained in my books, in matter of Fact, 1. That
some Preachers among the people called Quakers, in America, were charged by me
to be guilty of vile Errors and Heresies, repugnant to the Christian Faith. 2.
That some others of them did cloak and excuse them; and that no such damnable
Heresies, and Doctrines of Devils, were tolerate in any Protestant Society, as
these did among them in Pensilvania, etc. 3. That complaint being made to the
Yearly Meeting at Philadelphia, no due Censure was past upon them that were
guilty, but they were excused, and defended by them. 4. That they of the other
side began the Separation, and are guilty of it, and not we. 5. That our
Apology is Just, in our publishing these printed books, and God was with us,
and owned us in our so doing. Now all this was matter of Fact that I have so
affirmed in my printed books; and T. Elwood has been so liberal to me, to
grant, by way of supposition, all this to be true, and my books to contain
nothing (as yet discovered) of untruth or falsehood; yet for all this, he thinks
I am worthily blamed and judged, by them he calls the Yearly Meeting; and yet
again he affirms, it was not the proper business of the Yearly Meeting to
judge of the matter of fact.

If all this be true in matter of fact, as he allows it to be, by
supposition, then I and my friends joined with me, should not be blamed for
charging some in Pensilvania with being guilty of gross and vile errors, such
as no Protestant Society would tolerate, nor yet the Church of Rome. Therefore
whoever has blamed us for our so doing, are not to be noticed, the Charges
being supposed by him to be true. 2. Nor should he and others blame us for the
printing; and by his liberal Concession, what he calls the Judgment of the
Yearly Meeting at London, 3d m. last, 1694. is void, because he grants us by
his Concession, this matter of fact, That our Apology is Just, and we are
approved of God in our public Testimony, in way of printing; and therefore by
his liberal Concession, the Yearly Meeting is greatly to be blamed for finding
fault with us for doing that which we had a just Apology for. And 3. He
granting by his liberal Concession, That what we have said in defense of our
not being guilty of the separation, in matter of fact, is all true, and has
nothing of untruth or falsehood in it; that both he and all others, and what he
calls the Judgment of the yearly meeting, have unjustly blamed us, by laying
the blame of the Separation at my (or our) door, seeing he is so liberal to us,
by way of supposition, That they of the other side, and not we, are guilty of
it. And surely it is a most astonishing thing for him, to allow by way of
supposition, That all is true that we have printed in our printed books,
relating to the particulars abovementioned, and yet so to blame us, as he does:
for if all be true in matter of fact, that we have printed in our books, it is
true, that we are neither guilty of printing, nor of the separation, nor of
falsely accusing any: and therefore all such who blame us, as guilty of these
things, are reprovable in a high degree. But if he will restrict his words of
so liberal concession (that are delivered by him without the least restriction,
and may be justly taken universally, they being an universal assent by way of
supposition to my universal proposition, respecting matter of fact on both
sides, to matter of fact only with respect to the things or words done or said
by them of the other side, as reported by me in my printed books, yet his
concession, even in this restricted and narrowed sense, will sufficintly excuse
us in the Judgment of all sincere Christians; for by his concession in this
narrow sense of matter of fact, as only respecting what is said or reported in
the books to be said or done by them of the other side. If it be granted by his
supposition, that they are charged to be guilty of saying such words as contain
in them more vile and gross Heresies and Errors, as no Christian Society would
tolerate, and that complaint being made to the Yearly Meeting, and some other
Meetings, they would not suffer due censure to pass upon them, and that they
changed the Meeting from the Bank to the Center, on purpose to force me to meet
with them against my conscience, as Th. Wilson did witness, That I said, and so
began the separation; Then wherein can we be justly blamed? For the 3 things
wherein we have been blamed, are taken off by T. E. his concession, in the
Judgment of all sincere Christians, 1. That we have falsely charged them with
vile and gross Errors. Now T. E. allows, by way of supposition, that all
these charges are true, and not false; as W. St. his saying, To preach faith in
Christ within us, and in Christ without us, is to preach 2 Christ's. Th.
Fitzwater's saying in Prayer, O God that died in us, and Robert Yeoung his
saying, He did not find Christ without in all the Scripture, and that Christ
when he ascended, was separated from his Body, and Th. Lloid's saying, Christ
within did all; which was opposed by J. W. saying, that he did not believe, for
Christ without did somethings when he died for us; and Th. Fitzwater his
saying, he owned no Man Christ Jesus in Heaven, without him, but the grace of
God within him; and his saying, he had not learned that Lesson, whether it was
the Godhead, or somewhat else that Christ took of the Virgin, that was nailed
to the Cross; and some of them saying, God was not present in all his
Creatures, as Herbs, Grass: and the Monthly Meeting at Philadelphia excluding
the Man Christ Jesus, our blessed Mediator and Savior, from having any part or
concern in our salvation, and by condemning me for saying, the Light within is
not sufficient to salvation, without something else, etc.

These are but a part of the vile and gross Errors charged on them in matter of
fact, which being supposed to be true, that they are truly charged, by T. E.
his concession, and they of the other side refusing, on due complaint, to pass
any due censure on the Persons that were guilty. Who that has a Christian
heart and spirit within them, but must needs judge and say, that to deny such
to be our Christian Friends and Brethren, is no false charge nor reviling.
2dly. To be separate from such, after due Gospel Order given them, (though, as
is said, we began not the separation) was not blameworthy in us, but our
Christian duty; for I judge no other Christian Profession in Christendom, would
own such to be their Christian Brethren. And 3dly, That we could do no less in
conscience, but bear our Testimony against them, after the most public manner,
and that was by Printing, seeing the People called Quakers have printed against
them that have been guilty of far less gross and vile Errors. And to say, that
such gross Errors, and the Persons guilty of them, should have been cloaked and
covered by us, after due pains was taken to reclaim them, and rejected by them,
is a great reflection on the Body of the People called Quakers: if so the Body
of them did so cloak them, and would more tend to the Dishonor of Truth, and
Reproach of our Profession in general, than any thing I know ever happened
among us. But I cannot think the Body, or Generality of Friends, nay, nor the
Plurality, will take this imputation upon them, though T. E. would fix it on
them; for he affirms, I am Justly blamed by the Judgment of that he calls
the Yearly Meeting at London, which he takes to be the Representative of the
Body, for my public Testimony against these vile Errors, supposed by him to be
truly and justly charged in matter of fact: and therefore by his sense, the
Yearly Meeting and Body of Friends, represented by them, Judge it a Virtue or
Duty to cover and cloak them, which is not only against the whole current of
the Holy Scripture, and the Example of the Primitive Christians, and the
general Practice of all Christian Societies at this day, that publicly condemn
any that should be found guilty of these or the like Errors; but is against the
sense of some Heathen Writers; one of them having said, and who is worthily
commended for so saying. Alitur vitium, vivitque tegendo:i. e. Vice is
nourished, and gets Life by covering it.

Indeed this has been the thing that many of all Professions have charged upon
the People called Quakers, That they cover and cloak vile Errors and Heresies,
as well as wicked practices among them. I am heartily sorry that T. E. has
given so great Occasion, by this his scandalous book, to confirm them in their
Opinion concerning them. But I bear my Testimony against it, and so I hope will
thousands more, that the Body of Friends is not guilty of the charge.

One thing more I would have you notice, That notwithstanding T. E. his loud
clamor against me, in his scandalous book, for my printing my late books, in
which is discovered (by his supposition) nothing of untruth or falsehood in
matter of fact (and he charge nothing against me in matter of Doctrine)
wherein I blame some Preachers in America, for their vile Errors, repugnant to
the true Christian Faith, as abovementioned, and by his liberal concession,
supposing it to be all true that I have charged them with, by another liberal
concession and assertion of his, near the end of his Book, p. 72. I am
excusable, and ought not to be blamed, his words being these, And this know for
certain, Friends, that the way to recover the deceived, is to discover, lay
open, and witness against the deceivers. And surely, by his liberal concession,
supposing it to be true in matter of fact, that I have charged upon some
Preachers in America, as abovementioned, they are deceivers: for they who
treach false Doctrine and vile Errors, such as no Profession in Christendom
would tolerate, are deceivers, and they have deceived some in these parts:
Therefore out of his own mouth he has cleared me, to discover, lay open, and
witness against them. It Is like the man was so intent in his thoughts, that he
thought this saying would be a good Apology for his printing against me, taking
it for granted, that he has proved me to be a deceiver. But whether he has
not failed in his proof, I leave to all truly judicious and impartial to judge,
after they have duly perused and weighed my Answer, which I hope e're long to
make public. He did not well consider, that what did seem to make for him
against me, would really make for me against him, and all Others that approve
his scandalous book, and blame me for that which this his assertion clears me
of, thus showing himself to be no wise, nor well experienced Soldier, to put
his own best Weapon into the hand of him he supposes to be his Adversary.

The Answer to T. Elwood, mentioned in this Epistle, called, A seasonable
information, etc. I intend, God willing, to make public with the first
convenience, if nothing be done forthwith by that party that has approved and
promoted his book, to call it in, and disown it.

I remain in true Love, Your Friend in the Truth, George Keith.
POSTSCRIPT, to Tho. Elwood.
ANd because, as the Scripture says, of making many books there is no end, I
do here, in a Christian humble spirit, not like Goliath, but like little David,
confiding Only and Alone in the Lord, and in his powerful Name assisting me,
make this proffer to Th. Elwood, or any others that approve and promote his
book, at any place and time that he or they will appoint at London, providing
it be some Meeting Place of Friends that is large, and all sober and moderate
persons, whether Friends or friendly people, have freedom to be present, to
meet him and them, and to prove him guilty of gross Forgery in matters of fact,
Perversion, Misrepresentation, and false Accusation in many Particulars: and
also that he is guilty of false Doctrine, and Contradiction, not only to the
holy Scriptures, but to some of his own former books. And it is as just and
reasonable in me to demand a public free Meeting with him and them that
approve and promote T. E. his book, in order to prove him guilty of gross
Forgery, etc. as it was in G. W. and W. P. and others concerned (wherein I was
one) to demand a public and free Meeting with the Baptists, in order to prove
Th. Hicks guilty of the like Crimes, and the Baptists yiedling to such a
Meeting at Friends demand, how can I be blamed in demanding the like Justice,
or they excused if they deny it?

G. K.



A Seasonable Information and Caveat Against a Scandalous Book of Thomas
Elwood, CALLED, An Epistle to Friends, etc.
Whereas Th. Elwood has Printed a Scandalous Book against me, called. An
Epistle to Friends, etc. in great disunity, and against the Mind of many
Friends; and contrary to the Gospel Order Professed by us, (although approved
and promoted by a Party equally prejudiced against me, for my faithful
Christian Testimony to the Truth of Christ.) Upon a diligent Review and
Examination of his scandalous Book, I find in it at least fifty several
Perversions, and Misrepresentations, and diverse of them downright Forgeries,
and Fictions in matter of Fact, and false Accusations; the which in Order
follow, with their several respective Answers.

I. HE falsely accuses me (in his Title Page) of a Spirit of Contention and
Division, that (as he says) has lately appeared in me, and some few others
that join with me; who have made a Breach and Separation from Friends in
America. For seeing by a Spirit of Contention he means it in the worst Sense,
as Contending against faithful Friends, or Separating therefrom; This is a
false Charge; we remain in Unity with faithful Friends in America, and
elsewere; and contend only against Error and wicked Practices; and are only
separate from Unbelievers, and such as the Scriptures command us to be
separated from, Romans 16. 17. A Place of Scripture cited in his Title Page,
which makes against him; for they in America whose unjust Cause he has taken
to defend, has caused Divisions and Offenses contrary to the Doctrine of
Christ, and therefore we ought to avoid them; and there is a godly Contention
we ought to be found in, so as to contend for the Faith once delivered to the
Saints, Jude 3. -- And we are commanded to be 2 Cor. 6. 14, 15, 16, 17.
separated from Unbelievers, such as these are from whom we were separated in
America, though they themselves began the Separation, and not we. And these he
calls some few, are about Sixteen Meetings.

II. page 9. He falsely accuses me, that I blame Friends, That they were gone
too much from the outward to the inward; this is a down right Forgery, I never
blamed any for going too much to the inward; for it has been my Persuasion,
and that from a true Experience, that the more any Man does come to the inward,
even to the Grace and Gift of God in his Heart, the more he has a due esteem
of Christ's Death and Sufferings, and precious Blood that was shed for the
Remission of Sin; and the more his Faith is increased in Christ, as he dyed for
us, and rose again, and is our Mediator in Heaven. But because I have blamed
some Persons for not rightly and fully Preaching Christ without, and Faith in
him, as well as in Christ within, therefore he has forged this Fiction against
me, That I blame Friends, that they were gone too much from the outward to the
inward; but from his manner of falsely charging me, it plainly appears, as well
as from the words of some others, that it was their Sense, to preach Christ
without, and Faith in him, it draws from the inward, and from the Gift of God
within; but this is both false and contrary to the Doctrine of Christ, and his
Apostles, recorded in the Scriptures.

III. page 15. He falsely and unjustly charge me with Robert Hannoy's Book, as
if it were mine, both for Matter and Style, and that I cast it upon him; For as
I have diverse times declared, as I had no hand in the Printing it, but was
against it; so diverse things in it, that seemed to some most offensive, I was
not concerned in; though, as I have also freely delared, and is well known to
many, diverse of the words contained in some of these Queries, I spoke them in
the yearly Meeting, and so far I was concerned, but not in Printing them.

IV. He not only falsely accuses me, but is guilty of an absolute Forgery and
Fiction in matter of Fact, That I refused to go out at the yearly Meeting in
Philadelphia, held in the 7th Month, 1691. and, that my refusal to go out, was
the occasion of their delay to give Judgment against W. Stockdale; for which,
as a proof, he cites my Book, called, Some Reasons and Causes, etc. page 14.
But let the Reader that loves to see with his own Eyes, read that Book, and he
will find no such thing either in that page, or any where else; for I went out
at the yearly Meeting when I was desired, as my Book expressly testifies, to
which he appealeth; See page 18, at line 22, where it is expressly said, that at
the yearly Meeting he did withdraw, viz. G. K. at the Meetings desire, and yet
they did nothing to bring W. S. to Conviction. But my Book, page 14, cited by
him, shows, that my refusal to go out, was at the quarterly Meeting that was
half a year thereafter, where I give my just reason why I refused to go out,
viz. because my Accusers refused to go out also. So that this is a gross
forgery in matter of Fact; and yet he makes it the Foundation of his
Superstructure, in excusing them, why they delayed to give Judgment, page 19.
So this is a double forgery, one built on another.

V. page 22. He falsely alleges, that the yearly Meeting at Philadelphia, was
not at a stand to determine whether the Doctrine was true or false; but, if
they were at a stand at all, it was (says he) to determine whether the Charge
exhibited against W. S. by G. K. was true or false: But the contrary of this I
have fully proved out of my Books to which he refers; for in the Judgment they
gave the 4th Month, 1692. which was both defective and out of Season, like
Mustard after Meat; they grant, that Proof was made by two Witnesses, that the
Charge exhibited was true; and if they had been at a stand on that Point, it is
not like that they would have given any Judgment against him at all; but such
as it was, they grant they did not publish it either then, or till nine Months
after; and though they most deceitfully pretend, for an Excuse, their being
prevented by reason of my unruly Behavior and extreme Passion, as they are
pleased to call it; yet this cover is too narrow; for what hindered them all
that nine Months? and why did they contradict the sound Judgment of a monthly
meeting at Philadelphia, passing due Censure upon W. S. six Months thereafter?
it is sufficiently apparent from this, it was no cordial, nor sincere Judgment;
nor, did they, all that time intervening, bring W. S. to any Conviction, but
mightily supported him as an innocent Person. But whereas T. F. alleges, page
20. a Determination then, it seems, was given by his own acknowledgment. But I
answer, seeing it was not sincere, but hypocritical, as appears by their
contradicting the Judgment of the Monthly Meeting that gave it sincerely and
duly; and also that it was not published, nor W. S. brought by them to any
Conviction, but supported by them, it might well be said to be as good as none
at all, they making it void by themselves; and when they published it, or
another like it, (after nine Months, as an Abortive out of due time) they did
not own the words spoke by W. S. to be any Offense against God, or Christ, but
to sound and tender Friends, as I have formerly showed in my Book called, The
Plea of the Innocent; and for which I justly call it, as every sincere
Christian will call it so, a bare Shadow or Formality.

VI page 23. He falsely and most ficticiously alleges, that Th. Fitswater
sufficiently proved his Charge against me, for which he refers to my own Books;
but this is a great forgery, for his Charge was, That I denied the sufficiency
of the Light, and this his four credible Witnesses did not prove against me,
but it was quite another thing that the Monthly Meeting of the other side, the
26th of the 3d Month, 1692. alleges; they proved against me, viz. That I did
not believe the Light was sufficient without something else. Now because T. E.
judges both these one and the same, he has plainly excluded the Man Christ
without us, from having any part or concern in our Salvation; for the Man
Christ Jesus without us, and his Death, Sufferings, Blood, etc. are something
else than the Light within; and, thus by the Judgment of G. Whithead against
Jeffrey Bullock, who fell into the same Antichristian Error, he is gone from
the Light into Imaginations, and contradicts his former Testimony, in his
Book called, The Foundation of Tithes shaken, page, 238. where he says, Nor do
the Quakers ascribe Salvation to the following the Light within, (he should
have added the word only) but they ascribe Salvation to Christ Jesus, to whom
the Light within does lead those that truly follow it; and page 240, he says,
If any one expects Remission of Sins by any other way, than the Death of
Christ, he renders the Death of Christ useless.

VII. page 25. He falsely alleges, That I account the beginning of the
Separation at Philadelphia, from somes going away at the Monthly Meeting, the
day before the adjourned Meeting; and upon this Foundation of forgery he builds
a false Superstructure; for though some going away from that monthly Meeting,
was a preparation to the Separation, yet I did not reckon that the beginning of
it, but their going away at the adjourned Meeting the next day following, where
three great Instances of their beginning the Separation, appeared, First, Their
disowning the Meeting. Secondly, Upon that Foundation, their going away.
Thirdly, Their denying the Judgment of that Meeting to be a true Meeting, and
refusing to suffer it to be Recorded; but, that the Meeting could not adjourn,
because the Book and the Clark was gone, is so ridiculous, that it is not worth
mentioning; though that is the chief, or rather the only reason given by T. E.
For what else is this, but to set the Clark in Friends Meeting, where the
Papists set the Pope; So that as Papists argue, without the Popes Authority
there can be no general Counsel; in like manner, Without the Clark and his
Book, there can be no Meeting of Friends, qualified to judge of Church Affairs.

VIII. page 27. He falsely alleges, that the Meeting adjourned, was
surreptitiously obtained, which he grounds on a forgery or fiction of his own
devising, as if twenty nine of them might be loose or raw Persons; I may much
more justly say, his scandalous Book is surreptitiously come out in Print,
being contrary to the Mind of many Friends, and to Gospel Order, professed by
himself, and all professed Friends, viz. That none expose another in Print, or
Print against another, till he be disowned by the Meeting to whom he belongs,
after a fair Trial had: But so it is, that I have had no such Gospel Order
given me, nor has it been in the least intimated to me, That any Meeting in
London, where I now live, has denied me. But I Printed nothing against any in
America, till Gospel Order was given them, and was rejected by them.

IX. page 28. He falsely alleges, That I tell no Year when the monthly
Meeting, in the first Month last, was. But the contrary to this is to be seen
in my Book, page 19. where I show, that the monthly Meeting that gave Judgment
against IV. S. and T. F. was the 27th of the 12th Month, 1691. And it plainly
appears from my Book, that the monthly Meeting in the first Month last, (there
mentioned) was in the next Month following, in the Year 1692. (see that very
Year mentioned page 27.) unless he can find out some Month, or Months betwixt
the 12th Month of the Year 1691. and the 1st Month of the following Year, 1692.

X. page 24. He most perversely and ignorantly does allege, by a sort of
Argument that is so silly and weak, that scarce an ordinary School boy would
use it; that if this Act of T. L's, (viz. His withdrawing from the monthly
Meeting adjourned where I begin it) was the cause of the Separation, then it
could not be the Separation it self, but the Separation must come after this,
as the Effect follows the Cause; and of this Argument he is so conceited,
(though ridiculously weak) that though I answered it in the yearly Meeting, to
the Satisfaction of many; at which time I advised him to beware of falling into
the Ditch of that called Philosophy; yet he brings it up again, and is not
ashamed to Print his ignorance, and expose it; (not to say his folly) but the
Answer I gave him then, I now again give him more largely; that though the
efficient Cause cannot be the Effect, yet the formal Cause is the Effect in
part, as all Logicians or School men, that treat on the Nature of Causes and
Effects, do teach; and the material Cause is also another part of it; and thus,
the Soul and Body are the formal and material Causes of a Man, and yet they are
the Man. Wood and Stone, and Fashion or Figure of the House are the material
and formal Causes of the House, and yet they are the House. So T. L. and his
Faction going away out of the Meeting, and his rude and disorderly manner of
doing it, denying them to be a Meeting, and consequently to be the Church, were
the material and formal Causes of that begun Separation; and that evil Spirit
that set him and them at work, was the efficient Cause of it, and the final
Cause was to exalt themselves over their poor Brethren; that as they ruled in
the State, (most of them being Magistrates that went out) so they might rule in
the Church, and exercise a Tyranical and Arbitrary Power (Papist like) over
them; which they not long after discovered, by their open Persecution of Fining
and Imprisoning for Conscience Sake. And thus I have assigned the four general
Causes of that begun Separation, made by them, which this unjust Man, by his
Sophistical wrangling, would cast upon us.

XI. He falsely alleges, that the change of the Meeting in Philadelphia, from
the Bank to the Center, was in Course, page 30. This I prove to be false, and a
fiction, because, as the time of the Course of it was not yet come, nor did
come either so soon before or after, so T. L's putting it to a Vote, by giving a
Sign, whether it should be removed or not, the Sign being, They that stood
should be for its removing; they that sat, for its not removing; but this not
being according to the way and order of Truth, nor vielded to, we gave no
regard to it, farther then to prove by it, the Meeting was not changed by
Course, but by Will, and Arbitrary Power; and it is no wonder that they had an
influence on many to join with them, having the worldly Government in their
Hands.

XII. page 33. His Perversion of Thomas VVilsons Words, that gave Evidence
against me, at the Yearly Meeting, that I said, I believed they removed the
Meeting to force me to meet with them, proves, that they that used that force
toward me, were guilty of the separation, and the cause of it: For can there be
any greater cause of separation or breach, than to force Men's Consciences, as
some of them thought to force me to join in Prayer with them, whom I could not
in Conscience join with, for their unchristian Usage toward me (one of them
having publicly cursed me in the Men's Meeting, saying, VVoe be to thee from
the Lord; another calling me in the Meeting Babylons Brat, and none of them
censuring these wicked Actions) and they knowing that I was not like to be
forced by them, to join with such in Prayer, they knew how to find an occasion
against me, to disown me. And how many Hundreds here in England, Friends as
well as others, have been separated from other Professions, because of their
seeking to force and compel them to a way of Worship they could not in
Conscience own? So their seeking to force me, proves they had a design to
disown me. And so Thomas VVilson's saying, that he juddged me out of my own
mouth, judges him and them out of their own Mouth.

XIII. His Perversion in blaming me for having a private Family meeting my
House (hence casting the Separation upon me) to instruct my Family, and pray in
my Family, saying, page 33. That I give no account, by whose appointment, or
what Authority that Meeting was held; so that by his Sentiment, Men must not
instruct their Families, nor pray in their Families without Authority and
Appointment of the Mens-Meeting: or if they do, they must let none others be
present, though the Act of Parliament (now expired and repealed) permitted Five
beside the Family. His Clamor about our meeting at the Barbados House, is
idle and impertinent; we met not there, till they had separated themselves from
us, and denied the Monthly Meeting. And after this, who can say but we had
liberty to meet where we thought fit? Besides that, they not only threatened to
keep us out of the Bank Meeting, but most rudely abused us when we met in it,
at our ordinary times, having a Right to it as good as theirs, always
interrupting any of us that spoke, though we never interrupted them; and at
last sending some, by their Magistratical Authority, with Saws and Axes to
knock down our Gallery, but they were prevented by some that knocked down both
the one and the other, which I had no hand in, directly nor indirectly.

XIV p. 35. His Perversion, that I affirmed a Power to alter, choose, change,
pull down, and set up Meetings as I pleased; and the foundation of this
Forgery, is, by his own confession, because I declared my Sense, by way of
Proposition, That it were good to have but one public Meeting on First days,
and the remaining part to be used in private Families. Now, Reader, judge what
ground he had from my simple Christian-Proposition to invent this Forgery.

XV. He grossly perverteth my Words, that because I said, It was good to have
but one public Meeting on First days, thereby inferring, that it was not good,
according to my sense, but evil, to have two public Meetings on First days,
and that therefore to keep two was against my Conscience. But let the Reader
judge what perverse Reasoning this is. Page 36, 37. Knows he not a
Distinction betwixt two goods, and the one either equal to the other, or better
than the other, as the Circumstances may happen to vary and cast the Balance;
so that what is less good at one time, may be more good at another time? Do not
many Friends keep two public Meetings on First days, here in the City? And yet
many others, both in Cities and Country, keep but one; and yet by this Man's
perversion, one part of them do evil, and sin against their Conscience.

XVI. page 38, 39 His perversion, in laboring to cast the Separation on me, by
reciting some of my Words, but leaving out a material Clause in the Sentence
that clears me; the whole Sentence being this, Now the Scriptures that
warrant us in this Separation (although as is said, first made by them) are these
following, etc. the Words, although, as is said, first made by them: that clears
me fully, that I did not take the Separation on me, as he forgeth, he does
fraudulently leave out page 39.

XVII. His Perversion of the Sense of the Word separate, and Separation; a
Separation, says he, page 39. from a thing or Person, implies a being joined
to that thing or Person before, and till such separation be made; Here he
shows his great ignorance; for by his sense of the word, separate, Christ
being separate from Sinners, (as the Scripture expressly testifies) he was
joined to them before. And the People called Quakers, being separate from the
Papists, were joined to them before. Now let him tell me when Friends were
joined to the Papists before. And because England, and all Europe is separate
from America, by a wide and spacious Sea, let him tell us when they were
joined. He is extremely ignorant, that knows not that the word separate has
several Significations. Beside, it being granted that we were formerly ^oyned
with them, this does not prove that we began the Separation: but after it was
made by them, we were warranted and justified by the Scripture without, and the
Spirit of Truth within, to remain separate from them, till they renounced their
vile Errors, and evil Practices and the most that my words can import, is, That
had we made the Separation, we had been justified by the Lord in so doing,
after they had so openly discovered the vile Errors that some of them held, and
others did justify and support them that held them; but they prevented out
making the Separation, by first making it themselves.

XVIII. page 41. His denying that it has been proved, That my Opposers in
Pensilvania are guilty of vile Errors; and his alleging That I picked the
Words I charged them with, from their own Discourses, etc. But that this is a
Forgery, is apparent from the Testimonies of those whom he pretends greatly to
Credit; For first of all, That Judgment given out from the Meeting of public
Friends, as it is called, the 4th of the 4th Month, Signed by his dearly beloved
persecuting Friend and Brother, Samuel Jennings, does declare, that Proof was
made by two Witnesses; that W. S. should say, That George Keith 's Preaching
Christ without, and Christ within, was Preaching two Christ's; (and this to all
sober and sincere Christians, does appear to be a vile Error,) for if so, then
either Christ within, or Christ without, is a false Christ, seeing the true
Christ is but one. Secondly, I stand recorded on the monthly Meeting book at
Philadelphia, by the monthly Meetings Judgment given out against me, and
clearing Th. Fitswater 26th 3d Month for his accusing me, that I denied the
sufficiency of the Light; and the Evidence against me was, That I said I did
not believe the Light was sufficient without something else; whereby it is
evident, they exclude Christ's Manhood, Death and Sufferings, Blood and
Intercession for us in Heaven, from having any part in our Salvation; which is
so vile and gross an Error, as is enough to make the Ears of all sincere
Christians to tingle. But Thirdly, The Paper called, A true Account of the
Proceedings, etc. at the yearly Meeting at London, 2d Month 1694. does plainly
declare, that some were guilty of erroneous Doctrines, or unsound Expressions,
their words being these following; And although it appears that some few Persons
have given Offense, either through erroneous Doctrines, unsound Expressions, or
weakness, forwardness, want of Wisdom, and right Understanding, etc. And,
Fourthly, I produced above six Manuscripts signed with the Persons own Hands,
that were read at the yearly Meeting, that proved them sufficiently guilty of
vile Errors, repugnant to the fundamentals of Christianity. And if T. E. or any
others persist to charge me, That I have wrongfully charged them in
Pensilvania, these Manuscripts then read, with some others, may be made public
for my further clearing.

XIX. page 42. His Fallacy and Deceit in covering W. Southby, by concealing his
foregoing Words, in his Letter cited by him, that proves him guilty of my
Charge, which Letter under his own Hand I have to produce, where he confesses,
that he called it doubtful Questions, Whether the Patriarchs have received the
Resurrection? So, whether they had, or had not, was no Article of his Faith;
for surely no Article of the Christian Faith is a doubtful Question; but the
Doctrine of the Resurrection of the Dead, as a thing to come, and not past, is
such a great Article of Faith, that because some said it was past, they are
said in Scripture, To overthrow the Faith, etc. And T. Elwoods Fallacy is the
more manifest, that in W. Southby's Confession of Faith recited by him, there
is not one word concerning the Resurrection of the Body, nor of Christ's coming
without us to judge the Quick and the Dead, which were the things charged on
him, and which his Confession gives not the least account of, and so is
nothing to his present purpose to clear him; yea, his words of his Confession,
telling how he believed the day of Judgment when he was a Papist, makes rather
against him, than any ways clear him; for then, said he, I owned it very
carnally and outward; but if he do not own it, that that great Judgment shall
be outward as well as inward, he has a worse belief of it now, then when a
Papist.

XX. page 43. His Perversion in clearing Th. Lloyd, Arthur Cook, Samuel
Jennings, and John Delavall, on behalf of themselves, and many others, in their
Paper directed to me, where he writes some words of theirs, containing ten or
eleven Lines, giving an Account of their Faith concerning God, Christ, the Holy
Ghost, the Resurrection, and Eternal Judgment; which, say they, though offered
to you to the same purpose, and that several times, yet was rejected as
insufficient by you. But let the impartial Reader judge whether Eleven Lines of
a Confession of Faith, relating to so many great Fundamentals of the Christian
Religion, expressed in such general Terms, as the grossest of Heretics could
do, could suffice to satisfy our Consciences, when they had given us such
ground of Offense, that they were not sound in the Faith, both before this
Paper, and since? And whereas they say, firmly believing what is upon Record in
the Holy Scriptures concerning God, etc. so will every Papist say, every
Socinian say, and every Muggletonian; for it is a common Fallacy that the
vilest of Heretics use, whereby to deceive People, to tell them they firmly
believe all that is Recorded in the Holy Scriptures concerning God, Christ,
etc. But if this had been enough to say in general, We firmly believe what is
upon Record in the Holy Scriptures, Why have the People, called Quakers,
separated from the several Professions of Christianity here in England, and
elsewhere, upon the Account of Errors in Doctrine, which they did charge them
with, seeing all these Professions in general Terms say as much as we, that
they firmly believe what is upon Record in the Holy Scriptures? But we have
often told Th. Lloyd, and them that have joined with him, let them condemn
these gross and vile Errors, which we have proved some of them guilty of, and
others cloak and excuse them, and have refused to this day, to pass due censure
on them, and that shall satisfy us in this Point. And in this general
Confession of theirs conceived in such general Terms, there is nothing to be
found to clear them of their Errors, or things charged upon them; their Paper
mentions the Resurrection State, but what that Resurrection State is, they do
not declare it, or when it is witnessed; for many hold, to my certain
Knowledge, That the Resurrection is the New Birth, and nothing else; others
say, Immediately after Death they get the Resurrection fully; all which is
expressly contrary to the Holy Scripture. And they cover themselves no less in
relation to the Eternal Judgment; for the question between them and us, being,
Whether that great and last Judgment shall be only by Christ's inward Appearance
in Men's Consciences? Or, Whether also by his outward Coming and Appearance in
his glorified Person, even the glorified Man Christ Jesus? Whether he shall
outwardly come to judge all Mankind? But of this, to cover their Unbelief, they
are wholly silent. And this gross and vile Error, That Christ is not to come
without us in his glorified Body or Person, to judge all Mankind, I find too
many in England guilty of, which they have drank in too probably from some
unsound Expressions contained in some of the Printed Books too generally
conceived and owned by them.

XXI. page 43. His Perversion and Fallacy in covering these Men, because of
their saying in their Papers, If any of them, or any countenanced by them, have
given any Offense, either by unsound Expressions, or any Gospel-like
Conversation, and the same be made to appear by credible VVitnesses, we promise
unto you, that if the Parties concerned do not condemn the same, they shall be
disowned therein. But what more credible Witnesses could be desired, than the
several Manuscripts Signed with their own Hands, whom they have owned, and by
the several Manuscripts of John de Lavall in particular; two of which were read
at the yearly Meeting, wherein he charge me with Heresy, and denying the
fundamental Doctrine of the People, called Quakers, for saying, the Light
within is not sufficient to Salvation without something else; by that something
else it being confessed, that I did and do mean the Man Christ without us, in
whom all fullness dwells, and his Death and Sufferings, and Resurrection and
Intercession for us in Heaven; all which are something else than the Light
within, and all necessary to our Salvation. Also the Act of their monthly
Meeting at Philadelphia, clearing Th. Fitswater for accusing me, Of denying the
sufficiency of the Light, because I did not, nor can place our whole Salvation
upon the Light within, so as to exclude the Man Christ without us, from having
any share therein, is a sufficient proof that they have given just Offense to
us; and John Humphrey's two Letters that were read also at the yearly Meeting,
(who is an approved Minister among them) wherein he asserts, That we are not
justified by that Blood that was shed at Jerusalem; and that Christ himself
ascribed the work of Man's Salvation, and Sanctification, not to the Flesh that
Suffered, but to the Spirit that quickened; not to the Blood that was shed at
Jerusamem, but to the Flesh and Blood that is Spiritual, etc. most perversely
and ignorantly understanding these words in John 6. 33. And though we have
dealt much with them, to have these Errors disowned, and the Persons duly
censured, that were guilty of them, yet to this day, they have never done any
thing to answer our desire.

XXII. page 44. His Perversion of my words, I saying at the Meeting of the
other side, 22d 3d Month, 1692. That I and my Friends had Unity with the most
there, as to the main, by his perverse and strained reasoning to draw a
Conclusion from them, that is most unreasonable; now (says he) If there had
been such gross, vile, and Unchristian Errors, etc. held among them, as he
suggests, etc. How could he say, that he and his Friends had Unity with the
most there, as to the main. I answer very well, In the common Signification of
the word Unity, when we commonly say, we have Unity with them, under the
Profession of the Truth, whom we have not yet disowned, nor found any just
Cause to disown them, nor they to disown us. And this was the Case then; for
more than two thirds of that Meeting were Country Friends, who had come from
several Places in the Country to that Meeting, having notice that James
Dickeson was to be there, as was common in such Cases, when Traveling Friends
come to a Town Meeting, Country Friends flock to it in plenty. And there had
not been any breach betwixt these Country Friends and us at that time, nor for
a considerable time thereafter, until after the false Judgment of the 28th came
out against us, bearing date the 20th of the 4th Month. And after this false
Judgment was forced and imposed to be read in the Country Meetings both of
Pensilvania, and West and East Jersey it broke them generally into pieces, and
some of all the Country Meetings turned against us, and others of all of them
stood for us, and for the Truth of our Testimony. Beside, there were diverse of
the other side, belonging to the Town Meeting, that both at that time, and
always since, have loved us, and we them, and we had Unity with them; and some
of them afterward joined with us, and left the other side. But it was the
Preachers mostly, and others that did bear sway in their monthly Meetings, that
were most guilty of these vile Errors, some asserting them, others cloaking
them, and with such we had no Unity, neither then nor since. But for many of
the People we never denied to have Unity with them, whom we do not charge to be
guilty of these gross and vile Errors; but their Leaders and Teachers, and such
as do vindicate them in their sad Errors. And we would have been glad to have
kept Meetings with many or most of the People of the Meeting of the other side,
after the Separation was begun, believing and knowing that they were in great
measure beguiled and led astray by their Leaders, that they were too much given
up to follow, yet retaining a measure of Simplicity; but we could not meet with
them in Peace, after their Leaders on the other side had begun the Separation,
not having freedom given us, or Permission peaceably to exercise our gift among
them, but were always interrupted and molested, when we met together, and
otherwise most unchristianly abused. And thus I hope I have sufficiently showed
the good Consistency betwixt my saying, I and my Friends had Unity with the
most there at that Meeting, considering the Circumstances then of that Meeting,
and yet did remain in a Separation both of Spirit, and outward Fellowship from
many of that Meeting both then and since; and the same Answer here given may
serve to answer the same Objection and Accusation made against us very unduely,
in the Book called, The Christian Doctrine and Society of the People called
Quakers, page 18. of the said Book.

XXIII page 47. His Perversion of my words, about the word many, and very many,
in my saying it was my charitable Persuasion, that the worthy Name Christian
does belong to very many of that People; where, by very many, he construeth my
Sense to be only these few I had an experimental proof of, through intimate
Conversation, and frequent verbal Communication with, since I came last into
England. But this is a gross Forgery and Perversion, for I did really mean not
them only, but all them, whom I have at any time formerly bad Experience of
their Christianity, by intimate Conversation, and verbal Communication, either
in England, or any other part of the World, that have given me no occasion to
think otherwise of them, (as many have not, though some have) and my Charity
leads me to believe and judge, that there are very many called Quakers, that
are true Christians, both in Faith and Practice, that I have had no outward
knowledge of; but I cannot in Charity esteem them Christians, who have
unchristian'd themselves, either by their bold and open contradicting the great
Truths of Christianity, or by their persecuting and otherwise unjust and wicked
Practices.

XXIV. page 48. His Perversion of my words, that though I said in my last Book,
called, The causless ground, etc. I have not charged the People called Quakers,
either in the general, or in the plurality, he will needs have it to be
understood only of these few I have intimately conversed with, since I came
last into England. Oh! How has prejudice blinded him? But how can he, or I
either, be positive to say the People called Quakers, are good Christians,
either in general, or in the plurality, when Geo. Whitehead has told us in his
printed Epistle, printed about four years ago at London, and was reprinted in
Penstlvania, called, A Christian Epistle to Friends in geneneral, etc. That few
sincerely seek the Lord, etc. And very few have their Minds and Spirits really
and inwardly exercised in frequent Prayer, and daily Supplications to God, or
in heavenly Meditation or spiritual Contemplations, in Gods pure and spiritual
Laws, Ways, Judgments, and Works; or in holy Scriptures by the Holy Spirit,
which opens them; but too many have their Minds, Hearts, and Affections, taken
up with these fading Objects, and things below; or overcharged with the love of
Riches, Ca^es and Cumbers of this Life, to compass the Earth, wherein many a
good Talent has been hid, and poor Soul buried in Captivity. And concerning
Friends Children, and young Persons, he says, It Is but few in Comparison, that
come in at that door, viz. the work of Regeneration. And who will say, that the
worthy Name of Christian does belong to such? And yet by G. W's charge, they
must be at least the plurality, when very few do otherwise; though some
formality, and something of the form of Truth, as he says, they may have by
outward Education. But let none think I blame G. W. in this, it may be a true
charge, for what I know to the contrary; but why should I be so much blamed,
for charging neither the generality, nor plurality, but some particulars, when
he has charged many more with things as bad, as Errors in Principles, and that
publicly in Print, beside that Errors in Practice do commonly go along with
Errors in Principle. But it seems strange to many, as well as to me, that
Errors in Principle, as Pride, vanity of Apparel, Covetousness, Envy,
Backbiting, may without offense be publicly reproved by word of Mouth, in
Meetings, and also in Print; but Errors in Principle must not be reproved, and
witnessed against, either in public Meetings, or in Printed Books. Do Errors
in Practice, as Pride, vanity of Apparel, Covetousness, Envy, and the like,
when publicly witnessed against in Print, or in Meetings, open the Mouths of
Adversaries, and grieve faithful Friends, less than Errors in Principles?
unless it be said, that reproving Errors in Principles reflect upon the
Preachers; but reproving Errors in Practice, reflect only upon the People; but
if any of the Preachers be guilty, why may they not, and ought they not to be
as publicly reproved as the People, unless we respect Persons, and that both
for their Error in Doctrine and Practice? Is it not a just charge upon some
called Preachers, which Christ charged upon the Scribes and Pharisees, They
loved the Praise of Men, more than the Praise of God, and therefore cannot beat
to be reproved; for it has been the general default of Teachers and Leaders of
the People in former times, to hide their own Faults, and expose the Faults of
others, especially of such as did not flatter them, and gave them not honor
enough before Men. And nothing can be said against my Printed Books, in
reference to my public witnessing again the Errors in Principles, whereof some
are guilty in Pensilvania, and elsewhere, but what may be as much said against
G. Whitehead his reproving these great Vices and Immoralities among many called
Friends, having the Name and form of Truth. Have my Books tended to the
dishonor of God, disservice to Truth, reproach and grief of Friends, for my
Printing against the vile Errors whereof some called Friends, are guilty? And
has not G. Whiteheads printed Epistle had as much that tendency, for his
printing against the vile Practices of many more than ever I charged? But in
reality, I judge, and many others do judge, that the faithful witnessing
against Men's gross and vile Errors, either in Doctrine or Practice, is no
proper and direct cause of such Effects, as the dishonor of God, the
disservice of Truth, the reproach and grief of Friends; but on the contrary,
the proper and direct cause of Gods being honored, Truth cleared the Reproach
removed, and faithful Friends comforted, with a public Testimony borne against
such public Sins and Evils. And though I had a foresight and sense that
Enemies of Truth would seek to take advantage from my printed Books, yet I had
also a sense and foresight, as I have expressed in my Book, page 6. Some
Reasons, etc. That in the conclusion, they would be disappointed, and that
after a little time their great glorying and seeming gratifyings would be
turned into discontent and trettings. For on the other hand, does it not
greatly stop the cry and reproach that Adversaries of Truth cast upon Friends,
when they find us cordially zealous in our Testimony against all things
reproveable among us, whether in Doctrine or Practice; and will it not much
more occasion their outcry and reproach, to find us, if so any of us should so
do, covering and excusing what is not excusable. And whereas I said in my said
Book, That the publishing such account of things, might be occasion of grief to
many, which some seek to take advantage against me for. I did not think that
the simple Relation or Account of these things, would or could be any proper
cause of grief to faithful Friends; but I did judge, and so I do still judge,
that the gross Errors whereof I did give an Account, that too many in these
American parts were guilty of, would be a just cause and occasion of grief to
faithful Friends, but neither the Relation in Print, nor I the Relator of it,
should be blameworthy for the same, more then if a News-Letter should come
forth in Print, giving a Relation or Account of some great loss and destruction
of our Countrymen, or near Kindred and Relations at Sea, when the things
related do and ought to afflict us with grief; but who will say, we should
blame the Relation, or him that has faithfully related it to us, but rather,
that we should give him thanks, for his faithful Relation? And indeed, I judge
farther, Friends should have been justly grieved, with these vile Errors, and
wicked Practices, that too many professing Truth, have been guilty of; and it
had been more becoming all professing Truth among us, to have been deeply
humbled before the Lord, and to have lamented these things with Weeping,
Mourning, and Fasting, then to have found fault so unjustly with the zealous
Testimony I have borne against these things, that they might have approved
themselves like these in Ezekiel, 9. 4. That did sigh and cry for all the
Abominations that were done in the midst of Jerusalem, whom the Lord commanded
to have a Mark put upon, that they might be spared, when the City should be
destroyed. And if my Books, or the things therein related, have been
instrumental to move any unto such godly grief, for the great ignorance,
unbelief, Errors in Doctrine, that some are guilty of, repugnant to the
Christian Faith, so as to be humbled before the Lord, for these Evils, with
Prayer unto God, that he would cause his Light and his Truth to shine forth, to
the dispelling these Foggs and Clouds; that such who are in such Darkness,
Ignorance, and Errors, may be recovered. I have cause in that respect to
rejoice, and have in a great part, my end answered.

XXV. page 49 His gross Perversion and Reflection on the yearly Meeting, in his
saying, supposing it were true, That no untruth or falsehood, in matter of fact,
has been discovered in his Books, it was not the proper business of the yearly
Meeting to judge of the matter of fact contained in his Books, which were
alleged to have been done in America, by Persons not there to answer, or give
an account of them. And page 50. He says, Therefore let none think, that
because the yearly Meeting did not declare the matters of fact in his Books to
be false, therefore they are all true. Here note, 1. He grants that the yearly
Meeting did not declare the Matters of fact in my Books to be false, (and for
matter of Doctrine, they do not blame me in the least) and yet he holds that I
am justly censured and blamed by the yearly Meeting, which seems to me, an
unparalleled instance of unjustice he casts on the yearly Meeting, to blame me
for things in my Books that are neither matter of Doctrine, nor matter of fact;
for whatever can be said or written in a Book, must needs be one of these two,
either matter of Doctrine, or matter of Fact. I know not that ever I heard or
read of the like instance, that a Book, or the Author of it was blamed, when
nothing, either in Doctrine or Fact, was declared blame worthy. But it seems
this Man thinks himself to be more sharp sighted than the yearly Meeting, that
has, as he thinks, discovered matter of fact to be false in my Books, and that
is, That I cast the Separation off from my self, and lay it upon Friends; and
that it was so, he alleges did appear in the opening and stating that matter
in the yearly Meeting; but he only says it, but does not prove it. And if it
did appear in the yearly Meeting, how comes it that he says, The yearly
Meeting did not declare the matters of Fact in my Books to be false. Is not my
clearing my self of the blame of the Separation, a matter of Fact, in my Book?
this he says, the yearly Meeting has not declared to be false in matter of
Fact, therefore they have not declared it, that my clearing my self of the
Separation, is false; and consequently, they have not declared the contrary,
but that my clearing my self of the Separation is true, wherein he by his own
Confession, has plainly contradicted the Judgment of that called, The yearly
Meeting Paper, which lays it at my door, viz. The Separation, so far as I
have been concerned therein, and yet I judge, they lay it not so much at my
door, as by their own words, they should lay it at the door of them of the
other side, for they plainly say, And as to the Separation among Friends in
America, arising from the unhappy Differences, etc. So here, what can be more
plain than that they make the Differences betwixt us in America, to be the
cause of the Separation, as the word arising does plainly import; And seeing
the original ground and Cause of the Differences, was the unsound and erroneous
Doctrines held by them of the other side, which that Paper called, A true
Account of the Proceedings, etc. Does own them to be guilty of, it plainly
appears, they of the other side, were the culpable cause of the Separation, and
it lies mainly at their door in that respect, and no otherwise does it lie at
my door, but as I opposed their erroneous Doctrines; and if for this any will
lay it at my door, as being the innocent cause of it, I need not much contend
with them, though I still say, I began not the Separation; even as the
Differences in Doctrine betwixt Luther, and such as joined with him, on the one
hand, and the Pope, and Church of Rome on the other hand, caused a Separation
betwixt them, and the Separation did arise from the difference in Doctrine: And
if any will charge Luther to be the cause of that Separation, who own the Truth
of his Doctrine, and disown Popery, they will say, he was the innocent cause of
it, and the Pope and his Adherents, were the culpable cause of it, the
Application is easy to the case in hand. But let none be offended, that I call
that Paper, having this Title, A true Account of the Proceedings, etc. That
called the Judgment of the yearly Meeting, because indeed I never owned it to
be the Judgment of the yearly Meeting, but of a party of Men in it, that were
swayed by some, beyond what they ought to have been; for a very great part of
the yearly Meeting was gone, before any Judgment was given; and I can
sufficiently prove, they that did remain, were not unanimous in that Judgment.
And T E. does but equivocate, when he says, page 23. That I know, when the
Sense and Advice of the Meeting was in the Meeting openly read, and delivered
in Writing to me, there was not any one Member of the Meeting, that objected
against it, or expressed any dissent from it; for though they did not express
their dissent in my hearing, yet, as some of themselves tole me, they had
expressed their dissent formerly, before I was called; for diverse in that
Meeting did show their dissent, in charging the Separation upon me, and I judge
the words of the Paper it self, as I have proved, lays it more upon them of
the other side; and there seems not to be a good consistency, but rather an
interfering in the words of that Paper, of one part with another. Beside, that
diverse there did judge the Judgment was too partial, and too favorable toward
them of the other side, and especially toward Sam. Jennings. Nor can it be
said, that that called the yearly Meeting, was a free Meeting, for it was too
private, and limited to too small a number, and many of them deeply prejudiced
against me, and who had long before pre-judged the case, especially many of
them called public Friends, both of the City and Country. And many Friends
that had a desire to be present, were hindered to come in, and the Door kept
shut by some appointed so to do; and some that had got in, were turned out; and
therefore it cannot be owned to be the yearly Meeting, nor any Meeting duly
and regularly constitute, when any faithful Friend had not freedom to be
present, and deliver his Sense. And granting the Judgment given in that Paper,
called, A true Account, was the Judgment of the Plurality then present, this
proves it not to be a true Judgment; for R. B. in his Anarchy, etc. says, page
79. The Quakers allow that at times the plurality may be wrong, and the few may
be right. Nor can it be said, that the yearly Meeting, is the Representive of
the body of Friends, in cases that pertain to matters of Fact and Conscience;
for though Men may choose Representatives to sit in a National Assembly, to
judge of worldly Matters, and to make Laws for the outward Man, yet I deny that
they can choose Representatives to judge of Matters of Faith and Salvation,
that bind the Conscience singly as such; for this were downright Popery, and is
the Foundation of all that blind Obedience that the Pope and Church of Rome
imposes upon the People, because such a general Counsel has so decreed; but
rarely has any general Counsel, since the Apostles days, done much good, but
rather hurt, especially since the Purity of Christian Religion began to decay.
And this may clear me of these unjust and groundless Occasions, wherewith T. E.
does load me, as being guity of Insincerity, Hypocrisy, double Dealing, having
not a Conscience, etc. For my saying in my Introduction, to my Treatise, The
causeless Ground, etc. I tenderly entreat and desire that none apply or
construe any words contained in these following Lines, as intended by me in way
of Reflection, Blame, or Charge against either the body of Friends in general,
or any particular Meeting, or Meeting of Friends in particular, or against any
singular faithful Friend, or Friends whatsoever; For my Intention was singly to
clear Truth and faithful Friends in the first Place, and next my Innocence and
Christian Testimony; and this I did still judge, might well be done without
Reflection or casting blame upon any faithful Friends, or any Meeting of
faithful Friends; if any blame occasionally and indirectly fall upon any, it
was not my Intention, to blame the faithful; and if the unfaithful be
occasionally blamed, let them see to it, to amend what is blameworthy in them.
But as for that, called, The yearly Meeting Judgment, I own it not to be such,
far less of the body of Friends, or their true Representative, knowing that
hundreds of faithful Friends are otherwise minded. But my calling the monthly
Meeting in Philadelphia, that gave Judgment against W. S. and T. E. the only
Representative of the Church in that Place, does not prove, that the yearly
Meeting at London, is the only Representative of the body of Friends over all
the World, where they are to be found; That monthly Meeting did contain most of
the Men Friends that did belong to that Place, but the yearly Meeting does not
contain one for an hundred of the body of Friends; beside, there is a vast
difference and disparity betwixt a monthly Meeting Representing the Church in
that Place, where all can be present if they will, and hear and judge for
themselves, and not to hear by other Men's Ears, and judge by other Men's Sense,
and believe by other Men's Faith; but if a yearly Meeting be made the
Representative of the body of Friends all over the World, then what they decree
or determine, in Spiritual Matters, must oblige and bind the Conscience of all
Friends, so that they must believe by the Faith of the yearly Meeting, and not
by their own Faith.

XXVI. His perversion, in saying, p. 50. That the printing and publishing my
books, (wherein I bear my Christian Testimony against these gross and vile
errors that some are guilty of in America, are the proper and direct cause of
great hurt and mischief, etc. But he brings no proof for it, but that it is
apparent; and it is as good an Argument for others to say, it is apparent they
are not the proper and direct cause of any hurt, but of much good; and the
rather, because he confesses, The Yearly Meeting has not declared, that my
books contain any untruth or falsehood in matter of Fact; And for matter of
Doctrine, they have not charged me in the least; how then can a book which has
nothing of Untruth or Falsehood in it, be the proper cause of hurt? For as
exveris, nil nisi verum, i. e. of true premises, a false conclusion cannot
follow, so ex bonis nil nisi bonum, out of good things, that has nothing of
falsehood in it, but much truth, can nothing come but that which is good, as the
proper and direct effect thereof. But if the public reproving of men's errors
and vices be the proper and direct cause of hurt and mischief, the same
argument will prove, that when the Prophets did publicly reprove the errors
and vices or the sins of the people that were then the Church of God, by
visible profession. and did record them (tho not in Print; for it was not then
in use) in books, that they were the proper and direct cause of hurt, and when
John reproved the Pharisees, and Christ reproved most sharply Priests, Scribes
and Pharisees, that they were proper causes of hurt, and especially the
recording of them in books that have remained to posterity, and which some have
made an ill use of, and Paul's withstanding Peter to his Face, and committing
it to writing, that he was to be blamed, was the proper cause of hurt, etc by
this unfair, and undue way of arguing. Also when Friends did print books,
reproving the Errors of Doctrine in other professions, by the same argument,
they were the proper and direct cause of hurt, to open the mouths of Papists
against them.

XXVII. page 51. His perversion, and false charge, That I have sought
occasions, by my late book, to throw more Reproach on Truth and Friends But how
can faithful witnessing against Error be a throwing Reproach on Truth, and
Friends of it, he may as well say, one contrary produces another, Truth
produces Error, Light Darkness, Good Evil, all which is false.

XXVIII. His perversion and fallacy, in seeming to own the Doctrine in my book
[The Causeless Ground, etc.) page 3. and yet altogether waving the chief thing
of Doctrine, wherein the Controversy lies betwixt them of the other side and
me, and as I judge betwixt him and me; viz. That the Faith of Christ, as he
died for our sins, and rose again, is necessary to our Christianity and
salvation; that God does justify us, and pardon our sins for Christ's sake,
who died for us, through our faith in him, that is always accompanied with
sincere Repentance, etc. But his leaving out wholly this period and clause,
that is so material, showing the great difference betwixt us, in relation to
the Christian faith, I question not is to hide his and his brethrens errors in
Pensilvania, whose evil cause he has taken up to defend. And it will appear
clearly so to be, by noticing that he joins not the work of sanctification in
the heart, to Christ's outward appearance but to his inward appearance.
Whereas, had he the true Knowledge and Faith of Christ, he would join and
attribute the work of Regeneration and Sanctification both to Christ's inward
and outward appearance, and hold forth and assert the Necessity of the Faith of
his outward appearance. as well as of his inward appearance, in order to the
work of Sanctification and Regeneration; and would inform people, that the true
Faith in Christ, as he did outwardly appear, and die for our sins, is not a
bare historical and literal Faith, but a living Faith, wrought in the heart by
the power of God, and his Spirit inwardly revealed. But that he does not join
the work of Regeneration and Sanctification to Christ's outward appearance,
Death, Refurrection, Ascension and Mediation in Heaven, but to his inward only,
is clear from page 54. where he says, the Doctrines whereof (as well those
that related to the outward appearance and work of Christ in the flesh, as
those that relate to his inward appearance and work of Sanctification, in the
hearts of his people) were in the first Ages of the Christian Church fully and
clearly held forth and believed; and page 55. he distinguishing betwixt the
Doctrines we hold in common with other professions. that have always from the
beginning been asserted, etc and those Doctrines that respect the inward
appearance, he says. Yet those Doctrines that respect the inward appearance
and manifestation of Christ Jesus,, by his Light, Grace and Spirit shining and
working in the hearts of men and women, from the beginning, carrying on and
perfecting the work of Regeneration, Sanctification and Salvation, have been
more largely insisted on. So that it is evident he attributes the work of
Regeneration and Sanctification only to Christ's inward appearance, because he
gives this as the Reason why the Doctrine of his inward apperrance is more
largely insisted on, than the Doctrine of his outward appearance; that
Sanctification is wrought by his inward appearance, and not by his outward
appearance, viz. his Death, Blood, Resurrection, Ascension, Mediation, wherein
he erreth fundamentally; for the work of Sanctification is ascribed in
Scripture to Christ's Blood and Sufferings, as well as to his inward appearance,
and to both indispensibly necessary, and to Faith therein. For we are said to
be sanctified See Heb. 9. 14. Heb. 10. 29. Heb. 13. 12.
viz. through Faith in it; And he was wounded for our Transgressions; and by
his stripes, or Dolors, we are healed, Isa. 535. 1 Pet. 2. 24.

XXIX. His gross and bold Fiction and Forgery, in saying, p. 57. Whatever
jealousies and Dissatisfactions any of other professions had entertained
against us on this account before, they had no ground or occasion given them.
Whereas now he has given them occasion, tho unjustly and without cause, to
entertain wrong Jealousies of us.

But this his bold Fiction is false in both Parts. 1. That other Professions
had no ground of Dissatisfaction given them, touching these Doctrines, before
my Books came forth; for they had but too much ground from too many unsound
Expressions contained in their Books, and which some of that Profession have
objected to me, and which I could not answer, otherwise than to acknowledge
them to be unsound; but it would take up too much time at present, to mention
them, and the Books and Pages where these unsound Expressions are to be found.
But if T. E. or any else put me hard to it, I can produce for Evidence, but too
many, that to my certain knowledge have offended and stumbled many of other
Professions. 2. That I have now given them occasion to entertain wrong
Jealousies of us; for on the contrary, by my faithful Testimony to sound
Doctrines of the Christian Faith, and against the opposite Errors, I asserting
that these Errors are not chargable on the body of Friends, nor on the
plurality, but on certain particular Persons; this is the most effectual way,
and indeed the only way, to remove these Jealousies against us. But nothing can
be more effectual to confirm their Jealousies against us, than to find any
among us, either to deny, that any such erroneous Doctrines are chargeable upon
particular Persons, when it is clear, as the Light of the Noonday, they are
chargeable; or to excuse and cloak them, with such strained glosses, as they
cannot bear, and make the Offense the greater.

XXX. page 52. His Perversion and Fallacy, in construing my words, That the
Doctrine of Christ Crucified, etc. was buried in silence; as if I understood it
generally or universally, and respected all Friends every where; whereas my
words have a Restriction and Limitation very expressly; for I do not say buried
in silence by all, or most part, or opposed by all, or most part, but I say,
buried in silence by some, and opposed by others, which I did chiefly intend,
with respect to these parts of America, where the Controversy began among us
about Preaching The Necessity of the Faith of Christ without, as well as of
Christ within; and the Faith of his Manhood, as well as of his God head, being
necessary to our Christianity and Regeneration. But I confess, I find it buried
with too many here away in England, as well as there I found it buried in
America. And for all this Man's loud Clamor against me, until he clear himself
more than he has done, I can conclude no other concerning him, but that the
true Faith of Christ Crucified, and the true and sincere Doctrine of it, is
buried with him also, as in the Sequel will further appear.

XXXI. His Fallacy in excusing them, who do not Preach the Doctrines relating
to the Birth, Death, Resurrection, Assention, etc. of Christ, as to the outward
body, are not so frequently and constantly declared in our public Meetings.
(says he) Ye know also that the Servant is not to frame his Message himself,
but to deliver the Message his Lord gives him to deliver, etc. Plainly
importing that the Lord does not call his Servants or Ministers so frequently
to Preach the Faith of Christ without, as of Christ within; this proves that
in the Opinion of T. E. the Doctrine and Faith of Christ without is not so
Necessary to Regeneration as the Faith of Christ within; or rather not at all
absolutely necessary; for it is absolutely and indispensibly Necessary to
Salvation, to believe that Christ died for our sins, and rose again, according
to Romans 109. 8, It cannot be supposed that God will be wanting to move and call
all his Servants to preach frequently all that is necessary to Salvation, to
all to whom they preach; Therefore his supposing the preaching of it not being
so necessary to be so frequently preached, as that of his inward appearance,
gives us cause to believe he does not judge the Faith of Christ without
necessary to Salvation, but the Faith of Christ within only.

XXXII. page 54. His fallacy and perversion, in feigning and inventing another
excuse, as threadbare as the former, and as a fig-leaf that cannot cover his
Nakedness, nor that of his brethren, who gave the same deceitful excuse as he
does; to which his frivolous excuse I did sufficiently answer him, when he gave
it at a meeting of Conference, when he was present in the Upper Room at
Grace Church Street, about the time of the Yearly Meeting last, viz. That
though the Doctrines of Christ's inward appearance were generally lost and
forgotten, yet the Doctrines relating to the outward appearance of Christ in
the flesh, etc. were not lost, but retained, and preached through all Ages, and
by every sort or sect of professed Christians. To which I then answered him,
and I now again answer, The true Doctrine of the Faith of Christ without, as he
came in the flesh, etc. was as much lost in the time of the Apostasy, as the
true Doctrine of the Faith of Christ within; to wit, not the bare historical
literal Faith of Christ, that I confess was not lost, but the true living
Faith, and the Doctrine of it, was as much lost as that of his inward
appearance, tho none of them was universally lost; the which true Doctrine
teaches, That the only true saving Faith of Christ's Death etc. is wrought in
men's hearts, by divine Illumination, Revelation and Inspiration, and is taught
and begot by the Spirit in men's hearts. But T E. will not say, that this was
not lost; therefore his excuse in this also is vain and insufficient; and
indeed, as touching all these Doctrines that have been retained in the time of
the Apostasy, whether of God or Christ, etc. tho the literal Knowledge and
Faith of them has not been lost, yet the spiritual knowledge of them has been
lost as much as the knowledge and faith of Christ within; for the true
knowledge of both is but one knowledge, and the true faith of both is but one
faith.

XXXIII. Page 57. His perversion of my modest Proposition, about correcting
some unsound words in some Friends Books, as if with purpose, I did hunt for,
discover, and expose, if I can, the nakedness of such as in Comparison of my
self, may justly be reputed and called Fathers in the Truth. But I refer my
self to the impartial Reader, whether my modest Proposition can bear such
uncharitable construction; However, let it be granted, that some might be
reputed Justly my Fathers in the Truth, some of whose words being unsound, and
finding that they have done hurt to weak Readers, and are like to do hurt to
more, I should not think that any good Christian man, that loves the Truth more
than men, would judge the worse of me for correcting them tenderly and
Christianly, not as an Enemy, but as a Friend and Brother.

XXXIV. page 58. His perversion, in falsely accusing me, That I have taken up
Ham's work; by which he reflects not only on me, but on the late Christian
Teachers and Writers, who have with deserved praise noted and corrected the
errors and unsound expressions contained in the books of them called Greek and
Latin Fathers, as Erasmus, Skultetus, and diverse others commendably have done,
and as Friends, have corrected the weak and unsound expressions of diverse of
the blessed Martyrs, and others that have gone before us, who were in Christ,
as to time, before us.

XXXV. p. 58. His perversion of the Scripture words concerning Sem and Japhet,
their going backward to cover their Father's Nakedness, as if there were not a
further matter and mystery in it; For if it had been only that they must not
see their Father's Nakedness, they might have covered their Face and Eyes, and
gone forward, and not see their Father's Nakedness.

XXXVI. page 59. His perversion of my modest proposition, That every one owned
by us, to be a Member of our Christian Society, give some Declaration of their
Faith; which he makes to be an humane imposition, thus changing the commandment
of God to an humane imposition; for it is a commandment of God as to believe
with the heart, so to confess with the mouth, that God has raised Christ from
the dead; And we are commanded to hold fast the profession of our Faith; which
we cannot do, unless we first have it; and we cannot have it without some
Declaration of words; for Works, however so good, without confession, will not
prove a man to be sound in the Christian Faith; nor will confession alone
without good works.

XXXVII. p. 59. His perversion of my words, That I make a verbal confession the
door of admittance into our Society. But this is altogether false; I own no
other Door but Christ, and he both as sincerely believed in, (not with a bare
literal historical Faith, but a divine spiritual Faith begot in our hearts by
the Spirit of Faith) and as sincerely confessed, the sincere living Confession
flowing from a sincere living Faith in the heart.

XXXVIII. page 61. His perversion, That I make a bare profession, verbal
confession, or Declaration of Principles, Doctrines and Practices, the Terms of
Church Communion. This is false; I make them not the Terms at all, when the
profession is, but barely verbal; but when the Confession, or Profession,
flows from the living Faith of Christ, and from his Life in the heart, I
said, and still say, they are secondary Terms of Church Communion, the inward
life of Christ in the heart being the principle.

XXXIX. p. 61. His perverting of my words to a wrong sense, never intended by
me, my words being (The Causless Gro^^^, p. 8.] But that some Principles and
Doctrines and points of Faith, are necessary to be agreed upon, etc. and to be
owned, professed and declared by us, to be as it were the Terms, etc. As if my
sense were, That men were to contrive and cut out their own Terms. But how does
prejudice blind and bias him! Knows he not that men may well agree together
in one faith, by the Spirit's inward working in their hearts, as well as they
may agree together in one prayer, by the Spirit, without contriving and cutting
out their own Terms: I mean not by agreeing, or agreed, an humane political
contrivance, or design, but a divine agreement.

XL. p. 60, 61. His perversion, first in most fraudulently putting a false
gloss upon my words, about the word agreed on, and next deceiving and abusing
his Reader, as if I did put the same gloss upon R. B. his words p. 48. of his
book The Anarchy. Also his most disingenuous endeavoring to make the Reader
believe I wrong R. Barclay in citing some words of his, and that because I cite
not so many of his words as he thought fit to cite after me, in that place, p.
48. But I cited as many as were sufficient to prove, That it is R. Barclays
Doctrine and Testimony that Principles and Doctrines, and the Practices
necessarily depending on them, are as it were the Terms that have drawn us
together, and the Bond by which we became centered into one body and
fellowship, and distinguished from others; yet not this so the Bond, but that
we have also a more inward and invisible, the Life of righteousness: And in my
book called, The Reasons and Causes of the Sep. p. 24 25. I have cited R. B.
his words at great length, to confirm his agreement with me in this particular,
which he will never be able, with all his silly quibles, to overthrow. But when
he cannot fairly dispute, he goes to pervert and invent false things; first, he
quarrels with the word agreed; but I did not say R. B. used the word agreed;
but it must needs be his sense, That whoever believes the same Doctrine, by the
Operation of the Spirit of God in their Hearts, they must needs agree in that
faith. Secondly, he says, R. B. does not make a bare profession, verbal
confession, any Terms at all? and no more do I; and to suppose I do, is an
invention of his own. Thirdly, he says, The Principles, Doctrines and
Practices themselves, he calls not the Terms and Bond strictly and properly,
but as it were. But that manner of Phrase, as it were, does not hinder, that
they are truly in his sense the secondary Terms, or Terms in part, and that
properly enough; but they are not the only, or principal, but the inward Life
of Righteousness; as man's body may be said, as it were, to be the man, and yet
not the principle part of the man; for that is the soul.

XLI. p. 62. His gross perversion, insinuating, that in my book, Some Reasons
and Causes, etc. p. 16. I had cited R. B's words: but it was not his words, but
his Doctrine, that I mention in that place, as to the substance of it, but not
as to that particular Circumstance of answering to some plain questions with
yea or nay: This Circumstance I did not say was in R. B's book, but the
substance of the Doctrine; but all his proof, that it is not his Doctrine, is,
that he assures the Reader it is not: but let the Reader compare my Citations
at length, in my Reasons and Causes of Sep. p. 24. 25. and he shall find it is
his Doctrine, notwithstanding T. E. his boldly affirming it is not.

XLII. p. 58. His perversion, by insinuating, That all the most necessary
Principles and Doctrines of our Faith, both common and peculiar, are published
and made known by the general Consent, Advice and Approbation of the most
Judicious, Wise and Understanding Friends now alive. In answer to my
proposition, desiring it might be so, he says, by way of insinuation, Is that
a new thing to be done now? I reply, it is a new thing yet to be done: and I
believe he is not able to show me that book where it is done by general
consent: for it is not the consent of a few, or of the Second Days Meeting at
London, who take too much upon them, and have published and recommended books
that Truth cannot stand by. that I mean, but the general Consent of the most
Judicious Friends, the which, if it were done, were not to be imposed, but to
be recommended to other Friends.

XLIII. p. 62. His perversion, as if I said, That the lesser matters, of plain
Languages, and plain Habit, etc. were so the Terms of Friends Communion, as if
every one should thereby be entitled to our Communior, who speak the plain
Language, wear plain habit: but I neither said nor thought any such thing.

XLIV. p. 62. His perversion in owning these lesser things, when sincerely
performed. to be fruits effects, and signs of that inward and invisible Life of
Righteousness, but not the Terms so much as in part, as if fruits effects and
signs joined with the inward life of Righteousness, were not a part of these
Terms, which is as much as to say, because the body is not the whole man,
therefore it is no part of a man.

XLV. p. 64. His error and perversion in laying more weight on these lesler
matters of plain language, plain habit, etc. than on the outward profession and
confession, to the great Doctrines and Principles of the Christian Faith. This
is apparent from his words.

XLVI. p. 64. His perversion; in falsely charging me, That I spurn disdainfully
at the advice given me, to retract the bitter Language (as some call it) in my
books; whereas I modestly promise to do it, when they have told me what hard or
bitter words I have given to any that are not due unto them, withal desiring
some to give me their good Example. Is this any disdainful spurning?

XLVII. p. 64. His perversion, in feigning me to have retracted the
acknowledgment I made of my inward infirmities. But that I acknowledged, I had
justly offended any in words or deeds, relating to our differences in
Pensilvania or elsewhere, I say it is false, as diverse can witness.

XLVIII. His perversion, in misapplying James 1. 26. and 3. 11, 12. to me,
which most properly and duly belongs to himself; for surely he that is guilty
of so many Perversions, Fictions and Forgeries in matrers of fact, as well as
otherwise, and false accusations and bitter Language, without any just cause,
bridleth not his Tongue, and has not that sweet Fountain of the Water of Life
in him.

XLIX. p. 67. His perversion, in falsely affirming, that I was not condemned in
Pensilvania, without hearing, conviction or Trial: for as none of their
Judgments intimate, that I was so much as present, so the Evidences given, as
described in some of the books, sufficiently prove it:

L. His falsely charging me, That I am not in Unity with faithful friends, and
falsely and bitterly accusing me of hardness, that I said in my printed paper,
called, The Causless Ground, etc. I declare my real intention to remain in
Unity with all faithful friends every where; and his false and gross flander,
That my meeting with friends, and continuing to exercise my gift of Ministry
among them, is a very great exercise and burden to friends; and also his
slandering me, That I gave such interruption, and made so great disturbance at
the first public Meeting I appeared at in London, as the like has scarce been
known in any Meeting in that City. Here is a complex and bundle of false
Accusations and Misrepresentations; to which I answer briefly, thus; As I am at
present in Unity with faithful Friends, so I still declare my sincere
Intention, to remain in Unity with faithful Friends; and neither he, nor any of
his Abettors, can prove me guilty of making any breach or violation of true
Unity with faithful Friends, seeing I am one with them in Doctrine and
Practice, and the sincerity of my Spirit and Heart is to be judged by the
sincerity of the Doctrine I Preach, and the Innocence of my Life and
Conversation in Practice, as Christ has taught, to judge the Tree by its
Fruits. But it is too great Presumption in T. E. and some others, to judge that
a Man's Spirit is wrong, when they have nothing wherewithal to blame him justly,
either in Doctrine or Practice. I do believe that he, and such as he, vainly
boast of a false Gift; such a high Gift, or Spirit of discerning, is not given
to him, or them, nor indeed is commonly given, to all sincere Christians; and
if such a Latitude be allowed, that a Man shall be condemned to be of a wrong
Spirit, when they have nothing justly to charge him with, either in Doctrine or
Conversation; What Confusion shall this bring in, and disorder, and rash, and
false Judgment? The innocentest Man living shall at this rate be condemned, by
saying, he is of a wrong Spirit. And as some innocent Men have thus been most
unjustly judged, so some very bad have been justified upon this high pretense,
of a Spirit of discerning, to judge Men without regard to their Fruits. But the
general rule that Christ has given us, is to be observed above the vain
pretenses of some proud boasters, which is, to judge the Tree by its fruits;
and even in that case to give a right Judgment, is a spiritual gift of God, and
proceeds from a true spiritual discerning. But is it not apparent in T. E.
and some others that promote his candalous book, that they seek to drive me
forth from the Unity and Fellowship of Friends, by suggesting, reporting and
publishing false things against me, as David's accusers did against him,
concerning whom he complained to Saul, 1 Samuel 26. 19 If the Lord has stirred
thee up against me, let him accept an Offering: But if they be the children of
men, they are cursed before the Lord, (so the Latin Version of Ju^ius) for they
have driven me out this day from abiding in the inheritance of the Lord,
saying, go serve other Gods. But my faith and hope is in the Lord, whose
blessed power I feel, that I shall be preserved in Unity with the Lord, and
with his faithful People, notwithstanding the evil Endeavors of T. E. and his
Party, who seek to drive me out, from abiding in the Inheritance of the Lord.
But I am so far from pronouncing a Curse upon them for their evil devisings
against me, that it is my sincere desire that God may bless them, with true
Repentance, for that and all their other Sins. And as to the Exercise of my
Ministry among Friends, hundreds bear Witness, that my Ministry is both
refreshing and Edifying to them, and is burdensome to none, but to the ignorant
and unfaithful, and such as are prejudiced against me by false Reports. And as
to that Interruption and Disturbance that happened at the first public
Meeting, I appeared in at London, many can, and do bear me Witness, that I was
not the Cause, nor beginning of it. And why should T. E. or any other call it a
Disturbance in me to bear a public Testimony against a Man, that ought not to
be owned to be a Minister of Christ, viz. S. J. because of his proud and
persecuting Spirit and Practices; nor ought it to be reckoned a disturbance,
when Error and false Doctrine is Preached in a Public Assembly, in a zealous
Christian Spirit; to reprove it, when things are come to that pass especially,
that private Reprof is not regarded; for in my so doing, I have the Example of
Friends. of good Note, that have done the like before me. And why does not T.
E. remember the disturbance he himself made (which I heard some say, was
greater than that other) at a public Meeting at Grace Church Street some time
ago, (the most public Meeting of Friends at London) that gave great Offense to
hundreds, in his speaking against a Person, whose Ministry was well owned by
hundreds, some of which cried out on him, at that time, shame, shame. And as to
my general Department in Meetings, many can bear me Witness, it is peaceable,
having no Inclination nor purpose to interrupt any, though diverse have uncivily
and unchristianly Interrupted me, and otherwise behaved most unfairly toward
me. And to this bundle or sum of Fashoods and Misrepresentations, in the last
place, let it be added, his accusing of my innocent true Words, as savouring of
a boasting Spirit, because I humbly and modestly did mention my Thirty Years
Labor in the Work of the Ministry, and God having blessed my Labors with great
Success, in being an Instrument to the bringing many unto the blessed Unity and
Fellowship with his Spirit, and one with another in the same. I appeal to all
that have a true Savor, whether these Words savor of a boasting Spirit, I only
using them by way of Argument, to persuade some that had a wrong jealousy of
me, That I intend no breach among faithful Friends. But whether his words do
not savor of deep Prejudice, and want of Charity, in saying, he cannot but
express his fear, that I have been instrumental to draw many more from the
blessed Unity and fellowship of the Gospel, than ever I brought into it; for
which (he says) the doom was long since set, Ezekiel. 18. 24. For that I have
been Instrumental to draw any one from the blessed Unity, he can never prove;
and the doom that is set; Ezekiel. 18. 24. belongs to himself, (but not to me)
if to be guilty of so many Forgeries, false Accusations, and
Misrepresentations, be a turning away from his Righteousness, which formerly he
either had, or at least seemed to have.

There are diverse other gross Perversions, and false Accusations in his Book,
that I pass by, judging these noticed by me, are more than ever he will be able
fairly to answer, and to clear himself of.

His bitter Language and Revilings, calling me Vain, page 9. charging me with
an impetuous height of Mind, setting my self in an exalted Spirit of Pride and
Self conceit, etc. page 10. and with Insincerity, double Dealing, falseness of
Spirit, great Hypocrisy, great Deceit, as having no Conscience, as being an
open Opposer, and the greatest despiser of the Spirits Teachings, page 10. 13,
14, 15, 16, 20. etc. I shall take no further notice of, then to appeal to all
impartial Persons, whether T. E. be not highly guilty of that Vice, which he
unjustly would cast upon me, as being a Man that have no Bridle to my Tongue,
because that with sharp words I have reproved the gross Errors, and wicked
Practices of some in America, etc. But must he, and these joined with him, take
the liberty to give me the worst of Names, and the foulest reviling Language,
(without proving me guilty of deserving any one of them;) for, What can he say
worse of any Man, than he has said of me, and all this pass as Piety and true
Religion in him? If he and they blame hard and sharp words universally,
especially given to them, not yet denied, to be of the same Society, then why
does he give them to me, if he allows they may be given in some Cases; the
merit of the Cause; and what case is proper is duly to be examined, and left
to the Judgment of impartial Men, which I freely do, and chiefly and most
principally to that most just and impartial Witness of God, in every Man's
Conscience, to which every Man must stand or fall.

His saying, page, 72. The way to recover the deceived, is to discover, lay
open, and witness against the deceivers, having noticed in my printed Epistle,
that may serve as a Preface to this my Answer; I shall not faither consider
here, but that it serves wholly to my purpose, (and nothing to his, seeing be
has not proved me a deceiver, in the least particular) as an Apology to excuse
both this my present Reply to his scandalous book, and to all my other books,
relating to these differences; and the rather, that it comes from the mouth or
pen of a professed adversary.

But whereas he alleges, it is strange I should complain of the yearly
Meeting, for not condemning the Friends there, viz. in Pensilvania, without all
hearing, conviction or trial, which it must have done, had it condemned them
who are absent and distant several thousand miles. I answer, I did not complain
of the yearly Meeting, there being no word of the yearly meeting mentioned in
all my printed paper; but whereas they who gave out, that Paper called, A true
account of the Proceedings, etc. advised me to call in my printed books, I put
them in mind, that in order to a true reconciliation, they should have advised
them of the other side, to call in their false Judgments, and to give out a
Testimony acknowledging their error, in several passages of injustice toward
me, which they might have done by way of advice, tho without giving a formal
Judgment against them, being absent. But if they thought it not Just to give a
Judgment against them of the other side, being absent, what hindered them from
giving a Judgment against S. Jennings, being present, and who had chiefly
injured us, and me in particular; as also against Th. Ducket, who was present.
And why have they given a Judgment against our Friends in Pensilvania, and
West-Jersey, who were not present any more than they of the other side, by
giving out a contradictory Judgment to what was given out by the Yearly Meeting
at Burlington, signed by 70 persons? And seeing it is an undeniable rule of
Justice, not to Judge the person that is present in the absence of his
Accusers; but that the accusers and the accused be both present in person; why
did they judge me in the absence of my Accusers, in Pensilvania? If it be said,
they had sufficient evidence from my printed books, so had they as sufficient
evidence from their Manuscripts and Letters signed with their own hands, of the
Other side; and therefore it was not according to the rule of true Justice, to
have given any Judgment against me, tho present, in my accusers, and opposite
parties absence, unless they had dealt impartially, with respect to both, and
laid equal weight on the authentic evidences I produced against them, from
their own Manuscripts, signed with their own hands, and the true Copy of the
Court-Sessions, signed by the hand of the Clerk, as on my printed books. And
both sides being alike absent, or present, two of their side (the third
deceased) present, and three present on our side, it is an apparent quible and
shift, to give it as a Reason why they of the Other side in Pensilvania, had
not Judgment passed against them, being absent, and yet to judge G. K. his
Friends, who also were absent, and to Judge him in the absence of his accusers:
and if they think it was sufficient to have S. Jennings, and Th. Ducket present
to be his accusers, by the rule of Justice, it was sufficient to have G. K. and
Th. Budd to be present to be Sam. Jennings his accusers; so the case is as
broad and long the one way as the other, and either G. K. should not have been
Judged, or at least Sam. Jennings should not have been so connived and passed
by: yea so publicly countenanced and owned and G. K. so publicly censured and
hardly treated, as both then and since.

HIS Postscript I am little concerned to take notice of, being a pretended
Reply to two things in the printed paper of R. H. which he and some others so
highly aggravating, it was, and is still expected by many, that T. E. would
discover in the several particulars of it wherein he is so highly guilty, the
which he not having done, leaves a suspicion in the minds of some, that he had
better to have removed, by a full and particular Answer to the whole, than to
nibble only at these two, wherein he has said nothing to give just
satisfaction; for as it may be granted, that in great Assemblies, where all are
unanimous, as well as in lesser Assemblies (as it happened at the adjourned
Meeting in Philadelphia), the Judgment may be signed by one of the Members; so
when the Judgment is not unanimous, as it was not in that Assembly, one party
should not call that the Judgment of the whole, which was but the Judgment of a
part, supposing them to be the majority, it not being the way of Friends in
their Assemblies, to carry it by plurality of Voices; and had it come to a
signing with the hands of particular persons, as it happened in that paper
signed by 66 concerning J. S. and I. W. it is sufficiently probable diverse
would have refused to sign it, that said little or nothing against it in the
open Meeting, it being sufficiently known, that many are silent to things which
they do not always approve. To the second, he takes it barely for granted,
that the Yearly Meeting at Burlington, that gave forth that Judgment concerning
G. K. and T. L. etc. was a separate Meeting, which being as readily denied by
me, as affirmed by him, leaves the matter undetermined to some, until it
further appear which of the two sides might be most justly called the separate
Meeting. But that which casts the Balance is, when it is duly understood,
that they whom he calls the Separate Meeting, stood up for Truth against the
vile Errors, that too many of the other side were guilty of, and which the rest
of them did cloak and cover; and it is left to the impartial Judgment of the
Readers, whether it does not appear that they of the other side were the
Separatists, in the worst sense, after the due consideration of what is said
pro and contra, in reading these my late books relating to these differences,
and T. E. his late book in opposition, and this my Reply. But that the said
meeting was made up of some others that seldom or never went to Friends
meetings at all, as he alleges, it can easily be proved, that where one such
can be mentioned, that made up that called by him, the separate meeting, or
were otherwise unqualified to give Judgment in such a case, three can be
mentioned of the other side, or rather more, and much more unqualified, that
gave a contrary Judgment at the other meeting at that time, as can be
sufficiently proved, by comparing persons with persons, and names with names,
and it is evidently apparent, that what they could not do with the weight of
Truth and Justice, they labored to do with number of Names, diverse of whom
were manifestly known to be of bad Fame and Reputation. But it is not what
Number of Names makes a Judgment authentic and weighty, but what Truth and
Justice is in it.

THE END.
It was desired by John Raunce, that these Lines should be herewith Printed.
AT this time I would not have taken notice of T. Elwood, but to answer some
who are troubled about his unchristian dealing by me, and are desirous I should
say something to T. E's Postscript, as it is in his Pamphlet of three sheets
against my paper of Observations, etc.

In which Postscript T. Ellwood wordeth it after this manner; Since the former
part was written, I hear J. Raunce has hatched another false story against me
(which is, says T. E.) that I did not allow my Father a Shroud, but that he
was wrapped in an old Moth-eaten Blanket, etc.

The Charge I deny, and say, I did not hatch that story which Thomas Ellwood
chatgeth upon me; But this is the truth of the business, so far as I know; The
man that helped to lay T. Ellwood's Father into his Coffin, and saw him nailed
up in the Coffin, that very man gave the following Relation, which he spoke
before many persons, and did affirm very confidently, That Old T. Ellwood had
no other Shroud but somewhat of an Old Moth-eaten Blanket; and it was so little
and so short, that it would scarce cover his body. He had no Cap on his Head,
nor any Muffler for his Jaws: The Shroud was so sorry a thing, that he said, he
would not have given 6 d. for it. And surely T. Ellwood has no cause to accuse
me, and do as he has done in some of his Papers: and to tell so much of his
Kindness and Dealings by his deceased Father; and how that he had given
direction for his Interment, and that he went thither to discharge the Charge
of his Sickness and Funeral. Whereas he would not afford his own presence to
attend his Deceased Father's Body to a Burying Place belonging to Friends,
within one Mile where his Father dyed. But Thomas Ellwood rather chose to give
Twelve Pence a piece to four Poor Men to carry his Father's Corpse into the
Parish steeple-yard, where they Laid him in such place as was commonly made use
off for Vagabonds and Beggars, to the shame of an Undutyful Son, as it is well
known, etc.

But I having more at Large in my other Papers mentioned the Truth of things,
against which Thomas Ellwood may Cavil, and use a multitude of Words, But he
has not yet proved one thing false that I have written.

So I need say little now but to answer the Expectation of those whose desire
it was to know whether I was the hatcher of that story, which Thomas Ellwood
charge upon me, in his Postcript, And I say I was not the Author of it, But
it was the Relation of the man who helped to lay Thomas Ellwood's Father into
his Coffin, as is above mentioned.

J. R.


