AN EXAMINATION OF THE REFLECTIONS ON The Theory of the Earth.

Together with A DEFENSE of the REMARKS ON Mr. Whiston's New Theory.

By J. KEILL A. M. of Ball. Coll. Oxon.



OXFORD, Printed at the THEATER for Henry Clemens Bookseller. 1699.

Imprimatur,

Will. Paynter VICE-CAN. OXON.
June 30. 1699.
An EXAMINATION OF THE REFLECTIONS ON The Theory of the Earth.
THE Defense of the Theory which has been lately Published in Answer to my
Examination of it, is styled Reflections on the Theory of the Earth; But if its
Author had observed the Title, and made more Reflections on the Theory, though
fewer on the Examiner, he had acted more like a true Philosopher, and perhaps
might have saved himself the labor of Publishing any thing more than an
ingenuous acknowledgement of its errors, and me the trouble of a Reply. But
since the Reflecter has been pleased to follow another course, I must take his
work, and consider it in the method it lies.

He first sets down three propositions which He calls the foundation of the
whole work, viz. That the Primitive or Antediluvian Earth was of a different
form from the present. 2dly. That the face of the Earth as it rose from a
Chaos, was smooth, regular, and uniform, without Mountains and Rocks, and
without an open Sea. 3dly. That the disruption of the Abyss or the dissolution
of the Primeval Earth was the cause of the Universal Deluge. To these he adds a
Corollary drawn from the primary propositions concerning the position of the
Earth; in which he says, that the posture of the Antediluvian Earth or its
Axis, was not oblique TO THE AXIS OF THE SUN or of the Ecliptic as it is now;
BUT LAY PARALLEL TO THE AXIS OF THE SUN, and perpendicular to the plane of the
Ecliptic. These he makes the only fundamental propositions of the Theory,
(though the Theorist in his ninth Chapter Book 2d. makes one more concerning the
oval figure of the Earth) and tells us, That he who will attack it to the
purpose, must throw down in the first place these leading propositions, and
that if the Examiner had taken this method, and confuted the proofs that are
brought in confirmation of each of them, he needed have done no more; but if
instead of this, a loose stone be only picked out here and there, or a
Pinnacle struck off, it will not weaken the foundation.

I cannot imagine how this Author can assert, that I have not followed this
method in refuting the Theory; for if these he has mentioned be the substantial
and vital parts, I have examined every one of them, as will plainly appear to
any one, who will read the Examination; so that what he has said of me in
another case, may be very well applied to himself, That either he never read
over, or does not remember, or which is still worse, does wilfully
misrepresent what I have written on this subject.

The design of the first Chapter of the Examination is not as this Defender
imagines: to prove that the Deluge might have been made by a miracle, but to
answer the general Argument which the Theorist with a boldness little becoming
a Divine, brought for the truth of his Theory, viz. English Theory Chapter 7. Book
I.
that it could be made no other way, and therefore his method being the only
way possible, was the real one. To this I answered, that I thought it possible
the Deluge might come by a miracle, and that God Almighty was the immediate
cause thereof, the Scriptures having given us such an account of it in these
emphatical terms, (Genesis 6.17.) Behold says God, I even I do bring a flood of
waters upon the Earth.

But the Defender is displeased because I did not tell him wherein this miracle
consisted. The truth is, I never thought it my business to explain miracles;
and I wish no Theorists or Philosophers had set up for it. I should be well
contented to find in their writings a Mechanical and easy account of the common
and ordinary Phoenomena of nature. But it seems this Author will not be
satisfied unless I tell him how the increase of waters at the time of the
Deluge was made on the Earth. I answer, that according to the Scripture, some
of the water was raised from the great deep, and sustained on the surface of
the Earth by the hand of Omnipotence, a great part of it descended by forty
days continual rain; the waters which occasioned this rain being either newly
created, or risen from other matter turned into that Element, or brought from
some other place best known to the Divine Omniscience: which of all these three
methods was used, I will not take upon me to determine; but I think it might
have been done by any of them, notwithstanding the reasons alleged in the
second and third Chapters of the Theory, which this Author thinks me obliged to
answer. It seems he thinks them very strong and convincing, though when I wrote
the Examination, I thought them so weak and precarious that it would not be
worth while to take notice of them. English Theory Chapter 3. Book I.
The arguments against a Creation of waters are founded on a notoriously false
notion of the Cartesian Philosophy, viz. That matter and space are the same:
according to which principle it is not easy to understand, how either Creation
or Annihilation can be possible. Nor do I think the arguments against
Transmutation of Air or other bodies into water, of greater force than the
former: For if all bodies be only different in their modifications, motions
and figures, I can see no reason why any body may not be changed, and put on
the form of another; and therefore, if according to the Theorists principle
there is no vacuity in Nature, not only the Air may be changed into Water, but
also all the subtle matter which fills its Pores; and according to this
principle of a Plenum, that subtle matter will make as much Water as if the
same bulk of absolutely solid matter were transformed.

The Defender alleges, that if I proceed upon such Waters as were already in
being, and make them either Supercelestial or Subterranneous, I must tell him
WHAT THESE WATERS ARE, and must answer such objections as are brought against
either sort in the second and third Chapters of the Theory; if he means that I
should tell him the nature of this Water, and of what sort it was, I answer,
that it might be common Water, for that will be sufficient to drown the World;
but if He designs that I should tell him from what place it was brought, and
how it came there, I must own I know not: For to answer the question which he
makes in another place, I have not yet been all over the Universe to make
Observations, nor have I had any Revelation made me; it is enough both for him
and me to suppose this Water like common Water, and that 'twas brought upon the
Earth by the Power of God. The arguments which the Theorist brings against the
possibility of any such Waters, are sufficiently answered in the 30th. and
31st. Pages of the Examination.

After this, the Defender passes to the second Chapter of the Examination,
where I find he has but little to say to the arguments, though he would fain have
them appear small and trivial. I affirm in that Chapter that most of those
bodies which composed the outward Crust of the Earth were heavier than Water,
and by consequence must descend both through the Oil and Water also; and that
though small grains of dust, specifically heavier than Oil, if thrown upon it
would not descend because of its tenacity, yet if the weight of these particles
chanced to be increased by the additions of more, they must fall down. To this
He makes answer, that the parts which formed the Crust were not huge lumps of
solid matter, but little tenuious particles or small dust. Did not I make the
same supposition, and yet showed that though these small particles of dust when
they first fell, might have been sustained by the Oil, yet when their bulk came
to be increased by the falling of a great many others, their weight would be
augmented mented proportionally; upon which account they must descend like
other huge lumps of solid matter, and that long before ever they could form a
solid Crust, that would be necessary to support the weight of all the rest of
the descending particles? But the Defender has wisely passed over this part of
the argument, knowing it would be a hard matter to answer it.

I w^sh the Theorist or his Defender would be so kind as to give us a specimen
of this Operation for the making of an Earth, and because it would be too hard
a task to make a whole One, I would desire them to make a small portion of One;
let them take a Vessel, in which let some Water be poured in, and after that
some Oil, and I would have them try if by throwing on the Oil, small grains of
Sand, Gravel, Clay, Stone, and other Materials heavier than Water, they can
form a Crust: and we shall begin to think the rest of their Theory possible, if
this Experiment succeeds.

I had another Objection against such a formation of the Crust, upon the
consideration of the great height, from which these particles would fall, by
which their force and celerity must be very much increased, and therefore of
necessity they must pierce the oily liquid, and break through to the bottom; this
the Defender allows of, providing these particles descended like stones or any
other ponderous bodies; but He affirms these particles descended not in that
manner, but rather like flakes of Snow hovering and playing in the Air, their
course being often interrupted and diverted, and their force broken before they
arrived at the end of their journey. To this I answer, that though these
particles were small, yet they were ponderous, were small, yet they were
ponderous, being of the same intrinsic gravity with the matter of which the
outward Crust of the Earth is made up, and upon that account we cannot suppose
them to be like flakes of Snow, whose weight is but small, and their surfaces
very large in proportion to their bulk, which therefore must suffer a far
greater resistance than we can suppose these descending particles to have done.
Besides, if we consider the great height from whence these particles fell,
which the Theorist affirms to be as high as the Moon; and the thinness of the
Air at such a height (which must be extremely pure when Mr. Newton calculates
that now at a Semidiamaters distance from the Earth; the Air is so rare, that
one inch of our common Air near the surface, if so much expanded as that of
Saturn) we must of necessity think, that the descending particles would not
meet with so great a resistance as the Defender imagines. For what ever
interruption or diversion they met with from the Air in their descent, would be
inconsiderable. But the greatest part of it would arise from their falling on
other particles which were also descending, though not so fast, by which, though
the velocity of the swiftest body would be diminished, yet according to the
Laws of motion, the momentum or quantity of motion of both bodies taken
together would remain the same, and by consequence their force upon the oily
Orb would be also the same. I know no way the Theorist can take to answer these
objections, but by supposing that the Creation was neither in Spring, Summer
nor Autumn, as is commonly supposed; but that it was in the Winter when both
the watery and oily Orbs were frozen, and had consistence enough to sustain
these particles till they were formed into a solid Arch, able to sustain it
self; and if he will embrace such an opinion, I shall not take the trouble of
refuting it, having so many others of the same weight upon my hands. The Reader
may observe, that He takes not the least notice of the argument I brought
against him from Scripture, to prove that there were Metals in the primitive
Earth, which he plainly denies.

After these things this Author comes to quarrel with me for making
insinuations and suggestions, as if the Theorist did not own the hand of a
particular and extraordinary providence in the formation of the Earth. I own I
did make such insinuations, and I leave the Reader to judge whether I had not
reason to make them. He has openly rejected the History of the formation of the
Earth as delvier'd by Moses, and has deduced it purely from natural causes, and
the necessary Laws of Mechanism. Now if the matter of the Earth from a Chaotick
state did of necessity form and settle it self into a habitable Earth, from the
sole necessary principles of Mechanism and Gravitation, as the Theorist has
deduced it; I would fain know how this opinion differs from the Epicurean,
which the Theorist so deservedly derides? I know the Theorist talks very much
of Providence both ordinary and extraordinary, and makes most excellent
Discourses against the Epicureans for denying of it, which I was so far from
not reading or forgetting, or even wilfully misrepresenting, that I
transcribed some of them in the Examination, as an argument against his own
Theory.

It is a common thing with Theorists and Philosophers, who are great
Politicians in their way, to disown any opinion which they think will bring
upon them the displeasure of any considerable part of Mankind, though it follows
plainly from their Principles; or if that cannot be done, they hide and color
it the best way they can, that it may not appear too open and plain. Thus the
Theorist protests, that he meant no harm, when he affirmed the History of the
Creation as it was delivered by Moses, to be fabulous, and ridiculed the
Scriptural relation of the Fall; and I have really the charity to believe him;
yet hereby he has set the Atheists and Theists in a method of attacking our
Religion, and given them Schemes by which they think they can defend their own
Principles.

After this the Defender passes to consider what is said in the third Chapter
of the Examination about Mountains; He owns it to be a subject that deserves
consideration, and He says, that if the Examiner can prove that there were
Mountains in the primitive Earth, He will undertake that the Theorist shall
make no further defense of his Theory. The Theorists great argument why the
face of the primitive Earth was smooth and without Mountains, depended on the
supposition that the Chaos from whence it took its original, was perfectly a
fluid Mass. This I affirmed to be a precarious Hypothesis without any
foundation in nature, since the greatest part of the bodies we have in the
Earth, are hard and solid, and there not being a quantity of Water in Nature,
sufficient enough to moisten and liquify them, the Chaos could not be so fluid
as 'twas necessary ^t should be, to form it self into an uniform smooth body.
Besides that, the greatest part of them, such as Stones and Metals, are
incapable of being liquify'd by water. The Defender's reply to this is, Very
good, what is this to the Theory? Does the Theorist any where affirm that there
were Stones or Metals in the Chaos, or that they were liquify'd by Water? The
Theorist owns no such doctrine or supposition. I hope the Defender will not
think this any answer to the objection; I am sure none of his Readers can. I
thought that it concerned the Theorist very much, to prove his Chaos to be a
fluid Mass of matter; for otherwise it is not necessary that it should have its
surface smooth, regular and uniform; at least it is fitting that the objections
against its fluidity should be answered. For if the Examiner can prove that the
Chaos was not altogether so fluid as the Theorist imagines, and from thence
show, that there was no necessity that the face of the Earth should be smooth
and without Mountains, then the Theorists argument must be of little force, and
that objection will still very much weaken the truth of the Theory.

I freely own indeed, that the World was produced from a Chaos, such a one
namely as is recorded to us in Scripture; but I am far from granting that the
Theorist's notion is any ways agreeable to it, he supposes that all the
Elements Air, Water and Earth, with all the principles of Terrestial Bodies
were reduced into one fluid Mass, and mingled with one another, so that the
parts of any one sort could not be discerned as distinct from the rest. This I
suppose is a new sort of Chaos which never existed any where but in fancy.

It were easy for me here to assume the Defenders method, and argue against
it, by putting him questions, how, when and where, was this mixing and blending
together of all the Materials of Heaven and Earth? By whom, upon what design,
and for what purpose was this done? Was it to the end that they might all
settle themselves again in order, and each take its place, according to its
specific gravity; but if the great parts of the World were for the most part
so before, what necessity was there for disturbing them, only that they might
range themselves orderly again. He would do well also to tell us, from whence
he had this account of the Chaos, from Sacred or Profane Writers, if from the
latter, we are to value their authority no further than they are agreeable to
the Scriptures, since it would be no hard task to prove, that it was from the
Sacred History that the Heathen Writers first drew their knowledge of the
Chaos, which they afterward corrupted with their own fancies. In the Holy
Scriptures I can find no account of the mixing and reducing of all the
Materials of the World into one fluid Mass. Moses indeed tells us, that the
Earth was Tohu and Bohu, which we render without Form and Void, and can we from
thence conclude, that all the parts of it were fluid and mixed together? We may
allow, that the Jews understood the sense of these words better than we, or any
Heathen Writers, and they give them a contrary meaning; for according to the
Syriack Translation, those words signify, that the Earth was without either
Habitation or Cultivation, Terra erat deserta and inculta; in the Chaldaick
Paraphrase they signify, deserta and vacua. The Targum of Jonahan B. Vziel,
supposes their meaning to be this, Terra autem erat stupor and inanitas, vasta
a filiis hominum and vacua ab omni jumento; with which the Jerusalem Targum
does well agree, according to which Paraphrase they signify, that the Earth
was stupor and inanitas and desolatio a filiis hominum, and omni bestia vacua,
as that Paraphrase is rendered in Latin. We may conclude from thence therefore,
that the Jews thought that all that was meant by the words Tohu and Bohu was,
that the Earth was Void and Uncultivated, without out Ornaments and
Inhabitants, Men or Beasts, or any sort of Ammals.

Nor was the opinion of the ancient Christian Fathers any wise different from
that of the Jews as to this matter, Tertullian in his book against Hermogenes
says, Vnde compertus es Hermogenes uniformem and inconditam illam fuisse (...)
ateriam quoe ut invisibilis latebat; and in the 30th. Chapter he plainly proves
from Scripture, that there was not a confused heap of matter mixed and blended
together, out of which all things were made. St. Ambrose in the 8th. Chapter of
his Hexameron says, that the Earth was incomposit a utpote solertis agricolae
inarata culturis, quia adhuc deerat cultor, and again, Terra crat incomposita
quia nuda gignentium, nec thoris herbosa riparum, nec opaca nemoribus, nec
laeta segetibus, nec umbrosa superciliis montium, nec odora floribus, nec grata
vinetis. St. Basil tells us, that the true beauty and composition of the Earth
arises from its great fertility, (...), In his 2d. Homily in Hexam. near the
beginning.
whereby it is productive of all sorts of Vegetables, such as Plants of all
kinds, lofty and tall Trees, as well those that bear Fruit as those that afford
us none, fragrant and sweet Flowers differing both in color and smell; and the
Earth says he, being naked and unfurnished with any of those sorts of
Ornaments, might well be said by the Scriptures, to be Void and without Form.

In those discourses of the ancient Jews and primitive Fathers, there is not
one word of a perfectly fluid Mass of matter out of which all things were made,
there is nothing there of the mixing and blending together of the Elements, and
all the Materials of Heaven and Earth; in their Writings we cannot see that
such a Chaos as the Theorist fancies, was ever either delivered or supposed: we
find that their notion about the origination of the World was very different
from the Theorists, whose Hypothesis is not therefore founded on any authority
which is sufficient to induce us to believe it.

Nor has his opinion any more foundation in reason than authority, for if we
should allow of the Theorists account of the Waters that are in the Earth, and
from thence by computation compare the solid bodies with those that are fluid,
we shall find, that the liquids are not the hundred thousandth part of the
solid bodies in the Earth; nay, if we should take in the Atmosphere, the whole
System of fluids will not amount to the thousandth part of the solid bodies:
from which it plainly appears, that the Chaos cannot be thought to have been in
any manner an entirely fluid Mass, but rather a hard and solid one. For if we
take hard bodies as Earth or Clay, and fluid as Water or Oil, and mix them
together in the proportion of eight thousand to one, or even in that of a
thousand to one; that is, take one inch of fluid matter for a thousand inches
of solid matter, the fluids will have but a very small effect on the solids.
Since therefore the whole composition of the Chaos, when all its parts were
mixed and blendeed together, must not have been fluid, but rather hard and
solid; I hope the Defender will allow the objection to be to the purpose, and
of force against the Theory, which is founded on a contrary supposition.

Having thus proved that the far greatest part of those bodies which composed
the Chaos, were firm and solid, I think it easy to show, why there is no
necessity that an Earth formed from such a composition, should be smooth and
regular; for it is not so with solids as with fluids, where all range
themselves according to their intensive gravities, and settle themselves into a
regular and even surface; whereas solids take their place according to the
order they happen to be in, that body coming soonest to its rest, which is
nearest the Center, without any respect had to gravity or levity, and where
these bodies happened to be thickest or highest, or their parts less coherent,
there also after their fall would their surfaces be highest, and the face of
the whole would be very rugged and mountainous; the liquids, if we should allow
them to separate from the solids, would descend and fill the Holes, Cavities,
and Caverns that were made by the falling of these irregular pieces on one
another, and what was more than sufficient for this, might spread its self upon
the Valleys, and leave great protuberances of the solid Mass, as great as any
of our Mountains standing out above the surface of the Water.

But granting, that the greatest part of the Chaos was a fluid Mass, I brought
another argument in the Examination to show, how the face of the Earth might be
mountainous and uneven, by supposing in the Chaos a great many bodies, which,
by being in a great measure hollow, or fastened to some other matter of less
gravity than that of the fluid Chaos, would swim on the surface of it, after
the subsiding of all the rest, and some parts of them standing above the
surface of the watery Orb, would form Mountains. The Defender answers this, as
he does most other objections, by a question, Who told me that these lumps of
matter were hollow? Is not this precarious, or rather Chimerical and
ridiculous? I answer, I came to know this after the same manner, that the
Theorist knew there were neither Mountains nor Seas in the Primitive Earth; if
it be a precarious Hypothesis I cannot help it, but it is my comfort, that if
every thing that is precarious be also Chimerical and ridiculous, I know whole
Theories that will be so likewise.

After this he falls into a strain of very learned questions, What made those
solid lumps hollow, when, or where, or how were their inward parts scoped out
of them? I know none but Theorists that can give a positive answer to such nice
questions; I am content to say, they might have been so ordered by God Almighty
at first, for that very end that they might swim on the Abyss: though another
Theorist says, that the fluid Abyss was much denser and heavier than the
Mountains, and therefore they could not sink: and it is indifferent to me which
of these answers he takes, or if he find out some other of his own, which he
can easily do if he has a mind to it, that he will like better. It is enough
for me to show, that there is no necessity that an Earth arising from a Chaos,
should have its surface smooth and uniform, as the Theorist pretends it must.

But this Defender thinks that it is my opinion, that Mountains were really
sorm'd after this manner, and from thence he proceeds to collect, from my
Principles and Concessions, that there could be no Sea in the Primitive Earth,
and that an Orb of Earth must have been built over the Abyss, and after all he
concludes, that I have no good hand in making Mountains.

This way of writing would almost tempt me to believe, that he had never read
over that Chapter which he pretends to answer; for by the reading of it, one
may plainly see that it was not my design to settle this, or any other new
Theory of my own, about the formation of Mountains; nay, I positively declared,
that I thought there were other principles concurring to the formation of
Mountains, besides gravitation and the known laws of motion: my business was
only to show the weakness of the Theorist's arguments, and that an Earth
arising from a Chaos, might have been uneven, rugged, and mountainous,
notwithstanding he asserted, that it must necessarily form its self into a
smooth, regular, and uniform Figure. For my part, I think it absolutely
indifferent to the question, what way Mountains were made at the beginning of
the World, whether by Mechanical causes, or by the immediate hand of God
Almighty, or if by hollowing and making a channel for the Sea, the Earth was
raised and laid upon the dry land to form Mountains; (which by the by, is not
so ridiculous or so repugnant to Calculation, as the Theorist imagines) it was
sufficient to my purpose to show, that there was no necessity that the face of
the Primitive Earth should be without Mountains.

Having thus laid open the weakness of the Theorists arguments, I endenvoured
in the next place to show, the great use and advantage that Mountains afforded
to mankind: The Theorist asserted, that they did not consist of any proportion
of parts, that is referable to any design, or which had the least footsteps of
Art or Counsel. This I thought was a bold and ill grounded assertion, since it
is certain, that they are so far from being placed upon the Earth without any
design or contrivance, that they are justly reckoned by the Philosophers,
amongst the most useful, as well as the most stupendous parts of nature;
without them we could have had no Rivers or Springs, which are things necessary
to us, not only for our Commodious living, bur for our very subsistence. One
would think that this consideration was a sufficient argument to make us
believe that Mountains were not great Ruins, or the rubbish of a broken World;
but that they had been placed upon the Earth at the Creation, with a design
that they might serve the Antediluvian World, with the same advantages and uses
they afford us in the present One. For it is certain, that they had Rivers and
Springs as well as we, which they could not have in a smooth Earth, where there
were no Mountains; in which, Rivers were to have their origin, no upper and
higher grounds from which the water was to descend on the face of the Earth.

Instead of answering the argument, He makes a long declamation against me for
asserting that it is impossible to live without Rocks and Mountains. He accuses
me for confining the Divine Omnipotence and Omniscience, to one single mode or
fabric of a World, and of thinking all the Planets cast in the same mould: Who
(s^ys he) ever observed Mountains and Rocks in Jupiter, or in the remains of
Saturn? I answer, who but those that have observed Men or other Animals there,
that must have Water and Rivers, as things necessary for their sustenance?

Though the Defender is very Eloquent and Witty on this Subject, quotes Virgil
and Cicero, and complains much of the narrowness of some Men's Souls, yet I
think I can make it appear, that this assertion, as I delivered it, was no
limitation of either the Divine Omniscience or Omnipotence. None ever doubted
but that God Almighty could make Men subsist without Mountains, Rivers, Water,
Meat, or any other sustenance; but yet, one may boldly say without confining
the Divine Power, that it is naturally impossible for such Creatures as we are,
to live without those things; for our Natures and Constitutions require them;
and he must be without doubt in a preternatural state that can live without
them. The subject I was then handling was in Natural Philosophy, where we are
not so much to consider what is absolutely possible or impossible for God
Almighty to perform, as what is agreeable or contrary to the ostablish'd Laws
and Rules of Nature. Thus it is naturally impossible that Men or other Animals
of such Constitutions as we have, can live without fresh Water, Rivers and
Springs; it is contrary to the natural order of things, that these should be
without Mountains and Rocks, Upper and Lower grounds, for Water cannot
naturally run upon an Horizontal Plain; and therefore we may rightly conclude,
that where there are Men, there must be Mountains and Rivers, Upper and Lower
grounds, and all other things necessary for life.

It is absolutely indifferent to me, what sort of mould the rest of the Planets
are cast in, or what Inhabitants there are in Jupiter, Saturn, or Mercury, or
if there are any in either of them, (which I am sure is more than he can prove)
yet I would think it no hard matter to show, that it is impossible for us Men,
or other Animals of the same Nature and Constitution that we have, to subsist
in either of these places. For Saturn being very near ten times further from
the Sun than we, must have a hundred times less of his influence; and the
distance of Mercury from the Sun, being but one third part of our distance, the
heat of the Sun upon that Planet must be nine times greater than it is upon
ours, (the action of the Sun upon any subject being always reciprocal to the
square of its distance) both which extremes are by far too great to be endured
by Creatures of our texture and frame of parts; and therefore we may rightly
conclude, that whether they be mountainous and rocky, or have their surfaces
smooth and even, yet it is impossible that they should be Habitable by us, or
Creatures of our Constitution; though yet we know not but there may be some sort
of Inhabitants in these Planets, whose frame and temper will suit with the
nature and position of their respective dwellings. Thus we generally account
the places that are near either of the Poles uninhabitable, because no Men can
dwell there; though it is certain, that Bears, and several other Animals, whose
natures agree best with such a Climate, live in these places; and perhaps, if
ever the Theorists Earth had existed out of his own imagination, it might have
been furnished with some sort of Inhabitants, though it had been naturally
impossible for men to have subsisted there.

It Is somewhat hard that a Man cannot dissent from the Theorist and his
opinions, without being taxed for narrowness of Spirit. But whatever the
Defender may imagine, I am sure, there are some who esteem it as a sign of a
weak and narrow Spirit, to believe easily any Hypothesis, without sufficient
evidence of its being true; which cannot be produced by the Theorist in this
point. For my part, I think Virgils Shepherd, whom the Defender laughs at for
not letting his imagination rove, to fancy things he had never either heard or
seen, much wiser than some Theorists, Philosophers, and Freethinkers, who take
the liberty to imagine and believe any thing, but that to which in all reason
they ought to give a firm assent.

After a long declamation against consining the varieties of Providence to a
narrow compass, (which I know none that do) the Defender asserts, that my
arguments run upon impossibilities; which he says is a nice Topic, that lies
much out of our reach; and he thinks, that there may be Rivers without
Mountains, notwithstanding my reasons. All that I can say to this is, that if
he will not be convinced by reasons, which he cannot or does not pretend to
answer, he may think as he pleases; but I hope he will allow me the freedom to
dissent from him, till those arguments be answered.

THE design of the 4th. Chapter, was to show the inconveniences that would fall
upon the Earth, in case it had such a posture as the Theorist assigned the
Antediluvian World, namely, an Axis perpendicular to the plane of its Orbit. To
this Chapter the Defender makes some general answers; but first, according to
his usual custom puts a question, viz. If I will vouch that there are no
habitable Planets in the Universe that have such a posture? Jupiter he says, is
known to have a perpetual Equinox, and his Axis parallel to the Axis of the
Ecliptic; here he is mistaken, for it is not parallel to the Axis of the
Ecliptic, but that of its own Orbit; Mars says he, has little or no obliquity,
and must we suppose that these Planets have no Inhabitants, or that their
habitations are very bad and incommodious? Jupiter is the noblest Planet in the
Heavens, whether we consider its magnitude, or the number of its attendants;
and if a Flanet of that order and dignity have such a position to the Sun, why
might not our Earth have had the same? What is all this to the purpose? Are the
Inhabitants of Jupiter the same with the Inhabitants of our Earth? Or how does
he know that there are any at all there? It seems this Gentleman is mighty in
love with Jupiter and its Inhabitants; what degree of nobility and dignity it
has obtained I know not, yet if he was in the most pleasant country house in
all Jupiter, so far I dare vouch, that he would not be pleased with his
habitation, but would desire to change and come down again to his old Rocky
Mountainous Planet the Earth, and rather than stay there, he would be contented
to live in Lapland.

I make no question, but that the present position of Jupiter is very fit and
well suited to the nature and temper of its Inhabitants, Plants, and
Vegetables, (if there be any there) but what is sitting and commodious for
them, may be very inconvenient for us; if we were in Jupiter our blood perhaps
would stagnate and freeze, and a Jovian if he were brought hither, would melt
with heat. The inconveniences I showed, would arise from a perpendicular
position of the Earths Axis to its Orbit, were only in respect of the
Inhabitants of the Earth, and did not in the least concern those of Jupiter or
Mars, to whom such a posture might be more convenient than any other.
Conveniences and inconveniences are relative terms, and therefore to prove a
position incommodious, we must not only consider the consequences of the
position its self, but the Nature and Constitution of those Animals to which it
is to be adapted; and I hope I may affirm (without any reflection on Divine
Providence) that the present position in which God has put the Earth, is more
suitable and agreeable to the Nature and Frame of our Animals and Plants, than
any other, and especially than that which the Theorist assigns to the Primitive
Earth: I am sure that several Divines have asserted this, and were never
thought by such an assertion, to prescribe to God. Almighty what was best to be
done.

I censured the Theorist indeed for inquiring into Physical causes, when there
are none that can be known, and neglecting the final ones, which were the only
real principles by which the question was to be determined. For as I showed in
the Examination, there is no reason that can be assigned why the Axis of the
Earth should have one position more than another; the two motions of the Earth
round the Sun, and round its own Axis, being perfectly independent on one
another. God Almighty would order that which was most fitting and convenient
for its Inhabitans; and I laid it down as an Axiom, that God Almighty did
always choose such positions as brought with them the greatest good and
advantage to the Universe; and therefore, since the oblique posture of the
Earths Axis was that which its Maker was pleased to choose, I thought it might
be undoubtedly presumed, that it was the best. Proceeding on this principle, I
inquired into the several advantages which we reaped by the present oblique
position, and showed, that it was preferable to any other; and surely this
cannot be (as the Defender thinks) a prescribing to God Almighty, and telling
him what is best to be done in this or that World. When from the Wisdom and
contrivance of what is already done, we argue that it could not have been done
in a better manner.

He goes on and says, That some men cry out mightily against reason; and yet
none are more fond of it than they, when they can get it on their side. Some
men inveigh against Physical causes, when others use them, and yet as gladly as
any make use of them, when they can make them serve their purpose; and when
they cannot reach them, they despise them, and are all for final causes. I
never knew any that cried down either reason or Physical causes, when they were
plain and obvious. But it is no wonder if there are some that are displeased
with the reasons and causes that are assigned, by a set of Philosophers who
think they can give a Mechanical account, how an Animal, a Mountain, a Planet,
or a World may be made; and yet they know not so much of the principles of
Staticks and Geometry, as to explain the most common and ordinary appearances
of nature, which are really explicable by Mechanical principles.

And though one would think that it were but reasonable, that a man who pretends
to give the Physical causes of all those things, should be very well skilled in
Arithmetic, Geometry, Mechanics, and the Laws of motion; yet it generally
happens, that those that are least acquainted with those Sciences, pretend most
to the solution of such intricate problems, whereas they, who know them best,
can best discover how far they may proceed upon Physical causes, how far their
principles will lead them in the discovery of truth, and where it is that they
must be content to be ignorant; they know that they have not sufficient Data to
determine such problems, nor a great many others that have not the hundredth
part of the difficulty of those I have mentioned; and they are well pleased if
they know their final causes, the uses for which they were designed by their
wise Contriver, and never trouble themselves with that which it is impossible
to discover.

Monsieur Hugens I think, was at least as great a Philosopher as the Theorist,
and it may be easily supposed, that he understood Mechanism somewhat better;
yet he says, that he would be contented, and should think, that he had done a
great matter if he could come to the knowledge of things as they are now, never
troubling himself about their beginning, or how they were made, knowing that to
be out of the reach of humane knowledge, or even conjecture Hugenii
Cosmotheeros.


This Author it seems is very angry with me, for denying, that the Primitive
Earth had such a position as the Theorist assigned it; and upon that account he
says, I follow the very doctrine of those Scoffers mentioned by St. Peter, who
said, Since the Fathers fell asleep, all things continue as they were. Why so?
Did these Scoffers assert, that the Earth had never any perpendicular position
to the Plane of the Ecliptic? and did St. Peter affirm the contrary? Did he
say that the old World had a perpetual Equinox, the Equator being coincident
with the Ecliptic, and its Axis parallel to the Axis of the Sun, as this
Gentleman phrases it? I can find no such discourse in either of his Epistles,
nor can I see how such a thing can be deduced from them.

A man that had no Theory, or any particular System of his own to defend, would
think this the plain meaning of St. Peter, that there were some men then in
being, that denied a Providence, or that God Almighty had any care in the
Government of the World, because they thought, that since its Creation, every
thing went on still in the same method, without any particular manifestation of
a Providence; these the Apostle refutes, by telling them, that the World once
perished by a Deluge of Waters, and that it was to perish again by Fire; both
which are arguments enough for a Providence, and of gods particular care of the
World: this I take to be his plain meaning; except St. Peter be to be
understood in an Allegorical sense as well as Moses.

After this general discourse, he comes to a more particular consideration of
the inconveniences alleged against the parallelism of the Axis of the Earth,
with the Axis of the Ecliptic. One argument I brought was, that by the present
position of the Earths Axis, we received more of the Suns heat, than if it had
moved always in the Equator; and if our heat at present is not too great for
us, (as without doubt it is not) it was a very good reason why the present
position should be esteemed better than that the Theorist calls a right one,
wherein we should not have so much of the Suns influence, as we have. The
Defender thinks this is no argument against the Theory, for says he, if the
heat was equal and moderate in the temperate and habitable Climates, who would
desire the extreme heats of Summer? I answer, every one that observes how
necessary the Summers heat is to the production of Vegetables, and the ripening
of their seed, which could never be brought to any perfection, did the Sun
shine always in the Equator, whereby the action of the Sun in our Latitude,
would be little more than half of what it is at present in a Summers day, which
therefore could never be sufficient for the growth and perfection of
Vegetables. But (says he) how does this appear, supposing the heat constant?
Are there no Vegetables in Jupiter which has still the position the Theorist
gave the Primitive Earth, and which is vastly further distant from the Sun, and
by consequence must have much less of his heat? Whether there are Vegetables in
Jupiter, neither the Theorist nor I can determine, for we were never there to
see, and I believe it was never revealed to him or any body else, that there
are.

But supposing there are vegetables there, what is that to us? Does he think
them of the same nature and texture of parts that ours are of? Or that ours, if
they were transplanted thither could grow and ripen in such a cold soil, when
it is certain, that they require at least twenty five times a greater heat or
influence from the Sun, than is in that Planet? Besides, it is requisite (as I
showed in the Examination) that our plants and vegetables should have very
different degrees of heat, and therefore there must be such changes and
alterations in the seasons, as are necessary to produce the designed effect;
for that heat which is required for the first growth and vegetation of a plant,
will not be sufficient for the ripening and perfecting of the seed thereof, and
that which is necessary for the bringing the seed to perfection, would quite
wither the green and tender herb; and therefore, since this variety of seasons
and alterations of heat, cannot be obtained either in Jupiter or in the
Theorist's Antediluvian Earth; it is plain, that our plants could never have
been brought to perfection in either of those places.

But it seems this Defender is of the opinion, that the plants and vegetables
of the Primitive Earth, were of a different nature and constitution from those
we have now; so that he must think, that the nature of all our plants was
perfectly altered and changed, or that God Almighty having destroyed the old,
was pleased to give us a quite new species of vegetables and plants; this is a
miracle that is recorded no where in Scripture, or any where else that I know
of, and I hope he will not think us obliged, on his word to believe it.

I affirmed also, that if the Earth had such a position as the Theorist
assigned it, that the greatest part of it would not be habitable. For he
himself acknowledges, that the Torrid Zone was uninhabitable in that Earth; and
I am sure, that the greatest part of the two temperate Zones would not have
sufficient heat to ripen their Corn and Fruits, and consequently would be
nothing else but a Desert. To this he replys with this question, How much less
habitable would it be than the present Earth, where the open Sea which was not
then, takes up half its surface? I answer, that upon the same consideration I
cannot see how any part of it should be habitable; for there being no open Sea,
whose surface is exposed to the heat of the Sun, I cannot imagine how there
could be vapors enough drawn up to furnish the Earth with Waters, Dews, and
Mists. For when it is requisite that one half of the Earths surface should be
covered with water, on purpose to furnish vapors enough for Rain and Rivers,
how can it be supplied if there were no Sea at all? Can any Man suppose that
the Sun acted as freely through a Crust of an immense thickness to raise vapors,
as it does now upon the surface of the open Sea? This by the way, I think is a
very good argument against the Theorist, who asserted, that the Primitive Earth
had no Sea.

But the Defender thinks, that it would be very hard, if the seasons of the
Year were the same as they are now; that the Inhabitants of the Earth should be
confined to Herbs, Fruits and Water, especially in the colder Climates, where
the Winters are so long, and the cold vehement; this he thinks, would be a most
unmerciful imposition. Really as hard and unmerciful as it is, there are a very
considerable number of people in these cold Countries, the greatest part of
whose Food, is Bread, Herbs, Roots, Milk, Cheese, and the like; and who seldom
taste any Flesh-meats. And why might not the Antediluvians lead the same kind of
life? I cannot see that the imposition is harder upon one than the other.

The Defender says, that the change of the position of the Earth's Axis, is
matter of fact, and must be proved from History. And he wishes the Examiner
would consult Antiquity, which would give him a more favorable opinion of the
Theory as to this point. One would imagine by this, that this Gentleman had the
Observations of some Antediluvian Astronomers to produce, who had found, that
the inclination of the Earths Axis was changed from a perpendicular, into the
present oblique posture: But instead of those, he only quotes some
Philosophers, that did not live within some thousands of Years of the time,
when this change was supposed to be made. What credit is there to be given to
such a Tradition? Can we imagine, that there can be any thing certainly known
from Authors that lived so long after the time of this change? Especially, when
these men have said a thousand other things, that neither the Theorist nor any
body else can believe? And yet, if we consider what they have said, we shall
find it but very little to his purpose.

Diogenes, Anaxagoras, Empedocles and Leucippus, talked of the inclination,
declination, or depression of the World toward the South, so that the Northern
parts were raised higher, while the opposite parts slid toward the South. We
may easily observe, that these Philosophers from their way of speaking, were no
great Astronomers; it is hard to guess what they meant by such sentences: But
if we should take their meaning as the words at first seem to import, that one
Pole of the Earth was more depressed, or inclined toward the Sun or the
Ecliptic, than the other; the thing is absolutely false, for both the Poles
are equally inclined to the Sun, or the Plane of the Ecliptic: (as I have
sufficiently shown in the Examination Pages 79, 80, 81.
) But whatever their meaning may be, I am sure, it is easier to draw any other
consequence, than that which the Theorist has deduced from their words; nay it
is probable, that they meant the direct contrary to what he says they did,
namely, that the Sun formerly came more toward the North, than it does at
present, and that its distance from them toward the South, is now greater than
it was at first. This, one may easily deduce from the words of Leucippus as
they are quoted by Plutarch, (...). Leucippus terram in parts austrinas
prolabi putat ob istarum raritatem, quippe gelu concretis partibus
Septentrionalibus, dum oppositae interim ardent. So that it seems according to
Leucippus, the Sun acted more strongly upon the Northern Hemisphere formerly,
than it does now, and that it does not now come so near the Zenith of those
that live toward the North Pole, as it did at first; whereby the waters of
these Northern parts are quite frozen and turned into Ice, while the parts
toward the South, (being on the contrary exposed to too great heat) are burnt
and scorch't: that is, the declination of the Ecliptic from the Equator (at
least toward the North) was greater formerly than now.

Thus, we see how little favorable these Philosophers are to the Theorist's
opinion; and that their sentiments are at least as capable of being brought as
arguments against him as for him.

It it true, that Plato speaks of (...), a disharmony or irregularity in the
motions of the Heavens, that was not under the reign of Saturn. But this
signifys nothing to the Theorist's purpose, for if we should admit of his
position, yet still there would be the same apparent irregularities in the
motions of the Heavens. For the Planets would not in that case move uniformly
round the Earth, but would have their directions, stations, and
retrogradations, as they have at present; and none of them but the Sun would
move precisely in the Equator. The other quotation the Theorist brings from
Plato, is nothing to his purpose, and is alleged by another Theorist, to prove
a quite contrary Hypothesis.

These are the testimonies the Theorist has produced from the old Philosophers,
to prove the truth of his Hypothesis, which in my mind, if it were not for pomp
and show, he might have as well let alone; for I think, they will prove any
thing else just as well as what he designed. If these Gentlemen had spoke of a
coincidence that was at first between the Equator and the Ecliptic, or of the
Axis of the Earth or World, being perpendicular to the Ecliptic, or if they
had said, that the Sun at first moved always in the Equator, or that the days
and nights throughout the the whole Year were equal, (which might have been
easily said and much easier understood, than what they have delivered) they had
spoke something to his purpose; but instead of this, we have some dark
sentences, whose real meaning it is hard to guess at, and some of which seem to
be so far from proving the Theorists position, that they seem rather to infer
the contrary, and that the Suns declination was greater formerly than now. Sure
a man must be put to a hard shift for ancient Traditions, that will bring such
Testimonies to prove his point.

But the Defender alleges, that these places will at least prove that there
was some change made in the state of nature formerly; and if I will not allow
that which the Theorist has assigned, I must show some other which will have
the same effects. Why so? I hope he does not suppose me to be like some
Philosophers, that think themselves obliged to give an account of every
appearance, and fancy it a stain in their reputation and honor, to be ignorant
in any thing: If he supposes such a thing, I assure him he is much mistaken;
for I am sensible that there are more things which neither he nor I know than
what we do. The Poets are the next witnesses the Theorist produces to prove the
truth of his position: And these indeed talk of the continual spring and
verdure of the Earth that was under the reign of Saturn. We know the Fable of
the four Ages, of which the Golden was the first and best; in it they fancied
every thing that was pleasant and delightful, and therefore they removed from
it all extremities of heat and cold; and upon that account they would allow
neither of Summer or Winter, but a perpetual Spring wherein every thing was
fresh and blooming. But it is easy to perceive that all this was a figment:
For when they or other Writers were to describe any pleasant places, they
continually endowed them with such qualities. Thus Homer describes the Elysian
Fields as he is quoted by the Theorist, Archaeol. page 263. and Virgil supposes
that there were sine green Meadows there. This Poet also in summing up the
praises of Italy and prefering it before all other Countries, among other
excellent qualities he endows it with a perpetual Spring, Hic ver assiduum
atque alienis mensibus aestas. Virg. Georg. Lib. II. Thus Plutarch describes
the fortunate Islands, and Pliny the Loca Hyperborea. From which we may clearly
see, that there was no other foundation for any such assertion, but the fancy
of the contrivers, who were to set forth their places of happiness to the best
advantage.

But the Defender thinks, that if none of those he has mentioned will pass for
sufficient witnesses of the matter of fact; yet I will certainly allow of the
Testimonies of some ancient Astronomers, who have said something relating to
this matter. Well, let us see what they say. He quotes Baptista Mantuanus from
the Archaeolog. whose words are these. Erant illis (nempe Autediluvianis) ut
Astronomia and experimento constat, Caeli propitiores; volunt namque Astronomi
duos esse Zodiacos, unum in nona sphaera, alterum in octava, quod firmamentum
vocant; and initio rerum and temporum sic a Deo dispositos ut Aries Arieti,
Taurus Tauro, Gemini Geminis jungertur, and amborum coeuntibus in unum viribus
fortior fiebat in terris influxus, unde and herhas tunc salubriores, and
fructus terrae meliores. As also Petrus Aponeusis in his Conciliator Diff. has
these words, Cum capita Zodiaci mobilis and immobilis ordinate and direct
concurrebant, tum virtus perfectiori modo, a primo principio per medias causas
taliter ordinatas fortiori modo imprimebatur in ista inferiora, cum causae tunc
sibi invicem correspondebant.

These Testimonies I own do sufficiently convince me, not that the Theorist's
position of the Primitive Earth was the true one; but that the Defender who has
alleged them to prove his point does not understand them. For he could not
have quoted any thing that was less to his purpose than they are. I know not
what skill this Author has in the new Astronomy; but I am sure he does not
understand it if it be put into an old fashion dress. No doubt he thought that
these Authors meant by such words that at first the Equator and Ecliptic were
coincident; when they never dreamed of any such thing.

They as their own words inform us, suppose with all the old Astronomers two
Zodiacks, the one of which is exactly placed under the other, and (the
uppermost being immovable) the lowest in which the fixed Stars are placed
moves exactly under it, and performs its course from West to East, according to
some in the space of 25000. Years. At first these two Circles had the same
beginning, the Constellation Aries being exactly in the sign of the Ecliptic
of the same name, and the Constellation Taurus was exactly in the sign Taurus;
the Stars also that make up the sigure of Gemini, were exactly under the sign
Gemini of the immovable Zodiac, and so in the rest. By which these
Astrological Gentlemen thought, that both their forces being united, their
efficacy and virtue upon the Earth would be very strong. But now that the
moveable Zodiac has moved, these two Circles have not the same beginning, and
the Stars that make up the figure of Aries, are not in the sign Aries but in
Taurus, and those Stars which compose the sign of Taurus, are no more in Taurus
but in Gemini, so the Stars of Gemini are got into Cancer, and those of Cancer
into Leo, etc. as may plainly be seen on any Celestial Globe. Which they
suppose to be performed by the motion of the eighth Sphere or the moveable
Zodiac, of which all the old Astronomers speak, whom if he pleases he may
consult; particularly he may read Clavius's Notes on Sacrobosco de Sphaera,
which is as common and as good a Book as he can find on the subject.

But it seems the Defender thinks that this would appear more to his purpose,
if the old fashion disguise were taken off, and the business applied to the
true System of the Heavens. Well let us see if it is so. The new Astronomers
suppose that the Stars are immovable, and that the Earth turns round the Sun,
so that its Axis makes always the acute Angle of 66 with the Plane of its
Orbit: if this Axis were perfectly directed to the same point of the Heavens,
or moved always precisely parallel to its self, then the fixed Stars would seem
to have no other motion but the diurnal: But because the Earths Axis varies a
little from an exact parallelism, and does not precisely point to the same Star
when it is in the same place of its Orbit; but makes a small Angle with a line
that obtains the position it had formerly in the same place; hence it happens
that the Equinoctial points or the common section of the Equator and the
Ecliptic, retrocede or move backwards from East to West; and this is that
which the Astronomers call the precession of the Equinox, by which the fixed
Stars seem to move from the West to the East with a very slow motion, and the
Constellation Aries which at first was in the sign Aries, has now got into
Taurus, and Taurus has seemed to move into Gemini, Gemini into Cancer, etc.
From hence it appears, that according either to the old or new Astronomers, the
fixed Stars change their Longitude daily but not their Latitude, and they have
always supposed that the Axis of the World has kept still the same Angle with
the Plane of the Ecliptic. I will now leave it to any indifferent Reader, or
even to the Theorist and his Defender to judge, if these quotations signify any
thing to the purpose, or if they are not stronger arguments against the
Theorist's position than for it.

Since the Defender has advised me to consult Antiquity, I suppose it will not
be amiss to allege the testimony of a very ancient Philosopher, whose
authority ought at least to be as great as Leucippus's, Anaxagoras's,
Empedocles's, or even Plato's; I mean the Divinely inspired Moses, who is the
most ancient Writer that is now extant, and the only one who gives us an
account of the state and condition of the Primitive World, of which the
Philosophers adduced by the Theorist were altogether ignorant; in his Writings
there is not one word of the coincidence of the Ecliptic and the Equator, or
of the perpetual Equinox and Spring that was observed in the Primitive Earth.
Moses supposes no such thing but rather the contrary, for in giving an account
of the Creation he tells us, that God said let there be lights in the firmament
of the Heavens to divide the day from the night, and let them be for signs and
for seasons, and for days, and for years; from this it is observable, that
Moses supposes that there were different seasons from the very Creation, and
that their variety proceeded from the different motion of the Heavenly bodies,
and more particularly of the Sun, whereas if the Theorist's Hypothesis had been
true, the motion of the Sun could have made no variety of seasons; but the Year
would have remained with the same face and tenor, having but one continued
season. Thus it is evident, that the Theorists supposition in this matter, is
directly contrary to that of Moses, and I think that his testimony ought to be
of greater force with any candid Reader, even supposing that he had no Divine
Inspiration, than any thing that could have been said by such Philosophers as
the Theorist has brought, who lived not till many hundred years after Moses's
time.

After this dispute about matter of fact, our Author comes to defend the
Theorist's reason he gave for the Antediluvian position of the Earth. It is
said in the Theory, that the Earth being an uniform and regular Body, having
its Center of Gravity the same with its Center of Magnitude, it would naturally
take an even and parallel position with the Axis of its Orbit. In reply to this
I told him, that it was demonstrated by the Writers of Hydrostaticks, that a
Sphere (or indeed any other body) whose Center of Gravity coincides with its
Center of Magnitude, if put in a fluid of the same intensive Gravity with its
self, will be indifferent to any position given. Our Defenders answer to this,
is, That such a thing may be, that is, for ought that he knows it may be so, if
the Sphere was resting; but if it was turned about its Axis and the Axis of the
fluid, it would certainly take a position parallel to the Axis of the fluid. I
wonder who assured him of this; I can scarce believe he had any Letters from
Kensington or any where else for it; otherwise he would have produced them as
the grounds of his certainty. Well, though he is very sure of his point, yet
perhaps it may not be true, and therefore we will inquire if it is so or not.
Let A B C represent an Arch of the Ecliptic, or of any Circle parallel to it;
D E F any Circle in the Earth lesser or greater in the same Plane with the
Circle A B C let H be the point where the stream of the fluid falls diagram
perpendicularly upon the Circle D H E F and take any two Arches D H and E H
equal. The direction of the particles of the fluid falling upon the point E is
GE, and of those which fall upon D is I D, so that the lines G E, A H, and I D,
are parallel. Because the particles which move from G to E come obliquely on
the point E, part of their force will be spent in carrying or driving the
Circle forward, and part of it will be employed in turning the Circle round an
Axis perpendicular to the Plane A B C from H, to E and F. So that the total
force of the particles is to that part of it which is used in turning the
Circle round, as the square of the Radius to the Rectangle, contained between
the Sine of the Arch H E and its Cosine; after the same manner part of the
force of the particles which move from I to D and fall upon the point D will be
spent in turning the Circle round from H D to L, so that the total force of the
particles which rush upon D will be to the force by which they endeavor to
turn the Circle round as the square of the Radius is to the Rectangle contained
between the Sine of the Arch D H and its Cosine: and because the Arches H E, H
D, are equal, it is plain the force of the streams of the fluid particles
whereby they will endeavor to turn the Circle round its Axis must also be
equal; but they being contrary one to another will hinder the action of each
other in turning the Circle round. Just so whatever is the force of the
particles of the fluid which falls upon any point in turning the Circle round
from H by E and F there is another force which is equal to it, and endeavors
to move the Circle the contrary way from H to D and L, which two forces will
hinder each others effect in turning the Circle round; the same thing is true
of all the Circles that are parallel to the Ecliptic; and therefore the motion
of the fluid has no sort of effect upon the Sphere to turn it round an Axis
perpendicular to the Axis of the Ecliptic. But notwithstanding its own motion
and the motion of the fluid, it will remain indifferent to move round any of
its Diameters as an Axis, the fluid having no effect in making it turn round
one Diameter more than another.

I found fault with the Theorist for saying the Earth was inclined to the
Ecliptic, it being impossible to conceive how a Sphere can be inclined to a
Plane, passing through its Center as the Ecliptic does through the Center of the
Earth. The Defender endeavors to excuse himself in this matter, telling us, it
is the expression of the ancient Philosophers, though he thinks it may be
properly called an obliquation.

I would not have him raise a scandal on the ancient Philosophers without good
grounds, which I scarce believe he has for his assertion; yet if they said any
such thing, I did not think that the Theorist was so great an admirer of the
old Philosophers, that in complaisance to them he would have spoken nonsense.

He tells me that Situs rectus is another expression I quarrel with; really
though perhaps it is not very proper, I do not remember that I any where found
fault with it; and he might have spared himself the trouble of citing a passage
out of Hugens nothing to his purpose, for Mons. Hugens who always speaks sense,
does not say that Jupiter himself but that his Axis is right to the Plane of
his Orbit. But though the Defender endeavors to excuse the Theorist for his
improprieties of expression, yet he passes over without any excuse the great
error which he made in assigning the cause of the supposed change of position,
which the Earths Axis suffered at the Deluge.

The Theorist said, that at first the Earth was equally poised, and therefore
he thought it must keep its Axis steady and parallel to the Axis of the
Eliptick; but at the Deluge it lost the Equilibration as he calls it, and one
end or Pole becoming heavier than the other, the heaviest end inclined toward
the Sun, in which said posture he says the Earth has ever since continued. I
must acknowledge that I could not read this without some indignation, and am
ashamed to find one who pretends to give a Mechanical account of the Creation,
and of the changes the World has since underwent, discourse in so crude a
manner, that it may clearly be seen that he has not so much as a common insight
into that learning, which would have taught him the present posture of the
Earth and its Axis. For I showed in the Examination, that every one that
understood the Elements of the new Astronomy, knew perfectly that one Pole of
the Earth was not more inclined to the Sun than another; and that if such a
change had really happened to the Earth, viz. that one Pole of it had become
heavier than the other, that Pole had always inclined to the Sun and made a
perpetual Summer in all the places of the Hemisphere, while the other enjoyed a
continual Winter; and because no such thing happened, but both the Poles were
equally inclined to the Sun, it was a demonstration that no such change of
Gravitation happened to the Earth. The Defender is pleased to take no notice of
this argument, and yet has the confidence to assert, that he thinks the
Theorist's reasons very probable for the causes of the supposed change of the
position of the Earths Axis.

But the Theorist in the last Edition of his English Theory, seems to have
found out another cause which he thinks in some measure contributed to the
change of the Earth's position, and that it is the change of the Direction of
the Magnetic particles, which he says followed upon the dissolution of the
Earth. But before we can know if this would do, we must discover what these
Magnetic particles are, what their direction is, what it was before the
Deluge, what afterward, how it came to be changed, and how this change
produced a change in the position of the Earths Axis. And till he pretend to
give a Mechanical account of these things, he can no more expect a distinct
answer from me, than if he had said all this had been done by some occult
quality. For loose and general Harangues about Effluviums, Particles, subtle
Matter, Modes and Motions, signify very little more to explain Nature, than the
Qualities and Attractions of the old Philosophers, (whom the Theorist upon this
account so often derides) it is indeed but another sort of Cant, and affords as
little satisfaction to the mind. Before I proceed and further, I must own I was
mistaken when I said, that the Axis of Jupiter was obliquie to the Plane of its
Orbit. In reading of Hugen's Systema Saturninum, I remembered that this
position was affirmed of Saturn, and I thought that I had read there that
Jupiter had a like position, which I wrote down without consulting the Book it
self, which I had not then by me.

The Defender has mistaken my meaning, when he imagines I said, that according
to the Theorist both Jupiter and Saturn were Antediluvian Planets; for the
particle whom in the parenthesis, refers only to Jupiter, though in the mean time
I own the expression is ambiguous, and may refer to both.

At last the Defender comes to give us a short account of the Theorist's Creed
as to this point, which he conceives to be thus, The Earth was at first in an
even and parallel posture with the Axis of the Sun, or (as he explains himself
in the 2d. Page of his Reflections) its Axis was not oblique to the Axis of the
Sun or the Ecliptic, but lay parallel with the Axis of the Sun, and
perpendicular to the Plane of the Ecliptic. Then the Earth had a perpetual
Equinox and unity of Seasons, and the Heavens and fixed Stars moved uniformly
and concentrically with the Earth; but when the earth changed its posture into
that which it has now, it had the position of its Axis changed into a
parallelism with the Axis of the Equator, and the Heavens seemed to turn round
upon another Axis different from those of the Sun or the Earth. I must beg this
Author's leave to say, that he has grossly misrepresented the Theorist, who, so
far as I can discover never expressed himself to any such purpose. I thought
that there were already errors enough in this Theory, so that he needed not
have made them more by false misrepresentations. For I can find no such thing
in either the Latin or English Theory, as that the Axis of the Earth was ever
parallel to the Axis of the Sun. It is said indeed that the Axis of the Earth
was parallel to the Axis of the Ecliptic, and perpendicular to its Plane, and
this I must own is false; but were it trne, yet what the Defender advances upon
it would be impossible, viz. that the Axis of the Earth would also be parallel
to the Axis of the Sun, for since the Axis of the Sun is not perpendicular, but
stands at oblique Angles upon the Plane of the Ecliptic, as is evident from
Gallileo in his Book de Macchie Solari, Scheiners Rosa Vrsina, Kepler, Mons.
Cassini, Mr. Flamstead, and most of the Astronomers who have wrote upon this
subject: but even his own Master Des Carts, (from whom he seems as
industriously to dissent when he is in the right, as he is always sure to
transcribe him when he is in the wrong) tells us, that the Axis of the Sun
makes an Angle of seven degrees with the Axis of the Ecliptic: If I say what
these Learned Men have observed be true, then either the proposition advanced
by the Defender, or the 8th. of the 11th. of Euclid must be false. This Author
also tells us, that before the Deluge (the Earth having a right position) the
Heavens with the fixed Stars moved or seemed to move concentrically with the
Earth. I cannot suppose that he meant by this, that all the fixed Stars seemed
to turn round the Earth in Circles, that have the Axis of the Earth for their
Axis, for they do so now, and must do so whatever position the Earth obtains,
if the motions of the Stars be only apparent and caused by the real rotation of
the Earth round its Axis.

I fancy therefore that by a concentrical motion he means, (if he means any
thing) that which is performed in a Circle which has the same Center that the
Earth has, (as the word implys) and I am confirmed in the opinion, that this or
some other strange thing is meant by this word, because the Theorist in his
Archaeolog. asserts, that in his Primitive Earth all its Inhabitants would be
Ascii, that is, they would have no shadow at twelve of the Clock, or they would
have the Sun vertical to them at that time. This I dare venture to say is
impossible in this or any other of the numberless Worlds, that the Defender
dreams of among the fixed Stars, unless the Sun can be multiplied or made to
appear at many different places at the same time. For every one that ever read
any one Page about the first principles of Geography knows, that all those who
live under the same Meridian have twelve of the Clock at the same time, and
consequently if the Sun were at twelve of the Clock vertical to all those who
live under it, he must be in every point of that Meridian at the same time. I
leave the Reader to judge if these men whose notions in Astronomy and Geography
are so distinct and clear, are not very capable of making Theories and
discourses about the posture of the Primitive Earth, and the position of its
Axis? They should be advised before ever they venture again to make another
Theory, or defend this, to learn something of the common principles of the
Sphere. Perhaps they think them too common and easy, and such as every body may
know that will be at the pains to study, and therefore they despise them, and
go upon higher attempts to find out something that no body else can discover;
as the method how the Earth was made, and what was the state and condition of
the Antediluvian World. But for my part I would rather be quite ignorant of the
posture of the Primitive Earth and the position of its Axis, than not know the
common principles of Astronomy and the doctrine of the Sphere. I am sure if
this Author had spent but half the time upon this subject that he has done upon
the Theory, he might have avoided many absurdities, and would not have talked
of the Axis of the Earth being changed into a parallelism with the Axis of the
Equator, and the Heavens seeming to turn round upon an Axis different from that
of the Earth. For it is well known, that the apparent motion of the Heavens is
about the Axis of the Earth, and that the Axis of the Equator is the same with
the Earths Axis, and it is impossible that they could ever have been distinct.

It seems this Defender's acquaintance is only with the Antediluvian World; for
one would think by his way of writing, that he knew nothing at all of this
Worlds position or motions. His discourse and terms are so odd and strange,
that I sometimes believe they were terms that were used by the Antediluvian
Fathers; for I am sure they cannot be accommodated to the present mode and
manner of speaking.

The design of the fifth Chapter of the Examination is, to consider the
Theorist's method of forming Rivers in the Primitive Earth; which, according to
him were furnished with Vapors drawn from the Abyss through the Crust by the
heat of the Sun. Against this I objected that from thence it would follow, that
there could be no Rivers for a considerable time after the first Creation of
the Earth. For one would think that it must necessarily require some time
before the Suns heat could penetrate through a thick Crust to raise vapors from
the Abyss; all which time the Inhabitants of the Earth must be without Rivers.
The Defender thinks this objection may be answered by saying, that the Earth
was at first soft and moist, and therefore could not but furnish store of
vapors to supply the Rivers. But this is nothing but a shift; for if we bring
it to a Calculation, we shall find the cause no ways answerable to the effect.

I showed in the Examination, that the quantity of water evacuated by all the
Rivers every Year, was at least equal to 263080. Cubical Miles; now if we allow
no more Rivers in the Primitive Earth than there are now in ours, (whereas in
our proportion to the surface of the Land they ought to be double) so many
Cubical Miles of water will likewise be necessary every Year to supply the
Primitive Rivers; and if we admit that the Sun had penetrated the thick Crust
in the space of ten Years (which is a time little enough in all reason for such
an effect) the quantity of water that would be necessary to supply the Rivers
for such a time, must not be less than 263080. Cubical Miles; which is such a
quantity as would make the Earth very soft and moist indeed: But it would be
much rather a Marsh and Mire than an habitable Earth.

I objected also that it was impossible that the Rays of the Sun could ever
reach through a vast thick Crust, so as to be able to raise vapors from the
Abyss. Or if we should suppose that it did raise them, yet it could not do it
in such a quantity as would be requisite to furnish the Antediluvian Rivers.
For who can imagine that the Sun could act as freely upon the Abyss, as it does
now upon the open Sea? Whose surface is exposed to the continual heat of the
Sun, whereas the Abyss was enclosed by a thick Crustation, in which were all
the Materials of Earth, Sand, Clay, Gravel, Ores, and Metalline substances? And
seeing the Sea as it is now laid open to the action of the Sun, is but just
sufficient to supply us with Rain and Vapors; does it not seem a thing against
common sense to suppose that the Abyss enclosed with a thick shell could have
sent out a quantity of Vapors great enough for such an effect?

But I passed from these general words, and reduced the matter to Calculation;
where I showed, that if we allowed the mouths of all the Pores, Cracks and
Chaps, through which the Sun must have acted on the Abyss to have been 1/10000
part of the Earth's surface; there would then have been five thousand times
less Vapors to have served twice as great a quantity of dry Land; and
therefore that in a Country as bigg as Britain, there would not have been so
much as one River, nor so much Rain in a Year as does now fall in a day. All
the answer the Defender makes to this, is, that I suppose great cracks and
pitts through which the Vapors ascended, whose dimensions and capacities I
examine at pleasure, whereas he does not find that the Theorist makes any
mention of these Cracks for that purpose; The only question is, whither the
heat of the Sun could reach so low as the Abyss, when the Earth was dried and
its Pores enlarged. Here he is mistaken, this is not the only question; for
there is another material one besides, viz. That supposing the heat of the Sun
had reached the Abyss, whether there could have been vapors enough extracted
from it to furnish the Earth. And I think I have proved that there could not.

But it seems he will not allow of the Calculation, because it supposes, that
the Sun acted through large cracks, fissures and chaps, which he says the
Theorist did not mention for any such purpose: but he will have the Sun to have
acted only through the Pores of the Earth. Well, let us grant his supposition,
that the Sun did not act through large cracks and fissures, (which I thought
would best serve his design) but only through the Pores of the Earth; and we
will see how much the Theorist will gain by it.

Let us therefore consider one of these Pores, which we will suppose to be one
inch Diameter; (and I think it a good large one) let us also suppose that the
Crust from its surface to the Abyss is but one Mile thick, which is but a very
moderate supposition, as in the figure, where A B represents the mouth of one
of these Pores, A C the thickness of the Crust, C N D the surface of the Abyss,
E G H F the Diameter of the Sun; G H is the Diameter of that part of the Sun
which can shine all at once upon the diagram point N, which is midway betwixt C
and D. because A C is to C N as 5000. to half an inch, that is, as 120000. to
1. the Angle C A N will be somewhat less than two seconds; and therefore the
double of it which is the Angle A N B or G N H will be less than four seconds;
but the whole Diameter of the Sun subtends an Angle of 30. minutes, therefore E
F the Diameter of the Sun, is to G H the Diameter of that part which shines
through the Pore A B as 30. minutes are to four seconds, that is, as 1800. to 4.
or 450. to 1. But Circles are to one another as the squares of their Diameters,
and consequently the Disk of the Sun which shines all at once upon our Sea, is
to that part of it which shines upon the Abyss through its Pores, as the square
of 450. to 1. that is, as 202500. to 1; and therefore the action of the Sun
upon the surface of the Abyss, would not be the two hundred thousandth part of
what it is upon the surface of our new Ocean. But it is plain by the Figure,
that the Sun could not shine the ten thousandth part of the time upon the
Abyss, that it can do upon the Sea. And therefore if we diminish its action
also upon that account, we shall find that the heat of the Sun upon the Abyss,
would not be the ten milloneth part of what is upon the present Sea; and the
vapors raised from the Abyss, would be less than those which are raised from
the Sea very near in the same proportion. Has not the Theorist now mended his
cause mightily by this answer of his Defenders, which has made the argument
against him much stronger than it was before?

I am accused of dealing unfairly with the Theorist, when I make him suppose
that Mountains make way for the motion and dilatation of vapors. If this is
unfair dealing, I cannot tell what will be fair; for the Theorist himself has
expressly said so, in his Book 11. Chap. 5. Parag. 4. of the English Theory.
Where, speaking of the North and South parts of the World, which he says draw
the vapors to them; his words are these, The cold of those parts attracting
them, as we call it, that is making way to their motion and dilatation without
resistance, as Mountains and cold places usually draw vapors from the warmer.
Tho I quoted these words in the Examination, yet the Defender assures us, that
the Theorist supposes no such thing. It seems then that he can say one thing,
and suppose another. If so, I wish the Defender would give us two Catalogues,
one of those things which he says and supposes to be true, and another of those
things he says without supposing them to be true; I hope in this last we should
find what is said in the 7th. 8th. and 9th. Chapters of the Archaeologiae,
concerning the Mosaical account of the Formation of the World, its Primitive
State, and the Fall of Man.

Our next dispute is about the course of the vapors. The Theorist asserted,
that it would be toward North and South. Now I proved that it would be from
East to West; because I demonstrated, that there must be a continual wind
blowing that way, in an Earth where there were no Mountains to change the
direction of the wind; just as it is now in the Atlantic and Pacisick Oceans.
And seeing the vapors swim in an Air of the same intensive gravity with
themselves, it is demonstrable that they must follow the motion of that Air,
and be likewise carried from East to West. The Defender grants, that their
motion would be at first that way; But (says he) the question here is, where
they would be condensed or where they would fall. I think it does not signify
any thing where they fall; for I am sure they would not fall or be condensed in
a place to which they were never carried, that is, toward either of the Poles.

The Theorist was of the opinion that the cold in the North and South parts
attracted the vapors thither, that is, (as he explains it) made way for their
motion and dilatation. But because I showed that this method savoured a little
of absurdity, our Theory-mender says, that the vapors were diverted toward
North and South, by an impulse of new vapors. This opinion seems to me to be
as unnatural as the other, for if the vapors were crowded on one another by
their mutual impulses, they would condense one another, and fall down in the
places where they were crowded.

I am sure it is impossible, that an attome of vapor however impelled, should
make its way through an Atmosphere of the same gravity with its self, for some
thousands of Miles toward either of the Poles; when a stone which has some
thousand times more density than vapors, and consequently some thousands of
times also more force to break the resistance of the medium, if it were to move
to Eternity in the Air, yet it would never make any considerable way in the
medium, by reason of the continual loss of its motion.

It seems to contradict our senses to suppose, that vapors can move through the
Air without suffering such a resistance as must condense them. We observe, that
those vapors which are in the Clouds, when the Air grows light, begin to fall,
no doubt in the form of vapors; but afterward suffering a considerable
resistance from the Air, they are condensed into drops of Rain. If then the
resistance the vapors meet with for so small a way, be sufficient to condense
them, is it not naturally impossible that they should travel some thousands of
Miles and not be condensed till they arive at the Poles?

Our Author proceeds in the next place to consider the seventh Chapter of the
Examination, and answer the arguments that are brought against the Theorist's
way of making a Deluge. It is supposed in the Theory, that after some ages the
heat of the Sun must have peirced through the Crust of the Earth, and reached the
Abyss, where it must have rarified the waters there, and raised an immense
quantity of them into vapors, these endeavoring to expand themselves, and the
Pores of the Earth not being sufficient to let them pass through, would press
upon the Crust and break it into pieces, so that its fall upon the Abyss, would
produce an universal Deluge. Against this I objected, that it is impossible the
heat of the Sun could reach far into the Earth, so as to perform any
considerable effect, since by observation it was found, that in Caves and
Vaults there was not any sensible alteration of heat in Summer and Winter; and
therefore seeing that the heat of the Sun had so little effect in places of the
Earth that were so near its surface, how could any one imagine that it would
have any upon the Abyss which was covered over with a thick Crust.

But because this argument was proposed in general terms, I endeavored to
bring it to Calculation, in order to which I assumed one postulatum, viz. That
fewer Rays of heat passed to the Abyss through the Crust, than if it had been
composed of several surfaces at some considerable distance from one another,
(suppose 10.20. or 30. feet.) every one of which reflected half the Rays which
fell upon them, and transmitted the other half. 'This I thought was a
postulatum which every body would have granted; and if we consider how much of
the Suns light and heat is diminished by a thin Cloud of vapors, placed
between it and us, and how much light is reflected by the common Air, when it
passes through it, we cannot but own that the diminution of heat in passing through
every 20. or 30. foot of a solid Crust, must be at least the half of what falls
upon it. Upon this supposition I showed, that if there were but one hundred of
these surfaces, the number of Rays which fell upon the first, would be to the
number of Rays which fell upon the last, as 299 to I. or as the 99th. power of
2. to unity; from whence it followed, that if we took the distances as the
Logarithms, the heat of the Sun at each of these distances, would be as the
absolute numbers belonging to these Logarithms; Thus, if A B represented the
thickness of the Crust, A C the number of Rays which fell upon the surface at
A, D E the number of Rays which fell upon the surface at D; and if we draw
through the points C and E the Logarithmick curve to the Asymptote A B, the
Applicate B F will represent the number of Rays which will fall upon the
surface at B, which in our present case is vastly less than AC.

Instead of denying any of the propositions of this argument, or showing how
the conclusion is fasly deduced from the premises, he answers that so we may
divide an inch into an hundred or a thousand surfaces, and prove from thence
that no heat of the Sun could pierce through an inch of Earth. But is this a
parallel case, is there not a vast disproportion between an inch of Earth, and
a vast dense Crust of some Miles thickness? So that the postulatum which is
true in the one case, cannot be supposed to be true in the other; if we should
suppose as many surfaces in one inch of Earth as we did in the whole Crust,
then diagram the distance between any two immediate surfaces of the Crust,
would be to the distance between two immediate surfaces of the inch of Earth,
as the thickness of the Crust to the thickness of an inch; and consequently if
A D represent the distance between the two first surfaces of the inch of Earth,
A B the distance between the two first surfaces of the Crust, A C the Rays
which fall on the first surface of both, E D the number of Rays which fall on
the surface at D; the line F B which is the Applicate of the Logarithmick curve
D E F, will represent the number of Rays which fall on the surface at B. For it
is certain that the deeper any Rays pass in any medium whether solid or fluid,
they are still the fewer, and both light and heat are more and more diminished.
Thus the Rays of the Sun passing through a far greater portion of the Air when it
is near the Horizon, than when it is near the Zenith, is the cause that its
light near the Horizon is much less than when he is in his Meridian Altitude;
and the difference of his Illumination in both these places is so great, that
we can easily look upon the Sun when he is Setting or Rising, whereas we cannot
turn our eyes to him without hurting them, when he is near our Zenith. Thus
also it is observed by experience, that the deeper any Pool of water is, the
fewer are the Rays which reach to the bottom of it; the same thing is also
observed, if the medium is Glass or Crystal, or any other that lets either
light or heat pass through it.

Perhaps the Defender will say, that the Rays are diminished in passing through a
medium; but yet he does not see how they should be diminished in the proportion
I have assigned, viz. so that the Applicates to the Logarithmick curve are
always as the quantity of Rays which pass through. Well, that he may see that
this is not a precarious assumption, I will give him my reason for it.

Let A B K C represent any medium through which the Rays pass; let us suppose
this medium to be divided into parts of equal thickness, A D, D G, G M, etc.
let a represent the number of Rays which fall on the surface A C, and let 1/m a
be those which pass through to the surface D I; because the mediums A I, D L, are
uniform, they will both transmit the light which falls upon them, in the same
proportion, that is, because both these mediums are by supposition of the same
nature, equally dense, and of the same thickness, and the Rays which fall upon
both, have the same inclination, the quantity of Rays which fall upon the
surface A C, will be to the quantity which passes through the medium A I and
comes to the surface D I as that quantity which comes to D I is to the quantity
which passes through D L, and comes to L G and by consequence if a represent
diagram the number of Rays which fall upon A C, 1/m a the number which fall
upon D I, mm / 1 a will represent the number of those that fall upon the
surface G L. After the same manner m^/1 a will be as the number of those Rays
which come to M N, and m4/1 a will be the number of those which fall upon F B,
that is, If the distances A D, A G, A M, A B, are in an Arithmetical
progression, the Applicates A C, D E, G H, M O, F B, which represent the number
of Rays that come to the points A, D, G, M, B, respectively, will be in a
Geometrical progression, which is the property of the Logarithmick curve.

Though this way of reasoning by a Calculus, seems to be plain and obvious enough
to those who understand the common principles of Calculation, (which as I think
ought to be unknown to none that pretend either to write or defend a Theory, as
the Theorist himself owns) yet the Defender does whatever he can to find shists
and evasions for such arguments; and here he tells us, that we ought not to
consider surfaces but pores. Well, that he may see how ready I am to please and
obey him, I have done this already in the 71. Page of this Treatise, where I
have showed, that if the Sun shined, upon any surface that is exposed openly to
it, its heat on that surface would be 202500. times greater than its heat upon
the surface of the Abyss, when it shined only through the Pores of the Crust.
Which disproportion is great enough to show, that no great store of vapors
could be rarified in the Abyss. But says he, those that allow a Comet at its
nearest approach to the Sun, to be peirced through and through, so as to become
hotter than red hot iron, will not think it strange that at our distance, it
should have some proportional effect upon the inward parts of the Earth. Let us
illustrate his similitude by another; Those who allow that a ball of iron ten
inches thick, when put in a good fire may be made red hot, and be peirced by
the fire through and through, will not think it strange, that this ball of iron
removed 10. feet from the fire, should receive some proportionable heat even in
its inward parts, as without doubt it would. But the question is, if this
effect is any way sensible, or if we should suppose some water enclosed in the
middle of this ball, whether the heat of the fire could raise it into vapor at
such a distance, so that the force those vapors have to expand themselves,
would break or burst the ball.

I thought that this Gentleman had known so much of the new Experimental
Philosophy, as not to be ignorant, that heat does not pass into the interior
parts of a solid of considerable thickness, till it has quite dissolved the
Exterior parts; and if the solid is combustible, (as wood) it consumes the
outward parts, before it has any sensible effect upon the Interior; but if its
parts are compact, (as Metals or Stone) it loosens and dissolves the frame and
texture of the outward parts, and so makes its way to the inward.

But our Philosopher thinks he has found out one remarkable Phoenomenon, by
which he can prove effectually, that the heat of the Sun peirces deep into the
Crust, and that is in the case of the Earthquakes. He considers the cause of
them, and their depths, and he says, that all agree that they arise from the
rarefaction of Vapors and Exhalations; This rarefaction (says he) must be made
by some heat, and no other is proved to us yet by this Author, than the heat of
the Sun.

Why should I be obliged to satisfy him in all his difficulties in Philosophy?
Did ever I set up to be a Theorist, and give an account of all the Phoenomena
of Nature? Well; but it seems he expects it from me, and though I am no ways
obliged to it, yet out of abundance of good nature, I will give my opinion in
this matter.

I think then that the rarefaction of Vapors within the Earth, may arise from
another heat than that of the Sun. We know that there is an actual fire which
always burns in several places of it, which sometimes bursts out and makes an
horrible eruption, as in all Vulcano's and Fiery Mountains; and why may not
this fire be the cause of the rarefaction? This appears to be more probable,
because Earthquakes are most common in those places where these Vulcanos are,
as in the Kingdom of Naples and Sicily.

But supposing there were no actual fire under ground, yet I am of the opinion,
that heat may arise from other causes than that of the Sun. It is observed,
that from a due mixture of some particles of matter with those of another sort,
there will arise a very considerable heat: Some places underground are observed
to be exceeding hot, as some Mines, (where there is a mixture of Sulphurous,
Nitrous, and Mineral principles) the heat is so considerable, that a Man cannot
easily endure it, even in the extremity of Winter. There are other places so
warm, that the waters that run through them will scald a Man's hand. And may we
not suppose, that there are some Cavities deeper underground, where the Earth
is of the same frame and texture of parts? Now if some Sulphurous and Nitrous
Exhalations, should be gathered together within any of these Cavities, and by
motion, or any other accident, they should happen to be kindled, it is plain
they will expand themselves, rarify the Air, and make that Concussion of the
ground we usually observe in Earthquakes.

Now it is plain, that these Exhalations may be kindled without the heat of the
Sun, from observations that are daily to be made in our Atmosphere; where the
Sulphurous Exhalations that are the cause of Thunder and Lightning are kindled
in the Air, when the action of the Sun is not strong. This is also observed of
Meteors, (which we commonly call falling Stars) whose matter is kindled in the
nightime, when the immediate heat of the Sun can have as little effect as it
has within the bowels of the Earth: and I hope this will be sufficient to
safisfy him, that Earthquakes may arise from other causes than the heat of the
Sun.

Though the arguments I have already given, clearly prove, that there was no
rarefaction of the vapors, caused by the heat of the Sun within the Abyss, yet
I showed, that granting the Suns heat had reached the Abyss, even then an
Universal Deluge could not follow from thence; because I demonstrated by a
Calculation, that if the Suns heat drew vapors from the Abyss sufficient to
furnish the Rivers on the Earth, it must have exhausted this great treasure
long before the time of the Deluge. This manner of Examining the Defender calls
contention, and going from one extreme to another; though for my part, I think
there cannot be fairer dealing, than first to prove that his Principles and
Hypotheses are false and disagreeable to Nature; and then (supposing them true)
to show, that his reasonings upon 'em are false and inconclusive, and the
causes he assigns, are no ways proportionable to the effects he would account
for.

However, our Author assures us, that there are a great many uncertainties in
the computation. He knows I did not pretend to give an exact estimation of the
Water that the Rivers sent into the Sea. I can suppose that I have not come
within the truth by one, two, or three Cubical Miles of Water, (which is as
much as I need to allow) nay, I will grant him, that I have erred a twentieth
part, or even one half if he pleases, and yet the argument will be strong
enough. For according to the computation, the Abyss ought to have been
exhausted in the space of 460. Years; now from the Creation to the time of the
Deluge, there were 1600. Years. By which it is evident, that which ever of
these Hypotheses he takes, the Abyss must have been empty long before the time
of the Deluge.

But he thinks I go in this Calculation on principles that are not allowed by
the Theorist, because I suppose the Waters of the present Sea equal to the
Waters of the great Abyss; whereas (says he) there was near twice as much Water
in the great deep, as is now in the Ocean, seeing the Abyss was extended under
the whole Earth, and the Sea reaches but to the half of it. I always presumed
that it was the Theorist's Hypothesis, that the Crust fell down upon the Abyss
and drove the Waters from their place, so that the greatest part of the Waters
in the Abyss (after they had overflowed the Earth) came and settled at last in
the Sea. There might indeed have been some Water left in the Hollows and
Cavities of the Earth, but 'twould be inconsiderable in respect of the whole;
and the Theorist himself asserts, that if the Earth should disgorge all the
Waters in its bowels, it would not amount to above half an Ocean; and in the
Latin Edition he thinks, that it is altogether incredible, that the Water
within the Earth should be as great as what is in the Sea and Rivers. So that
this Gentleman, who asserts that there was almost twice as much Water in the
Abyss as there is now in the Ocean, seems never to have read the Theory, or to
have understood the Theorist's Hypothesis which he endeavors to defend.

But what if there were twice as much Water in the Abyss as there is now in the
Ocean; yet even in that case the whole must have been exhausted long before the
Deluge, since one Ocean could have been drawn up in the space of 460. Years:
Nay, if we suppose that there were but just so many Rivers in the Primitive
Earth as there are now in ours; (whereas in proportion to the dry Land there
ought to have been twice as many) yet in the space of 1600. Years, there is
time enough to have the whole Abyss exhausted, as is evident by the Calculation.

The Defender alleges, that the Rivers were not supplied by the vapors, only
from the Abyss, but also from the Earth and Waters upon it. This evasion was
foreseen, and obviated by me in the 165. Page of the Examination; where I
proved that there must be at least the same quantity of vapor exhaled from the
Abyss as was before, because the same cause still continuing to act, would
still produce the same effect, and the Abyss having at first furnished the
Rivers with a sufficient quantity of Water, would still continue to furnish 'em
in the same quantity, nay rather in a much greater; since (according to the
Theory) the heat of the Sun was stronger and stronger every day upon the Abyss,
and the vapors exhaled were so many at last, that not being all of them able
to crowd through the Pores, they broke the thick Crust of the Earth with their
violent effect to expand themselves and fly upwards. Thus we see all the shifts
and evasions which this Author makes, are not of the least weight against my
computation.

But supposing that all the Water in the present Ocean was then in the Abyss,
yet I proved, that from the fall of the Crust, there could arise no Universal
Deluge, because the Theorist himself proved, that there must be at least eight
Oceans of Water required to cover the Earth. The Defender confesses, that the
Water in the Abyss was not sufficient to make a Deluge in the nature of a
standing Pool, over-topping and standing calm over the heads of the highest
Mountains; (as it is usually conceived) but the Deluge that rose from the fall
of the Crust was rather like a rushing Sea, overflowing and sweeping them with
its Raging Waves and Impetuous Fluctuations. I beg the Theorist's pardon for
mistaking him: I thought that he designed to explain Noah's Deluge, and not one
of his own imagination. Now I can easily prove, that such a Deluge as this
Gentleman conceives, is no ways like that which happened in the days of Noah.
For though the Theorist computed but eight Oceans of Water that were sufficient
to cover the whole Earth above the tops of the highest Mountains, yet I
determined the quantity more nicely in my Remarks on Mr. Whistons Theory, where
I proved, that there must be at least three and twenty Oceans of Water that
were necessary for such an effect. From which it is evident, that the Water in
the Abyss could but cover one part of twenty three at a time, and the other
twenty two parts must remain dry; and that after the Water had overflowed this
part, it must have proceeded to the next, and so successively, till at last it
had overflowed the whole Earth. This is the way that our Author must conceive
the Deluge.

Let us see now what account the Scriptures give us of Noah's Deluge. Genes.
Chap. 7. v. 2. it is said, That the fountains of the great deep were broken up,
and the windows of heaven were opened, and the rain was upon the Earth forty
days and forty nights. And again, verse. 17. And the flood was forty days upon
the Earth, and the waters increased and bare up the Ark, and it was lift up
above the Earth. verse. 18. And the waters prevailed, and were increased greatly
upon the Earth, and the Ark went upon the face of the waters. verse. 19. And the
waters prevailed exceedingly upon the Earth, and all the high hills that were
under the whole heavens were covered. verse. 20. Fifteen cubits upwards did the
waters prevail, and the mountains were covered. verse. 24. And the waters
prevailed upon the Earth an hundred and fifty days. Chap. 8. ver. 1. And God
made a wind to pass over the Earth, and the waters assuaged. verss. 2. The
fountains also of the deep and the windows of heaven were stopped, and the rain
from heaven was restrained. verse. 3. And the waters returned from off the Earth
continually, and after the end of the hundred and fifty days, the waters were
abated. ver. 5. And the waters decreased continually until the tenth month. In
the tenth month, on the fifth day of the month were the tops of the mountains
seen.

We may observe from this, that the Scriptures inform us, that the whole Earth
was under a Deluge at the same time, that the waters increased and prevailed
gradually every where for the space of 150. days, that all the high hills under
the whole heavens were covered, that all these Mountains lay under Water for
several months, that the Ark swam and was carried up above the Mountains, and
when the Waters began to abate, it rested at last upon one of them; that it was
the eighth month from the beginning of the Deluge when the tops of the
Mountains first began to appear, till which time they lay all of them hid and
covered with Water. Now in the Theorist's imaginary Deluge, it is plain, (as I
have already observed) that there was but a twenty third part of the Earth
covered with Water at the same time; it is also evident, that the Waters could
not increase gradually in any one place for the space of 150. days, since the
whole Earth was to be covered over with waters in that time. His single Ocean
of Water could not stay but the three and twentieth part of that time in one
place, and therefore it must have gone off from that place, and left it dry
long before the end of those days.

Nor is this Idea of a Deluge less consistent with Reason and Philosophy, than
it is with Scripture. Is it possible to conceive a moving, wandering Mountain of
Water? For Water naturally settles its self into a surface concentrical to the
Earth; and by whatever force, or however it should be raised into an heap, it
will immediately spread it self uniformly upon the surface of the Earth, and
descend by whatever ways it can. If therefore we should suppose all the waters
in the Abyss drawn or forced up to cover the hills of any one place, it will
immediately descend and form it self into a surface parallel to the Horizon,
and so spread its self equally every where upon the Valleys of the Earth,
leaving the Mountains quite uncovered. The Theorist himself acknowledges, that
a Mountain of Water is an impossible thing; and indeed, this notion of a Deluge
seems to be so extravagant, that I can scarce think that any body will be so
credulous as to believe it; and yet it is impossible that it can be any other
ways, if we suppose all the Mountains of the Earth to have been covered with an
Ocean of Water, of no greater dimensions than that assigned in the Theory,
which cannot cover more than the three and twentieth part of the Earths surface.

The Defender in vain alleges, that we are to conceive this Ocean as a mighty
rushing Sea, overflowing and sweeping with its Raging waves and Impetuous
Fluctuations, all the Mountains; for this will not at all take away the
absurdity, because motion can never multiply any body, nor make it to be at
more places than one at a time. Water can only by motion be in many places
successively, which will give us the Idea of such a moving heap or Mountain of
waters, as we have just now proved impossible. Nor is this notion of a Deluge
agreeable to the principles of the Theory. For let us suppose the Crust to have
been broken by the force of vapors endeavoring to expand themselves, it must
immediately fall down and drive the Water of the Abyss out of its place, some
one way, and some another; this Water will ascend with a very considerable
force, let us suppose as far as five Miles perpendicular height, after which it
will descend again and fall to the ground; and all this will be by computation
in much less time than one day. These waters having acquired a great force by
their fall, will descend very swiftly into the Valleys and Cavities of the
Earth, and leave both Mountains and Upper-grounds quite uncovered. And as the
Waters that were raised by the fall of the Crust, could cover no more than a
twenty third part of the Earths surface, so it is evident it could remain but a
very short time upon the tops of those Mountains it overflowed; whereas in
Noah's Deluge, all the Mountains of the Earth lay under water for the space of
150. days. Thus I have proved, that the Deluge the Defender endeavored to
explain, is neither consistent with the holy Scriptures, true Reason and
Philosophy, nor the Principles of the Theory, from whence he pretends to deduce
it.

Of the Figure of the Earth.
THOUGH what the Theorist has said in relation to the Figure of the Earth, be one
of his grossest and most palpable errors, and though there is a positive
demonstration that it is of a Figure directly contrary to that he assigns, yet
his Defender thinks himself obliged to maintain it, and therefore spends more
time and paper about it, than upon any other point.

He is not contented with what has been said by several Mathematicians and
Philosophers of the present Age upon this Subject; though one would think that
they knew the methods to determine the Figure of the Earth much better than
either the Theorist or himself. He is afraid that they will give it against
him, and therefore he appeals from them to some farther Observations, that He
and the Theorist point out and direct us to make. As to observe for instance,
whether the extent of a degree be the same in different Latitudes, or whether
the shadow of the Earth in a total Eclipse of the Moon be truly round; as also
to observe if toward the Poles, the return of the Sun to their Horizon be
according to the rules of a Sphaerical Surface of the Earth. These are the
Observations the Theorist would have made to determine the controversy. Which I
will now consider, leaving the Defenders Observations to be examined in a
proper place.

I noted in the Examination, that I did not think any Observations that could
be made upon different measures of a Degree in different Latitudes, could be so
nice and exact, as would be necessary to determine the point in controversy.
For supposing that the greatest Diameter of the Earth were to its least as 101.
to 100. by which one Semidiameter would be very near 40. Miles greater than the
other; (a difference which his friend who was so kind as to write him a Letter,
thinks to be much too great) and then the greatest Degree upon the Meridian,
would be to the least very near in the same proportion; that is, it would be 1
part of 100. greater than the other; but this difference is so very small, that
I believe no Observations in order to this discovery, are nice enough to be
relied upon. For where the length of a Degree in Miles is determined either by
the resolution of many right-lined or Spherical Triangles, it is scarcely
probable, that the errors in Observations and Measuring, will amount to less
than of a Mile.

Though therefore we can scarce hope of ever attaining to a knowledge of the
Earths Figure by measuring of it, yet to satisfy the Theorist in this matter, I
took notice of one Dr. Eisenschmidt, who compares the magnitude of Degrees
observed in different Latitudes, and finds that they are greater at the Equator
than at the Poles, and that they gradually decreased from the Equator toward
either of the Poles; from which he infers, that the Earth is of such a Figure
as the Theorist has assigned to it, whereas I following the Theorists
principles, demonstrated that the Earth must have another Figure, and that the
Diameter of the Equator must be greater than its Axis.

But our Defender says, that my demonstration proceeds upon a supposition, that
the Vertical Lines or the Lines of Gravity (I suppose he means the Lines of
direction of heavy Bodies) are to be drawn directly to the Center. Does not the
Theorist admit of the same supposition? Does not he make the Water descend from
the Poles to the Equator, that it may be so much nigher to the Center? Since
therefore according to the Theorist, the Lines of direction of heavy Bodies are
toward the Center of the Earth, and (if we proceed upon that Hypothesis) where
the Degrees are greatest, there the Earth must have its Diameter greatest, it
will evidently follow from Eisenschmidts Observations, that the Earth must not
be an oblong Spheroid but a broad one, and have its Axis shorter than the
Diameter of its Equator.

Our Defender tells us, that Dr. Eisenschmidt supposes the Vertical Lines or
Lines of Gravity, to be drawn at right Angles to the Tangent of each respective
Horizon. What Dr. Eisenschmidt does really suppose I know not, but I am sure he
cannot suppose a thing more absurd than what our Author makes him suppose in
this place. For that the Line of direction of heavy Bodies is at right Angles
with the Tangent of the Horizon, is to me such an incomprehensible supposition,
that I shall excuse my self from considering of it, till the Defender (who I
suppose would have us think he understands it) is at leisure to explain it.

I have not seen Dr. Eisenschmidts own Book, to know upon what principles he
proceeds: It is said in the Acta Eruditorum, that he embraced the Theorist's
opinion about the Figure of the Earth; and I believed that therefore he would
also follow his and the common opinion, that all heavy Bodies tend toward the
Center of the Earth; because it seems most reasonable, that the direction of
heavy Bodies should be toward the Earth's Center of Gravity, which we may
suppose to be the same with its Center of Magnitude. Nor can we suppose this
direction to be any ways changed, but upon the account of the centrifugal
force, that all Bodies in the Earth have acquired by being turned round the
Earths Axis. Now if he had taken the Centrifugal force into his consideration,
he must have concluded (as I have done) that the Earth had the Diameter of its
Equator greater than its Axis, which is still contrary to the conclusion he
made. So we see, that whether this Author supposes the direction of heavy
Bodies to be toward the Center of the Earth, that then by Observations he must
have concluded, the Earth to have been of a broad Spheroidical Figure; or
whether he supposes the Lines of direction of heavy Bodies to be changed by a
Centrifugal force, he ought to have drawn the same consequence from thence,
though not indeed from his Observations of a degree measured in several Latitudes.

The Defender not daring to trust much to his own skill in this matter, has
obtained a Letter from a Gentleman of his acquaintance concerning it. But all
that Gentleman's reasons depend on a supposition which the Theorist cannot
allow, viz. That the Tangents of the Ellipse are in the Horizontal Plane;
whereas it is evident, that according to the Theorist's Hypothesis, these
Tangents can never represent the Horizons, for he makes the Water to run from
them down to the Equator: now it is certain that Water will not run if it be
placed upon an Horizontal Plane; and if we are to make Water run any way, we
must always make its Channel inclined to the Horizon.

This Gentleman indeed reasons truly, provided the Lines of direction of heavy
Bodies were always perpendicular to a Plane, touching the Spheroid in the point
where the Body falls; but as I have already observed, this supposition is not
to be admitted by the Theorist, and we can no more suppose a Plane touching a
Spheroid to be the Horizon of the point where it touches, than we can suppose a
Man who stands upon the side of a Hill, to have that plain for his Horizon
which touches the side of the Hill in the point of his station.

Thus, I think I have plainly proved, that there is no certain way to determine
the Figure of the Earth from the observations of a degree taken in several
Latitudes; yet I have shown, that if either the Theorist or his Defender will
depend upon those observations which are already made; we must conclude from
their own principles by evident demonstration, that the Earth is of a very
different Figure from what they assign it.

The next way the Theorist would take to determine the Earth's Figure, is by
its shadow upon the Moon: But it is easy to prove this way as uncertain as the
other. For let us suppose (as we have done already) that the greatest Diameter
of the Earth is to its least, as 101. to 100. (which is a much greater
proportion than what is allowed either by Mr. Newton or Mons. Hugens) because
by observation, the Diameter of the Earth's shadow, is three times the Diameter
of the Moon, and the Moon appears under an Angle of 30. minutes, therefore the
Diameter of the Earth's shadow seen at that distance, will appear under an
Angle of 90. minutes or a degree and half; and therefore if we suppose the
Diameter of the shadow to be divided into an 100. equal parts, (the whole
appearing under an Angle of 90. minutes) every one of these parts will be seen
under an Angle of 90/100 or 9/10 parts of a minute; that is, in our present
case, one Diameter of the shadow will appear under a greater Angle than the
other, by 9/10 parts of a minute. Now by experience we find, that any object
that appears under an Angle that is less than a minute, is seen as if it were a
point. It is therefore plain, that if there were a Lucid Body whose Disk is
large enough to receive the whole shadow of the Earth, that we could observe no
sensible difference between the length of its Diameters; but if this Lucid Body
had its Disk but just big enough to receive a 1/8 part of the Earth's shadow,
(as it really is in the Moon) it is most evident that we could not determine
the Figure of the shadow near so nicely, as in the former case. We see then
that by the Earth's shadow upon the Moon, its Figure is not to be determined
with any tolerable exactness.

The third observation the Theorist would have us make, is about the return of
the Sun to the Polar parts of the Earth, whether that be according to the rules
of a Spherical surface. But this method is as little to be relied upon as any
of the rest. The various refractions of the cold and thick Atmosphere, make all
observations that are made there, very doubtful and uncertain: Besides, the
Latitudes of those places that are near the Poles, are not exactly determined,
so that there is no trusting to observations that have been already made, and I
believe no body will go now to these places and Winter in them, on purpose to
make new and more exact observations to determine this controversy.

The Defender, having thus pointed out the Theorist's own observations, comes
now to consider the arguments that are brought by those, who say that the the
Earth is of a broad Spheroidical Figure. He tells us, that the learned Mr.
Hugens thinks it may be proved by experiments made about the different
Vibrations of a Pendulum in different Latitudes; and brings an instance of an
experiment made at Cayen in America, where it was observed, that a Pendulum
Vibrating in a second is shorter than one at Paris that performs its Vibrations
in that time; from which he says, he concludes that Gravitation is less under
and near the Equator than toward the Poles, and from thence, that the Figure
of the Earth is protuberant and rises in the middle, its shortest Diameter
being betwixt Pole and Pole.

We see here that our Author ascribes the observation about the Figure of the
Earth, drawn from an experiment of Pendulums to Mons. Hugens, whereas it was
Mr. Newton who first made the discovery, from whom Mr. Hugens had it; and this
Writer in justice ought to have ascribed it to its true and genuine Author. But
this is not the first time that the honor of several noble Inventions, which
the World ows to that excellent Geometer and Philosopher, has been given to
others.

The Defender tells us, that there are several things to be considered before
we come to the conclusion; first the matter of fact, concerning the inequality
of Vibrations of equal Pendulums in different Latitudes; and then the
inferences made from that inequality. As to the matter of fact, he tells us,
that it was Mr. Richer who made the experiment, whose Person or Character he
does not know, or whether his relation be extant in Print. It Is strange, that
the Defender thinks that no body is to be trusted in a Philosophical
experiment; but those whose Persons and Characters he knows. Has he such an
universal acquaintance, as to have an exact knowledge of all those who are sit
to make Observations and Experiments in Natural Philosophy? Certainly he must
think, that the Gentlemen of the Royal Academy are better Judges of that than
he is. Mons. Richer was chosen by them, and sent at the command and charges of
the French King, to make Observations in the South parts of the World; and
doubtless, when these Observations were to be made by order, and at the
expenses of their King and Patron, they would never choose any but one whom
they knew to be well qualified for such an undertaking. And Mons. Richer
himself has justified the judgment of those that chose him, by his excellent
Observations, both Astronomical and Physical, that have been so well received
by the Learned. Among the rest, he gives us an account of this Observation
about the Pendulum very exactly; He tells us, that during the ten months he
stayed at Cayen, there scarce passed a week in which he did not make the
Observation, and found it always the same.

Mons. Vaun, Mons. Hayes, and Mons. Du Gloss, were also chosen by the same
Academy, and sent to the Island Goree in Africa. They had it particularly in
their instructions, to make Observations about the Pendulums; which they did,
and confirmed the Experiments made by Mons. Richer. We may see a particular
account of all their Observations in the Receuill des Observations faites in
diverse Voyages per l'ordre de sa Majesty, in fol. Printed at the Royal Press in
Paris.

To all this we may add, that the ingenious Mr. Halley when he went to St.
Helena, (having first fitted the length of his Pendulums for Vibrating seconds
at London) found afterward that length at St. Helena to be too great; and
therefore he was forced to shorten it, that it might Vibrate seconds there;
though he did not then observe the exact difference between them. These repeated
Experiments I hope will put the matter of fact past all doubt.

But (says our Author) even Mons. Hugens speaks dubiously of the Experiment.
This I deny; for Mons. Hugens never in the least doubted of the Experiment,
viz. That a Pendulum Vibrating seconds at the Equator, must be shorter than a
Pendulum performing its Vibrations in the same time at Paris; for he has given
evident demonstration that it must be so. Mons. Hugens only doubted whether
Mons. Richer had observed exactly the difference of their lengths; being fully
assured in the mean time that there was a difference, as will be plain to any
body that will be at the pains to read his Book. The reason why he doubted if
Mons. Richer had given us the exact difference was, because he found that the
difference observed by him, did not answer the numbers he brought from his own
Calculation, which proceed upon a supposition that Gravity at all distances
from the Center is the same.

But it seems the Defender does not see the consequence which is drawn from
thence, viz. That Gravity must be less at the Equator than at the Poles, and
therefore wishes, that it were proved by other Experiments. It is strange and
surprising, that this Author should know exactly how the Earth was made, by
what Principles and Laws of Mechanism the World was framed, how the Deluge
overspread the World, and what way the Mountains arose, and yet should be
ignorant of so plain and easy a piece of Mechanism as this, which has not the
hundredth part of the difficulty or intricacy of those which he pretends to
know. Well, to convince him I will here repeat the demonstration somewhat
plainer than I did in the Examination.

Let us suppose two bodies moving in two equal Cycloids; it is demonstrated by
Mr. Hugens that the time of the descent through these Cycloids, is to the time of
the descent through the Axis of the Cycloids always in a given proportion, viz.
as the Semiperiphery of a Circle is to its Diameter; and therefore if the time
of the descent or vibration in these two equal Cycloids, should be unequal the
time of the descent through their Axes will be also unequal. Now the Axes of the
Cycloids being equal, and the time in which the Bodies move through them,
unequal, it is evident that the two forces which move these two Bodies must
also be unequal; that is, the accelerating force of Gravity in the one, will be
greater then the accelerating force in the other; or which is the same thing,
(supposing the Bodies equal) the Conatus that the one has to go downwards, will
be stronger than the Conatus that the other has to go downwards, that is, the
Gravity of the one will be greater than the Gravity in the other.

Now this is the very case in hand; for we find by the Observations of
Pendulums, that a Body Vibrating in a Cycloid here, will perform its Vibrations
in shorter time, than when it Vibrates in the same Cycloid at the Equator; and
therefore it is a demonstration that the Gravity at the Equator is not so great
as it is here. Which if the Defender had well understood, he needed not to have
troubled himself about the making of other Experiments, since there can be none
that are more nice than this. For though the difference of time for one single
Vibration be very insensible, yet this difference being often repeated, will
come at last to be very sensible, and by observing it for a longer time, we may
come to as great exactness as we please.

From this we may conclude, that there can be no experiments made which will
more nicely determine the different Gravities at the Equator and here, than
what is to be done by observations from Pendulums; and that no body will speak
against such Experiments, but they who do not understand them. But however we
will now consider the Experiments the Defender would have made to examine the
different Gravities here and at the Equator.

He tells us, he would not have it made by a Balance or Scales, but by such
powers as do not immediately depend upon Gravity, as Springs or other Engines,
Rarefactions, or whatsoever has the force to raise, sustain, or remove,
ponderous Bodies. But how does this Author know, but these Springs and Engines
may change their force also at the Equator, and so be able to raise no greater
weight than they will do here. Has not the weather a very great effect upon the
Elasticity of all sorts of Springs, which it alters according to the dryness or
dampness of the Air? And can we be sure that the same Spring in so different
Climates and seasons, will preserve the same Elasticity? But granting that
Springs would not alter their Elasticity in different Climates and seasons, yet
the difference between the Gravity here, and that which is at the Equator is so
small, (the one being to the other as 690. to 689.) that the difference of
their effects would be scarce sensible. For let us suppose that a weight here
extended a Spring to the length of an inch, the same weight would not draw it
out so far at the Equator; by 1/690; of an inch; which quantity is so small,
that we should need good Microscopes to perceive it.

The next Experiment the Defender would try, is that of the Barometer; for he
thinks the Mercury should sink much lower there than with us, or indeed, to
nothing if the height be comparatively so great as is supposed. It is hard to
conceive, why the Mercury should sink lower at the Equator than it does here. I
cannot suppose he concludes so, because it is lighter there than here; for upon
that account it ought to rise higher, neither can I suppose that he thinks it
ought to sink, because the Air is not so high there as here; for the Air turns
round the Earths Axis as well as other Bodies, and therefore it must have a
Centrifugal force as the rest have; and where this Centrifugal force is
greatest (which is under the Equator) it will rise highest from the surface of
the Earth. Since then we can see no way by which he can prove this paradox, we
must leave it, and desire him to make it out in his next Book.

There are some other Experiments, that the Defender would try to know the
exact Figure of the Earth; as for instance, He says, the height of the Equator
should make a different Horizon (as to the Heavens, or the Earth and Sea) East
and West, from North and South, the Figure of the Earth being a Sphere one way,
and a Spheroid the other, the Sea also must be seventeen miles deeper at the
Equator than at the Poles. Then in reference to Rivers, the motion of those
that rise near the Equator must be swift and rapid, but very slow must the
motion be of those that ascend to it, if at all they can be supposed to climb
so great a Hill.

The great River of the Amazons rises five degrees from the Equator, yet runs
up to the Equator with a vast load of Waters. Rio de Nigro has a longer course
against the bent of the Earth, and crossing the Equator falls into the Southern
Sea. The Nile in Africa crosses the Line, and has a long course on this side of
it. Rivers do not rise higher by a natural course than the Fountains head, and
Hydrographers do not assign above two foot in a mile for the descent of Rivers:
but upon this Hypothesis, there will be fourteen or fifteen foot for every mile
in Rivers descending from the Equator; which is a precipitation rather than a
Navigable Stream. Suppose (says he) a Canal cut from the Equator to the Poles;
it would be a paradox to say, that water would not flow in this Canal having
fourteen or fifteen foot descent for every mile; but it would be a greater
paradox to suppose, that Rivers would rise to the Equator, and with the same
celerity as we see they do upon an ascent of so many feet. These are the
Defenders thoughts on this subject: it is scarce imaginable how any one should
be so forward in defending the Theory, that appears so entirely unacquainted
with Natural Philosophy, as this Author does. However, if it be not too late
for him to learn, I will do what I can to inform him, and consider what he has
said.

His first thought, that there should be a different Horizon, as to the
Heavens, the Earth and the Sea, East and West, from North and South, the Figure
of the Earth being a Sphere one way and a Spheroid another, is such
unintelligible language as would puzzle a Mathematician to imagine, how it were
possible for a man to put such words together, with a design to mean any thing.
But however, if I may humbly guess at what this incomprehensible Gentleman
intends; I suppose he would say that the Section of the Earth is a Circle one
way, and an Ellipsis the other.

Now I can casily demonstrate, that if the Earth were a Spheroid, any point of
it would have no other Horizon than what some would have a Sphere, whose Axis
is in the Axis of the Ellipse; thus, Let A E B be an Ellipsis, E F a Tangent to
it in the point E, to which erect the perpendicular E C meeting with the Axis
in C at the Center C, and the distance C E, describe a Circle; it is plain,
that this Circle will be touched by the straight line E F in the point E, and
if both the Ellipse and Circle were turned round the Axis A B there would also
be a Spheroid and a Sphere generated; both which would have the same Plane
touching them in diagram the point E, because the periphery of a Circle whose
Radius is D E would be in both their surfaces, and the Ellipsis and Circle
touch one another in the point E, that is, because the Horizons at E are
supposed to be in the Plane which touches the Spheroid and Sphere in that
point; both these Figures will have the same Horizons. The same thing is
demonstrated of any other point.

As for his other thought, viz. That the Sea ought to be seventeen miles deeper
at the Equator than at the Poles; he would have done well to have offered us
some of his abstruse reasons why it ought to be so, for a common Reader, that
is not used to his profound way of thinking, cannot easily perceive any, for he
will not suppose without any arguments for it, that the Channel of the Sea is
exactly of a Spherical surface, but rather think with the rest of mankind, that
it is raised after the same manner that the surface of the Sea is, and is
further distant from the Center at the Equator than at the Poles.

His next is a very strange thought about Rivers. For (says he) if the Earth
were of a broad Spheroidical Figure, and if we should suppose a Canal cut from
the Equator to the Poles, it were a paradox to say, that the water will not
descend from the Equator to the Poles; but it would be a greater to suppose,
that Rivers would rise from thence to the Equator. Well, if this be a paradox,
I hope he will thank me if I teach him how to solve it.

For the greater ease and clearness, let us suppose the matter of the Earth
first to have been fluid. If this matter had no Centrifugal force, it would
settle its self into an uniform smooth (though Spherical) surface; but the Earth
being turned round its Axis, and all the parts of it by this rotation acquiring
a Centrifugal force, and those at the Equator having a stronger force to recede
from their Axis than those toward the Poles; it is evident, that the fluid at
the Equator would rise no higher than that toward the Poles, and the fluid
would settle its self into a broad Figure; as is here represented, where, AE Q
represents the Diameter of the Equator, P P its Axis. diagram

Now this being the Figure which arises from the force of Gravity joined with
the Centrifugal force, it is evident, that as long as these two causes continue
to act, this Figure will remain the same, and the fluid will not alter its
position nor descend from AE to P; but that cause which first brought it into
such a posture, will always preserve it in the same. Or if we should suppose
this Figure altered or changed by any external force, so that the Diameter of
the Equator was made shorter; it is evident, that as soon as this external force
is taken off, that the fluid being acted by the two already mentioned forces,
will immediately restore its self into its former natural figure; and the parts
of the fluid will never come to an equilibrium one with another, till they
settle so as that the Spheroid have the same surface it had before.

Let us next suppose this fluid Spheroid to be changed into a solid one, all
except one Channel extended from AE to P, and as deep as you please: The fluid
in this Channel having the same forces to act upon it, according to the same
direction, and in the same manner, will still keep the same position, without
ever changing its figure, and every part will remain in the same place that it
was in before; it being indifferent to the fluid in the Channel AE P whether
the matter next it be fluid or not fluid, solid or not solid.

By this, I hope it will appear no paradox to say, that if a Channel were cut
from the Poles to the Equator, that the water would not run from thence down in
this Channel to the Poles. I will next make it appear no paradox, to say, that
water may be made to run from the Poles to the Equator. It is well known, that
(whatever be the Figure of the Earth) water will not run from the Land to the
Sea, except the Land be raised higher than the Sea, and be made to incline to
it. Let us therefore suppose that B M N O AE were the surface of the Land
raised higher than the Sea, but always inclining to it till diagram it meets
with it in AE. It is plain, that whatever water is at B, will endeavor to
approach to the surface P AE as much as it can, and settle it self there in its
natural figure; and because the point M is nearer to the surface P Ae than B,
the water must move from B to M, but the point N being nearer to the surface
into which the water does naturally affect to settle it self; it is evident,
that this water will likewise move from M to N; after the same manner and upon
the same account, would the water move from N to O and from O to Ae, it still
coming nearer to the surface upon which it would naturally spread it self, that
is, it would move from the Poles to the Equator. Thus, I hope I have made it
manifest, that it is no great paradox to say, that the water will move from P
to Ae or from the Poles to the Equator. I have insisted more largely upon this
point, that it may appear more evident to the Defender; because it seems he
cannot understand such reasonings, unless they are made very plain; for I had
said the same things in the Examination tho somewhat more obscurely.

Before I leave this subject, I cannot but observe, that though our Author
perhaps is very well acquainted with the Antediluvian Geography and the rise of
its Rivers, yet it seems that his skill is not very great in the modern. For he
makes Nile in Africa to cross the line, whereas if he had consulted the modern
Geographers and their observations, he had seen that the Nile rises some
degrees on this side of the line, as it is to be seen in Ludolphus's Map of
Aethiopia.

After this fine discourse of our Authors about the ascending of Rivers toward
the Equator, to conclude the argument he says, that if this difference of
Pendulums were found, it will still bear a dispute from what Physical causes it
proceeds. He indeed may dispute it, and perhaps will never come to know it as
long as he lives, but I believe very few else will ever doubt, but that it
proceeds from a greater Gravity in the one place than there is in the other;
especially since it can be proved from demonstrative principles, that if there
be two Pendulums of equal lengths that perform their Vibrations in unequal
times, that the Gravity where the swiftest Pendulum Vibrates, is greater than
where the slowest is. This I say can be demonstrated from most evident and
Geometrical principles; and if the Defender does not understand them, it will
be his wisest course to suspend his judgment till he has learned as much of
the Elements of Geometry and Mechanism, as will qualify him to comprehend them.

I not only proved this variation of Gravity, from its effect upon Pendulums,
but I also showed the cause of it, and that it must be so, upon supposition,
that the Earth turns round its own Axis. For all Bodies that turn round an
Axis, endeavor to recede from that Axis; and because at the Equator Bodies
moved swiftest, the Circles there being greatest, this Conatus or Centrifugal
force would be also greatest; now this force at the Equinoctial acting directly
against the force of Gravity, (which it does no where besides) it is evident,
that upon this account Gravity must be less there than any where else. Upon the
account of this diminution of Gravity it must follow also, that the Diameter of
the Equator will be greater than its Axis, or that the Matter at the Equator
rises higher than at the Poles.

The Defender says, that this is agreed and owned on all hands, in case there
were no impediment to hinder the rising or retrocession of the middle parts;
but (says he) the Theorist did believe, that the Vortex was of a shorter
Diameter there than through the Poles, which hindered the rising of the fluid.
What this impediment is, or what should occasion this straitness of the Orb at
the Equator I know not; I hope the Theorist does not suppose that there is a
great iron hoop at those parts, a solid ring like that of Saturns, which keeps
in the fluid from rising. Yet how it should be else kept in is beyond my skill
to guess; I wish he would explain this more at length, that we might know what
he means by it.

But let us suppose this straitness of the Orb at the Equator, and see what
will follow from it; Let ACB represent diagram the Earth, first of a Spherical
Figure: E F G H a fluid Orb of Air which surrounds it, which we will suppose
straiter at F than at E and G; Let A B be the Axis of the Earth, because the
matter of C has a greater endeavor to recede from the Center than the matter
any where else upon the Earth; it is evident that this matter must press
stronger upon the fluid immediately above it, than the matter at other parts
can do upon the fluid immediately above them; and because the matter of the
Earth is much more solid than the fluid Air, it is plain, that the Vis motrix
or absolute force that the matter of the Earth has to recede from the Center,
will be greater than the absolute force that the Air has to recede from its
Center; it is plain upon this account, that the Air must yield to it; but
according to the Theorist the Air cannot rise higher than F, therefore it must
recede toward E and G, and leave room to the matter at C to rise up to M; by
which means it is evident, that (this matter thus rising at the retrocession of
the fluid Air) the solid matter of the Earth must settle its self in the form
of a broad Spheroid. Thus, from the Theorists own principles and suppositions,
I have proved that the Earth must be higher at the Equator than at the Poles.

The Author tells us, that those who affirm that the Earth is in form of a
broad Spheroid, will allow of no Vortices to the Planets; but then (says he)
they must assign some other sufficient cause to carry the Planets in their
Periodical motions with the same velocity for innumerable Ages about their
common Center; and the secondary about the Primary; as also what gives them
their diurnal rotation, and the different position of their Axes.

I thought that this Defender had been better acquainted with the history of
Philosophy for these twelve years past, than it seems he is. One would think
that he had done nothing but por'd upon the Theory all this time, since he is
not acquainted with what is known to every body that pretends to Philosophy now
a days.

He may find several hundreds of people that can tell him, that there are other
causes found for the Celestial motions than the Vortices, which will easily
explain all those Phoenomena he has just now mentioned. The causes why the
Planets move in Elliptical Orbits are now discovered; it is known why they move
swiftest at their Perihelia, and slowest at their Aphelia. The cause of the
procession of the Equinox is now no longer a mystery; and (which is for our
purpose) it depends upon principles that ruin the Theorist's Figure of the
Earth, and assert the direct contrary, making it in the form of a broad
Spheroid.

The motion of the Moons Apogeon forward and of its Nodes backwards, its
variation, and all its other motions, are easily accounted for by the same
causes, none of which could ever be made out by the Vortices. For by them we
cannot answer the first question the Defender puts, viz. What is it that carrys
the Planets round the Sun with the same velocity for many Ages? Nay, supposing
that we were altogether ignorant of any other cause, yet it is no hard matter
to prove, that the Vortices can never be the cause of the Celestial motions;
and therefore there being no Vortex, there can be no such thing as a straitness
in the Orbit at the Equator, which the Theorist and the Defender suppose. But
if I should allow them both their Vortices and the straitness of their Orbs, I
have already proved, that they will signify nothing to their purpose.

The Defender tells us, that this reasoning about the Figure of the Earth
depends upon the Theorists Hypothesis, that the Globe of it was once fluid; and
from thence he pretends to confirm the Theory: For (says he) neither Figure of
the Earth, oblong or oblate, can be proved from the rotation of the Earth and
its Gravity, without supposing the Globe formed into that shape before it came
to be hardened, before it came to be loaded and stiffned with Rocks and stony
Mountains, and therefore upon both Hypotheses it must be allowed, that there
was such a time; such a state of the Earth when its tender Orb was capable of
these impressions and modifications, and that Orb must have lain above the
waters not under them, nor radicated to the bottom of them; and in the last
place, this concretion upon the waters (says he) must have been throughout all
the parts of the Earth, for there is no reason why one part of the fluid should
be covered more than another; so (says he) that in effect we must suppose, that
all the watery Globe was at first covered over with an Earthy concretion: Now
this being admitted (says he) we have confirmed the main point of the Theory,
namely, that the Abyss was at first covered over with an Orb of earth; and if
we will grant him this he will compound for the rest.

He is a little too unreasonable in expecting grants of such things as are
altogether precarious, and affirmed without so much as a show of an argument.
My business was to prove, that he had deduced a wrong conclusion from his own
Hypotheses and Principles; and therefore, supposing that the Globe of the Earth
was once fluid, I proved from thence, that it must have settled it self into
the figure of a broad Spheroid, and not of an oblong one.

But yet I demonstrated, that supposing the Earth to have been partly fluid and
partly dry, as it is at present, that even in that ease, the Figure of the
Earth must be Spheroidical, because we observe that the Land is very nearly of
the same Figure with the Sea, (only raised a little higher, that it may not be
overflowed) and composes with it the same solid, but the Sea being fluid will
settle its self into just such a figure, as if the whole Globe were fluid, that
is (as I have demonstrated) its surface will be the same with that of a broad
Spheroid; and therefore the Land which is of the same figure will be so
likewise. And thus I hope I have proved, that whether we suppose the Earth to
have been at first entirely fluid, or to have been composed of parts some solid
and some fluid, that from either of these suppositions it follows, that the
Figure of the Earth must be directly contrary to what the Theorist assigns.

But (says our Author) if the Earth was from the beginning in this present
form, firm and solid, (as it is now) Rocky and Mountainous, then the question
is, how the Parts or Regions of the Earth about the Equator, could be raised
above a Spherical figure or into an oblate Spheroid; suppose then the waters
raised by the circumvolution of the Earth, how was the Terra firma raised, or
how could it be raised by that or any such cause. These questions (says he) are
no matter of difficulty to the Theorist, who supposes the first Earth to have
covered the Waters, and to have taken their shape (whatever it was) as upon a
mould.

However easy they may be to the Theorist, I assure him that they are much
easyer to me, who suppose that God Almighty raised the Land at the beginning,
when he formed the Earth into the Figure it has at present, which otherwise
could never have risen of its self. The dry Land therefore was raised and
formed into a Spheroidical Figure by its wise Creator, on purpose that it might
not be overflowed by the Sea at the Equator, which (as I have proved) must of
necessity have been higher there than at the Poles; and therefore if the Land
at the Equator had remained in a Spherical Figure, no higher than that which is
at the Poles, the Sea must of necessity have risen above it, and spread its
self upon it like an Inundation. It was therefore wisely ordered by the Divine
Providence, that not only the Sea but the Land also should be formed into a
broad Spheroidical Figure, on purpose that it might not be overflowed with
Waters.

That the Readers might observe the Theorist's great skill in drawing of
consequences, and how well his Oval-figur'd Earth was supported with reasons; I
gave them his argument thus, All bodies by reason of the Earths diurnal
rotation, do endeavor to recede from the Axis of their motion, but by reason
of the pressure of the Air, and the straitness of the Orb, they cannot recede
from the Axis of their motion, therefore they will move toward the Poles where
they will come nearer to the Axis of their motion, that is, Because all bodies
endeavor to recede from the Axis of their motion, therefore they will
endeavor to go to the Axis of their motion. In answer to this, the Defender
says, that the Theorist asserted, that all Bodies did conari a centro sui motus
recedere, which I have rendered, endeavor to recede from the Axis of their
motion; and by changing the word Center into Axis, of plain sense (says he) I
have made nonsense; and then he is so free as to own, that the conclusion will
follow from my own words, but not from those of the Theorist. I own, that I
changed the word Center into Axis, not carelessly but wilfully, with a design
not of making it nonsense, but better sense than it was before. For we never
say that a Sphere turns round about its own Center, for that would be plain
nonsense indeed, but round about its own Axis; for we cannot so properly say,
that a Body moves round a Center as round an Axis, unless we abstract from its
Magnitude, and conceive it as a point. The reason is plain, for when any Body
revolves, it is evident that every point of it which does not lie in the Plane
of another points Orbit, must describe a different Periphery, which must have
also a different Center, so that all those Centers are placed in one line,
which is therefore called the Axis of the Bodies motion; about which, Bodies
are said to revolve much more properly than about a Center: however, this
Author says, that by changing the word Center into Axis, of plain sense I have
made nonsense. This Gentleman seems to be so extremely paradoxical, that I
have often suspected he must have a different method of judging what is sense
or nonsense from other people, if he has it, it were but fair to show it, that
we may know when things will be agreeable to his Criterion, or when they will
not; if he thinks it nonsense to say, that Bodies do endeavor to recede from
the Axis of their motion, it is my comfort to have some good Mathematicians on
my side, who think otherwise: I need only mention one of them, whose very name
is enough to defend me, viz. The greatest Geometer and Philosopher of the Age,
who uses this way of speaking very often in his Philisophiae Naturalis
principia Mathematica, for which he needs go no further than page 8. where it
is said, Gyrantium parts omnes conantur recedere ab Axe motus.

But however, let us reassume the word Center, and see if the argument will
appear more plausible, or seem to conclude better than it did by using the word
Axis: All Bodies by reason of the Earths diurnal rotation, do endeavor to
recede from the Center of their motion, but by reason of the pressure of the
Air and the straitness of the Orb, they cannot recede from the Center of their
motion, therefore they will go toward the Poles, and move in a Circle where
they will be nearer the Center of their motion. I hope I have not now changed
his words, but have delivered his true meaning; I leave the Reader to judge if
it is not excellently well concluded, and if the connection be not so evident,
that it needs no Comment to make it out.

Now supposing, that the Theorist had reasoned well all this time about the
Earth, and had deduced its true Figure from its true causes; yet I
demonstrated, that all this will not make Rivers run from the Poles to the
Equator, for a reason that I will take the liberty here to repeat, that we may
compare it with the Defenders answer; The demonstration is this:

The Rotation of the Earth round its own Axis being still the same, the cause
which thrust the water from the Equator to the Poles, will also continue the
same and invariable, and by consequence it will hinder the water from returning
again toward the Equator; and therefore, supposing that the Earth was formed
into an Oval-figure, yet there could not be any course for the Rivers; for only
so far would the water ascend toward the Poles till the force which protruded
it that way, came to be in Equilibrium with its Gravity, and there it would
stop, neither ascending farther or descending again, as long as the same cause
continued to act; that is, so long as the Earth turned round its own Axis in
the space of twenty four hours. But if the Earth should cease to move round,
then indeed, in that case and no other, would the water return to the Equator.
For let the figure P Ae P Q represent the Farth, PP the Poles, Ae Q the
Equator, B a body upon the surface of the Earth. I think it is evident, that
the body B will so far ascend toward the Poles, till the force that protrudes
it that way, be in Equilibrium with the force that draws it to the Equator. For
if at B one were greater than the other; for example, the force which draws it
toward the Poles, were greater than its gravity or its tendency toward Ae,
then it would still move toward the Pole, till both forces come to act
equally, and there it would rest as long as these two forces continued in
Equilibrium, which must be so diagram long as the Earths diurnal motion lasts;
now whatever Bodies either solid or fluid, are brought and laid upon the
surface of the Earth at B, these being drawn or pusht with the same
accelerating force either to the Pole or to the Equator, that the first fluid
had which was constituted at B, the same causes continuing to act upon both,
they will rest there also, and consequently will not descend to the Equator.

The Defender thinks he has transcribed this reason very briefly thus; Page 55,
56.
The same causes which cast the Abyss or the Occan toward the Poles, will also
keep the Rivers from descending from the Poles; and then he answers, that there
is no parity of reason betwixt the Abyss or the Ocean, and the Rivers. We see
(says he) in the flux and reflux of the Occan, it has not that effect upon
Rivers nor upon Lakes, nor upon lesser Seas, yet the circumrotation of the
Earth continues the same: He adds, That my confounding the Ocean and Rivers in
the Antediluvian Earth is so much the worse, seeing there never was an Occan
and Rivers together in that Earth; while (says he) there was an open Occan
there were no Rivers, and when there were no Rivers there was no open Ocean,
but an enclosed Abyss; He concludes at last, That tho I make large transcripts
there and elsewhere out of the Theory, yet I do not seem always to have well
digisted the method of it.

I hope the Reader will observe how unfairly this Author is pleased to deal
with me, for in all the argument I have not so much as once mentioned the
Ocean: but the demonstration was universal and reached all sorts of Bodies,
whether they be in the Abyss or on the surface of the Earth. My words were,
that whatever Bodies either fluid or solid, if brought and laid upon the
furface at B, being drawn or pusht with the same accelerating force, that the
first fluid had which was constituted at B, the same causes continuing to act
upon both, they will rest there also, and not descend to the Equator. Where is
it now that I have confounded the Ocean with the Rivers? Or is there any thing
in these words, by which it appears that I have not digested the method of the
Theory? There is one of this Authors acquaintance, that is pleased to tell us,
that disingenuity in examining the Writings of another Person falls more heavy
in the construction of fair Readers, upon him that uses them, than upon him
that suffers them: If it be so, Reslections page last line last.
this Gentleman may easily know, what these Readers will think of him.

However, it seems he thinks, that though none of the water returned to the
Equator while the Earth was at first fluid, and had put on its Oval-shape, yet
when the first concretion was settled upon it, whatever water was after that
upon its surface, would then descend toward the Equator. Why so I pray? What
reason does he give for this? Had not the fluid which lay at B, the very same
causes to keep it from descending to the Equator, that it had before, when the
Earths surface was all fluid? Was not there the same diurnal rotation of the
Earth, in the same time, and by consequence the same Centrifugal force? Was
there not the same pressure of the Atmosphere, and the same straitness of the
Orb that was before? And in a word, every thing the same that kept it from
descending in the former case, would also preserve it in this in the same
position, what reason then can this Author give us for this assertion? Indeed,
he offers us none; if he has any, he keeps it as a secret, which it seems he
will not communicate but to his friends. I think he will do well to keep it
secret for ever.

But, though he will neither show us his own reasons nor answer mine, yet that we
may not be altogether dissatisfied, he is pleased to give us a similitude to
explain it: Page 55, 56.
We see (says he) in the flux and reflux of the Ocean, (let the cause be what
it will) it has not that effect upon Rivers, nor upon Lakes, nor upon lesser
Seas; yet the circumrotation of the Earth continues the same. Is there any
parity of reason here between the flux and reflux of the Sea, and the descent
of the fluid to the Equator? Or does he think that the flux of the Sea arises
only from the rotation of the Earth? If he had studied true Philosophy but half
so much as he has done the Theory, he might have known that the Tides of the
Sea are caused by the action or attraction of the Moon upon it; and because one
part of the Ocean (being directly under the Moon) is more attracted by it than
the rest, the Ocean there must swell, and the water will run from the other
parts of it, unto the place which is most attracted. Now in Rivers, Lakes, and
narrow Seas, there being no difference of attraction in any of its parts, (they
being all so narrow that the Moon cannot act stronger upon one side of them
than the other) it is plain, that no part will swell more than another, and the
waters will not rise higher, nor move from one place to another, by reason of
this equal attraction.

Perhaps, this may be a little obscure to this Author, who as it seems does not
understand the true cause of our Tides; but it not being my business to explain
these things at large, I will refer him to an excellent discourse of Mr. Edmund
Halleys, which he made to K. James, when he presented him Mr. Newton's Book of
the Principles of Natural Philosophy.

He tells his Reader that I ought to have given a better notion of Centrifugal
force than what I have done; For he quotes Page 110. of the Examination, where
it is said, that the Centrifugal force or that force by which a Body is drawn
toward the Center; and in the next Page it is said, that by this Centrifugal
force Bodies endeavor to recede from the Center of their motion, which is
true, but contrary to what I said before.

He needed not have gone so far as the 22. line of the next page, to have found
out the true notion of a Centrifugal force; for if he had repeated the words
immediately following his first quotation, he might there have found it. But if
he had done so he had lost his aim, and the Reader would have perceived that it
was not a confusion in my notions, but only a fault of the Press. I will here
repeat the sentence, that the thing may be set in its true light, If a Body
(said I) revolve freely in a Circle about a Center, as the Planets do about the
Sun, its Centrifugal force, or that force by which it is drawn toward the
Center, will be always equal to its Centrifugal force by which it does
endeavor to recede from the Center. A candid Reader would have immediately
imputed this to nothing else but a fault in the Printing, and instead of the
first word Centrifugal force, he would have seen that the word Centripetal
force ought to have been put, as the very sense would easily have directed any
one that had the least acquaintance with this subject.

After this the Defender tells us, that I might have spared what I have
transcribed from other Authors, about calculating the diminutions of Gravity
made by the Centrifugal force in different Latitudes, these being needless to
the confutation of the Theory. Why so I pray? Are they not to the purpose? Or
do they not answer the intended design, which was to find out by a Calculus the
difference of Gravity in different Latitudes, and from thence to confirm our
Hypothesis, by comparing Calculations with Observations, and seeing how the one
agrees with the other? Well, but I am blamed for transcribing them from other
Authors. I hope he does not think them the worse for that; or that I ought not
to make use of them as arguments against his Theory, because they were said by
others. He might indeed have justly blamed me, if I had published them as new
notions or inventions of my own, and told the World I expected thanks for the
discoveries, as a late Author has done; but I pretended to no such thing.

It is well known that Mr. Newton was the first that made the discovery, and
showed the method of Calculating the Gravity of Bodies at different Latitudes,
whom therefore I mentioned as the sole Inventor. Mr. Hugens indeed I did not
name, seeing he had the notion entirely from Mr. Newton, as that learned
Gentleman does freely acknowledge. But after all this, I have not so much
transcribed from these two learned Authors, as I have endeavored to explain
their notions, and make them intelligible to Men of lower capacities.

Those two excellent and learned men, had something else to do, and matters of
greater concern to mind, than to publish their discoveries at large, so that
every Reader might understand them. I thought therefore that it would not be
altogether displeasing to the World, if I endeavored to explain their Theorems
about the Figure of the Farth, and the effects of Gravity joined with a
Centrifugal force; so that they might become intelligible to those who
understand the Elements of Geometry and the common principles of Staticks: and
I doubted not but it would be more acceptable, because there has not (at least
to my knowledge) been any discourse published of this nature in English.

Without doubt the Reader does now perceive, how vain, empty, and incoherent, a
piece of Philosophy this Theory is; its principles are false, suppositions
precarious, and the reasonings upon them, are all along so weak and ill
grounded, that it is hard to think that the Theorist himself can give any
credit to it; and yet (which is strange) he professes that he believes it more
than he does the Mosaic History of the Creation; though there is this great
difference between them, even supposing no inspiration in the case, that there
is nothing in the account that Moses gives, but what is really possible; for
according to him the whole was performed by the immediate hand of God Almighty,
who needs not the help of second causes for such a work; whereas the Theorist,
who would have it arise from Natural and Mechanical principles, always assigns
such causes as are utterly insufficient for the proposed effect, and generally
such as would really produce the contrary.

But if after all, the Theorist will still insist upon the truth of his Theory,
and has no mind to prove it himself; I would advise him to find out some new
Defender, who can understand, and consider the force of an argument somewhat
better, than his last seems to have done, who (as it appears) has not so much
defended the Theory, as exposed its nakedness and his own unskilfulness.

However, since the Theorist has such a high opinion of his own performance,
and so mean a one of the account given us by Moses; before I end this discourse
it will not be amiss, to Examine a little the notion he has given (in his
Archeologiae Book II. Chap. 8, 9.) of the Mosaic History of the Creation.
Which in short is this, That we are not to believe the first Chapter of Genesis
in a literal sense; but that Moses receded from the Physical verity, as he
calls it, and spoke only (...), Archeol. p. 317.
that is in plain English, there is not a word of it true, the World being
neither Created nor Formed in the manner there recorded; but that his History
of the Formation of Heaven and Earth was not contrived to be agreeable to the
truth, but to the notions and dispositions of the people for whose use it was
written.

To make this out, he pretends to find many faults and incongruities in that
History, which I need not now particularly consider; since there is none of
them that is really incongruous and disagreeable, either to the Nature of
things or the Wisdom of God, but only to his notions, and ways of thinking: As
for instance, when he says (and he tells us that he speaks it with indignation)
that without the greatest reproach both to the Work and its Maker, it is
neither to be said or imagined, Archeol. p. 299.
that this Farth which he styles the very dregs and excrements of nature,
should be the chief and principal part of the Creation, and the first born of
every Creature, so that there should be more time allowed for the framing and
ordering of it, than what is bestowed on all the rest of the World.

However great the Theorist's indignation is, that he has conceived upon this
account, I am sure there are some that cannot read those Reflections of his
upon this History, without a much greater. It may be supposed that Moses who
had an immediate conversation with God Almighty, knew better what was a
reproach to the World and its Maker than the Theorist does, and yet we find
that he thought it no affront to the Divine Wisdom, not only to say and imagine
such a thing, but also to write it, and that with a design, that it should be
received as true by all future generations.

But says the Theorist, the Sacred Writers do often speak in a Mystical,
Archeol. p. 318.
Allegorical, or Metaphorical style, and according to the capacity of the
people, and why might not Moses do the same in delivering the History of the
Creation. To answer this, let us consider in what cases the Scriptures are to
be taken, not in a literal but in an Allegorical and Metaphorical sense, and
then compare each of them with the present case, to see if there is any parity
of reason between them.

First then, the Scriptures are to be understood in an Allegorical sense, when
their liternal meaning would imply a contradiction, either to some other place
of the Sacred Writings, which is most evidently to be understood literally; or
to the nature of the things spoken of; thus when God Almighty is said to have
hands and feet, ears and eyes, to move and walk, and to have the affections and
passions belonging to Men, all or any of these since they are a contradiction,
to the Infinite perfections of the Deity, can never be understood in a literal
meaning; though there should be still some sort of analogy between them and the
thing signified. We are sure, that this consideration can have no place in the
Mosaic History of the Creation, which most certainly does neither contradict
any other part of the Scriptures, nor is there any thing said there but what is
plainly possible, and can be performed by the Power of God, who if he had
pleased, could have formed the World or any part of it (how great soever) in an
instant.

In the next place, the Scriptures are not to be taken in a real and literal
meaning, when they speak according to the system of appearances, and the
notions which we draw from our senses; Thus, when it represents the Earth
plain, and as having four Corners, with the Heavens stretched over it like a
Curtain. In those indeed, and in many other such like places of Scripture, it
is certain, that it was the design of the Sacred Penmen, not to speak
according to the reality and nature of the things themselves, but according to
the notions and opinions which people received of them from their senses; or
indeed when the Sun is said to move every day from East to West, to Rise and
Set, to stand still, there is no necessity of imagining that all those things
are really performed by the Sun; but there the holy Penmen, as all other
Writers which do not concern themselves with Astronomy, speak according to the
system of appearances, and as the Heavenly motions are represented to them by
their senses, it being the common and received way of speaking from which we
are not to recede, if we design to be understood; and even all those
Astronomers who firmly believe the motion of the Earth, when it is not their
business to explain the true system of the Universe, are forced to speak in the
same Dialect: and I believe we should scarce think a Man right in his wits,
that in writing or speaking upon any common subject, instead of saying that the
Sun rose or set, or that it came to the East or went to the West of us, would
say, that our Horizon moved till it came above the Sun or went under it, or
that our Horizon turned round till the East or West points of it came to be
exactly under the Sun.

Now this can never be applied to the Mosaic History of the Creation, since
the method of the Formation of the World could never have appeared to our
senses, and without a Divine Revelation, we should have been ignorant of it to
this day, and had never discovered the order and method by which all things
were formed. Moses certainly wrote that discourse on purpose to give us a true
notion of the Creation, and therefore was to speak of things as they were
really formed, without any respect had to appearances as they would be
represented to humane senses; since there was no Man then in being to whom they
could have appeared, and I am of the opinion, that if he had purposely and
directly wrote as much, upon the System of the World and the motions of the
Heavens, as he has done upon the subject of the Creation, all those who
acknowledge the Divine Authority of his writings, would have been obliged to
believe it.

The next case, wherein we are to recede from the literal sense in the
interpretation of Scripture is, when they deliver parables; those being only
contrived by their Writers to illustrate something wherein they would instruct
the people, can never be supposed to be understood in a literal meaning.

This way of writing is indeed very ancient, and is of great use for informing
Mankind in the precepts of Prudence and Morality, which are never so easily
retained, or so strongly imprinted on our imagination, as when they are couched
under some Fable, whose Moral is easily apprehended. But then from the nature
of those Parables, and the manner of their delivery, it is easy to perceive,
that their Authors never designed they should be received as true History; all
their aim was, that we should attend to the Moral, for the sake of which the
Parable was contrived; this is plain from the Parable of Jotham of the Trees
choosing themselves a King, and from all the Parables of our Savior.

But the History of the Creation is a very different case from any of them;
Moses does not give it us as a Fable, only contrived for the sake of some Moral
meaning which he would have thereby understood, but delivers it seriously as
matter of fact, which he would have us believe as firmly and truly as any other
part of his History; and this a Man of integrity could never have given himself
leave to do, had he not been satisfied that the History was exactly true.

But if the Theorists Hypothesis about the Mosaical History of the Creation
were true; it seems that Moses must have been guilty of imposture in a very
high degree, for he supposes that History to have been absolutely false, and
without any foundation in the reality of things, and at the same time freely
owns, that Moses wrote it with a design that it should be received as true, not
by one Man only, but by a great and populous Nation, and that not for one
Generation, but through all succeeding Ages; this I take to be strange
doctrine, and no ways agreeable to the high esteem we owe either to that great
Prophet, or to the Veracity of that unerring Spirit that assisted him in
writing.

But it is the Theorists opinion, Page 320, 321.
that Moses thought it necessary to give the Jews a Cosmogonia, a Theory of the
Earth, each of their neighboring Nations (as he guesses) had one of their own,
which were generally erroneous and inconsistent with the true Religion; and if
so, some of them might have had his Theory for ought we know; now he thinks,
that without doubt the Jews had taken one from them, or had made one for
themselves, unless they had been otherwise provided by Moses; he illustrates
this with a very decent similitude, Si nuptam non dederis siliam ipsa sibi
maritum queret e famulis forsan aut humili plebe.
if you do not get a Husband for your Daughter, she will find one for her self,
your Footman perhaps, or some one as mean.

Well, but since the Jews were to have a Cosmogonia, why should they not have
been taught the true one? O says the Theorist, that was by no means sitting,
for they were an ignorant, indocible people, and could never have been taught
true and solid Philosophy, such as his own Theory is; For let us feign says he,
at least (and it is but feigning at best) that our Theory is true, let us
suppose the Primitive Earth to have been made in the same form and manner as is
described in the Theory; had not Moses spent his time well in teaching such
Philosophers? Can we suppose that those Brick-makers, those who still smelt
strong of the Oinions and Garlic of Egypt, those who could not distinguish a
Molten Calf from God Almighty; can we (says he) suppose, that ever they could
have learnt the true principles of things, or the Laws of nature and motion? to
have delivered those things to them, would have been to cast Pearls before
Swine.

The Theorist may have as great thoughts of his Theory as he pleases, but it is
my humble opinion, that there is very little skill required, either in the Laws
of motion or Natural Philosophy, to understand it, as well as he himself does:
there is no necessity of a long proof for this, since we are sure there are
some, that have not only Read it, but even stood up in the Defense of it, that
seem to understand as little of real Philosophy, and less of Mechanics, than
the most ignorant of his Brick-makers.

Let us now assume the same liberty with the Theorist, Page 319.
that he has done with Moses, and let us suppose that the Theorist should get a
Congregation of Jews, who I believe are still as dull as ever they were, and
should begin to Harangue them thus.

Be it known unto you Men, Brethren, and Fathers, That this Earth which we now
press with our feet, and find so firm and solid under us, was once a fluid
Chaos; that is (that I may adapt my discourse to your low capacities) a medly,
or a confused Mass of Earth, Water and Air, mixed and blended together: How it
came to be so, or how long it continued in that state, I know as little as you
do; only I am sure that it was once so, and I would have you take my word for
it; at last, this disorderly Mass came to settle, and all Bodies took their
place according to their weight, the great heavy Bodies fell lowest, and
composed the innermost solid; next to them the Water took its place, and over
it the Oil spread it self, above all there was a huge thick Orb of Air, full of
mud and earthy particles, those by degrees fell down upon the surface of the
Oil, and at first made a thick slime, which through time began to harden, and
compose a firm and solid Crust, over the face of the Waters; that was able to
sustain the weight of all the rest of the descending particles.

What deep reach of thought is required for the understanding of this? How
many, and what are the Laws of nature and motion that the Jews must know before
they can comprehend it? in my mind the less they knew of those things, the
fitter they would be to understand the Theory; at least, I am sure they would
be more easily persuaded to believe it. We see now that this way of reasoning
as the Theorist has applied it, is of no force against the Mosaic History, for
his refined Theory if it had been true, might have been as easily comprehended
by the Jews, as the plain and simple Cosmogonia of Moses.

The Theorist perhaps may think, that I have here and elsewhere treated his
Theory with too much contempt and disdain; but let him consider how meanly he
himself has spoke of some of Moses's writings, with how much scorn and derision
he has rejected his History of the Creation; let him think how plainly and
openly he has ridiculed the state of Innocence and the Fall of Man; let him
compare what he has said in the 7th. 8th. and 9th. Chapters of his
Archeologiae, Lib. II. with the hardest Expressions in this discourse against
his Theory, and I am confident he will find no reason to complain of uncivil
usage.

His Defender it is true, accuses me of hard words and course language, in
saying that is false, that is absurd, that is ridiculous; whereas most of the
Philosophers have been forced to use the same expressions, insomuch that they
became Philosophical terms, and (till the Defender began to write so smoothly)
Men were never accounted rude and uncivil for using of them. Nay, the Theorist
himself has been sometimes pleased to deliver himself in the same manner, and I
am sure that he has handled the writings of some excellent Men with more
severity, than his Theory has met with from me.

His rude treatment of Aristotle may be a sufficient testimony of this, whose
Philosophy he never mentions but with the greatest contempt and scorn: Though the
works of this Philosopher have been honored with the general commendations of
all the Learned through so many Ages, and are still justly valued by those who
have the greatest reputation either for Polite or Philosophical Learning; His
discourses upon Rhetoric, Poesy, and Politics, his Logic and Ethics, are
deservedly admired as Master-peices in their several ways; and though his
Physiology is not without errors, yet I am sure that there is more true Natural
Philosophy in his Mechanical questions alone, than in all the Theory. But if
some sort of Philosophers are not acquainted with the true value of this
Author, yet the general reception that he has found in all the Universities of
the Christian World, might one would think, have secured him from the rude
insults of any private Writer.

However, the Theorist is not satisfied with exposing this great Man and his
Philosophy as they come in his way, but in order, as he thinks to make him more
contemptible, has given us a short Veiw or Catalogue of his errors, If I should
do so with him, and set down a Collection of all the errors that may be found
in his writings, they would I am afraid, tire the Readers patience, and make a
Folio almost as big as the Theory.

At last, he takes his leave of Aristotle in those very civil terms, Vale
Stagyrita semper mihi eris malus Astronomus, Theologus pejor, Physiologus
pessimus.

It were easy for me if I designed to be ill natured, to change the word
Stagyrita into Theorista, and then take my leave in the very same form; but
though I think the Theorist far inferior to Aristotle, yet I am not for parting
with him in so rude a manner; I acknowledge him to be an ingenious Writer, and
if he had taken a right method and had made a considerable progress in those
Sciences, that are Introductory to the study of nature, I doubt not but that he
would have made a very acute Philosopher.

It was his unhappiness to begin at first with the Cartesian Philosophy, and
not having a sufficient stock of Geometrical and Mechanical principles to
examine it rightly, he too rashly believed it, and thought that there was but
little skill required in those Sciences to become a Philosopher, and therefore
in imitation of Mons. Des Carts, he would undertake to show how the World was
made, a task too great even for a Mathematician.

All that I now desire of him, is to spend some time in the study of Numbers
and Magnitude, Astronomy and Staticks, that he may be the better able to
understand the force of my Arguments against his Theory, after which I doubt
not but that he will easily perceive its errors, and have the ingenuity to
acknowledge them. But till then, all further disputation between him and me,
must needs be vain and frivolous, since true reasoning in Natural Philosophy
depends on such Principles as are demonstrated in those Sciences, the knowledge
of which he has not yet attained.

FINIS.
A DEFENSE OF THE REMARKS Made on Mr. Whistons New Theory.
IN my Answer to the two Theorists, I endeavored to show, that neither of them
had lit upon an Hypothesis which would solve the Phenomenon of the Creation and
the Deluge, according to the Mosaic History; and that the schemes they had
drawn, might be confuted by their own principles: I thought, all that could be
expected from me was, to show, that both of 'em were unlucky in the choice of
their main Hypotheses, and unskilful in the management of them.

But Mr. Whiston in the first Paragraph of his Vindication, has surpised me
with a new distinction between an Hypothesis and a Theory, and tells me, That
in a Theory, (such as he desires his should be thought) Wit and Skill are
qualifications not necessary, and very little to be considered therein. If this
be allowed, all Theories are unanswerable: But upon presumption that every body
is not of his opinion, I shall persist in making good my first Objections
against him.

As to the account he gives of the Origin and Progress of his Work, the
Persons and opportunities that were conducing to it, I can only say, it shows
too great a fondness for his Theory; and 'twas scarce worth his while to
trouble his Reader with such minute relations about it, especially after it
was, as I presume, already confuted. But however, since I have read this
History of its Birth, I am less surpised at the mistakes I meet with in it;
since that very Learned Friend of his, upon whose judgment he seems chiefly to
rely, (for I dare venture to say Mr. Newton wont engage for the truth of all
his Theorems) has given the World reason enough to suspect him, none of the
shrewdest Judges of that part of Learning.

After Mr. Wh. has duly informed his Reader, by what steps and methods he
accomplished his wonderful performance, he tells us, That it is a little
surprising, that I of all men should in public appear against him. His Reader
may think, by this way of speaking, that there lay some special Obligations on
me to be silent, though I declare I know none; I never enjoyed the happiness of
Mr. Whiston's acquaintance, and therefore cannot guess, what it is that should
oblige me more than any other, to forbear publishing Remarks on his Theory.
It Is true, I did and allways shall respect and honor him, as a Learned and
Ingenious Man; but I hope he does not think, that upon this account I ought to
have suppressed all Objections against his Philosophy. He seems to be of
opinion, that it was my duty, privately to have communicated my difficulties to
him by a Letter, and not to have taken this public method of writing Remarks
on the New Theory. I declare, I am altogether insensible of such a duty, and I
don't think, that I have transgressed the rules of civility by what I have
done. It is commonly thought, that whatever any one publishes is submitted to
the judgment of its Readers, and any one of them may take the same liberty in
publishing Remarks upon it, that its Author did at first in proposing it to the
World: And since I am persuaded that my Objections against the New Theory, are
at least, as strong and convincing as his Reasons are for it, I cannot see, why
out of a complement to Mr. Whiston, I should suppress them.

Mr. Whiston says, that I am deeply engaged against his design, through a
peculiar fondness I seem to have for unaccountable Miracles. If I had a mind to
criticize upon words, I would ask him what he means by unaccountable Miracles,
and whether there be any that can be accounted for, since it is the common
opinion, that what can be accounted for by natural causes, is no Miracle.
However, I know no Miracles I am fond of, save those mentioned in Scripture;
and at present I am only engaged in the Defense of two of them, viz. The
Creation and the Deluge, and a fondness for them seems not to be peculiar to
me; since till this Age of Worldmakers, Christians have always thought them
such works, as could never be produced by the Laws of Nature and Mechanism.

I know indeed that there are some, who are not only for explaining the above
mentioned, but even most of the other extraordinary events recorded in the holy
Scriptures, by natural principles: But I dare suppose Mr. Wh. would not
willingly be put into a Catalogue with such Authors. I could, and I think with
just reason too, tell him, that if he had not a peculiar fondness for his own
Theory, he would easily perceive, that all those things which he endeavors to
deduce from Mechanical principles, are not to be explained by such causes. But
I am willing to pass by his preliminaries, and enter upon his argument.

I first objected against the New Theory, that the Chaos, which was the
origination of our Earth, could not have been the Atmosphere of a Comet, since
the one is represented as a dark caliginous Body, having darkness on the face
of its Abyss, and the other was a transparent fluid, and was enlightened, if not
from its own Central Body from within, yet at least by the Sun from without. To
this he Answers, that Comets cannot be changed into Planets till their return
from the vast and cold Regions beyond Saturn; and he says, that we need not
think that they will be then so vehemently hot, that they must be light also.
If what he says in another place is true, I cannot but still think, that they
must be hot to such a degree, that they will also be extremely Luminous; for
according to him, the heat is so great even after their return toward the Sun,
that all the parts of their Atmospheres are in a violent agitation, heavy and
light, dense and rare, fluid and solid parts, are jumbled and mixed together in
the greatest confusion, through the violence of the heat. This I think, is
sufficient to make us believe them very lucid likewise. But says he, solids
preserve some of their heat after their light is gone. But is it credible, that
the heat of the Central solid should be so great as to preserve its Atmosphere,
at the distance of some hundred thousands of miles, in a continual agitation,
and at the same time not be light? Can we suppose that it will raise vapors
into its tail to the distance of many millions of miles, and after all imagine,
that it is not so hot as to be lucid? This I think would be as great a paradox,
as any that is to be met with among the Philosophers.

It Is known, that the intenseness of light and heat is always proportional to
the density of Rays that produce them, and that this density, is in all places
in a reciprocal proportion to the squares of the distance of the Body, from
which they proceed; and by consequence it is plain, that heat and light must be
prodigiously stronger at or near the surface of the hot or lucid Body, than at
a great distance from it; and therefore it is no wonder, if the heat of a solid
be very sensible to a hand that is laid upon its surface; when the eye placed
at a distance from it, cannot perceive its light. But let us bring this point
into numbers, that we may see it more evidently. It follows from Mr. Whiston's
own positions, that the heat of the Central solid must be so great, even before
the Comet arives at its Perihelion, as to act upon the Atmosphere at the
distance of 10000. miles, and from thence to raise vapors into its tail for
many millions more; and therefore the intenseness of its heat at that distance,
must be to the intenseness of the heat at the distance of ten miles, for
example, as the square of ten is to the square of 100000. miles, that is, as
one to 100000000. If therefore the heat of the Central solid at the distnace of
100000. miles, had any sensible effect upon its Atmosphere, it must be
prodigiously stronger at the distance of ten miles, and therefore cannot be
supposed to be without light.

He allows the Sun to shine through the Atmosphere of the Comet, whilst it
remains such; But then upon the Commencement of the Creation, when it began to
move in a Circular Orbit, it lost its pellucidness, and became a dark and opake
fluid. How this should come to be I know not, nor can I discover, why upon the
change of the Comet's Orbit from an Ellipsis to a Circle, its Atmosphere should
be likewise changed on a sudden from a clear and transparent fluid, to a dark
and caliginous one. Immediately before the change of the Orbit, even after it
had descended from the cold Regions beyond Saturn, he allows its Atmosphere to
have been so bright and diaphanous, as that the Central solid might have been
seen through it. It must be then a miracle and an unaccountable one too, that
could have caused such an immediate darkness.

It was also objected to him, that his dense and heavy fluid, could not be the
Mosaical Abyss; for it was at first dark, and afterward enlightened, whereas
his new Abyss after it was once dark, never again became visible, being always
covered with an opake Crust. Here he owns, that the word Abyss is not to be
restrained to his dense fluid, but that it comprehends all that heterogenous
and hitherto muddy fluid, which was beneath the Earths future surface, where
the Spectator in the Historical Journal of the Creation, is supposed to have
been.

But I desire him to tell us, whither this muddy fluid was afterward
enlightened; whither the same collection of Opake and Earthy Corpuseles which
produced a darkness on the surface of the dense and heavy fluid, would not
create also a thick darkness upon the surface of the muddy one; whither this
darkness would not continually increase, as those Earthy and Opake particles
came closer together, and when at last they fell upon, and enclosed this muddy
fluid, and formed a Crust (according to him) of 60. or 70. miles depth, whither
they would not exclude the light from it for ever.

I had urged to him, that 'twas said in Scripture, Darkness was upon the face
or the exterior surface of the Abyss, and that afterward there was light upon
it. Now if Mr. Whiston cannot show us clearly an Abyss from his principles,
whose exterior surface was first dark, and afterward luminous, I hope he will
grant that his Theory is not conformed to the Mosaic History.

Another Argument against the Theory, was to this purpose. If the Earth was
formed by the principles of Mechanism out of the Atmosphere of a Comet, we must
allow the whole subsidence to be as leisurely, and to proceed by the same steps
that the violence of its heat decreases, which would not then (as he would have
it) be completed in six Years, nor indeed in as many Centuries; and the Opake
parts would take so much time in descending and composing the Crust of the
Earth, that the Sun would always illuminate (at least the upper Regions of its
Atmosphere) as freely as it does the whole Atmosphere of Comets, while they are
within our Observation. He allows this to be an Argument of good force, and to
deserve consideration; and he tells us, that if Comets were observed to have no
Atmosphere after their return from the Regions beyond Saturn, before they arive
at their Perihelia again, then indeed this reasoning were unavoidable; but
seeing the contrary is evident from Astronomical Observations, it cannot affect
his Hypothesis. If he had denied any Proposition in my Argument, or any
consequence drawn from it, I should have known what reply to have made; but I
cannot apprehend how this Observation upon Comets does in the least affect my
Argument, nor imagine to what purpose it was brought in here, but to amuse some
thoughtless Reader.

He tells us farther, that the Laws, Properties, and Operations of Bodies,
which we find established here on Earth, do not universally obtain in the
Atmospheres of Comets. This I own to be an Answer, not only to this one
Argument, but to all that can be said against his Theory. But may not any other
Theory be defended at the same rate? Might not Dr. Burnet have maintained his
Theory this way? And when it was objected against it, that heavy Bodies, such
as Earth, Clay and Stones, could not swim upon Oil or Water, would it not have
been easy for him to have said, that Bodies had then other Laws, Properties,
and Operations, than they have now, and that it was at that time the Law of
Nature, that the heaviest Bodies should swim uppermost, and the lightest fall
to the bottom? Though one would think, that it were as impossible that there
should be such a Law of motion, as that a Proposition in Euclid should be
false. If the Laws of motion were arbitrary and changeable, why should the
Mathematicians pretend to demonstrate them as necessary consequences from their
principles? Let us suppose a Vectis in one of Mr. Whiston's Comets, and two
powers applied to its Brachia, upon which they act perpendicularly, so that the
powers be to one another in a proportion reciprocal to the length of their
Brachia. It is actually impossible but these two powers must act equally, the
one against the other, or that one of them unassisted by any other cause,
should be able to move the other against its direction: Since effects must be
always proportional to their adequate causes. And yet, according to Mr.
Whiston's position, this Law of Nature perhaps is only true in our Earth, and
not in any Planet or Comet whatsoever.

By this Answer Mr. Whiston has granted me all that I designed to prove, viz.
That the Earth was not formed according to the known Laws of Mechanism, but by
the efficacy of the Divine Spirit which moved upon the face of the Waters.

It was said in the Remarks, that there is no need of a hot Central solid, to
solve the origin of Springs, and such other Phenomenon of nature; they being
better accounted for by other means. To this it is answered, that the reality
of an internal heat within the bowels of the Earth, is a matter of fact, and
must be accounted for whatever becomes of Springs. I always allowed an internal
heat, but thought it might be accounted for without a hot internal solid; and I
refer him to what has been said upon this subject, in the Examination of the
Reflections on the Theory.

Mr. Whiston thinks, that the account I refer to for the origination of
Fountains is not so universal, as to stand in no need of subterraneous vapors;
But since he has given us no reason for this thought of his, I need say no more
to it, but that I think otherwise; I am sure it is evident by Calculation, that
the Vapors raised by the heat of the Sun from the Sea, are alone sufficient to
serve all our Rivers and Fountains with Water. And nature never makes use of
two distinct causes where one would do; for then the effect would be greater
than it ought to be.

I told him, that he receded without necessity from the literal sense, in
supposing, that the formation of the Sun, Moon and Stars, mentioned in the
first of Genesis, is to be only understood of their being made visible, and of
their appearing to an eye placed in the Earth. But since he desires to know my
reasons for this opinion, I must tell him, that his interpretation seems to be
extremely forced, and no way agreeable with the design of the sacred Penmen.
Moses's narration is plain and simple, and throughout the whole, he does not
affect to speak either Metaphorically or Allegorically; but he delivers it as
certain matter of fact, which we are firmly to believe. He plainly mentions the
Creation of the Sun, Moon and Stars, and makes the production of them a
distinct days work by its self; In expressing their formation, the same word
(...) (and he made) is used, that is found afterward in the 25th. verse, where
there is an account given of the production of beasts; and therefore Moses
seems to have designed that the word should be taken in both places in the same
sense. Besides all this, it is certain, that Moses did not speak of things as
they appeared, or would have appeared to an Eye placed in a muddy fluid, since
there was no one then in being to whom they could have appeared.

From all these considerations, I think it evident, that it was Moses's
intention to be understood in a real and literal meaning. I desire Mr. Whiston
to consider what is said more at large upon this subject in the Examination of
the Reflections on the Theory.

But after all, I do not see that Mr. Whiston's reasons prove any impossibility
in Moses's account of the Creation; all that I think he proves in his long
discourse is, that the plain and simple account that Moses gives us, is not
agreeable to his Theory, to his way of thinking, or to the method by which he
would have the World produced.

His Theory supposes, that the Sun upon the second day before it became
visible, raised as many Vapors from the Earth, as were sufficient to sill all
the Seas, Lakes, and Rivers, that were in the Primitive Earth. Here, I thought
he assigned a cause no ways proportional to the effect. For since the Sun even
when it shines very strongly and directly upon our Ocean, does in a whole year
raise but the thousandth part of our present Ocean into Vapor, how can it be
supposed, that it could raise as much Vapor in that time, as would fill the
Seas, Lakes, and Rivers, of our Primitive Earth, when all the while it was not
visible, but obscured by a dark and thick Atmosphere, by which the power of its
beams must be extremely weakened. In answer to this, Vindic. page 9.
he tells us, That he does not suppose that all the Water that was in the Seas,
Lakes and Rivers, of the first Earth, made above the thousandth part of our
present Ocean, which he thinks might have been easily exhaled by the Sun in one
half year.

Now I would have him to consider this Objection a little further, and he will
find that it is not so light as he imagines it is: he knows that there must be
a certain proportion betwixt Land and Sea, that the ground may be sufficiently
furnished with rains and dews: for the quantity of Vapor that is raised from
Water, all other things being alike, is always in proportion to the surface of
the Water, and if the surface of our Sea were, for example, but the thousandth
part of what it is now, there would in that case be raised but the thousandth
part of the Vapor from it, that is at present raised from thence; and because
the dry Land by such a supposition would be near double of what it is now, it
follows from thence, that any particular piece of ground would not have much
above one part of two thousand of the rains and dews it has at present. So that
if this had been the case of the Primitive Earth, it must have been absolutely
barren and unfruitful: But if that cannot be allowed, it is evident, that there
must have been a much greater Sea there to make it habitable, than what Mr.
Whiston supposes.

But if after all the Antediluvian Sea had been formed only by the raising of
Vapors by the Suns heat for one half year, I do not see how it could have
amounted to the ten thousandth part of our present Ocean. For it is known, that
a few Clouds will more obscure the light of the Sun, and by consequence
diminish its heat in the same proportion, than if nine in ten parts of its Disk
were obseur'd by an Eclipse: however, I will only suppose, that its heat was
but just as much diminished by the thick Atmosphere Mr. Whiston speaks of,
(which had perfectly darkened and obscured his body for more than two years) as
it would be in an Eclipse where nine ten parts of its Disk were obscured; and
then the number of Rays producing heat in any part, being but a tenth part of
what they are now upon us, they would not raise above a tenth part of the
Vapor that could be raised by the free and open action of the Sun. But the Sun
when it now acts upon us freely, raises not much above one thousandth part of
the present Ocean into Vapors; therefore it is evident, that in the other case
it could not raise much above the ten thousandth part of the present Ocean, and
a Sea only formed from those Vapors, would be little better than none at all.

But allowing it possible in the manner Mr. Whiston contends for, allowing him
too, that this small stock of Waters was sufficient for the necessities of the
Earth; yet after all this way of forming the Primitive Sea is by no means
agreeable to the account given us by Moses, Where we are told, that God divided
the waters which were under the Firmament from the waters which were above the
Firmament, and the waters under the heavens he gathered together into one
place, and the gathering together of the waters called he Seas. But Mr. Whiston
tells us, the Sea was made by those Waters that were raised into Vapor by the
heat of the Sun, that is according to his interpretation, by the Waters above
the Firmament, which is directly contrary to Moses's account, who says, it was
made by the gathering together of the Waters under the Firmament. It must be
strange turning and wresting of words, that will bring both these ways to agree.

Besides, if the Sea were formed as the New Theory says it was, the dry Land
must have appeared immediately upon the raising of the Vapors, whereas,
according to Moses, it did not appear till after the formation of the Sea. It
is plain then, that this Theory of the Sea given us by Mr. Whiston, is in every
circumstance as inconsistent with the holy History, as it is with Reason and
Philosophy.

Mr. Whiston acknowledges, that my reasoning against his third Hypothesis of an
only annual motion of the Earth before the Fall, is strong and forcible, and
therefore he has been pleased here to invent another Hypothesis to support the
former, by which he hopes to remove all the difficulties that were raised
against it; viz. That the Earth did not revolve in a Circular Orbit till after
the Fall, but in a moderate Ellipse. I shall not trouble my self with new
answers as often as he thinks fit to contrive new Hypotheses, and therefore
will only give this reply at present, that it will scarcely be allowed, that
but one half of the Primitive Earth was habitable before the Fall, as it must
be by such a supposition. We know, the more Hypotheses any Theory is clogged
with, the more precarious it looks; such of them especially as do not naturally
result from the whole Theory, but are only introduced to remove some urgent
difficulty, are generally thought least of all to deserve any credit. One of
the great Beauties of the Theory was, That as soon as the Comet was turned into
a Planet, it had a Circle for its Orbit, and tho this beauty is not perfectly
spoiled, yet its luster seems to be considerably diminished by the new
supposition of his new sort of Figure called a moderate Ellipse.

Mr. Whiston is pleased to take notice of a supposed mistake, he imagines have
committed, about the quantity of heat in the Primitive Earth, which I reckoned
from his principles, must have been some hundreds of times greater than what is
in the present. This he says, he is sure is a plain error, who ever it was that
made him so sure of it, I am certain they have mightily deceived him. If he had
taken the pains to consider, that the heat of the Sun for any small portion of
time is always as a Rectangle, contained betwixt the Sine of the Angle of
incidence of the Ray producing heat, and that time, and had troubled himself a
little further to calculate the proportion of the quantity of heat that was in
the Primitive Earth upon his Hypothesis, to that which is in our present Earth,
he would have found the mistake was not on my side but his own. Every body
knows, that the longer any thing is exposed to the heat of the Sun, the hotter
it must be; and this is so manifest, that a great part of our heat in the
Summer arises only through the length of time the Sun shines upon us. For if our
Summer and Winter days were each of them twelve hours long, the heat in Summer
would be to that in Winter, in proportion little more than three to one, (their
difference in that case arising only from the more direct action of the Sun in
Summer than in Winter) whereas, in the present case, our Summers heat is to our
Winters heat in a greater proportion than that of seven to one.

It was objected against the New Theory, that a Comet coming near the Earth
could not produce any tide in the Abyss below the Water, because it was closely
shut up by a thick and solid Crust, that pressed so close upon it as to leave
no space, at least, not such a considerable one, as would make room for any
considerable commotion of the Waters. In answer to this, he tells us, That he
wonders how I come to imagine the Orb of Earth to be so compact and solid a
Sphere, as to be able to overcome the great impulse the Abyss would make upon
it, at the approach of the Comet. We may easily conceive this to be no
Argument, if we consider, that a tide is nothing else but a great agitation or
commotion of the Waters, arising from the attraction of some great body placed
near it; and because the velocity of the Waters produced by this attraction, is
at first infinitely small, their force upon any other body must likewise be
infinitely small in comparison of what it will be after the Waters have
acquired a certain determinate velocity. For as in a heavy body its velocity or
force by which it endeavors to descend, is at first infinitely small in
proportion to that which it acquires in any determinate time; so here, if we
suppose the velocity impressed on the fluid by the attracting body to be always
in proportion to the time, and at the end of any determinate time AB in which
it has moved, it has acquired the diagram velocity BC: After the first instant
of time AD, its velocity was as de; and because AB is infinitely greater than
AD, it is plain from thence, that BC must be infinitely greater than de, that
is, the force or impressed motion upon the fluid after it has moved in the time
AB is infinitely stronger than it was in the beginning of its motion.

Let us now apply this to the case in hand; and in the present Figure let C
diagram represent the Central solid, ABDF the dense Abyss, FGHE the outward
Crust lying close upon it, and partly subsiding in it. This Crust Mr. Whiston
imagines to be 200. miles in depth. If the Abyss had acquired any impulse or
velocity by motion, and by that force acted against the Crust, I make no
question but it would be able to break it and crack it into as many pieces as
Mr. Whiston pleases. But here there is no room left for motion, no vacuities,
or void spaces; wherever the fluid is attracted, its motion will be absolutely
resisted, either by the fluid next, or a dense and solid Crust immediately
contiguous to it. The small cracks and fissures Mr. Whiston mentions, would be
absolutely inconsiderable, and the motion in them could not be strong enough to
break or disjoyn so thick a Crust, whose parts by their own weight, and their
close subsiding together, would be firmly compacted and united. Whatever the
cracks and fissures were, which he imagines at first made by the Diurnal
Rotation of the Earth, in the space of 1600. years, they would come to be
healed and made up, so that there would not be so much as one subsiding column
that can be supposed separate and disjoined from the rest. And though we may
still suppose some small fissures in the Earth, yet he asserts that they were
most in the Mountains; and therefore it is impossible that the Strata could be
disjoined and separated from one another by them.

All the effect that would follow from this attraction is this, Both the fluid
on the Abyss and the Central solid would be attracted by the Comet; but the
fluid on the Abyss being nearer to it than the other, would be more strongly
attracted; and because the solid Crust by reason of the firmness and union of
its parts, cannot move faster to the Comet than the Central solid does, it is
evident from thence, that it must be pressed only by the difference of
attraction, or by that force by which the fluid in the Abyss is drawn more
toward the Comet, than the Central solid is; and seeing the fluid has acquired
no velocity or impetus by motion, it is clear from what is already proved, and
by what is more fully demonstrated by Borell in his 24.25. and 26. Chapters of
his Book De vi percussionis; that the force of the fluid thus pressing, will be
infinitely less than what it would be if it had acquired any determinate degree
of velocity by motion. And since Mr. Whiston seems to acknowledge, that a great
impulse of the fluid would be necessarily required to break and disjoyn the
Crust, the small force arising from the pressure of the fluid, can never be
able to produce so great an effect.

What Mr. Whiston says of a Floor of disjoined Planks laid cross the Thames,
that may as well be supposed to stop the Tide or the ascent of the Waters, as
the Crust of the Earth the Tide of the Abyss, is I think no parallel case. For
it is not the attraction of the Moon that is the immediate cause of the Tide in
the Thames; but it arises solely from the check and great impulse that the
Waters receive from the motion of the Sea, by which they are driven backwards
with violence, and are made to ascend up the River and produce Tides.

But if Mr. Whiston will still assert, that the Strata or subsiding Columns
were separated and disjoined like so many loose Planks, (though it contradicts
what he has said in another place Vinlic. page 17.
) yet granting that it was so, I shall from thence evidently demonstrate, that
there could no Water arise upon that very account from the Abyss or Bowels of
the Earth, as shall be shown in its proper place.

The New Theory supposes, that the forty days rain mentioned in the History of
the Deluge, was caused by the vast quantity of Vapors that were in the Comets
tail, which being very much rarified and expanded, would immediately mount up
again into the Air after their fall upon the Earth, and descend again in
violent and outrageous Rains. Against this it was objected, that the incredible
velocity with which these Vapors descended, and the great resistance they met
with in their descent through the Air, together with the force by which they fell
upon the ground, must of necessity have condensed them into Water. Here he
answers, that though the greatest part of the Vapors should be condensed into
Rain, yet it is hard that I will not allow many of them to escape the same,
enough at least to make a constant forty days Rain: for it is strange to him,
that so thin a Body as our Air, lying in so small a compass about the Earth,
should have the good luck to stop and condense all and every part of so immense
and swift a descending Column of Vapors. As strange and hard as it is, yet I
cannot see how its possible any should escape being condensed. If there were
any void Canals in our Air through which some Vapors might descend, we might
then allow him his Hypothesis; but since it is evident from the nature of our
Air, that its impossible there should be any such empty spaces, it is certain,
that there is not one of these Vapors but must meet with Air, wherever it
moves in our Atmosphere, which it must therefore force out of its way; and
because it is supposed to move so prodigiously swift as to descend 860. miles
in a minute, the resistance it will meet with from every particle of Air must
be vastly great, and must therefore necessarily condense it.

But if I should allow him that these Vapors were not condensed in their
descent through the Air, yet to imagine that they should be not condensed when
they fall with so prodigious a swiftness (as he allows them) upon the Earth,
Water, or any other thing that will stop their motion, is such a fancy as needs
no confutation: if they had such a strange velocity as he speaks of, they must
penetrate and destroy all Humane and other Animal Bodies, so that such a shower
as this one day, would have done the business of a Deluge, and there would have
been no occasion for other thirty nine days Rain.

But after all this, Mr. Whiston grants, that the Vapors might be condensed in
their fall; but yet he says, that their heat which at first rarified them, and
had continued their expansion in the Comets tail, would immediately after their
fall rarify them again, and raise them into new Vapor. But if so, I cannot see
how this will answer the account that Moses gives us of the Deluge, For he
tells us, that the increase of the Waters was gradual, and produced in a great
measure by forty days Rain; and that they continually increased and prevailed
upon the Earth for the space of 150. days: whereas by this Theory, the Deluge
must have happened all of a sudden; according to it, the very first day, all the
Waters that came from the Comet must have fallen upon the Earth, and by
consequence the Waters that were raised from the Abyss, must have immediately
ascended; so that if this Theory were true, the Deluge must be accomplished in
one day and not in 150; for as to the Vapors which were raised and continued
to fall for forty days, (unless the water was very scalding hot indeed) that
would be very inconsiderable, and would rather diminish than increase the
quantity of Waters upon the Earth, until they again descended in Rain.

I come now to consider the way Mr. Whiston raises the Fluid from the Abyss. He
supposes, that the great weight of the Water which lay upon the Crust, would
depress it and make it sink deeper into the Abyss, and by that means force and
squeeze the Fluid through the fissures and cracks of the Earth. But against this
I positively demonstrated, that no pressure of the Fluid whatsoever, could make
the Crust sink deeper into the Abyss. In answer to this he is pleased to tell
me, That my demonstration supposes, either that not the water on the Earth but
in the Fissures, did contribute to the raising of the Fluid through them, or that
the several Columns had free liberty, and could subside as far as occasion
should be, (which he has in his Book showed they could not) or that a pressure
from a Column specifically heavier than the Fluid, is necessary to raise it
upwards. Because Mr. Whiston answers my demonstration, as if he did not rightly
understand it; I will here put it into a clearer light, and apply it more
particularly to the present case.

Let A B C D represent the Fluid Orb of the Abyss, E F G H the solid Crust
swimming upon it, whose parts are separated and disjoined by cracks and
fissures, like so many loose Planks laid cross the Thames, (and so indeed they
must necessarily be, if the Diameter of the Abyss diagram was enlarged sixteen
miles, as the Theory supposes) it is certain, that the loose Crust will be so
far immersed in the Fluid of the Abyss, or, which is the same thing, the Fluid
will rise so far up within the fissure, till the surface I K upon which the
Crust lies, is as much pressed by the weight of the incumbent Column as the
surface i h at the same distance from the Center, is by the weight of the
incumbent fluid; that is, the fluid m n i h must press as much upon the surface
i h, as the solid Crust does upon the rest of the surface of the fluid.

Let us next imagine all this Crust overflowed with Water; and because Water
cannot lie upon the Crust till the fissures are first entirely filled, the
water must descend through them, and press upon the diagram surface of the Abyss
that lies within them Now if the pressure of the water which lay upon M N the
surface of the Abyss within the fissure, were exactly equal to the pressure of
the water which lay upon the Crust, the surfaces I K and I H being equally
pressed, the parts of the fluid would still remain in the same position. But
here in this case the surface I H in the Abyss being pressed with a deeper
Column of water than that which presses upon the Crust, the weight or pressure
of the water upon it, will be greater than the weight or pressure of the water
that lies upon the Crust, and consequently the surface I H being more pressed
than the surface I K, the fluid M N I H will descend further and raise the
Crust higher, and it will more emerge out of the fluid; so that we must
evidently see, that by the addition of this water, the Crust instead of being
depressed lower will be raised higher.

Mr. Whiston says, That this demonstration supposes that the several Columns of
Earth had their free liberty, and could subside as far as occasion should be,
which he has showed in his Book they could not. It seems then that he owns,
that the Columns would not subside* if they had their free liberty, but if they
had not their free liberty to subside, then he thinks they would subside or
sink deeper into the Abyss; that is in short, Those Columns would not sink
deeper if there was nothing to hinder them, but if there was any thing that
could hinder them from sinking deeper, then indeed they would, and must sink
deeper. This is so strange and surprising a way of reasoning, that I scarcely
believe it could have come from Mr. Whiston. It looks much more like the
reasoning of his learned friend. I should have thought, that if he had been
left to himself to argue the case, he would have concluded, that because the
Crust could not sink deeper when it was left at its liberty, or when there was
nothing to hinder it; It would have certainly so much the rather not sunk
further, when there was an impediment.

I know but one possible case where the pressure of the incumbent fluid can
make the Crust sink deeper into the Abyss, and even in that case, I clearly
demonstrated, that the fluid under the Crust could not be raised so high as to
spread its self upon the surface of the Earth. But because Mr. Whiston has not
taken any notice of this case, nor answered any thing to the Calculation that I
had from thence deduced, I will here repeat it more clearly. Suppose A B C D a
Cylindrical Vessel half full of water, in which let there be put a wooden
Cylinder, which is exactly adapted to the sides of the Vessel, so that no fluid
can descend between the side of the Vessels and the Cylinder. diagram It is
evident, that if there were no holes in the Cylinder, it could not in this case
be any ways depressed under the surface of the water, nor could it sink into
it, if never so great an additional weight were laid upon it; but the Base of
the Cylinder would lie immediately on the surface of the fluid.

Let us now suppose this Cylinder bored with holes parallel to its Axis, then
indeed it would sink so far within the fluid, till the water within the holes
came to be of such a height, as to press as strongly upon the fluid under them
as the solid Cylinder does upon the fluid under it, and there it would rest at
the height, for example, of half the Cylinder, if the water were twice as heavy
as the wood. Let us suppose in the next place, that there were long Tubes fixed
in the holes to preserve the fluid, which is to be poured afterward above on
the Cylinder from running into the holes, and then let Oil or any other fluid
lighter then wood, be poured on as high as the very top of the Vessel; this Oil
would indeed press upon the Cylinder, and make it sink deeper into the fluid,
which would rise up within the holes till it pressed as strongly upon the
surface of the water under it, as the Oil and Cylinder both together do upon
the surface of the water under them. Now in this case, since the water is of a
greater intensive gravity than both the Cylinders of Wood and Oil; it is
evident, that it is impossible the fluid within the holes can rise so high as
the top MN, for then the fluid which lies immediately under that which is
contained within the holes and the Tube, suffering a greater pressure than the
rest of the fluid under the Cylinder, will immediately descend and force that
which is under the Cylinder to ascend. So that though the solid Body must in this
case sink deeper, yet it is plain, that none of the water within the Vessel can
by this means be brought upon the surface.

Let us now apply this to the present purpose, and see what will be the effect.
Suppose A B C D a solid Mountainous Crust laid over the Abyss; and let the
orifices of the fissures be supposed to be diagram only in the Mountains, which
we may conceive like so many Tubes rising up from the tops of the Mountains;
and afterward let there be laid upon this Crust any load of water whatsoever,
for example to the height of two miles.

Mr. Whiston says, that it is evident, that the pressure of two entire miles
over each Columns being so prodigiously great, must squeeze the fluid upwards
through the fissures, and thereby throw out the incumbent water, and perhaps it
self upon the face of the Earth. But as evident as he says this matter is, I
must sincerely declare, that I cannot see how any such effect can follow from a
pressure after this manner. I hope Mr. Whiston does not act here like some new
Philosophers, who, when they are to deliver some false, dark, or
incomprehensible notion, generally usher it in with a speech about clearness
and distinctness, and tell us, That it is evident, it is plain, it is
demonstrative. But rather than suspect such dealing from him, I could suppose
that the fault was in my own apprehension, if I had not demonstration on my
side, to show, that from such positions no such effect can follow. Does not he
suppose this Crust to be composed of Columns of 200. miles in depth? Did not
they subside close by one another, and form a solid Arch upon the Abyss
according to him? If so, those fissures and cracks upon the Mountains like so
many windows in a Vault, would not much weaken the strength of the Fabric; but
still it would be able to sustain a much greater weight. Would not the water
that came from the Comet immediately spread it self equally over the face of
the Crust? And by this every Column would be equally pressed, and therefore one
could not sink deeper than another. What is it then that could force the fluid
through the fissures? However, let us suppose the pressure much stronger upon one
place than the rest; if the solid Column upon which this pressure lay, was
closely united and cemented to all the other circumambient ones, how could it
be broken off from the rest? It is impossible to imagine that the weight of the
waters above it could do this. But if it was before separated and disjoined by
the Tide on the Abyss, or any other cause, would not the water run down in the
fissures which separate it from the rest, and instead of depressing, elevate
the loose Crust, as I have already demonstrated?

We cannot well suppose this part which was most pressed, if it was loose from
the rest, to be so closely joined to them, as to leave no space for the fluid
to descend: For it would be a strange chance that would make the surfaces of
the Columns so exactly fitted and adjusted to each other. Besides, if they were
so, because the Arch A B is greater than C D, it is impossible that in such a
case it could descend or be forced downwards. But after all, if it could
descend, I have already demonstrated, that none of the water in the Abyss or
Bowels of the Earth, could by that pressure be raised so high as the tops of
the Mountains, that it might from thence spread it self upon the surface of the
Earth.

If Mr. Whiston does not see the evidence of this reasoning, I must leave him
to be satisfied by his own experiment Page 307.
; only instead of a Cylinder of Stone or Marble, I desire him to take one of
Wood; and if by pouring Oil upon it, he can raise any water from the bottom to
the surface of the Cylinder, I will give over all reasoning upon this subject;
but if he finds that his experiment will not succeed, (as it certainly cannot)
I hope he will own that he is in an error; and then I doubt not but he will
think I had reason to speak peremptorily upon this point, when I said that it
was demonstratively evident, that by no sort of pressure of the incumbent
fluid, the Abyss could be forced upwards to spread it self upon the surface of
the Earth, which words I do not think fit to retract.

I have already considered the ways Mr. Whiston has taken to bring waters upon
the Earth, to make a Deluge. Let us next see how dexterous he is in removing
them. In my Remarks on his New Theory, by Calculation I showed, that there must
have been at least twenty three Oceans of water, to drown the Earth at the time
of the Deluge. One would think that it were a hard task to remove such a load
of waters Mechanically. Yet he tells us, that he thinks there is no manner of
difficulty in it.

In his Theory he supposes, that the waters descended through the perpendicular
fissures and cracks, which were outlets to so great a part of them before; and
by that means Saturated all the Pores of the dry Earth, that was capable to
contain mighty quantities of water. Now in the Remarks on the New Theory, I
showed that none of the waters could descend through the cracks and fissures of
the Earth; for they of necessity must have been all full at the time of the
Deluge, since water cannot lie upon the surface of the Earth, till all the
cracks, holes, and fissures in it, be first filled. This is so evident both to
sense and experience, that it is beyond all contradiction true: it being as
impossible to make water lie on the Earth before all its cracks, pitts, and
holes are filled, as it is to make a Vessel retain water, whose bottom is bored
through with many holes.

Instead of answering this Argument, Mr. Whiston tells us, That certainly the
Pores and Interstices of thirty or forty miles of dry Earth, are capable of
receiving three or four miles of water into them, and certainly the same
fissures that permitted the ascent of the fluids from beneath before, would
after the ceasing of that force, permit the descent of the waters of the
Deluge, and by degrees and length of time draw them off.

I find Mr. Whiston is generally most certain, where other men are most
doubtful. How can he be certain, or so much as suppose, that the waters could
lie above the mouths of the cracks and fissures, to the height of two miles
perpendicularly, and none of them run in to fill them all the while? What new
Laws of Hydro-staticks has he discovered? It is generally supposed to be the
nature of a fluid, to descend through whatever holes and fissures it can find;
and 'till they be once filled, it is impossible it should rest above the mouths
of those fissures, especially to the height of two perpendicular miles. For so
high it must have been above most of those cracks, since most part of the Hills
in which he supposes those fissures were, do not exceed above a miles height.
Before the water could have risen to such a height, not only the perpendicular
holes and fissures, but even the Horizontal ones, must have been absolutely
filled.

I cannot therefore enough wonder, how he can imagine so much water forced
through the Earth upon its surface, and all those cracks and fissures remaining
empty all the time: I am surpised to hear him tell us of dry Earth, that was
capable of receiving vast quantities of water, for I cannot suppose an Earth
that has been watered by eleven Oceans of water gushing through its Pores, to be
very dry. Another man would rather think, that it must have been very wet, for
it is not to be imagined, that so much water could pass through the Crust without
leaving as much of it self as the Crust could hold behind it, since water
rather than ascend will remain in any Pore or empty space that can contain it.

But let us now allow, that the Earth or the Crust was as dry as if there had
not one drop of water remained in it; yet the Earth through which water generally
can sink, is but a few feet in depth; the rest of the Crust is composed of a
tough Clay, common Stone, Whinstone, Coal, Metalline Ores, and the like; and I
believe he can never persuade Mankind, that there are so many Pores in such
heavy, close, solid Bodies, as are capable to contain twenty two Oceans of
water.

But after all, let us suppose that the fissures were empty, and that they were
capable to receive the whole twenty two Oceans of water. Let us suppose that
the water lay over them, without descending into them; that is, let us grant to
Mr. Whiston so many impossibilities. Yet even all these suppositions will not
answer the Phenomenon of the draining of the waters from the Earth after the
Deluge. This I think I can prove easily, since that according to the Mosaical
account of the Deluge, the waters were removed from off the face of the Earth
in one half year; whereas if they had been removed by the method of the New
Theory, they could not have been drained from the Earth in many hundred years.
And therefore upon this account Mr. Whiston's suppositions will not answer the
Phenomenon. To show this, let us suppose the mouths of all the cracks and
fissures to have been just equal to the mouths of all the Rivers in the Earth,
(though if we consider how narrow and small they are in respect of the mouths of
the Rivers, we cannot allow them to have been near so much) It was proved in
the Examination of Dr. Burnet's Theory, that all the waters that run through the
Rivers would fill the Ocean, if it were empty, in the space of 812. years; and
consequently, if at the time of the Deluge, the water descended no faster through
the fissures, it is evident, that upon the former supposition it would be 812.
years, before the Earth had received one Ocean into its Bowels, and therefore
it would be 17864. years before twenty two Oceans could be removed through those
fissures. But let us now suppose that the velocity of the water descending, was
ten times greater than the velocity of the Rivers; we shall still find, that
the waters would take 1786. 4. years to run through the fissures. So that although
Mr. Whiston has been pleased to ridicule my fondness for Miracles, yet since
all the natural causes he has assigned, are so vastly disproportionate to the
effects produced, he may at last perhaps be convinced, that the easiest,
safest, and indeed the only way is to ascribe 'em to Miracles.

FINIS.

