A SUPPLEMENT TO A Late TREATISE, CALLED An Essay for the Discovery of some New
Geometrical Problems, Concerning Angular Sections, resolving what was there
Problematically proposed; and with some Rectification made in the former Essay,
showing an easy method truly Geometrical, without any Conick Section, or
Cubick Aequation, to sect any Angle or Arch of a Circle into 3.5.7. or any
other Uneven Number of equal parts.
By G.K.
WHereas it was supposed in the former Proposal, that a straight Line could be
drawn through the extreme Points of three or more Concentrick Arches at both
ends (the Arches beginning or ending upon a straight Line ^oming from the
Center of those Concentrick Arches) having equal Cords, though not equal
Arches. Upon further consideration, it is found, that however seemingly such a
Line may appear to be straight in many cases, as when the Radius is short, or
the Angle very acute, yet in no case is such a Line mathematically straight,
but is a regular Curve, and can be as regularly drawn, and by as true
Geometrical Art, as any Parabola, or other Conick Section can, and with greater
facility and readiness, and which any Tiro who understands nothing of Conick
Sections, and Cubick Equations may do. The way of drawing the said Curve is
this: Let a short cross-Rule be set at right Angles with another longer Rule,
and let the length of the cross Rule be at pleasure 2 or 3 Inches, or more, as
6 or 7, as ye have a mind to make the length of the Cord of each part of the
Section of your Angle, which as in the following Figure let be 3 Inches, and
let the just half of the cross-Rule be on the left side of the long Rule, and
let a small Brass or Steel-Pin be fixed on the right end of the said cross
Rule, that as the Rule is moved, may make an Impression on the Paper, as the
point of the Compass does in drawing a Circle. The length of the longer Rule is
to be as occasion requires, as double or triple the length of the other.

Having thus prepared your two Rules, the one cutting the other at right
Angles, and the cross-Rule fixed to it, (though it may be made also moveable on
it) suppose the Angle given to be trisected is BAC, measured by the arch BMC.
in order to draw the curve Line with one draught of the Hand, set the left end
of the cross-Rule, on the point B, and from B let it run or slide along the
line BA, and as it runs along the said Line, let the left side of the long Rule
still run through the Center, or vertical point A, which is most easily done;
and let it run or slide along from B toward A, until the other end of the
cross-Rule reach at least to the line AC, or further as one pleases, and the
Brass Pin on the other end of the cross Rule shall describe the regular curve
FIG Having thus drawn the curve Line, at the distance of one half of the cross
Rule draw the straight Line DE parallel to AC. and where the Curve Line cuts the
straight line DE as at I, a Line drawn from the center A to I, shall by true
Geometry, trisect the given angle BAC.

The Demonstration.
Seeing it is the property of these two Rules crossing each other at right
Angles, where ever the two ends of the cross Rule terminates, to make an
Isosceles triangle, making always two right angle triangles, whose Bases are
equal, and the Perpendicular common to both, therefore by the 4. 1. el. Eucl.
the Hypotenusals are equal. Therefore with Radius AI describing the arch HLIS,
draw the Cord HI. and from I let fall a perpendicular on the line AC. as IK,
making HI=LI=IK, therefore the arches of those equal Sines are equal, as
HL=LI=IS. q.e.d. The same or any other Angle obtruse or acute may be trisected
into 3 equal parts, without the curve Line, or any part of it, by finding the
point I, which can be found without the curve line by letting the cross Rule
slide or run along the line AB, (while the left side of the long Rule still
runs through the center A) either upwards or downwards, until the right side
of the cross Rule touch the straight line DE which shall be at I. And thus
without any need of noticing or regarding the Curve Line, the Point 1 is found,
where the two straight lines HI and DE meet together: And as thus any Angle may
be trisected without drawing any Curve Line, so it may easily and truly be done
without either Scale or Compass, other than what the two cross Rules are, as
any Artist may easily perceive.



If any object against this Method, as Mechanical, and not Mathematical and
truly Geometrical, because performed by an Instrument, I shall refer them to
two great Geometricians for its Vindication, to wit, Des Carts in his second
Book of Geometry, and Franciscus a Schoten in his Commentary on him, argum.
lib. 2. both which do prove that what is performed by Instruments Geometrically
made, is Geometrical, otherwise the plainest Geometry must be rejected, because
its Figures are drawn by Rule and Compass, both which are Instruments, and not
only Parabolas, and other Conick Sections which are Curves, but diverse other
Curves, yea, all such that can be drawn by Art, with the help of Instruments,
such as they have devised, they contend to be truly Geometrical; and both of
them in their Geometrical Treatises, use diverse Instruments for describing
Curves Geometrically much more difficult to be made, and with more difficulty
to be used, than what is here proposed of two simple Rules, cutting one another
at right Angles. And seeing it has no dependence on Solids, or Algebra
Equations, and may be done without any Curve Line, as is above showed, and
whose demonstration wholly depends on a few easy Propositions of the first
Book of Euclid, I see not why it may not be called Plain Geometry: And as the
word Mechanical is used to signify a thing not Mathematically exact, but
coming near to it by Approximation, in this sense it is not Mechanical, but
Mathematical, and purely Geometrical, being grounded on as good demonstration,
as any Propositions in Euclid, and being but a Corrolary from some of them.

The next thing to be shown is the Quinquisection, where to make one Figure
serve to both, I make the Cross Rule only one Inch and one 4th part from the
middle line AM, setting off on both sides one half of the length of the cross
Rule, draw the parallel Lines ad and be, then let the cross Rule side along the
line AB, as in the Trisection, while the left side of the long Rule slides
through the center A, the other end of the cross Rule shall describe a Curve, a
part of which shall be g h, that may be continued at pleasure. Again, setting
the right end of the cross Rule one the Point d, let it slide or move along the
Line da, (while the left side of the long Rule runs through the center A,)
the left end of the cross Rule shall describe a part of another Curve, meeting
at h the other Curve. And having found the point h with radius A h describe the
Arch v h z x y N which shall give v h=one fifth of the whole Arch, as is
evident from the foregoing demonstration.

The Quinquisection also may be made without any Curve, if two long Rules be
jointed together like a Sector, and each have a moveable cross Rule to move on
them at right Angles, with the long Rules. For let the center of the two long
Rules be fixed on the center A, and let the 2 cross Rules be moved together
from B and d, until (the left end of the one still touching the right end of
the other) the right end of the Cross nearest to the Line a d touch upon some
Point of it as at W, the Point at W shall give the Quinquisection as above.

And thus a true Geometrical Line of Cords may be made by any Tiro, without any
Conick Section, or Algebra Equation, and without any Table of Natural Sines or
Arithmetical Operation; for whereas Euclid (11.4.) has taught how to find the
Cord of 36 degr. and also it is found by Quinquisecting the half Circle, as is
above showed, it remains only to trisect the Arch of 120 degr. which gives the
Cord of 40, and 36 taken from 40, leaves 4 degr. which bisected gives 2, and
that bisected gives 1, which is the one 360th part of the Circle, and one 90th
of the Quadrant; and this is more methodical than to teach a beginner to make
his Line of Cords, for projecting of Angles, by sending him to Conick Sections,
and Algebra Equations or the Table of Natural Sines, which he is not capable at
his entry, nor after he has made some good progress to understand (it being to
teach ignotum per ignotius an unknown thing by a more unknown) quite contrary
to all good method of true Science, such as Geometry is. The method of the
Quinquisection here delivered, sufficiently shows without example, any other
Section desired.

The Corrolaries mentioned in the former Treatise, with the Rectification here
made, are all valid, some of the chief of them I shall here mention.



1. One great Use is to teach a beginner how to make a true Line of Cords, as
is above showed, and how to divide a Circle into any parts required.

2. Another great use Descartes shows in his third Book of Geometry, for the
resolving any such Equation in Algebra as z 3=+ p zq, where the Root z is an
unknown quantity, and can be found by the Trisection of an Angle.

3. A third great use is to give some New Promblems in Practical Geometry, one
whereof I shall here show. Let a straight Line A F be given, (see the second
Figure) and it is required on the point A to erect an Isosceles ABC, whose side
BC produced, shall terminate on a limited point D, under the given straight
line AF.

The construction is thus, draw a straight Line from D to A, as D A, next make
the right Angle FAE. Divide the angle EAD into three equal parts, and with
radius AD describe the Semicircle GFE. From C to B set off GB=ED. Then draw the
line AB, and from B draw the line BCD, which shall form the Isosceles triangle
ABC, whose side BC being produced, shall terminate on D. q.e.f. the use of this
is obvious in Architecture.

4. A fourth great use is to give us some New Problems in Geography and
Navigation.

Example.

There are four places A. B C. D so situated. A is distant from D 100 Leagues,
and bears South-Easterly from it 70 degr. B is distant from A 100 Leagues
South-Westerly. C is distant from B 100 Leagues North-Westerly C and A are in
the same Latitude and so that these three places B. C. D lie in a straight Line
one from another.

Q. What is the distance betwixt these two places, B and D, and the Course on
the Rhumb Line betwixt A and B, and the distance betwixt A and C.

The Resolution. Divide the angle EAD into three equal parts, and make CAB=one
third part of EAD, and draw the line BAD. Thus the four places A. B. C. D shall
be duly situated, and an Isosceles Triangle shall be formed ABD, whose side
AB=AD=100 Leagues, and the angle BAD=86 degr. 40. consequently by plain
Trigonometry, the angle of the course GAB being found, which is 23 degr. 30
min. the angle ABD, its double is 46 degr. 40=ADB, by the Rule of Opposits.

As the Sine of 46 d. 40 to AD 100 Leagues, so the Sine of 86. 40 Log.
9.861757 2.000000 9.999265 11.999265 9.861757 to BD 137. ^. fere 2.137508


From which substracting BC 100 Leagues, there remains CD 37. ^. as was
required.

A Fifth great use of the Trisection, and other Sections is, having the Ratio
of any 2 Angles given in any plain. Triangle, to find the quantity of them, if
the quantity of the 3d Angle be given, without any regard to their sides. What
other uses these Angular Sections may have, is left to the search of
Industrious Artists.

London, Printed for the Author, and are to be had at the Three Pigeons over
against the Exchange, and at his House in Pudding-lane, at the Sign of the
Golden Ball, where he Teaches the Mathematical Arts.


