George Keith 's Complaint Against the QVAKERS: OR, AN Answer to the Quakers
Complaint AGAINST George Keith, Humbly Presented to the Clergy OF THE Church of
England.

LONDON Printed, and Sold by the Booksellers of London and Westminster,, 1700.

George Keith 's Complaint Against the QVAKERS, etc.
Learned Sirs,
It Is unto you, into whose Orders I am now Admitted, and by whom I am Owned,
since the Quakers have denied me, that I make my Complaint of the Quakers; that
cast on me such Aspersions, that its evident and demonstrable out of my Books,
what I have said of you, as these following evince, viz. That you Ran, and the
Lord never sent you; and that you were Covetous and Ambitious, seeking how to
please Men, for your own Ends; and it is true, That I cried against your
Philosophy, and your Universities, saying, They are the Stews of Antichrist,
out of which comes your ignorant, profane, scandalous Ministry; and that the
Generality of you have not the True Faith; and that in process of Time, your
whole Ministry will consist of ungodly Men; the Wicked being still preferred by
the Wicked: And so, they say, I am preferred among the rest; and by contrivance
and design, now I am so Old, as to have so much Natural Wit, as to see I must
make some shift how to live; having cast my self out from among the Quakers,
and seeing it is the far easiest of many or most Trades, to be a Preacher, to
get Money, and become one of the Man-made Ministry, where All is done for
Money: Therefore, Learned Brethren, I come among you; for you know, No Money,
No Preaching; as the Old Proverb is, No Penny, No Pater Noster. And the vile
Quakers slander me in these, and other matters of Truth, by saying, You (and I
may now say, We, Brethren) Preach not Christ; but say contrary, That is not
Christ which convinces every Man of his sins, and tells him all that ever he
did; it is but a Humane Principle, and not Divine: And to Read Set-Forms of
Prayers out of a Book, which to read, whether in private or public, and call
that Reading Prayer, is not (I affirm) any part of Gospel Worship; neither was
it known in the Church, either in Justin Martyr, or Tertullian's Time, who
lived above 300 Years after Christ.

And, Learned Brethren, these Heathens, as I call the Quakers, in my late
Sheet, Reproach me with another thing that I said of them, whilst I was one of
them, concerning such as you (and I) that now oppugn the Quakers with gross and
horrid Lies, and false Calumnies, and mere Abuses, like unto the ways that ever
the worst of the Adversaries of Truth have used against the True Witnesses of
it; and yet said I, It never yet has been proved, nor never will, that the
Religion professed by the sincere and faithful People, called in scorn Quakers,
is either Paganism, or any other thing than Real Christianity; and
notwithstanding I have so said, I do Retract, Disown, and Deny whatsoever is to
be found in any of my Books, contrary to the Holy Scriptures. Yet these
Heathens, Learned Brethren, do not forbear to Reproach me with what I have
truly said, concerning the Sacraments Christ has ordained in his Church, viz.
Two only, as generally necessary to Salvation, as we profess; that is to say,
Baptism, and the Supper of the Lord. Viz. As for Infants Baptism, and
Sprinkling a Child of Eight Days Old more or less, on the Forehead, and call it
Baptism, I said has no footing in all the Scripture, neither of Precept nor
Practice; neither was it in use for an Hundred Years and more after the
Apostles days, among Professors of Christianity; and that we cannot Prove it,
although we Practice it, and get Money by it, but do it by a bare Imitation, and
a mere pretended Call, which is great Presumption, yea, Superstition; although we
call it Christ's Ordinance, and say, It Is Commanded by Christ; yet he has
given us no Command; but we set up the Commandments of Men in the Room of God's
Commands, like the Pharisees, as they show in their late Sheet, entitled, The
Christianity of the People called Quakers asserted by (me) George Keith; and in
their Book, called The Creed-Forgers detected, they show, that I said,
Tertullian was against Infant Baptism, and that we cannot (as true it is) give
any Evidence in Church History, that Christ commanded those Words to be used,
which we use in Baptism; and Zuinglius is against us in this Case; and that 1
Cor. 11.23, 24. proves no Institution of the Lord's Supper at all; and that we,
Learned Brethren, own (as you know we do) and acknowledge, that there is no
absolute necessity of using that called the Supper, so as that none can be
Saved, but such that partake of it: And that whatever Outward thing God
Commands, brings along with them a real Advantage to Men's Souls; and you know,
we hold this to be an Outward thing, and Visible Sign. And for my part, I still
adhere, as I said in my Retractations, to my former Advice, that nothing be
required by one sort (i.e. by us, or any others) from another, as an Article of
Faith, or Doctrine, in common to be Believed, but what is expressly delivered in
the Scriptures, in plain express Scripture-Terms.

And, Learned Brethren, you know, we hold the Lord's Supper as an Article of
Faith, or Doctrine, to be believed; and yet cannot we prove it by what is
expressly delivered in the Scripture, in plain and express Scripture-Terms.
What, Brethren, shall I do with this Gang of Quakers? Although I charge them not
either upon the Generality (pray mind that) far less the Universality of all
them called Quakers; yet I must confess, I have positively said in my late
Sheet, That I have proved the Quakers (without Exception) Heathens;
notwithstanding those that have but a little sound Judgment may easily find, I
do not contradict my self in any thing, nor do I continue to hold palpable
Contradictions; for I have declared in Print, Those that continue to hold
palpable Contradictions, all Ingenious Persons will conclude great Hypocrites,
for none but stark Mad and Crazed in their Understanding, will hold perfect
Contradictions, for what I hold is agreeable to Holy Scripture; therefore these
Quakers that I have charged with the Gangreen of their Vile and Gross Errors
and Heresy, that is, a Complex of the worse sort of Errors and Heresies,
Demand of me to prove by plain Scripture, and in Plain and Express Scripture
Terms, that the Baptizing Infants, and Signing them with the Sign of the Cross,
and the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper, as used by us, and our set Forms of
Prayer, and our taking Tithes, and pleading for the Divine Right thereof, and
our requiring they should be paid to us (the Ministers of the Nation) as
Ministers of Christ, and that as such we should receive Tithes and Stipends; to
prove all this, and much more, from plain Scripture, and in plain and express
Scripture Terms, they do demand; because I still say, I adhere to my former
Testimony.

Again, If I believe these things to be Articles of Faith, or Christian
Doctrines to be believed, and many other things that we Hold and Practice;
these Quakers would have plain Scripture for all such things, and in plain and
express Scripture Terms they would have it proved; is not this unreasonable,
Brethren? I have indeed declared, in public Print, That I have been above 30
Years among the Quakers; and since I left them, have published to the World,
that I Reverence Divine Providence that I became a Quaker: And have Affirmed,
That they held the Fundamentals of Christian Doctrines, and that I knew the
Quakers and their Principles, having been Conversant with them in their public
Meetings, as well as private Discourses, with the most noted and esteemed
amongst them for 30 Years; yet have said, to Excuse my self since I left them,
If I had known they had such Errors among them, I would as soon have put my
Head in the Fire, as have owned them: Yet in my Retractations, I declare, I am
of the same Faith as I have been above 30 Years. Thus they say, I say and
unsay, and pretend Ignorance when I well knew, and vindicated those Doctrines
stoutly, and in the Name of the Lord, which I now chargeas Errors upon them,
many of which were writ before I was a Quaker; and therefore as to my pretense,
that if I had known the Quakers had such Errors, I would as soon have put my
Head in the Fire, as have owned them; which the Quakers esteem an idle Story,
for they will not believe I was so Ignorant, as not to know them, because I
vindicated them; and besides, they account there is no need for me to put my
Head in the Fire, because they think me too hotheaded already; and that if
what I have said be true, That I am of the same Faith still, that I was when a
Quaker, and that I have been for above 30 Years past; then I must be a Quaker
still; and if I never was a Quaker, then they pretend they do not understand
what reason I had to publish to the World, That I reverence divine Providence
that I became a Quaker; thus they reflect upon me, and endeavor to render me
in palpable Contradiction, and to show that by my own Saying, I prove I am an
Apostate, a great Hypocrite, Crazed in my Understanding, and stark Mad: But,
Learned Brethren, seeing I meet with these things, I make my Complaint to you,
to whose Service, for my Wages, Stipend, or Reward, I am now Devoted.

And I say, and do what I can, by calling the Quakers Heathens, Deists; their
Divinity, mad Divinity; their Religion, the Religion of Julian the Apostate;
and render them Stoics, Platonists, and what not; and assert I have proved
them Apostates, telling them in my late Sheet, That I think not at present to
take particular Notice of the Pamphlets which charge me with some Passages in
my former Books, particularly the Account of a National Church, etc. the
Animadversions thereon, the Portraiture of G. K. and the Broad-Sheet, cum
multis aliis: But they still call upon me to prove that those Principles which
I have formerly vindicated in the Name of the Lord, are contrary to Scripture;
and the Quakers tell the World most truly, I Deny and Retract what is contrary
to the Holy Scriptures, that is to be found in any of my Books; by which they
conclude that I do more Retract what I have lately writ and done, than what I
writ or did formerly; because they suggest, that according to their Opinion, I
Writ, Preached and Practiced, more agreeable to the Scripture then, than I do
now; and when I had more Charity for them, I was better than now I am, and less
envious, and more like a Christian indeed: Therefore in my late Sheet I say, I
do Retract, Disown and Deny whatever is to be found in any of my Books contrary
to the Holy Scriptures, or the 39 Articles of the Church of England; which, I
say, I sincerely believe are perfectly according to the Doctrine of Holy
Scriptures: And now they would have me prove that the Quakers hold any
Fundamental Doctrine that is contrary to the Holy Scriptures, and the 39
Articles of the Church of England. And what Fundamental Principles or Doctrines
of the Christian Faith to be believed, they, i. e. Quakers hold, that are
contrary to the holy Scriptures, and 39 Articles.

Seeing that I say, I am of the same Faith, and have not changed in any
Fundamental Principle, nor indeed in any one Principle of the Christian Faith,
nor varied therefrom to this Day; for all the while I was a Quaker, I was
Orthodox, or Sound in the Christian Faith, although I have, to render the
Quakers odious, asserted them to be Erroneous. And although I now say, Those
Texts of Scripture, relating to Baptism and the Supper, I was mistaken in; and
when I did particularly Assert, Water was not meant; and since affirmed that it
is meant in Mat 28.19. yet I have not varied in any one Principle of the
Christian Faith, nor contradicted my self; neither does this prove, when I held
otherwise than now I do, that I was not then found in the Principles of
Christianity, or Doctrines of the Christian Faith, or that I held any thing
contrary to the 39 Articles, by no means, for then I should be an Apostate,
stark Mad, and Crazed in my Understanding, (if I contradicted my self;)
according to my own Saying, and was unsound in the Principles of Christianity,
or Doctrines of the Christian Faith; or that I held any thing contrary to the
39 Articles.

And, Learned Brethren, you are not Ignorant how we have encouraged some to
write against the Quakers, although it has cost some Scores of Pounds: and there
has been a Complaint made, in the Quakers Names, against me, humbly presented
to the Clergy of the Church of England; therefore my Letter-Learned-Brethren,
that are as False and Conceited as I am, and think you can split Hairs, strain
Sentences, quibble about Words to raise Strife, use Sophisms, draw wrong
Conclusions, make undue Inferences, to Wrong the Living, and Desame the Dead,
that you may render both Erroneous, the living Ignorant, and your selves Wise
and Knowing, when it is well known (to them that are truly wise and knowing) we
are otherwise: Therefore such of you that have more Passion than Patience,
Pride than Humility, empty Conceit than sound Judgment, Folly than Wisdom; that
are more taken with Lies and Railery, than Truth and Reason; to you I do
Address my self, as being nearest Related to me, and with whom I am in abundant
more Unity, than with the Patient, Humble, Wise, Judicious, and sober honest
Men; for they may think, that I might better Employ my Time, and my Parts, and
Zeal, to much better purposes, in furthering the Reformation of Men's Lives,
and of the Manners of the Nation, than by raising or keeping up with an
Unchristian Temper, to the manifest Injury of the Christian Religion, which is
an Institution of Love, dangerous or unnecessary Controversies or Divisions; --
all Religions being, I think agreed, that bad Men are a Scandal to the best
Religion; and that they cannot, if they continue so, be saved in any, as is
said, p. 27. of that Book, said to be published with the Approbation of a
considerable number of Lords Spiritual and Temporal: This Advice being contrary
to my Practice, I rather choose to make my Address to you; and it is to such that
all along I intend my Complaint: And this I may add.

Concerning Ordination.
Indeed I am ashamed that I should derive either my own, or that any other of
the Protestants should derive their Call or Ordination through so unclean a
Conduit, as the great Antichrist; and through confessed Synioniacks, Magicians
and Necromancers; yea, through Papesse John, a Vile Harlot: Sure I am, the most
Famous of the Primitive Protestants abhorred such a thing; and if at any time
any of them alleged that outward Ordination, it was but an Argument, Ad
hominem [as we use to say] by way of Retortion, to stop the Papists Mouths;
otherwise acknowledging their Call to be Extraordinary and Immediate.

And because it has been suggested, that the Quakers are Papists; look in G.
K.'s Looking* Glass, p. 96, 97, 98, 99, 100, 101,

I. And you may see, the Papists and G. K. and his Brethren, agree as to their
Notions and Distinctions of Trinity and Persons, which the Quakers deny; who,
though they confess Father, Son, and Spirit, and that these Three are One
(according to the Scriptures) yet deny the School-Men's uncertain Notions and
unscriptural Terms of Trinity and Persons.

II. They agree in affirming, That Infants are really guilty of Adam's Sin,
before they commit* Actually any of their own.

III. They agree, in denying there is a Saving, Evangelical, Supernatural Light
in all Men, by which they may be saved, without the use of other outward Means,
if God necessarily Abstract them from them; both affirming, That such as have
not the Scriptures, or some to Preach to them, or Baptize them, etc. must of
necessity Perish, unless the Lord make use of some Extraordinary Means.

IV. They agree, That Humane Learning, and Natural Parts, are more Essential
Qualifications to Ministers and Preachers, than the Grace of God; and that Men
may be true Ministers without the Grace of God, but not without the other.

V. They agree, In deriving the Power of their Ministry by an Outward
Succession, which, together with the use of Outward Ordination, they judge
sufficient to Constitute a Minister, though he want an Inward Call from God's
Spirit, reckoning People are obliged to hear him, and look upon him as a
Minister, because of his outward Formality of Ordination, without questioning
his Inward Call*

VI. They agree, in affirming, That the Clergy ought to be a distinct sort of
Persons, distinguished from the rest of the People by their Black Coats*

VII. They agree, in affirming, That Preachers are not to wait, to speak as the
Spirit gives them utterance; -- but then* when the Bell Ringeth, Repeat over
before the People, as the Schoolboys do their Lessons.

VIII. They agree, That Ministers ought to have a set Limited hire, and ought
not to supply their Wants with their Hands, as did the honest Apostle Paul; but
sit at Ease, and feed of the Fat.

IX. They agree, in affirming, That all Ministers are not alike, but that there
ought to be Diocesian*Bishops over the rest, whom Men must call, My Lord.

X.:They agree, in affirming, That Men may, yea, and ought, to Pray, Preach,
and do all their other Acts of Worship when they please, whether they be moved
and influenced by God's Spirit, or not.

XI. They agree, in affirming, That Water Baptism is the Baptism of Christ, and
a Standing Ordinance of the Church of Christ.

XII. They agree, in affirming, That Instant Sprinkling is an Ordinance of the
Gospel.

XIII. They agree, in affirming, That partaking of the Visible Signs of Bread
and Wine, is a Sacrament, or Standing Ordinance in the Church of Christ.

XIV. 'They agree, That it is lawful for Christians to Swear.

XV. They agree, That it is lawful for Christians to Fight, and kill one
another in Fighting.

XVI. They agree, in the Bloody Antichristian Tenet of Persecution* in
affirming, That the Civil Magistrate may Lawfully Kill, Banish, Imprison, and
Poyn'd Men, for their Opinions in Matters of Worship and Doctrine.

XVII. They agree, in affirming it Lawful for Men to Kneel, Bow, and take off
their Hats, one to another; and in the use of vain Titles, Complements and
Cringings, etc.

XVIII. They agree, in Asserting the Lawfulness of Gaming, Sporting and
Playing; and all such other things, as Dancings, Singings, Actings of Comedies,
using of Lace, Ribbonds, Plaiting the Hair, and such other kind of
Superfluities.

All which, although the Papists, and G. K. and his Brethren Agree, the Quakers
Deny and Disown, with several other Particulars, as may be seen in G. K.'s
Looking-Glass for all those called Protestants in the Three Nations.

Thus, as that called The Quakers Complaint against George Keith, is made in
the Person of the Quakers; That Liberty is taken to write this in G. K.'s
Person: And as that Pamphlet ends with Quotations; so this, called, George
Keith's Complaint against the Quakers, ends with Quotations. For a farther and
a more particular Answer to which, you are referred to a Book lately Printed,
entitled, The Creed-Forgers detected; sold by T. Soul, in White-Hart-Court in
Gracious-street: Both which are recommended, 1. To G. K. and his Brethren; and,
2. To the Serious Perusal, and Weighty Consideration of all the Impartial, to
whom this shall come; and to them it is left.

FINIS.

