The Light of Truth Triumphing Over Darkness an^ ^gnorance, Error and envy.

Manifested in Robert Gordouns late pretended testimony to the true Savior.

Wherein every one whose eye is open may see his Seat; And who have Salt in
themselves may favor his words, work and Spirit and discern his deceitful
dealing by smitting the innocent in secret, yet not with that subtilty which is
able to cover in this day wherein Light is manifesting the works of darkness.

SO, The Devil was here deficient BUT Envy siays the foolish man.

Given forth in the 2 Month 1670. By George Keith* and G. White-head.

Printed in the year 1670,

R. G. Having had knowledge of thee from the beginning and acquantance with
thee through many years, and a love for the^, and regard to thee, I found a
readiness in (...) to signify My sense of thee and sorrow for thee in that
spirit and mind which could d^light to do thee a service in Love. But indeed
thou appearest before me as one very incapable (in that spirit and state
wherein thou stands) of a return to the Lord or of a steady Conductor to thy
bewildred mind, the traversing of which without a guide has centred it in a
Whirle pool. And in thy reelings thou art now resolved thou will fight, neither
with great no^ small, but with the King of Israel: The Light of (...). I have
often wished thee to come under its banner, that it might have become thy
covering, then had not darkne^s covered thy understanding nor the Fogs of
lirror so confounded thee but that thou might have seen thy way out of the mire
and clay wherein thou art toyling thy self, traveling in pain and bringing
^orth the wind.

It did not a little astonish me, upon a view of thy book to find thee (whom I
judged had attained a measure of reason) setting up thy own shadow, in thy own
immagination, and then cudggelling it down again as though thou were
encountering an Army, for where did (...) the people called Quakers deny that
body (prepared of God to do his will in) which suffered at Jerusalem by wicked
hands? which thou seems to take for granted; and then labors like a man in a
sweat, (and indeed thy labor is in the fire) to prove its existence in that
day of its service and its necessity as to mankind, which by them was never
denied, and I dare thee, and all men upon the earth to prove they did or do.

I take notice of thy acknowledgement in the 4 page of thy book, that the
manifestation of God in the flesh of Christ, was that their by way might be
opened for the ministration of the other mystery (...), separating them and
making the one subservient to the other, and yet after runs against it ^n the
whole scope of thy work: which is m^nifest beyond all gain saying*

(...) qualification and a work to be wrought and that by a Spirit too? ^ven as
though the words had been expressly written to give thy words the lyc. I am
really sorry for thee, and my very (...) d^sir^d and does thy good) and mark
thy self that if possib^^ thou might see the confusion ^hy enemy drives thee
into, for within ten lines after on the same page thou says, seeing the travel
of his soul rested well pl^ased that he might make it effectual within every
man, end yet before, no work to be (...) in any man by any light or spirit: Oh
Robert whether drives thou? whether art thou driven?

I mark one thing more page 4. thou says, He has already subdued all, made an
and of sin completed the work of (...)* redem^tion, dyed for Us and reconcil^d
Us to God etc. and as I was weighing it in my mind what or whom thou did intend
by the words, Our, and Us, That other part of thy book came before me page 13.
where thou says: he did bear Our sins in his body on the tro^, Propitiation for
the sins of the (...) world past present and to come, so then it appeared by
the word Us thou intends the whole world.

Nevertheless (to go round again) thou pleads with a generation, saying that
their pleading a faith in his death and sufferings, interest in the
satisfaction and atonement made to God through his blood* page 6, Will not
shelter them from the wrath of the Father, page 7. What I not shelter them, and
yet Christ a propitiation for their sins past present and to come, what
incongruous work is this, which they that runs may read.

Several other pass^ges in thy book are observable, and I do not charge thy
intention with blasphemy but thy work unawares Vergeth near it, for page 22.
thou says of Christ who was never defiled, having the iniquities of us all in
h^s body etc. how unsound are thy words? and in page 24. thy words are,
Spiritual m^sticall ^l^goricall Christ, light within us, Spirit and po^er in
the man Christ. And now does thou know what thou speaks? to Catigorize a
Spiritual and an Alegoricall Christ identically, and so in effect mak^ them
both one. Thou have sometimes accused some for Alegorizing his body of flesh,
but now thou dare do it to his Spirit; I wish thou knew the weight of this
and what tendency it has to make void the faith converting its object into a
Chimaera.

In the same page thou says: if in every man this seed or Christ is not saved:
does it remain for ever under condemnation? There is a supposition and a
question from it of thy own forming, and presently thou concludes it a doctrine
of some others, saying, oh how contrary is this doctrine? First it is gross
confusion in thy self, to call a supposition and question, a doctrine, and
secondly it is a smitting in the dark, by thy implying and raking for granted
there is a people that hold it. If thou meanest the people called Quakers
a^cuse them openly, if not then clear them, of the many inconsequent
implycations of thy book which many do and will understand to be against them
until thou put off thy Viza^d.

But it is enough to me, (and I wish it may be serviceable to thee for good)
that some faith^ul friends of truth have in love to truth and to thee set thy
work before thee as in a glass, that happily thou may see thy self by their
labor of Love which after follows* else I might have found in my heart to
have dealt with thy book throughout, and I am satisfied in due time thy own
words will become thy burden, but still I wish it may be for thy good for I
have a real Love to thee and regard for thee as I said at first.

A. Robeson.

Light set over Darkness.
In somewhat writ in answer unto a printed paper published by R. G. (so far as
it Concerns us the people called in deri^ion Quakers and our principle) wherein
he has both difing enuously represented us, and darkly) and ignorantlly
opposed our principle, even Jesus Christ* the true light w^h enlightening every
man that comes into the world that all through him might believe and in
believing might all aim unto eternal life and salvation.
R. G I have seen and considered thy book or paper entitled A T^stim^ny to the
true Saviou^, and I find somewhat in me from the Lord to answer thee in Love to
thy soul, and in a zeal for God and his truth and people, whom the spirit that
has set thee on work, to write this book has labored to vail and cloud that
the light of the glory thereof, might not shine forth, but its work is in vain,
for the truth shines forth in brightness over all that confusion, mist and
darkness by which it seeks to hinder it, and indeed the youngest child of truth
may see thy weakness, and confusion herein, and how thou figh test as one
beating the air against that precious people, and their testimony whom though
thou do not expressly design, yet any who reads thy book, and are acquainted
with us and our principle, will see that thy book is levelled mostly against
us, and our principle* its very design being to cast mire and dirt upon us, and
to mar the visage and beauty of that precious truth, the Universal light
which is within, but it is returned upon thee and this stone which thou
rejects, and seeks to persuade others to reject is set over thee, and will be
too b^rthensome for thee, if in time thou repent not.

I find not my self concerned to take a particular notice of all thy words, so
as to give a particular answer to them, only so far, as thou manifests both
thy own confusion, and self contradiction on the one hand, and thy opposition
to the sound and wholesome words of truth together with thy disingenious
stating and wresting of that pure do^ctrine affirmed and declared by us, on the
other. In the second and third page thou writes of two snares, wherewith some
are entangled, which are summed up in this, to wit the dividing these two great
Gospel Mysteries, and setting the one in opposite terms against the other,
contrary to the tenden^y of the Holy Scripture^, and what these Snares are thou
more particularly expresses, page 5. -- But there are some upon the one hand,
so zealous for Christ (thou says) and what he did for u^ ^n his Crucified body
without us that they n^glect in themselves, and ^ppose in others the mystery of
Christ within as a matter of no co^cernment at all to them etc. and this thou
reckons the first snare and indeed a snare i^ is, and that very dangerous and
dreadful* but for all thy work to discover this snare to others, thou art
found entangled in it thy sel^, and intangling others with thee, as much as
thou can ^s I may afterward make appear. The second snare thou mentions, is
that some on the other hand, pretend so much zeal, for this mystery, Christ
within, the opperations and acting of the Spirit of God in themselves, that
they deny the mystery of God in the flesh of Christ* as a matter of any
necessity to them, as to redemp^ion reconc^liation, and justifica^^on etc*
which charge thou plainly directs against us called in d^rision Quakers, as may
appear by the import of thy discourse, though thou does not expre^ly name us,
to which I say it is a fa^se charge, nor are we guilty of it* as also thou
false^y alleadges, tha^ we recko^ to accomplish this in our own bodies, each
for himself throu^h obedience to the Law, or Light in his Conscience, which
Light they call Christ, Redeemer and only Savior, without r^spect to the ^rue
Christ* and ou^ only Savior Jesus Christ of Nazareth. I say this is false,
for though we say Reco^ciliation, and justification, and Redemption is wrought
in us* by Christ* yet not without respect to Christ, even as outwardly
manifest, born, and crucified etc. for our justification etc* has a true and
real, and certain respect to Christ both as inwardly manife^^ed in us, and also
as manifested in that body of flesh which was crucified in (...) etc for we do
believe that he took upon him the form of a servant ev^^ in the outward and
died even in the outward, and offered up even his very flesh* through the
eternal Spirit in the outward, as a sacrifice of a sweet smell* and atonem^nt
unto God, in order to our justifica^ion and reconciliation with God, so as
thereby he prepared or made ready the way, for our justification* though our
justification was not s^^ply and absolutely thereby wrought, as if no more were
to be done by him and his Spirit in us or as if his outward body, flesh, blood,
and life were the only sacrifi^^, and propitiation, exc^uding the inward. And
now if I should stop here, and proceed no furthe^ I give a sufficient testimo^y
against thy f^lse charge upon us, yet I must say somewhat f^rther for the
clearing this matter, for whereas thou not only affirms that Salvation and
justification has a necessary respect to Christ his taking on him the form of
a Servant or man, in the outward, and ^umbling himself therein, even to the
outward death (which we also grant God having so ordained it to be) but also
thou seems to affirm, that the express knowledge and b^li^f of his taking on
him the form of man, and his ob^d^en^^ and sufferings therein is of a^s^lute
necessity unto all and every one, for salvation, so as none could be saved
without that express knowledge, though it was never revealed to them. This I
deny, how can thou prove this by Scripture, for may not the benefit of Christ
his taking on him, the form of a man redound unto many, who do not expressly
know it (they having a true light within them) even as a diseased person may
receive benefit of a cure applied to him thou^h he has not an express knowledge
of all the names and ways, ^ow from first to last it has been prepared, and
even as many have s^ffered hurt, through the disobedience of the first man to
wit Adam who have not known expressly that ever such a man was, or the manner of
his disobedience. So why may not even many receive benefit, through the
obedience of Christ, in the outward, who have not known expressly his outward
coming and sufferings? otherwise Adams disobedience were more effectual for
man's destruction, then the obedience of Christ were for his Salvation.

As for what thou writes against those, who pretend to the imputed
righteousness of Christ etc. but under all this retaining and indeed
entertaining the Serpents nature in their souls etc. as in pages 6, 7, 8, 9, 10
11, it touches not us, for we have no such principle, not belief, and thou
have need to examine thy own heart, lea^t thou be found in this snare thy self,
does thou retain, or entertain, nothing of the Serpents nature in thee yea art
thou ^ot of such a belief, that sin does of necessity live* in thy soul, and
thou cannot be freed so from it, but that it must live in some measure in thy
soul, for term of life, and is not sin the Serpents nature, and if it cannot
but live in thee, does thou not retain, yea entertain it in thy soul? for
surely sin cannot live in any measure* where it finde^ no entertainment? yea as
to this matter art thou not in con^usion, and contradiction to thy self; for
though thou blames them, who pretend to the imputed righteousness of Christ,
but under all this re^aining, yea entertaining the serpents nature, page 6 yet
p. 16 thou expressly pleads for Redemp^ion in another for us, while ^in is
within, and to (...) otherways, thou calls it an arguing with God, and charging
him with folly, how will thou rid thy self heir of Confusion and contradiction
to the self, I might take notice of diverse other unfound words of thine from
page 1. to page 10. but desiring to be short, I shall pass them* and only take
into consideration another piece of confusion and contradiction to thy self,
for page 9. thou says, Of one who is dead in sins and trespasses, and remains
so still, that he is a child of wrath, as well as others, and is altogether so
sti^l and yet page 12* thou affirms that God is fully attoned, perfectly
reconci^ed to man, etc. sing^y and solely upon the acco^^t of the active and
passive obedience of the man Jesus Christ of Nazar^^h, done in his crucified
body without us, and this thou would inter from, 2 ^ar. 5. 18. and thou further
add^ that he (to wit Paul, in the cited place) mentions not any consideration*
qualificatio^* or work wrought, or to be wrought in any man, by any Light or
Spirit whatsoever, now is not this confusion and contradiction to ^hy self.
First to say a man dead in ^ins or unsanctified altogether is altogether a
ch^ld of wrath, Secondly to say, that God is fully and perfectl^ attoned and
reconciled with him, in this state, for what (...) ^t to be a child of wrath,
but that the wrath of God is upon him* and against him, and yet says thou God
is fully reconcil^d with such, altogether children of wrath, and yet God is
fully attoned, perfectly reconciled with them, is it not palpable confusion,
and contradiction? nor does that cited place 2 Cor. 5 18 prove what thou
intends* only thou wrests it, as that thou say^, he says not God, is yet to be
reconciled but he is alread^ fully reconciled but say I with whom is he (...)
reco^c^led with unbelievers, and unsanctified persons? but the Apostles words
are in that place has reconciled us viz. us who believe and are sanctified,
but of the world he says reconciling, so not reconciled yea in the sa^e place
he mentions a qualification to be wrought by the Spirit, on their parts* in
order to their full reconciliation. viz that they be reconci^ed to God be ye
reconciled to God said he.

And page 13. I hou affirms that faith is but the evidence of that red^mption,
and salvation already wrought by Christ for us, citing that Scripture, Heb. 11.
1 but though the Apostle say, faith is the evidence of things not seen, he does
not (...), it is but the evidence, as excluding it from being any quali^^cation
requisite unto redemption, or justification, yea he calls it also a sub^ance of
things hoped for. And here I shall take not^ce, how thou art fallen into that
principle of the (...) so c^lled who maintain that men are justified with God*
before (...), and that faith is only the evidence of ju^^^fication* But (...)
th^n brings no s^fficient proves of Scripture to (...) 53^ 6 of (...). nor 2
Cor. 5. 18. 2^* nor Act* 4. nor Gal. 44. Give any ground for it that God is
fully attoned, perfectly reconci^ed with u^beli^vers, for though he was made
sin for us, and that God had laid ^n him the iniquities of us all, yet the
unbelievers do still remain under the burden of sin and they are concluded in
it, and wrath is revealed in them against it, as says the Scripture, and God
is against them in it, till they be agreed with him through faith and
fancti^^cation (ag^^e said he with th^ne adversary, etc.) and there is ^o peace
to the wicked says my God, it is not s^id, there is no evidence or intimation
of peace to them, but there is no peace to them while they so continue and as
for the one o^^^ing once for all, yet the fr^it and effect thereof is not given
unto ^ll, so ^s that all ^re justified for many are condemned, he that
believes not, said Christ is condemned already.

I come now to examine thy assertion, page 10. which tho^ endeavors to confirm*
through the most part of thy paper, and it is this. Secondly (says thou) there
is another snar^ carrying death also in the bosom of it, though covered with
the smooth words of power, spirit, and light within, and it is tha^ spirit that
publishes that the light that enlightneth every man that comes into the world,
is the true Christ, our only Sa^iour, Mediator and Redeemer, and that there is
not another, and that man (...) to head, and to be joined to this light, as
that, which as (...) condemns him, so i^ able of it self to save and rede^m
him* as he becomes obedient thereun^o* Here with open mouth thou smi^es against
our principl^, even Jesus Christ the true light that en^ightens ^v^ry man that
c^m^th into the wo^l^, that all through him might believe, though thou may
remember that some time formerly thou h^^t c^nfess^d to it* and also pleaded
for it, but thou have given way to the darkness which has clouded any sma^l
conviction of thi^ truth in thy soul, and now turned thee into ^nmity against
it, and that the darknes^ has ruled thee in this work appears plain^y from thy
manifold confusion and contradiction to thy self wherein thou art entangled
page 17. thou says this Doctrine (declari^g the Light and Power (...) Spirit
within, to be Christ, the only Mediator and Savior,) asserts another Christ,
another Savior then him Jesus Christ of Nazareth, wh^ (...) conceived of the
Holy Ghost, and born of (...) Ma^y, and yet page 5. tho^ ple^ds for Christ
within* and blames them who neglect in thems^lv^s, and oppose in others the
mystery of Christ within, yea page 7 (...), for Christ formed within men,
saying to them that without dyi^g to the old Nature of sin, and rising i^ the
new (...) of right^o^s^^s^* (...) so Christ formed within you, you cannot
in^^rit the Kingdom who of the weak^st disc^rning cannot see thy self
contra^^ction here ^ea and thy enmity to the mist^ry of Christ within! though
at times forge^^ing and contradicting thy ^elf, thou seems to be for ^t, but if
thou were indeed for this mystery Christ within as he is the seed, the (...),
the Power and the Life, tho^ would not say that such Doctrine asser^^ another
Christ, then him Jesus Christ of Nazareth, for Jesus Christ is still one and
the same, the Savior, and Mediator, and R^deemer is still one and not divided,
there ^re not two Christ's, one without, (...) of the Virgi^ Mary, and another
within, formed within, but it is one and the same Lord Jesus Christ* who in the
fullness of time, took upon him, the form of ^ servant, and was found in the
true form of a Man born of the Virgin Mary, who was also in the beginning with
God, and was the Gift of the Fathers love unto man, from the begi^ning, to be
in them, and unto them Light and Life to enlighten and quicken them unto God.

But now let us a little weigh the weight of those arguments, which thou (...)
against th^s Doctrine; of the Light within, being the Savior, and saving them,
who become joined and obedient thereunto*

First thou s^ys, this Doctrine is of no less consequence, then to establish
again the Covenant of wor^^* which speaks thus* do this, and live thereby,
making void the Righteousness, which is of Faith in Christ which speaks on
this wise, believe, and thou shall be saved.

To which I say nay, this Doctrine does not est^blish the Covenant of the works
of the Law, mentioned by the Apostle, by which no flesh can be justified, no^
does it make void the Righteousness which is of Faith, Christ for the
Righteousness which is of Faith in Christ does well consist (...) stand with
obedience to Christ the seed, and with works which are wrought in the virtue
and strength of him, the seed formed within, raised within, living ^ithin, ye^
their consistence is so necessary, that they cannot be divided, for ^aith
without works i^ dead, but thou art ignorant of the Nature of the New Covenant,
or Righteousness of faith as if it excluded works, and doing and as if doing
were prop^^ only to the Old or first Covenant, in order to justification, which
is false, for both the first and the second Covenant require^h doing, and
works, but after a different manner, the first Covenant* putt^th man upon
doing, without giving unto him, that grace and life, which ^s sufficient, to
make his works acceptable unto God, perfectly and ^hroughly, which i^ only
^dministred in the incorr^ptible seed of ^ife, in its arisings, and springings
up in the heart, and so the first Covenant or Law comes before the seed be
raised, or brought forth* and requires man to do such things* in the state. ^ut
man can giv^ no prefect obedience to this law for it only condemns him, and
g^ves him the knowledge of sin* but gives him no spiritual life, for the life
is in the ne^ Covenant and springs up in the seed thereof, and so the first
Covenant or Law is called in Scripture the Carnal Commandment, and it^ seed and
birth is Carnal, o^ accor^ing to the flesh, which cannot give unto man to
perform perfect obedience unto God* for the Law makes nothing perfect but the
bringing in of a better hope which is the power of an endless l^fe, in the
incorruptible immortal spiritual and heavenly seed not only requires
p^rfection and perfect obedience, but brings to it and gives power to answer
and perform it, for the new Covenant ^ath a se^d and birth that is not carnal
and weak but spiritual and powerful, and requires obedience and works of and
from men, in this even in the virtue, power, and life of this spiritual seed,
and of this Ishmael and Isa^ck, Esa^ and Jacob, were figures, as the Apostle
declares in the Epistles to the Galla^ians and Romans, Ishmael and Esau,
sig^ifie the chi^dren of the ^lesh, or fleshl^ seed, who are the child^en of
the old or first Covenant, who cannot attain unto the blessing of full and
perfect justification and acceptance with God through all they can do* but the
^lection attaineth it the elect seed, and the children thereof* who are born
not of the flesh, but of the spirit, not of a fleshly seed, but a sp^rit^^l,
not of the first Adam, but of the second, who are the children of Abraham,
according to the spirit, of whom Is^^ck and Jacob were figures, and though the
new Covenant requires faith or beli^ving yet it requires not only faith, but
works also, in order to a full and perfect justification with God, for Abraham
was justified by works, and not by ^aith only so Rachab, so Phir^ha^ and the
Apostle says* R^m. 8. 13. If ye thro^gh the spirit do mortif^e the the deeds
of the body, ye shall liv^, so the new Covenant requires both ^aith and works
too; believing and doing, but believing is the first thing* it requires men
not simply to do* without respect to ^aith in Christ the seed, but requires
each in their order as that men should believe and do, for its faith which
draw^ life from Christ and expresses it in works, which render them living and
acc^ptable unto God* (otherwise they are dead) so people must first believe,
and then to their faith they must add vir^ue etc. and this believi^g is a
winni^g of the very heart, and soul of man, unto the Light and spirit and power
of Christ, within, manifest in the ^eed through which strength* is rece^ved to
give perfect obedience to God. Moreover that the new Covenant requires doing,
is plain from D^ut. 30. 14. But the word is very near unto thee* even in thy
mouth, and in thy heart* for to do it, which word, the Apo^tle Paul, expounds
to be the wo^d of Faith and ^ighteousnes^ of Faith, (Romans 10. 8) which ^e
preached and that was the new Covenant I have been the more large in ope^i^g
this matter, because it will give occasion unto me, to return a clear and full
answer, in very few words, to all thy other ca^nal and unlearned objections and
reasonings against the Truth in this particular, as in that thou brings for a
second Argument that Paul said, b^ the works of the L^w, (...), etc. And here
thou adds by way of exposi^ion* that is by our obedience to the Law, either
written in Tables of stone, or to the Law* or Light in the Conscience, but this
exposition has ^o ground from Scripture, and its but a figment of thy own
invention of darkness for its clear, by the works of the Law, Paul understands
the law of the first Covenant as the Jews imitation of the Letter are outward^y
administered, before the spiritual seed of Lif^ be raised; which has in it* the
Law of the Spirit of Lif^ in Christ Jesus* for the justification is in the seed
and these works only are j^stified* which are done in the Life and virtue
thereof, nor is thy third objection of any more weight, as wh^re the Apostle
says, Had there been a Law given, which co^ld have given life, ve^ily
right^ousn^ss should have been by the Law, for it is manifest he understands
the Law of the first Covenant, which was the ministration of death, and no^ of
Life, but the Law of Christ, or the Law of the spirit of Life in Christ Jesus
gives life, and so justification is by this Law, and yet faith is not made
void, nor the promise made of none effect, (...) the reward reckoned not of
Grace but of debt, for this law, is of Grace, and of promise, and the whole
obedience giv^n to it* is all of the free Grace of God in Christ Jesus, and the
same answer may serve to that other Scripture cited by thee, ^ man is ju^^^fied
by ^aith without the deeds of the law, and to him that works not, etc. Which
excludes the deeds and works of the law of the first Covenant, or the works of
any law* from justification, which is not given forth and administered in the
E^ect noble and royal, and ^^mortal and incorruptible ^eed of life* for before
this seed be raised all are under transgre^^ion (...) further says* That the
Apo^^le concludes them ign^rant of* and not submi^^i^g to the r^ght^ousness of
God, who go about to establish their own righteousn^ss, by the works of the
Law, so say we also but the r^ghteousness which is in the elect seed and the
works thereof, are not that self righteousness, but the righ^^ousness of God,
and is our righteousness, as Christ is ours, ev^n by the free grace and gift of
the Fat^er. So having thus cut the (...) seeming strength, thy carnal
objections may have with weak people, I shall not ne^d further to answer
particularly thy other words hereab^ut* seeing they contain no force of
Arguments, but are only thy bare assertions and positions, which wanting a
sufficient foundation fall of themselves.

Thou further alleadges page 15. That to affirm just^f^cation, to b^ in
obed^ence to the Light (...), is to make him who is indeed the good Samarita^e*
to be no better th^n the Priest and ^he Levite, who looked upon the w^^^ded man
and so passed by, but have thou not here gross^ly manifested thy weakness and
shallowness* does he not the part of ^he good Samarita^^, in coming i^to our
wounded souls in pouring in the Wine and Oil of his blessed spirit life and
virtue, to cleanse and (...) them, yea if he did not appear in us, and justify
(...) within, work Redempt^^on and Salva^^on from sin in our hearts, he might
^e said rather to pass by us, as the Priest and the Levite. But that both here
and often elsewhere thou insin^ates; as if we had no respect to his outward
coming and sufferings in order to justification, is a ^^lfe and disi^genious
alleadg^nce of thin^, we dearly own and respect him, in bot^ the way^ of his
coming, an^ do not set the one in opposition to the other, nor divide them, for
they are in Unity; and work together (according to the Eternal pu^pos^ of God)
for the full and per^ect deliverance and Sa^vation of Man, and who receive him,
in his inward coming, and become subject to him* receive the ^enefit of his
ou^ward coming, receive the ben^fit of his sufferings and death* his suffering
and death is thei^s, and they who witness him to live in them, may (...), it is
Christ, who dyed who can cond^mn, who have hi^ Lif^ in them, have any interest
in his death, and his blood cleanses them from all sin, but who seeks to rely
upon his outward coming, and suffering^* and deny and crucifi^ his appearance
of Light, and Life in their heart^, have no p^rt in him.

But thou altogether excludes his inward coming by his Life and Spirit in men's
hearts, from havi^g any share in men's Redemp^ion, and Salvation, whereas the
Apostle speaks of being sav^d by his Life, and mentions ^* day of Redemption*
that was yet to come, after his outward sufferings, unto which those who first
believed in him, were (...), and though the Apo^^le says* if while we were
enemies, we were reconciled to God, by (...) death of his Son, yet he adds,
much more shall we besaved by his Life, and though thou use^ thi^ Scripture to
prove, that men are fully and perfectly reconciled with God sing^y and solely
upon the account of what Christ did and suffered without us in his cru^ified
body, excluding so much as any inward quallification wrought by him in u^, ^et
it is but an abuse of the place, and a wresting the word^, beyond the true
int^nt and sense of the spirit* nor need I go any further, then thy own
confession, to alleadg^ a more safe way of understa^ding that Scripture, as
where thou says, page 13. Al^h^ugh in the day^ of Isaiah* Christ was not (...)
come in our flesh, yet the prop^^^ spe^ks ^f ^t, as a (...) al^eady done it
being so i^ the purpose of God and so why (...) said that (...) speak^ of being
reconciled after this manner, it being so in the purpose of God, to reconcile
them, fully unto him, not as they remain in enmity to him, but turned from it
and so become friends and love^s of him, and we do willingly acknowledge, the
full and perfect Redemption, was in Christ, while we were enemies, yet we did
not receive it, while we continued enemies, but now since we believed, and were
turned to him* in our hearts, we have received it, as said the Apostle, by whom
we have now received the atonement, or reconciliation, so mark the word
[(...)] we have now received the reconciliation, now since we believed, and
were turned to him in our hearts, but not before.

In the 17 page whereas thou accuses us, With denying the true Christ and
asserting another, ye^ thou art found in the same guiltiness thy self, which we
are free of, for we believe and acknowledge him, who was manifest in that body
of flesh, to be the true and only Christ and Savior, and yet we believe him
also to be the only true Christ and Savior as manifest ^n us, for he is not
two Christ's but one, though he has had two manners or ways of coming, as
without us, and within us, both useful and needful, yea, both concurring unto
our full and perfect deliverance and sa^vation, from sin and the consequences
thereof in soul and body, and we believe that his outward coming was not a bare
and naked example, but has a real influence and service in its place in and
upon all, who are saved, though all have not that express knowledge thereof,
yea will thou not confess that infants are saved by Christ, who yet have not
this express know^edge of him.

But that I may make it appear, that thou denies the true Christ, I shall bring
the own words page 17. Where thou expressly denies, that this light, which
enlightens every man tha^ comes into the world is Christ, and what is this to
deny Christ, and to deny the Scriptures Testimony of him, for said he himself I
am the light of the World, and said John of him, he was the true light that
enlightens every man that comes into the world that all through (...) believe,
and if all through him might believe (which was John's Testimony) then all
through him might be saved. But thou will have this light not to be in Christ,
but some other light which remained in Ad^m after his transgression, and before
the promise of the M^ssiah, and stands in every man, as a witness for God,
whe^^by he shall be left without excuse, on the day of his righteous judgment,
but thou gives no shadow of proof for it, that this Light is another, for
though (...) quenched the part^cular measure o^ his light in him: at his
transgression, yet he had (to wit Ch.) a residue of light to reach forth unto
him again, though Adam changed yet Christ remained the same, and shined a light
in his conscience in the midst of all that darkness he had let in by hi^
transgression, and who was it that convinced him of his sin, but Christ, to
whom all judgment is committed and who was it. that first p^eached the Gospel
to him, was it not Christ, was not God in Christ reconciling even Adam unto
himself, after the fall and did not Christ come again to give light and life
unto Adam behoved not Adam to know Christ within him* else he had been a
reprobate, was not the word of Faith brought near to him, even in his heart was
not the seed sown in him, which has its fruit eternal Life, and did not this
seed in him bruise the Serpents head, and i^ Ab^l Enoch, Noah, and though we
say that the seed of the woman, which bruiseth the Serpents head, be Christ
within, yet we do not limit your words to him, as only within, for they may be
partly understood of his coming within, and also of his coming without for in
both he bruizes the serpents head, and what pitiful ignorant reasonings is it
in thee, as to say, he (to wit God) did not direct him to tha^ ligh^ in his
conscience etc. in pointing out to him a remedy, but I ask thee was not Adam
saved or to be saved, as other men to w^om Paul th^s says. Say not in thy
heart who shall ascena into He^ven etc. For the word is very n^ar unto thee,
even in thy heart, and this said he is the word of Faith which we preach, and
Mose^ directed the J^ws to the (...) word, ^eu 30, and was not the voice of Go^
in the Garden heard in Adam, and the same word also in his heart which is
called the ingrafted or implanted word, that is able to save the soul.

And that Law, and Nature, by which the Gentiles did the things contained in
the Law, thou will not have it to Be the Law; and Nature of Christ but some
other thing, but what thou tells not, but this has been so often over again and
again confuted in our friends printed books, that herein I need say little or
nothing to it, which thou have borrowed, from the blind and dark Priests, which
have so taught thee, though some time ago, thou came by this Light which now
thou disputes against to be in some measure convinced, that it was the true and
saying Light, alas! for thee, that thou have let the darkness so blind thy
understanding, after it was a little ope^ed, God be merciful unto thee, and
give thee a sight of thy folly and enmity against the truth, and a heart to
repent therefore. Only shall propose a few Queries unto thee, which may serve
to show, that the Nature and light by which these Gentiles did the things of
the Law, and knew God, was that of Christ, for 1* How could they do the things
of the Law, but by the Divine Nature of Christ, seeing without him men can do
no good thing! 2. How could they be excused, but by Christ, as some were, yea.
3. How could they be without excuse* who dis^beyed, if they had no principle
given them, sufficient, whereby to perform their obedience, which is only
Christ, for an insufficient principle had been a sufficient excuse for them. 4.
How did some of them perfect the Law, and judged the circumsion and was Jews
inwardly and had praise of God, if not by Christ. 5. How could they clearly see
the invisible things of God, but by Christ the Son, seeing it is said, none
knows the Father, but the Son* and he to whom the Son reveals him, and though
these invisible things are clearly seen in or through the things that are made
yet not without that which is to be known of God* manifest in them, which God
had showed unto them, which gave them an eye, or understanding to see his
invisible power and Godhead in these things.

And thus I have gone through all these things in thy book, which deserve any
consideration, so far as they relate to us, and our (...), the other pages in
thy book being spent almost wholly in provi^^ that, which none of us deny, nor
any called Christians that I know of (...) thou setst up a man of straw; to
create work unto thy self to knock (...) down as to prove that Christ is
outwardly come in the flesh, and suffered and died, and offered up himself and
his body, and life, unto God, for a sacrifice of atonement, all which the
Scriptures approve better then thee, and who among Christians deny it, but
under all this, it may appear, that thou secretly labors to prove that the
Name of Jesus Christ, Redeemer and Savior belongs only, to the word, as it was
manifest in that particular body and form of man, born of the Virgin Mary, but
no to him as manifest in the Saints, which both contradicts the Scripture
Testimony, and also thy own words elsewhere, who speaks of Christ within, yea
of his being formed within and though we do wi^lingly grant that the word, as
it became manifest in that flesh, and form of man, and assumed un^o it, the
seed o` Abraham, is called and indeed is Jesus Christ, yet we may not limit nor
confine the Name on^y to him as manifest in the outward, for as he is inward^y
revealed in us he is called Christ, yea by him, even Jesus Christ, were all
things (...) said (...) Apostle

But I cannot before I have done with thee but take notice how in diverse
places, thou disingeniously represents our (...), and words, flinging thy
scoffs and jears at the blessed and (...) seed, cal^ing it a strange
allegorical mistical Christ, but if he be so (...) unto thee^ it is because
thou have spent thy eye^ upon his light in thee which would have given thee,
true acquaintance with him.

But dare thou deny it, is there not a divine and elect seed in the Saints by
which he is formed in them, and lives in them, and is h^ not crucified in some
and raized, or arizen in others and how could this be, but in respect of the
^eed, for as he is in the Father, and was with the Father, before the World
began, he cannot be said to be crucified nor raized. And oh how b^dly and
disingeniously thou represents us as saying* That it is the seed that it is
only to be rede^med (...), as being under the Law, sin, condemnation, Whereas
we say indeed, that the seed suffers under sin and is to be raised from under
it, yet the soul, yea and the who^e man is also to be saved within; and through
the s^ed whoever believe in Christ and are joined to him, but we do not say,
the seed is condemned, unless by such a spirit as thine, as drowns it calling
it but a Natural thing, as the Jews condemned Christ calling him but a Man, the
Carpenters Son and then in thy ignorance and envy thou asks, if in every man,
this seed or Christ is not saved? does it remain for ever in some under
condemnation? I answer nay, for though for a time it suffer, yet in the time
appointed of God, it is raised up in all, even the most ungodly, over all their
ungodliness to minister in them, the Wrath and righteous judgment of the Lord
against them, without mercy, as thou will find by sad experience if in time
thou repent not which I wish from my heart, even that repentance may be given
thee, for all thy enmity and hard speeches against him and his truth. Again how
grossly and disingeniously thou wrests the words of some of us, viz. That Christ
was sometime preached a^ crucified, to the Jews but more generally a light to
the Gentiles* as if there were one Christ (says thou) to wit, a crucified
Christ, preached to the Iew^, and another Christ, to wit, a Light enlightening
every man that comes unto the World, prea^hed unto the Gentiles, but this is a
most piteous and abominable wresting of these words aforesaid, which do not
import 2 Christ's but but one and the same in a twofold way of manifestation, or
appearance, and though Prophets and Apostles preached him, as in the form of a
man, yet they preached him also, and that more generally, as a light to the
Geutiles, yea and to Jews also. Thou would also persuade simple people as if we
did separate the benefit of Christ's outward coming from inward, while thou
speaks, after this manner* How are you thus iniferably be beguilded to preach
up the Light enlightening ^vory man, that comes in^o the World for (...) Christ
to cry up a light within, (...) cry down the blood without, to preach him as an
example, to cast out the (...) but though we preach him as the sight that
enligh^ens (...), and cry up the light within, yet we cry not down the blood
without, no^ in preaching him, as an example do we deny the a^^onement (...)
are bu^ ^hy false and groundless insinuations, and as touc^^ng our preaching
him, as the light that enlightens every man that comes in^o the world, that all
though him might believe and so be saved thou (...) as well have bespoke John,
after that manner, saying O^ thou miserable begui^ed John, who preaches the
light that enlightens every man that com^s into the world to be Christ* for so
he preached him and so did others.

I shall yet take notice of two or three passages (...) in thy book, and so
leave it, for to trace and follow thee in all thy confusions and dark
imaginations, were neither worth the travel, nor the time, for by these few
hints, the weakest of any true judgment, may perceive, what a bulk of
confusion thy book is.

Page 27. thou says, That light and salvation of the Gentiles prophesied ^f 49.
6. Isa. is not said, I will give it, the light that enlightens every man that
comes into the world, for that was already given to every man* as he came into
the worl^, but it is, I will give, speaking of one to be given, that which was
not actually given, for a lig^ht to the Genttles, but this is a most weak and
shallow manner of reasoning, for though Christ was given in some measure, for ^
light from the beginning, and even in the darkest times, yet afterward he came
to be given in a greater measure, of light and manifestation, so here is not
another light, then was given at first, but a further measure of the same, for
in ^he beginning was the word Christ Jesus, and in him was life, and the life
was the light of men. And thus all thy other empty and shallow reasonings may
be answered in many other place, which speaks of Christ as a light, a Prophet
etc. which thou would confina only to him, as outwardly come* as particularly
that of Moses, a Prophet shall the Lord your God raise unto you, like unto
(...), which thou would only hint and confine to his outward coming and
becoming many in the land of Judea, for otherwise thou says, it could not be
said, that he should be raised up l^ke unto Moses, for Moses was a man. But the
light and power, and spirit within, is not a man, as Moses was. But if we go to
scan too narrowly upon this word like unto me, as if it did import every way a
like, it will not answer thy intent, for Christ, even as man in diverse weighty
circvmstances was unlike to Mos^s, Christ was bo^n of a Virgin, so not Moses,
Christ never sinned so not Moses, and many others might be named, but if thou
say Moses and Christ were like to one another, in that likeness, understood by
the spirit, so say I, which yet is not confined simply or only to his manhood,
for even Christ in spirit was and is raised up like unto Moses insomuch that as
Moses was given of God as an outward deliverer of the out^ard Israel, from out
of Egypt, and from under Pharaoh in the outward, destroying their enemies
without, and leading them through a red sea and wilderness outward into a good
outward land, and giving them Laws and Precepts from God etc. So Christ even in
Spirit is given of God as an inward deliverer, of the inward Israel from out of
spiritual Egypt, and from under spiritual Pharaoh destroying their inward and
spiritual Enemies, leading them through an inward and spiritual sea and
wilderness* into a good spiritual land, giving them spiritual Laws and Precepts
from God, and stoning them to death with a spiritual stone, who do not observe
them, and is this no likeness at all intended by the spirit of God, as the
sense of these words of Moses? How has thy prejudice blinded thee in this and
many other things?

Last of all I cannot but reprove thee, for thy disingenuous and deceitful
insinua ion in the last page of thy Book, in these words. How much sor^r
punishment shall he be thought worthy of that has trod under foot the Son of
God, and counted the blood of the Covenant an unholy thing (...) the blood of
any ordinary man ^r beast. But did thou ever read or hear from any of us, as if
we counted the blood of Christ, even in the outward, as the blood of any
ordinary man, or beast? or thinks thou to infer such a conclusion from our
principle as because we say, Christ the light within us is precious and saving,
that therefore we account his blood as the blood of any ordinary man, or beast,
but I must tell thee thy inference is bad and deceitful and does no wise follow
from our principle, as is evident from what is aforesaid, yea the spilt blood
of his Saints* and their death is of great account with the Lord, when brought
to it through the violence of men, acted by Satan, and much more the blood of
him, who as a Lamb offered up himself without spot to God, as a sacrifice of a
sweet smell who was delivered for our offenses, and rose again for our
justification.

G. K.
Writ 7. 2. mo, 1670.
Here follows Robert Gordon's answering and confuting himself; some of his
manifest Contradictions; to his Principles being insert, in his own words: And
the Pages of his Book noted where they are.
R. Gs. Principles.
GOd man, in whom all things pertaining to man's redemption, etc. were
transacted not in our persons or within us, but in his crucified body without
us, before any good wrought in us. He has already subdued all things, finished
trasgression, made an end of sin, page 3. and 4.

R. G's Contradiction.
The mystery of Christ by his spirit dwelling in his Saints, called in the holy
Scripture, Christ within you, whereby God works in us, etc. God working all
things in us by Christ, page 4. his Spirit working all their works in them,
page 5.

Observation.
See his manifest contradictions: How is sin and transgression finished and
made an end of without man, while no good is wrought in them? And seeing God
works or transacts all things in Believers by the mystery of Christ and his
holy spirit within, and all their works in them; how is all done and finished
without them before any good is wrought in them?

R. G.
Some pretend so much zeal for this mystery of Christ, the operation of the
Spirit of God in themselves, that they deny the mystery of God in the flesh of
Christ, page. 5.

Contradiction.
The mystery Christ within you, whereby God works in us through faith the fruit
and effect of the work already wrought, etc. Christ within us whereby through
faith we have evidence in our selves, etc. page 4.

Observation.
We cannot too much own, or be over much zealous for the mystery of Christ
within, or the work of God through his spirit within us: nor thereby deny the
mystery of God in the flesh of Christ, or the effect and benefit of his
sufferings in his body, as falsely is implied and insinuated against us, since
that in owning Christ in the mystery, we cannot but own the evidence thereof.

R. G.
In the crucified body of Christ perfected and wrought at once Redemption,
Justification and Reconciliation, finished and completed in Christ for us,
page 13. not in our persons, page 4.

Contradiction.
He was delivered for our offenses, he was raised again for our justification.
O remember the work of regeneration is to be wrought within thee, page 9.

Observation.
If Redemption, Justification, etc. be not to be fulfilled by Christ in man, or
not in their persons: what are you redeemed ^^stified or regenerated) from or
out of: Surely not from iniquity or sin, as true believers were; and then you
hypocriss ^in is remaining in your persons, foa all your pretenses of being
redeemed, justified, etc. without. But take thy contradiction. O remember the
work of regeneration i^ is to be wrought within thee,

R. G.

He was made sin for us, that we might be made the righteousness of God in him.
He mentions not any consideration, qualification or work wrought, or to be
wrought in any man by any light or spirit whatsoever [A gross errour] but
singlely and solely upon the account of the active and passive obedience of the
man Jesus, etc. page 12. in the crucified body, justification, etc. finished,
completed for us, page 13.

Contradiction.
Who seeing the travel of his soul, was satisfied that he might make it
effectual within every man, that should come to God through him; he counted to
his Apostles the word of reconciliation as his Ambassadors in his steed to
beseech men to be reconciled to God. Work out your salvation, page 12.

Observation.
But first, Were the Saints made the righteousness of God in Christ, without
any inward qualification or work of his light or spirit? What a gross error,
contradiction and sin-pleasing doctrine is this! Is not this the Priests very
notion of imputation, while men are corrupt and sinful in themselves, while
they neither partake of the divine nature nor divine image in themselves; And
then, Secondly, what need was there for the Apostle to besee^h them to be
reconciled to God, or to work out their salvation, if it was already wrought
and finished without them before any good was wrought in them?

R. G.
The Lord does not direct man to that light in his conscience that showed him
his loss, nor to light and power etc. But promises him another kind of Savior.

Contradiction.
A great mystery, God manifest in the flesh, etc. He alone, and none else then
the very Word; the love of the Father must be this great undertaker, etc. (viz.
for man) page 20.

Observation.
See his manifest falsehood and contradiction: For God the very word or love of
the Father, which does redeem, deliver and save the soul, are not of another
kind then the Light and Power: But the same divine Light and Power, by which
the promised Seed, did, and does bruise the Serpents head, and overcome him,
that man might be redeemed from the hand of his enemy.

R. G.
The worker of the Redemption could not be the light enlightening every man,
etc, page 21,

Contradiction.
[Yet] the very word (page 20.) God manifest in flesh. p. 18.

Observation.
Here his gross error and contradiction, in denying Christ, the Word and
Redeemer, to be that light that enlightens every man, and yet the very word
does redeem and save: And was it not the Word that was with God that was the
true Light, that enlightens every man coming into the world? See Io. 1. 1. 4, 9.

R. G.
Redemption, and all things already wrought, purchased, etc. for us in the
crucified body; not within us, but before any good wrought in us, page 3, 4, 5,
without the help of any thing to be wrought in us, page 20,

Contradiction.
He (to wit Christ) ever lives: Mark, this man ever lives to make
intercession for them. O bear with me a little, not satisfy your selves until
you have a real evidence of your being particularly redeemed by experimentally
witnessing the Living power of truth in your inward parts, page 7.

Observation.
Note his contradiction here. For first, if all things be already wrought in
the crurified body, what does he interceed for? Is it for that which God cannot
justly withold (if this be true) Secondly, are all things already wrought
without the help of any thing to be wrought within: And yet we must have a real
evidence of our part^cular redemption by the living power of truth in our
inward parts. See how he has confuted himself herein.

R. Gs. Erroneous and envious Principle.
That such as preach and print up the light inlightening every man that comes
into the world to be he (to wit Christ) reject him, and set at naught the
stone, etc. page 32.

Contradiction.
This is the Christ to whom John came to bear witness, and there is not
another; he is the word made slesh, page 31, 32. the word was not converted
into flesh, but remained the word still, page 22.

Observation.
This man preaches up that in one place to be the Christ, which in another
place he preaches down or denies it to be: For that Christ that John came to
bear witness, to that was the word (that became flesh and tabernacled in them)
was the true light that enlightens every man that comes into the world
mentioned before (Ioh. 1.) But this R. G. Further shows his Self-confutation,
Enmity, and Antichristian spirit against the true Christ, who is the light.
See here

R. G. his Antichristian doctrines against the universal light and power of
God and his Son, Io. 1. chapter
Viz. 1. That the spirit that publishes, that the light that enlighteneth
every man that comes into the world is the true Christ, is a snare carrying
death in the bosom of it, page 10. 2. That the light that enlightens every man
that comes into the world, is not he (to wit Christ) page 20. 3. That the
worker of redemption could not be the light and power, page 21. 4. That the
bearer away of iniquity cannot be a mere spiritual Christ, altogether light and
power within, page 22. 5. That the true Christ, man's only Savior and
Redeemer, and the light and salvation of the Gentiles prophesied of Esa. 49. 6.
is not the light that enlightens every man that comes into the world, page 26.
27. 6. That the unbelieving Jew who rejected Christ, yet had a clearer sight of
him then they have who assert that the light that enlighteneth every man that
comes into the world is he, and that such are wholly ignorant, page 29. 7. That
none of the Prophets ever witnessed the light that enlighteneth every man that
comes into the world to be the true Christ, page 32, 33. 8. That they deny the
Lord that bought them, who set the light that enlightens every man to be the
true Christ and Savior, page, 40. 9. That such are miserably beguiled, who
preach up the light enlightening every man that comes into the world for the
true Christ, page 37.


R. Gs. Contradictions to his Principles before cited.
He is Jesus Christ the same, yesterday, to day, and for ever without beginning
or end of days, he is the word by which the world is made; yea, of the Son it
is said, thou Lord in the beginning have laid the foundation of the earth, and
thus he is the wisdom and power of God, page 23. This is the Christ, to whom
John came to bear witness, and not another, he is the word, page 31, 32.

Redemption is see^ by the light of the glorious Gospel shining in our hearts,
page 25. Old Simeon was a devout man, obedient to the light in his conscience,
he waited for the consolation of Israel, and it was revealed to him by the holy
Ghost, Luke 2. 17. through it in himself he waited the appointed time, etc.

Observation.
Christ said, I am the light of the world, Io. 8. 12. chapter 12. 46. and chapter 3.
19. and that was the true light that lights every man that comes into the
world; Io. 1. 1. (read on) and that light which brings to see Redemption, and
revealed the consolation of Israel, to wit, salvation by Christ was his light
within, wherein Simeon and others of the holy men of God waited, and this was a
light of the glorious Gospel or power of God shining in the hearts, etc.

R. Gs. Principle.
That the light in our consciences that shows good and evil, is not given for
righteousness, nor able to reveal or give life (any more then the law written
in Tables of Stone.) p. 11.

R. G's. Contradiction.
[Yet] Old Simeon was obedient to the light in his conscience, etc. Redemption
is seen by the light shining in our hearts, etc. (as before.)

Observation.
Then the light in the conscience is given for righteousness (if to be obeyed)
for it manifests evil, and leads out of darkness, and sin where it is obeyed,
and every one that does truth comes to the light, that his deeds may be
manifest that they are wrought in God, Io. 3. wherefore the light in the
conscience is given for righteousness: and the path of the Just is a shining
light, and the life that was the light of men is above and before the Letter or
Law written in tables of stone, as to giving of life.

R. G.
God said to Adam, in the day thou eatest thereof thou shall die (it could not
be revoked) who could fulfill the requirings of Wrath and satisfy? not Light
and Power, etc. But he who trod the Wine. Press of his Fathers wrath alone, P.
19. 20.

R. G's. Contradiction.
The Chastisements of our Peace were upon him, etc. p. 21.

Observation.
Mark, here, Wrath and Chast^sements are two differing things, and differ in
the execution; as Chastisement is in love to Gods People, who receive the
Atonement, but Wrath and Vengeance due to Rebellion; and is to come upon them
whom he will tread down in his anger, and trample in his fury, even in the
Wine Press of his wrath, as Isai. 63. Now it appears, this R. G. takes this, as
Christ's stopping (or treading down) the Fathers wrath, (as his words import)
wherein he is greatly mistaken; for it is rather an executing of his wrath, and
revenge upon the wicked or Persecutors, whom he will trample in his fury for
the deliverance of his own Seed, and ransomed ones: And this Christ who is both
the wisdom, light, and power of God, can, and will do, by whose power also
salvation for sin and death, is witnessed in them that believes in the Divine
Light and Power, which is able to give us all things pertaining to life and
godliness, 2. Pet. 1. 3.

R. G.
Redemption is a Mystery, which by the Principles of right reason, cannot be
discerned.

Contradiction.
But is seen by the light of the glorious Gospel shining in our hearts, p. 25.

Answer.
Right reason does spring from the true light that shines in the heart, and
the good that this light teaches and shows is reasonable or consistent with
right reason, however this man seems to decrie right reason; in some degree
therein resembling Lod. Muggleton, (the false witness) who says Reason is the
Devil. But this R. G. again in Contradiction to himself, seems to set up right
reason, to justify his Principle, as where he says, p. 2^. concerning Mary,
that the light in her Conscience, is not the Son called Jesus, conceived in her
Womb; Surely that agrees not to right reason ^aith he. But surely, if he deny
the light of the Son of God to be in her Conscience, because of his Conception,
or taking on him Flesh in the Virgins womb, he might as well deny and oppose
his Divinity; for (...) was not limited into that comp^ss, as not to be in her
Conscience, nor was the Son of God and his light to be under such a limitation
(either as to time or place) as a finite creature, for his outgoings were from
of old, from everlasting, Micah 5. 2.

Here follows a further Account of some passages taken out of R. Gordons Book,
wherein his Confession to the Truth (professed by us as to the work of the
power and spirit of God within) and his erroneous Contradictions to the same,
are set opposite, that his self Confutation and breaking the neck of his own
Cause, may be obvious to every (...) Reader.
R. G. his confessing to truth. R. G. erroneously contradicting.
R. G. p. 6. First there is a spirit of Error, ( a) and its work is to deceive,
and its end to destroy such in whom it rules, and its deceit is seen under
this fair Covering, a pretending to the imputed ( b) righteousness of Christ,
pleading a faith in his Death and Sufferings, interest in the satisfaction and
atonement made to God through his blood, but under all this, retaining the
serpents ( c) nature, In their soul preserving alive in themselves unmortified
corruptions bearing dominion ( c) over them, ( d) O be not so easily decieved,
God will not be thus mocked, he sees not as man sees, ( e) he tries the heart
and reins. Know of a truth, such as you sow, such shall you reap; to whom you
yield your selves servants to obey, his servants you are, whether of ^in unto
death, ( e) or of obedience unto rightousness; and on the day of the Lord every
Kingdom shall have its own, on the day of that wonderful severation, when the
Lord shall judge the world by the man Christ Jesus, every thing shall be
severed to be for ever included in that state whether of light or darkness into
which it was sown, according to that righteous proceeding of the son of man,
Matt. 25. He shall s^y to the sheep on his right hand, Come ye blessed of my
Father inherit the Kingdom* But to the Goa^s on the left hand, depart from me
ye cursed, and on that day your supposed coverings though of the imputed ( f)
righteousness of Christ, your high pretenses, though to his death and
sufferings; your crying Lord, Lord, will not shelter you from the wrath of the
Father, you being wholly altogether of the nature of those Goats on Christ's
left hand, though pretending to the Sheeps clothing. Oh! hear with me a little
to plead with you in tender compassion to your immortal souls, that you might
be persuaded; Yes, entreated to inquire a little into this matter, not
satisfying your selves to say that you believe there is a Redemption ( g)
already purchased you in Christ, until through a living faith in your selves (
h) you have a real evidence of your being particularly redeemed by experimental
witnessing the living power * of the ( i) Truth in your inward parts, which in
words you outwardly profess, Consider the words of our Lord to Nicodemus,
Except a man be born again ( k)he cannot inherit the Kingdom of God, there
lies an impossibility in this thing, he places not Goats, remaining such in
their state, in the same place with Sheep; there is a great gulf between these
two: They are of two contrary natures; Two opposite States and Kingdoms
prepared for them. Therefore without being changed, without being in your minds
renewed, translated out of darkness into sight, without dying to the old Nature
of Sin, and rising in the new nature of Righteousness. And so Christ ( l)
formed within you, you cannot inherit this Kingdom, because without this real
change wrought in some measure within you through the Operation of the Spirit
of God within ( m) there is only a dawbing of the old Sepulcher, while
rotteness is ^till within, a talking of being justified through the Redemption
already purchased in Christ, without wi^nessing the Life, Power, and Virtue of
the thing it self within.

(n) Therefore I do exhorts thee (...) Spirit in thy mind thou art subjected
to, for as many as are led by the Spirit of God are the Sons of God; and if any
man have not the spirit of Christ, ^he is none of his: ^o that it will not be
enough to say that Jesus Christ dyed for sinners, and that his righteousness is
imputed to thee, as altogether from without thee: O remember the work of
Regeneration is to be wrought within thee.

R.G erroneously contradicting
R. G. (a) All things pertaining to man^ Redemption, were transacted in God-man
(Christ) not in our persons, nor within us, but in his crucified body without
us, before any good (b) wrought in us; God having already wrought all things
for us, in the body of Christ, as being our rightousness. p. 3, 4.

(c) He has already subdued all things, finished transgression, and made an
end of sin, abolished condemnation and death, and so has for ever in himself
completed the work of Redemption, etc. with God for us. p. 4.

(d) To bear my testimony to the Redemption and Rightousness already purchased
in his crucified body for u^, the son buried our sins in his grave, all things
are finished, sin, death and the flesh in the body of Christ, p. 5. 16.

(e) It is a mystery of the Gospel, the believer to be pure and beautiful as in
Christ, while weak in many things in himself* in his body he has a law of sin,
but in the Lord he has put it off, as he walks by sight he is in the Earth, in
Labors, in Groaning, warfare, and Imperfections, etc. p. 16. (f) The Law, Sin,
Death, charged upon his Crucified body he buried them in his Grave, thus
abolished Sin out of the sight of God, p. 39.

(g) Redemption, etc. already wrought, purchased in his Crucified body (for us)
without us, p. 4.

(h) The light in the Conscience is not able to reveal or give life, p. 11.

(h) There is a Spirit in some that declares that we are Redeemed, Justified,
Saved, and made Righteous, and accepted with God by the work of the Spirit * of
God wrought within us, p. 11.

(i) What ever Spirit shall declare Christ now coming, or coming to within us,
to Reconcile, to Atone, to Redeem us, etc. is no other than a Denier of Jesus
our Savior, notwithstanding its high pretenses to light and power, and Spirit
within, p. 15. 16.

(k) But know thou, O Man, that that Doctrine how misterious soever in show,
that teaches Redemption to be by Operation of the Spirit within us, and not by
that alone * Operation of God in the man Christ Jesus is, it may be agreeable
to man's reason, but a fearful co^tradiction to that blessed Mystery of Grace,
p. 17.

(l) Under this Mental Reservation, the seed, the light, the nature of the Dove
in me, is he the Christ, etc. but is this a form of sound words, page 31.

(m) Come down from the heights of your reason, to believe your Redemption
already finished the law of sin and death already abolished, p. 3. 7. through
what he did and suffered without you, without respect to any works wrought, or
to be wrought (n) within you, by any light whatsoever. p. 42.

(o) The work of Redemption is already (...) at once in the Crucified b^dy
without us, p. 21. 23. The Ope^^^ion of the Spirit of Christ within us (...)
Redeem (...) p. 23.

Thus far R. G. has shown himself one while like a Quaker (so called) having
gotten many of their words, another while like a Presbyterian, or Independent*
showing his self-contradiction and instability. And what may the Reader think
of him, but that he has gathered and learned something from the Quakers, or
out of their Books [though he was never of us.] However like a perverse
Apostate he chiefly smites at them, in his enmity chiefly to the injury of his
own Soul and Conscience, who for all his opposition, cannot wholly forget, and
drive the Quakers principles out of his mind, but is forced to confess to the
truth of them to his own confusion and overthrow; And it is remarkable that the
most of his Pamphlet is confu^ed; But where he acts the part of a Quaker, (so
called) whom he further imitates in this wise, (viz.) R. G. Christ's Death and
Sufferings, his Resurrection and Righteousness will not avail thee, thou
remaining in thy self wholly unchanged, unsanctified by and through the
operation of the Spirit of Christ within thee, whereby they may become of use
to thee, Thou wast dead in Sins and Trespasses, and remains so still, thou wast
a child of wrath as well as others, and thou art so still, etc. [And in his 35
page he goes on thus, viz] What will an Historical faith ^s of things
altogether without, avail thee, while thou have not the evidence within thy
self, by a lively faith of thy being redeemed through the Redemption that is in
him? A ^^attering hypocritical extolling of Christ in his Offices, as King,
Priest, and Prophet without thee, while thou deniest him in the exercise of
these Offices within thee, by the Operation of his Spirit, etc. And this is thy
own condition R. G. as appears by many passages in thy Book, contrary to what
here thou have confessed, as may plainly be seen in comparing thy
contradictions before; and who but one presumptious and impudent, would have
appeared thus public as thou h^^t done, to confute others* (and to undervalue
and oppose the sufficiency of the Light, Power, and Operation of Christ within,
as to Redemption, Salvation, and Justification, etc.) with such a heap of
darkness and confusion as thou have vented, who yet otherwhiles art made to
confess to the Operation of the Power and Spirit of Christ within, whose Light
is set over the head of all thy Darkness, Deceit and Enmity, and over all such
Backs^iders as are in the same spirit of Enmity and Opposition with thee: such
as R^. Cobbet, Elizabeth Atkins (and Rob. Rich, who is of a Ranting Principle)
[to whom we may add Muggleton, or his railing against us;] who have spread
abroad their confused malicious P^mphlets, with their lies and slanders against
us, wherein they do but gratify malicious spirits, Apostates, and Ranters. And
seeing that Michael Stantcliff (who came some years amongst us, professing the
Truth with us, and owning the light within, and to some yet does formally seem
as if he were a Quaker, which appea^ance no doubt he has found to make for his
Interest,) yet is turned into so much dimness, darkness, and enmity against the
People called Quakers, as to opprove of this Rob. Go^don his Pamphlet (^iled, A
Testimony to the true Savior) as being an Ingenious clear Piece, and that
which we could never get through, etc. As also, to help to convey or spread
them abroad (against those that Preach the true light that enlighten^ every man
that comes into the world to be Christ, etc.) R. G* intending chiefly the
people called Quakers, against whom he has insinuated diverse forgeries and
slanders; Wherefore we say to thee M. Stantcliff, be ashamed, and repent of thy
approving and countenancing such a bundle of Confusion against the truth, and
(against an innocent People whom thou once own^d^t) remember from whence thou
art fallen, and how thou persistest in enmity and prejudice against Truth and
us, least the Lord cut thee off, and thou end thy days in trouble and anguish;
we have desired and sought thy good, though thou have rewarded us evil for
good: And now we wish thy Repentance, and pray the Lord forgive thee, that thou
may not end thy days, and perish in thy Perverseness and gainsaying.

Here follows a brief account of some places of Scripture sent to Robert Gordon
by Gawin Longworth: R. G. his Answer to them.
Ioh. 1. (from 1. verse forward) in the beginning was the Word.

12. chap. ver. 46* I am come a light into the world.

15. chap. ver. 5. I am the vine, ye are the branches.

Romans 8. 10. If Christ be in you, etc.

1. Cor. 1. 24. Christ the power of God, and the wisdom of God.

2. Cor. 13. 3^* Seeing you seek experience of Christ speaking in me.

Tit^^ 2. 14. Who gave himself for us that he might redeem us from all
iniquity, etc.

1. Ioh. 5. 12. He that has the Son has life.

Chap. 4. v^r. 4. Greater is h^ that is in you, then he that is in the world.

Robert Gordons Answer to these Scriptures, viz.
I Have considered the Scriptures thou mentioned, and I find that in none of
them it is testified who the true Christ our only Savior is; but what he is
through the operations of his spirit in Believers, called therefore the
Anointing within, or Christ within, but these operations of his spirit within
are no where in Scripture called the Lord's Christ our only Savior. And if
thou own no other Mediator, Christ or Savior, then what is described in these
Scriptures thou mentions; then necessarily thou disowns the Lord Jesus Christ
of Nazareth, a man approved of God, etc. Thus far R. G. telling us of the
writings of that enlightened man, Jacob Behm.

Observe. Here the ^enour and tendency of R. G's. Answer, how Antichristian it
is; he appears here plainly as owning another Mediator, Christ or Savior, then
that Christ that said, I am come a light into the world, I am the vine, etc.
(and we ask, was not he Jesus of Nazareth?) and of whom it is testified in
Scripture, Christ in you, Christ the power and wisdom of God. He that has the
Son has life, who gave himself for us, that he might redeem us from all
iniquity, etc. But R. G. does not own this Christ to be the Lord's Christ, or
Jesus Christ of Nazareth, but he must have some other Christ then this Christ,
that is described in those Scriptures before (but dare he say that Jacob Behm.
owns his doctrine herein?) for this Christ who is the Word, the Light, the
Christ in Believers, the power and wisdom of God, speaking in Sain^s. R. G.
deems but as operations of the Spirit, and not Christ the Operator, Savior or
Redeemer; wherein he is greatly mistaken, and has outrun himself besides any
right aim: For Christ, as the Word, the ^rue Light, the power and wisdom of
God, the Redeemer from all iniquity, and as in his Saints, the giver of life
and victory over the world, etc. He is the true Operator of God, and the Author
of Faith, the worker out of Sin, the Savior and Redeemer from iniquity (and so
an Operator as such) he is given for a leader, for light, life, and salvation
to all that believe in his light, which will shine, live, prevail, and prosper
against all the darkness, dark spirits, and enmity which oppose it.

Something further added.
HEreby it may appear, and be very obvious to every impartial Reader, how
disingeniously, injuriously; and falsely this R. Gordon has dealt by us called
Quakers, whom he chiefly smi^es at (chiefly for our so much owning and
preaching the true light that enlightens every man) having, in many things he
has writ, neither given a true account of our principle, nor stated our words,
nor the Authors, nor cited our Books or Pages, that it might be seen how he
has wronged us worse then many of the Priests have done, insinuating several
falsehoods against us, which were never our principles, and then making war
against them, and drawing false inferences and consequences upon us, which have
neither natural dependence, nor any relation to our principles; as may be seen
at large in his bundle of impertinencies and confusion. And whereas R. G.
several times confesses Christ and his spirit to be within us, revealing and
evidencing within us, what God has wrought for us in the body of Christ, as
that love God commended to us in his Son, through his suffering and death,
according to his 1. 4. and 23. pages. Now mark herein he has in some degree
assented to the truth of our principle, though to his own confusion; for that
it follows, that our preaching Christ and his Spirit in the true Believers,
does not oppose nor make void his sufferings without, but evidence and make
known the benefit and living effects thereof within, and bring both into the
fellowship of Christ's suffering, and to a conformity unto his death. But this
R. G. in contradiction to himself, like a malicious injurious person,
insinuates against us the dividing and opposing Gospel truths one to another,
and a denying the mystery of God in the flesh of Christ, as a matter of any
necessity to redemption, reconciliation, etc. falsely adding these words, viz.
R^ck^ing to accomplish this in their own bodies each for himself, through
obedience to the law or light in his conscience, etc. page 5. This is a false
conclusion put upon us, and contrary to what this man has confessed before:
For its not of our selves, but God that works in us to will and to do by his
spirit and power, which evidenceth and reveals in us life and salvation, by
Jesus Christ, who is our Savior and Redeemer, and by him and in him has God
appeared to reconcile us to himself, who has wrought all our works in us, Isa.
26. 12. and to this we testify in his Son (who is made unto us wisdom,
righteousness, sanctification and redemption) and against all such dark spirits
and opposers of his light and work within, as this our Opposer is, who says
that God man in his crucified body without us, and before any good wrought in
us, has already subdued all things, finished transgression, made an end of
sin, abolished condemnation and death, has for ever as our head in himself
completed the work of redemption, reconciliation with God for us, etc. God
having already finished, wrought and accomplished all things for us in the body
of Christ, page 3, 4, 5, 9, 12, 13. And further he adds, page 26. v^z. having
already vanquished in his crucified body, and buried in his grave sin and
death, and all the powers that were against us: But in contradiction to h^s
asserting all these things as wrought in his body, he lays it otherwhiles upon
purchase, as redemption, reconciliation, righteousness, etc. being already
purchased for us in his crucified body without you, without respect to any
works wrought, or to be wrought within you by any light whatsoever. Thus far R.
G. page 4, 5, 9, 23, 42. But to go round again in contradiction to this, of all
this being wrought, accomplished, and purchased without in his crucified body
without respect to his light and work within, R. G. confesses and tells us of
God working all things in us by Christ, the mystery of Christ within, and the
operations of his spirit working all their works in them, p. 4, 5. From whence
it then follows, that all is not wrought and accomplished without them, nor
ought the work or light of Christ within thus to be disrespected as this man
most blindly does; neither is men's sin and death either vanquished or buried in
the grave with Christ's body without; for sin and death reigns in and over all
men till they be quickened and renewed by the spirit of Christ within, and
raised up out of sins and trespasses,: and in this sense we own true believers
and sanctified ones to be purchased unto God, and hereby an everlasting
inheritance obtained or purchased, and that God has purchased his Church with
his own blood, Act. 20. 28. And that such as were a chosen or purchased people
or generation, were a royal Priesthood, a holy Nation, a peculiar People to
show forth the praise of him who had called them out of darkness into his
mavelous light, 1 Pet. 2. 9. So such did not (...) and oppose the light
within, nor disrespect its work within as to the purchasing and redeeming man
to God; as this blind Opposer has done, whose confusion runs after this
manner, viz. all things are already wrought and completed for us in the
crucified body without (nay) God works all things in us by Christ the mystery,
the operations of the spirit of God works all their works in them: See here how
inconsistent this man's work is, and how he has broke the neck of his own
cause. But for whom does R. G. reckon? has this God-man (as he calls him) or
God and Christ (in union) wrought and completed, or purchased all, as
redemption, salvation, righteousness, etc. was it for all or but for a few? See
his Answer. R. G. page 13. For the sins of the whole world past, present* and
to come, etc. A large confession and latitude to the world, indulging them in
sins to come, as the sin-pleasing professions are wont to do, and further to
hearten them on therein all their days, he reckons God does not see their
sin in them, page 39. And surely they cannot be hindered of salvation for all
this, nor it in justice be detained from them, because its so dearly purchased
and paid for, and wrought wit^ God, by his Son, when no good is wrought in man
(if you believe R. G.) which doctrine tends to make a merry world in their sins
(and not to regard the work of God within) as it has made many hypocrites, and
many such merry also over God's witness or light in them, which would have
wrought good in them, had they owned it to have wrought evil out of them. But
seeing R. G. has run into the Priests and Professors doctrine, in his confused
way and method, maintaining their principle of satisfaction and imputation,
opposing the light and work of Christ or the spirit within as to justification,
redemption, or salvation within.

Let Us first inquire how he states this satisfaction (or work that he thinks
was wrought with God by the man Christ, but not in man) R. G. God said to Adam,
in the day thou eatest thereof thou shall dye, and because he is God it could
not be revoked, the justice of God must stand firm in the execution of this
sentence, he is just and righteous as well as l^ving, justice to be answered to
the full; who could break thorough this stirred up wrath? who could have
answered the requirings of love, and fulfill the requirings of wrath that would
hold man captive in death, and yet satisfy both? Not its light and power in
the man Christ, or the light enlightening every man that comes into the world,
not the word alone, but Jesus Christ partaking of our flesh and blood, as being
the Son of the Virgin Mary, page 19, 20. Note his error in denying the light
to be Christ, and so opposing Christ's Divinity.

Let the impartial Reader judge of this man's confusion and ignorance herein,
in these his distinctions about God and Christ, and between Christ and the
light and power within, not owning the light that enlightens every man to be
Christ, or the Son of God contrary to Scripture; whereas the light that
enlightens every man, is that eternal word that made all things, which to say,
this cannot answer or satisfy love and wrath, is a blasphemous opposing the
omnipotency and power of God, as if he could not satisfy himself in either,
and his sl^ghting and debasing the divine light, and power of Christ in man,
and so undervaluing God, as if he were no Savior, especially while this man
thinks God was so displeased, and his wrath so stirred up, that it would hold
man captive in death, unless Christ as the Son of Mary, should satisfy and
answer this wrath, and undergo this death, another while (in contradiction) it
was as God man that he satisfied, etc. which if he take it to be an eternal
death or wrath, that was threatened on man for disobedience, I ask if Christ did
undergo that either as God or as man, or as both? and dare any say plainly that
God executed wrath and revenge from himself upon his innocent Son, or take
vengeance upon the Son of his love, or could that be an answering of divine
Justice, so to take vengeance on the innocent, and let the guilty go free, with
their sins past, present and to come; and then, if all be if all be thus
wrought and purchased of God by Christ, paid and satisfied for in his crucified
body: and that for the ^ins of the whole world, and in their stead, and that
for their sins past, present and to come: then how can God in justice execute
wrath or revenge on any for sin, if his innocent Son has undergone it and
satisfied it all, and that for all men, for sins past, present, and to come:
And then what manifest contradiction is it for this man to confess to his
intercession, his ever living to make intercession for them that come to God by
him (though this we own) But how does this agree with the doctrine of such a
rigid or severe satisfaction and payment as before implied? For if the Son
endured the Fathers wrath to the full, and thereby stop^ it (for Priests call
it vindictive Justice) does not this ^ender God to be more severe than his Son;
yea, and unjust also: As if a Creditor should keep or leave the Debtor in
prison, and always be interceded to, either for his deliverance or
forgiveness, when his Surety has paid and satisfied to the utmost farthing
that could in the rigor of the law be exacted upon the Debtor; which much less
can be either mercy, forgiveness, or remission: But if it be granted that
forgiveness of sins must be asked at God's hand for Christ's sake, and that man
must repent and be converted, that his sins may be forgiven and blotted out,
and that he may be under God's terms, and under an obligation to believe, obey
and follow the spirit of Christ within, in its inward operations and teachings;
then this confutes this man and all such carnal professors: For all is not done
without, nor^ man absolved or discharged in the Court of Heaven (as Priests use
to say) either from the guilt or punishment of sins past, present and to come,
seeing that all judgment is committed to the Son, and men are not acquitted, by
his sufferings without, either from the obligation or obedience of his law
within, which is that of the spirit or new covenant which is inward, but are
liable to the censure and judgment thereof, if they disobey it, and walk
contrary to the spirit of truth within, wherein we are not without the law to
God, but under the law to Christ. And God is not satisfied with men in their
sins, his wrath being revealed from heaven against all unrighteousness of men,
how ever they may imagine Christ to have satisfied is in their stead, and
removed it out of God's sight.

And further, as to that death that came over Adam in that day he transgressed,
it was not the sentence of eternal wrath and destruction, given and fulfilled
by God, but a death from that innocent life and communion which he had with God
before, as the fruit of his transgression which God foretold, and threatened
them with before, not as from an obligation upon God presently to take full
revenge on man, or to cut him off for ever the same day he transgressed; for
that he did not, neither was his divine justice such an obligation upon him as
to limit him from showing mercy or forgiveness (on repentance) and salvation
without such a rigid payment or severe kind of satisfaction as is supposed; for
he said I am a just God, and Savior, and besides me there is no Savior: and
in his mercy and love to lost man in general, he both promised and gave a seed
to bruise the Serpents head, and to be a ransom, atonement, and most
acceptable and satisfactory sacrifice as a Lamb without spot to God, not as the
subject of wrath or vindictive Justice, but as a sweet smelling sacrifice to
God, and propitiation for mankind, and to be a living example through all, not
only to end the law and sacrifices without, but also to bring the true believer
through, and beyond the ministration of death, condemnation and wrath within,
into peace and union with G^d, who out of his infinite love, sent his Son to
save man from sin and death, whose suffering, sacrifice, mediation,
in^ercession and offices (with the blessed effects thereof within) we own and
confess according to the Scriptures of truth, as inwardly revealed and
evidenced by the spirit, which we do not admit, either o^ sins past to be
unrepented of, nor of sins present to be committed, nor sin ^o come to be
persisted in, however this, or other Opposers and Prof^ssors do sooth and
flatter themselves therein, under their traditional notion, of a satisfaction,
and imputation without them, p. 16. (as after R Gs. q^estions) How can there be
redemption, where conscience ^hargeth of sin, is it not against reason to
believe redemption in another for us while sin is within? To this he thus
answers; To this spirit, I say, who art thou that thus a^gues with God? Which
indeed is no answer nor proof, but a mere s^lly begging of the question, nor
any demonstration that such a belief, that is both contrary to conscience and
the conviction of the light therein, is either true or right in the ground of
it, whereby any are thus credulous either of their being redeemed, saved or
j^stified without them, whilst they lie under the guilt and imputation of sin
in their own consciences, sin being then their burden and bondage, which is
contrary to a redeemed and justified state; but such a blind and dead faith,
and conceit of redemption and justification, as this man has appeared in,
hypocritical Professors are w^nt to sooth up themselves withal in their sins.

And R. G. further adds, p. 1^. viz. Indeed it is a mystery of the Gospel that
man's r^ason cannot comprehend, the believer to be pure and beautiful as in
Christ his head, while weak in many things in himself, in his body (...) ^ath a
law of sin, but in the Lord he has put it off; as he walks by ^ight he is in
the earth, in labors, ingroanings, warefare and imperfections; but as he walks
by faith he is in Christ, walking in rest, in victory and perfection, these ^r^
paradoxes reason cannot fathom.

Answ^^ This man thinks he is gotten beyond reason in his parado^es, which
indeed do appear so contradictory, confused and unreasonable, that every
rational man may see his darkness herein, to conclude the believer in war^ar^,
and imperfections in the body, with a law of sin, while pure, beautiful,
walking in rest, in victory and perfection in Christ his head, which is all
one, as to say he i^ in Christ; and out of Christ, pure and impure, perfect and
imperfect, at the same instant, or (as the hypocritical Priests and Professors
have said) that men are imputatively righteous, and justified, while inherently
and actually sinful and unjust: and yet for all this R. G. makes account in
page 39. that the law, sin and death are so charged on Christ's crucified body,
that sin is purged away out of the sight of God; while yet he does not believe,
h^s people act^^lly ^reed from it, which is corrupt Antinamionisme, but these
and such like paradoxes ^e cannot own, as either reason or truth: For how is
Christ the Believers and Saints head, or they perfect in him, if they be
imperfect or impure in the body? are they not members of Christ? and is not
their faith their victory over sin and death? And is it no* perfection they
have wa^ted and traveled, to be ^e^ewed into the image of the heavenly?
Where Is the new birth, new creature, perfect on, righteousness and true
holiness, so much preached, and testified of, by the holy men of God in the
Scriptures of truth? if men must be reckoned pure, and perfect, and in Christ
when yet they are not washed from their fi^thiness, in which state many are,
when yet they conceit that God counts them pure and j^stified: Bu^ he that j^^t
fieth the wicked, and he that condemns the just they both are abo^ination
before the Lord.

R. G. We find thou have no^ brought forth any new thing as to matter or
substance, in these matters, but art p^^nged in the old dark stuff of Priests
and Professors, who have writ against us, though thou art more confused, and
appearest more malicious against us then many of them ^however thou pretendest
love and bowels* p. 40 which cannot hide thy dissimulation and enmity; and thou
have not methodized nor worded their principles so well as many of them, thou
being confounded and mangled between truth and their corrupt traditional
principles, which we perceive thou do not see the bottom and tendency of,
however* thou think thou art wise, but the devil has blinded thee with
prejudice and conceit, as he has all that take thy part, and spread thy books,
or else thou durst never have brought such a piece of folly, falsehood, and mixed
mangled stuff to public view, as thou have done, who also to show thy
ignorance of redemption thou usest these words, viz* The operation of the
spirit of Christ within us, not to redee^us, p. 23. and Christ came into us by,
the ministration of the spirit not to redeem us, page 38.

Answ. This is contrary to the testimonies of both Prophets and Apostles, who
witnessed the redemption of their souls, from under the bondage and power of
sin and death, so from the hand of the enemy, Psa. 107. 2. David said, draw
nigh unto my soul, and redeem it; ps. 69* ^8. So he did not put redemption afar
off; for the God of Israel was near, whom the people owned for their Savior
and Redeemer from all in^quity, Ps. 130. 7, 8. And as the Apostle exhorted,
grieve not the holy spirit of God, whereby ye are sealed uno the day of redempt
on, Ephesians. 4. 30. So that there was a day of redemption to be expected, unto
which they were sealed by the holy spirit; which redemption was a freedom,
recovery or purchase from all iniquity (which could not be effected without the
operation of the spirit of Christ within, who gave himself for us, that he
might redeem us from all inquity, Titus 2. 14. But this R. G. would impose on
people a faith concerning redemption, reconciliation, and justification, as all
being finished, wrought or purchased without them, without respect to any works
wrought or to be wrought within them, by any light whatsoever, p. 42. See,
Reader, how erroneously he has excluded the work of God and Christ from
within, as to the ransoming or freeing of man from sin, and making him
righteous, and so bringing him into unity, peace, favor and friendship with
God, which is the true sense of redemption, justification and reconciliation,
which are not effected, nor obtained without the operation of the spirit of
holiness within (though Christ's testimony, suffering and example without had a
tendency thereto) 1 Cor. 6. 11. For it was by the spirit of God, that the
Saints were both washed, sanctified and justified, how ever tke Devil and his
Agents endeavor to exclude, and invalidate the inward operations of God,
Christ, or his Spirit.

G. W.

Errata.
Page 1. l. 37. 'for consider read crucify. p. 4. for 1. r. 4. l. 6. for
enl^ghtening, r. enlighteneth. p. 12. l. 27 for any, and. p. 14. l. 1. for is
this, r. is not this, etc. p. 15. l. 38. for no r. not. p. 16. l. 12. for
spent, r. shut. p. 17. l. 39. for hint, r. limit. p. 18. l. 1, for many r. man.
Second part. p. 2. l. 30. for counted. r. committed. p. 8. l. 7. r. Christ now
come, dele to. p. 12. l. 2, for Longworth r. Lawrie.


