THE DEISM OF WILLIAM PENN, And his Brethren, Destructive to the Christian
Religion, Exposed, and plainly laid open.

IN The Examination and Refutation of his late reprinted Book, called, A
Discourse of the General Rule of Faith and Practice, and Judge of Controversy.
Wherein he contendeth* That the Holy Scriptures are not the Rule of Faith and
Life, but that the Light in the Conscience of every Man is that Rule.

By GEORGE KEITH.

LONDON, Printed for Brab. Aylmer at the Three Pigeons against the Royal
Exchange in Cornhill, 1699.

The PREFACE to the Christian Protestant Reader.
Christian Reader,
I Have been concerned more earnestly and amply to treat on this Subject in the
following Treatise, to refute that grand Error of William Penn and his
Brethren, who make it their great Fundamental, that the Light within, with
respect only to its ordinary and common Discoveries given to all Mankind, to
Christians, Jews, Mahometans and Heathens of all sorts, Protestants and
Papists, is the general Rule of Faith and Life to them all: So that all under
these several Denominations, are true and good Christians, and ought to own and
acknowledge one another as Christian Brethren and Members of one Catholic or
Universal Church, if they obey and walk according to the common and ordinary
Dictates thereof, without all superadded Revelation External or Internal of
Christ without, as God and Man in one Person. But their constant Practice does
evidently contradict their Principle, for though they have acknowledged, that
such the Heathens who were or now are obedient to the common Discoveries of the
Light within them, without all Faith in Christ without them, are their
Christian Brethren; and for the same reason they may conclude, Jews and
Mahometans, who are obedient to their Light within to be such, yet generally
they disown all Christian Protestants among whom they live, be they ever so
Just and Sober, and obedient to their Light within them, if they come not under
their Profession and Circumstances to be Christians: And thus as some have well
observed, they Christianise the Heathens, and Heathenise the Christians,
calling them all, the Worlds People, but themselves they call the Children of
Light, the Elect People of God; and say of themselves they are in the Truth,
and none but they and their Deist and Heathen Brethren; and perhaps the
Quietists and Followers of Molinus (whose Book they so much esteem) among the
Papists. This being their Fundamental and Capital Error, and the great Original
and Spring of all their other Errors, that as so many Streams issue and proceed
from it; the which being plainly detected (as by Divine assistance I hope I
have done in the following Treatise) it is greatly to be hoped (to which I join
my earnest and sincere Prayers to God Almighty in the Name of Christ Jesus)
that it may be a means to undeceive and recover from Error many of that People,
if they will or dare give themselves the liberty to read it. The Book called, A
Discourse of the General Rule of Faith and Life, by W. Penn; to which this is
an Answer, was first Printed in the Year 1673, as an Appendix to his part of
the Christian Quaker, and is now again reprinted in this present Year 1699,
which sufficiently shows, that W.P. and his Brethren are not changed, nor
reformed from what they were so long ago; though his and their late Pretenses,
That they own the common Principles of Christianity, and differ not much in
Doctrine from the Church of England, have occasioned some to think them
somewhat Reformed of late; but it is their great Mistake, which the Fallacies
of W.P. and others of his Brethren, by their late Fallacious Creeds, have led
them into. Indeed I did not know but that it was a new Book, so litte had I
read or considered the Contents of it, which by occasion of their reprinting it
this very Year, I have been awakened, and as it were alarumed, to take special
notice of, and strictly to examine, detect and refute, the which, whither
effectually done or not, is left to the free and impartial Judgment of the
Intelligent Christian Protestant Reader. Their printing it at this juncture,
does not a little argue their great Imprudence in laying themselves so open to
be rank Deists, while they at the same time pretend to hold the Christian
Doctrine, that is point blank incosistent therewith, and great boldness that
they are not ashamed in the face of the World to say, and unsay, and to be
professed Deists and Christians at once; which is as great a Chimera or
Impossibility, as for one and the same thing to be Horse and Man at once; I
mean not, one part Horse and another part Man, for such a Monster perhaps is
possible, but to be in all the parts both Man and Horse, without all Redundancy
or Deficiency of either; which as impossible as it is to be in Nature, it is as
impossible that W.P. and his Brethren can be both Deists and true Christians at
once; that they are Deists, the Book to which this is an Answer, does
sufficiently prove: And therefore notwithstanding all their late Pretenses,
till they retract that and their other former Books, true Christians they
cannot be.

ERRATA.
PAge 35. Line 13. read imperfect. p. 43. l. 10. for regulus read regulans. p.
76. l. 2. for Iad r. and. p. 99. l. 12. for 13 r. 3.

The DEISM of William Penn, and his Brethren, Destructive to the Christian
Religion, Exposed, and plainly laid open.
The Introduction.
Showing the great Importance of our knowing what the True Rule of Faith and
Life is: And containing a Retractation of some Unsound and Erroneous Passages
in some of my former Books about the Rule of Faith, yet no-wise so Erroneous as
the Doctrine of W.P. nor being of that Tendency, as his is, to introduce Deism.

Page 3. HE says, Since there are so many Faiths in the World, and perplexed
Controversies about them, that is greatly behooves every Man, if he contend for,
then, first to know the True Faith that overcomes the World. Concerning the
General Rule of Faith and Life, he is pressed to say something from that
weighty Consideration, That Men Perish for want of it, and can no more arrive
at Truth without it, than the distressed Mariner can gain his Port, who Sails
without either Star or Compass. This his weighty Consideration is a plain
Confession, That the not having a right and true understanding of the Rule of
Faith, what it is, is of very dangerous Consequence, even no less than
Perishing and Destruction to all such who want the true Knowledge of it, and
set up another thing in the room of it. It may therefore be very necessary for
W.P. to consider the Matter a little more weightily, that in case he himself
have not the true Knowledge of the Rule of Faith and Life, in what danger he is
of Perishing: And how, (in this his Work, of laboring to bring all People
under a Christian Profession, that give up to believe him, to another Rule of
Faith and Life, than what is the true Rule indeed,) If he persist in so doing,
he will not only bring his own Blood upon himself, but the Blood of many
others, that are and may be mislead by him. And whether he will yet better
consider it or not, which I heartily wish, and pray, that God would be pleased
to open his Eyes, and give him Repentance, and a better Understanding: It is a
plain Case, That the true Knowledge of the true Rule of Faith and Life is very
necessary, yea, so necessary, that the Danger for want of it is Perishing or
Destruction. Yet I mean not, that every Error in Circumstance, about the true
Rule, is of that Danger; or that some loose and indeliberate Expressions, that
some have used in Preaching or Printing, while their Meaning has been more
sound than their Words, even about the RULE, are of that Consequence. It has
happened to some well-meaning People, as it had happened to my self, that they
and I have both spoke and writ unadvisedly: As in some other Matters, so in
this, running along, or rather being carried along with the Stream of some of
the ancient Friends, so called of the Ministry, in asserting, both in Speech
and Print, too frequently, that the Spirit within, meaning the inward Evidence
of the Spirit, as touching the great Matters of the Christian Faith and
Practice, was the principal Rule of Faith and Life, wherein I acknowledge my
Error and great Mistake, and do here particularly retract it, notwithstanding
the general Retractation I have lately made, in my late Book called, G.K' s
Explications and Retractations. But though I was then in an Error, and under a
great Mistake, in my way of wording the Matter, and darkened too much and
clouded in my Understanding in that very Point, yet I crave leave of my Reader
to show, that even then my Error was not Fundamental, nor such as this is of W.
Penn's and his Brethren, whose Error in the Case has carried them to plain
Deism. My Mistake chiefly consisted in this, in confounding the Term Rule of
Faith, with the Term Inward objective Medium, which I ought to have
distinguished, for the Rule of Faith, is not (properly speaking) that formal
object of Faith, called by some, Objectum formale quo, or objective Medium and
Motive of Credibility, but the material Objects of Faith, to wit, all the
Credenda or things in Scripture that ought to be believed, are the Rule of
Faith: And therefore instead of saying, the Spirits inward Evidence and
Testimony was the Rule of Faith, and principal Rule; I should have said, it was
the principal objective Medium of Credibility: Which as I then did believe and
assert, so I do still, and hope never to retract it. And therefore while I
continue adhering to this Persuasion, I remain (as to the main) the same I was
in my Judgment, as when I wrote my former Books touching these Matters; my
chief Bent and Zeal being, against that which I judged a very Erroneous
Opinion, and Hurtful, held by some counted Learned Men, and which I judge still
that so it is, to wit, That the inward Evidence of the Spirit in the Souls of
the Faithful, to the Truths of the Christian Religion, is only Effective and
not Objective; and I pleaded warmly, that the Spirits inward Evidence,
otherwise called Testimony, Witness, Inspiration, Illumination, or Operation in
the Souls of the Faithful, is not only Effective, but Objective also, to wit,
by way of formal Object, or objective Medium, and Motive of Credibility. And
this I reckoned then, and do still, the greatest Certainty and Assurance, that
the Scriptures are of Divine Authority, and infallibly true; wherein I knew,
and still know, I had the best Protestant Authors, both for Piety and solid
Learning, on my side, as also my Feeling, and Experience (to the Praise of
God's Grace I say it) in the Case has confirmed me; though I know some called
Learned Men, who have more of that called Divinity Learning in their Heads,
than in their Hearts, do contradict it; yea, to a Degree of Ridiculing it,
under the Name of Fanaticism and Enthusiasm, not well regarding the Authority
of their worthy and judicious Ancestors, who in the Articles of the Church have
expressly mentioned, the Feeling of the Holy Ghost in his Operations and
Motions. But I erred in calling this either inward Feeling, or the Object of
it, the principal Rule, for properly and rightly speaking, it is not the Rule
of Faith; but the principal Motive of Credibility. That which is only, strictly
and properly speaking, the Rule of the Christian Faith, is the Doctrine of the
Holy Scriptures; especially respecting the great Fundamentals and Essentials
thereof. To give a preference to the inward Operation of the Spirit, and his
writing his Law in the Heart, to the same Law as writ on leaves of Paper; and
to the experimental part of Christianity, above all that can be outwardly told,
or heard, or read. I think no true Christian will deny, but when it is ask^d,
which is the greater Rule, the Inward or the Outward, they compare things that
are not to be compared, that cannot be said to be either the greater Rule, or
the lesser, which is, properly speaking, no Rule at all, but the moving or
impulsive Cause, that moves and inclines me to take the Holy Scriptures to be
my Rule, being infallibly true, and of Divine Authority. And whoever be yet in
the same Mistake and Error that I then was in, God forbid that I should judge
so uncharitably of them, as to conclude they err Fundamentally, for want of not
giving right Names to things; or not having so clear inward Idea's and
Conceptions of them, when ( as to the main) they mean well. I am bold to appeal
to my Books from first to last, whither according to the Strain and Intent, in
all that I have Printed on that Subject, I have not always acknowledged, that
the Doctrine of Christ Crucified, and Remission of Sin by his Blood, and other
Doctrinal Principles of Christianity, were absolutely necessary to be believed
by us for our Eternal Salvation: And that the Doctrine of the Holy Scriptures,
as outwardly conveyed to us, by Preaching or Reading, is the ordinary Means
whereby God works Faith, and Conversion, and Regeneration, in them that shall
be Saved: And that therefore so long as we live, we are not to lay aside either
that, or any outward means of Grace and Salvation that God has afforded. And
how far I have formerly denied, that the Scripture was the Rule of Faith, I
meant, that as it was not the Letter or Writing, so nor the Doctrine, as simply
and wholly limited and confined to the Letter. As if it should happen by Divine
Providence, that a Person, or Company of Persons, should have the Holy Bible by
Violence taken from them, or not have it in any Language they can understand,
that therefore they are not in a possible State of Salvation: For though in
God's ordinary way, the Letter or Leaves of the Book, since the Writing of the
Scriptures, are as it were, the Repository, or Ark, where God's Law is
preserved, and to which a Recourse ought frequently to be made, to read therein
for daily Information and Instruction: Yet the Doctrine is not so limited, or
confined to the Letter or Leaves of a Book, but that the same Doctrine may be
well and soundly preached, and believed, where the Book either has not come,
or by Violence of Men has been taken away; as it has been reported, that
Persecutors have taken away the Bible from some Faithful Martyrs of Christ; but
though they took the Letter out of their hands, they could not take the Word of
God, to wit, the Doctrine and true Sense of it out of their Hearts. And so far
as I can remember, it was never my Persuasion, what W.P. here lays down in
his Book, by way of Position, that the Light in every Man's Conscience, or the
Dictates and Testimony of it, abstractly considered, from the peculiar
Doctrines of Christianity, are the Rule of Faith to Christian Men. If any shall
find that or the like Doctrine in any of my Books, on the first Intimation of
it, I declare I shall (by God's help) be ready to retract it, and condemn it as
most Erroneous, and as a Fundamental Error; for it is plain Deism, of which I
have not the least remembrance that ever I was guilty, as W.P. has now plainly
manifested his Deism, in this Book I have under Examination.

Section I.
The Definitions of General Rule and Faith, given by W.P. not to be allowed,
because there is no such General Rule and Faith, as he defines.

BEfore he comes to hs Arguments, he gives us his Definitions of General Rule
and Faith. By General Rule (says he) we understand that constant Measure, by
which Men in all Ages have been enabled to judge of the Truth or Error of
Doctrines, and the Good or Evil of Thoughts, Words or Actions.

Answ. Here he undertakes to define a thing, that by the Definition of it,
plainly demonstrates, That it is not in being, nor ever was in any Ages of the
World, ever since the Distinction betwixt God's Church and the World came to
be. I say, ever since that Distinction, all Mankind, in all Respects, Cases and
Conditions, never had one General Rule; so his Definition is, as if one should
define a golden Mountain, or something that never yet has been, since the
Distinction above mentioned. Possibly in Adam's Family, for some time, (God
only knows how long) all Men belonging to it, had one Rule universally, but
it is more than he can prove, that this was only the Light in every of their
Consciences, by its common Discoveries; for Adam himself had special
Revelation, (whither by outward Vision, and an outward Voice, or only by
internal Inspiration, is not necessary at present to determine) which taught
him to expect Salvation by the promised Seed of the Woman; and this Doctrine no
doubt he preached to his Family. That the Light, or common discovery of the
Light, in every Man's Conscience, may be called a General Rule of Moral Justice
and Temperance, called by Paul, ( Romans 1. 19.) the Law writ in the Heart, may
and ought to he granted, but this General Rule did not extend, nor does, to be
the Rule, or a Rule of the Faith of Remission of Sin, by the Blood of the
promised Seed of the Woman, the Lamb of God that was to be slain, and should
take away the Sin of the World. And seeing the Light in every Conscience
teaches nothing of this Faith, that in Scripture is called the Faith of God's
Elect, and the common Faith, to wit, of the Faithful in all Ages. Therefore
W.P. in the very entry of his Work, makes a great Stumble, and uses a great
Fallacy, as if all Mankind, ever since the Dispersion of the Nations, to this
day, had one general Rule of Faith and Life, and that was the Light in every
Conscience, abstractly considered from all External Helps and Means, both of
Knowledge and Faith. Let W.P. tell us, whether the Light by its common
discovery in every Man's Conscience, taught or gave the Command of Sacrificing.
If he say, God, or the Spirit that is God, taught them to Sacrifice, he shifts
the Question, which is not what God did teach by special Revelation, but what
he did teach Men generally in all Ages, by common Illumination, the Dictates of
which are in great part generally the same, to all Men in all Ages, but so is
not that either of Sacrifices or Circumcision, or many other things that God
commanded to some and not to others, and to some in one Age and not in another,
such a general Rule of Morality or moral Justice has been, is, and ever will
be, in the World: But what is this to the Rule of the Christian Faith, which
for Substance is the same with the Faith of all the Fathers, Noah, Abraham,
David, etc.? It is easy to espy W.P's Design in this his Undertaking, if he
can prove that there is but one General Rule of Faith and Life to all Mankind,
the next step is, by good Consequence, that all Mankind ought to have but one
Faith, and one Religion, and that is Deism and Paganism with a witness. The one
Faith that the Scripture mentions, is not one Faith of all Mankind, but one
Faith of God's Church, which is called the Faith of God's Elect, when that
Blessed Time shall come, that the Gospel shall be outwardly preached to all
Nations, as our Savior has foretold it shall be, it is justly hoped that
there will be a General Rule of Faith and Life to all Mankind that then shall
live, but to talk of such a thing now, and to define a thing which is not, and
write a Book about it, is like T. More's Vtopia.

Page 4. He is as Unsuccessful and Fallacious in his Definition of Faith: By
Faith (says he) we understand an Assent of the Mind, in such manner to the
Discoveries made of God thereto, as to resign up to God, and have dependence
upon him, as the great Creator and Savior of his People. This Definition of
Faith, indeed, suits well with the Definition of his General Rule of Faith. But
there are many parts of Mankind, that have not only a Faith in God, as the
great Creator [the Faith here only defined by him] but have a Faith in Christ
too, and in God the Savior and Redeemer, considered as in the Person of a
Mediator, who is both God and Man, by which Faith in Christ, they have a most
firm Faith in God, grounded upon God's Promises, which are all Yea and Amen in
Christ And here in W.P's Definition of this Pagan and Deist Faith, he supposes
that which will not be granted to him, viz. That any ever had such a Faith in
God, as to resign up to God and have dependence upon him, as the great Creator
and Savior of his People, without all Faith in Christ, considered as God-Man.
If by the Savior of his People, he means such a Savior as saves them with
eternal Salvation, and makes them Heirs of God, and Co*heirs with Christ; I say
without all Faith, either explicit or implicit. That some of the Gentiles who
endeavored to live up to some Moral Principles, discovered to them by the
Light in their Consciences, and the Improvements that their reasonable
Faculties made, being enlightened thereby, by viewing the Works of Creation and
general Providence, had a kind of Faith and Hope in God, that prompted them to
expect Temporal Blessings, and some Temporal Rewards, from the Observation they
could make, that Divine Providence did ordinarily bestow such Blessings upon
Men that were morally honest, may, and ought to be granted: But this is not the
Faith of God's Elect, and of the Heirs of eternal Salvation, that is grounded
upon the Faithful Word of God, and his Faithful Promises first delivered to his
Holy Prophets and Apostles, and by them to us, even such a word of Faith, as
that, It is a faithful saying, that Jesus Christ is come into the World to save
Sinners, 1 Timothy 1.15. For to him gave all the Prophets witness (as Peter
preached to Cornelius) that whoever believes in him, should receive remission
of Sins, Acts 10.43. God's Promises come not to Men, nor ever came to them, by
the common Dictates of the Light within, whither they call it God, or the Word,
or the Spirit, there are diversities of Operations, Gifts and Ministrations,
inward as well as outward of one God, one Lord, and one Spirit, who is over
all, in all, and through all. It is but a faint Hope and Faith, that Men can
have in God, without the Promises, and without all special Revelation. The
knowledge of God's Goodness, discoverable by the Light in every Conscience, in
the Works of Creation and Providence, may give Men, that are morally honest,
some probable Faith, that he will be favorable to them: But the infallible
ground of certainty, concerning eternal Life and Salvation, none ever had, or
can have, without the Promises and special Revelation. For all the Light and
Knowledge that the Ephesian Gentiles had, in their mere Gentile State, Paul
told, That at that time they were without hope, and without the Promises, and
aliens and strangers to the commonwealth of Israel, Ephesians. 2.12. An indigent
Man, that knows a good Man, that is able to help him, yet he is not sure that
he will help him, unless he has his promise, and some particular intimation of
his mind; but if he have that, then his Faith has sure footing. But the
Faithful have not only God's Word and Promises, but confirmed by his Oath, that
by two immutable things, they might have strong Confidence, and Hope, that is,
as an Anchor, sure and steadfast, and which enters within the Vail, whither the
Forerunner has gone. But there is nothing of this sort of Faith, that I can
find, as any-wise necessary or essential to the Religion here described in this
Treatise of W.P. but pure Deism, and at best refined Paganism all along, as
will further appear in what follows.

I find in Page 50 of the same Treatise, a quite differing Definition of Faith,
which if not plainly contradictory to the former, is very disingenous and full
of Equivocation; but whatever way it be taken, if he adhere to it, and allow it
to be a proper Definition, (where the Definition it self, in the parts of it,
ought to be essential to the thing defined, and such as the thing defined
cannot be without,) it yields as sufficient Argument, against his Position,
That the Light in every Man's Conscience is the Rule of Faith. His Definition
is this, Faith is yielding up to the requirings of God's Spirit in us, in full
assurance of the Remission of Sins that are past, through the Son of his love
and Life everlasting. Several things are faulty in this Definition: First, That
he confounds the Effect, or Concomitant of Faith, with Faith it self; for the
yielding up, or Resignation to God's Requirings, is rather an Effect or
Concomitant of Faith, than Faith it self, especially in the present case, as it
has respect to the Rule which determines what is to be believed, or assented
unto, upon the Credit of Divine Authority. Secondly, That he makes Remission of
Sins to be antecedent and prior to Faith, which is the Error of the
Antinomians, and plainly contradictory to the Scripture, that holds forth both
Repentance and Faith, to be necessary Requisites, in order to Forgiveness.
Thirdly, That he makes full Assurance of Remission of Sins to be of the Nature
of Faith, whereas there is a Faith of Adhesion, that is, true Faith, that many
of the Faithful have, who have not arrived to that full Assurance. But that
which I principally notify in this his last Definition, is, That he makes this
full Assurance of the Remission of Sins, to be through the Son of God's love.
Where, that the Equivocation and Fallacy may be discovered, I ask him, what he
means by the Son of his Love, through which this Assurance if Remission of Sins
is obtained; If he means by the Son of his Love, only the Light within every
Man's Conscience, it is a palpable Equivocation, and inserted on purpose to
deceive the Christian Readers, who generally by Men's having Remission of Sins
through the Son of God's Love, do understand the Son of God's Love to be the
Word Incarnate, to wit, Jesus Christ God-man, as he died for our Sins, by his
Death to purchase to us the Pardon of them. But this sense of the words, which
is the true Scripture sense, and the sense of all true Christians, W.P. does
not admit, if he adhere to what he has said, both here and in his other Books;
for in his Serious Apology, Page 146. he says, in behalf of himself and
Brethren, That that outward Person that suffered at Jerusalem, was properly the
Son of God, we utterly deny. And here in this Book, he makes it not any of the
absolute Necessaries, in Religion, but some considerable Matters superadded, P.
44. That God was manifested extraordinarily in the Flesh, that he gave his Life
for the World; that such as believe and obey his Grace in their Hearts, receive
Remission of Sins, and Life everlasting. But which way soever he understands
these words, The Son of God's Love, seeing he makes the Rule of every Man's
Faith, not to be the Words of God, declaring his Promise of Forgiveness, as
outwardly delivered in the Holy Scriptures; but the Light in every Man's
Conscience; he is bound to give us some better proof than his simple
Affirmation, That the Light in every Man's Conscience, or indeed in any Man's
conscience, reveals to him God's Will to forgive Sins, without all special
Revelation or Declaration of God's Will, as contained in the Holy Scriptures,
seeing the Holy Scriptures do hold it forth, as one of the great Secrets and
Mysteries of God's Will declared to Men, by the special Revelation of the Holy
Spirit, through his Holy Prophets and Apostles, even Remission of Sin, and Free
Justification, by Jesus Christ, through Faith in him, and not by any Works, or
Obedience, that either the Jew did perform to the outward Law, or the Gentile
did perform to the Law writ in the Heart. When Peter preached Remission of Sin,
by Faith in Jesus Christ, whom the Jews hanged on the Tree, to Cornelius, he
confirmed this Doctrine, not from the eternal Precepts in every Man's
Conscience, or the common Dictates of the Light in every Man, but from the
general Testimony of the Prophets, Acts 10.43. To him (said Peter) give all the
Prophets witness, that through his name, whosoever believes in him, shall
receive Remission of Sins. But according to W.P's Doctrine, the Apostle Peter
should have said, To him the Light in every Conscience, gave the Dictates of
that Light in every Conscience witness, That whosoever gave up to the
Requirings of the Light in them, [without all Faith in Christ God-man without
them] shall receive the Remission of their Sins. And seeing whatever is the
Rule of Faith must teach us, all that is needful to Salvation, by it self, as
W.P. argues, he must prove that the Light in every Man's Conscience, dictateth
to him this Proposition, That is thou shall confess with thy mouth, the Lord
Jesus, and believe in thine heart, that God has raised him from the dead, thou
shall be saved, Romans 10.9. Or if it does dictate some other way than this, then
that and the like places of Scripture, contradict the Dictates of the Light
within. But that this Proposition laid down Romans 10.9. is no Dictate of the
Light within in Men's Consciences, is evident from W.P's plain Confession, P.
32, 33. who says, That the Light within should tell us, that Christ suffered
Death and rose again is not needed, inasmuch as an account of that is extant in
Scripture. Whereby it plainly appears, he holds it not needful to our
Salvation, to believe that Proposition Romans 10.9. seeing the Light within, that
is the Rule of Faith, does not reveal it, and such Revelation is not necessary;
and consequently according to him, the belief of that Proposition, Romans 10.9.
is not necessary to any for Salvation. And if that be not necessary, by the
same method of Argument (according to W.P.) nor is the belief of all the other
parts of Scripture necessary to Salvation, which are not the common Dictates of
the Light in every Conscience. The only use of the whole Scripture, according
to W.P. is merely Historical, which though perhaps true, is nowise necessary to
our Salvation to believe the truth of it; but we are left at liberty, to
believe or disbelieve all and every part of what is contained in the Scripture,
without any danger to our Salvation; excepting these few absolute necessaries,
that the Light within every Conscience teaches us, as well as the Scriptures.
But none of all the twelve Articles of the Apostle's Creed, according to the
true Sense of Scripture, or the common received Sense of all true Christians,
are taught by the Light within, without the external Revelation of the
Scripture; therefore according to W.P. the belief of none of these twelve
Articles is necessary to our Salvation. The which being the plain Import of
W.P's Doctrine laid down in his Book, whither it be not Plain Deism appearing
with open face, I appeal to all sincere Christians.

Section 2.
His Arguments from Scripture, that the Light in every Man's Conscience, is the
Rule of Faith and Life, Answered.

HE begins with his Proofs, Page 4. That the Light in every Man's Conscience,
is the general Rule of Faith and Life, from Matt. 11.27. and 1 Cor. 2.11. he
argues, That because the Father cannot be known, but by the Revelation of the
Son, and Holy Spirit, consequently that Light, metioned John 1.3. or Spirit,
must have been the general Rule of Men's Knowledge, Faith and Obedience, with
respect to God.

Answ. His Consequence is denied, he gives no proof of it; yea it is manifestly
false; and to discover its Fallacy, observe how he confounds the efficient
Cause, and Author of Knowledge and Faith, with the Rule, which he ought to
distinguish: He might as well argue, no Man sees what hour it is on a Sun-dyal,
but by the Sun, and consequently the Sun, and not the Dyal, is the Rule whereby
he knows the hour.

Page 5. His next Argument is, from Ephesians. 5.13. Whatever makes manifest is
Light, therefore the Light in the Conscience is the general Rule.

Answ. The Consequence again is denied, it has the same defect as the former,
as will appear by forming the like Argument, Whatever makes manifest an outward
object to our Eye, is some outward light of Sun, Moon, or Candle, etc.
Therefore that alone, without the object manifests it, and also without the
Organ of sight, who sees not the Fallacy of this Argument, and as much he may
see the Fallacy of the other.

The next place of Scripture he argues from, is Romans 1.19. which he falsely
quotes, as I have observed, he has misquoted this place, both here and in page
21, for thus he quotes it. WHATEVER might be known of God, was made manifest
within, for God who is Light has shown it unto them. But let the place it self
be considered, and it says not, WHATEVER, but what is to be known of God is
manifest in them; to wit, the Gentiles or Heathen Nations, who had not the
peculiar Doctrines of the Christian Faith revealed to them, or Preached among
them. And that the words, what is to be known of God, cannot be meant of
WHATEVER can or is to be known of God was manifest in them; as the Text does
not say it, so it is a manifest Falsehood: It cannot be said of the best
Christians, that whatever is to be known of God, is made manifest in them; for
the best know but in part, and there is still more to be known of God, even in
the best of Christians, than what is at present revealed, or made manifest in
them. And it is very evident from the following words, what Paul meant by that
saying, What is to be known of God; or as it is in the Greek, (...). viz. The
Eternal power and Godhead, which was made manifest, partly by the things made
or created without Men, and partly by some Divine Illumination within them. But
does it therefore follow, that because those Heathens had some knowledge of the
Eternal Power and Godhead, that therefore they knew all the fundamental
Princiles of the Christian Religion? By no means, more than it follows, that
W.P. knows some things of England, and some other Countries, partly by
History, and partly by his sight of them, therefore he knows the whole Earth,
so far as it is habitable.

He brings another Proof, That the Light in every Man's Conscience is the Rule
of Faith and Life, from Micah 6.8. He has showed unto thee, O Man, what is
good, and what God requires of thee, etc. Which (says he) could not be,
without the Light of his Son shines in Man's Conscience; therefore the light of
Christ in the Conscience, must needs have been the General Rule, etc.

Answ. His Consequence is again denied, which he does not prove, it has the
same defect with his foregoing proofs, that he confounds the Author, and
Efficient cause of Faith, with the Rule, which is the instrumental Cause
thereof. But let it be further considered, what the following words are, not
mentioned by W.P. here, and let them be compared with the foregoing words, Ver.
7. Will the Lord be pleased with Thousands of Rams, or with ten Thousands of
Rivers of Oil? shall I give my first born for my transgression, the Fruit of my
Body for the Sin of my Soul? Ver. 8. He has showed thee, O Man, what is good;
and what does the Lord require of thee, but to do justly, and love Mercy, and
walk humbly with thy God? And it will appear, that the words at least have a
Comparative Sense, as intimating that Justice, Mercy and Humility, or Humble
walking with God, are more acceptable to God, and the greater things of God's
Laws, than all outward Sacrifices were. But does it therefore follow, that God
did not require those outward Sacrifices then to be offered up, or that God did
not require Faith in the People of Israel, that he did Command them? And if
such a Faith was then required of them, which the common dictates of the light
in every Conscience did not teach them but special Revelation; by the like
reason, it can be proved, that the Faith of Christ the great Sacrifice, as he
was outwardly to be offered up, of which all the outward Sacrifices were Types,
was also required by the Lord from that People, the which Faith, all the
faithful then had, and by which Faith, they received the remission of their
Sins according to Acts 10*43. But seeing the Light within every Man gives them
not this Faith, nor teaches it them, it evidently follows, that the Light
within every Man is not the Rule of the Christian Faith; it may be further
said, that the words Micah 6.8, 9. if they were to be understood, with respect
to mere Heathens and Gentiles, who have not the External Word, might imply,
that no more is required of them, than those general things which the Law or
Light in them does teach them, and is the only Rule they have; but these words
seem not to be spoke with respect to mere Gentiles, but rather to them that
were by Profession the Church of God; and though neither Faith nor Repentance,
nor many other Evangelical Virtues and Duties are there expressed, yet without
doubt they are employed, as well as where Faith is only expressed, in many places
of Scripture, Love and other Virtues are employed. And indeed by the like
Fallacy W.P. might infer, that our whole Religion consists in practiseing the
Duties of the 2d. Table from James's words, Pure and undefiled Religion is to
visit the Fatherless and the Widow, and to keep unspotted from the World. And
that Consequently he that does this, though he practice none of the Duties of
the First Table, he has Religion enough, yea though he have no Faith in God, no
fear of him nor Love to him, if he be Charitable, and temperate, as it has been
reported some Atheists have been.

Page 5. His next Argument is, It was by this Law, that Enoch, Noah, Abraham,
Melchisideck, Abimilech, Job, Jethro, etc. walked, and were accepted, as says
Jreneus and Tertullian, they were Just, by the Law written in their Hearts,
then was it their Rule too, and in that Just State

Answ. This Argument has several defects in it. 1. To argue from a Law or Rule
of Moral Justice, to a Law or Rule of Faith in Christ the promised Messiah,
without which Faith there is no promise of Eternal Life and Salvation in all
the Scripture. Secondly, That he Jumbleth Abimelech and Jethro, (none of which
were prophets) with Abraham, and others that were Prophets, and had
extraordinary Revelation, concerning the Messiah. Thirdly, That he makes no
distinction betwixt what the Light or Word did reveal commonly in all Men, by
the common Illumination, and what that same word did reveal to the Prophets,
and by them to the Faithful, by special Revelation and Illumination. And indeed
all his Arguments are in great part built on this Fallacy, of not
distinguishing, but confounding the common or general Illuminations, given to
all Men, from the special and extraordinary given to some. That the common
Illumination of the Divine Word, was to the Patriarchs, Abraham, Noah, etc. a
Law, or Rule of Justice is granted; but that it was to them a Law, or Rule of
Faith, whereby they believed in the promised Messiah, is denied, for that was a
special Revelation, that was the Law or Rule of that Faith, and not the common
Illumination, though both common and special, were and are from the same Divine
Word; yet this hinders not their Distinction; as all the Creatures of God have
one Creator and Author of their Being; yet this hinders not, but that the
Creatures are widely distinct one from another.

Section 3.
His first and second Arguments, that the Scripture is not the Rule of Faith
and Life, Answered.

Page 5. IN the next place he pleads, that the Scriptures cannot be the Rule,
arguing thus, Arg. 1. How can they be the general Rule, that have not been
general.

Answ. He is still guilty of confounding and jumbling things that ought to be
distinguished. 1. None says, that the Scriptures are a general Rule: If by a
general Rule, he means a Rule actually obliging all Men whomsoever, for the
Scripture obliges none but such, who either have them, or at least can by some
possible means have them. 2. It is granted, that the Law or Illumination that
is in all Men, is the general Law, or Rule of Justice and Morality to all Men.
But what then, will it follow, that Christians have no other Rule, but that of
moral Justice? 3. He ought to have distinguished, betwixt the general Law, or
Rule of Justice given to all Mankind, and the general superadded Law, and Rule
of Christian Faith and Practice, given in general to Christians; but for want
of this distinction, he deceives himself, and seeks to deceive others, with
fallacious Arguments.

Page 6. He brings an Objection thus, But granting that the Light within were
so, [ viz. the general Rule] before Scripture was extant, yet, etc. Answ. He
supposes that to be granted, which ought not to be granted, viz. That the
common Illumination before Scripture was extant, was the Rule of the Faith of
all the Faithful, who lived and died in the Faith of the promised Messiah, by
whom they believed to have Remission of Sin and eternal Life. This is
altogether denied, for this Faith they had not by the common Illumination, but
by special Revelation given to some by Prophecy, and to others by means of
their Prophesies.

Page 6. His Quotations out of Gentile Authors, as Thales, Pythagoras,
Socrates, etc. prove no more at most, but that they acknowledged an inward Law,
Rule and Principle, of Justice and moral Virtue placed in Mankind: But what
says all this, to prove that all Mankind had, or have, a Law or Rule of the
Christian Faith? Nothing at all.

Page 8. Arg. 2. He makes a fresh Assault, to prove that the Scriptures are not
the Rule of Faith and Life, etc. His Argument is this, If now the Rule, then
ever the Rule; but they were not ever the Rule, therefore they cannot now be
the Rule. That they were not ever the Rule, is granted. That they are not
therefore now the Rule, I shall prove (says he) thus: If the Faith of God's
People, in all Ages, be of one Nature, then the Rule but of one Nature: But
clear it is, Heb. 11. the Faith has been but of one Nature, consequently the
Rule but of one Nature. In short, If the Holy Ancients had Faith, before they
had or wrote Scripture, they had a Rule, before they had or wrote Scripture.

Answ. His whole way of arguing here, is extremely weak, to detect which, let
him consider, when it is commonly said, the Scriptures are the Rule of Faith,
it is not meant simply and barely the written Letter, but the Doctrine
delivered in or by the written Letter, is the Rule, which at other times is
thus expressed, the Word of God contained in the Scriptures of the Old and New
Testament, or the revealed Will and Mind of God, delivered to us by Scripture,
is the Rule of Christian Faith, etc. And seeing the Doctrine of Faith in the
promised Messiah, and of eternal Salvation, through Faith in him, is the same,
in the Essentials and Fundamentals of it, now as then, and then as now without
any substantial Variation; it is evident, that as the Doctrine now committed to
writing, is the same it was before it was in writing, the Rule is still the
same, and the Faith is the same, for Substance and Nature; for the different
manner of conveying the Doctrine, makes no essential Difference, either in the
Doctrine, or Faith, and consequently nor a different Rule. As when the Doctrine
is delivered by Preaching or Writing, to one Nation in one Language, and to
other Nations in other Languages; yet the Doctrine may be still the same: Nor
does it change the Nature of the Doctrine, that some had it by Prophetical
Inspiration and Revelation, without any external Mediums; and others had it by
and through some external Mediums, as by means of the Ministry of Faithful Men
faithfully conveyed, through the several Ages, the Spirit of God inwardly by
his secret Inspiration, moving the Faithful to believe the Doctrine preached to
them by such Faithful Men. And here I would have him to consider his great
default, in not distinguishing the Inspirations of God's Spirit, the want of
which leads him into so many Bypath, as if all Divine Inspirations were
Prophetical, and of the same Nature, with what the Prophets and Apostles had,
as Prophets and Apostles; whereas the Scripture plainly distinguishes the
various Gifts, Operations, and Ministrations, of one and the same God, Lord and
Spirit; all which may be accounted Divine Inspirations: Are all Prophets? said
Paul, 1 Cor. 12.29. intimating they were not all Prophets, who yet were true
Saints and Believers, all which had the same Spirit inspiring them all, but not
the same manner and kind of Inspirations, but far differing; the Prophetical
Inspirations taught them the Doctrine of Faith without all outward teaching of
Men; but the Inspirations of other Faithful Men, who were not Prophets, did
teach them the same Doctrines, by means of outward teaching of Men.

Section 4.
His third, fourth and fifth Arguments, Answered.

Page 9. Arg. 3 HE frames a new Argument here, which he sets out in a twofold
Dress; I shall produce it in its best Dress; and thus it is, Such as the Faith
is, such must the Rule be; but the Faith is (as before) Inward and Spiritual,
therefore the Rule must be Inward and Spiritual, which no mere Book can be.

Answ. Here he takes his Consequence as granted, without any offer of proof;
but it is altogether Fallacious: If by the term Such, he mean such every way,
and in all respects, and Universally such, it will Infer the greatest
Blasphemy, ( ad Hominem) as to argue thus, Such as the Faith is, such must the
Rule be; but the Faith is an Act, or thing that had a beginning in Time,
therefore the Rule is an Act or thing that had a beginning in time; and that
Rule, according to him, being the Word and Spirit of God, which is God,
therefore God ( Absit Blasphemia) had a beginning in time. If by the term Such,
he mean not such universally, but only in some respects, as because the Faith
is true and certain, therefore the Rule is such, his proposition is granted,
but then the Consequence would not follow, that because the Faith is inward,
the Rule is only inward, no more than it will follow, that because my sight of
an object, is in my Eye, that therefore the Object is no where but in my Eye.
He grants, that until the Son came, the Law outward was a Rule, page 19. and
yet all those Holy Ancients who lived before the Son came, had the true inward
Faith, therefore they had the true inward Rule, and not the outward Rule, by
his Argument, which destroys his former Argument. His Syllogism Transgresses
a certain Rule in Logic, The major Proposition in the first Figure, must not
be particular.

Page. 8.9. As to his Authorities and Testimonies, out of Justin Martyr, and
Clemens Alexandrinus, to prove that the Word and Spirit is the only Rule of
Faith, that Socrates and Heraclitus were Christians as living with Christ the
Word. It may be supposed that Justin Martyr and Clemens Alexandrinus, might
thhink that they had Faith in the promised Messiah, as Abraham, had, nor has
W.P. proved the contrary; and if they had that Faith, the Rule of that Faith
was the same as to us, to wit, the Doctrine of Faith, which is still the same
whither given by prophetical Inspiration, or by an outward Ministry. His
Quotation out of Eusebius, affirming that Abraham, and the Ancient Fathers were
Christians, and his defining a Christian to be one, that by the knowledge and
Doctrine of Christ excels in Moderation of Mind, in Righteousness and
Continency of Life, etc. has not the least weight to confirm W.P's. most false
Doctrine, viz. That Deism and Christianity are but one and the same thing, and
have but one and the same Rule, to wit, the Light as with respect to the common
Illumination; for Eubseius in the definition of a Christian, makes the Doctrine
of Christ that whereby he excels in those Virtues. But can W.P. prove, that the
Doctrine of Faith in Christ, as God-man, for remisiion of Sin, and Eternal
Salvation, was no part of the Doctrine of Christ, according to Eusebius's Sense.

Page 9. Arg. 5. He proceeds to a new Argument, against the Scriptures being
the Rule. If the Scriptures were the general Rule, they must have always been a
perfect Rule, ever since they were a Rule, but this (says he) is impossible,
since they were many hundred years in Writing, and are now imperfect also as to
number. How then are they the perfect Rule? And if imperfect (says he) How can
they be the Rule of Faith, since the Rule of Faith must be perfect?

Answ. This Argument surely is very imfect, as well as offensive, so openly to
charge the holy Scriptures with imperfection. Is the common discovery by the
Light within given to all Mankind, a perfect discovery of all things necessary,
given to all at once? He grants, It is not, comparing the Light within to a
Schoolmaster, that first teaches the Children to Spell, before he teach them
to Read, Chr. Quak Page 18. what if all or much that was either spoke or writ
by prophetical Inspiration, was not at first extant, this does no more argue,
that the Scriptures are imperfect, than that it argues, that because our
blessed Lord from the dimensions of a Child increased to the dimensions of a
Man; that therefore he was imperfect when a Child, whereas a Child and a Man
have the same essential perfections: And in like manner, the Doctrine of the
Christian Faith, concerning the remission of Sin, and Eternal Salvation, by the
promised Messiah, was the same, and had the same essential perfections from the
beginning of the World, and in all Ages, as it has now. And one Tenth part, yea
perhaps much less than one Hundred part of the Writings of the Holy Scriptures,
do perfectly contain all the essential parts of the Christian Doctrine, which
yet makes not the other parts superfluous. I would fain know, if God Almighty
had given to W.P. but an Estate of one hundred a Year, might not that without
more have been a full enough provision for him; does it therefore follow, that
the other Hundreds he has beside, are superfluous?

Besides, If not only, the number of the Books of the Holy Scriptures is
increased, beyond what it was at first, and for many Ages after, but that
diverse very profitable Doctrines have been super-added, to the fundamental, and
some new Commandments given by God Almighty to latter Ages, that were not at
first given. Does this argue any imperfection in the Commands of God? But that
new Commands were given, to some in one Age, that were not given to others in
former Ages, W.P. I think cannot deny, yea that to Abraham, the Commandment of
Circumcision was given, in the Ninety Ninth Year of his Age, the Scripture
Testimony is plain; Does it therefore follow, that the Commands formerly given
him, or the Promises, or his Faith before that time was lame and imperfect? If
adding new Commands by God himself, to what was formerly given by him, does not
make the body of God's Commandments imperfect, nor does adding to the Rule of
Faith, by Divine Authority, make the Rule as first given imperfect: Yea W.P.
grants, page 2. That though Men in all Ages had some knowledge of God, yet not
upon equal discovery. And in his Christian Quaker, page 18. Things are
necessary in reference to their proper times, that may be requisite to morrow,
which is not to day. If then all Men have not the same discovery, they have not
the same general Rule.

Section 5.
His sixth Argument, taken from the Imperfection of the Scriptures, Answered.

IT is greatly worth our noticeing, after that W.P. has argued against the
Scriptures being the Rule, because they were not all given at once, but at
sundry times, whence he infers their Imperfections, and consequently that they
are not the Rule of Faith and Life. Yet in Page 22, he makes the new Creature,
or new Creation, to be the Rule, and on the Margent quoting, Gal. 6.16. As many
as walk according to this Rule, or in this Rule, (...); and Phil. 3.16. he
says it must be understood, Let us walk in the same Attainment; and he says,
The Rule mentioned Phil. 3.16. is spoken of the Measure of Attainment. Pray
consider how his Argument here, for the new Creature and Measure of Attainment,
being the Rule of Faith and Life, quite overthrows his Argument, against the
Scriptures being the Rule, because as he suggesteth, they are imperfect, they
were not all given at once.

That one Age of Christianity should have one Rule, and another Age another
Rule, he makes it very absurd, p. 24. But is the Measure of Attainment the same
in all Christians, and in all Ages? I suppose he will say nay; then by his own
Argument, the lesser Attainment in some Ages and Persons is imperfect, and
therefore cannot be the Rule of Faith. And will he say, the new Creature has
the same Stature in all Christians? Or will or can he say, That the new
Creature is so perfect in him, that nothing is to be added to it? If nay, then
by his own Argument it is imperfect, and therefore not the Rule. And whereas he
quotes Drusius on the Margent, to prove from Gal. 5.6. that Faith that works by
love is the Rule, that is according to him, Faith is its own Rule, for the
subject of his Discourse is, What the Rule of Faith is, which one time he makes
to be Faith it self, p. 22. another time Christ himself, and the Spirit; a
third time neither this nor that, but the Testimony of the Spirit, Internal
Revelation and Inspiration, the eternal Precepts of the Spirit in Men's
Consciences, there repeated and declared, p. 25. But again, How can the new
Creature be the General Rule, seeing all Men have it not who have the
Scriptures? If because the Scriptures are not general, they are not the Rule,
as W.P. argues, by the like reason the new Creature is not the Rule, because
not general, and consequently by his way of reasoning, all unregenerated
Persons have no Rule at all. But if unregenerated Persons have a Rule, who have
not the new Creature brought forth in them; then by his own way of arguing
against himself, one part of Mankind, to wit, the Regenerated, have one Rule,
which is the new Creature; and the other part, to wit, the Unregenerated, which
is commonly the greater part, have another; but that, according to him, is
absurd, for then all have not one and the same general Rule, which he contends
they ought to have. That there is a general Rule of Moral Honesty and Justice
given to all Men, the same which Paul calls, The Law writ in the Hearts of the
Gentiles, is granted; but that there is a general Law or Rule of Faith,
concerning Salvation by Christ Crucified, is denied.

Section 6.
Whither the new Creature, mentioned Gal. 6.16. is the Rule of Faith: And
whither the Doctrine is the Rule to the new Creature, or the new Creature the
Rule to the Doctrine; and which is the prior or principal Rule.

AS touching these places of Scripture, quoted by him, touching the Rule, as
Gal. 6.16. Phil. 3.16. 2 Cor. 10. 13, 15. none of them all say, either that the
Light within, or the new Creature, is the Rule of Faith and Life; nor does he
give any proof by any true Consequence that it is. And here by the way, W.P.
should be put in mind, to prove what he asserts by plain Scripture, without
Consequences, which his Brethren commonly allow not of; but when any of their
Opponents argue with them, by Consequences, however so fair, they will not
allow of them: And yet throughout this whole Treatise of W.P. he brings not one
Argument from express Scripture to prove his Matter, but proceeds all along by
Consequences, not one of which is fairly and truly inferred, as will appear in
the thorough Examination of them. The Rule mentioned Gal. 6.6. has a plain and
easy reference to the Proposition laid down by the Apostle in the foregoing
Verse, which is this, That in Christ Jesus, neither Circumcision avails any
thing, nor Uncircumcision, but a new Creature. This Proposition laid down by
the Apostle, in so many express words, is an excellent Rule, and one of the
many excellent Rules appertaining to the Christian Religion, the entire body of
which Rules, is deservedly called the Rule; and well might the Apostle say, As
many as walk according to that one Rule, which is very comprehensive, Peace be
upon them; for he that duly walks according to that Rule, will be careful to
walk according to all the other Rules appertaining to the Christian Religion,
whereof that one is a main. But let it be granted, that in some sense, the new
Creature may be allowed to be a Rule (as I see no hurt to allow it in some
sense) and a Law to him, or them in whom this new Creature is wrought, or
brought forth; for even those Gentiles, which did the things contained in the
Law, are said by Paul, Romans 2. to be a Law to themselves: Which did show the
Work of the Law writ in their Hearts: Then surely much rather every regenerate
Person, by reason of his new Nature, may be said to be a Law or Rule to
himself, according to that saying of Boethius de Consol. Phil. Quis legem det
amantibus? Major lex amor est ipse sibi. The love of Virtue is greater than any
Law that can be expressed or laid down in words. But how? as Law there is
understood not properly, a Law or Precept informing the Understanding, but
Metaphorically, as it is an inward power, having a mighty impulse upon the Will
of a good Man; even as the love of Vice is a mighty Law, that acts with a
mighty impulse on the Will of a bad and vicious Man: Hence as the one may be
understood to be (even in the Scripture sense) the Law of the Spirit of Life in
Christ Jesus, so the other may be understood to be the Law of Sin and Death,
LAW in both these respects being understood not properly but Metaphorically, as
when we commonly say, God Almighty the great Author and Creator of Nature, has
given a Law to the Nature of every thing, as weight to Stones and Metals,
whereby they are moved downwards, and levity to Fire, whereby it is moved
upwards; but whither these Motions proceed from an inward or external Cause in
these natural bodies, is not the proper matter of Debate here, only the
instance is given to show, that LAW has commonly a Metaphorical Sense as well
as proper, and so has the word or term Rule. And I suppose W.P. though perhaps
not much acquainted with School-distinctions, has heard of the distinction of
a Rule into Regula regulus, and Regula regulata, i. e. the Rule ruling, and the
Rule ruled, at least of the primary and secondary Rule; for he has allowed in
this Treatise, that the Scriptures may be called a Secondary Rule, at least in
several parts of them. And why may not much rather the new Creature, or work of
Sanctification, be called a Secondary Rule; and the Doctrine of the Christian
Religion, consisting of many excellent Precepts and Promises, and other Gospel
Truths, the Primary Rule? Yea, that it is so, is evidently proved, because the
new Creature it self, to wit, the Work of Regeneration and Sanctification in
the Souls of the Faithful, is instrumentally wrought by the Form of Doctrine
contained in the Holy Scriptures, the Spirit of God, (working by and with the
said Form of Doctrine) being the principal Agent and Efficient, according to
Romans 6.17. Ye have obeyed from the heart, that Form of Doctrine which was
delivered unto you, or as the better Translation is out of the Greek, unto or
into which ye were delivered, the word translated Form is Type, signifying
Pattern, Mould or Frame, according to the Fashion of which a thing is made, as
when a piece of Clay is formed by the Potter, by the Frame to which it is
applied, or Wax receives the Impression of the Seal; or a Vessel of Brass,
Tin, or Silver is framed by the Mould into which it is cast. Now as the Mould
or Pattern, whereby any Vessel is framed, is prior to the Vessel, and the shape
or fashion of the Vessel, is posterior to the Pattern or Exemplar, according to
which it is framed, even so the new Creature is posterior to the Form of
Doctrine contained in the Holy Scriptures; and this evidently proves, that the
Doctrine contained in the Holy Scriptures, being the same that was extant in
the Church of God, before it was committed to writing, has the precedence and
priority in point of a Rule to the new Creature; so that the Doctrine, to wit,
the doctrinal Word and Words of God, given by God and Christ to the Holy
Prophets and Apostles, and by them to other Men, who by means thereof are
converted, and inwardly renewed, regenerated and sanctified, through the
Operation of the Holy Spirit, as the principal Efficient, is the Rule to the
new Creature, and not the new Creature the Rule to the Doctrine: Hence it is
that the Word of God, to wit, the doctrinal word, or word of Doctrine, is by a
Metaphor called Seed in Scripture, for of Seed, Plants, Trees and Animals are
produced. And seeing according to Scripture, Faith is wrought by hearing the
Word outwardly preached in God's ordinary way, and that Word is the Doctrine of
the Christian Religion, given originally by God and Christ, to the Prophets and
Apostles, and by them to us, it evidently follows, that Faith, or the new
Creature, is not a Rule to the Doctrine, but the Doctrine is a Rule to the
Faith, and consequently the Doctrine is the primary Rule of Faith and Life, but
not that Faith and Life is the primary Rule, or any Rule at all to the
Doctrine, even as in natural Generation the Seed is before the Birth and Fruit,
so is the Doctrine before the Faith, and before the Person that is the Believer
or Saint, and regenerated Person, as such, and before the Church, for the Word
and Doctrine does not depend on the Church, nor is built on the Church, but the
Church depends on it, and is built thereupon, Ephesians. 2.20. Jesus Christ himself
being the chief corner stone, and great Foundation of both.

Section 7.
The Rule of the Christian Faith, must be a Doctrine which sets before our
Minds, all the Credenda, or things necessary to be believed in certain
Propositions, concerning which, the Mind of Man can give a Judgment,
Affirmative or Negative.

AGain, that the Doctrine is the most perfect Rule, being compared with the new
Creature or work of Sanctification, is evident, because so far a Man is said to
be the more sanctified and redeemed, the more that his Faith, Love, Hope,
Humility, Patience, Temperance, Justice, and other Virtues, comes up to a
Conformity to the precepts of God and Christ faithfully declared to us in the
Holy Scriptures. And notwithstanding the high pretentions of some among the
People called Quakers to perfection, yet I appeal to W.P's Conscience, if he
can or dare say, or think, that his Sanctity, or Virtues come up to a full
Conformity to the Holy precepts delivered in the Holy Scripture. Is his Faith
as great, as the Doctrine given us in the Holy Scripture requires it to be? Is
his Love as perfect perfect and complete? Is his Meekness, Patience and
Humility, Justice, Temperance and Piety equal to the height, breadth, depth,
and length of all God's Commands, even as outwardly delivered in the Holy
Scriptures; I trust he has so much discretion as to say nay; then let him not
exalt his Sanctity, or Work of the New Creature wrought in him, above the
Sanctity of the Holy Doctrine, and precepts of God and Christ contained in the
Holy Scripture, making his Sanctity, or New Creature in him, superior or
primary Rule to the Doctrine; but let the Doctrine have its due place, to be a
superior and primary Rule, to his Sanctity, or work of the New Creature wrought
in him; let his Faith and Love, and other Virtues (if he has them) be Ruled by
the Doctrine of the Holy Scriptures, and subjected thereunto, but let not the
Doctrine be subjected unto his Faith and Virtues, which are far inferior to the
Purity, Spirituality and Holiness of the Doctrine. But if he will say, the New
Creature in him, is the greatest, and highest, and most perfect Rule, whereby
to square his Faith and Life, it follows that he is arrived at the highest
pitch of Holiness, for what can be beyond, or above the highest and most
perfect Rule of Sanctity? But again, the greatest Sanctity (that is possible)
of Men, or Angels, simply considered, could not have given the knowledge of
Christ's Incarnation, and of our Redemption by him, without a divine
Revelation; therefore the Sanctity or New Creature in the Holiest of Men, could
not be to them a Rule of Faith, as touching these Mysteries. If he will say,
there is a higher and more perfect Rule of Sanctity, than the New Creature
wrought in him, let him tell us what it is, if not the Doctrine delivered in
the Holy Scriptures, the Laws, Precepts and Commandments delivered there. If he
say the Light within, or Christ and the Spirit within, is that highest and most
perfect Rule of Sanctity. To this I answer, The Spirit, or Light within,
abstractly considered, cannot be properly a Rule; I say abstractly considered
from the Doctrines and Precepts delivered by the Spirit, whither internally,
without any external Medium, or externally by some external Meidum. Nothing
properly can be a Rule of Christian Faith, as in respect of the peculiar
Doctrines of the Christian Religion, but that Doctrine which sets before our
Minds, certain propositions of Truth, to which the Mind can and ought to assent
from sufficient Motives of Credibility, which W.P. from his own definition of
Faith must allow. For he defines Faith ( Page 4.) to be an assent of the Mind
in such manner to the discoveries made of God thereto, as to resign up to God,
and have dependence on him, as the great Creator and Savior of his People.
[Where Note that he wholly passes by, Christ Considered, as God-Man, from
being concerned in the object of Faith, and so his Faith is no other, but the
Faith of a mere Deist.] Now seeing he defines Faith to be an assent of the
Mind, to certain discoveries made of God thereto, etc. These discoveries must
be certain propositions set before the Mind, in some form of Words mentally
conceived and apprehended; for the Nature of the Mind, or intellect of Man is
such, that it cannot Judge what is true or false, but as the truth is set
before it in certain propositions consistng of Words, at least internally
conceived and apprehended; for the assent of the Mind, is a Judgment of the
Mind formed, whereby it Judges this or that to be true; and if it be a true
Judgment, it must have some proposition consisting of words, concerning which
it is enabled either to affirm or deny what is really true; as the Mind cannot
assent to this great truth, that God is not a Body, but by a negative
proposition consisting of some words, which is a negative Judgment; nor can it
assent to this other proposition, that God is a Spirit, but by an affirmative
proposition, consisting of some words, at least Internally conceived, [called
by some Idea's] which is an affirmative Judgment; and therefore so far as Faith
is an act of the intellect, and an assent of the Mind, it must needs have some
Words, at least internally proposed to it, whereby it is capable to give an
assent to the Truth of what it Judges; and seeing in matters purely of Faith,
the Mind is not capable of giving an assent to the truth of them, without some
sufficient motives of Credibility, as that they are given of God, who is a God
of Truth, and cannot lie nor deceive. From these Considerations it is evident,
that as there can be no assent of the Mind or intellect without words, or
Idea's, so there can be no Faith without them, and consequently that the Rule
of Faith must be certain propositions consisting of words and sentences, such
as God delivered to the Prophets, and which are recorded in Scriptures, such
are, That the Word was made Flesh, that a Virgin should Conceive and Bare a
Son, and that Son should be the Savior of the World; that by his Death he
should reconcile us unto God; That he should rise again from the Dead, on the
Third Day, and ascend into Heaven; and that he should there remain, appearing
in the presence of God for us, our mighty Advocate and Intercessor until he
come again, to Judge the Quick and the Dead, etc. How can the Mind of Man
assent to these great Truths, without words, at least Internally conceived; if
he cannot, as every intelligent Person must acknowledge, then those very words,
as they lie in a certain series and order of propositions, are the Rule of his
Faith. But seeing these words have no self-evidence, but the evidence of the
truth of them depends on the veracity of God, the Original Author of them; the
next thing to be enquired into is, what is the great and most principal motive
of Credibility to move, and effectually persuade the Mind, that they are the
Words of God; surely he who believes that there is a God, cannot but assent to
this proposition, that whatever God has said is true, that all the Words of
God are Words of truth, it has as immediate evidence to him, that has the
least true knowledge of God, as that the whole is greater than the part. That
then which is only requisite to move the Mind of Man to assent to any words
delivered to us, as the words of God, is to have a sufficient motive of
Credibility given us, why we should believe them to be indeed the words of God.
That the Prophets and Apostles knew, that all the words they delivered to Men,
as the words of God, were infallibly the words of God, is generally granted by
all that own the Truth of Divine Revelation, the manner of their Conveyance to
their Understanding, being with such a Divine Power, Majesty and Glory, and
making such a Divine Impression on them, as infallibly assured them; and this
many times without all Miracles proposed to their outward Senses.

Section 8.
That the Faithful have as good Assurance of the Truth, and Divine Authority of
the Holy Scriptures, by the ordinary Inspirations of the Spirit, in the use of
the outward Means, as the Prophets had by Extraordinary and Prophetical; The
Distinction betwixt them, explained.

THE great Question therefore that remains now to be considered and resolved
is, Whither the Faithful cannot have, and actually have not, as good Assurance,
in respect of all Fundamentals and Essentials of the Christian Faith at least,
that the words delivered by the Holy Prophets and Apostles, were the Words of
God, as if they had received them in the same way and manner, as the Prophets
and Apostles received them, which was without any external Medium, such as the
Ministry of Men and Books, whereas the way that we now receive those words, is
by some external Medium, to wit, the Ministry of Men and Books. I shall not
here insist upon the external Motives of Credibility, taken either from so many
Thousands of the best and wisest of Men, in the several Ages of the World,
since the words were committed to writing, who have received and embraced them,
to be what really they are, even the Words of the Living and True God, or such
as are taken from the Words themselves, as outwardly delivered, such as the
Simplicity, Purity, Majesty and Efficacy of their Doctrine, the Harmony of the
several Parts, the fulfilling of the many Prophecies contained in them, the
many other incomparable Excellencies of them, the wonderful Effects they have
had on many Thousands and Millions of Men, in being instrumental to their
Conversion from Idolatry and Ungodliness, to true Piety and Sanctity; all which
are of great weight, to convince the Reason of Men; but because all this does
amount to no more but a rational Conviction, and does not beget a Divine Assent
or Persuasion, Therefore I conclude with all Orthodox and Sound Christians,
that our full Persuasion and Assurance of the Infallible Truth, and Divine
Authority of them, is from the inward Work of the Holy Spirit, by his Internal
and Supernatural Illumination, Inspiration, and Revelation, and secret and most
inward Teaching in our Hearts, by sensible and perceptible Impressions, Sealing
to the Truth of them, upon our Hearts and Minds.

And here I think fit to guard against a twofold Extreme, that I find too many
run into, both greatly and dangerously erroneous; the one is of some, that
grant indeed, that the Spirit does inwardly operate in the Souls of Men, and
more especially in the Souls of the Faithful; but this Operation, or Agency and
Efficiency of the Spirit, they will have it only to be effective, and no-wise
objective; that is to say, no-wise perceptible, or sensible to the Soul, in
which the Spirit does so operate: Hence it is, that some of them have called
this Internal Operation of the Spirit even in the Faithful, Medium incognitum
assentiendi; the which Assertion being so repugnant to the Scripture
Testimonies in many places, that hold forth the Spirits internal Operations and
Virtues to be as sensible, upon the internal and spiritual Senses of Souls, in
any good degree, inwardly quickened and made alive to God, as the Operations of
outward Light, Heat, Cold, or the most affecting Objects of Sight, Taste,
Smelling and Feeling, are upon our outward and bodily Senses; and also being so
contrary to the Experience of many Thousands of true experienced Christians, I
shall not insist here any further to refute it. The other as dangerous and
erroneous Extreme is of such, of whom is W.P. and his Party, as plainly appears
by what he lays down in this Treatise, and often elsewhere in his Books, who
hold, That the Manner and Kind of the Spirits Internal Inspirations,
Revelations, Illuminations, and inward Teachings, is the same with that which
the Prophets and Apostles had; that is to say, that whatever (they think) they
have a Divine Knowledge and Faith of; the words, which are necessary to be the
Rule and Medium, to the obtaining this Knowledge and Faith, must be given them,
as they were given to the Penmen of the Holy Scriptures to wit, without the
external Medium of the Holy Scriptures, and without any external Teaching
whatsoever; and that therefore their Faith and Knowledge, so far as it is
Divine, has no dependence on the words delivered in the Holy Scriptures; but
whatever they know or believe, by a Divine Knowledge and Faith, it is wholly
from words inwardly given them from the Spirit, without all outward conveyance
of Men or Books. Hence it is, that W.P. calls his and his Brethrens Rule of
Faith and Life, the eternal Precepts of the Spirit in Men's Consciences; but as
for the Precepts and Words outwardly delivered in Scripture, they are but to
him, what Pythagoras, and other Philosophers quoted by him, Page 6. judged of
other Writings, to wit, liveless Precepts: Hence many of his Party have
presumed to call them, a Dead Letter, Death, and Carnal. Yet Page 25. he is so
yielding and seemingly kind to the Scriptures, that he grants them to be a
subordinate, secondary and declaratory Rule. Such a subordinate, secondary and
declaratory Rule (says he) we never said, several parts of Scripture were not.
Here observe for all his professed kindness to the Scriptures, he will not
allow all the parts of Scripture, but only some parts of it, to be so much as a
subordinate, secondary and declaratory Rule: though even the Ceremonial
Precepts, he has as great reason to believe them to be the Words of God, and
consequently a Rule of Faith, though not of Practice (as touching the external
Types) as truly as any other parts of Scripture. But seeing every subordinate
and secondary Rule, pre-supposeth a primary Rule, which has no dependence on
the Secondary; though the Secondary is wholly from the Primary, as the
Transcript is wholly from the Original; but the Original is entirely complete
and perfect without the Copy or Transcript; it is evident that according to
him, he has all what he thinks to be a Divine Knowledge and Faith, wholly
from his primary Rule, and nothing from the Scriptures, which he calls the
Secondary, for the Excellency of the primary Rule is, that it teaches all that
is to be divinely known or believed, without the need or help of any secondary
Rule, otherwise it should not be primary, nor should the Scriptures in that
case be a subordinate Rule but coordinate, and of equal Dignity, Necessity and
Use with what he calls the Primary; for whatever is a primary, full, adequate
and perfect Rule, such as he will have only the Light within, or by whatever
other Name he designs it, it must propose to him all the Credenda and Agenda,
i. e. all things he ought to believe and practice, without any other Rule
whatsoever: And yet in Contradiction to his own Doctrine he grants, p. 25. That
by and through the Scripture, as some Instrument, this great and universal Rule
(which he will have to be, the living, spiritual, immediate, omnipresent,
discovering, ordering Spirit of God) may convey its directions. Judge Reader,
if this be not a Contradiction to his former Doctrine, and a great
Impertinency, surely as he who has the Original, has no need of the Copy, nor
great use of it for himself; so if W.P. have such a perfect complete primary
Rule that teaches him, without Scripture, all what he ought to know, believe
or practice, I cannot understand of what great use the Scripture can be unto
him, or at least it is of no necessity to him, this primary Rule has taught
him all beforehand, otherwise it is not primary. If it be objected, That the
Prophets and Apostles had the Spirits inward Teachings, to be their primary
Rule, in what they delivered as Prophets and Apostles, and yet they made use of
the Scriptures, such as were penned before them. I answer, Because neither the
Prophets* nor Apostles were taught in all things, that they believed and
practiced, by the Spirits inward Teachings, as the primary Rule; but only, in
what they spoke or writ as Prophets and Apostles, in other things which they
had not by Prophetical Inspiration; the Scripture, what was then extant of it,
was the primary Rule to them, as well as to others of the Faithful, who were
neither Prophets nor Apostles.

Section 9.
That the Doctrine of the Holy Scripture is the Rule of Faith, which Faith, the
Spirit of God, being the principal Efficient, begets and works in the Faithful,
by the Doctrine, which is the Instrument of the Spirit. That it brings
Confusion, and derogates from the Spirit, to make the Spirit the Rule.

Arg. 6. ANother of W.P's great Arguments, to prove, that the Scripture is not
the Rule of Faith, p. 13. is, How shall I be assured (says he) that these
Scriptures came from God. If with the Spirit that gave them forth, which
searches the deep things of God, (a measure of which is given to me to profit
withal) then it is most congruous, to call the Spirit, by way of Excellency,
and not the Scriptures, the Rule.

I answer, denying his Consequence, It is indeed allowed, that it is congruous,
for that cause, to call the Spirit the principal efficient and moving Cause,
together with Christ, and God the Father; but most incongruous, false and
pernicious, to make him to be the Rule; which is so far from giving the due
Honor and Excellency to the Spirit, so to do, that it derogates from his
Honor and Excellency; for it confounds the efficient Cause with the
Instrument, and is as absurd as to say, the Square, or Carpenter's Rule, that
the Carpenter works with, that is but of Wood, is the Carpenter himself, which
is extremely false; it is no derogation from the Spirit, to say, that he uses
the Rule or Instrument of his own preparing, whereby to frame and fashion us,
according to his good pleasure, as the Carpenter uses his Square or Rule, to
frame his pieces of Wood to put into a Building. And for the better clearing of
the matter, a little further, when all Orthodox Christian Writers say, that we
are assured, that the Scriptures came from God, with, or by the Spirit that
gave them forth; they mean not, that the Spirits inward Testimony or Witness to
the Divine Authority of the Scriptures, is any new or repeated Testimony of the
Words and Doctrines of the Scripture, which is not necessary, but only by way
of putting a Seal on a Deed or Bond, together with the Hand or Subscription of
him that gives the Deed or Bond; which Hand and Seal confirms the Truth of the
Bond; yet it does not tell what the Contents of the Deed or Bond is, nor is it
necessary it should, the Deed or Bond it self tells the Contents of it. And to
use the Schools Distinction a little in the case, The Doctrines and Words
contained in the Holy Scriptures, are the material object of Faith, to wit,
quod Creditur, i e. what is believed; but the Spirits inward Testimony, Seal or
Impulse, and Motion, which carries in it a peculiar Evidence, that none
knows, but he who has it, is the formal Object of Faith, to wit, propter
quod Creditur, that inward Motion and Influence, Impression and Influence of
the Spirit, that sensibly and perceptibly moves the Faithful to believe the
Truth of the Scriptures, as being the Words of God.

Nor is this Controversy, about the Rule of Faith and Life, a Logomachy, or
strife of words, as some may ignorantly suppose, but a most material Case, and
of most dangerous Consequence, to exclude the Scriptures, which are the great
and blessed Means that God has appointed us, for begetting true Faith,
Knowledge and Obedience in us, through the mighty Operation of the Spirit of
God. But if what the Spirit of God has appointed us to be the Means and
Instrument of our Knowledge, and Faith, and Practice, and the Rule whereby to
discern Truth from Error, Right from Wrong, with the Spirits internal
Illumination, we prove neglectful of it, to wit, of the Holy Scriptures, in the
frequent use of them, by Reading, Hearing, Meditation and Prayer, we provoke
the Holy Spirit to depart from us, and to leave us to our vain imaginations,
and Satan's suggestions and delusions, to be received by us as Divine
Revelations, and Inspirations, as has happened to many, to their unspeakable
hurt. Again, as the Spirit, nor yet his Internal Inspiration, or Illumination,
and Revelation, is not the Rule of Faith, but the principal efficient of it,
and his Internal Inspiration, Illumination and Revelation, is the Objective
Medium, moving the Mind to assent to the truth of the Doctrines contained in
the Holy Scriptures, but not the Rule of Faith, nor the Material object of it,
so nor is the Spirits Internal Illumination, Inspiration and Revelation, the
Rule of Interpretation of Scripture, but that which enlightens the
understanding, and opens the Spiritual Eyes of the Mind to understand the
Scripture, or so much of it at least as contain the fundamental Doctrines of
Christianity, and beget a Saving, Sanctifying and Savoury knowledge of them,
without any other Rule than the Scripture it self; for as when our Eyes are
opened, and receive outward Light, to see an object, we need no new object,
whereby to see the Object proposed, but that our sight be strengthened, and
enlightened; so in receiving a Spiritual Understanding of Scripture truths, we
need no other Rule, either outward or inward, but the Scripture it self; only
we need the Spirits inward Illumination, Inspiration, and Revelation, to assist
and help us to a Saving Understanding of them, by way of an objective Medium.

Section 10.
His seventh Argument, against the Scripture being the Rule of Faith; from his
arguing, That they are obscure, and have not the Method of a Rule, Answered.

Page 10. Arg. 7. ANother Reason he gives, which he calls his Third Reason, is,
From the obscurity of them that they are not plain but to the Spiritual Man;
they seem not in their own Nature and frame, to have been compiled and
delivered as the general Rule, and entire Body of Faith, but rather Written
upon particular occasions and emergencies, the Doctrines are scattered
throughout the Scriptures, insomuch that those Societies who have given forth
verbal Confessions of their Faith, have been necessitated to toss them to and
fro, search here, and search there, to lay down this or the other Principle.
Besides here they are Proper, there Metaphorical; in one place literally, in
another Mystically to be accepted. And after diverse other words of Complaint,
against their being the Rule, he concludes, Thus Peter said of Paul's Writings,
that in many things they were hard to be understood, therefore not such a Rule
which ought to be Plain, Proper and Intelligible.

Answ. Reader: What think thou of this sort of Language, in derogation from
the Holy Scriptures? What if I should say of W.P's and all his Brethrens
Writings, what he here says of the Scriptures, That they are neither Plain,
Proper, nor Intelligible, would he not account that saying, a derogation from
them? If this be not to prefer the Friends Writings to the Scriptures in these
Men's esteem, let the impartial Judge, most of which have the advantage above
the Scriptures, by his arguing, The Scriptures were Writ upon particular
occasions, but some of their Books at least designedly Writ, in the Scriptures,
the Doctrines are scattered here and there, but in W.P's and G.W's Books, the
Doctrines and Principles are in excellent Order, and lie together. Paul's
Writings in many things are hard to be understood, and beside they were
originally Writ in Greek, which many understand not, and we have not the
Autographa, but Copies, and of these great variety and difference, as he
argues against the certainty of the Scriptures, upon the foundation of all
others that are not one with them, in making the Spirit the Rule of Faith. P.
23. But we have the Autographa, or at least the first Printed Copies of G.W.
and W.P. without any variation, or difference in matter; and which is a great
advantage, their Writings are the Dictates of the Holy Ghost, originally in
English; whereas we have nothing of the Scriptures originally in English, but
the whole is a Translation very imperfect, and differing from other
Translations both of English and other Languages, and which is best, the
unlearned know not at all, and even the learned many times are not certain; all
which give the advantage by very far, to the Writings of the Friends above the
Scriptures, upon the supposition, that they are the immediate Dictates of the
Holy Ghost, as these Men do not suppose, but positively affirm many of them to
be; especially such as they say, are given forth from the Spirit of Truth. But
suppose diverse parts of the Scripture were writ upon particular occasions, and
emergencies, as to Men, yet many other parts were writ designedly and
intentionally for general instruction to all the faithful; and these so writ,
contain all the essentials and fundamentals of Christian Faith and Practice,
and even these writ upon particular occasions and emergencies seemingly to Men
accidental or occasional; yet with respect to God, were designed by him for a
general good, without whose wise and all-ruling provividence nothing can
happen. What seemed more occasional than Joseph's being sold into Egypt? yet
God Almighty had a glorious design in it, though he was neither the Author nor
Approver of their Envy who sold him. But is it any prejudice against the
Scriptures being the Rule, that they must be searched, to find out the
Doctrines contained in them: Or that some places are hard to be understood,
though all the fundamental Doctrines necessary to Salvation, are sufficiently
plain, to all the Faithful who are Spiritually enlightened to understand them.
Do not the like Objections as much, and rather much more, lie against the Light
within all Men, being the Rule of Faith and Life? For excepting the common
Principles of Moral Justice and Temperance, all other things relating either to
Faith or Life, with respect to the peculiar Doctrines and Precepts of the
Christian Religion, are not to be found at all, in the Light within every Man,
abstractly and by it self considered. Otherwise if W.P. think's they are, let
him tell me, what one peculiar Doctrine of Christian Religion, or peculiar
Precept of it, distinct from Deism, or Gentile Religion, has the Light within
him taught him? If he say, to believe that there is one great God Almighty,
that Commands him to be Honest, Just and Temperate; I say, these are not
peculiar Doctrines and Precepts of Christianity, but common to it with Deism.
And if he has no other Principles or Precepts taught him by the Light within,
but what every Deist, Mohammedan or Jew, who are Enemies to the Christian Faith
have, then let him speak out yet more plainly, though I think he has spoke very
plain already: If the Light within him, has taught him any other Principles or
Precepts, than what Deists, Jews and Mahometans have, let him tell us, that he
may convince us, that the Light within every Man is the Rule of Faith, and not
the Scriptures without; but let him not only tell us so, but give us some
effectual Reason, to convince any ratinal Man, that the Light within him only
has taught him that peculiar Principle and Precept of Christian Religion,
without the Scriptures being so much as Instrumental in his being so taught:
For all Orthodox Christians, by affirming the Scriptures to be the Rule, they
give no more to the Scriptures but to be the Instrument of the Spirit, in
giving all Saving knowledge and Faith of Divine Truth, and if he allow them in
God's ordinary way, to be the Instrument of the Spirit, in giving him, and us
all, the Knowledge of Christian Doctrines and Mysteries peculiar to the
Christian Religion, he has all this time been fighting with his own Shadow; for
if so, he agrees with them all, from whom he seeks so much to differ, and writ
against. That the Spirit of God can reveal in every Man, all necessary Truth,
is granted by all Christians; but the Question is not, what he can do, but what
he does, in God's ordinary way of working.

Section 11.
His eighth Argument answered, That the Scriptures cannot give Faith, therefore
they are not the Rule of Faith. And his ninth tenth Arguments answered.

Page 11. Arg. 8. HIS fourth Argument, as he numbers them, against the
Scriptures being the Rule, is, Because the Scripture cannot give Faith,
therefore is cannot be the Rule of Faith.

Ans. The Consequence is denied, and he gives no offer of proof for it; his
Argument is as weak, as to argue, a Carpenter's Rule or Square cannot build a
House, therefore it cannot be a Rule or Instrument for him to work by in
building a House. This his way of arguing, destroys all use of service of
Instruments and secondary Causes; the like Failure has his arguing against the
Scriptures being the Rule of Practice, Arg. 9. Because it cannot distinguish of
it self in all Cases, what ought to be practiced, and what not. Well; but what
if it cannot of it self, as the Carpenter's Rule cannot of it self as measure
one piece of Wood more than another, without the hand of him that uses it;
does it therefore follow, that the Rule cannot do it, when applied by the Hand
of the Man himself?

Page 12. This (says he) was the Case of Christ's Disciples, who had no
particular Rule in the Old Testament, for the abolishing of some part of the
Old Testament Religion; on the contrary they might have pleaded for the
perpetuity of it. For instance, God gave Cirumcision as a Sign for ever.

Answ. By his favor he is mistaken, in saying they had no such particular
Rule, for the abolishing (he should rather have said, expiring of) some parts
of the Old Testament Religion: Let him read Jer. 3.16. and 31.31, 32. compared
with Heb. 8.8 and he may find the contrary, the word for ever in the place
mentioned by him, in relation to Circumcision, and other Jewish Types,
signified not to the end of the World, far less endlesly, but for a certain
limited time, as the Jews themselves confess at times it so signifies; yea, and
some of the most judicious of them have confessed, they were to cease before
the end of the World.

In his tenth Argument he but too much gratifies his Deist Brethren, and
Profane Atheists by his bringing their and other Popish Arguments, against the
Scriptures being the Rule, Page 13. As that they are not in the Original,
because that is not extant, nor in the Copies, because there are Thirty and
above in number, and it is undetermined, and for ought we see (says he)
indeterminable. And the variety of Readings among those Copies, amount to
several Thousands. And if the Copies cannot, how can the Translations (says
he) be the Rule? And so goes on, disputing against the Translations being the
Rule. And then argues against their being the Rule, from diverse of the Books
of Scripture being rejected by some, and received by others; all which Pleas
both of Deists and Papists, have been abundantly answered by Protestant
Writers; see Dr. Till^tson's Book, called, The Rule of Faith, in answer to J.S.
a Papist, whole Arguments against the Scriptures being the Rule of Faith, are
so much of the same sort with these here of W.P. as if he had taken them from
him. And the inward Testimony of the Spirit sufficiently asserted to the Truth
and Divine Authority of the Holy Scriptures, without taking away from them
their due Honor, Use and Service, of their being the Rule of Faith and Life,
in all things necessary to Salvation; which yet W.P. labors to rob them of,
under a pretense of exalting the Spirit, but really is a degrading and
dishonouring both, as is above proved; beside the great Mischief it causes, in
casting all People, who believe W.P. and his Party, loose from the Scriptures,
that Satan may have the more advantage over them to deceive them, as he has
woefully done; for if the whole Scripture, and every part of them, be not to
them the Rule of Faith, they may choose what to believe, and what not to be
believe; and to believe no more than what the Spirit within (which as it may
be, and often is not the Spirit of God) teaches them to believe; for they may
hence infer, since the Spirit, that is the primary Rule, teaches them not to
believe any such Doctrines, or Precepts, it is but Spurious and Apocryphal, and
no part of the Secondary Rule, as sometimes they are pleased to call it; though
the distinction of primary and secondary Rule will not be found in their first
Authors, for then the Spirit was the only Rule, and the only Means, and the
Scriptures were Carnal, and the dead Letter, and li^eless Precepts, as W.P.
seems to call them, else why does he quote Philo, and Phythagoras, and
others, that called all outward Precepts such.

Section 12.
His eleventh, twelfth and thirteenth Arguments answered.

Arg. 11. HIS eighth Argument is, That the Scriptures are not the Rule of Faith
and Life, because they cannot be the Rule in their Translations, Page 26.
Supposing the ancient Copies were exact, it cannot be the Rule to far the
greatest part of Mankind. Indeed (says he) to none but learned Men; which
neither answers the Promise relating to Gospel Times, which is universal; nor
the Necessity of all Mankind, for a Rule of Faith and Life

Ans. Why not in their Translations, by the help of the Spirit, as above
declared? It may be supposed, that W.P's Learning is not so great, that he
needs not the Translation, as well as other Men; it is well known, that the
Translations, and all the various Copies and Readings, make not the least
Alteration in any of the Fundamental or Essential Doctrines of Christianity;
yea, scarcely in any (much material) whatsoever.

Arg. 12. His ninth Argument is, from those voluminous Discourses of Cases of
Conscience that are extant among us: For (says he) had the Scriptures been as
Sufficient [Note here his fling at their Sufficiency] as the Nature of the Rule
of Faith and Life requires, there had been no need of such Tracts.

Answ. This Argument equally fights against the Light within being the Rule
of Faith and Life, for if it actually does all that the Nature of a Rule of
Faith and Life requires, then pray, What need had there been of so many Tracts
of the Quakers Writings about Doctrines and Principles, as well as Cases of
Conscience, which have amounted to a prodigious Number within these Fifty
Years, seeing all Men have the same Light within them, to be the same Rule in
all: Is not that sufficient without any of these Tracts? If W.P. say it is
because the Authority of the Light within is much gainsaid among Men, and the
Dictates of it grievously perverted and made contradictory; If both Parties,
even among the Quakers themselves, may be believed, G.F and his Party, when
alive, and now W.P's and G.W's Party, judging that which John Story and his
Party believed to be the Dictates of the Light within, to be the Dictates of a
False Spirit, and they judging the like of them. Therefore Books and Tracts
have been multiplied among themselves. And as good and much better reason can
be given, why so many truly pious and edifying Tracts have been written by many
Godly Men, to vindicate both the Sufficiency of the Spirit, and true Light
within, in all the Faithful; and also the Sufficiency of the Scriptures
without; this as the Rule, and that as the principal Teacher, Agent, and
Efficient, working with and by the Rule, and yet none of the two, how much ever
sufficient, excluding the Lord Jesus Christ God-Man without us, from being our
All sufficient Savior, each being sufficient in their own order and manner of
acting. As concerning such Gentiles, to whom the offer of Faith has not been
made, neither by Men nor Writings, none say, that the Scriptures are a Rule to
them; but as they have no outward Rule of Christian Faith, so nor does it
appear, that they have the Christian Faith it self; If any have it, they have
it not by the common Illumination, but by some miraculous and extraordinary
manner, unknown to us. And how God disposes of the more Sober and Virtuous
among them, does not at all reach the present Controversy, which is not,
whither the Scripture be the Rule to all Mankind, that ever lived, or now live,
but whither it be the Rule of Faith and Life, to them who have them, or may
have them, by some possible means.

Page 16. Arg 13. Whereas he says, Does not your own Language and Practice
prove its ( viz. the Scriptures) Insufficiency to that end, at what time you
both exhort to, and go in secret to seek the Mind of the Lord in this or that
important Affair? Why do not you turn to Chapter and Verse for satisfaction, if
the Scripture be appointed of God for the General Rule.

Ans. This Argument has also as great force, or rather much greater, against
the Light within being the General Rule; for do none of the Friends both exhort
to, and go in secret to seek the Mind of the Lord, in this or that important
Affair? Why do they not turn to the Light within to be forthwith without all
Prayer, or waiting, informed and satisfied? If they do not, yea, if W.P. do
not, both he and they are woefully deceived, by neglecting Prayer, and waiting
on God, to receive Satisfaction in this or that important Affair; but if they
find their need both for Prayer, and waiting for direction, then let him answer
his own Argument, and make due Application. But to give a positive and direct
answer, if it be either a matter of Doctrine or Precept, that any Christian
wants due Instruction and Direction in, they may both Pray, and Read, and
search the Scriptures, and Meditate, Iad wait for God's inward Illumination and
^nspiration, to give them a right Understanding, and they may expect it will be
given them, if they sincerely seek it, and use all due Endeavors and Means to
attain it, one of which is, to consult and use the Advice of others, whom they
have cause to judge, Spiritually, more enlightened than themselves. If it be in
Cases that are neither matter of Doctrine, nor Precept, but where the matter is
by it self indifferent, and neither simply commanded nor forbidden, as many
such Cases there are, they may and ought to pray and wait for direction, and it
may please God to give it to them, by some secret Motion, Impulse or Impression
of his Holy Spirit, which may sufficiently satisfy them, without making that
impression, Motion or Impulse, the Rule of either Faith or Obedience, seeing
the Matter is neither a Matter of Doctrine nor Precept, wherein either Faith or
Obedience, as touching that particular is concerned, but a Motion or Impulse
simply from God, upon the Will, cannot be properly called a Rule, because, as
is abovesaid, a Rule, properly speaking, is a Form of Words and Propositions,
either outwardly expressed, or inwardly conceived, to which the Intellect
either assents or dissents: And if any true Christian finds such a motion, or
impulse on his Will, if after examination he find that it does not incline
him, to any thing either contradictory to Scripture, or true Reason, he is in
no great danger to yield to it; and if he do not yield to it, upon just
suspicion or fear, that it is not of God, it will not be charged to be a Sin
upon him; for nothing is Sin, but a Transgression of God's Law.

Page 19. The Law outward (says he) as a Rule was but as Moses, till the Son
came, the Servant abides not in the House for ever, the Written Law held its
place, but till the inward Rise in more Glory and Brightness, or rather, till
People became more capable of being turned to it, and living with and in it.

Answ. Had not Mankind generally the Light within them, under Moses? How comes
it then, that it was not the Rule to them, and did not dismiss the written Law?
But if there be no written nor outward Law given by Christ under the Gospel,
then all that he taught outwardly, and for which he sent his Spirit upon the
Apostles, to bring it all to their Remembrance, and to move them to commit it
to Writing, Yea, the whole New Testament Writings must be dismissed, and turned
out of the Church, the House of God, as was Ishmael and his Mother out of
Abraham's House because by his most false Arguing, the written Law given by
Christ, and the Holy Ghost, under the New Testament, is as much the Servant, as
the Old Covenant was. O the Vanity and Folly of this manner of Arguing, which
wholly makes void Christ's Prophetical and Kingly Office, as he was outwardly
sent in the Flesh, by the Father, to give a more full and clear discovery of
the way of Salvation, as the great Prophet, and to give forth his Royal Laws,
to the Church under the New Testament, as King and Head thereof!

But he further enlarges upon this Argument, P. 17. telling us, There are a
Thousand Cases, in which the Scripture cannot be our Plain and distinct Rule
and Guide: And he adds on the Margent, There Is not laid down in Scripture, any
general Rule, how to answer before Magistrates, and to act in times of
Sufferings.

To which I answer, First he does not well to confound Rule and Guide; it is
granted the Spirit of God is the Guide, Teacher and Leader of the Faithful; but
it does not therefore follow, that the Holy Scriptures, i. e. the many
excellent Instructions, Precepts and Examples given us therein, for the
Government of our Life in all Estates, are not the Rule which the Holy Spirit
uses as his Instrument, to Guide us, in all parts of our Duty. But he might
have told us some of those Thousand Cases, in which the Scripture cannot be our
plain and distinct Rule, whereby to know either our Duty to perform it, or what
is prohibited, that we may avoid it, though we have the inward assistance of
God's Spirit to enlighten our Minds; and set before them, on all necessary
occasions and emergencies, such Scripture Precepts and Prohibitions, as suit
with the present occasions. But if the cases be of things in themselves simply
indifferent, i. e. neither commanded nor forbidden, either by any Precepts of
God, or Just Precepts and Laws of our Superiors, we are left to our choice,
according as our rational Faculties, and Christian Prudence, shall direct us, a
due regard over all being had, to the Glory of God; and that whatever we do, be
done in the Spirit of true Love and Charity; which are general Rules plainly
given us in the Holy Scriptures; the particular application of which in all
particular Cases, whither in relation to Superiors, Inferiors or Equals, the
Holy Spirit by his special Illuminations in our Hearts will teach us, as we
faithfully pray and wait for them, without the need of any other general or
particular Rules, than what already are given us in the Holy Scriptures,
Therefore in opposition to this extravagant and rash Assertion of W.P, that
there are a Thousand Cases, in which the Scripture cannot be our plain and
distinct Rule; I affirm, that there is not one Case, respecting our Duty either
toward God, our selves or our Neighbors, but plain Instructions, and Precepts
are given us in the Holy Scriptures concerning the same; but we still need the
Grace and Guidance of God's Holy Spirit, to give us the Spiritual discovery of
them, and to enable us rightly to practice them. Surely David had a far better
and greater esteem of God's Laws, Precepts and Testimonies, even as outwardly
delivered by Moses, and also by himself, than W.P. has; concerning which he
said Psalm. 119.24. Thy Testimonies also are my delight and my Counselors.
Though David was a Prophet, yet, as King over the People of Israel, he was
commanded of God, to write him a Copy of the Law of God, in a Book, which was
to be with him, and he was to Read therein all the days of his Life, that he
might learn to fear the Lord his God, to keep all the words of that Law, and
these Statutes to do them, etc Deuteronomy. 17.18, 19, 20. And yet David was highly
illuminated and inspired, far above W.P. or any of his Brethren, but the
written Law, was to be the Rule of his Actions as well as of other Men. Nor
could David have excused himself from taking the written Law, to be the Rule of
his Life, because he had it in his Heart; and if it could be no excuse to
David, nor can it be to any Christian now, [King or Subject,] that because they
have the Law writ in their Hearts, and the Spirit put in their inward parts,
according to God's promise in the New Covenant, that therefore the Laws of God,
both of the Old and New Testament* that are of a Moral concern, even as
outwardly delivered do not bind them, which is in very deed to take away the
Authority of the Holy Scriptures, and make void the Prophetical and Kingly
Office of Christ, yea and the Office of the Holy Spirit also* who inspired the
Holy Penmen to commit them to Writing. And it is no less extravagant and rash
in W.P. to assert, that there is not laid down in Scripture any general Rule
how to answer before Magistrates, and to act in times of Sufferings; for though
no particular words are given us, limiting and determining us what to say, yet
the general matter of our Duty is plainly laid down in Scripture, what and how
to answer before Magistrates, as that of Peter and John, Acts 4.19. How that it
is better to obey God than Men, and that of the three Children to King
Nebuchadnezzer, Dan. 3.17, 18. And how to act in Times of Suffering, we have
both excellent commands and examples in Scripture, as Mat. 10.28. 1 Pet. 2.20.
1 Pet. 4.16. Luke 23.34. Acts 7.59, 60. But seeing he does so peremptorily
require a general Rule, to suit all Cases, as well as all Persons of Mankind,
otherwise it could not be general, which yet he will have it to be, what those
dictates or Revelations of the Light in every Conscience are of Jews,
Mahometans and Christians, that can give such plain directions, to all Persons
in all Cases, which the Scripture cannot give, I desire him to tell at least
some of them, If he does not, it is a sign he cannot, and that consequently his
Argument is vain, for the Light or Spirit abstractly considered without all
Revelation can be no Rule.

Section 13.
His fourteenth Argument (which he calls his eighth) answered.

Page 120. AFter he has given Thirteen Reasons, and all false ones enough, as I
think I have sufficiently showed, he comes to that he calls his eighth reason
after his former Thirteen at least: Why the Scriptures cannot be the Rule under
the New Covenant which is this, Christ the Spiritual Leader of a Spiritual
Israel, writes his Spiritual Law in the Heart, as Moses, the outward Israel's
Leader, writ the Law upon Tables of Stone. This was God's Promise, and the
privilege and blessing of the New Covenant, that as the outward Jew had an
outward Law for a directory, the inward Jew should have an inward Law for his
directory; and as the outward Jew had an outward Priest, at whose Mouth be
ought to seek the Law, so the Jew inward and Circumcision in Spirit, has an
inward and Spiritual High Priest, whose Lips preserve knowledge, at whose Mouth
he is to receive the Law of Life. The King, Ruler, Judge, Lawgiver,
High Priest, Law, Rule, are all Spiritual so the Scriptures inform us. My
Kingdom, said Christ, is not of this World. Again, the Kingdom of God is
within, Luke 17.20, 21. I will write my Law in their Hearts. They shall be all
taught of me. Heb. 8.10. quoting Rev. 21.3. Joel 2.28. Tit. 2.11, 12. Job.
32.8. Romans 1.19. [ And here again he falsely quotes the words, Whatever may be
known of God, etc.] Gal. 5.16. 1 John 1.7. Isa. 2.5. Rev. 21. 23. Gal. 6.15,
16. as also he quotes unduly 1 Cor. 12.7. putting a measure of the Spirit for a
manifestation of the Spirit.

Answ. 1. If the Light within be a general Rule to Mankind, then the outward
Israel had it as well as the inward Israel* Where is then the distinction, and
difference betwixt the one and the other? 2. If the Rule of the inward Israel
be within, and the High Priest within, then as the inward Israel, has no Rule,
to be the Rule of their Faith and Life, but the Light in the Conscience, so
they have no High Priest without them but only within them, that is, the Light
in the Conscience; and so there is no High Priest without us, nor no Heaven
without us, into which the Man Christ Jesus is gone; nor King Christ without
us, but only within us; for to say he is both without us and within us also,
will spoil W.P's Argument altogether, and mar his Analogy, betwixt the Law
without under Moses, and the Law within under Christ, the High Priest without
then, and the High Priest within now. If he grant there is a High Priest
without us, and who is also King, as well as Priest, (and that he is more
without us than within us, as all true Christians believe, who have not the
fullness within them, but receive of his fullness, and Grace for Grace, and
therefore that fullness is in the Man Christ without them) he must also grant,
that the Law and Rule of Faith is as well without us as within us, and so his
Argument is spoiled, but that he will be loath to grant, for then the
fundamental Principle of him and his Brethren is plucked up by the Roots, by
confessing to the Man Christ, a High Priest without us, or King without us,
which will necessarily infer the Law and Rule of Faith delivered us by Christ
without us, is not within us only, but without us also, as Christ the Lawgiver
is. Thus we see for Love of their (supposed) Rule of Faith only within them,
W.P. and his Brethren, who approve his Book, abandon and reject utterly any
Christ, High Priest, or King without them, as also he has done in his Christian
Quaker, where he will have P. 97. The Lamb without (in the Passover) to show
forth the Lamb within, (to wit, the Light in the Conscience) but not the Lamb
Christ without, as he was outwardly slain. And yet W.P. for all this, has said
in his late answer to the Bishop of Cork, That the Quakers* differ little in
Doctrine from the Church of England, setting aside some School Terms. And in
his answer to the Bishop of Cork, P. 97. he says, We [ i. e. he and his
Brethren] plainly and entirely believe the Truths contained in the Creed,
commonly called the Apostles Creed. But possibly some fallacy is latent here
also, as if he had said, they believe the Truths Contained in the Jews Talmud,
or Turks Alcoran, for doubtless there are some Truths contained in them both,
but many Falsehoods, and so he may think there are in that Creed, for all his
seeming fair Confession to it, and I offer to prove they have disbelieved them
all. But how this consists with their having only their High Priest, King and
Prophet within them, as they have the Law and Rule of their Faith only within
them, as W.P. here does Argue, I leave to the intelligent to Judge, and whither
this palpable contradiction bewrayes not their great disingenuity, considering
that they will not grant, that they are in any one point changed, in their
Faith or Doctrine, from what they were ever since they were a People but as God
and Truth is the same, so his People, to wit, (the Quakers) are the same, as
they have in so many express words lately Printed, in the Book called the
Quakers Cleared, etc. 3. As concerning the several places of Scripture quoted
by him, that he brings to prove, the inward Teachings of God, Christ and the
Holy Spirit, and God's writing his Laws in the Hearts of the Faithful, all this
is granted by all Sound Christians, but that is not the true State of the
Controversy betwixt the People called Quakers, and their Opponents. But the
true State of the Controversy is this, whither the inward Teachings of God, of
Christ, and of the Holy Spirit, come to believers, without all outward means,
and without all outward Ministry and Service of Men or Books; and whither the
Law, and Rule of Faith, that Believers have in them, put in them, yea, and writ
in their Hearts by the Lord himself, is without all outward Instruction, and
Teaching, or Service of Men, or Books; or whither the Law, and Rule of Faith
and Practice within, in respect of all the peculiar Doctrines and Precepts of
the Christian Religion, be not (so to speak) a Transcript, or Copy from the
Law, and Rule of Faith, without us, as delivered in the Holy Scriptures, which
therefore may be called the Original as to us, though that Original Law and
Rule without us, came from an inward Original in the Holy Prophets, and in the
Man Christ, and his Holy Evangelists and Apostles, which yet had a higher
Original, to wit, the Archetypal Law, as it was in God, before the Copy or
Transcript of it came to be in the Prophets, and from them, committed to
writing outwardly, and from that outward writing, transferred and transcribed
into the Hearts of the Faithful, where it becomes an inward Law, or Rule in
them: And thus the Faithful have the Law and Rule of Faith both without them
and within them; first without them, in the Holy Scriptures; next within* them,
put in them by the Lord in their Hearts, by means of outward Instruction, as
Preaching, Reading, etc. And if the Question be asked, Whither is best, to have
it without them, or within them? I answer, to have it both ways is very
necessary; for in God's ordinary way of working* we cannot have it within us,
if we had it not first without us, no more than we can have Food within us, if
we had it not first without us; for as our outward and bodily Food, that
nourishes our Bodies, comes into our Bodies from without us, by the Door (so
to speak) of our Mouth, so the wholesome Doctrine of eternal Salvation by Christ
our Blessed Savior and Redeemer, (by means of which our Souls and inward Man
are nourished, being accompanied with the Divine Influences of the Grace and
Spirit of God and of Christ) comes into our Souls, by the Door of our outward
Hearing and Reading in the Holy Scriptures. Again, though there be ever so good
Food, and ever so Plentiful, without us, yet if we receive it not within us, it
neither does nor can nourish us: And as the clean Beasts under the Law, did
chew the Cud of what they did eat, for their Nourishment, so the Faithful, what
they outwardly hear and read of God's Word in the Holy Scriptures, must
meditate upon inwardly, for their Spiritual Food. Thus the great necessity of
having the Law and Word of God both without us and within us, the Rule of our
Faith and Life is evidently apparent, so long as we live in these mortal
Bodies: And therefore God has appointed, and Christ has given an outward
Ministry, together with his other Gifts and Graces, to his Church, to continue
to the end of the World, and to his last coming. But again, if it be asked, Is
there not an Internal word, Voice or Teaching of Christ, distinct from the
outward word, Voice and Teaching, that outwardly sounds in our outward Ears.
I answer, There is, but in God's ordinary way, it works in the Faithful,
accompanying the outward word; and by means thereof, the which inward word,
Voice and Teaching, (properly and strictly speaking) is not any singular, new
or differing Form of words, but rather a Divine Power, Light and Life,
quickening, enlightening and strengthening the Understanding and Heart of Man,
Spiritually and Savingly to understand the Divine Doctrines and Mysteries of
the Christian Faith, outwardly delivered in the Holy Scriptures; and not only
so, but giving the Souls of the Faithful, at times, a Divine Sense, Sight and
Taste of God's Divine Power, Love and Life, called in Scripture, A tasting of
the heavenly Gift, and of the good Word of God, and of the powers of the World
to come; which Sight, Sense and Taste, and Spiritual Feeling, is indeed beyond
all that can be either uttered with the Mouth, heard with the Ear, or conceived
in the Mind, in or by any Form of words, as the outward Sight, Sense, Taste and
Feeling of outward delightful Objects, is beyond all words, and report of them,
as the Scripture says, Eye has not seen, nor Ear heard, nor has it entered
into the Heart, to conceive the good things that God has prepared for them
that love him. But (as says the Apostle Paul) God has revealed them to us (to
wit, to the Faithful) by his Spirit, 1 Cor. 2.9, 10. Isaiah 64.4. viz. in an
earnest and first Fruits, the Harvest and full Fruition being reserved for the
future State. And here again, if it be asked, what is the Rule, whereby to know
surely the true Divine Enjoyment, as above described, from the false and
counterfeit, that may be nothing other than Satan's Transformings? I answer, It
is improper in this Case, to ask what is the Rule of Faith or Practice, because
this high Divine Enjoyment, is (properly speaking) neither an Act of Faith nor
Practice, though it is a proper Consequent and Concomitant of sound Faith, and
godly and virtuous Practice; for as in the exercise of the outward Sight,
Hearing and Taste, no Form of words can be a Rule to a Man, to teach him how to
See, Hear or Taste, but the sound Disposition of the Organs of those Senses,
and the due Application of the Objects, is all that is requisite to enable a
Man to know what he certainly Sees, Hears and Tastes; so when the Spiritual
Senses of the Soul, are awakened by the quickening Power of God, and the Mind
fitly and duly disposed, whatever Divine and Spiritual Objects are presented to
that Soul and Mind, it naturally and necessarily apprehends them by its
Spiritual Senses, which are as it were the Spiritual Organs of the Inward and
Spiritual Man; the best and fittest Disposition of the Soul and Mind, making it
capable for such Divine Enjoyment, is, Internal Purity of Heart, as our Savior
has taught us, saying, Blessed are the pure in Heart, for they shall see God;
that is, always accompanied with a sound Faith, grounded upon the sound and
wholesome Doctrine of the Holy Scriptures: And though no Form of words can be a
Rule, a Priori, whereby to discern true Enjoyments from false and counterfeit,
yet a Posteriori, that is, by the Consequents and Effects, they may soon and
quickly be discerned, if duly examined by the infallible Rule of Faith and Life
laid down in the Scriptures, even as a Posteriori; or consequentially, a Man
may know, whither what (he apprehends) he sees, hears, or tastes outwardly,
be real or imaginary.

Section 14.
Diverse places of Scripture explained, and rescued from his Corrupt Glosses
and Interpretations.

BUT before I finish my Answer to this his last Argument, I think fit to take
notice, how he has perverted, misconstrued, and misapplied all and every one of
the places of Scripture above recited out of his Page 21, to prove that the
Light in every Man's Conscience, is the Rule of Faith and Life to every Man,
and that without any necessary super-addition without or within Men, be they
Jews, Mahometans, Infidels, Christians, they have all but one and the same Rule
of Faith and Life, as they have one and the same Creator. For indeed not one of
these places are to be understood, as with respect to that part of Mankind,
that lived or now live in pure Heathenism, or Gentilism, but such as were or
are professed Members of God's Church as the Jews were, when our Savior was
bodily present on Earth; and as the Christians were and now are, excepting that
one place Romans 1.19. which as I have above noted, he falsely quotes, rendering
it, Whatsoever may be known of God; which as the English Translation does not
so word, nor does the Greek bear it, and the Falseness of it I have above
described; as for the saying of our Savior, My Kingdom is not of this World;
which is the first of those Quotations above given: Can it be supposed, that by
his Kingdom there, he meant nothing but the Light in every Man's Conscience, he
offers not the least proof of it; the Kingdom of God, and of Christ, in
Scripture, (otherwise called the Kingdom of Heaven) has diverse
significations, sometimes it signifies his Church, that is called a Kingdom of
Priests, sometimes his Rule and Government in and over his Church, by his Laws,
and Precepts, and Power of his Spirit and manifold Gifts and Graces, and
sometimes the Gospel, with the Blessings thereof, that is, the Doctrine of the
Gospel; as where Christ said to the Jews, The Kingdom should be taken from
them, Matt. 21.43. as has been accordingly fulfilled, though still they have
the common Illumination of the Light within them; and sometimes it signifies
his Kingdom of Glory in the future State after Death. This next Quotation is
out of Luke 17.20, 21. The Kingdom of God is within you; which also he falsely
quotes, leaving out the word you, so making it universal, to serve his Design,
for a Proof that the Light in every Man's Conscience, is that which is meant by
Christ in this place, the Kingdom of God. I grant God has an universal
providential Kingdom in and over all his Creatures, and more particularly in
and over all Mankind, according to Psalm. 103.19. and his Kingdom rules over
all, or in all; and that his providential Kingdom among Men, is administered in
great part, by means of the common Illumination in and over all Men; but the
Kingdom, as it is here understood Luke 17.20, 21. is not his providential
Kingdom, but a new Administration of the Gospel, that many were looking for,
and expecting, which made the Pharisees ask, when the Kingdom of God should
come; surely as they meant not to ask when his providential Kingdom should
come, or when should Men begin to have something to reprove or convince them,
for common Sins in their Conscience; nor did Christ mean it so, but of some
more excellent Dispensation by his Doctrine and Preaching, which the Pharisees
had heard as well as others; and therefore it might well be said to be not only
among them, as some translate it, but even in them, to wit, the Doctrine of the
Kingdom, together with which some inward Seed of Light might have been sown in
some of their Hearts by his Ministry, beyond and above the common Illumination*
But what proof is this, that the Gentiles had the Kingdom of God in them, in
this Sense, who never to this day heard Christ, or any of his Ministers, nor
received any Gospel Doctrine, by any outward Testimony, by voice or writing.
And Heb. 8.10. compared with Jer. 31.33. and all the other places do wholly
respect that part of Mankind, to whom the Gospel is outwardly preached, and for
most part such who did believe it, or were in due time to believe it, as that
noted place Titus 2.11, 12. by the Grace of God, that had appeared to all,
cannot be understood, the common Light or Illumination in all, because v. 13.
it was such a Grace, that taught such who gave up to be taught by it, and obey
it, to look for that blessed Hope and glorious Appearance of the great God, and
our Savior Jesus Christ, who gave himself for us [to dye for us, that by his
Death, and precious Blood outwardly shed for us] he might redeem us from all
Iniquity. Now can W.P. or any of his Deist Brethren, prove that any Jew,
Mohammedan, Heathen, or Deist, that obey the Dictates of the Light within, are
taught thereby to look for this glorious appearing of Jesus Christ, when he
shall come in his glorified Manhood, to judge the Quick and the Dead, for that
no doubt is the glorious Appearing here meant, the most Obedient of his Jewish
Mohammedan Brethren to the Light within them, and the most strict and exact
Deists here in England will tell him, they believe no such thing, their Light
within them has taught them no such Faith nor Hope; yea, Cornelius that was a
most excellent Gentile for Virtue, and I suppose in his Gentile state surpassed
for Piety and Virtue, the best Deist in England, was not taught by the Light
that was formerly in him in his Gentile state, to believe Remission of Sin
through Faith in Jesus of Nazareth, whom the Jews hanged on a Tree, etc. but
was informed by the Angel, to send for Peter to preach this Jesus to him; nor
did the Angel direct him to the Light in him simply for Information, but to the
Apostle Peter without him, that by means of his Ministry he might receive the
Christian Faith, and the special Illumination of the Holy Ghost, as accordingly
was fulfilled. And as to the words Jer. 31.34. compared with Heb. 8.11. they
shall not teach every Man his neighbor, and every Man his Brother, saying,
Know the Lord: For all shall know me, from the least to the greatest. This
Promise does only belong to the Children of the New Covenant, to wit, the
Members of Christ's Catholic Church, and not to all Mankind, therefore cannot
be meant of the common Illumination in Heathens and Infidels, nor of many
Thousands living under a visible Profession of Christianity, who are not so
taught of God, that they need not a Man to teach them; or to say, know the
Lord, for to be so taught is a high State, and the words have their full and
perfect accomplishment in the future State, though in part here; and
comparatively, they have their present fulfilling, as often indeed many places
of Scripture have a comparative meaning Besides, that it is granted, that that
high degree of Divine knowledge above described, that is, a divine enjoyment of
God, by Spiritual Sensation, Sight and Taste, one Man cannot teach it to
another, for it surpasses all words, either uttered or conceived; as one Man
cannot teach another that is Blind to see, or Deaf to hear, or that has not
his Taste, to Savor; though as to the Doctrinal knowledge, he may teach him,
and by means of that Teaching, be made instrumental, by the blessing and Grace
of God, to open his Spiritual Eyes, and excite those Spiritual Sensations in
him. And what though Christ left nothing in Writing by himself, for the Rule of
Faith and practice, as W.P. argues, what his Apostles and Evangelists
committed to Writing by his Inspiration, was sufficient, why it should be
received to be the Rule of our Faith, that is, the outward Instrument, whereby
Faith is wrought in us, and whereby we may be helped, through the Spirits
inward Illumination and assistance, how to discern what we are to believe to be
true Doctrine, and what we are to practice. But it is very strange what he
further says, That had he intended the Rule of his followers to have been a
written Rule, [note, a written Rule] he would have left it upon record, with
all punctuality, this must be believed and that done, on pain of Eternal Death.
His words plainly import, as if such punctuality had not been recorded, but as
if People who read the Scriptures, or hear them ever so truly expounded, were
left at liberty to believe this or the other thing, or not belive it, though
written and commanded; and also to do or not do, without any danger of
Damnation; whereas the plain words of our Savior are recorded by Mark 16.16.
He that believes not shall be Damned; believes not what? surely both what
Christ Preached, and what his Apostles and Evangelists were inspired to write,
by his Spirit, to whom those Writings should come, for others to whom they have
not come, their Sins against the Law and Light in their Consciences, are
sufficient to render them without excuse. But (says he) nor did his followers
write in the method of a Rule. How knows he that? Is he so great a Master of
Method, so as that he can prove, they write not in the Method of a Rule? What
says he to Christ's Sermon on the Mount, and his other Sermons recorded by the
Four Evangelist's, which alone, though we had no other parts of the New
Testament, are a sufficient Rule both of Faith and Life, which yet makes not
the other parts superfluous: It is a good saying, Abundance of the Law breaks
not the Law; as God's ways are not as Man's ways, so God's Method, in
delivering us the Rule of Faith and Life, is not as Man's Method. And what
says he to Luke, who ( Luke 1.13.) declares, that having had perfect
understanding of all things from the very first, it seemed good to him to write
them in Order; and said John, (John 20.31.) These are written, that ye might
believe, that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of God, and that believing ye might
have Life through his Name. It is strange that a Quaker should argue against
the Scripture being the Rule of Faith and Life for wanting the Method of a
Rule, who may be thought very improper Judges of Method, being so immethodical
themselves both in Writing and Preaching, and cry out against others for
Method; and yet now the Scriptures must be rejected from being the Rule of
Faith and Life, for not being writ in the Method of a Rule, If W.P. must be
believed, whereas the best skilful in the Method of Teaching, both pious and
learned, have not only greatly esteemed, but highly admired the Method of the
Scripture, even when it seems least to have Method, and most especially, the
Method of our Savior's Sermons recorded in the Four Evangelists, and of that
most excellent form of Prayer he taught his Disciples. And if the Scriptures
must be rejected from being not only the Rule of Faith and Life, but a written
Rule (as his express words above noted are, though in contradiction to himself,
who elsewhere calls them a Rule, but not the Rule; now he will neither have
them to be the Rule, nor a written Rule) for want of the Method of a Rule, he
may quarrel against diverse parts of God's Creation, as not being placed in
that Method and Order, that his Wisdom thinks meet. Sure I am, some Atheists
have argued at such like rate, against the Worlds being Created by an infinite
Wisdom and Goodness, because, as they imagined things lie in great disorder,
throughout the visible World, here a spot of the Earth fruitful, there a great
part of it unfruitful, and uninhabitable; some parts have too much Water that
drown the dry Land, overflow Cities, fruitful Fields and pleasant Meadows;
other parts are scorched with drought and uninhabitable for want of Water;
other large parts not fit for Habitation for Cold. Also the Providence of God
toward Mankind are greatly disputed by Atheists, because of that seeming
disorder and want of method, in things and Events that happen to Men of all
sorts, virtuous Men neglected, oppressed, afflicted, and vicious Men exalted,
honored and praised. It is a great Default in W.P. thus to argue against the
Scriptures, for want of Method, as being the Rule, wherein he too much
resembles the Atheists arguing against the Ways and Methods of Divine
Providence, from thence concluding there is no Rule of Divine Providence in the
World, as W.P. concludes, there is not the Rule of Faith and Life in the Holy
Scriptures.

Section 15.
Whither the Laws and Precepts of God and Christ, as written in the Holy
Scriptures, do bind the Faithful to Obedience. W.P. his absolute Necessaries of
Religion, no other but what are generally owned by Infidel Jews, Mahomitans,
Deists, and the greatest Heretics.

HAving thus finished my Answers to his Arguments against the Scriptures being
the Rule of Faith and Life, yea, not only against being the Rule, but a Rule,
as above noted, in contradiction to himself, who sometimes calls them a Rule,
to wit, a Subordinate, Secondary and Declaratory Rule; but yet he will not
allow this to the whole Scripture, but that several parts of it are so, that
is, so much of it as Heathens and Deists have taught them by the Light within,
to wit, Precepts of Moral Honesty, etc. but Salvation by Christ Crucified, and
Remission of Sins by his Blood, is not taught them by their Light within;
therefore this Doctrine of the Scripture is not so much as a Secondary Rule to
W.P. and his Deist Brethren; the unsoundness of which Distinction I have above
showed, I shall now briefly point at some other Impertinencies in his Book now
before me, and so conclude.

Page 25. We confess (says he) the reason of our Obedience, viz. to the
Precepts written in the Scriptures, is not merely because they are written, for
that were legal, but because they are the Eternal Precepts of the Spirit in
Men's Consciences. Here diverse things need Correction; First, I know none that
ever said, that the reason of our Obedience to those Precepts, is merely
because they are written, but chiefly and principally we are obliged to believe
and obey them, being the Commands of God: but though the reason of our
Obedience to them, is not merely that they are written, yet being now written,
and the Wisdom of God having so appointed it, that they should be written, and
the Writers being inspired to that very purpose, to write them for our
Instruction, and that we should believe them and obey them; we ought both to
believe them and obey them, as they are outwardly written; otherwise, if their
deliverance to us by writing, have no Influence on us to believe them, and obey
them, we may wholly disregard them as such, and only mind those eternal
Precepts of the Spirit, as he terms them, in the Consciences of Men, to wit,
Jews, Mahometans, Heathens, Deists. Again that he says, It is legal to obey
them, merely because written I see not how it was legal, for the Law did not
command them to obey them merely as written, but because they were the
Commandments of God; but to reject them, as having any Influence on us, or
laying any Obligation on us as written, is to reject Christ's Prophetical and
Kingly Office, a part of which was to inspire his Evangelists and Apostles to
commit them to writing. But again, That nothing is to be obeyed for a Rule, or
the Rule, but the eternal Precepts of the Spirit in Men's Consciences, as he
affirms. This indeed makes a very short and near way to Heaven, were it as
true as short and near. He seems to give us an account what these eternal
Precepts are, Page 44. But most Persuasions (says he) are agreed about the
absolute Necessaries in Religion, from that Light and Witness God has placed in
Man's Conscience, viz. That God is, that he is a Rewarder of them that
diligently seek him; that the way of God is a way of Purity, Patience,
Meekness, etc. without which no Man can see the Lord.

Answ. Note well, Reader, these few things, That every Deist, Jew and
Mohammedan, that are sober and rational, will acknowledge, are all the absolute
Necessaries in Religion, that he lays down. But how falsely does he allege that
most Persuasions are agreed, that these, without all the Articles peculiar to
the Christian Faith, (as concerning the Holy Trinity, the Incarnation of the
Word, the Satisfaction of Christ, by his Sacrifice on the Cross to Divine
Justice, etc. in a word, all the twelve Articles of the Apostles Creed) are all
the absolute Necessaries in Religion. Is the whole Christian Catholic Church
of Christ throughout the World, in all Ages, no considerable part of Mankind,
having Religious Persuasions? Or if they are, let him tell us, what part of
Christ's Catholic Church ever held, or does now hold, that none of all the
twelve Articles of the Apostles Creed, or few of them, are the absolute
Necessaries in Religion, together with other Moral parts relating to Moral
Virtues. I think he can tell us scarce any, but such as may be justly doubted,
or disowned to be Members of the Church of Christ. If he bring in himself, and
his Party and Deist Brethren, he but begs the Question, to say, they are a part
of the Christian Church, while they deny the great Fundamentals of her Religion
to be absolutely necessary. But let us hear him further in the same Page, he
says, Nay they accord in some considerable Matters super added, as some of
them speak, that God was manifested extraordinarily in the Flesh; that he gave
his Life for the World; that such as believe and obey his Grace in their
Hearts, receive Remission of Sins, and Life everlasting. First, It is needful
he should explain what he means by these words, That he gave his Life; whither
the Life of the Man Christ without us, or the Blood, which is the Life, and
that Life is the Light within, as he has been heard to preach, and is
according to his Books. And what means he by the word believe? Whither to
believe, that Christ died for our Sins, and rose again? Well, in Charity I will
suppose this to be his meaning, otherwise he would greatly equivocate; but
still all this belief is none of the absolute Necessaries in Religion, they are
some considerable Matters superadded; Superadded to what? To the Scriptures.
Nay, they are the chief Doctrines of the Scriptures. Therefore again I ask,
Superadded to what? Why to the Light within its Dictates. But are they
necessary to be believed, since they are supernumerary, and superadded to the
Dictates of the Light in every Conscience? Yea, says W.P. Page 35. where the
History has reached, and the Spirit of God has made a Conviction upon the
Conscience. Well then, If they are necessary to be believed, where the Spirit
of God has made this Conviction upon the Conscience; this Conviction is not
the Effect of the general Light in every Conscience, but somewhat superadded;
and therefore the general Light in the Conscience, is not the perfect and
complete Rule. But what if the Spirit make not this Conviction upon the
Conscience of some, who have the Scripture, which he calls the History? Is he
sure the Spirit will make it, or does make it, on every Conscience to whom the
History reaches? If he say yea, he throws down his Fabric with his own
words; for if so, this Conviction made by the Spirit of God on the Conscience,
must be a part, yea, the greatest part of the Rule of Faith, to all who have
the Scriptures; because the Scriptures hold forth many more things to be
believed and practiced, than these few eternal Precepts, as he calls them, of
the Spirit in the Conscience. And though W.P. here seems to render them
excusable, to whom the Doctrine of Christ's Death has reached, and yet believe
it not, on whom the Spirit of God has not made a Conviction. Yet in his
Treatise of Spiritual Liberty, he calls it a loose Plea, to pretend want of
Conviction for not obeying G.F's Orders, and tending to Ranterism. But if he
shall say, the Spirit does not work this Conviction upon many that the History
reaches, as his words import, then they are left at liberty, whither to
believe them at all, without all Sin or danger. Thus we may see what sort of
Faith he and his Brethren have, of the Articles of the Creed, viz. An
unnecessary Faith, to have it, or not have it, is all a Case, if they have it
not, it is not their Sin, their primary Rule the Light within them, tells them
nothing of it. But then why should the Secondary Rule tell them any of these
things? As there is nothing in the Copy but what is in the Original, so there
is nothing in the Secondary Rule, the Scriptures, at this rate, but what is in
the Dictates of the Light within; and therefore all that is to be found in the
Scripture, that is not in the Dictates of the Light within* is not so much as
the Secondary Rule. Thus we may see of what little value the Scriptures are and
must be with him and his Party, by this his way of arguing and answering
Objections. But note, Reader, how in his foregoing words I have faithfully
quoted, he makes the believing and obeying God's Grace for Remission of Sins,
and Life everlasting, to be none of the absolute Necessaries of Religion, but
superadded, as some of them speak. Here is Obedience to God's Grace made as
unnecessary by W.P. as Faith in Christ, as he was outwardly manifest in the
Flesh. What thinks G.W. and his Brethren of this Doctrine? Is it not plain
Antinomianism, yea plain Ranterism?

Section 16.
The Scriptures are not certainly known and believed, upon the Foundation of
W.P. and his Party among the Quakers, but are upon the Foundation of all
Orthodox Christians. The Question wrongly stated by W.P. about the Sufficiency
of the Light or Spirit of God within, which is not what he can reveal, but what
he does reveal, without the outward Means of Instruction.

Page 23. HE labors to turn off that Objection against him, of his arguing
from the uncertainty of the Scriptures, that they cannot be a Rule of Faith and
Life, by answering, The Scriptures are uncertain upon their Foundation, but not
upon ours. We would have them received (says he) upon the Spirits Testimony
and Evidence which gave them forth. I answer, And so would all true Christians;
but the difference is great, in the way and manner of their and his defining
this Testimony or Evidence, which he and his Brethren will have wholly to be by
Prophetical and Apostolical Inspiration, the same in Specie and Kind with what
the Prophets and Apostles had, giving them a new repetition of the same
Articles and Precepts, and all this only from the Light within, as it is a
common dispensation to all Mankind; the falsity of which, common experience, as
well as the Testimony of Scripture does sufficiently prove; for if the, Light
within them does de novo, give W.P. and his Brethren, the Revelation of all or
most of these peculiar Doctrines of Christianity, why should they have it more
than Jews, Mahometans, Deists and Heathens, many of whom they account have
been, and are faithful and obedient to the Dictates of the Light within them.
Besides if more be revealed to the Quakers by the common Light within, than to
other parts of Mankind, who have not the Scriptures; they must needs grant,
their Rule of Faith is more large and full, than that in others; and
consequently not being so perfect in others, as in them, it is no general Rule
of Faith, for thus he argued against the Scriptures. But if the Scriptures, are
so wholly uncertain upon the foundation of other Christians, and so certain
upon the foundation of the Quakers, from their pretense to the same divine
Inspiration that the Prophets and Apostles had, they would wonderfully oblige
the Christian World, If we could believe them, to tell us, from their
infallibility, what Translations are best; or rather to give us a new
Translation by divine Inspiration; and which of all the Copies, and various
Iections are truest: but that this is a groundless and empty brag, is too
apparent, while their ignorance, and gross perversions of Scripture, and false
Interpretations, are greater than any other in Christendom, as can easily be
proved. But in contradiction to all this, that the Scriptures are certain, upon
the Quakers foundation, from the divine Inspiration, and Revelation that the
Spirit has given them of their Truth, much or indeed most of all this is again
denied by W.P. telling us, in answer to that Objection Page 32. This Light you
speak of, could not tell you, which way Sin came into the World, that there was
an Adam and Eve, that they fell after that manner, and that Sin so entered the
World, that Christ was born of a Virgin, suffered Death, and rose again, etc.
He roundly answers, that inasmuch as an account of those things has been
already revealed, and is extant, therefore any new Revelation of such things is
not needed. I answer, How not needed? and yet certain to you, upon the Spirits
inward Evidence and Testimony, and to none but you, and such as you, who
pretend to the same Revelations with the Prophets and Apostles? However, seeing
he grants, he and his Brethren have no Revelation from the Light within them,
That Christ was born of a Virgin, suffered Death, and rose again; therefore he
must needs confess, all these things concerning Christ's Birth, Death,
Resurrection, are uncertain to them, and so no matters of their Faith. And then
seeing other Christians believe these things upon an inward Evidence and
Testimony of the Spirit, though not by the same Revelation in Kind or Specie
with that of the Prophets and Apostles; yet by way of Seal to the truth of
them, as above explained, the proper consequence of which is this, that all
these great things recorded in Scripture, concerning Christ's birth of a
Virgin, his having dyed for our Sins, his Resurrection, Ascension and
Intercession for us in Heaven, are altogether uncertain upon the Quakers
foundation, because as W.P. confesses not inwardly revealed to them, which yet
are certain upon the foundation of all true Christians, to wit, the inward
Testimony and Evidence of the Spirit, by way of sealing to the Truth of them,
as by an objective medium, as above explained. But why are not these things,
concerning Christ's Birth, Death, revealed to the Quakers by W.P's confession?
Why; because they are not necessary to be believed, they are none of the
Eternal Precepts of the Spirit in the Consciences of all Men, Teaching some few
things of owning a great God Almighty, and some few moral Principles, of
Temperance and Justice, as doing as we would be done by; this is the Quakers
Evangelium Eternum, their everlasting Gospel, whatever is more is unnecessary
and Superfluous.

Page 32. He says, To say the Light or Spirit could not do it, [ viz. reveal
that Christ was born of a Virgin, suffered Death, and rose again, etc.] is
blasphemous as well as absurd: Answ. I know none that says, the Spirit or God
and Christ considered as the Light, could not do it; but that is not the
Question, what the Spirit could do, or what the Light within, taking it in the
highest Sense, as to signify the divine Word, could or can do; but the proper
state of the question is, whither the Spirit, or Light within, has given,
generally any such Revelation of these things; which if he has not given, and
that to all Men, then to be sure, even by W.P's confession, such Revelation is
no part of the Rule of Faith, for it is not what God who is Light, or the
Spirit can reveal, but what he has revealed that is the Rule of Faith, and
does ordinarily reveal. And seeing the Quakers, as W.P. has granted, have no
inward Revelation of these things, viz. That Christ was born of a Virgin, etc.
It is no part of their Faith, or Creed, for the Rule of their Faith has not
taught it them. If any have said, the Light within every man cannot reveal
these things, they do not mean by the Light within, either Christ or the
Spirit, but that common Illumination that is in all Men, that is neither Christ
nor the Spirit, but yet is a gift of Christ and of the Spirit.

Section 17.
His Proofs out of the Fathers, and Primitive Protestants, for the Spirits
being the Rule of Faith, all Fallacious. An Instance of Calvin ( quoted by him)
in some Passage of his Institutions, expressly to the contrary. Whither the
Esseni, Pythagoras, Clinias, and the Scythians, before our Savior's
Incarnation, thought Swearing unlawful, from the Light within.

AS for these, many Authors some Fathers, and other late Protestant Authors,
that he quotes in confirmation of his Assertion, viz. That the Scripture is not
the Rule of Faith and Life, but the Light in every Conscience; none of all
these quotations, which I have diligently read and considered, say any such
thing, viz. That the Scriptures are not the Rule of Faith and Life, or that the
Light in every Conscience is that Rule. Either he is very ignorant, and
unacquainted in Calvin and Beza's wriings, and other Protestants, or very
unfair to quote them, when he cannot but know in his Conscience, if he be
acquainted with them, that all those Protestant Authors did Zeolously contend,
that the Scripture was the Rule of Faith and Life, and though they did
Zealously assert the necessity of the Spirits Internal Evidence and Testimony,
to Seal to the Truth of the Scripture, and give the understanding of it, yet
none of them all that he has quoted say, or hold that the Spirit, or Light in
every Conscience is the Rule of Faith and Life; I rememno such Doctrine taught
by them, and yet I suppose, I know their Doctrine, as well as he; and were it
needful, I could produce sufficient Testimonies from their Books, that he has
manifestly wronged them; but he who takes so great liberty to wrest the
Scriptures, no wonder if he make bold to do the same with these Men's Writings.

His Quotation out of Calvin is this, Inst. Lib. 1. Cap. 8. It is necessary the
same Spirit that spoke by the mouth of the Prophets, should pierce into our
Hearts, to persuade us that they faithfully delivered that which was committed
to them of God. This does not prove that Calvin denied the Scriptures to be the
Rule of Faith, having expressly taught that they were.

But to show how little acquainted W.P. is with Calvin's Doctrine in this
point, [whom he has quoted for him, to prove that the Scripture, or written
word, is not the Rule of Faith, but the Light in every Conscience, or the
Spirit abstractly considered from the written word] or how unfair and
fallacious in so doing, if acquainted with his writings, I shall give some
passages out of his Institutions.

That is, in English. Nam cum humana men's pro sua imbecillitate, pervenire ad
Deum nullo modo queat, nisi sacro ejus verbo adjuta and sublevata, omnes tunc
mortales, exceptis Judaeis, quia Deum sine verbo querebant necesse fuit in
vanitate atque errore versari. Calvin Instit. Lib. 1. c.6. S.4.


For when the mind of Man, for its weakness, could by no way come to God,
unless helped and assisted by his Holy Word, it was necessary that all Men, the
Jews excepted, did walk in vanity and error, because they sought God without
the Word.

Thus we see, according to Calvin, how necessary was the Word of God, to wit,
the Doctrine outwardly delivered of God to Men, by the Holy Prophets, to bring
them to God, out of error and vanity, for by the Holy Word, it is manifest,
Calvin meant not the Light within, which all Mankind had, as well as the Jews,
but the outward Word of Doctrine delivered by the Prophets, according to Psalm.
147.19* He showed his Word unto Jacob, etc. The which external Word, he calls,
Sect. 1. Aliud and melius adminiculum, i. e. another and better help, which was
necessary, to direct us rightly to the Creator of the World, comparing it with
whatever other helps God had given to Mankind, (without them or within them,)
which he calls, Communia illa Documenta, those common Documents, the which
external Word, (he says) is Rectior and certior ad ipsum Cognoscendum nota, i.
e. a more right and more sure Mark, whereby to know him, which also he calls,
the Rule of the Eternal verity, and cap. 9. Sect. 1. l. 1. inst. He calls
them Nebulones i. e. Knaves, and charge them with Nefarious Sacrilege, that
divide the Word, to wit, the external Word from the Spirit, which God has
Joined together by an inviolable Bond; and in the Title of that Chapter, he
calls them Fanatics, and says, They overthrow all the Principles of Piety,
who despising the Scripture, (to wit, considered as the Rule) flee over to
Revelation, pretending to be taught by the Spirit, without the external Word.
Where it is evident, he does not mean, that whoever are taught by the outward
Word, are sufficiently taught, without the Spirit; but that whoever are taught
Savingly, to know God as the Creator, or Christ the Redeemer, they are taught
of the Spirit, with and by the external Word, as the instrument of the Spirit
which he has given to us, for a Rule of Faith and Life, not that it is the Rule
to the Spirit, but the Rule to us of the Spirits giving and preparing, and
which he persuades us to be Truth, by his secret operation in us. And as unfair
and fallacious as W.P. has been, in wresting, misapplying and abusing Calvin's
words, to prove that he was not of another Mind, than W.P. viz. That the
Scriptures is not the Rule of Faith and Life, he is as unfair, absurd and
fallacious in his quoting other late Protestant Authors, as Bish. Jewel, Dr.
Ames, Dr. Owen, all which are sufficiently known by their Books to be of a
contrary Mind, as much, as one thing can be to another: The Quotations indeed
taken out of those Authors, prove, that they did assert the necessity of the
Spirits inward Operation, in the Souls of Men, to persuade them, to believe the
Truth of the Scriptures, and the necessity of his Internal Illumination, to
give the Saving understanding of them, as particularly the quotation given out
of J. Calvin instit. lib. 1. c. 8. who gives the Sense of all those Authors,
and indeed of all true Christians, viz. It is necessary, the same Spirit, that
spoke by the Mouth of the Prophets, should pierce into our Hearts, to persuade
us, that they faithfully delivered that which was committed to them of God,
which he illustrates by the word Obsignare, elsewhere in that Book, that is, by
Sealing to the truth of them; but this does not prove that this inward
Obsignation of the Spirit is the Rule of Faith, even in Calvin's sense; or that
the Scripture was not that Rule.

Page 36 It Is strange that W.P. should bring a proof against the Lawfulness of
Swearing, from the Conviction of the Light within some Jews, long before Christ
came, to wit, the Esseni, that when the Scriptures of the Old Testament made it
lawful to Swear, in some Cases, (if W.P. believes that the Spirit of God did
Dictate these Scriptures) that the same Spirit in the Esseni should teach them
that it was unlawful, even while the Mosaical dispensation was yet standing.
But how proves he that the Esseni did think Swearing unlawful, from a
Conviction of the Light within them, when others of the most faithful of the
Jews, both then and before that time did Judge Swearing Lawful, and that from
the declared and revealed Will of God, in the Old Testament, that came from the
Light within, in Moses and the Prophets, that was in force until Christ
suffered, as to all the other parts of it. If he will allow, that the eternal
Precepts of the Spirit in the Conscience, command one thing to some, and the
quite contradictory to another, surely at this rate, the Light within must be a
very uncertain Rule, for by this Concession, one may take the liberty to say,
his Light within commands him to Kill, to Steal, to commit Adultery, though the
same Light in another forbids it. I had thought, that by the Eterprecepts in
the Conscience, W.P. had meant, those unchangeable Precepts, and Laws of
Justice and Temperance, etc, which in all Ages have been the same to all Men,
and will ever be the same to all, so long as the World lasts. But now it
seems, even the Precepts of Light within are not Eternal, but Temporal, and may
be changed, and one may be commanded to Swear, or permitted without Sin to
Swear, and another forbidden. But there are two things that W.P. in his
instance of the Esseni (that would not Swear, which he quotes out of Josephus
and Philo. That they shun Oaths worse than Perjury; for they esteem him
Condemned for a Liar, who without it is not believed,) should prove, neither of
which he has done: First, That they held it Unlawful in any Case to Swear,
even when called before Authority, for it may rather be thought, it was common
Swearing they were against, [a thing that was too ordinary among the Jews,]
seeing the Law did allow Swearing in a Judicial way, Levit. 5. that was then in
force. Secondly, Suppose they were against all Swearing, that they had this
from the Light within them, it is much more probable, it was an erroneous
Opinion in them, which could not proceed from the Light within, otherwise it
had contradicted the standing Law of God without, then in force, which not only
allowed Swearing, but commanded it upon necessary Occasions. And as idle and
impertinent are his Instances of Pythagoras, the Scythians in King Alexander's
time, and Clinias, all which lived some hundreds of Years before Christ came in
the Flesh. Now if Swearing was lawful by the Law of God among the Jews in those
Ages, How can we suppose it unlawful among the Gentiles, since I know not one
Instance can be given, that the Light in any Gentile did condemn what the Light
within, or Law of God without, in the Jews, did justify, for this were to set
Light against Light? It Is nothing to the purpose, if some in these ancient
Times were against Swearing, but the Question is, Whither it was the Light in
them that taught them so; or rather, whither it was not an erroneous Opinion,
like that of not eating Flesh, said to be taught also by Pythagoras, was that
(thinks W.P.) from the Light within? If so, How does the Light in him allow him
to eat it, and to take his liberty in diverse things, that the Severity of
Pythagoras's Doctrine did not allow? What if any now should say, that the Light
within them forbids them to eat Flesh, How could W.P. convince them of their
Error? If he bring Paul's words, or any other Scripture words to his
Conviction, may he not answer, that the Scripture is not the Rule of his Faith,
and W.P. has confirmed him, by his late Book that says the same; and if the
Light within, in the Esseni, might contradict the Scripture of the Old
Testament, why may not the Light within in a Quaker, contradict the Scripture
of the New Testament, both being given from the same Spirit; and the Scripture
of the Old Testament, as binding to the Jews, before Christ's Incarnation, as
the Scripture of the New Testament is to the Christians since. And how can W.P.
prove, that Poligamy is against the Light within? It is granted, that the New
Testament forbids it. But what then; by W.P's Doctrine, the greatest things in
the New Testament, are not necessary absolutely to be believed, but upon
Conviction of the Spirit, i. e. upon a new Revelation, as that Christ was born
of a Virgin, dyed for our Sins, etc. And he plainly tells us, Any such new
Revelation is not necessary: If this be not to turn People loose, and to run
them into great Confusion, Light against Light, and Spirit against Spirit,
while the Holy Scripture is denied to be the Rule of Faith and Life; yea, a
Rule, I leave to the Sober and Intelligent to judge.

Section 18.
A Correction of a Saying of W.P. Scandalous and Offensive to Christian Ears,
That Men are not like to be informed of the Knowledge and Experience of the New
Birth, from our Savior's words to Nicomedus, John 3. Nor can that Scripture be
my Rule ( says he) in that heavenly travel, etc. Neither can any other Writing
whatever.

Page 29. HERE I find one passage more in this book of W.P's, that I am sure
greatly derogates from the Scriptures, and is justly offensive to Christian
Ears. Having quoted our Savior's words to Nicodemus, that he says may be
credited Historically, that unless a Man be born again, he cannot see the
Kingdom of God, John 3. But what is that (says he) to the Knowledge and
Experience of the new Birth, that they are never like to be informed of there:
Nor can that Scripture be my Rule in that heavenly Travel, respecting the many
and wonderful Trials and Exercises, that are to be met with in the way to it.
Neither can any other Writing whatever. This Only is the Office of that Spirit
and Word Immortal, by which we are begotten again. I answer, Here he excludes
not only that place above mentioned, but the whole Scripture, from being
instrumental to our Information, and plainly denies that any can be informed of
it there; this is indeed to make it not only not the Rule, but not a Rule in
this great case. But his assertion is extremely false, the place quoted ( John
3.3, 5.) informs us of the necessity of Regeneration; and the following words
informs us, of the way and manner how it is wrought, to wit, by the Spirit, as
the principal Efficient, and by Faith in the Son of Man, as the Instrumental
cause; v. 14, 15, 16. and this Faith is wrought instrumentally, by the Words
and Doctrine of the Gospel, called by Paul, ( Romans 6.17.) The Form, or Pattern,
of Doctrine, whereunto the believing Romans were delivered, as the Metal that
is melted into the Mould, that frames it into a Vessel. And will W.P. say, that
his and his Brethrens Preaching and Words, inform People nothing of
Regeneration, nor of the manner of it, and the several steps in the progress of
it. If not, their Preaching so much of the New Birth, and the manner of it (at
least as they think) is very unprofitable; but if they think their Preaching
profitable, to inform concerning Regeneration, and manner of it, then their
Preaching must be better than the whole Scripture. Had he said the Scripture
without the Spirit cannot guide or direct us in the way of Regeneration, nor be
instrumental toward it, without the same, he had not been to blame, all true
Christians say the same; but to exclude the Scriptures, that is, the Word and
Doctrine contained in the Scriptures, from being so much as an Organ or
Instrument in the hand of the Spirit, as the Spirit gives Efficacy to it, is
extremely false and erroneous, and contradicts the Scriptures Testimony, and
the Experience of Thousands, who can set to their Seal, that the Spirit of God
has made the Scriptures, to wit, the Word and Doctrine delivered in them,
Instrumental, both to their Conviction and Conversion. Surely James was of
another mind than W.P. who said, That the Faithful were begotten of the Will of
God, by the Word of Truth, and Peter said, They were made Partakers of the
Divine Nature, by the exceeding great and precious Promises, (which are to be
found in the Holy Scriptures) through the Operation of the Divine Power. And as
false it is, what he says, That Experience (to wit, of the New Birth,) must go
before all Doctrinal Scripture: Meaning the Doctrine delivered in the
Scripture, which was the same before it was written: This is to set the Cart
before the Horse, as the Proverb is, or the Fruit before the Seed; Are Men
regenerated in Blindness and Ignorance, or rather are they not renewed in
Knowledge? And this Knowledge, does it not presuppose some doctrinal
Principles, of which Men must be first convinced? Has the Doctrine of the great
Love of God, in sending his Son into the World outwardly to dye for us, and
inwardly to enlighten us, no Influence on our Regeneration? Was Adam
regenerated, before God gave him the Promise of the Woman's Seed, after his
Fall? by his Assertion it must be so, which is wonderful Ignorance! Is he so
little acquainted with the Holy Scriptures, as not to have seen the Lineaments,
Steps and Progress of the New Birth, fairly delineated, and the whole manner of
it, as clearly as any Country can be delineated in the fairest Map, with all
the several Roads; but as the Map can be of no use; to a blind Man, though to a
seeing, it is of great use; so to a Man whom the Spirit of God has in some
measure enlightened, the Scriptures are as serviceable, as a Map to a Traveller,
yea, and much more, they are really the Instrument of the Spirit, both for
convincing and converting Men, and the Rule according to which the Spirit leads
them, in the various steps of it. It is granted, That the Experience of
Regeneration, in whom it is wrought, is much more than any verbal account of it
by the best of words, and gives a Man in some respect, a more satisfactory
Knowledge of it, than any Man can have by Scripture words, or any words
whatsoever, who is not himself regenerated, as the sight of a Country is more,
and gives a Man a more satisfactory account of it, than all verbal Descriptions
or Maps can do, to him that never was in the Country. Yet this proves not, but
that the Geographical account of that Country by words and Maps, truly and
accurately given, by Men of great Wisdom and Sincerety, is of great Service and
Advantage, both to Strangers who desire to see the Country and live in it, and
also to them that already live in it. And for all the great Conceit that W.P.
has of his knowledge of the great Mystery of Regeneration, by his Experience,
of which he denies, That the Scriptures have given him any Information: Yet he
is very ignorant of it still, if he be of his former mind, as he wrote in his
Preface to R.B's Works, That Regeneration is a greater Mystery than God
manifest in the Flesh. Had W.P. consulted Scripture, it would have better
informed him, and to be sure, the true Experience of Regeneration, never taught
him any such horrid and extremely false Assertion.

Page 31. He says, The knowledge of those Prophesies of Christ's Sufferings,
was by extraordinary Revelation, not falling within the ordinary Discoveries,
that are absolutely necessary to Man's Salvation, by which he shows his Power
and Faithfulness that he is God, and can foretell, and will bring to pass. But
therefore must there be an extraordinary Light or Spirit, and not rather an
extraordinary Sight and Sense from one and the same Light and Spirit in them.

Answ. First, this quite overthrows his Notion of a general Rule, that must be
one and the same to all Mankind; for if the Prophets had extraordinary
Revelation, concerning Christ's Sufferings, which other Men have not that
extraordinary Revelation, was the Rule of their Faith touching that matter,
which could not be the Rule of Faith to them, who had no knowledge of that
thing. Secondly, Though the inward extraordinary Revelation, given to the
Prophets concerning Christ's Sufferings, was not necessary to others of the
Faithful, who were not Prophets, for their Salvation; yet the Knowledge and
Faith of them was necessary to Salvation by some other means, to wit, by having
the Doctrine, given to the Prophets by extraordinary Revelation, preached, or
conveyed to the Faithful by the ordinary outward means of Instruction; which
differing manner of conveyance makes not any difference in the Doctrine, nor
yet in the Faith of it, for Matter and Substance. Thirdly, That he makes the
Faith of Christ's Sufferings, none of the absolute Necessaries to our
Christianity and Salvation, because not given to us, as it was to the Prophets
by extraordinary Revelation. This plainly gives us a new and fresh Instance of
his Deism and Paganism, appearing with open face; for if the Faith of Christ's
Sufferings be not necessary to our Salvation, because we have it not given us
by extraordinary Revelation, as the Prophets had (which is a false Consequence)
by the same reason, not one of the twelve Articles of the Apostles Creed, or
any of the other Creeds, called the Nicene and Athanasian, nor any one of the
peculiar Doctrines and Articles of the Christian Faith, are necessary to our
Salvation, though we hear them daily preached, or may daily read them in the
Holy Scriptures, because by his false Inference, not given us by extraordinary
Revelation; and at this rate no more Faith is necessary to our Salvation, than
what any Infidel Jew, or Mohammedan, or Heathen may have, by the common Dictates
of the Light in every one of their Consciences abstractly considered, without
all means of outward Instruction by the Holy Scriptures, which is a plain
undermining of the whole Christian Religion, and introducing Deism and Paganism
in its room, and is really a degree more remote from Christianity, than any
Pelagianism or Socinianism. Fourthly, Whereas he querieth, Must there be
therefore an extraordinary Light or Spirit, and not rather an extraordinary
Sight or Sense, from one and the same Light and Spirit in them. I answer,
Taking Light and Spirit in the highest sense, to signify God, Christ, or the
Holy Spirit, it will not infer another Light or Spirit, but another
Illumination, Inspiration and Revelation, as well as another Sight and Sense,
proceeding from one and the same Spirit, and from one and the same Light,
originally according to the Doctrine of the Holy Scripture, that teaches there
is diversity of Operations, Administrations and Gifts, but one God, one Lord,
and one Spirit. But the words and terms Light and Spirit sometimes in
Scripture, signify some Internal Act of Illumination, and Operation, and Gift
of the Spirit; as when we read of the seven Spirits of God in Scripture, and
that God is called the Father of Lights, this does not signify seven real
distinct Spirits of God, but seven Gifts or Virtues, and Operations of one and
the same Spirit: And because there are several sorts of Illuminations,
proceeding from one Light originally, which is God, and the Divine Word,
therefore they are called Lights; and in this sense (fully agreeable to
Scripture) the Prophets and all the Penmen of the Holy Scriptures, may be said
to have had an extraordinary Light and Spirit, as well as an extraordinary
Sight, that others of the Faithful had not, or now have not, and yet the Faith
the same for Matter and Substance [for extraordinary Revelation, may be called
extraordinary Light well enough] and also the Faithful may be said to have an
extraordinary Light and Spirit, that no Infidel Jew, Mohammedan, Heathen, or
mere Moralist, Deist, or mere Formal Professor of Christianity has, to wit, in
respect of the diversity of the kinds and sorts of the Illuminations, according
to the differing subjects, that of the Prophets differing from that of other
Faithful Men that were not Prophets, who yet had the same Faith, though not
conveyed by the same manner of Illumination, and the Illumination of the
Faithful differing from the common Illumination, given in common to Mankind,
which in the respects abovementioned, may be said to be three several Lights
and Spirits, according to the three several subjects, all which are but
originally one and the same; like to which we have an Example in the Beams of
the Sun, that remaining the same in their nature, yet according to the
differing Mediums and Subjects of reception, seem wonderfully diversified, so
that passing through Glasses of several colors, as green, red, blew and
yellow, the Beams or Rays, will have these differing colors, which diversity
proceeds not from the nature of the Sunbeams, but the differing Mediums and
Subjects; and thus also the same Influence of the Sun, melts Wax and hardneth
Clay; and operating on a Field where Barley is sown, contributes to produce a
Crop of Barley; but operating on a Field where Wheat is sown, contributes to
produce a Crop of Wheat, from the differing Seeds and Subjects it works upon.

Section 19*
His Definition of the Judge of Controversy, lame and fallacious, as his
Definition of the general Rule and Faith; in what Sense the Spirit is the Judge
of Controversy, quoad nos, i.e. as to us.

THus having gone through, and examined all that I have observed in his Book,
giving his Reasons and Arguments, That the Scripture is not the Rule of Faith
and Life, but the Light in every Conscience; and having shown the Weakness, yea
the Falsity of them, I thought it not necessary to take notice of his
Enlargements and Amplifications on his several Arguments, but answer to the
Argument it self, wherein its strength seemed to lie. I shall be brief in my
Examination and answer to his second part, to wit, concerning the Judge of
Controversy, for, because it has such a necessary Connection with the former,
the former being clearly discussed, the latter will easily be determined.

Page 39. He gives us his explanation, what he means by these Terms, Judge and
Controversy, A Judge (says he) is one that has not only power to determine,
but discerning to do it rightly. Controversy is a debate between two parties,
about the Truth or Falsehood, to be determined by that Judge. But as he wrongly
stated the Question in the first part, about the Rule, so here he is very short
in stating the Controversy about the Judge. It is without all Question, among
all that own that there is one great God Almighty, that he is the Great and
Supreme Judge, of what is Truth and what is not, universally, and that most
perfectly and infallibly; and all that believe in Christ and in the Holy
Spirit, do own that Christ and the Holy Spirit, together with the Father, are
that Supreme Judge, as they are one and the same Supreme God; and not only so,
but all true Christians own, that Christ, as the Son of Man, has all Judgment
committed to him, and is both Head and Judge in his Church. Now that wherein
W.P. is short in stating the Question here is, that he does not assign the true
Rule, whereby the Judge, to wit, God, Christ and the Spirit, does give forth a
definitive Judgment, to be understood and received, by the Members of the
Church of Christ. Neither God, nor Christ, nor the Holy Spirit, need the
Scripture, to give a Judgment, as to themselves, their knowledge of what is
Truth, and what is not so, is wholly independent from the Scripture, but the
Question is to be thus stated, What Rule, Standard or Measure, God, Christ and
the Spirit has given to the faithful, in particular, and to the whole Church in
general, since the Doctrine of the true Faith was committed to writing, whereby
they may understand, and know, the true Judgment and determination of God, and
Christ, and the Holy Spirit, the Supreme Judge of Controversy. True it is,
that the Lawgiver is the best interpreter of any point that may concern his
own Law, and therefore as God is the Lawmakers, so he is the Supreme Judge and
Interpreter of his Law. But as an Earthly Lawgiver, suppose an Earthly King,
with the consent of the great Counsel of the Nation, gives forth his Laws to
his Subjects, if any Controversy arise about the true sense of those Laws, the
King and his Counsel that made those Laws, is to determine the Controversy by
the Laws themselves, one part of the Law serving as a Key, to open what is hard
to be understood in another part of it. Thus it is in this Nation, and commonly
in all Nations, for the Law is supposed to be such a perfect Law, Entire and
Complete, that the Sense of it needs not be given by giving forth any new Law,
to give the sense of the former; nor ought any Subject to presume to give his
private Interpretation of the Law, by any private Gloss or Sense, which he
cannot demonstrate from the Law it self; and as it is thus, as to the Laws of
Men, how much more is it so, as to the Laws of God? The Laws of Men indeed,
receive frequently new Additions and Alterations, and yet this cannot be done,
but by Public Authority: But the Law and Rule of Faith and Life, that God has
given to the Faithful, and to his Church, now under the New Testament, is so
full, perfect and comprehensive, that is, fully Sufficient without any
Addition; and if it can be supposed, that it may please God to give forth any
new Laws to his Church, it must be allowed, that there must be the same
Evidence, and ground of receiving them to be such, as was given for the Old
Testament by Moses, and for the New Testament by Christ. Now had W.P. fairly
stated the question, he should have stated it thus, Whither the Spirit of
Christ, (whose Judgment and Determination is all one with that of Christ and
the Father) does give his Judgment to the Church, and the Members of it, by any
other Law or Rule, Measure or Standard, than what is already to be-found in the
Holy Scriptures, whether relating to Articles of Faith, or positive Precepts of
revealed and instituted Religion, by Christ and his Apostles in the New
Testament. Or whither the Spirit gives this Judgment, not by the Doctrines and
Precepts contained in the Scriptures, but by the common discoveries and
Dictates of the Light within every Man's Conscience, which are commonly the
same, and of the same extent in all Mankind, be they Jews and Mahometans, and
Painims abroad, or Deists at home here in England or elsewhere: Or lastly,
whither by any new particular Discoveries, Revelations or Dictates, and new
Precepts of the Spirit, not formerly given, either to Mankind in general, or to
the Church in particular. To the first, all sound Christians agree. The Second
is, the sense of W.P. and those of his Brethren of the Second Days Meeting that
have approved his Book. The third is, the sense of some of the chief Teachers
and Leaders, that first arose among the Quakers, that did affirm, they had new
Commands given from the Spirit, by immediate Revelation from Heaven, some of
which are neither the common Dictates of the Light in every Conscience of
Mankind, nor to be found in the Scriptures, either expressly, or by any
necessary consequence from them. And indeed the first Teachers and Leaders
amongst that People, did not think it worth while, to prove their Doctrine, or
warrant their Interpretations, by consequences from Scripture; but the general
proof was, This is the Word of the Lord unto you; for G.F. (see his Journal)
plainly told, that when he first came forth, he was commanded of God, to say
thee and thou to every Man to whom he spoke, and not to put off his Hat to any:
Also the setting up of Women's Government in their Meetings, distinct from the
Men, by the more devout sort, who did think, and still think, that G.F. was a
Prophet, as immediately sent as Moses, or any other, is Judged to have been by
a Divine Authority and Power in G.F. without any dependence on Scripture Rule,
or seeking to fish it by consequence from Scripture. And pray what need is
there to bring Scripture proof, for any thing that Men either believe or
practice, either by consequence or express words, seeing that is not the Rule
of either Faith or practice, but the Light in every Conscience, as W.P. says
here in this Book, or some New Revelation, or discovery, that neither Jews nor
Turks, nor other Deists have, nor all Christendom, but only and alone, the
People called Quakers. But if these new Revelations be their Rule in the Case,
it quite overturns W.P's Fabric, of setting up a general Rule of Faith and
Life in every Man's Conscience. For a new Revelation, that only one part of
Mankind has, cannot be a general Rule. W.P. makes not the Light within (which
he will have to be the Spirit, or God himself, or Christ in every Man,)
abstractly considered from the inward discoveries, Dictates and Precepts there
delivered, to be the general Rule, which he calls the Eternal Precepts of the
Spirit in the Conscience, and the Noble precepts writ in Man's Heart, Phrases
that he has borrowed from some Heathen writers, as Pythagoras and Sophocles,
and which are to be owned in their place, to be such, and to be a general Rule
of Moral Justice and Temperance, as is above owned; but not either the general
Rule of the Christian Religion, with respect to its peculiar Doctrines, and
Precepts, nor indeed so much as any Rule at all in that state; nor indeed is it
at all proper to call the Spirit the Rule in his Sense, but rather the Dictates
and discoveries of the Spirit, which W.P. calls sometimes Revelation, to wit,
Internal, and the Internal Testimony of the Spirit, Eternal Precepts and noble
Laws writ in all Men's Hearts; for the Spirit abstractly considered, from all
Internal and External discovery, Revelation and Testimony, teaches Men nothing
at all, and therefore can be no Rule to them, as such. And seeing W.P. has
cast away the Holy Scriptures from being the Rule of Faith and Practice even to
us Christians, that is, all and every one of the peculiar Doctrines and
Precepts of Christianity, that are to be sure no part of those Eternal Precepts
and Laws writ in all Men's Consciences, not one of them, nor all of those
peculiar Doctrines and Precepts, are so much as a part of the Christians Rule
of Faith and Life; for if it were, then the Christians, the Deists, the
Mahometans, and Infidel Jews, should not have one general Rule of Faith and
Life, which he contends for.

Page 41. He proposes an Objection, and pretends to solve it. Obj. But is not
the Scripture the Judge of Controversy. [He should rather have made the
Objection run thus, Is not the Scripture the Rule, whereby the Spirit of Truth,
who is properly the Judge, does by his inward ordinary illumination in the
Faithful, determine the Controversy, in all the necessary things of Salvation?
Yea, and also in many other things, though not absolutely necessary, yet very
profitable.] He Answers. How can that be, since the Question most times arises
about the meaning of Scripture? I reply, yet still the Scripture is the proper
Rule to determine the Controversy, even when the question arises about the
meaning of the Scripture; because what seems obscure in some places of
Scripture are, opened and made plain by other plain places of Scripture,
treating on the same Subject, that are as a Key to open them, with out any
other Rule than the Scripture it self; only there is need of the Spirits
Internal Illumination and assistance to help us to use that Key, especially in
reference to the saving knowledge of them.

He proceeds in his answer to the Objection, saying, Is there any place (to
wit, in Scripture) tells us, without Interpretation, whither the Socinian or
Trinitarian be in the right, in their differing Apprehensions of the Three that
bear record, etc. Also the Homousian and Arian about Christ's Divinity, or the
Papists or Protestants about Transubstantiation. If then things are left
undefin'd and undetermined, I mean literally and expressly in the Scripture, and
that the Question arises about the Sense of words, Does the Scripture determine
which of these Interpreters hit the mark? From all which he concludes, that not
the Scripture, but the Interpretation must decide the Matter in Controversy,
and that Interpretation must be given from the Spirit of God, to be a true and
infallible Interpretation.

Answ. Seeing that Interpretation, according to W.P. cannot be given from the
Spirit, without an extraordinary Revelation, the things in Controversy, being
such (according to W.P's Phrase and Confession, P. 31.) as fall not within the
ordinary Discoveries, that are absolutely necessary to Man's Salvation; and
that W.P. also grants, that he and his Brethren have no such extraordinary
Revelation, for it is not needful, being none of the absolute Necessaries to
our Salvation, P. 33. It evidently follows, that neither W.P. nor any of his
Brethren, nor indeed any other Men now living whatsoever, have any certainty
whither the Socinian or Trinitarian be in the right; that is, whither Christ is
God, and whither Christ had any Existence before Mary; and whither Christ be in
any of the Faithful, yea or nay; yea W.P. has no certainty of this Fundamental
Principle, that Christ is in him, or in any of his Brethren; the great reason
of their Assertion, that Christ is in them, being, that Christ is God; so that
if it be not certain from Scripture, that Christ is God; and if the Socinian
Doctrine should prove true, that Christ is only a Man, it will evidently
follow, (as I think W.P. will grant) that it is utterly false that Christ is in
any Men whatsoever; and that that Light that is in Men, even the most Faithful,
is not Christ; for how can that, which is only a mere Man, and a mere Creature,
[as the Socinians say that Christ only is] be in all Men. Again, If it cannot
be determined from Scripture, without extraordinary Revelation, (which W.P.
grants, neither he nor his Brethren have, as touching these Matters,) whither
the Arians or the Homonsians be in the right; it evidently follows, that
neither W.P. nor his Brethren, are certain, whither the word mentioned John
1.1. be any other than a mere Creature; and consequently they are not certain,
but that they themselves are Idolaters, who give any Divine Worship to Christ,
as he is that Word. Also if it be not certain from Scripture, whither the
Papists or Protestants be in the right about Transubstantiation, without
extraordinary Revelation, according to W.P's way of arguing, If the Papists
should happen to be in the right, and W.P. by his Confession, knows nothing
to the contrary but that they are, he and his Brethren should be guilty of
horrid Contempt and Blasphemy, to call that which is the Body of Christ,
nothing but Bread. And is not this Assertion of W.P. a fair Inlet to Popery,
that the Scripture does not determine expressly, without Interpretation, and
that Interpretation cannot be had without new Revelation, whither the Papists
Doctrine of Transubstantiation be true? So that to him at present, it is a
Matter of Indifferency; and if W.P. should turn Papist, or suppose him to be
one, when he declares himself, he needs only pretend a Revelation for that and
all the other Matters in Controversy betwixt Protestants and Papists, to
justify him, and prove him to be no Changeling. And at this rate of W.P's
arguing, not only all the peculiar Doctrines of Christianity are wholly
uncertain, and Papists, Socinians and Arians, and other the worst of Heretics,
that oppugn the Christian Doctrine and Faith, may happen to be in the right,
and these called the Orthodox to be in the wrong; but the great Fundamental of
the Quakers is overthrown, and rendered uncertain also; yea, this very Position,
that he labors so much to establish, That not the Scriptures, but the Light
in every Man's Conscience, is the Rule of Faith and Life to every Man. For this
Position of his, is not literally and expressly in the Scripture; so that
according to W.P. not the Scripture, but his and his Brethrens Interpretation
must determine this Controversy; and this cannot be done without extraordinary
Revelation, it being none of those things that fall within the ordinary
Discoveries of Men, to wit, that the Light in every Man's Conscience is Christ,
and God, for then Christ would be God, and the Socinians would be Blasphemers
that deny him so to be. By all which it evidently appears, that this Argument
of W.P. not only renders all the peculiar Doctrines of Christianity mere
Skepticism and Uncertainty; but the great Fundamental of the Quakers, as
concerning the Light being Christ in them, and the Rule of their Faith, to be
equally Skepticism and Uncertainty. But that he says, Christ's Divinity is
left undetermined in Scripture literally and expressly, is false; for it is in
several places literally and expressly affirmed that Christ is God, and that and
many other Truths suppose not literally and expressly mentioned in Scripture,
yet by good and necessary Consequences, without all extraordinary Revelation
from plain places of Scripture, can be certainly inferred. And if he will not
allow that there is any certainty by arguing from the Scriptures, by
Consequences of true Reason, his whole Discourse in this his Book that I am now
answering is disallowable, for he has not brought one place of Scripture, that
literally and expressly says, the Scripture is not the Rule of Faith, or that
the Light in every Man's Conscience is; and he does not pretend to
extraordinary Revelation in the Case; and if he did of shall, he must give us
leave to distrust him, until he bring sufficient Evidence for it, which I
believe he will never be able to do: Yea, the Falsity of his Reasonings by way
of Consequence, to prove his Position, That not the Scripture, but the Light in
every Man's Conscience is the Rule of Faith and Life, is evidently apparent,
from the answers already given. And suppose he should pretend to extraordinary
Revelation in the case, and that that is the ground of his Certainty, and Rule
of his Faith, even that Pretense destroys his Fabric; for seeing all Men
have not that extraordinary Revelation, it cannot be a general Rule. If he say,
The common discovery that every Man has, teaches him sufficiently without
either Scripture or extraordinary Revelation, That the Light in every Man's
Conscience is the Rule of Faith. I answer, How can that be, unless it were a
self-evident Proposition, as that the whole is greater than the part; and if it
be a self-evident Proposition, why has W.P. taken so great pains to prove it?
Men commonly think it needless, to prove any self-evident Proposition, and
properly speaking, it is impossible to be proved. But if his said Position has
no self-evidence of the Truth of it, how shall it be proved? not from
Scripture, for that would make the Scripture the Rule; nor from Humane Reason,
for that would make Humane Reason the Rule, which W.P. seems not to set up for
the Rule. It is granted, that the Light in every Man's Conscience, in respect
of some Moral Principles of Justice and Temperance, has a Self*evidence, and so
far is a Rule; but that it is the Rule of Faith to Christians is denied; and by
whatever Medium he proves it, that must be his Rule, by his manner of arguing,
which runs him into the like vicious Circle as the Papists are run into, when
they prove the certainty of Tradition by the Church, and the certainty of the
Church by Tradition; so W.P. proves, that the Light within is the Rule of Faith
by the Scripture, and the certainty of the Scripture by the Light within.

Section 20.
His Proposal of the way, to determine all Controversy destructive to the
Christian Religon, lets in Deism and Heathenism to overspread the World, a
Remedy worse than the Disease. His misrepresentation of sound Protestants, and
false and uncharitable Judgment of them. Several Scripture places, that prove
the Doctrine of the Holy Scriptures to be the Rule of Faith and Life, to all
Christian People.

I Confess he has one very notable and plausible Answer to an Objection made
by himself P. 44. were it as true, as seemingly fair and plausible. The
Objection is this, How will this determine Controversy, ( viz, to cast away
the Scriptures from being the general Rule of Faith and Life, and to set up the
Light in every Man's Conscience, according to the general Discoveries it gives
to all Mankind) and allay the Fury of Debates that are on foot in the World. He
answers roundly, Nothing like it, if Men adhere to it. But first were it
true. it would have this mischievous and yet most necessary Consequence, that
the Christian Religion would be utterly lost, so far as it has any
peculiarity, or peculiar Dignity, Worth and Advantage, above Deism or Paganism.
A rare Cure indeed, that W.P. here prescribes to all Christendom, to heal their
Breaches, and end the Disputes and Controversies betwixt the worst sort of
Heretics, and the most Orthodox Christians; and betwixt Papists and
Protestants; such a Remedy here prescribed by him, is worse than the Disease.
He says, Most Persuasions (he should have come out more plainly with his
Expedient, saying, most Heretics, Arians, Nestorians, Sabellians, Eutychians,
and them of the opposed side called Orthodox, yea, Papists and Protestants)
agree in his general Rule of Faith and Life, that is, they own the common and
general Dictates of the Light in the Conscience, and so does the civilized part
of the whole World of Mankind, and agree about what he makes the absolute
Necessaries, viz* That God is, that he is a Rewarder of them that diligently
seek him; that the way of God is a way of Purity, Patience, Meekness, etc.
without which no Man shall see the Lord. Now all Heretics commonly (few I
think excepted) own these Generals, and many of them have Moral Lives; Is this
enough to their eternal Salvation, though they deny the Lord that bought them
with his precious Blood, as he outwardly suffered on the Cross, on this
pretense, that their general Rule set up here by W.P. teaches them nothing of
any such Lord that bought them, with any Blood outwardly shed for them? Is not
this the ready way to open the Flood-gate, and to let in Deism and Heathenism,
to overrun not only England, but all Christendom; and not only to destroy the
Protestant Christian Religion, but any remains of Christian Doctrine that are
in the Popish Countries? But from this Cure of W.P. we have all great cause to
pray, Good Lord deliver us. But nor would this Cure he proposes, be successful
upon the Hypothesis of his general Rule, if universally received for a Rule.
The Heathen Philosophers, many of whom professed and owned the Light in every
Conscience, as it did enlighten their Reason, yet how many great Controversies
were there among them notwithstanding, and often great Heats and Animosities.

And if this Cure of W.P. be so effectual, how comes it, that it has not healed
the breaches and great Controversies, that have been on foot these Forty Years,
chiefly about G. Foxes orders, his party contending that they were the Dictates
of the Light, both in G.F. and all his followers: the other party as strongly
denying it, that they were any Dictates of the true Light within; and let W.P.
tell us, when any such Controversy arises, which are the true Dictates of the
Light and true Spirit, abstractly considered from the Scripture, what shall be
the Cure in that Case? He seems indeed to give an answer to this in Page 42.
Answ. By the same Spirit as well said Gualt. Cradock, the way to know, whither
the Spirit be in us, is its own Evidence, and that is the way to know it in
others too; and the Man that has the Spirit, may know the Spirit in another.
There is (says he) a kind of Sagacity in the Saints to this purpose. To this I
answer, where the Spirits Doctrine, which is the Doctrine both of Christ and
the Father, goes along with the Spirit, according to Isaiah 59 21. and many
other places of Scripture, there is a great Truth in it; but whatever Spirit
either teaches another Doctrine, or draws Men away from the necessary belief
of Christ's Death in the Flesh, in being a Sacrifice for our Sins, and other
Fundamental Principles peculiar to Christianity, is not the true Spirit of
Christ, whatever Unity or Sagacity W.P. and his Brethren may think they have,
to know it in one another, while he and they make nothing to be the Rule of
Faith, but the Light in every Conscience ( John 2.9.) which teaches not this
Doctrine of Faith, nor proposes this great Object of Faith, to wit, Christ
Crucified to the Conscience, they destroy all necessity of that Faith, as
concerned in our Salvation: However with plausible shows, he and they will say
it is necessary, where the History, as he terms it, has reached; but how? not
for Salvation, but historically, as we believe the History of Alexander or
Julius Caesar, or as W.P. and his Brethren pretend to believe G.F's Journal.

The Difficulty that he moves P. 41. about Interpretation of Scripture, is
easily resolved, without any new material object of Faith, if the Spirit of God
be acknowledged inwardly to enlighten the Understandings of the faithful, and
that they faithfully receive the same, it will infallibly, give to all the
Faithful, so much of the true knowledge and Faith of all Scripture Doctrine, as
is necessary to Salvation. Page. 46. As unfair and fallacious as he has been,
in his Definitions and Arguments about the Rule of Faith and Life, no less
unfair and fallacious is he, in his representing many Orthodox and sincere
Protestants, as if they Judged the Quakers for their asserting an unerring,
certain, or infallible Judgment in things necessary to Salvation. This is a
very unfair representation of them: The Question lies not about an unerring
certain and infallible Judgment, given by the Spirit of God to all the
faithful, in the things necessary to Salvation, which they fully assert. But
the Question lies here, whither they have this infallible Judgment, either by
the common Discoveries and Dictates of the Light in every Man's Conscience, or
by any new discoveries of the Spirit, abstractly and seperately considered from
the Scriptures; so that the Doctrine, as delivered in the Holy Scriptures, is
not the Rule, or Instrument, whereby the Spirit works or begets this infallible
Judgment in them, in all the necessary things of Salvation, [which ^et are more
and others, than those assigned by W.P.] to wit, Faith in Christ crucified, and
raised again, and other fundamental Doctrines of the Christian Religion.

A Second part of the question is, Whither all, or any of the Quakers, when met
in their Yearly Meetings, or any other Meetings, or the most enlightened among
them, have an infallible Judgment given them in all things, as their chief
Teachers have asserted; so that they are not only infallible in the most
necessary things, but in other things; Yea, in all that they have given forth,
either in Preaching or Writing, as the Word of the Lord, and with an Authority
the same in kind with the Prophets, as W.P. does in the Conclu^ion of this
Book, where he pretends that he has a Message to tell them, and that from the
Spirit of the Lord God of Truth, and that is, Page 48. That Men unregenerated,
for all their external imitations, of the Ancients in some Temporary and
figurative parts of Worship, will never be accepted. But this is no
extraordinary Revelation, it is a Doctrine that is daily taught, and generally
believed among all true Christians, that never were under the profession of
Quakers. But the fallacy is here, that all are unregenerate in his Sense, who
own, that what they are taught and helped to believe know or practice, is by
the Doctrine contained in the Holy Scriptures, as the Rule of their Faith and
Life, and Instrument of the Spirits preparing and giving them, the Spirit
himself being the principal efficient. Author and Cause, and primary principle
of their Knowledge, Faith and Practice. Yet all this is Judged by W.P. here in
his Conclusion, to be nothing, but a literal Knowledge, Historical Faith, and
outward Religion, that is but as the Old Heaven, that are to be wrapped up as a
scroul, and the Old Wine and Bottles that belong not to the Kingdom of God. For
which Uncharitable and False Judgment, I heartily pray God that he may forgive
him, and giving him a better understanding, and reclaim him, (if it be the
blessed Will of God) from those most dangerous errors he is entangled in, and
especially from this, that is the foundation of his other errors, to wit, his
Deism and setting up the Light within, or Spirit, or whatever he calls i^,
abstractly and seperately from Christ's Doctrine and Words, even those divine
Oracles and Words which the Father gave to Christ, and Christ gave them, by his
Holy Spirit to the Apostles, John 17.8. And by the same Holy Spirit, by means
of the Apostles writing has given to all the faithful since; thus dividing what
God and Christ have Joined together, surely this cannot be the true Light nor
Spirit in him, or his Brethren, that leads away People from hearing the true
Shepherds Voice, either as it is outwardly sounded in the outward Ministry of
the Word, outwardly Preached, or as it is inwardly sounded and Echoed by the
Holy Spirit, in Teaching the faithful to believe the same Doctrine, that is
outwardly delivered in the Holy Scriptures. My Sheep, said Christ, hear my
Voice; they that draw from Christ's Doctrine, being the Rule of Faith and Life
to every true Christian, draw from the Spirit of Christ, and from his Voice,
whatever seeming pretenses they fallaciously make, to exalt the Spirit, by
rejecting that Instrument, to wit, the Rule of the Holy Scriptures, by which
the Spirit does both enlighten the faithful, and beget Faith and Hope, and Love
in them, by the precious Oracles and Testimonies therein contained; and also
does refresh, quicken and comfort them, If the Spirit, and his divine
influences be the Wine that refreshes and cherishes them; the Scripture so to
speak, are the Flagons that convey it to them, according to the words in the
Song, Cant. 2.5. Stay me with Flagons, comfort me with Apples, and many other
plain Testimonies of Scripture, that hold forth in God's ordinary way the
Doctrine of the Holy Scriptures, as outwardly delivered, to be the means (and
therefore the Rule) by which the Spirit does both Teach, and also Quicken,
Comfort and strengthen them; such as these following places, which I recommend
to W.P. and his Brethrens Consideration, Psalm. 19.7, 8, 9, 10, 11. Prove. 6.23.
Psalm. 119. 4, 5, 6, 18, 49, 50, 105. Psalm. 147.19, 20. Isaiah 8.20.59.21. John
10.3. John 17.8, 20. John 20.31. John 5 39. Acts 10.44. Romans 16.17. Romans
16.25.26. Gal. 3.2. Ephesians. 1.13. 1 These. 1.5. 1 Timothy 4.16. 2 Timothy 1.13. 2 Timothy
2.20. 2 Timothy 3.15, 16, 17.

28th of the First Month, 1699. G. K.

FINIS.

