THE True Copy of a Paper Given in to the YEARLY MEETING OF THE People called
Quakers, At their Meeting Place in Grace Church Street, London, 15 day of the
3d. Month 1695. By George Keith, which was read by him in the said Meeting, by
their allowance.

With a brief Narrative of the most material passages of Discourse betwixt
George White-head, Charles Marshal, and George Keith, the said day, and the day
following, betwixt George White-head, William Penn, and Francis Canfield on the
one side, and George Keith on the other; wherein is laid open their most
Unfair, Unjust and Unchristian Method of Procedure against him, contrary to the
Doctrine of Christ, and all true Gospel Order.

TOGETHER With a short List of some of the vile and gross Errors of George
Whitehead, John Whitehead, William Penn, their chief Ministers, and now having
the greatest sway among them (being of the same sort and nature with the gross
Errors charged on some in Pensilvania) most apparently oppsiote to the
Fundamental Doctrines of the Christian Religion, asserted and maintained by
them in their Printed Books, and some scandalous passages out of Stephen
Crisp's Collection, approved by them, concerning Christ's Generation in Time,
and Blood of his Humanity; faithfully transcribed by George Keith.

And a Proposition to William Penn, to prove his charge, That G. K. is an
Apostate.

Isaiah 29 13 11. ^5. Forasmuch as this People dram, etc. 2 Per. 2. 1 But there
were fals^ prophets also among the People, even as there shall be falls Teachers
among you, who privily shall bring in damnable Here^ie even denying the Lord
that bought them, and bring upon themselves shift destruction; and many shall
follow their pernicious ways, by reason of whom the may of Truth shall be evil
spoken of. London, Printed for R. Levis, 1695.

To the Yearly Meeting of the People called Quakers, met at London, the 15th,
3d Month, 1695.
I Come here before you in a Spirit of Love, to acquaint you with diverse things
relating to my present Case; choosing rather to commit what I had to say, into
writing, then by word of mouth; well knowing that words spoken, either may not
be so well remembered by them that hear them, or may be liable to be
misconstrued by some that may be prejudiced.

In the first place, I lay my Complaint before you, against diverse persons
owned by you, as Members of your Society, for their public defamation of me,
and grossly and unchristianly representing me in some late printed books; as
particularly Thomas Ellwood in his two Printed Books against me, and John
Pennington in his printed Book. And I desire that Justice of you, that ye may
hear what I have to offer to you as sufficient proof and evidence, that they
have grossly defamed me, and falsely accused me, and misrepresented me; and also
I laying Complaint against the second days Meeting, or that party of them, who
have either approved or permitted such scandalous Books to come forth against
me; and also for their approving or permitting Sam. Jennings his scandalous
Book filled with many Falsehoods and Defamations, to come out against me, as I
have made sufficiently to appear in my late Answer to the same, and offer more
to make appear, if ye give me a hearing.

Secondly, I lay my Complaint before you, against diverse persons who have
publicly Interrupted me in my public Testimony, and exercise of my Ministry
in Meetings, particularly Daniel Whirlley at two several times in the Meeting
at Whitehart-Court; the last time being the last first Day; and W. Penn, some
Weeks ago, at Ratcliff Meeting, not only interrupted me in my public
Testimony, but called me Apostate, and an open Enemy to Truth and Friends,
doing what in me lay to pluck up the Testimony of Truth and Friends by the
Roots, with diverse others false Speeches and Defamations; but instead of
proving his charge against me, he went away in have. Now his Charge against me,
That I was an Apostate, and did what in me lay to pluck up the Testimony of
Truth and Friends by the Roots, does plainly enough imply his offense at the
Doctrine asserted by me, as being opposite to the principal Testimony of Truth
asserted by faithful Friends, and striking at the very Root and Foundation of
Friends Testimony. Now I desire this Justice of you, That W. Penn be required
to make good his Charge against me, and prove me guilty of the same, or that he
be brought to acknowledge his Error; and also I desire to know what any of you
have against me, in matter of Doctrine, or Life and Conversation, that makes
some so unfriendly and unbrotherly toward me; and whatever my Offenses may be,
whether supposed or real, that it may appear that ye are for doing Justice
impartially, without favor or respect of persons; I judge ye ought to be
concerned, equally to hear my Complaints, and do me Justice against such owned
by you, as have wronged me, as to hear their Complaints against me, and do them
Justice against me; if it appears that I have wronged them, yea, suppose I
were as bad as some represent me, or worse, suppose I were Turk or Jew, ye
ought to do me Justice against them that have defamed me, and falsely accused
me; and in order to do me Justice, to hear the Evidences and Proofs that I have
to bring forth against them.

Thirdly, Whereas they that gave forth that Paper, called, A true account of
the Proceedings at the last yearly Meeting in this place, gave it as their
Advice, That Friends should be tender and kind to me; as I should approve my
self to be a Man of Peace and Charity toward all, and Answer your Christian
Advice therein, and to avoid all public and apparent reflections on both
sides. Now that it may appear ye are for doing Justice impartially, let it be
impartially examined by you, as well whether they of the one side have not kept
to that Advice given in that Paper, as whether I have kept to it on the other
side, and let it be duly weighed in the Balance of Truth, which of us are
more or less guilty, or whether they or I be most, or altogether Innocent; but
if it be said, there is no time for such an Examination or enquiry, I say, if
sufficient time be not allowed for such an Examination, no due Judgment can be
given in the Case against me; for whatever pretenses some make to Judge me to be
wrong, and of a wrong Spirit, from their inward Sense and discerning, without
outward Proofs and Evidence in matter of Fact against me, will bear weight with
none of a sound Judgment, and who have a due regard to Christ's Doctrine, which
is to Judge the Tree by its Fruits, and these Fruits must be made appear in some
matter of Doctin or Faith, and the Scriptures forbid to receive an Accusation
against an Elder, but before two or three Witnesses.

Fourthly, I lay my Complaint before you against Will. Bingely, John Vaughton
and others, who have manifestly, to the observation of the Meeting, endeavored
to hinder my speaking in Meetings, so closly speaking one after another, and
sometimes making signs, and pulling by the Coat to stand up and speak, on
purpose to prevent my speaking; and on a First Day, at Whitchart-Court Meeting,
W. Bingely and Sam. Walldenfield, broke up the Meeting before its usual time,
as is well known VV. Bingely, or some other crying out, pass away Friends,
after I began to speak, which occasioned a great disorder and confusion in the
Meeting. And is it not a great shame and scandal that it should come under
public observations, to makes signs one to another, by pulling him by the
Coat, or Sleve, to stand up and speak, which occasions many to say, The Quakers
can transgress their Principle when they have a mind, by speaking whithout a
motion of the Spirit, when they obey the outward Sign and Motion of another to
speak, as if the Spirits inward motion did ansver to the beck of their outward
Motion; and have we not blamed it in other Professions, for one to say to
another, Brother do ye Pray, as being an Argument such did not attend to the
motions of the Spirit of God in themselves, and to be sure no more do they
among us, who give signs one to another, to speak in Meetings.

Fifthly, Whereas it is said by some, and particularly by John Vaughton and
John Field, which I think they will not deny; and can be proved, That those who
denied me in Pensilvania, their denying me and disowning my Ministry, was
enough for Friends to deny me here, and that there need no more for Friends to
deny me here; for friends here, and they who denied me in Pensilvania are one,
and they own their Judgment in disowning me, to be a true Judgment and
effectual. Now if this be so, and that it be your Sense, how is it that this
was not expressed in that Paper, called, A true Account given out at the last
Yearly Meeting, and that Friends generally Joined with me in Prayer, about the
time of the last Yearly Meeting, and were uncovered when I Prayed, and that
they recommended it to Friends, to be Tender and Kind to me, and to avoid all
public and apparent Reflections on both sides. But if it had been their
Judgment, that I ought not speak in Meetings, it had been improper to adv^^e me
to avoid all Public and apparent Reflections, for he that says nothing in
Public, cannot be said to Reflect.

Sixthly, seeing diverse owned by you, as Members of your Society, both in City
and Country, do still own me, as a Friend of Truth, and my Ministry and
Testimony; and others disown me, and a third sort are in suspense and doubt
concerning me; I desire you to be plain and express in giving your unanimous
Sense and Judgment concerning me, either to own or disow me, in such plain and
express Terms, as may leave no room for any doubt of your meaning; and what
paper ye give out concerning me, let it be signed with all your Hands, that
give Judgment in the Case, and not laid on the Clark, that it may appear all
present are Unanimous in the said Judgment. But ye cannot give out any Paper of
Judgment against me, for any new matter since the last yearly Meeting, until
after ye have given me a fair opportunity to answer to all that my Accusers
bring against me: Nor can ye in Justice permit such who have sufficiently
Discovered themselves to be prejudiced against me, either to be Witnesses
against me, or to sit among you and give Judgment in the Case, nor can it be
reckoned a duly Constitute Meeting, if any owned by you to be Friends, be kept
out, and Excluded from hearing and seeing, and giving Judgment in the case, and
the Meeting consined to a select number of Ministers, and two sent from every
County, this cannot be owned to be any True, Free and Duly Constitute Meeting,
where all, or any that desire to be present, and give their Judgment are
Excluded, and is plainly contrary to the Doctrine delivered by R. B. in his
Annarchy, and generally approved by Friends. Now the persons I do particularly
except against, either to be Evidences against me, or Judges in my Case, being
manifestly prejudiced, are Will. Penn, Will. Bingely, George Whithead, John
Vaughton, John Field, Sam. Waldenfield.

Seventhly, What Sentence ye pass concerning me, I desire you to make it
Public, and let me have a true copy of it, with your particular Rasons of your
censure, what it is either in matter of Doctrine or matte of Life and
Conversation, that moves you to pass any Hard or severe censure against me, if
so ye do, and not to give such bare general Reasons as some use against me,
without all Proof or Evidence, in mattr of Fact against me, as that I am of a
wrong Spirit, Contentious, se^king to break the Peace of the Church, etc.

And lastly, I desire to know your sense of these words, in the Paper called, A
true Account of the Proceedings, given out about the time of the last yearly
Meeting, wherein they advise me to clear the Body of the People called Quakers,
and their Ministers from these gros Errors, charged on some few in America. If
ye mean by the Body, only the Faithful, I have done it formerly in my Printed
Books, declaring I never charged the Body of Faithful Friends; but if ye mean
by the Body, the generality, and such generally who are under the same
Prosession, and not denied by them, I tell you plainly it is a most unjust and
unfair thing to require it of me, because, as I know not one of many hundeds of
that People, in many places, whether they be sound in the Faith of these
Doctrines, or guilty of these gross Errors charged on some in America, so to my
certain knowledge, some here, even in England, are guilty of diverse of these
gross Errors, which I offer to prove out of their Printed Books; and suppose
any of them have corrected their Judgment, since their Printed Books, yet until
they correct their Books by as public a Testimony, as they have published
their Errors, they are liable to be blamed for these Errors.

And seeing I know not any thing that any have against me, of Just Occasion,
why I should be disowned by you, or my ministry, but that the great occasion
many take against me, is my zealous and conscientious Opposition to vile
Errors, opposite to Fundamental Doctrines and Principles of Christianity; which
I have sufficiently proved diverse guilty of in America; and of which I offer to
prove some sufficiently guilty of here among you, and owned by you; and for my
conscientious refusing to hearken to the Advice, or suppose, command of them
that would enjoin me to clear the Guilty, which neither God nor any good man
will do, without Repentance, and disowning their Errors; and my conscientious
discharge of that part of a Gospel Ministry, in reproving vile and gross Errors
in Public Meetings; and rescuing many places of Scripture from the Perverse
Glosses that some put upon them in Public Meetings. If for this my
conscientious performance of my Duty both to God, and also to the Souls of
People, I shall be disowned by any Party among you, or among that People called
in scorn, Quakers (for I believe I shall never be disowned by the most Faithful
and Conscientious of that People, for my Faithful and Zealous Testimony to the
Truth, against vile Errors; and that I shall never, by the Grace of God, give
any Just Occasion to any against me); though I cannot but be very sorry on
their Account, who shall so unjustly judge me, and cast me out; yet I shall
rejoice, and have great Cause so to do, that it has pleased God to give me a
Lot amongst others his dear Servants, who have suffered the like Evil Treatment
by men of high Pretenses, and I rely upon God's Faithful Promises, who has
promised a great Reward to such in Heaven, who suffer for his Name's sake on
Earth; an Earnest of which I now enjoy by his blessed Spirit in my heart, John
16. 1, 2, 3. Isa. 66. 5. Job 31. 34, 36.

George Keith.

A Brief Narrative of the most Material Passages, etc
ON the 14th of this Iustant the 3d month, 1695. I came to the Meeting House
Door, at Grace-Chureh-street, where the Yearly Meeting was sitting, which was
carefully kept shut by Three or Four Persons, they refusing to let in but
Friends of the Ministry, and others Commissioned from the several Counties and
Meetings, or any other persons whom they thought fit; and I offering to enter
in, was stopped by the Keepers; I enquiring their reason, they told me I was not
in Unity with Friends. I replied, I know no Meeting, as yet in England that
has disowned me. But one of the Keepers proffered to go in, and acquaint the
Meeting, that I desired to have entrance, which he did; and a little after some
came out, and told me, I was not to have entrance, but if I had any Paper, they
would carry it in to the Meeting; I told them I had a Paper, but not having a
Copy of it, I would not give it out of my Hand, and though I had another Copy,
yet I was resolved to give no Paper to them, to be read in their Meeting,
unless I were present, so that Evening two of the Meeting came to my House, and
told me the Yearly Meeting agreed I should come next day, about the sixth hour,
in the Evening, and have entrance to read my Papers, or hear it read, providing
I would withdraw when dersied, which I promised; so at the time appointed I
came, and was allowed to sit at the great square Table, among the Ministers and
Commissioners, that can hold about it, either fully or near double, to the
number 24, whether by allusion to the 24 Seats and Elders mentioned, Rev. 4.
But doubling the Numbers, I do not determine, only I think it suits not with
their crying out so much as they were wont against chief Seats in the
Synagogues, to erect such a stately Fabric, in their Meeting House at that
time, it little differing from the manner of a Throne, but that it is low upon
the Floor, covered with green Cloth, yet few take liberty to sit there, but
the chiefest in respect among them. After some time of Universal silence, I
stood up, and declared that I had brought a Paper, which I desired they might
suffer to be read among them; Jasper Batt much opposed its Reading, but George
Whitehead stood up, and made a Speech, the substance of which was, That I had
the Advice of the last Yearly Meeting given me, but instead of hearkening to
it; I Printed a Paper reflecting on the Yearly Meeting the last year, and no
wise answering the mind of the Meeting; and though I mention not the Yearly
Meeting in that Printed Paper, called, The Causless Ground, yet it is apparent
I meant them; for I recite some of their words; and by that which Robert
Hannay, that came over with me, and owned our Proceedings in America, had
Printed of Vile Reflections against the Last Yearly Meeting, it is evident I
did mean the Yearly Meeting; for his Printed Paper is a Commentary upon mine.
And now (said G. W.) if thou have any Paper to offer to this Yearly Meeting, to
give Friends satisfaction, that thou will hearken to the Advice of the Last
Yearly Meeting, and disown what thou Printed in that called, The Causless
Ground, Reflecting on Friends; the Meeting will hear rhy Paper: Otherwise I
think it ought not to be heard. To which I replied: As in that Printed Paper I
mentioned not the Yearly Meeting, so there are no words in that Paper answered
by me, but were spoke by other Persons before and after the Yearly Meeting;
therefore ye cannot prove that I Reflected on the Yearly meeting. Beside, I do
not own, that that Paper, called, A True Account of the Proceedings, etc. was
the Yearly Meetings Act, but of a Prevailing Party or Faction in it; and I do
not own Robert Hannay's Paper to be any Commentary upon mine; he is of Age to
answer for himself. I desired him he would not Print it; and had no hand in
Printing it, as I have often formerly declared; which Th. Elwood wrests, as if my
Sense were, I did not work it at the Press. But this is one of his many other
gross Perversions of my words. And as to my Paper giving satisfaction to the
Meeting, I cannot say whether it will actually satisfy the Meeting; but I
judge there is enough in it to be just Cause of Satisfaction to them; but
whether it will satisfy I know not; the Event will best prove that; therefore
I desire ye will permit it to be read, I claiming their Promise (without any
condition) to suffer it to be read: so, after some time, they allowed me to
read it.

After I had read it, and some time of silence interveened, Charles Marshal
(one that abounds with his Prophecies and Predictions; but I know not if ever
any of them came to pass; but surely many have failed apparently) stood up, and
said, He had some few words of Exhortation to me, from God; and they were so
weighty on his mind, that he was minded to come to my House, and deliver them;
but finding me there, he would communicate them; which was, To exhort me to
come down to the Witness of God in my Heart, and return to that which convinced
me at first, and gathered me out from among the Professors, and leave all these
Imaginations, and bury them, and be reconciled to Friends. After he had ended,
I stood up to reply, but there was a great Opposition in diverse, to hinder me,
they saying, There was no need of a Reply to a few words of Exhortation. I
answered, I hoped I might have the like Liberty to Exhort him, as he had to
exhort me; so way being made, I replied, That I was come down to the Witness of
God in my Heart, and was not departed from that which convinced me, and was in
Unity with Faithful Friends; but it was my desire, that both I and all of us,
might more come down to God's Witness in our Hearts, and if they did so, they
would do Justice impartially; and to be sure he needed very much to come down
out of his Height; And for his saying, he had a mind to come to my house and
deliver his Message, he had time enough, for a Year past, to have once visited
me; but he never did; and if he happened to pass by me, in the street, scarce to
look to me, (though his former Acquaintance) but with scorn and disdain; so
that I looked on his present Exhortation very unseasonable, especially after
his many Curses and False Prophecies poured out against me in diverse Public
Meetings, since the last Yearly Meeting, as is known to many; And a little
after, the Meeting desired me to withdraw, which I did.

When I came before them the next day, after some silence, Geo. Whitehead
began, and made a long Speech, repeating what he had said the day before, and
adding new matter, he said, He was not forward to be the Speaker, but it being
laid upon him by the Meeting, he was willing: He said, I had not only given
great dissatisfaction by my Printed Paper, called, The Causless Ground, and by
my Reflecting on Friends Testimonies in Public Meetings, and refusing to
hearken to Friends Advice, to clear the Body of the People called Quakers, and
their Ministers, from those gross Errors, etc. but by the Paper I had given in
Yesterday, I had greatly increased the dissatisfaction in Friends against me, I
charging Ancient Friends in the said Paper, and who have been always owned by
Friends, as Faithful Ministers, with high Charges; and not them only, but the
Second Days Meeting also, and had taken upon me to Judge Ancient Friends and
Brethren, and the Second Days Meeting; yea, and all Friends that will not say
as I say: And for me to oppose my self thus generally to Friends, and judge
them all, as I had done, was a great dissatisfaction, and did bespeak, or prove
me very far declined from Friends, and from a true inward sense of Truth. After
he had spoke a great while, to the same purpose, but chiefly finding fault,
that I had excepted against some of the most Ancient, and most approved Friends
of the Ministry, as not being worthy either to be my Judges, or so much as
Evidences against me; after some time of silence, in great coolness I replied
to him: It cannot be expected, That I can Reply to every thing particularly in
this long Discourse of G. W. It were better to speak but to one thing at once;
I cannot remember all the particulars, but so far as my Memory serves me, I
shall endeavor, by God's assistance to answer to some of the chief things. I
deny that I have as yet judged all Friends, I reserve to my self a Judgment of
Discretion, as a private person, the due privilege of every true Christian; but
why is it thought such a crime in me, to lay my Complaint before this Meeting,
against some particular persons, who have greatly injured me, and abused me;
and why ought not my Complaint to be heard against them, as theirs is heard
against me. The Advice of that, called the Paper of the last Yearly Meeting,
was that Friends should be tender and kind to me, and to avoid Reflections on
both sides. It will appear to be great partiality, only to examine, whether I
have kept to this advise, or transgrest it; and not also to examine impartially,
whether these that have reflected on me in Public Meetings, and have
interrupted me in my Testimony in Meetings, and falsely accused me, as William
Penn some Weeks ago, did at Ratcliff Meeting, calling me, in the open Meeting,
Apostate, and an Enemy to Truth and Friends. Have I not just cause to except
against such, as being either Judges, or Evidences against me, and particularly
against thee George Whitehead, whom I can sufficiently prove greatly
prejudiced against me? And as for that other part of the Advice, said to be
given by the last Yearly Meeting, viz. That I should clear the Body of the
People called Quakers, and their Ministers, charged on some in America; to this
I have some things to say; and first I would have you to consider, that Advice
is one thing, and Command is another, even as Paul distinguishes in the case
of single Life, when he gives his Advice or Judgment, but no command in that
Case, 1 Cor. 7. 25, 40. And surely Paul was not so severe, to disown them that
gave not obedience to his Advice; and I know no Church, nay, not the Church of
Rome, that is so severe as to disown them that will not hearken to her Advice
simply, if they obey her Commands. I find not that the Yearly Meeting Paper, so
called, gave me any Command in this case, and therefore no Transgression. But
again, as I have declared in my late Paper to you, I want to know what ye mean
by the Body of the People called Quakers, and their Ministers; if only the
Faithful, I never charged them, and have again, and again cleared them in
print; but if ye mean all that go under the same profession, of Quakers, not
di^owned by you, I say, that is a most unfair, and unjust thing to require of
me; for as I know not one of many hundreds of that People in diverse Places, nor
their Faith, whether it be sound or unsound in these matters, so to my certain
knowledge, some of great note among you, yea here sitting before me (pointing to
W. Penn, George Whitehead, and John Whitehe^^ but not mentioning their Names)
are guilty of some of those gross Errors charged on some in America; and how
can I clear them that are thus guilty, until they Correct these gross Errors in
their Printed Books, that are standing Evidences against them; and what Justice
could I expect, that these being the leading men at the last Yearly Meeting,
should fairly or sufficiently Condemn these men's gross Errors in Pensilvania,
charged on them, when they themselves are guilty of the same, as I offer to
prove out of their Printed Books, never retracted by them. But by this my free
Discourse, many in the Meeting began to be very uneasy. After I had ended,
George Whitehead began again, and resumed some Heads of my Discourse; he told
the Meeting the word Advise had a twofold signification, one when it was
relating to an indifferent matter, another when it related to that which was a
Command of God, to wit, to keep in Unity with Friends, and in Charity and
Peace, and not to break the Peace of the Church by contentions, and exposing
Friends to the World. Next, as to my Question about what they meant by the Body
of the People called Quakers, he wondered I could pretend ignorance in that,
seeing I had Printed diverse Books, in defense of the Body of that People, and
had answered the Books of Adversaries against them, which Friends well received
and encouraged me therein; and yet after all this, to pretend to be Ignorant,
what was meant by the Body of the People called Quakers, was to him very
strange. But however, he would tell me what they meant by the Body; First, they
meant none who had broke themselves off from Friends by their evil Contentions
and Strivings, and walked not in Charity and Peace with Friends; But by the
Body they meant all who walked in Unity with Friends, in the same Profession
with them, and were Charitable and Peaceable; and here he spoke much in Praise
of their Unity, that had been preserved among them, notwithstanding of the
endeavors of many to break it.

To this I replied, thou mistakes the Case, George Whitehead, I refused not to
hearken to the Advice of Friends, so far as it was a Command of God, but so far
as it advised me to do what is contrary to God's Command. I own I ought to Live
in Unity, Charity, and Peace with sound and Faithful Friends, but it is no
breach of that Unity to reprove Errors publicly Preached in our Meetings, and
to rescue many places of Scripture from the Perverse and Corrupt Glosses of
Ignorant Men, and if contending for Truth, and hard words be an Argument of
want of Charity, none have been greater contenders, than many of the People
called Quakers, not only amongst other Professions, but even among themselves,
before they disowned one another.

The Advice given me, to clear the Body of that People of all gross Errors,
when I know so many guilty, even such among you, as are owned most to be in
Unity, is a most unjust thing to require of me, and if for this I must be
disowned, I shall rest well satisfied. Next, as to the sense of the Word, Body
of the People called Quakers, I have been a Preacher and Writer among that
People, and a Labourer among them, these thirty years past, and I never
understood, that all deserved to be called the Body, that did but outwardly
profess Unity with Friends; I am not such a Novice, as not to know that it was
the Sense of many Friends, as well as my sense, that many Professed Truth with
us, and made a Profession of Unity, that were not in it, and were not in the
Possession of the Life and Power of Truth, whereof they made an outward
Profession. And as for the Unity of them here away, that some so much boast of,
there is no such great cause, so to glory and boast of Unity.

One thing G. Whitehead much insisted upon of my being changed, or at least so
appearing, since the last Yearly Meeting, for then I seemed to be very much
concerned, and desirous not to be broken off, and disjoynted from Friends, but
now it appears to him, and others, that it is a very indifferent thing with
me, to be disowned by Friends; To this I replied, That he did in that, as in
other things, mis-represent the Case; it is no matter of indifferency to me
now, but of great weight and moment, both with respect to you, and me; first,
with respect to you, if God should permit you to be so blinded, as to disown
me, without any just cause on my part, but simply my bearing my Faithful
Testimony to the Doctrine of Christ, and against the gross Errors of some among
you; this to me is no indifferent thing, on your Account; next, as to me, That
is no matter of indifferency, for if I be disowned by you, for well doing, as I
shall be very sorry for you, so I shall greatly rejoice on my Account, because
of the Spiritual Advantage I hope to receive thereby, relying on the Faithful
Promise of Christ, Matthew. 5. 11, 12. About this time, there being a great
Commotion in the Meeting, by reason of my free and bold Speech (which some are
pleased to call Passion, and Railing) William Penn stood up, desiring Friends
to keep down to the Sense, for by that they were to judge of this Disorderly
Spirit, or Person, who had accused George Fox, and other Ancient Friends
Writings, and may be (said he) he may pick up some things here and there in
them, to Criticize upon.

After he had done, I said to him, William Penn, Thou may be ashamed so falsely
to Accuse me, in the face of the Meeting. I said nothing of George Fox, nor had
I him at present in my Remotest Thoughts, I only mentioned some here present;
but George Fox is not here, at least, visibly present; and for your pretending
to Judge me by your sense, without giving me any fair Trial, or bringing any New
matter against me, either in Doctrine or Practice, to prove against me Face to
Face, by plain external Evidence, in you so doing ye will make your selves
Ridiculous in the face of the World; we are here set, as upon a Stage before
God, Angels and Men; and if ye pass any Judgment against me, by your pretended
inward Sense, ye will be sufficiently discovered, what unjust men ye are. And I
say to thee William Penn, it became thee not, so to abuse me in an open Meeting
at Ratcliffe, calling me an Apostate, and an open Adversary to Truth and
Friends. I am thy Elder Brother, and was a Preacher among the Quakers before
thou was a Quaker; though thou, and some others, of latter years, have lifted
up the Heel against me. William Penn replied, Thou boastest of thy Antiquity,
which I should not do, were I in thy case. I Answered, I boast not of my
Antiquity, but by thy own words, and the words of G. W. Ancient Brethren should
be Regarded, and not run down by others of latter years, as thou and others
seek to do, though ye have nothing justly against me,

I intend not to let it pass, thy publicly accusing me to be an Apostate, but
to put thee to make it good, in the Face of the Nation, [that is his own
Character, not mine, for I can prove him in the Apostasy from some of the chief
Fundamentals of the Christian Doctrine.] William Penn Replied, He would Answer
me in the Face of the Nation. [So let this his promise be remembered, the event,
I hope, will prove it, how badly he will acquit himself]. I told him he had
sufficiently shown his prejudice against me, and how unsit he was to be my Judge.

Then he began to tell in great heat, what he had born of me, even more than
what he might have born of Fifty Persons, of my greatness. [But I contend not
with him in Greatness, but in the cause of Truth, which is greater than all his
Greatness, not only Fifty Fold, but Infinitely] and how much he had Labored to
qualify Friends toward me, in order to a Reconciliation, and how he had Writ
in my Favor, to them in Pensilvania. This last I acknowledged to be True, but
how real he was in his favor, either then or since, time has sufficiently
discovered, having Opposed me, and Accused me in several Private Meetings, as
well as of late Publicly at Ratcliffe, and Haranging against me, as I was
told, in my Absence, at the last Yearly Meeting, which some present greatly
blamed. And some putting William Penn in mind, to give an Account to the
Meeting, of his manner of Opposition, to me at Ratcliffe Meeting, and what just
cause he had so to Treat me; He began, and told the Meeting what he spoke, by
way of Opposition to me at Ratcliffe, was not till after I have abused, not
only him, and Friends there present, but had abused Friends in general, and had
distinguished my self from them, by saying of them, they did put such a gloss
on that place of Scripture, 1 John 1. 7. The Blood of Jesus Christ his Son
cleanses us from all sin, and by charging Friends in general, and saying, he
would prove it out of their Books, that they denied, That the Blood of Christ's
Humanity did with God Expiate for Sin, and said William Penn, though I was
much spent in the Meeting by my former Testimony, yet after he had so abused
Friends in general, I was raised up in such a Transport, so that I was carried
beyond my self, not knowing whether I was sitting, standing or kneeling; but I
was in no Passion, the glorious Power of God, which I felt, did so Transport
me, that I confess I gave Judgment against him, and saw no need of staying,
till a Quarterly or Yearly Meeting should Judge him, seeing he had Judged us
all, and plainly distinguished himself from us; at which I confess I was much
moved, and had scarce patience to hear him assert such gross Falsehoods, and to
father his Transport of sinful Passion upon the Spirit of God, which God forbid
I should ever do.

And after William Penn had done, I replied, That was most abominable in him,
and blaspheming (though not against the Holy Ghost, I hope) to father his most
sinful Passion (calling it a Transport) upon the Glorious Power and Spirit of
God, a thing but too familiar with him, and many others of his Associates. It
could be no Divine Transport falsely to accuse me, of that whereof I was not
guilty. But he gives you a most false Relation in matter of Fact; He says, he
did not oppose me, and judge me, until after I had not only abused him, and
Friends there present, but had abused Friends in general, and had distinguished
my self from them, by saying of them, They did put such a Gloss on that place,
1 John 1. 7. The Blood is the Life, and that Life is the Light within. But I
neither charged him, nor any called a Quaker, at that time, for putting such a
Gloss upon that place, though I can sufficiently prove, That both he and others
have put that Gloss on it at other times.

And though I said, I could prove, out of some of their printed books, That
they did not own, That the Blood of Christ's Humanity was that which did with
God expiate for sin; yet I charged only some particular persons called Quakers,
but not the people in general; therefore his Information was false in the main.

In the Conclusion of my Discourse with them, among others, Francis Camfield
pressed much, That silence should be made, and let any who were dissatisfied
with the Last Years Judgment, declare their dissatisfaction; and if they did
not, they were not honest men. To which I replied, Although it passes for a
Proverb, Silence is Consent, yet ye know it is not always true: How often in
Meetings, when things are carried by a prevailing Faction, or Party, against
Truth, Right and Justice, Persons will be silent, through fear of displeasing,
yet are not satisfied, but go away grieved and wounded; and this ye are not
ignorant of? what say thou to it, Francis Camfield, know thou not that it
is so?

FINIS.
A Short List of the Vile and Gross Errors of Geo. Whitehead, John Whitehead,
and William Penn, etc.
Friendly Reader,
I Design only to give thee at present, this short List of these men's gross and
vile Errors, opposite to some of the Fundamental Doctrines of Christianity,
reserving a more full Account of both their Errors, and some others in high
esteem with them, to another Opportunity, with a due and impartial Correction
of them; wherein I purpose also, God willing, (if he shall be pleased to
prolong my Life and Health, and afford me his Gracious Assistance) impartially
to publish, together with the said Correction, some short Explications, and
also Emendations, where I see need, of some Words and Passages in my former
Books; for upon a Review of my former books as the Book of Immed. Revel. the
Book of Universal grace, the Rector corrected, and Truth defended, I freely
acknowledge. I have found some Passages and Words, that not only need some
further Explanation. but even in some part an Emendation and Correction. And I
thank Almighty God, that has not only given me to see them, but has given me
that humility of heart, and Love to Truth, and Regard to the Salvation of
Souls, that I can freely both acknowledge and correct my former mistakes, after
the Example of some Worthy Ancients. And had these men, that are turned my so
implacable Enemies, for my zealous and free opposing such gross Errors that I
found them here, as well as others in America, guilty of, and which those in
America had sucked in out of their Books, had but had the l^^e Huminity, and
Love to Truth, and Regard to the Honor of God, and Salvation of Souls, instead
of hating and excommunicating me, for my Opposition to those Errors, they would
have loved, and embraced, and encouraged me, and gone before me in their good
Example, to have openly corrected them; But Old Self prevailing in them, would
not permit them to do any such thing; a plain Evidence they Love the Praise of
men more than the Honor of God and Salvation of Souls; and the Conceit that
they had begot the People generally into, that all what they preached and
printed was from the infallible Spirit; and that they were altogether of a
sound Mind and Judgment in all parts of Christian Doctrine, tending so much to
support their Praise and high Esteem and Admiration, among their too credulous
Followers, being to be contradicted, if they should acknowledge their former
Errors, and unsoundness of Faith in these great matters; This is the Pinch and
Difficulty at present, and rather than acknowledge their Fallibility and gross
Mistakes, and pernicious Errors touching Fundamental Doctrines, they resolved
to cloak and cover all these gross Errors, both of them in America, as well as
their own, and the more safely to hide themselves, they now begin to Preach
contradictory to their former books, in diverse things, but will not own any
self-contradiction, pretending there is none. But withal, they mightily charge
me with my Contradictions to my former Books; To which I can, and do thus
answer: 1. If in any things or words, I do contradict what I have formerly
Printed, I am willing most freely and cordially to correct my former mistakes;
for I never judged my self absolutely infallible; but as my own former books
have plainly declared, I did judge both my self, and all others now Living,
liable to mistakes; and I far rather, upon Divine Illumination, and sound
Conviction, contradict my former books, than persist in any known Error.

But, 2dly, Upon the most impartial search that I have made, I find not any
cause to correct either my Judgment or Books, as touching any of the great
Doctrines and Principles of the Christian Religion; nor do I know that I am of
another Faith in any One Principle of Christian Doctrine, contrary to what I
believed, ever since I went under the Profession of a Quaker, so called. The
Words and Passages generally, if not universally, that I find cause to correct,
not being so much relating to the Truth of Principles of Christian Doctrine, as
to some places of Scripture unduly applied, to prove, or defend things that
were Truths, but did not really prove these Truths, either by express words, or
yet by any real, and true and proper consequence, or Relative to some other
Lesser and more Circumstantial Matters. But as to the Fundamental, and
otherwise great Articles of the Christian Faith, I think my gracious God, that
I have been well preserved, and have not found any thing, in any of my former
or latter books, contradictory to any One Fundamental Doctrine of the Christian
Faith; and I wish I had not found too much just Cause to blame others, for
their great Errors in Fundamental Doctrines; and had they been so humble as to
have Corrected their own Errors, I had not thus exposed them; and if any shall
judge it to be an Act of Prejudice, or Malice in me, thus to Expose them, after
due warning given in private to most of them, and after they have thus
publicly disowned me, I have this comfort, that they judge a miss of me, and
that nothing of Prejudice or Malice has moved me to this undertaking, but love
to Truth, and Men, and next to the Honor of God, the regard to my Christian
Name and Reputation, which these men have sought to slay, and by so doing, to
expose me, and my Family to outward want, and necessity; but I trust in God's
Mercy, their design will be disappointed, and God will in due time, clear me of
that cloud of unjust Infamy, they all seek to cover me with, and that he will
plead my righteous Cause, for to him I do commit it.

But now to proceed to give the short List I promised.

All sincere Christians believe that by that bloody Sacrifice of Christ upon
the Cross, through Faith in him, they are cleansed from their sins, and that by
the Blood of Christ, by which true Believers are said both to be Justified, and
Sanctified, is to be understood the real and true Blood of Christ's Body that
suffered on the Cross, which George Whitehead calls Visible and Material
Blood, and positively denies that the Saints are cleansed by that Blood, and
gives diverse Reasons of his positive denial, (all which are most false and
absurd).

First, because that Blood is not in being, giving for his Authority W. Burnet,
page 40. of his Book.

2dly. Because the Blood that came out of Christ's Side, when peirced by the
Spear, was not shed by Christ, the shedding of it was no Act of Christ, but of
a wicked Soldier, and therefore not Efficacious, or Meritorious, for remission
of Sin, or cleansing from Sin.

3. Because, as the New Covenant is inward and Spiritual, so is the Blood of
the New Covenant, but so was not that Material Blood, and the material Blood of
the Beasts that were Offered in Sacrifice under the Law, was not a Type of that
material Blood that was shed upon the Cross, for that were to say, one Type was
a Type of another, See G. VV. his Book called, The Light and Life of Christ
within, in Answer to W. Burnet, a Baptist Teacher; And this Antichristian and
wretched Doctrine, he gives out, as the Quakers Principles; withal, telling
the Quakers, see no need of Directing men to the Type, for the antitype, viz.
Neither to the outward Temple, nor yet to Jerusalem, either to Jesus Christ, or
his Blood, knowing that neither the Righteousness of Faith, nor the word of it
does so direct, Romans 10. And a little after he says, And where do the
Scriptures say, the Blood was there (viz. at Jerusalem) shed for Justification,
and that men must be directed to Jerusalem to it? See his page 38. 39, 59, 60.
Agreeable to this is that Doctrine published by W. Penn in his Part of the
Christian Quaker, p. 97. This Seed (said he) viz. the one Seed Christ (as he
calls him there) must be Inward and Spiritual, since one outward thing cannot
be the proper Figure or Representation of another; nor is it the way of Holy
Scripture so to teach w^ the outward Lamb shows forth the inward Lamb, the Jew
outward, the Jew inward. If this be not as plain a denial of Christ to be any
outward Being, having any bodily Existance without us, I know no English. He
goes on, at a most Antichristian rate, to prove that this Seed of the Woman
that bruiseth the Serpent's Head, was not Christ's Body, or what he had from
the Virgin, strictly considered as such.

2dly, (Says he) It is clear from hence, the Serpent is a Spirit; now nothing
can bruise the Head of the Serpent but something that is also Internal and
Spiritual, as the Serpent is. But if that Body of Christ were the Seed, then
could he not bruise the Serpents Head in all, because the Body of Christ, is
not so much as in any one, and consequently, the Seed of the Promise is an Holy
and Spiritual Principle of Light, Life and Power, that being received into the
Heart, bruiseth the Serpents Head, and because the Seed, which cannot be that
body, is Christ, as testify the Scriptures; the Seed is one, and that Seed
Christ, and Christ God over all Blessed for ever; we do conclude, and that most
truly, that Christ was, and is the Divine word of Light and Life, that was in
the beginning with God, and was and is God over all, blessed for ever. But as
it is readily granted by all true Christians, that Christ is God, so by Christ,
as he is called the Seed of the Woman, and the Seed of Abraham, in whom all
Nations of the Earth are blessed, is understood, Christ not as he is God only,
or the word only; for it is wonderful blindess, or inconsiderateness to say,
God is the Seed of the Woman, or the Seed of Abraham, without any respect to
the word becoming Flesh, or taking Flesh; But it is neither the Body of Christ,
strictly considered, nor the Soul of Christ, strictly considered, without the
Godhead, nor the Godhead strictly considered, without the Soul and Body of the
Manhood of Christ, that is the Seed of the Woman, or Seed of Abraham, but the
Godhead and Manhood jointly considered, and most gloriously united.

And his third Argument is as unchristian as the other two, viz. because the
Seed bruised in good measure, the Serpents Head, in the Holy Men and Women of
all Generations, before that outward appearance, this is a Truth, but the
Consequence he draws from it, is a notorious Falsehood, and a most Antichristian
Doctrine, viz. That therefore the Seed of the Woman, and the promised Seed of
Abraham, figured by the Types and Figures of the Law, as the Pascal Lamb, etc.
was not any outward thing,; or person, but an Holy and Spiritual Principle of
light, Life and Power and at this rate Christ was not a Lamb without, nor a Man
without, but a Lamb within, and Man within. And though he pretends to
overthrow his Adversaries Opinion, viz. Some called Baptists and others, yet he
Fights against his shadow, by limiting the question, by the phrase strictly
considered, for I know no Baptist that ever said, the Body strictly considered,
i. e. without the Soul of the Man Christ, and without the Godhead, is Christ,
or that promised Seed of Abraham, and Seed of the Woman. And though Christ did
not become the Seed of the Woman. according to the sense of that place of
Scripture, Genesis 3. until the fullness of time, that he was made of a Woman, yet
seeing that Divine Power, that inwardly did destroy the Power of Sin, and
Satan in true Believers, in him that was promised to come, was the real Power
of him, that was to come, and the gift of it, was the real purchase of his most
Holy and Perfect Obedience unto Death; when he came; it is truly said, That he
bruised the Serpents Head in all true believers in all Ages. And thus having
showed the Antichristian Doctrine of these 2 great Champions, that have
appeared against me, to give out this Nameless Bull of Excommunication, in some
Particulars, that are Fundamental Articles of the Christian Faith, I shall in
short present to the Reader's View, the Antichristian Doctrine of the Third
Champion, John Whitehead, not only contradicting the plain Doctrine of the Holy
Scripture, in a Fundamental Article of Faith, but also contradicting his
Brother William Penn; for William Penn says, the Body of Christ is not so much
as in any One; but John Whitehead says indeed, That Christ has a Body, or is
in a Body suitable to his Spirit, consisting of heavenly flesh and bone; and
does not deny, that Christ has any Body now beside his Church; but he
confesses he has several times denied, that Christ has now a body of flesh
and bones circumscript or limited in that Heaven which is above, and out of
every man on Earth. See page 40, 41. of that book called, The Quakers Refuge;
the Postscript of which is here cited: And he says plainly, Wheresoever the
Spirit and Life of Christ is, that is in the body of Christ; and thus, as he
owneth that Christ has a body that is not the Church, yet he owneth no other
body (beside his Church) that is circumscript, and out of every man on Earth;
And yet not only W. P. says, The body of Christ is not so much as in any One:
a plain contradiction to John Whitehead. But George Whitehead, in his Printed
Postscript, in answer to W. H. queries, in the book called, The Malice of the
Independent Agent Rebuked, says, concerning the flesh (of Christ) that was
raised from the Dead, it is so far circumscribed, or encompassed in the
Heavens, as it is capable of, and as is proper to it; and though it be
spiritual, and glorious, yet a body; and therefore not in every place where God
is. To be Omnipresent is only proper to God, and not to bodies: See how like
Sampson's Foxes, though tied by the Tail, their Faces look contrary.

Again, In the Collection of Stephen Crisp's Treatises, commended and signed by
George Whitehead, John Whitehead, Francis Camfield, John Vaughton, VV.
Bingley, John Field, my chief opposers and adversaries, and others, ye have
these following gross and absurd passages, most offensive to Christian Ears,
concerning Christ's Generation in time, and expiation of sin by his Blood.

In his Treatise called, The Backslider Reproved, being a Reply to one Robert
Cobbet, he blames the said R. C. for affirming (page 194.) that to be the Seed
of Promise, which came by Generation, of and from the Properties of Mary. He
further adds, Is not that the Seed of Promise mentioned in Isaiah 9. 6. who is
called the mighty God, the everlasting Father, the Prince of Peace. And what is
Mary, the Mother of God; this will please the Papists well; and where is thy
Scripture to prove that Jesus the Savior was Created.

And page 197. he says, But indeed we never believed him to be produced by
Coagulation, as R. C. does, nor by the Generation of and from the Properties of
Man in Mary, for then some might have declared his Generation, which the
Scripture says, who can do.

Obs. 1. It is denied here by S. C. That that was the Seed of Promise, which
came by Generation, etc. This is plain contrary to Matt. 1. 1. The Book of the
Generation of Jesus Christ the Son of David, the Son of Abraham.

2. As it is Evident from Scripture, so it is the consent of all sound
Christians, That Christ was the Son of God by an eternal Generation, before the
World began, and the Son of Abraham and David, by Generation in the fullness of
time, and though this Generation was Miraculous, yet it was of and from Mary;
therefore he is said to be made of a Woman.

3. His denying that Jesus the Savior was Created, or calling for Scripture to
prove it does sufficiently prove, that he understands Christ only to be God,
and wholly excludes the Manhood of Christ, from being Christ, or any part of
him.

4. That Prophecy in Isaiah 9. 6. Unto us a Child is Born, etc. which is a
plain Prophecy concerning Christ's Birth in the fullness of time, he plainly
denies it to be understood of Christ as he was born of Mary.

5. I believe with all sound Christians, against Jews and all Infidels that he
who was born of Mary is that Child or Son, given, who is both God and Man, and
yet one Lord Jesus Christ; and though none can fully and in all respects
declare either the Generation of Christ, before the time of this World was, or
his Generation in the fullness of time, yet in some degree, and respect, it has
been declared both by the Prophets and Evangelists and Apostles, but none ought
to declare it, but Holy Men, to whom it has been, in some measure, Revealed.

6. I find that not only S. C. but G. W. quarrels with that Expression, calling
Mary the Mother of God, as if it were Popery. But are they wiser than the Holy
Ghost, who gives these Names to the Child that was to be born according to
Isaiah's Prophecy, wonderful Counselor, the mighty God, etc.

Again, in the same Treatise, (pap. 192.) concerning the Blood of Christ's
Humanity, he says.

And then again, concerning the Blood that saves and does away sin, hear what
R. C. in his 11. page says, My Brethren, you are bought with a price, not of
blood of Bulls and Goats, nor Heifers of a year old, but by the Blood of God.
But in his 13. page he is of another Opinion, and says quite contrary; these
are his words, viz. which blood being the Blood of his Humanity, as he was
Creature, was that which did with God expiate for sin; so now which of these
two Doctrines shall we believe, that we are saved by the Blood of God, or Blood
of the Humanity, or shall we suppose them to be both one, and so God to be
Human, and so the Doctrines indifferent. R. C. will do well to clear up these
things, or own his Condemnation, upon his folly and presumption.

Obs. There needs little observation to demonstrate how unsound, and unsavory
these words are; but some, to excuse them, say they are only by way of Query;
but it is a plain case, he not only querieth, but positively affirms, that to
say we are bought by the Blood of God, is quite contrary to say, which Blood,
being the Blood of his Humanity, as he was Creature, was that which with God
did expiate for Sin, so that it is clear, as S. C. did hold them to be two
Bloods; he did hold Expiation not to be by the Blood of the Humanity, whereas
the Blood of the Man Christ, is called the Blood of God, because Christ, whose
blood it was, was and is both God and Man.

2dly, Whereas S. C. puts R. C. to own his Condemnation upon his folly and
presumption; this is no query, but a positive affirmation. Now R. C. his
supposed folly and presumption charged by S. C. was, That he said the Blood of
God did expiate for sin, the which was the Blood of the Humanity of Christ: But
this is a sound Assertion, and to contradict it is folly and presumption, for
God has not Blood, strictly considered, being a pure Spirit; but the Blood of
Christ is worthily called the Blood of God, because Christ is not only Man, but
God also: And like to this is that place, 1 John 3. 16. Hereby perceive we the
love of God, because he laid down his Life for us; this He is Christ, who is
not only Man, but God also, and yet one Lord Jesus Christ the Immanuel.

1. An Additional List to the Former.

G. Whitehead says in his Printed Book, the Light and Life of Christ within,
etc. page 64. The shedding of that Blood let out by the Spear, was an act of a
wicked Man, and the Spear an Instrument of Cruelty, which to lay the
Meritorious Cause, or stress of Justification upon, is false Doctrine. For
there is a great difference betwixt Christ's Offering up himself by the Eternal
Spirit, a Lamb without spot with God, and the Acts of Wicked Men inflicted upon
him, as it is said, by wicked hands they put him to Death.

Obs. Here not only he Excludes the shedding of that Blood, but the Death of
Christ, and all his bodily Sufferings from being concerned in that Offering,
and so charge false Doctrine upon the Holy Scriptures, that attributes the
making Peace betwixt God and us, to Christ by the Blood of his Cross, called
so, because it was that Blood that was shed, when he suffered on the Cross; and
the Scripture says, He was wounded for our Transgressions, etc. And by his
Stripes we are healed, which doubtless are to be understood of his Bodily
Sufferings, as well as of the inward Grief of his Soul. And it is a great
undervaluing of Christ's Sufferings and Death and Blood, that because by wicked
hands men put him to Death, that therefore his Death, Sufferings and Blood was
not Meritorious, for though the violent Death of the Martyrs was not
Meritorious for Remission of our sins, yet it was precious in the sight of God,
and had great acceptance with God; and at this rate of G. W's carnal Reasoning
(I am sure the Light of Christ in him never taught him so to reason; but a dark
carnal Spirit, more like a scossing Celsus, who wrote slightingly of Christ
against the Christians) not only all the Martyrs sufferings, but all Friends
sufferings, and his own sufferings also (who I heard was once Whipped for his
Profession) was of no value, being Inflicted by Wicked Men. And tho the Blood
that came out of Christ's side, when the Soldier Peirced him, was shed after he
was Dead, yet that does not hinder, but it was of the same value with that
Blood of his, that was shed before his Death, and with all his other
Sufferings; and when Christ said to his Disciples, before his Passion, Take,
eat; this is my Body, and this Cup is the New Testament in my Blood, shed for
the Remission of the Sins of many, as all Protestant and sincere Christians
hold, as by his Body, he meant his real Body, whereof the Bread was a Figure;
so by his Blood that was shed, he meant his real Blood, whereof what was in the
Cup was a Figure, and by a Figure, called, Enallage Temporis; he said of his
body, This is my Body broken for you, etc. And this Cup is the New Testament in
my Blood, shed, etc. Tho the thing was not then done, but soon after was done;
and tho our blessed Lord in his bodily Sufferings was wholly passive, yet his
obedience to the will of his Father, which was a most Holy and Perfect
Obedience, in his most Holy and Perfect Resignation, and Patience in his
exceeding Love, both to his Father, and also to Men in his most profound
Humility, and all other most excellent Virtues, that God did regard in his
Sufferings chiefly, and that was so highly Meritorious, yet the Blood, and the
shedding of it is mentioned in Scripture, because he could not be a true and
proper Sacrifice, without his Blood had been shed, for without shedding of
Blood there could be no Remission; and though his Death and Sufferings and
Blood were all Valuable, and precious in God's Sight, yet his Obedience was
chiefly considered, as it is said, because he humbled himself and became
Obedient unto Death, therefore God has highly exalted him, etc. And his
Obedience, Blood, Death and Sufferings, are jointly to be considered by us in
that great Work of our Redemption.

Again, In the forecited Book, page 58. He excuses these most Blasphemous
words of Sol. Eccles, which were, The Blood that was forced out of him by the
Soldiers, after he was Dead, who before that bowed his Head to the Father, and
gave up the Ghost, I did say that was no more than the Blood of another Saint.
G. Whitehead to excuse this gives three Answers.

1. He says, now to these words, viz. No more than the blood of another Saint,
his intent was, as to Papists, and you whose minds are carnal, who oppose the
Light within.

Secondly, he says, and also simply, as to the essence of the blood; which you
do not say is still in being, but not as to the spiritual virtue which is still
in being. And a little after he argues thus in the same page: And seeing that
the children had flesh and blood, and Christ took part of the same, if the
same, how was it more; or another simply as to the matter of blood?

His third answer is, that he owns the blood shed in one sense, was more then
the blood of another Saint (tho not in the matter of it as to the visible) in
that it had a peculiar signification, etc.

Obser. As to his first answer, that his intent was, that that blood was no
more than the blood of another Saint, as to Papists, and Baptists, whose minds
are carnal, who oppose the light within; here is a plain denial, that Christ's
death, and blood shedding was of value for all men; Papists, and Baptists, and
all others are excluded, whose minds are carnal, and who oppose the light
within. We had wont to blame the narrowness of them, that said Christ dyed not
for all men; and shed not his blood for all, but G. W. here excludes Papists,
and Baptists, and all others whose minds are carnal, who oppose the light
within from any other benefit by Christ's blood, than what they have by the
blood of any other Saint; but have we not Preached and Printed that the light
within is a benefit that Papists and Baptists, yea, Jews, Turks and all
Mankind, have by Christ's Obedience unto Death, which we have proved from Romans
5. 15, 18. and other places of Scripture; but this benefit all Men have not by
the Death and Blood of any other Saints. To his 2d. Answer, That that Blood of
Christ was no more than the Blood of another Saint, simply as to the Essence of
the Blood; by his rate of Arguing, he might excuse it, if S. E. had said, It
was no more than the blood of a common Thief, (as it was reported, he or some
other did say) seeing the blood of a Saint, and the blood of a common Theif,
simply considered, differ not as to the visible, or matter of it. But I say, as
the blood and body of a Saint differs much from the blood and body of a
wicked man, because the body and blood of a Saint is Sanctified, so is not the
body and blood of a wicked man, while such, so the blood and body of Christ
differs from that of all Saints, by way of Excellency, and that in a very
high degree, beyond what can be expressed or conceived, not only that it was
never defiled with sin, but for other great Reasons. And tho Christ took flesh
and blood, and the true nature of man, yet that proves not, that as man,
Christ had not that which was more excellent, even belonging to his body and
blood as well as to his Soul, far above all other men, his very body being
Miraculously conceived, and having no immediate Father, as Man, but God. As to
his 3d. Answer, That is as weak and impertinent as the other two; he owns that
in one sense, the blood shed was more, in that it had a peculiar signification,
etc. But this is but a small preference, to say in one sense, it had a peculiar
signification, the blood of the Beasts in one sense had a peculiar
signification, that were Offered in Sacrifices under the Law, being Types and
Typical significations of Christ's Blood. But the blood of Christ that was
outwardly shed, had not a Typical Signification, as the blood of beasts had,
but was a real part of the true Atonement, together with his Body and Soul;
and if he had any knowledge of the great Mystery of that Blood, and any due
value for it, he would not only have owned it to be more than the blood of
another Saint, in one sense, but in a manifold sense, or rather every way,
having the preference; the blood as well as the Body of the Saints, is
corruptible, and does corrupt; but neither the body nor blood of Christ did
corrupt; and that G. W. insists so much on that Argument, that because that
blood is not in being, which W. B. had confessed, that therefore it is not
Meritorious of Justification; this is but Argumentum ad hominem at most against
W. B.; but what says G. W. to it, is that Blood in being, or did it corrupt?
Let him speak out plainly, and not shift or quible, as his manner too much has
been in Controversy; and if nothing can merit, or be efficacious, which is not
in being; this does as much render Christ's Death, and bodily Sufferings
ineffectual, but only for that little time that he suffered; and because
Christ's Death and bodily Sufferings are now at an end; Christ having once
died, dies no more: But the Scripture says, that Christ by one Offering has
for ever perfected them that are Sanctified, and that was the Offering his body
once for all (his blood being also a part of the Offering) together with his
Soul, and this Offering was effectual in all Ages before he Died, as well as it
is now effectual, and will be to the Worlds end, to all that truly believe, and
obey his Gospel.

But what little true knowledge, either G. W. or W. P. has of the Mystery of
Christ's Flesh and Blood, or of Christ without us, does sufficiently appear
from two Citations more; I shall bring one of G. W. another of W. P. in the
Second Part of the Christian Qnaker, done by G. VV. page 243. We really own,
(says he) and confess to the Blood of Christ, both in the History, and in the
Mystery, etc. By this it plainly appears, that he did not own the blood of
Christ, as it was ourwardly shed, to have any mystery in it, that blood
outwardly shed, was blood in the History, but the life or spirit, or Light
within, that is blood in the Mystery. Next VV. P. in his Answer to John Faldo,
finds great fault with him; See his Rejoinder, p. 335. 336, 337. For his
holding it to be a Truth, That Christ without is a great Mystery, who died as a
Malefactor, by his Death reconciled to God, etc. Yea, and more misterious, than
for Christ to be in the Gentiles (rightly understood.) But in opposition to
John Faldo's Assertion, VV. P. says, in way of reply, The History is made the
greatest Mystery, and to believe the one, matter of greater difficulty, than to
experience the other. And p. 336, 337. He says further, It is strange, that
should be reputed most Misterious, which was the Introduction to the Mystery,
and these Transactions counted most difficult, that were by the Divine wisdom
of God, Ordained as so many facile Representations, of what was to be
accomplished in Man. In short (says he) it is to lessen if not totally to
exclude the true Mystery of Godliness, which is Christ manifested in his
Children, their hope of Glory.

Obs. It is plainly evident, that they make not only Christ's Works and
Sufferings without us, but History; but even Christ himself without us, is to
them but History; and to believe in him without us, is but History, and an
Historical Faith. But if these Men were not extremely dark and blind, they
could see and own, that as Christ within is a Mystery, and a great Mystery (and
if John Faldo did deny it, I shall be far from Justifying or excusing him) so
Christ without us is not only a Mystery, but a greater Mystery, or rather, as
Christ both without us and within us, is but one Christ; so one exceeding
great, and glorious Mystery; but if we may distinguish this one great Mystery,
as it were in two parts, as we commonly distinguish a two fold appearance of
Christ, one without us in the Flesh, another within us, by his Spirit, and yet
but one Christ, so we ought to own and confess, if we have any Spiritual Sight
and knowledge of Christ, that Christ without us, as he is both God and Man, God
manifest in the Flesh, in whom dwells all fullness of Grace and Truth, is a
far greater part of the Mystery, than Christ within us, for the fullness dwelt,
and still dwells in the Man Christ without us; but the best of the Saints
that ever lived, have but their respective Measures, and the Mystery of Christ,
his being both God and Man, his miraculous conception and Birth, his being that
Universal Offering for our Sins, his Death, Resurrection and Ascension, and
continual intercession for us in Heaven, and his continually giving forth, and
sending down to his Saints on Earth, new and fresh influences of Life, Light
and Grace; yea, and by what he conveyeth into men's Hearts of his Power and
Virtue, both to begin and carry on the work of Regeneration in men, what a
complex of Mysteries is here? who can sufficiently declare them? or who, that
is not grossly ignorant of the inward work of Regeneration, can prefer the
inward work of Regeneration (tho a great and glorious mystery) to Christ, as he
is both God and man without us, who has the Spirit given him without measure?
Is not this to prefer the measure to the fullness, the stream to the Fountain,
the Effect to the Cause, the Gift to the Giver, and the Life in the Hands and
Feet, and other Members, to the Life in the Head, and the Sap and Virtue that
is in the branches to that which is in the Tree and Root? And seeing the work
of Regeneration and Sanctification in the Saints, is a great mystery; must we
not own him who is the Author, and great Cause of it, to be greater? Unless VV.
Penn will say, that it is not Christ without us, but only Christ within us,
that is the Author and Cause of Regeneration. Indeed if he can prove that only
Christ within men, is the cause of Regeneration, he has gained his Point; but
this he will never be able to do, and he may expect as soon, to persuade men of
understanding, that the Sun is no cause of the Generation of Herbs, and Plants
in the Earth, being without them; as that Christ without men, is not the Cause
of the work of Regeneration within; for if we ascribe the work of Regeneration
within men, to Christ, or to his Spirit, Light and Life within, as the measure
that measure within, comes from the fullness in the Man Christ without them, yea
and from the Man Christ, in whom the fullness dwells, and the measure acts
in the Saints, by the Power and Strength of the Fullness thereof, for and VV. P.
or G. VV. to suppose the Mystery of Regeneration, can either be experienced,
witnessed, or understood, without the Mystery of Christ without us, argues as
great ignorance in them, as if one should think, he can demonstrate the
Generation of Herbs and Plants, Springing out of the Earth without the Sun

But it is a further instance of VV. Penn his great Ignorance in the Mystery of
Christ, that by his words above named; he makes Christ without, but the
introduction to the Mystery, viz. Christ within, as to say, The Life in the
Head, is but an introduction to the Life in the Members, and thus the Members
shall be more valuable than the Head. And lastly, It is a most ranting strain
in him, to say, That what Christ did, and suffered without Men, which he
calls Transactions, to be so many facile Representations of what was to be
accomplished in Man. Thus Christ without, is made but a Type, Figure and Shell,
and the inward is made the Kernel and Antitipe. But was there not more in
Christ, of the inward, incomparably, than in all men? For what of the Kernel or
Substance any or all the Saints have, they have it out of him, and by and
through him, even the Man Christ without them. And whereas it is plainly
evident from VV. Penn his words abovementioned, That he will not have the
Manifestation of God in the Flesh of Christ, to be the true Mystery of
Godliness; but Christ manifested in his Children,, the hope of Glory; he sets
things in opposition, which ought not to be opposed, but joined together; and
he perverts, most grossly, these words of the Apostle Paul, (even as some of his
late Brethren have done) 1 Timothy 3. 16. without controversy great is the mystery
of Godliness, God manifest in the Flesh, Justified in the Spirit, etc. Jumbling
two places of Scripture together, and confounding their sense, as if because
that place, Colos. 1. 29. mentions Christ in you, the hope of Glory, that
therefore by God manifest in the Flesh, etc. Of which Paul says, without
controversy, great is the mystery of Godliness; is to be understood Christ in
the Saints, and not Christ without us, as he was both God and Man; whereas it
is most evident, That place is to be understood of the Man Christ, in whom was
and is the most Glorious Manifestation of God that ever was, and no otherwise
of Christ, in the Saints, but by way of concomitancy or consequence, because
whatever Manifestation of the Life Virtue or Measure of the Spirit of Christ,
any of the Saints have, they have it out of the fullness of the Spirit, and of
Grace and Truth, that dwells in the Glorified Man Christ Jesus, and out of
his fullness, it flows into their, is water in the cteeks flows into them
out of the Ocean, or fullness or Water that is in the Sea; and as the outward
Light we have on Earth, daily flows from the Fountain and Fullness of Light,
that is in the outward Sun, and this the last clause of that Verse, 1 Timothy 3.
16. plainly proves, viz. Received up into Glory, manifestly pointing at
Christ's Ascension into Heaven, and the Glory he is stated into. And let W. P.
plainly Answer me, whether he Judges that the manifestation of God in the man
W. P. or in the man G. W. or any other man whatsoever is greater, or a greater
mystery, than the manifestation of God, in the man Christ Jesus, as his words
plainly import, at least by a natural and necessary consequence, because he
says, The one is but the History, and the introduction to the Mystery; but the
other, viz. God and Christ in W. P. and other Saints, is the mystery it self,
and Christ without, and all that he did and suffered without men, is but so
many facile Representations of what was to be accomplished in man. Thus as the
Scenographical Description of an House, is far inferior to the House, being but
a facile Representation of it, a mean cheap thing, that ye may have for a Penny
and less, and the very making the Draught of it, a facile thing, easily made,
with little, either labor or cost, whereas the House is a great work, not
built but with great labor and cost, so Christ without, and those transactions
of his, are but facile representations of what was to be accomplished in Man;
if this be not to make the man W. P. and what is accomplished, or to be
accomplished in the man W. P. and other Saints of more value and consideration,
than the man Christ Jesus of Nasareah; and than all his most worthy and most
highly valuable Actions, and Sufferings, which W. P. calls Transactions, I
appeal to all sincere Christians. How much more Christian would it have been in
W. P. to have said, what was done, or accomplished in the Man Christ Jesus of
Nasareth, and his most Holy and Perfect Obedience, both active and passive (so
far as is imitable by us, and so far as men are capable of being made
conformable thereunto) is that original, and most excellent Exemplar, and
archetipe pattern, according to which, the Saints are made conformable, and the
Virtues and Fruits of the Spirit, which are accomplished in the Saints, and
remain to be fully accomplished in them, answer to these Virtues in Christ, by
way of Analogy and Similitude, so that both these in him, the Head, and in them
the Members, are real and substantial Virtues, but more eminently and
Transcendently greater in the Man Christ, than in any other men, however so
Holy, that ever were, or shall be. And as the Saints, which are Christ's
Members, are to be made thoroughly conformable to him, both in his Virtues, and
active obedience, so in his Death and Sufferings, so as to be Crucified with
him, Buried with him, Risen with him, etc. Yet this is not to be so understood,
as if what was accomplished in the man Christ, without us, above Sixteen
hundred years ago, is but the Figure, or Type (or History and facile
representation, as W. P. phraseth it, (more Ranter like, than a sober
Christian) of what is to be accomplished in man. And tho these called Socinians
do greatly Err in not owning Christ to be God, as well as Man, in the two fold
Nature of his Godhead and Manhood, most wonderfully United, and so greatly
derogate from his great and high Dignity, yet I know not that any of them all
have such mean and low Thoughts of the Man Christ, as to hold, That the
manifestation of God in the man Christ, was a less mystery, and of less
consideration than the manifestation of God in holy men. And if W. P. thinks to
evade, by answering, that tho the manifestation of God, in the man Christ, is
greater than the manifestation of God in the man W. P. simply as in it self
considered; yet as to W. P. and as to his Spiritual Advantage, and well being,
and Spiritual Blessings, the manifestation in W. P. is greater, and of greater
consideration than the manifestation that was, or is in the man Christ Jesus.
But if he take to this evasion, he runs himself into as great an Error as the
former, and makes himself not a member of Christ the Head, but an independent
man, neither having, nor needing any dependence on the Man Christ, who
considered even as man, as truly as God, is the Head of all the Faithful; and
if he take to this Error, he will be a complete Deist, that professes a
dependency on God, but not on the man Christ, whereas every true Christian does
believe, and profess a dependency, both on God, and on Christ, and as God is
the Head of the man Christ, so they believe that Christ is the Head of his
Church, and (de jure) the Head of all men. And therefore as their Faith
respects God, by which they exercise a continual dependency on him, so the same
Faith respects the man Christ now glorified in Heaven, as a real object without
them, as the way, and conduit of conveyance, by and through whom, they daily
receive new and fresh supplies of Grace from him, who is the God of all Grace,
the Father of Lights, and Father of Mercies. And whereas the Saints dependence
on Christ is resembled in Scripture, to that of the Members on the Head, and of
the Branches on the Vine, let W. P. tell me whether his Philosophy (or not to
use that offensive word, which seems to many of his Ignorant Brethren, with
whom Ignorance is the Mother of Devotion, as too plainly appears by their
crying out so much against Knowledge, without a true distinction as a sort of
Witchcraft, or the forbidden Fruit) or rather his Understanding and common
sense of a man, teaches him not, that the manifestation of Life in the Head,
is great, and more to the members, (as well as in it self) than what is of Life
in the members, also the Life n^^ the Tree, or Root, is more to the Branches,
as well as in it self, than the Life in the Branches, and water without W. P's.
Belly, is more to W. P. (as well as it is in it self, in Rivers or Fountains)
than as it is in W. P's. Belly, for let him have ever so much water, or other
refreshing Liquor, that quenches his Thirst in his Belly, he will Thirst
again, and need more from the Fountain without him, than what he has at
present in him. But if he say (as some ignorant persons have said) wresting and
misapplying Christ's words, John 4. He that drinks of the water that I shall
give him, shall never thirst, but the water that I shall give him, shall be in
him a well of water springing up into everlasting Life) he has the Fountain in
him, so needs not to have his Faith exercised in Christ as an object without
him. I answer, as I grant all true believers have the water of Life, as a
Fountain in them, but this Fountain they receive it from out of the great
Fountain, and fullness that is in the Man Christ without them, and this Fountain
and Well of Living Water in them is daily increased, and multiplied in them, by
what comes into them from out of the said Fullness in the man Christ. And these
words, Colos. 1. 26. Christ in you the hope of glory, perverted and misapplied
by William Penn, do not prove that the Manifestation of God in his Children, is
greater, or a greater Mystery, or a greater concern, and ground of Consolatiion
to them, than what is in Christ without them; for if Christ in us be our hope
of glory, then we have not all in us, that we hope for; hope looks beyond what
is presently enjoyed or possessed, to the stock and full inheritance, that is
treasured up in Christ, and is not in us, but in him, and what we, or the best
of Men have in them, is but the earnest and first Fruits of Glory, but not the
full possession of it, and this full possession is laid up for us in Christ our
Head, who is in Heaven, for we read in Scripture, not only of Christ in the
Saints, their hope of Glory, but also of the Hope which is laid up for them in
Heaven, Colos. 1. 5. And surely that Hope is laid up for us in Christ, who is
in Heaven, even that Heaven into which Christ has bodily Ascended; and this
Heaven is without men, and cannot be confined to the narrow Bounds of Men's
Breasts, unless William Penn will turn Ranter in this also, and not allow that
Christ did Bodily Ascend into any Heavens without men; of which some of his
former Books have given too great cause of Suspicion; representing a Local
Heaven, as a Carnal Mahomotan Notion; and to deny the Locality of Heaven and
Hell, that is void, of outward place, is to him no very Offensive Opinion. See
his Rejoinder to Jo. Faldo, page 179, compared with 180.

I have diverse other gross and vile Errors wherewith to charge George Whiteaead
and William Penn, in reference to the Resurrection of the Body, and Christ's
Satisfaction; and particularly George Whitehead, in reference to Christ's
outward coming in his Glorified Body or Person, at the general Judgment, which
I can sufficiently prove in diverse of his former Books he has denied, let him
quible, and shift as he will, to defend himself; and for all his confession to
God Almighty in Prayer, as he was Heard lately by me, and hundreds more, at the
public meeting in Grace Church Street, in Prayer, saying, Lord thou know we
received our gifts of Ministry in a spirit of Charity and a sound mind; yet by
what I have already proved him guilty of, and others of his Brethren; and doubt
not I shall yet further prove him, and them guilty; it is manifest he told to
God in his Prayer a great untruth, if not a wilful Lie; But I shall keep these
others to a further reserve.

And now I propose this Just Demand to William Penn, that when at Ratcliffe
Meeting, some few Weeks ago, he called me an Apostate, and judged me so to be
in the Name of the Lord, That he give me an opportunity, either at
Ratcliff-Meeting, where he passed this Sentence in a public Meeting against
me, or at Grace Church Street Meeting, or any other public Meeting of the
People called Quakers, in or about London, to make good his Charge against me,
and let him signify to me the time and place, where he will make it to appear,
that his charge against me is true, or retract his false charge, and confess
his Error; otherwise, not only I, but many others, yea, all that rightly
understand the Case, will say, as William Penn, is not a sound Christian in
his Doctrine, no more is he in his Morals; and the Baptists, so called, will
rise in Judgment against him, who heard his complaint against Thomas Hicks, if
he will not hear this my Just complaint against him.

26. Day of the 3d. Month, 1695. G. Keith.

FINIS.

