Feb. 6. 1687^This may be Printed, Sunderland, P.

A TRUE and PERFECT NARRATIVE OF THE Strange and Unexpected Finding the
Crucifix and Gold-Chain OF That Pious Prince, St. Edward The King and
Confessor, Which was found after 620 Years Interment: AND Presented to His Most
Sacred Majesty, King JAMES the Second.

By Charles Taylour, Gent.

LONDON, Printed by J. B. and are to be Sold by Randal Tailor, near Stationers
Hall, 1688.

To the Kings Most Excellent Majesty.
Dread Sir,
NExt to my Fathers Serving your Most Sacred Majesty's Royal Father of Glorious
Memory, in the quality of Cornet of Horse in Sr William Courtneys Regiment, in
all his Wars against his Enemies, and breeding up his Children in Principles of
Unshaken Loyalty. I cannot but esteem it a great part of my good Fortune to
have been made the happy Instrument of preserving so Holy and Sacred a
Treasure, as the Crucifix and Gold-Chain of St. Edward the Confessor seem to
be: And the having an Opportunity of laying them at your Majesty's feet. And
whereas your Majesty was then pleased to accept the same with some kind of
satisfaction, so I humbly beseech your most Sacred Majesty to pardon this
presumption of giving your Majesty the trouble of a further account of that
Action, then at that present I could recollect or call to mind, and that the
Memory thereof may not be lost to Posterity; which is the humble request of,

Your Majesty's Most Faithful, Obedient, and Loyal Subject, and Servant,
Charles Taylour.

A TRUE and PERFECT NARRATIVE
Of the Strange and Unexpected finding the Crucifix and Gold-Chain of St.
Edward the King and Confessor, etc.
SO many and so various have been the Relations and Reports, concerning the
finding and disposing of the Crucifix and Gold-Chain of St. Edward the King and
Confessor, and those so fabulous and uncertain withal; That in Honor to
Truth, to disabuse the misinformed World, and to satisfy the curiosity as well
as importunity of my Friends, I think my self under an Obligation to set forth
this plain Narrative of the matter of Fact, from whom all others (though never so
Erroenous) pretend to have it. In order thereunto (to avoid confusion,
prolixity, and what is worse, Tedious Preambles, and digressions) I shall take
this short Method to perform it.

In the first place, I shall give an account of some things previous (or what
went before) in order to the discovery.

Secondly, the description of the place it self from whence these things were
taken.

Thirdly, the manner of finding and securing the same, the disposing thereof,
and presenting them to his present Majesty.

Fourthly, an Exact description of the said Crucifix and Chain with other
dependencies thereon.

And lastly, Some material Remarks, and Historical Observations on the whole.
For the first, you are to understand that behind the High-Altar or back of the
Communion Table, in the Abbey Church of St. Peters-Westminster there are two
doors, one on the right and the other on the left hand, and both leading into a
small Chapel, Dedicated to St. Edward the King and Confessor, and till this
day known by that name, though sometimes (by reason many Kings and Queens of this
Realm have been Interred therein) call d the Chapel of the Kings. Into this
Chapel and thorough one of those doors it is that when the Solemnity of our
Kings and Queens Inaugurations or Coronations are performed in this Church,
that they withdraw after the Unction, Benediction, and other Ceremonies are
passed at the High-Altar, where they not only repose themselves for a time, but
are dismantled of their former Princely Robes and Accoutrements, to be
re-invested with more Noble, more Stately, and those of greater Grandeur and
Magnificence: The Archbishop of Canterbury, the Lord High-Chamberlain of
England, and the Dean of Westminster officiating; on which occasion several
Boards, Scaffolding, Traverses, Tables, and other cumbersome materials are
there set up, covered and adorned with costly Tapestry and other rich
furniture; All which (as heretofore) was likewise performed at the Solemn and
Happy Coronation of our Royal Sovereign his present Majesty, King James the
Second, and his most excellent Consort our Gracious Queen Mary, whom God grant
long and happily to Reign here, and Eternally in Glory hereafter.

In the midst of the aforesaid Chapel of St. Edward there is a very lofty and
Noble Tomb still remaining, built after the manner of a Shrine, and for which
intent it was erected by King Henry the Third. The Base (placed on a very
curious floor, inlade with all sorts of fine colored Agats and Marbles) raises
it self about six or Seven foot from the Pavement, supported at each corner by
twisted or Serpentine Pillars, and the whole Composure of Mosaic Work. (Though
of late much injured and defaced by picking out the colored Glass and Stones)
On the North and South Side hereof are three Niches or Arches, with one at the
East End, so ordered and contrived that the Sick and Infirm might here repose
without offense or injury to each other: On this, as a pedestal, (for it is
solid throughout) is a more Sumptuous Cabinet or Repository made of Wainscot
hollow within, (and formerly covered with plates of Gold and Silver without)
but at present nothing remains but the Wooden-frame or Casket only. Within this
Hollow place or Caverne* then it was that I have often observed (by the help of
a Ladder) something resembling a Coffin made of sound, firm, and strong Wood,
and bound about with bands of Iron, and during the Eighteen years I have
belonged to the Quire of this Church, it was a common Tradition among us that
therein were deposited the Body or Remains of Holy King Edward the Confessor.

Now it happened not long after the Coronation of their Present Majesty's, that
the aforesaid Coffin or Chest was found to be broke, and an hole made upon the
upper Lid thereof, over against the Right Breast, about six Inches long and
four broad, some esteeming it an Accident, (through the Carelessness and Neglect
of the Workmen in removing the Scaffolds) others thought it done out of Design;
but be it the one or the other, thus it continued for almost seven Weeks, and
often viewed by diverse of the Church before it was my good Fortune to go
thither;
when (on St. Barnaby's Day, In the Year of our Lords Incarnation One Thousand
Six Hundred Eighty and Five) I met with two Friends, (between Eleven and Twelve
of the Clock after Morning Service) who told me they were going to see the
Tombs, so I went along with them, Informing them that there was a Report that
the Coffin of St. Edward the King and Confessor was broke; and coming to the
place, I was desirous to be satisfied of the Truth thereof: In order thereunto,
I fetched a Ladder, looked upon the Coffin, and found all things answerable to
the Report; And putting my hand into the hole, and turning the Bones (which I
felt there) I drew from underneath the Shoulder-Bones a Crucifix richly adorned
and enamelled, and a Gold Chain of four and twenty Inches long, unto which it
was affixed, the which I immediately showed to my two Friends, they being as
much surprised and equally admired the same as my self. But I was afraid to
take them away wirh me, 'till such time I had acquainted the Dean, as the
Governor and Chief Director of our Church; And thereupon I put them into the
Coffin again, with a full Resolution to inform him. But the Dean not being to
be spoke with at that time, and fearing this Holy Treasure might be taken
thence by some other Persons, and so concealed by converting it to their own
use, I went (about two or three hours after) to one of the Quire, and
acquainted him with what I had found, who immediately accompanied me back to
the Monument, and from whence I again drew the aforesaid Crucifix and Chain`
and showed them him who beheld them with admiration, presently advising me to
keep them 'till I should gain an opportunity to show them to the Bishop of
Rochester our Dean; so I kept them for the space of three Weeks and five days,
as having no opportunity in all that time to speak with him, by reason of his
uncertain ^^silence, being often in the Country, and wh^^ ^^ Town so taken up
with the affairs of Parliament that I was not willing to disturb him; In the
mean time, hearing that his Grace John (late Lord Arch Bishop of York, and my
ever honored good Lord) was come to Town, I went to pay my Duty and Respects
to him and showed him the Crucifix and Chain, who looked upon them as great
pieces of Antiquity, (for so he was pleased to call them) showing them with
admiration to the rest of his Family, and ordered me to wait upon him the next
Morning, for he designed that I should go along with him to Lambeth-house, that
his Grace of Canterbury might have a sight thereof: Accordingly my Lord
Archbishop of York carried me thither, and when I had produced them, and his
Grace had well viewed and perused them, he expressed the like conceptions of
them as my Lord of York had done before, Viz. That the whole was a very great
piece of Antiquity. After this (having these things so long by me) I procured
an able Master in Drawing and Limning, to take an exact draught thereof,
according to the full dimentions with the Reverse, Figures, and other
adornments, the which I have now by me. About the same time that Industrious
and Judicious Antiquary Sir William Dugdale, Late Garter Principal King at
Arms, was pleased to give me a visit, and told me how his Grace the Lord
Archbishop of Canterhury had informed him of a great Rarity I had in my
possession, and named it, desiring moreover that he might have a sight thereof,
with whose request I willingly complied, telling me likewise that he would make
some remarques thereon.


On the Sixth day of July following, My Lord Bishop of Rochester, and Dean of
Westminster, dining at his Grace the Lord Archbishop of Canterburys; His Grace
was pleased to declare to his Lordship what he had seen, concerning these
Things, and to inform him how they were still in my Possession, so that upon
his Lordships return to the Abbey that afternoon about four of the Clock, I was
sent for, who immediately took me along with him to Whitehall, that I might
present this Sacred Treasure to the King; and being no sooner introduced into
his Majesty's Closet, (where I had the Honor to Kiss his Royal Hand) but upon
my knees I delivered them with my own hands to him, which his Most Sacred
Majesty was pleased to accept with much Satisfaction, and having given him a
further account how the remains of the body of that Holy King was, and opened
the Cross in his presence, I withdrew, leaving them safe as being now in his
Royal possession.

At the time, when I took out of the Coffin the aforesaid Cross and Chain, I
drew the Head to the hole, and viewed it, being very sound and firm, with the
upper and nether Jaws whole and full of Teeth, with a list of Gold above an
Inch broad in the nature of a Coronet, surrounding the Temples: There was also
in the Coffin white-Linnen, and Gold-colour'd flowr'd-silk, that looked
indifferent fresh, but the least stress put thereto showed it was well nigh
perish't; There were all his Bones, and much dust likewise, all which I left as
I found, taking only thence along with me the Crucifix and Gold-Chain. His
Majesty was pleased soon after this discovery, to send to the Abbey, to take
care that no damage were done to the Coffin, and ordered it to be enclosed in a
new one, of an Extraordinary strength and goodness, each planck being two
Inches thick, and joined together with large Iron wedges, where it now remains
as a Testimony of his Pious Care that no abuse might be offered to those Sacred
Ashes.

To set forth these Things in their proper colors, and to describe the same,
so that the Eye of the mind may be brought down to have a just apprehension of
them, I will not, with my weak Judgment, pretend to undertake: Yet having them
so long in my possession, and viewing them so often with delight, I will
endeavor what I can to give you the description of them. For the Chain, it was
four and twenty Inches long, complete, all of pure Gold, the Links oblong, and
Curiously Wrought: The upper part whereof (to lie in the Nape of the Neck) was
joined together by a Locket, Composed of a large round Nobb of Gold, Massy, and
in Circumference as big as a Mild-shilling, and half an Inch thick: Round this
went a Wire, and on the Wire about half a do^en little Beads, hanging loose,
and running too and again, on the same, all of pure Gold, and surely wrought.
On each side of the Lockett were set two large square red Stones (supposed to
be Rubies.) From each side of this Lockett, fixed to two Rings of Gold, the
Chain descends, and meeting below, passes through a square piece of Gold of a
convenient bigness, made hollow for the same purpose; This Gold wrought into
several Angles was painted with diverse Colors, resembling so many Gemms or
precious Stones, and to which the Crucifix was joined, yet to be taken off (by
the help of a Screw) at pleasure. For the Form of the Cross, it comes nighest
to that of an Humettee flory among the Heralds, or rather the Botony, yet the
pieces here are not of equal length, the direct or perpendicular beam being
nigh one fourth part longerthen the traverse, as being four Inches to the
extremities, whilst the other scarce exceeds Three: yet all of them neatly
turned at the ends, and the Botons Enamelled with Figures thereon. The Cross it
self is of the same Gold with the Chain, but then it exceeds it by its rich
Enamell, having on one side the Picture of our Savior Jesus Christ in his
Passion wrought thereon, and an eye from above casting a kind of beams upon
him: whilst on the reverse of the same Cross is Pictured a Benedictine Monk in
his habit, and on each side of him these Capital Roman Letters: on the right
limb thus,

(A) Z A X A

And on the left thus,

P A C H

This Cross is hollow, and to be opened by two little Screws toward the top,
wherein it is presumed some Relic might have been conserved. The whole being
a piece not only of great Antiquity, but of admirable Curiosity. And I look
upon this Accident as a great part of my good Fortune, to be made the mean
Instrument of their discovery and preservation.

For Remarques upon the foregoing relation I shall offer but two to your
consideration: First, some Observations concerning the time when these Holy
Things were first found, and when delivered to his present Majesty: And
Secondly, how this discovery agrees with Antiquity and those who have writ
concerning the Deposition, Interment, and Translation of this Saints Body,
together with the reasons of his Canonization, and rebuilding the Monastery and
Abby-Church of St. Peters-Westminster. For which last Observations, I must here
own my self indebted to my very worthy Friend Mr. Hen. Keep, who was pleased
to favor me so far as to oblige me with this short abstract from his large
History of this Abby's Memoires.

For the first it is highly remarkable, that it should happen on that day
whereon the late Rebellion began in the West, and much about the Same Hour in
the afternoon when they landed, that I secured them, being on the Eleventh day
of June, and Thursday in Whitson-weeek. But much more Observable were the
delivery of them to his Majesty: it being at a time, and on a day when all
people stood in suspense how that great point would be decided, when (as a most
happy Omen and Forerunner of the Good News which came within few hours after,
that his Majesty's Forces had gained an entire victory over his Enemies) I
humbly presented the same to his most Sacred Majesty, being on the Sixth day of
July following: notwithstanding I had endeavored to have done it before; but
through several unexpected interruptions, was disappointed of my intent till
then: So that Heaven seems more to have had the conduct thereof then bare
chance or casualty.

As for this Holy, and Religious King Edward the Confessor, he was the Seventh
Son of King Etheldred, by Emma his Second Wife, Daughter of Richard the Second,
Duke of Normandy: And during the Invasion and Possession of this Land, by the
Cruel and Inhumane Danes, he together with his Mat. West. Hor. Hist. p. 202.
Brethren were conveyed by their Mother into Normandy, and there remained
until their Tyranny and Oppression were over-passed: During which space (all
his Elder Brothers being dead, and the Danes at length utterly destroyed or
expelled the Kingdom) He was by the Unanimous and Joint consent of the Nobility
and Gentry of this Realm sent for, and Proclaimed their Lawful King and
Governor, Hen. Huntingd. Hist. Lib. 4.
suitable to the many Prophesies and Revelations declared heretofore concerning
him. Coming therefore (according to the Exigence of the times) but with a small
Retinue into Ingulph. Hist. p. 961. Jo. Brompton Chro. p. 955.
England, he was Crowned at Westminster, as some Authors have it (though others
say it was at Winchester) by Eadsius, Archbishop of Canterbury, and Alfric
Archbishop Mat. West. Flor. Hist. Flor. Wigorn. Gul. Malmsb. de Gest. Ang.
Reg. Lib. 2.
of York, on Easter Day following, in the Year of our Lord God, One Thousand
Forty and Three; Granting unto the said Abbey of Westminster that from
thenceforth whenever himself, or any of his Successors, Kings of England,
should wear their Royal Diadems in that Church, that the Precentor of the same,
should receive, at the hands of the Kings Sheriff, half a Mark of Silver, and
the Covent One hundred Simnells; or Wastel-Cakes of the: finest Flower,
together with Sixty four Gallons of the best Wine, in commemoration thereof*

The King being thus placed on the Throne of his Ancestors in Peace, and
recollecting what had passed in his former Exile, Two things more especially
offered themselves to his consideration. First, how those Vows and Promises he
had then made in case of his Restoration, might be performed to his
Satisfaction; And Secondly, how such wholesome and binding Laws might be
Instituted, as not only to secure the Freedom and Tranquillity of his Subjects
during his own time, but to future Ages. The last of these he committed to the
care and prudence of his great Council, to see Effected, which were so happily
accomplished, Ailred Abbas Rieval* de vita S. Edw. and Mirac. Gu. Lambard de
priscis Angl. legibus edit. per A. Whelock. p. 136. Hen. Spelman Council. Tom.
1. p. 619.
that even to this day they bear the name of St Edwards Laws; The basis and
foundation whereon all our other Laws depend, and which the Princes of this
Realm in their Coronation-Oaths oblige themselves to observe: As to his Vows
some had respect to the public, others more immediately related to himself.
For what belonged to himself he presently performed upon his first ascending
the Throne; But what concerned the Public, took up further time of
deliberation; among the rest he had Solemnly undertook, that as soon as he had
settled his Kingdom in peace, to Visit the Holy See, to go to Rome, to perform
some set devotions at the stations in that City, and there to repose himself
for a time. But this was found a matter of that Consequence (that
notwithstanding his whole inclination and fixed resolution to effect it) yet at
length he was over-persuaded by the entreaties of the Nobility, and Tears of
his People to decline it, at least 'till such time they might send to the then
Bishop of Rome such Persons of Worth and Nicol. Harpsfields Hist. Angl. Eccles.
Page 218.
Learning that might lay the Case, with all the Inconveniences seriously before
him, and to have his Resolution thereon: which was Caes. Baron. Annal. Eccle.
Tom. 11. p. 290. N. 9.
done; and that with such cogent Reasons, and convincing Arguments, that the
designed Journey was Dispensed with: Yet in lieu thereof, he was enjoined to
bestow what Money he had laid up toward the Expense of that Voyage on the
Poor, Miserable and Indigent; And moreover as a further Remembrance thereof, to
Erect some New, or Repair some Old Church and Monastery to the Honor of St.
Peter. All which the King most readily embraced, and immediately pitched upon
the Restoring of the Monastery and Church of St. Peter's Westminster. In Order
thereunto he decimated all his Revenues, set Workmen to pull down the Old, and
to erect a New Church (even from the Ground) in place thereof; repaired the
Offices of the Ruined Abbey, filled the same with Monks, and settled a competent
Revenue to sustain them. But see the instability of Humane Affairs! No sooner
was this Work brought to perfection, and the day of Holy Innocents in the Year
of our Lord One Thousand Sixty and Six, prefixed for the Solemn Dedication of
the Church; But the King fell sick on Christmas Day preceding, and growing
worse and worse, on the day following he was scarce able to stay out the
Solemnity of High-Mass; being led from thence to his Chamber, and taking his
Bed, the next day his Life was despaired of; So that he made his Will,
Received, and prepared himself for his departure: at the same time bestowing
several Gifts and Rewards on certain Palmers or Pilgrims that came from far
Joh. Brompton Chron. p. 955.
to see him; And to the Abbot of Westminster delivered the Ring (returned him by
St John) to be perpetually preserved among the Relics of that Church. The day
following, though very weak, he did his endeavor to be Assistant at the Pompous
Dedication of his New Church; but Nature, now almost spent in him, deprived him
of that Satisfaction: So that being in his Bed, he had Monastic. Angl. Tom 1.
Chart. 1. Hen. Spelman Council. Tom. 1. pro Chart. 2. In Archivis West. Chart 3
Mat. Paris p. 2
no more strength left then to Sign his three Charters of Privileges, Donations,
and Confirmations, which he bestowed thereon. And thus languishing 'till two
days after the Circumcision, he fell into a Trance, became Speechless,
Motionless, and lying for dead until the Eve of the Epiphany following: Hen.
Huntingdon Hist. Lib. 2. p. 367. Mat. Westin. Flo. Hist. p. 220.
when reviving again with the Chief of the Nobility about him, he began to
declare what had been revealed to him concerning the future State of the
Kingdom during the time of his Ecstasy; at the end of which Discourse, gently
reposing his Head on his Pillow, he Flo. Wigorn. p. 633. Rog. Hov. Ann. pars
prior. p. 439.
expired (after he had Reigned 23 Years, Six Months and 27 Days) to the
Sorrowful Lamentations of those that beheld him, and exceeding grief of all
his Subjects, who soon after found his Predictions verified in the dismal
effects of War and Bloodshed, which ensued.

All things are now preparing for his Funeral Ailred. Abbas Rievallis de vita
and Mirac. S Edw. Con. p. 402.
Rites, the Body washed and Embalmed with sweet scenting Odors, and Aromatique
Spices; wrapped in White and Precious Linen, and those covered with Rich and
Costly Vestments; a Coronet on his Head, a Crucifix on his Breast, and other
Regal Ensigns of Majesty; all which, together with the Corpse, were placed in a
Stone Coffin, made after the Fashion of those Elder Times, hollow within,
according to the Shape of a Man, Flo. Wigorn. Rog. Hoved. Ann. p. 439. Mat.
Paris Hist. Angl. p. 2.
and Covered with a loose Lidd of the same Stone; which the day following his
Exit, (viz. on the Epiphany or Feast of Kings) was Translated to his New
Church, and there, according to his Desire before his Departure, it was
deposited with all the Ceremonies and Grandeur suitable to the Quality of the
Person and the Occasion.

As this Holy and Religious Prince had, during his Life time, Cured many most
Inveterate Jo. Brompton Chron. p. 950.
and Malignant Distempers, especially those who had any extraordinary
Glandules, or hard Swellings in their Necks or Throats; so after his Death,
People affected with the like Diseases, coming to his Tomb, several received
Benefit thereby. The Fame whereof, drew many to pay a kind of Inferior
Devotion to his Memory; Among the rest, that good Bishop of Worcester the Pious
Wulstan was none of the least: And when William Surnamed the Conqueror took
Possession of this Land, turning out the Old English to make way for his New
Normans, having already made Lanfranc his Countryman Archbishop of Canterbury
in Ailred. Abbas Rieval. ut supra. p. 402.
the room of Stigand: and still placing some, and displacing others; having the
Formality of a National Synod to Countenance and Confirm the same. This Wulstan
was likewise Cited; where it was objected against him, That he was Illitterate,
Insufficient, and Unworthy to bear so great and weighty a Charge as that of a
Bishop; and withal, that he had mis-behaved himself therein; being admonished
to resign up his Pastoral Staff, and Ring, and to leave the same to the Kings
disposal. The Good Old Man, concerned at these Proceedings, took upon him an
unusual boldness, and standing up, acknowledged that he was indeed unworthy so
great Honor, unsought, and unlookt for by him; yet as for the discharge of his
Duty therein, his behavior had been such that no man with any Honesty or
Justice could either tax or blemish; And whereas he had received those Ensigns
of his Function from so Knowing and so Glorious a Prince as King Edward, he
would deliver them to none but him: And so departing the Council, came to his
Masters Tomb, where he deposited his Crosier with the profoundest humility
imaginable; expressing his Condition with much vehemence and concern; at last
concluding, that it would please Almighty God so to make manifest his
Innocence, that That Pastoral Staff might be Now legend. Angl. in vita S.
Wulstani. Lau. surius ad 19 Jan. in vita S. Wulstani. auct. per Jacob Mosandrum.
delivered to none but those who were worthy of it. The Archbishop, and Synod
being informed of all that passed, sent immediately for the Croysier: but he
that came for it found it immovable, the Truth whereof being suspected, a
Learned and Grave Bishop, Gumulfus of Rochester by Name, was Deputed to
ascertain the Truth, which likewise he Confirmed: At which, the King, his
Nobles, the Popes Legate, the Archbishops, and Bishops, with others there
Assembled, admiring, all came to see the Wonder, the Archbishop first
attempting to displace it, but in vain; and after many fruitless endeavors of
others, Wulstan was entreated by the King to attempt it; who no sooner touched
the Nicol. Harpsfield Hist. Angl. Eccles. p. 219.
Pastoral Ensign, but it fell as it were of it self into his hands. Upon which
the King with all there present cast themselves at his feet, begged his excuse
for the Injury they had done him, and that he would give them his Blessing: But
the Good old Man, overcome with such Condescension, fell likewise on his Knees,
embraced the King, and the rest of the Company, and heartily forgave them. This
was the occasion that William the Conqueror ever after bare so great a
Veneration for his Kinsman and Predecessor; Insomuch that from thenceforth he
Commanded the Coffin to be Inshrined, and this Shrine to be covered with Plates
of Gold and Silver, and further Richly Adorned with Pearls and: Precious
Stones, which was remaining Ailred Abbas Rieval: de vita and Mira. S. Edw. p.
40^.
entire and undefaced in the time of Laurentius Abbot of Westminster, about one
hundred Years after.

Ibid.
Six and thirty Years after this, when Gilbert Surnamed Crispin was Abbot of
Westminster, certain Discourses and Arguments arose among the Monks, concerning
the Corruptability, or incorruption of this Kings Body: So that to satisfy
their Curiosity, the Abbot was resolved upon ^n inspection: whereunto Gumulfus
Bishop of Rochester, formerly mentioned, and now very Ancient, with other
Persons of great Credit and Gravity were invited* And coming with mighty
expectations to the Tomb, the Shrine opened, and the upper Lidd of the
Stone-Coffin removed, Ibid.
such a flagrant Odor proceeded from thence, that it scented the whole Church;
they beheld the upper Vestments that covered the Body as fresh as if newly put
on: the Hands, the Arms, the Joints of the Fingers and Toes, as plyant, and
Supple, as but lately deprived of Life* the Flesh retaining a lively and
beautiful Vigor as if animated again: But the Face being covered with an
extraordinary Covering none would venture to uncover the same, until the grave
Bishop of Rochester undertook it: And beginning below his Beard, which was
long, and white as Snow, he proceeded to disclose the whole Visage, which was
so shining and of so unusual a brightness, that they were all Struck with
admiration; wherefore with great reverence they covered it again; changing the
former Vestmonts, and putting on others of equal pri^e; Incensing the Corpse,
and laying on the cover, they all departed with great Satisfaction, seeing they
found things so suitable to their desires and expectations.

W. Thorn. Chron. Aug. Cant. p. 2255.
In the Year 1163. Thomas of Beckett (afterward St. Thomas,) Archbishop of
Canterbury out of a peculiar devotion to this pious Princes memory by the Kings
Intercession, and at his own Expense, procured of Mat. Paris p. 99.
Pope Alexander the Third his Canonization, which was Solemnized after this
manner. The Laur. Surius in vit. S. Ed. Confess. cum Add. Limpomani.
Usual Ceremonies having passed at Rome, and the Apostolic Letters returned
by those who were sent to procure them; Laurentius, who was then Abbot of
Westminster, received orders to convocate many reverend and venerable persons,
as well Bishops, as Abbots; Noblemen, as others, to his Church of Westminster,
and there publicly to read the said Letters, or Breves to the assembly; he
accordingly performed the same, to the well liking and rejoicing of all those
who were present at their publication: But for as much as the Kings Affairs
detained him at this time in Normandy, and his presence thought extremely
necessary to the consummation of so grand a Ceremony as the Translation would
be, it was deferred 'till his arrival in England almost two years after; unto
whom, the Archbishop of Canterbury, the Abbot of Westminster, with some others
applying themselves to know his Royal Pleasure therein; He at length wholly
left the same to the Abbot of Westminster's disposal, who being desirous (as
Gilbert his predecessor had done) to see in what condition the Sacred Body lay
before he would venture to expose it to the public, called together the
Prior, with a select number of the Monks; who consulting thereon, came to this
resolution: that no one should presume to be present at the sight thereof, but
those who had beforehand prepared themselves by Fasting, Weeping and Prayer for
such an occasion, and that they only should meet in the Church on the Eve
before the Translation, with Tapers in their hands, Albs on their Bodies, and
their feet to be all Naked and bare, and from thence to proceed in the Search
according to their desires, which was done accordingly; the doors being first
shut, and all others excluded from coming into the Church at that time, they
went by way of Procession, to the Steps of the high Altar, Singing of Psalms,
and reciting the Litanies, with Prayers made on purpose for that Action. The
Abbot, Prior, and two of the Brethren, (leaving the rest at their devotions)
approached the Tomb, and removing the upper Stone of the Coffin, they beheld (by
the help of their lights) a man, lying in rich Vestments of Cloth of Gold,
having on his feet Baskins of Purple, and Shoes of great price, his Head and
Face were covered with a Rich covering, Interwoven and wrought with Gold, with
a Beard White and Long, inclining to Curl, and falling decently on his Breast;
which sight struck a profound reverence in the Spectators, who called the rest
of their Brethren, whom they had left at the Altar, to behold the same: Their
curiosity ended not here, but led them further, so that they began (with great
Piety and Devotion) some to touch his Head, others his feet, and some his
Hands, which they found without any manner of Corruption or Putrefaction. And
such was the firmness of this Saints Body, that all parts seemed to retain
their former brightness and perfection; notwithstanding the outward parts of
those Vestments, which lay next the lid of the Coffin, were a little sullied,
and had lost some of their freshness, by the contiguity and moldering of the
cement and dust of the Stone which had fallen upon them: all which they gently
wiped away with a Linen Cloth, resolving to remove the whole Body from that
Stone-repository to another of Wood, which they had there before prepared for
the same purpose: so that some assisting at the Head, others at the Arms and
Legs, they lifted it gently from thence, and laid the Sacred Corpse first on
Tapestry spread on the floor, and then wrapping the same in diverse silken
Clothes of great value, they put it into the Wooden Chest, with all those
things that were found in the former, except the Gold Ring, which was on the
Kings Finger, which the Abbot out of devotion retained, and ordered it to be
kept in the Treasury of the Abbey, as a commemoration thereof. The next day,
viz. on the third of the L. Surius ut Supra.

Joh. Fleet. de*fundat. Abb. West. Ms. in Bib. Westminster.


Ides of October, being Sunday, (and the appointed time for the more solemn
translation of this Saints Body) in the Morning Early the Holy Relics were
brought into the Quire of the Church, and publicly exposed for all those who
out of devotion or curiosity should come to see them. The King himself assisted
to support the Coffin, at the time of Procession, to whom were joined Thomas
Archbishop of Canterbury, Gilbert Bishop of London, Henry Bishop of Winchester,
etc. with many others; The concourse of all sorts of people, as well Nobles, as
Artificers and Soldiers, being so great, that the like had not been seen for
many years. After the Procession the King with his own hands helped to deposite
the holy Relics in a Shrine which he had caused anew to be made for them, all
glittering with Gold and Silver. This day of his Canonization was solemnly kept
for some Ages after this, by the Religious of those times, and is not forgot at
present by many pious and devout Catholics, who come annually (on the 13th of
October) as they do on that of his deposition (the 5th of January) to perform
some part of their Devotions here.

Once more this Sacred Body was removed from it is Old Habitation and Repose,
and that was about the Year of Grace, 1226. When King Henry the Third pulled
down the Old Church built by this Saint, and Erected a most Stately Edifice in
the room thereof: causing a peculiar Chapel likewise to be set apart, and
Dedicated to him; adorning it with several Carvings of Masons work, wherein
much of his Story, History of his Life and Miracles, are curiously wrought*
some part thereof remaining (on the Architrave on the backside of the High
Altar) at this day. In the midst of this Chapel there was likewise prepared a
Noble and Magnificent Shrine, the upper part covered with Plates of fine Gold,
so Artificially workt by the hands of the most cunning Goldsmiths, and set
about with Precious Stones (all at the Kings cost) that it amounted to an
inestimable value: but the under-part (with the curious floor round about it)
was framed by the command, and at the charge of Richard de Ware the then Abbot
of Westminster, with a part of those Stones, and by the same Workmen who
composed the Pavement before the High Altar; and which he brought out of Italy
in his way to England, when he came to the Government of this Abbey. The King
likewise commanded a Coffin to be made J. Weever. Fun. Mon. p. 455.
all of pure Gold wherein to enclose anew the Sacred Relics. And on the day
of their deposition, or placing them in this rich Feretory, there Nicol.
Harpsfields Hist. Angl. Eccles. Page 457.
was a Solemn Procession, The King in Person being there with the Chief of the
Bishops, Abbots, Priors, and other Religious and Clergy who were then in Town.
Moreover, further to grace the Action, on that day, the King made a most Royal
and Magnificent Feast at his Palace at Westminster, where all comers and goers,
as well Rich as Poor, were liberally* treated or rewarded. Which Royal Mat.
Paris. p. 1005.
Feast and grand Solemnity was performed in the Year of our Lord, 1269.

From this very time we have nothing on Record, that takes notice of any other
removal or disposal of these Holy Relics: And therefore may conclude, they
remained safe and undisturbed until the days of King Henry the Eight, when we
find (in that general Inundation which swept amay all things Sacred) this Noble
Feretory stripped of all its costly furniture, and the Body of its Golden-Case,
to be meanly enclosed in a course Wooden Coffin; the same I presume I lately
saw, and from whence I drew the so often-mentioned Crucifix and Gold-Chain.

FINIS.

