THE Antichrists and Sadduces DETECTED Among a sort of QUAKERS: OR, Caleb
Pusie of Pensilvania, and John Pennington; with his Brethren of the Second Days
Meeting at London, called Quakers, Proved Antichrists and Sadduces, out of a
Printed Book lately published by them, falsely called, A modest Account of the
principal Differences in point of Doctrine, betwixt George Keith, and those of
the People called Quakers in Pensilvania, etc.)

Being an ANSWER to the said Book, Signed particularly by Caleb Pusie, but
expressly recommended in Print by John Pennington, and approved by the Second
Days Meeting at London.

With some few Remarks on John Penningtons late Book, entitled, The People
called Quakers cleared, etc. And Geo. Whitehead his Postscript, showing some of
their gross Perversions, Falsehoods, and Groundless Calumnies against G. K.

And a POSTSCRIPT, Containing an earnest Expostulation, with the most Pious and
Learned Persons, whether in the Church of England, or among other Protestant
Dissenters; and a serious Invitation unto them, to employ some of their Time
and Labor, by their Pious and Learned Writings, to oppose and refute those
vile Errors boldly avowed, and publicly broached, in the late Printed books of
some Leading Men, among a Gang, and sort of Quakrs.

By GEORGE KEITH.

London, Printed for the Author, and are to be sold at his House at the Golden
Ball over against Red-Lyon-street in White-Chappel.

THE Anti-christ's and Sadduces DETECTED, Among a sort of QUAKERS.
IN the first place, it is fit I should give the Readers some Information who
the Second Days Meeting at London is. It is a Meeting of the Ministry of them,
called Quakers, of William Penns and George Whiteheads Party, belonging to
London, and some of the Country that may happen to be present, who Meet at
Whitehart-Court in Lombard Street, every Second day of the Week, and assume a
Power to License and Approve of all Books that are to be Printed by any of
their Party, and have approved this Book, falsely called, A Modest Account, and
all the late scandalous Books of Thomas Elwood and John Pennington, come forth
against me, and claim Authority over all other Meetings (the Yearly Meeting
perhaps excepted) sending out their Circular Letters to all other Meetings in
all parts of the World, as they think they have occasion, and to whom the
Meetings from all places, direct their Letters upon any occurrence of
difference (as the Churches and Bishops of other Countries had wont to direct
their Letters to Rome, which was the Rise of that Roman Hierarchy) the which
Meeting may be fitly compared to the Conclave of Cardinals at Rome, but who is
the Metropolitan of this new erected Hierarchy at London, at present, is not
certainly known, as whether W. P. or G. W.

He does acknowledge, 1st. differences in point of Doctrine. 2. Principal
differences. How does this agree with many of them called the Church Party
here, who say, They do not deny G. K's Doctrine.

P. 8. As concerning the Sufficiency of the Light, without something else (that
he says you have made such a pudder about of late) for this he brings a Proof
from my Book, Light of Truth, p. 12. and 6. where I say the express Knowledge
and Belief, etc. Is not universally of absolute necessity unto Salvation, and
so I say still, annd so says R. Barclay, whom he abuses as well as me, for we
both frequently caution and limit the matter, saying the clear distinct express
Historical Knowledge is not universally necessary. See my Book, Universal Grace,
p. 117. ad Finem. But whereas he Of Christ Crucified.
states the difference in point of Doctrine betwixt some in Pensilvania, and
me, as if I said, it were an Error to affirm, 'the Light within were
sufficient, without something else, which I never so said, nor thought, for the
Light within is sufficient without, not only something else, but without
thousands of somethings else; But my assertion was and is, 'The Light within is
not sufficient to Salvation without 'something else, which they blaming, they
ought to hold the contradictory assertion, viz. The Light within is sufficient
to Salvation, without any thing else, for two contradictories are not betwixt
two particulars, but one particular, and another Universal; now seeing they
hold, 'that the Light within 'is sufficient without any thing else, it is plain
they Exclude the Man Christ without us, and his Death, etc. from being
concerned in our Salvation.

P. 8. He basely forges me to say, It is a real degree of Blasphemy to say this
Light cannot make satisfaction for sins past, citing page 38. 39. Refutation.
See the place, I have no such words, but plain contrary. I say, Refut. p. 42.
43. Neither is the Saints greatest inward Righteousness or Holiness wrought in
them by the Spirit of God, an Atonement or Propitiation for their sins, but
Christ alone, who Dyed for us, the just for the unjust.

P. 9. He cites my Book, Looking-glass for Protestants, p. 10. That Magistrates
may Preach, which he thinks a contradiction to my late Testimony with Friends
in Pensilvania, that Friends of the Ministry should not meddle to be Justices
and Judges in Criminal Cases; but this is no contradiction, for it is one thing
occasionally to Preach, or Teach, or Exhort, as any Christian can do, and
another to exercise the Office or Function of a Minister of the Gospel of Peace
one day, that says, Resist not Evil, and our Weapons are not Carnal, and
another day to hang Men for Murder, etc. Which scarce any that profess to be
Ministers do in Christendom, but the Quakers in America.

P. 9. That I say of Christ's Body now in Heaven, It being no more a Body of
Flesh, Blood, and Bones, but a pure ethereal, or Heavenly Body. This he brings
to prove a contradiction to my self, leaving Citing Way cast up. p. 113. false
quot. true quot. p. 131.
out the foregoing words, -- Which remains the same in Substance, that it was
on Earth, etc. So that by my saying, it being no more a Body of Flesh and
Blood, I mean it in the Apostles sense, 1 Cor. 15. Flesh and Blood cannot
inherit, etc. See my words cited by himself, p. 10. a Testimony against the
false and absurd Op. The Flesh that is mortal, gross and corruptible, is not
the Flesh that shall be raised up immortal and incorruptible.

P. 12. He makes me to contradict my self in saying, Presb. and Indep. p. 133.
The Express Knowledge of Christ, his becoming Man, and suffering, was positively
denied to be of necessity to Salvation, but now I furiously quarrel with
Friends about it, that it is. But his fallacy lies in this, that I say, the
express Knowledge is not universally necessary, but some knowledge, if not
express, yet implicit, is, and this is no Contradiction.

P. 15. He Argues from my Book, The Light of Truth, p. 8. That the Light within
is the only Christ, and he says, p. 14. the word only admits of nothing else,
than Light, Power and Spirit within.

Answ. 1. Here it is manifest, he places all on the Light within, so that the
man Christ Jesus of Nazoreth without us, is nothing of Christ; but as his
Assertion, and Consequence is Blasphemous, so it follows not from my words; for
as I then said, so I still say, Christ is but one, and there are not two
Christ's, one within, and another without; but it will not follow, that there is
nothing of Christ without us, but what is within us. Suppose Caleb Pusey's Head
is without the House, and some, or most of his Body is within the House, as is
possible, the Caleb Pusey that is within, is the same that is without, yet
there is something of him without, that is not within, it is the same Body of
Water in the Complex, that is in the Thames, and in the Sea, yet it follows not
that there is nothing of the great and vast Body of Water, but what is within
the Thames. But when Men that have neither Learning, nor good Exercise of Human
Reason, will meddle to Dispute, we see how ignorant they prove themselves to be
in the face of the World, or how they expose themselves in Print, neither to be
true Christians, nor Men of true Reason; he had better kept with working at his
Mill, being by profession a Miller, than enter into a Dispute of matters
wherein he is so grossly ignorant.

But seeing the Second Days Meeting at London has countenanced his Book, and
the Quakers generally at London allow it to be Sold next door to their
Meeting House in Grace Church Street, they make his ignorance, unbelief,
Saducism and Antichristian Doctrine to be theirs.

And seeing my Book, called, The Light of Truth, in Answer to R. Gordon, was
approved by the Second Days Meeting, and that he would infer from my words,
That Jesus of Nazareth cannot be something else than the Light, Power and
Spirit within, it is plain, that it is both their Sense and his, that Jesus of
Nazareth is nothing at all of Christ without us, which is a plain contradiction
to themselves, and to himself in his following words. But no such consequence
does really follow from my words.

P. 17. He so mingles my words with his own, that no man can distinguish the
one from the other, but the Reader that does not compare my words in my own
Book, with his Citations, would think them to be mine, for whereas my words are
in the page cited by him. -- For whereas thou not only affirms that Salvation
and Justification has a necessary respect to Christ his taking on him the form
of a Servant, or Man in the outward, and humbling himself therein, even to the
outward Death, (which we also grant, God having so ordered it to be) etc. He
makes as if I said, (his words are for as G. K. says) the Lord having ordained
it so to be, how can or dare we say therefore, that he was, or is not
sufficient, by his Light, Power and Spirit, to save without something else. But
see Reader his Forgery, I say no such words, but my words are a plain
contradiction, by necessary consequence to his presumptuous assertion, for
seeing God had Ordained it so to be (as I have said) that our Salvation and
Justification has a necessary respect to Christ his taking on him the form of
a Servant in the outward, therefore it evidently follows, that God could not
save us without respect to the Man Christ in the outward, otherwise he could or
should contradict his own Ordination; but as God cannot lie, so nor can he
contradict his own Counsel and Ordination, and therefore the presumption is his
and not mine. And seeing they grant that God in the Man Christ without us,
cannot save us without an inward work of his Power and Spirit within us, to
Regenerate and Sanctify us, which is a Truth, and yet is no Reflection on his
Sufficiency and Omnipotency, so nor is it any reflection on him, that God in us
cannot save us without the Man Christ without us, for he is as truly God
without us, and incomparably more manifest in the Man Christ without us, than
in us.

P. 19. He says, I exposed Friends to the World in Print, for retaking a
Sloop, without ever admonishing them before hand for it, and that when I
reckoned my self an Elder in the Church among them.

Answ. This is a gross falsehood and Forgery, I Printed nothing about their
retaking a Sloop, till a considerable time, after 28 of the Ministers had
Excommunicated me at Philadelphia; to which Sentence, some that gave a
Commission to retake the sloop by force of Arms, did put their hands, and all
the rest consented, and they have disowned me to be any Member of their Church,
and how then could I own my self to be any of them? which I did not. So that
this whole passage is false, and a wilful piece of Forgery.

P. 20. He also alleges, That I came to them, and commended them for what
they did, and said, It was very well done, adding, methinks you should consider
these things.

Answ. But what proof brings he for his Affirmation? None at all, and he having
sufficiently discovered his gross forgery in other things, renders his credit
of no value in this; and I well remember that at the retaking of the Sloop, I
was not in the Province; but that I commended them that they had done well, to
send Armed men to retake the Sloop, I affirm is an absolute forgery, for it
never was my Principle, since I was called a Quaker, and I have many to bear me
witness, that it has been my constant Principle that Friends should not in any
case use the Carnal Sword; and the same Principle Robert Barclay, in his
Apology, has largely asserted, and whom we have quoted, and it is well known
that many of greatest note among the Quakers has declared the same. And
suppose I did say, that they who did retake the Sloop did well, which I do not
remember, all this might have been well said without any contradiction, or
equivocation, for it was Peter Bosse, and one or two more with him in a little
Boat, having neither Gun, Sword nor Spear, that retook the Sloop, when a great
many Armed Men that filled several Boats stood off at a distance, and were
afraid to come within shot, and so the praise of that work belonged to him, and
not to them, and the Magistrates did ill reward him, for they not long after
Fined him 6 Pounds, and put him in Prison for some passages writ to Sam.
Jennings in a private Letter, and kept him in Prison 20 miles remote from his
Family, till the Magistrates that were Quakers, and had cast him into Prison,
were turned out of the Government by G. Fletcher, who was made Governor of
Pensilvania, by a Commission from K. William and Queen Mary, and how soon he
came unto the Government, he Released him, after inquiry, that they had nothing
justly against him. See a further Account of this in the printed Trial of G. K.
T. B. and Peter Bosse, first printed at Philadelphia, and Reprinted at London.

And concerning Peter Bosse his retaking the Sloop without Force of Arms, John
Homes, a Baptist Teacher, and either then, or some time not long after a
Justice of Peace (whose Name, and Christian Behavior is mentioned in the said
printed Trial, in refusing to give Judgment against G. K. whithout hearing) did
write some English Verses, which are these following.

One That was Peter Bosse. Note, These few Lines are but a small part of many
more English Verses made by the said John Homes, that he spread abroad, having
this Title, The Fighting Quakers Expedition in Pensilv.
Quaker, Master of a Boat,
With our small Fleet along did Float,
And tho he used not Sword nor Gun,
Yet with his Oars and with his Tongue.
He played his part exceeding well,
As these who were with him, can tell.
P. 22. Whereas he makes me to say, in one Book, The express knowledge of
Christ's Death and Sufferings, as Man in the outward, is not universally
necessary to Salvation: And in another, That the express Knowledge of Christ's
Death, is universally necessary.

Answ. In this he uses (after his manner) gross deceit, and greatly abuses
his Reader and me also, for tho he cites a passage in one of my Books, to
prove the first, viz. Presh. and Indep. Vis. p. 133. Yet he cites no passage in
any of my Books, for the second that I can find, tho I have narrowly searched,
but the only proof I can find he brings is, that he says, p. 15. I furiously
quarrel with Friends about it, and confess it to be a main matter of
Controversy with Friends there. This is false, I never had any Controversy with
any, whether the express Knowledge and Faith of Christ's Death and Sufferings be
universally necessary to Man's Salvation, so as necessary to be had by all and
every one before Death. But the true state of the Question betwixt them and me,
was and is, Whether the express Knowledge and Faith of Christ's Death and
Sufferings, etc. be not necessary to Salvation, to all Professing Christianity,
and who have the opportunity and help of the Holy Scriptures of the Old and New
Testament, whereby to receive it, the Holy Spirit inwardly cooperating to
produce the Faith of it in them that hear or read that Doctrine, as delivered
in the Holy Scriptures; and whether the Doctrine of Christ should not be
Preached, as he Died for our Sins, and rose again, etc. as a main Doctrine of
the Christian Religion in order to Salvation! For I have always distinguished
betwixt simple Heathens or Gentiles, who have not the occasion to have the
Faith outwardly Preached, and those in Christendom under a Christian
Profession, who have the occasion to hear it Preached; to the former I have
said; the express Knowledge and Faith of that Doctrine is not necessary, tho the
implicit in some degree is, but how much, or what measure or degree of it is
universally necessary I have never affirmed? And that this is the true state of
the question betwixt my Adversaries and me, I need go no further for a Proof
than from my present Adversary, who makes it a great Error in me, to say, the
Light within is not sufficient to Salvation, without something else; for if
that be false, the contradictory is true, viz. The Light within is sufficient
to Salvation, without any thing else, but the Death and Sufferings of Christ,
and his Blood outwardly shed, and his Intercession for us in Heaven without us,
are all something else, and if the Light within be sufficient without all
these, then there is no need to believe or Preach any of them, but only and
alone the Light within.

P. 24. He spends his Pages from 24. to 28. in some base insinuations against
me, about the 12 Revolutions, and telling some Stories, most of which are
absolutely false (and that little that is true, in any of them, is not fairly,
nor duly related) and which he brought no proof for, but his own forfeited
Credit, or the report of such as are of as ill Credit as himself, and known to
have been prejudiced Persons against me.

P. 29. What he says of my Praising the Quaker`s Doctrine to Cotton Mather in
New England, was before that Party rose up aginst me in Pensilvania, to oppose
the same Doctrine I delivered in my Printed Books, in answer to Cotton Mather,
which Doctrine they seemed to own, and all my former Books were Approved of by
most of the Ministers of best note in Pensilvania, that were writ, in Answer to
Cotton Mather, and his Brethren in New England, before they were Printed; so
that it was a most astonishing thing to me to find how suddenly they who
professed to own the Doctrine contained in these Books, turned against the very
same Doctrine, after W. Stockdale had accused me, of Preaching two Christ's,
because I Preached Faith in Christ without, and in Christ within, therefore
this sudden Alteration began in them, and until I came to England, (and found
the greatest part of their Teachers here in England, and particularly G.
Whitehead, and W. Penn, to favor and support those in Pensilvania, whom I have
sufficiently detected guilty of vile Errors) I had but too good an Esteem for
them, wherein I confess I was mistaken; and this put me on a further search
into their Books, which formerly I did not much Read (and many of them not at
all) and what I did Read, I did not so well consider; and upon my further
search, I found sufficient cause to change my Judgment concerning these Men.
But none can charge it on me, that either by word or writing I ever agreed with
them in those vile Errors, which since I have discovered and reprehended in
them, so that this is no change or contradiction in any Doctrine or Principle
of Faith, and what change of Judgment I have of these Men, they have the like
of me, and will readily confess they have been as greatly mistaken in me, as I
have been in them; and therefore they can have no advantage against me in that
respect.

And whereas he Insinuates, page 24. 25, 26. That I have dropped here and there
some passages in my late Books, from which they cannot but conclude, That
either I did intend to conform Friends to some Doctrine, of which, by what
follows, the Doctrine of the 12 Revolutions may be supposed to be not the least
in his Eye, or else to separate from them. Some of which expressions he
mentions out of my late Books Printed in Pensilvania, all which were generally
approved by Friends of the Ministry, out of which he has gathered them; and if
he thinks these Expressions will prove the Doctrine of the 12 Revolutions, he
should have proved it by positive Arguments, and not give simple Queries for
Arguments; all which I could easily Answer, without the Doctrine of the 12
Revolutions, but that I have no mind to answer his curiosity, or gratify such a
prejudiced Adversary; and he might much rather query, whether G. F. did not
hold the Doctrine of the Revolutions, that has said in some of his Printed
Books, before Languages were* he was; and his Charging the Blood of many that
were slain above a thousand Years ago upon the People living in his time, in
the City of Leichfield, as he declares in his Journal, and how he went in
Blood a great way, and was commanded to pull off his Shoes, etc. This and some
other like passages has occasioned some to think G. F. favored the
Revolutions, but I do not say he did. And whether the Disciples did not hold
that Doctrine, that said, Master, who has sinned, this Man, or his Servants,
that he was born blind; and many other places of Scripture there are on which
he might as much and much more query concerning the Revolutions, as any
expressions he has mentioned of mine, as well as he might query, concerning
the Revolutions, all Friends generally who hold, That God has given to every
one a day of Visitation, wherein he may be saved, and that a Time of God's long
suffering is extended to every one wherein he may repent and be Converted,
seeing many Dye, in the Morning, as it were of their Age, without all signs of
Conversion, and have had but little Time given them, between their Birth and
Death, wherein to Repent. And as to his Question, If an honest Indian, or Poor
infant dye without that outward Knowledge, etc. He quite misseth the matter; I
never affirmed the absolute necessity of an outward Knowledge, universally to
Salvation, besides that, properly all knowledge is inward, and not outward, the
subject of it being the mind and understanding that is inward. And seeing it is
certain, that there are honest men, both among Indians, and them called
Christians, that are not born again, I return his own Query upon him to Answer,
what becomes of them when they dye, seeing without being born again, there is
no entering into the Kingdom of God, and what becomes of many called Quakers,
and others, that before they dyed, had no signs that they were arrived at that
high state of a sinless perfection, for tho Friends have earnestly contended
for the Doctrine of Perfection, as attainable by the Grace of God in this Life,
yet they have generally acknowledged, that many in whom the work of
Sanctification is begun, have not as yet arrived to that state, but have many
sinful imperfections remaining in them, and the Flesh lusting against the
Spirit; now let him tell me, or any for him, what becomes of such when they
Dye, and I may give him the like Answer, or some better, what becomes of honest
Indians when they Dye, if he or they say, they who are in measure Sanctified,
but not Perfected in Sanctification before they Dye, are made perfect in
Holiness at the instant of Death, tho this Answer Friends have blamed, when
given by those against whom they have contended, yet if they think fit to allow
of it, as current now, as it will in great part end the Dispute about
Perfection, and Answer the great Objection about the Popish Purgatory; so it is
as valid to Answer that Question, What becomes of honest Gentiles, that before
they Died, had no Knowledge nor Faith of Christ Crucified, to wit, that it is
given them at the instant of Death, by the internal Operation, and illumination
of the Holy Spirit: But if any say, this Answer is more alleged than Proved, I
reply, it has the same probability in the one case, as in the other.

P. 30. To prove my inconsistency and contrariety with my self, in the Doctrine
of the Resurrection, with a most blasphemous presumption, he finds fault with
Scripture Doctrine it self, and like a scoffing Sadducy, or rather Atheist,
goes to fix a contradiction on the Scripture it self; for thus he brings me
in, contradicting my self, that which rises is the mortal, that puts on
immortality, and the corruptible which puts on incorruption; citing my Book,
called, A Testimony against that absurd Opinion, p. 3. But in another place, p.
10. he cites me, saying, The Flesh that is mortal and corruptible is not that
Flesh that shall be raised up immortal and incorruptible. And citing my Book,
called, Truth Advanced, he brings me saying of that which rises, That it is a
pure noble part, that consumes not, nor corrupts. And then he querieth, If
that which rises be the corruptible, p. 31. how is it, that that which rises
is incorruptible and corrupts not again? Now Reader, I desire thee to notice
how he quarrels not so much with me as with the Scriptures, to prove a
contradiction in them, for my saying, That which rises is the Mortal that puts
on Immortality, and the Corruptible that puts on Incorruption, this is plain
Scripture, 1 Cor. 15. 53. For this Corruptible must put on Incorruption, and
this Mortal must put on Immortality. And for the next Citation, which he makes
a contradiction to the former; it is also most plain and evident in the
Scripture, The Flesh that is Mortal and Corruptible is not that Flesh that
shall be raised up Immortal and Incorruptible; for the Scripture says Flesh
and Blood cannot inherit the Kingdom of God, 1 Cor. 15. 50. And surely that is
the Flesh that is Mortal and Corruptible. And p. 37. That which thou sowest,
thou sowest not that Body that shall be: And v. 42. It is sown in Corruption,
it is raised in Incorruption, etc. And to his question, which implies a
negation and opposition to plain Scripture; I answer, That which rises, is
incorruptible, and corrupts not again, because it is made incorruptible and
immortal by the mighty Power of God, and to question the immortality and
incorruptibility of the Bodies of the Saints after they are raised from the
Dead, is to suppose that they shall dye again, and has this necessary
consequence, that they shall sin again, for the wages of sin is Death: But this
contradicts the Testimony of Christ, and all his Holy Prophets and Apostles,
and is a plain Introduction to Epicurism and Atheism. And that I said in my
Book, Truth Advanced, which he finds fault with, as being a contradiction,
that that which rises is a pure, noble part that consumes not, nor
corrupts. This I say still, and is no contradiction; for in my Book in that
very place cited by him. p. 113. I bring a similitude of a grain of Corn, which
very Similitude the Scripture brings, to demonstrate the Resurrection, 1 Cor.
15. 37. Now all but fools and idiots know, that as there is a Grain of Corn
that corrupts, and turns to Earth or Dust, so there is another part in it,
that is more Noble, that corrupts not, but by the corruption and dissolution
of the other part, is, as it were, set out of Prison, and gets a new Life and
Multiplication, and as true Philosophy and right Reason, and Ocular Experience
teaches, that the generation of one thing follows the corruption of another,
yet there is something in the new generated thing, that was in the old
corrupted thing; so every Husbandman, that has common sense, knows, that his
Seed which he sows, does not all perish or rot in the ground, but a part
remains in every Grain, that multiplieth, except in some extraordinary case,
of immoderate Rains and Colds, that altogether destroy the Seed in the ground,
as sometimes happens; and then he expects no Crop, unless he sow again. And
that this man will needs meddle with Philosophical matters, to confirm himself
by false Notions in gross Sadducism, and opposition to the plain Doctrine of
Holy Scripture, is a lamentable case; and that he has got the Second Days
Weekly Meeting at London, to approve his book, in order to disperse it all over
the Meetings of the People called Quakers, to corrupt and leaven them more and
more into Sadducism and unbelief, who have been in any degree formerly
corrupted, as I find too many are; and to spoil and defile the minds of young
People, is yet more lamentable.

Page 32. He goes on not so much in contending with me, as against the
Scripture it self. But that which seems mightily to vex and disquiet his
Thoughts, is, that he cannot conceive how there can be an incorruptible part
lodged or placed in the corruptible body, and how the body can have any
incorruptible part in it before the Resurrection; for then he thinks it would
be both corruptible and incorruptible at once; and also it needs not be changed
from an incorruptible body to an incorruptible body? And what change is that? I
question if any Sadducee did ever argue so ignorantly against the Resurrection
of the body as this bold ignorant does. Shall I send him to his Mill, or own
Trade of grinding, or sawing Timber, for further instruction? Does he not know
that Corn hat^ two parts in it, the one Husk, the other Meal? And has not a
Tree in it two parts, the one Wood, the other Bark? And is not the one more
Noble than the other? And when a man eats Corn with the Husk, and swalloweth
down at least a good quantity of the Husk or Bran, together with the Food that
is mixed with it, does the Husk become any part of his body? or, rather, does
it not belong to the Excrement, with other gross parts of the food? Is there
not in all food one more Noble part that becomes not Excrement, but is
transmuted into real flesh, in man? And did not what our Savior eat, turn into
his real flesh, and become incorruptible, seeing his flesh saw no corruption?
And was not his body of flesh, that did not see corruption, yet further
changed, after his Resurrection and Ascension, from a lower degree to a higher
degree of Glory? Bus if it were not for the sake of others, to whom I hope this
may be serviceable, I should think my time lost to trace this ignorant man,
that is so stubborn and presumptuous in his ignorance, (and it might seem like
casting Pearl before Swine) that so dares to tread under his dirty feet, such
precious Truths of Scripture. But I hope what he arrogantly treads under, and
his ignorant Sadducean Fraternity with him, others will gather up, and value,
for the worth of them. And besides the Scripture Similitude of Corn, I brought
another Similitude in that same Page of my book, p. 113. comparing the mortal
and corruptible body of man to a Mass, or Mixture, that has both Gold and
Dross in it, which Mass is an Heterogeneous body, and is not pure Gold. And
though Gold is not in the highest or strictest sense incorruptible, yet it is
the most incorruptible of all Metals or Minerals, or other such visible bodies;
and therefore in comparison of many other bodies, it may be said to be
incorruptible. Now why may it not be said, of a Mass that has both Gold and
Dross in it, it is a corruptible body; for all Heterogeneous bodies are
corruptible; and yet it has that in it which in a certain respect is
incorruptible; for we know not any thing that can corrupt it, seeing it
endures the hottest fire that can be put to it.

P. 33. My Similitude taken from the Soul of Man, that remains the same in
substance, after its sanctification, that it was before, when unsanctified, and
defiled with sin, he says, is short of the matter; for such a change is surely
rather a purification than a transmutation, even as the washing of a body
besmeared with dirt, when cleansed, is a purification, and not a transmutation.
But still this ignorant presumptuous man runs himself rashly upon the sharp
pricks. Formerly he has labored in vain to destroy the felicity of the body
of a Saint, and now he labors as much in vain to destroy the felicity of his
Soul; that he makes the work of Regeneration in the Soul of Man, to be nothing
else but a purification from sin, as when a Body besmeared with dirt, is
cleansed, that is a Purification, and not a Transmutation. I never heard, nor
read a more ignorant and nonsensical Assertion. This is like that other most
nonsensical Assertion of one of their great Preachers here at London, Jacob
Talner, and a Member of their Second Days Meeting, who said in a public
Conference at Turner's -Hall, London, 28. 3d. month, 1696. desired by himself,
That Adam, before his Fall, was neither Holy, nor Righteous, nor Wise; and from
this False Assertion, he brought an Argument, That Spiritual Death could not be
an effect of Adam's Sin: Both which Assertions are flatly contrary, not only to
Scripture, but to the common manner of Preaching among the People called
Quakers; and this he boldly affirmed in the hearing of some hundreds, many of
which were his own Party. What is this but to make the Souls of the Saints,
nothing but as so many Tabulae Rasae, washed Tables without any Beautiful
Colors, or lively Portraiture on them? Is then the Image of God in the Saints
no positive thing, but a Freedom from sin, or a Negation of it. Is Holiness
nothing but a Negation of unholiness? Is the ardent Love of God in the Saints
nothing, but a mere negative of hatred of God? Does not the Scripture plainly
distinguish betwixt the finishing Transgression, and bringing in everlasting
Righteousness? O wrerched ignorance! And O lamentable shame that falls upon the
Second Days weekly Meeting of the People called Quakers, for approving such
Antichristian Doctrine, worse than Heathenism; for I never heard that ever any
Heathen Philosopher said or taught, That Virtue in the Soul of a Man, was
nothing but the absence of Vice. The Holy Scripture does not only Teach us,
That the Saints are washed, but Sanctified, and Transformed, Romans 12. 2. And
what is now become of G. Foxes frequent Doctrine in his Preaching, and Printed
Epistles, That Christ, the Second Adam, brings up them that follow him, not
only to the state of the First Adam that fell, but unto his Image that never
fell, and is the Holiness of the Second Adam, nothing but a freedom from sin
and unholiness; he may as well say, Heat is nothing but the absence of cold,
Sweet is nothing but the absence of Sower, or Bitter; Light is nothing but the
absence of Darkness, and that the best things, are mere Negatives, and
nonentities; and the putting on the New Man, is nothing else but the putting
off the Old Man; and so at this rate the Scripture is vain and false, which
does distinguish them, as much as betwixt the putting off a filthy Garment, and
the putting on a new clean Garment? But if on better consideration, he be
ashamed of his rash Assertion, and come to acknowledge that the Soul by
Regeneration, not only is purified from Sin, but wonderfully changed and
transformed, from Natural or Animal, to Spiritual, from Earthly to Heavenly,
and yet the same in Substance; let him acknowledge that the mighty Power of God,
through Christ, that thus has changed the Soul, retaining the same substance,
can and will change the low Body of a Saint, and fashion it like the Glorious
Body of Christ, as the Scripture plainly Testifies, Phil. 3.

P. 34. But nothing will satisfy him, unless I can demonstrate how a Natural
and Corruptible Substance can be turned into a Spiritual one. Well, if I can
demonstrate that this actually was done, will that satisfy him? I fear his
unbelief will still harden his Heart against this excellent Doctrine of holy
Scripture. But however, I will try a little more to Convince him. The Food
which our Savior received into his Body, was it not before he received it,
corruptible, or to use his Phrase, a Corruptible Natural Substance? Yea, surely
it was, and what part of that Food became part of his Body and Flesh, it was
turned or changed into incorruptible, for as his Flesh saw no Corruption, so
without all doubt it is at present an incorruptible Substance, which G. W.
after his former wrangling has acknowledged, Malice of the Indepen. Agent, p.
17.

P. 34. His wrangling and quibling from his own gross misunderstanding of some
places of Scripture, helps him nothing, as that David slept with his Faethers,
and saw Corruption, Acts 13. 36. And that of Job, I have said of Corruption,
thou art my Father. If he will take these Scriptures strictly and literally, he
must as much contend against the Immortality of the Soul, as the Resurrection
of the Body; the Mortal Body of Man is truly said to be Corruptible, because it
consists of two heterogeneous parts, the one Noble, the other ignoble, to wit,
the Husk, Dross, or Cortex, and after the Separation of the Noble, from the
Ignoble, it is not corrupt, but pure, yet at the Resurrection it is raised up
to an higher Dignity, and made immortal and incorruptible, as it neither shall,
nor can return to be united with that drossy part again, and so is truly
incorruptible, as well as immortal.

But he will not leave off, until, as the Man-Eater, or Anthropophagus, eats
Man's Flesh, he Eat or swallow up (with his devouring Throat, thereby thinking
to destroy it) the Doctrine of the Resurrection of the Body. And he joyneth
with Atheists and Sadducees here in arguing against the Resurrection of the
Body (being the same in Substance) from the Man-Eaters. And to my Answer to
their Objection from the Man-Eaters, he Replyeth, first, Repeating some of my
words, but omitting the Explanatory part, I shall therefore cite them as they
are in my Book, p. 118. Truth Adv. I say, Allowing there is a great change, or
renewing of the gross material and visible Parts of Man's Body, yet the Radical
Body, or Radix, and Principal Substance of the Body remains the same, and is
of a durable and lasting Nature; and tho it may be increased in Man, while he
lives, yet it is not diminished, nor the parts of it separated asunder; and
tho Man-Eaters may Eat the gross part of Man's Body, yet that more subtle and
invisible part they cannot, nor can that which belongs to one be given to
another; hence by way of Allegory and Metaphor, it is called Bone in Scripture,
Isa. 66. 14. From this, most nonsensically he infers, That I affirm, the
Man-eaters Eat the Accidents of Man's Body, but not the Substance, and will
needs have it the same, or equally absurd with the Doctrine of
Transubstantiation. But this sort of quibling comes partly from his gross
ignorance, and partly from the perversion and prejudice of his Spirit, for I
neither said, nor thought that the Man-Eaters eat only the Accidents, but I
distinguished betwixt the Radix and principal Substance of Man's Body, and that
which was but the drossy part, which is also a substance, and if he deny it to
be a substance, to wit, the Dross or Drossy part of any Body, which is
frequently separated from the Noble Volatile part, by Chimical Operations, and
otherwise, he is guilty of the Popish false Notion of Transubstantiation, and
not I, for the Dross is frequently separated from that more Noble Substance,
that it was mingled with; and if he says that Dross is not a Substance, but an
Accident, then here is the Popish Doctrine affirmed by him, with a witness! But
let this Miller-Philosopher, (who, as the Shooemaker, goes beyond his Last, so
goes beyond his Sphere of Knowledge, in all his undertaking against these
great Truths of the Christian Faith) tell me, does he think that a Man-eater
can, properly speaking, eat Iron, Silver, Gold, Lead: if he swallow it down,
will it not go forth at the draught with the Excrement, and yet is no part of
the Excrement? This is a thing usually known, that some, to save their Gold
from Robbers, have swallowed it down; but did they eat it? If he say, nay; then
I say to him, no more can a man-eater eat that radical and principal substance
of a Saints body, to make it a part of his body; for as every body has a
distinct seed, so the Radix of every body is a distinct Radix.

P. 36. But behold the man's great hypocrisy, after all his so much contending
against the Resurrection of the Body, and charging the Scripture it self with
inconsistency and contradiction, yet he has the impudence to say, we firmly
believe there shall be a Resurrection both of the Just and Unjust. And again he
says, We do not think it a necessary business to be curiously prying into the
manner of it; Neither, says he, do we find the Primitive Christians come to
any Result about what their Bodies should be. But this is a plain Contradiction
to the holy Scripture, That the Primitive Christians believed, and all true
Christians do now believe, which says, This corrrptible shall put on
incorruption, and this mortal shall put on immortality. Now what is this
mortal? It is not the Soul which he thinks (I suppose) is not mortal; therefore
it must be the Body. And concerning the manner of it, the Scripture is very
plain and express, It is sown natural, it is raised spiritual; it is sown in
corruption, it is raised in incorruption; it is sown in weakness, it is raised
in power; it is sown in dishonor, it is raised in honor.

P. 36. But he goes on still, querying, 1. If it was the common belief of the
Primitive Christians, that the very same matter and substance of this
corruptible body, should be the body that is raised, why should any among
themselves, especially, have asked such a needless question, as with what Body
do they come? I answer, Such who asked that Question, were such among them,
that said, there was no Resurrection of the Dead, as such there were, 1 Cor.
15. 12. How say some among you, there is no Resurrection of the Dead? And
therefore Paul thought it not needless to propose their Question, on purpose to
answer it; and that he might take occasion thereby the more fully and amply to
declare it.

His second Question is, Would not the Apostle have answered more to the
matter? I answer, He answered very well to the matter, after he had reproved
them as Fools, for querying from their unbelief, and their ignorant manner of
arguing against it, as many do at this day, he proceeds to show the manner how
it is raised, having in the foregoing Verses proved the Truth of the Thing, he
does next show the manner of it; and the Question which he answers, is not
concerning what is raised, or who are raised, but how are the Dead raised, and
with what manner, or with what quality of body do they come; so the truest, and
best Translation out of the Greek, which has it not (...), but (...). i. e.
not quo corpore, sed quali corpore; not with what, but with what quality of
body do they come? But this their querying was a sort of arguing against the
thing it self, of the Resurrection. And by an Argument which they thought to
take from the manner of it, they argued against the thing it self, even as the
Sadducees argued with Christ against the Resurrection, from the false conceit
of the manner of it, that they had, as if the Body were to be raised up in the
same manner as it is now, so as to be fit for generation, and the use of
marriage, which Christ confuted; so many at this day, and especially this
Sadducy, Caleb Pusie, and his Sadducean Fraternity in Pensilvania, and here in
England and elsewhere, they argue against the Resurrection of the Body it self,
from the manner of it, as thus, If the same body for substance shall be raised,
then it must be raised, for manner, such as it is now, but that is impossible.
Now the Apostle answers, by donying, that it shall be raised in the same
manner, but it shall quite be changed and transformed, not transubstantiated,
from mortal and corruptible, and Natural or Animal, to immortal, incorruptible
and spiritual. Oh, say they, this connot be, this would be a
Transubstantiation, like that of the Papists. But I say, this Caleb Pusie, and
his Fraternity, that profess to hold a Resurrection of the body, but not of
that same substance, fall in with the Popish Transubstantion; for
Transubstantiation is a change of a thing from one substance to another, as the
Papists say; and therefore Caleb Pusie, and his brethren, who deny that the
body is the same in substance, but changed from one substance to another, are
clearly one with the Papists, in their absurd Doctrine of Transubstantiation:
And thus the Pit he and his Saddueean brethren have dug for me, he and they
are fallen into both together.

And it is manifest Hypocrisy in Caleb Pusie and his brethren, for him and
them to say, they think it not necessary to be curiously prying into the manner
of it, when they are most absurd in determining the manner of it, contrary to
all Scripture and Reason. For they will needs have it, that the change is a
change of the substance, and not of the Quality and Condition: The Body, say
they, that the dead are raised with, is another body in substance, so they will
needs have it. But then let him tell us, when the deceased Saints get this
other body, that is another in substance: I suppose he will say with his
brethren, in the same ignorance and unbelief, G. W. and W. P. that they get it
immediately after Death; for they both argue against the deceaed Saints
expecting any Resurrection of the body, that this implies the Soul to be in a
kind of Purgatory or Disquietness, till the supposed Resumption of the body.

Page 41. He charge G. K. to be guilty of belying the Magistrates at
Philadelphia, Printing, That the Magistrates not only countenanced the hiring
men to fight, but also gave them a Commission so to do, signed by Three
Justices of Peace, whereof one was a Preacher, citing Appeal from the 28, etc.
And from thence he justifies their Persecution against G. K. in fining him
Five Pounds. But now how he proves this to be false, first, he says, it was
more than they had power to do, being Civil Magistrates. But this is no Proof;
for ignorant men, such as they were, might go beyond their power. However, he
grants, if it was not a Commission, it was a Warrant of a Hue and Cry, signed
but by Two Justices of Peace, and neither of them a Preacher. But what Proof
brings he for this? None but his bare Affirmation. But so it was, that some of
them who received the Commission, told us, it was a Commission signed by Three
Justices, whereof one of them was a Preacher. And when this very matter was
debated before the Yearly Meeting at London, 3d mo. 1694. Samuel Jennings
pretending it was not a Commission, but a Hue and Cry, Thomas Lower
contradicted it in my hearing, and the hearing of many others, saying, it could
be no Hue and Cry, for no Hue and Cry had any power to extend beyond dry Land;
but this was to go to the Water, which I leave to men better skilled in Law to
determine: However, whether a Commission, or Hue and Cry, which is but a Nicety
of Phrase in Politics and worldly Government, it confirms the substance of
what was affirmed, That some Quakers signed a Paper, commanding and giving
power to men, by Force of Arms, to retake a Sloop; which is sufficiently known
to be against the professed principles of the Quakers here in England, who have
witnessed by diverse Printed Books and Testimonies, That they are against all
use of Carnal Weapons, so much as in self-defence, and have declared against
Ship-masters, that were Quakers, their carrying Arms, so much as in
self-defence.

Page 41. Another falsehood he charge on G. K. is, That he said, the Ministers
there, viz. in Pensilvania. bad engrossed the Worldly Government. And this he
offers to prove to be false, for there were many that were not Ministers, nor
Quakers neither, then in the Government. But this he only says, and it is a
notorious Falsehood, well known to them that lived there; for on the contrary,
very few, but Quakers, were Magistrates, and for most part Preachers, and these
few that were not Quakers, nor Ministers, they were but as mere Ciphers, the
Ministers ruled all, and did all, and the small number of the rest signified
nothing, in that properly called the Province of Pensilvania; and Ministers
were not only justices, but Criminal Judges, a thing no where so practiced,
that I know, any where in Christendom beside. But however, whether G. K. was
rightly informed in these Particulars, or not, that was not the Thing he was
fined for, but for calling Sam. Jennings, an ignorant, presumptuous and
insolent man, and saying, he was too high and imperious in worldly Courts. And
this was and is well known to be a Truth; And he since remains sufficiently
under that Character.

And have not many called Quakers, used greater liberty than all this, to
reprove the Pride of greater Men in Magistracy here in England in Times past,
under their sharp Persecutions? And for a witness to it, let the Trial of
William Penn and William Mead, Printed at London, declare, as well as other
Printed Trials and Books, not a few. But it is but waste of Time and Paper to
answer to all his Impertinencies. One thing is greatly worth noticing, That
though these men showed great warmth to fine, imprison, and otherwse prosecute,
for some pretended Offenses against them, that were (had they been real) but
small, and had better become them to have passed them by, being not against
them as Magistrates, but as Quakers and Neighbors; Yet they did not only
tolerate, but support and countenance Persons guilty of blasphemous Speeches
against both God and Christ, and with an unbounded Liberty, did abuse me in
particular, as well as my Friends, one of them in a public Meeting calling me,
Wicked Fellow, another calling me Ranter, wicked Man, while I was in Prayer on
my Knees, in the Meeting. And though they would not allow us to distinguish
betwixt them, as being Quakers and Magistrates, yet they did so distinguish,
when they told us, They were not for fighting, as Quakers, but as Magistrates,
which how apt and proper a distinction it was for them to use, I leave to the
intelligent to judge.

Page 46. He says, Now to be plain, This is to show, That G. K. may be (as
well as others have been) a man of great Knowledge in Chronology, yet being led
by a Wrong Spirit, what does it profit? But how has he proved, that G. K. is a
man of a Wrong Spirit? What One Evil Thing has he proved against me in all his
book, either in Doctrine or Conversation? I know none: Though I have proved him
guilty of many. And taking it for granted, That G. K. on extraordinary great
Provocations and Abuses, did drop, once or twice, some unadvised (yet true)
Expressions, does this prove him to be a man of a Wrong Spirit? He has been
more ingenuous than all his Adversaries, who have far exceeded him in heat and
hard words, to acknowledge it, which I never knew that any of them did.

Page 47. He pretends he has got a great Advantage against me, upon the Account
of a Citation out of my book, called, Truths Defense, page 169. which he
recites, though not so truly, as is in my book. But however, as it is, I agree
to it, as to matter and substance. And though he says, Page 53. That they do
not question that in the least, that G. K. is of another mind now. It is a
false Insinuation, I remain in the same mind still, That I would have nothing
urged, nor pressed as Articles of Faith, but what is delivered to us in plain
express Scripture-words (which is the substance of that large Citation). And it
is as false in him to say, That this was so often desired, but could not find
place, viz to take their Confession in express words, for this we never
refused: but I said again and again, We shall take your Confession in
Scripture-words (as many can bear me witness), provided ye will condemn your
Errors that are contrary either to express Scripture-words, or to the plain and
manifest Sense of them, obvious to every intelligent Christian. But this they
would never do. And whereas he querieth, How know we that they have a Sense
contrary to Scripture-words? I answer, They have sufficiently discovered it,
not only by One or Two unsound Expressions, but multitudes of them, as their
Letters, and Manuscripts there, and the Printed Books here, sufficiently prove;
And we need go no further for a Proof, than the most gross and Antichristian
Expressions and Sayings of Caleb Pusie himself, in this very Treatise. For
whereas he has plainly affirmed, p. 15. ad finem, That Jesus of Nazareth
cannot be something else than the Light, Power and Spirit within. Now can there
be any thing more contrary to express Scripture, than this Assertion? Was not
Jesus of Nazareth a real man, consisting of Soul and Body, in whom the fullness
of the Godhead dwelt bodily, and who, above measure, was filled with all
fullness of Grace and Truth: And is that Body, and that Soul, and that
Fullness, nothing else but the Light within us? Oh, Abominable Nonsense, and
Perversion, and Contradiction to Scripture, and all true Reason! He may as much
say, The great body of water in the Ocean, with the Channels and Places that
receive it, is nothing else than the River Thames, and that little narrow Tract
of Earth in which it runs. And at this Rate, whatever is declared of Christ, as
born at Bethlem, or conversing with his Disciples in Judea, teaching them, and
working mighty Signs and Miracles among them; And lastly, Crucified on the Tree
of the Cross at Golgotha, must be understood of nothing else but the Light,
Power and Spirit within. If this be not as great and gross Ranterism as ever
was among men. I leave all sober Christians to Judge. Again, seeing he pretends
so much to express Scripture, let him tell me, 1. Where does the Scripture say,
That Jesus of Nazareth is nothing else than the Light, Power and Spirit within?
I am sure it is no where to be found in the Holy Bible; but in Antichrist's
Bible it may be found, and is found. 2. Where does the Scripture say, That the
Light within is sufficient to salvation, without any thing else? or that it is
an Error to say, The Light within is not sufficient to salvation, without
something else? Which Two being contradictory, if the one be false, the other
must be true. 3dly, Where does the Scripture say, it is sufficient to Eternal
Salvation, only to believe and obey the Light within, without all Knowledge and
Faith of Christ Crucified and raised again, seeing the Scripture, plain
contrariwise makes it the Terms of Salvation, in great part, to confess with
the mouth, and believe with the heart, that God has raised Jesus from the
Dead, Romans 10. 9, 10. 4thly, Where does the Scripture say, The Blood that was
shed without the Gates of Jerusalem, is not that Blood whereby we are
justified, which was John Humphreys Assertion, a Minister in Pensilvania, which
we could never get him, nor any of you all, to condemn; and no wonder; for G.
W. in his book, Light and Life, has said as much. 5thly, Where does the
Scripture say, The bodies of the Saints, at the Resurrection, shall be other
bodies in substance, from what they were here on Earth, which this Caleb Pusie
has affirmed 6 thly, Where does the Scripture say, The Regeneration, or
Conversion of the Soul, is only a purification from sin, as the washing of a
body besmeared with dirt, when cleansed, is a Purification, and not a
Transmutation, as Caleb Pusey has also affirmed, as above? And though I remain
still in the same mind, That no Article of Faith should be urged on any but
what is contained in plain express words of Scripture, (or so agreeable to
express Scripture, as the common sense of all mankind, that hears Scripture
words, must acknowledge, as though it is not said, in Scriptures, That Egypt,
Arabia, Palestine, Mesopotamia, are Places without us, yet common, Sense tells
us so); Yet I see not why I should be so confined to express Scripture words in
things that I require no Man to own or believe, as Articles of Faith, but leave
them to their Liberty, and others take their Liberty to use great variety of
other words; and I think I may say it without vanity, the manner of my
Preaching and writing has been full as much Scriptural, as to Phrase, as most
of the Preachers and Writers among the Quakers.

As for his querying, page 56. where are the express Scripture words that say,
The four hundred pieces of Silver that Abraham Purchased the Burying Place
with, signifies four hundred Virtues. I Answer, The Scripture says that as
much, though not expressly, yet implicitly, as it says, The Treasures we are to
lay up in Heaven. are Spiritual and Divine Virtues, which are the true Riches,
and the Wells that Abraham Dug, and Isaac, signified the Spiritual Wells of
Water within them; and Egypt signified the power of Darkness, and Canaan that
slowed with Milk and Honey, signified the Kingdom of God, for the Old Testament
abounds with such Allegories. But if any do not believe my interpretation by
way of Allegory on that place of Scripture (while they and I own the literal
Sense) or any others of the like nature, I am far from urging it upon them, but
leave them to their free Judgment, and as God shall be pleased to Enlighten
them. For there are many things both in my Book, called, Truth Advanced (so
reproachfully mentioned by him) and in many other of my Books, wherein I may
possibly differ from others in Judgment; yet I leave them to their Liberty to
Dissent, as I desire to be left to my Liberty, to believe as I judge God has
persuaded me. But such as differ from me, so far, and so wide, as this Person
does, Caleb Pusie, and these of the Second Days Meeting, that have Countenanced
and Approved his most Antichristian Doctrines, directly contrary to the great
fundamentals of Christianity, affirming Jesus of Nazareth to be nothing else
but the Light within; and saying, The Light within is sufficient to Salvation,
without any thing else; so Excluding our Lord Jesus of Nazareth, his Death, and
Sufferings, his Resurrection, Ascension, Mediation for us in Heaven; all which
are something else than the Light within, from being concerned in our
Salvation, I can by no means own them to be my Christian Brethren, but esteem
them to be worse than Mahometans, and than other Sober and Honest Heathens or
Gentiles, for their opposing so great Truths so plainly expressed in Holy
Scripture; and it is not the Light in them, but gross Darkness that leads them
into these abominable Errors, and the very Spirit of Antichrist Possesses them,
and they are such Antichrists, concerning whom John Testified, 1 John 2. 18.
and 1 John 9. 3. Every Spirit that Confesses not that Jesus Christ is come in
the Flesh, is not of God. And this is that Spirit of Antichrist, etc. For
notwithstanding their seeming confessions to him, yet seeing they own not
Justification by his Blood outwardly shed, and Salvation by Faith in him, as he
Dyed for us, and Rose again, their Faith and Confession is vain, and
Hypocritical.

G. K.
London, the 2d. of the 4th Month, 1696.
Some REMARKS on John Pennington 's late Book, entitled, The People called
Quakers cleared, etc. and G. Whitehead his Postscript. Showing some of their
gross Perversions, Flashoods, and Groundless Calumnies against G. K.
Page 3. THeir blaming me for appointing a Meeting, to which their Consent was
neither sought, nor made Necessary.

Answ. They got timely Notice a Month beforehand, and were desired to be
present and why might not I appoint a Meeting without their Consent, to Detect
their Errors, and to show the Unjustness of their Sentence of Excommunication
against me, as without my Consent, they appointed a Meeting to Excommunicate
me; I desired them again and again in former Prints to consent to Time and
Place; yea, to appoint Time and Place, and I should stand to their Appointment;
But they still refused, Offenders use not to consent to their Trial.

P. 3. Their charging me with Spleen and Malice. I reject as false and
fictitious.

P. 4. Their telling of two Books lying on my Hand unanswered, and my having
given them Ground to expect an Answer to two of them.

Answ. To the first, some of their own Church have sufficiently answered, to
show the Badness of their Cause, in that Censure they gave against Thomas
Elwood, which was read at the Meeting at Turner's-Hall, 11th. of the 4th.
Month. 1696. and is Printed in the Exact Narrative, page 46. To the second, and
all the other I answered at that Meeting, and have sufficiently detected their
Abuses, Fallacies, Perversions, as well as False Doctrines; though I have a
great deal more in reserve. But all impartial Men will clear me of any blame,
in not answering them in Print, when I have offered to Answer them viva voce,
at a Meeting; for there is no end of answering them in Print; and they can, and
do more securely Forge, Pervert, and Abuse their Readers and me also, in Print,
because they know few will be at the pains to compare their Books with mine, to
see who is innocent or blameworthy: But Face to Face, and by Word of Mouth, it
is easily made apparent; and beside, as I have formerly told, to print Books to
answer all their Books, is too great a Charge for me.

P. 4. They allege, 'I have vindicated their Principles from their Common
Adversaries.

Answ. Such as I did think were their Principles, I did formerly vindicate; but
most of them, which I did think were their Principles, I have found of late
were not their Principles, though I retain them still as mine; and I challenge
them, or any Man, to prove, that ever I did vindicate any of these four
abominable Principles, which I have proved G. W. and W. P. guilty of at the
late Meeting, 11th. 4th Month, 1696. and whereof the late Printed Narrative
gives an Account And though they allege, I have changed my Principles, yet
they have not made it to appear, nor I believe they ever shall, that in any one
Article of the Christian Faith that are reckoned among the Simpliciter
credenda, I have changed any one Principle, Only as to the Sense of some Places
of Scripture, relating to Water Baptism, and the Supper, I own I have changed
my Mind, but to the better; and also as to some other places of Scripture,
improperly alleged to prove some real Truths.

P. 4. to p. 10. As concerning these several Testimonies they bring out of my
Books in all these pages, I own every one of them still, as things sincerely
believed by me, and I believe by many others also, so far as they relate to
Doctrine But that I held them forth as the Principles of the Teachers among the
Quakers universally, or as the Principles of G. W. and W. Penn, seeing I have
since found them so palbably to contradict them in their Printed Books, I
freely acknowledge my shortness and mistake therein. But they most uncharitably
allege, That it is hardness in me, to have changed my Opinion, or Persuasion
of these men, seeing they have given me so great and just occasion so to do, by
boldly defending and excusing these vile Errors.

The next thing they charge me with, is my Inconsistency and
Self-contradiction; but this is a False Charge, their manifest failure in their
undertaking will sufficiently, I hope prove. The first Self-contradiction they
think they have catched me in, is what they bring in page 111, 2. viz. That I
said, (Nameless Bull, page 11.) Seeing this true Faith is wrought in God's
ordinary way by Preaching, therefore the true Faith of Christ's Death and
Sufferings ought to be one of the first and chiefest things that every true
Minister ought to Preach, etc. But they think I contradict this, [Way to the
City of God, page 3.] The knowledge of his inward coming, is that which is the
more needful, and in the first place, as being that by which the true and
comfortable use of his outward coming is alone sufficiently understood.

Answ. As I have somewhere else said, It is my Lot to have to do with Men, that
have neither so much true Logic, nor Common Sense, as to understand what a
true Contradiction is. Let any Man of common sense judge, if it be a
contradiction, or least inconsistency to say, The true Faith of Christ's Death
is one of the first things that ought to be Preached, to bring Men to witness
the true Faith of Christ's Death, and being made Conformable to his Death: And
also to say, The knowledge of his inward coming is the more needful in the
first place: As it is no contradiction to say George Whitehead was one of the
first Quakers in the North of England; George Fox was the first Quaker. But for
the better understanding of the Case, the distinction betwixt general Religion
and Christian Religion, is to be considered, (which distinction I have used in
my Book, called Divine immediate Revelation and Inspiration continued in the
true Church, Printed at London, 1684. and which was read and approved by the
Second Days Meeting, when I was present, and therefore G. W. is bound to own
what is in that Book, unless he will say, their Ministers are changed in their
Principles) see page 44. where I also distinguish betwixt general Revelation in
Men, and special; the general I said was common to all Mankind, the special
given to true Christians. By general Revelation, (which is that common
illumination given to all Mankind, men are taught to know that God is, and that
he is the maker of all things, and that he has given a Law to Men, in their
Hearts, which they are to obey; and when they disobey this Law, they make
themselves guilty before God; and by this general Revelation, or illumination,
Men generally know that they are Sinners, all having sinned; and by this inward
Law, and illumination, common to all men, is the knowledge of Sin, and of the
Wrath of God, that is due for Sin: and by this General or Common illumination,
many of the Gentiles came so far as the Servants state, and had acceptance with
God as Servants, but were short of the state of Sons. because they had not the
Faith in Christ Crucified, according to Gal. 3. 26. This same distinction of
general and special Revelation, in other terms I held forth in my Book of
Universal Grace, approved also by the Second Days Meeting and Printed in the
Year 1671. which is about 25 Years ago; see page 8, 9, 10. of that Book, where
I largely treat of a twofold inward Appearance of Christ in Men, the first and
second, and how the first prepares for the second; and how the first is not to
be rested in, but that we ought to press forward into the second, page 9. ad
finitum. And I said, the first was that of the Law, the second that of the
Gospel, page 8 The former that of the first Covenant, the latter that of the
second Covenant. And I say expressly, page 8. 'The Gospel lay hid within the
Law, as within a Vail, which the outward Tabernacle did plainly figure and hold
forth: And notwithstanding that I have held forth this distinction in Print 25
Years ago, yet many of my present Adversaries cry out against it as New
Doctrine, and contrary to Friends Principles. And it most evidently appears
from the express Words of my Book of Universal Grace, page 120. That I did not
then hold that the Light within was sufficient to Salvation without any thing
else, or without Christ's outward coming, and his Obedience, Sufferings and
Death, (as my Adversaries Caleb Pusie, and the Second Days Meeting that has
approved his Book do affirm, and as these Men also do, who have given out their
Scandalous Book, called The People called Quakers cleared) for I say expressly
in that page 120. The Light within, and Christ's outward coming with his
Obedience, Sufferings and Death, are both sufficient, useful and necessary in
their own kind and way, Consummating, and being Consummate in another. And here
Note, that though I did not say, Christ within, and Christ without, are two
Christ's; yet I said his Light within, and his Coming in the Outward, with his
Obedience, Sufferings and Death, were two things, Consummating and being
Consummated in one another. Now to wipe off the Injurious Charge of my
Adversaries G. W. and J. P. in this particular (which I thank God, I can as
easily do, and all other their Injurious Charges against me, as Paul did throw
off the Viper from his Hand, I say conform to the Doctrine of my former Books,
and in good Consistency with all the passages in them, the Light within (which
in a true sense is God and Christ the Eternal and Essential Word) is to be
Preached in the first place, to Heathens and Gentiles, or any other called
Christians, who have not any true knowledge of God, or fear and reverence of
him, and to all bold and presumptuous Sinners, and briefly to all Men
whatsoever, not really and truly converted to the Christian Religion, to bring
them in the first place to some knowledge of God, and some true fear and
reverence of him, and also to some true knowledge and sense of their sinful
state and condition, and that they are liable to the Wrath and Displeasure of
God for their Sins; all which are in good order previous or prior to the true
Christian Faith, which is a Faith in Christ crucified and therefore may be
Preached before that Faith. But that the Christian Faith it self may be
received by Preaching, that Faith is one of the first things that is to be
preached. as being one of the first Principles of the Christian Religion, as is
clear from these Scriptures, Acts 20, 21. where Repentance toward God, and
Faith toward the Lord Jesus Christ, are joined together as first Principles of
the Doctrine of Christ, compared with Heb. 6. 1, 2. And these Ignorant Men so
deeply Prejudicod against the Preaching of Christ Crucified (to wit, G. W. and
J. P.) as being one of the first things needful to be Preached, and Faith in
him, in Order to make Men true Christians, might by the same Silly Sophistry
and Quibling, accuse Paul and John contradicting each other and inconsistent;
yea, the Holy Ghost himself, who did inspire them both, in what they wrote: For
whenas Paul told the Corinthians, when he Preached the Gospel unto them, 1 Cor.
15. 3. that he delivered unto them First of All (Note these Words, first of
all) that which he also received, how that Christ dyed for our Sins according
to the Scriptures; and that he was buried, and that he rose again the third
day, etc. And yet John Preached not that the first thing, but began with
Preaching the Word that was in the beginning, and how in that Word was Life,
and the Life was the Light of Men; and that Light was the true Light that
lights every man that comes into the world, John 1. 1. to 9. But in this
there is no Contradiction nor Inconsistency betwixt Paul and John; for John
begins with that Principle of Doctrine that is necessary to General Religion,
and to the Knowledge of God as Creator; Paul begins with the Preaching CHRIST
Crucified, as one of the first things necessary to Christian Religion, and the
knowledge thereof: And such Order is necessary in teaching Practical Arts and
Sciences, as in order to teach Astronomy, some first Principles of Arithmetic
and Geometry are necessary to be taught in the first place, as to add and
substract in Arithmetic, etc. And to make a Perpendicular Line, or draw a
Parallel, to bisect an Angle, etc. Yet none of these are properly Principles of
Astronomy, as it is a peculiar Science: But the first Principles of Astronomy
are not to be taught before Arithmetic and Geometry, but after them. And so
the first Principles of Medicine, are to be taught after the first Principles
of the Physics; and thus the first Principles of Christian Theology are to be
taught after the first Principles of Ethics, or Ethology, which was the
Gentile Religion, and which did teach many true and excellent things of God, as
is to be seen in Aristotle's Ethics, who wrote of (...) i. e. something Divine
in Man, by which he could live virtuously; and yet who but he that is no true
Christian himself will say, that Aristotle's Ethics, or Socrate's and Platoe's
Morals, are enough to teach the Christian Theology. Thus I hope I have made it
appear, that as my Adversaries have not proved me inconsistent with my self, so
they have proved themselves inconsistent with true Christianity, and no true
Christians in their Principles, but Heathens, and falling short of Heathen
Morals, in Falsely accusing the Innocent, a Vice contrary to true Morality.

The second part of their Charge, in page 10. is, That I did formerly hold that
Christ's Inward coming saves, where the Outwardis unknown. But here they are
guilty of gross Forgery and Perversion; first of Forgery, seeing they cite no
passage in any of my Books, where I express these Words, where the Outward is
unknown, and seeing by their Words, where the Outward is unknown, they mean
Christ's coming without us, I say they are guilty of grossly perverting my Words
and Sense, as if I did hold, that Christ's inward coming saves, with Eternal
Salvation, without all knowledge of Christ's outward coming; and in
contradiction to themselves, they grant I have distinguished betwixt the
express or explicit Knowledge and Faith of Christ's Death and Sufferings, in
order to Eternal Salvation, and the implicit Knowledge and Faith of it;
asserting this last, but not the first, as universa'ly and indispensibly
necessary. They object against this distinction idly and falsely, that it is
said by me, page 14. 'That the distinction betwixt explicit and implicit, is a
late distinction: But the place of my Book, cited by them, says no such thing.
But I mention how in diverse of my late Books I have distinguished betwixt the
express and implicit Knowledge and Faith; but this proves it not to be a late
distinction, for it is an ancient distinction, and sufficiently implied and
understood in my oldest Books, when I treat on that subject; for whereas they
confess that I have used the Word express in my oldest Books, that proves that
I did then make that distinction, though I did not express the other term of
implicit, which though not expressed, yet was really understood by me, as in
many cases it is enough to express the one Term or Member of a distinction, as
when we call a Man a rational Creature though we express not the Word
Irrational, yet we sufficiently distinguish betwixt a Man and a Bruit, that Man
is rational, and a Bruit is irrational; and when I say, some or many things
commanded us, are jure divine, this sufficiently implies and intimates, to
any of common sense, that some things may be commanded us, that are not jure
divino, but jure humano; yea, all things done and practiced by the People
called Quakers, are not jure divine, as themselves confess; therefore as jure
divino implies the other term of the distinction, when not expressed, viz.
jure humano, so the term express implies the other term implicit, though not
expressed. And though my ignorant Adversaries would make their ignorant
Followers think, this is only a new and odd, distinction of mine, yet all true
and Orthodox Christians do hold it as well as I, and have used it, as they do
at present, and has its Foundation in Scripture; for when Paul said, Ephesians. 3.
6. That the Mystery, how that the Gentiles should be fellow Heirs, and of the
same Body, and partakers of his Promise in Christ by the Gospel in other Ages
was not made known unto the Sons of Men, as it is now revealed unto his Holy
Apostles and Prophets by the Spirit, he plainly implies this distinction, for
in other Ages, yea, in all Ages it was at least obscurely and implicitly made
known but not expressly as in Paul's Age, and the Ages succeeding; and that
Great Mystery of Christ is said by Paul, to have been kept secret since the
world began, but now is made manifest, and by the Scriptures of the Prophets,
according to the commandment of the everlasting God, made known to all Nations
for the obedience of faith, Romans 16. 25, 26. Now what is made manifest but
expres? And what is kept secret, but implicit? So that this very distinction,
which my ignorant Adversaries blame in me as new and odd, is the very
distinction of Paul in equivalent terms: And seeing they will not allow that
distinction, as applied to the Knowledge of Christ without us, of express and
implicit, it is plain they hold, that not any Knowledge, not the least grain of
the knowledge of Christ without men, is universally necessary to Salvation,
neither express nor implicit; which how Antichristian and Unscriptural it is, I
leave to all true Christians to judge. But why will they not allow it as well,
with respect to the knowledge of Christ without us, as of Christ within us?
Will they say that Men may be saved without all knowledge of Christ within,
either express or implicit? If yea, then we shall see what ignorant Persons
they allow shall be saved, and what a prodigious Ignorance they establish: If
nay, then they must answer me with the same distinction in the same terms; or
in terms equilvalent; and if they use that, or any other the like distinction,
it shall be found new enough to them, at least as new, or rather much more new,
as that I have used in this case: nor needs G. Whitehead blame me for using new
Distinctions, seeing both himself and William Penn have used them in several
Cases, to serve a turn (a phrase they apply to me, page 19.) as in excusing
Geo. Fox his saying, Christ is not distinct from the Saints, the Soul is a part
of God. And when they excuse Is. Pennington's saying, 'Can outward Blood
cleanse? And George Whitehead his excusing his former Sayings in diverse of his
old Books, 'that Christ is not in all Men. He comes off with this distinction
of late, saying, 'He is not in all Men unitedly, or by union. Which distinction
I used not only in my Book of Universal Grace, which was written in the Year
1669. (though not printed till the Year 1671.) but also in my Answer to the
Thirty Queries, sent by the Bishop of Aberden, expressly mentioned in the
Preface to Robert Barclay's Answer to William Mitchel, in his Preface to it,
called, Truth cleared of Calumnies. The which Answer of mine to the said Thirty
Queries, was given in the Year 1666. before R. B. printed any thing, or before
he was a Quaker: And I the rather mention this my Answer to these Thirty
Queries, because in these chief things which my Adversaries charge me to be
changed in, my Faith is the same now, as it is there declared, as well as in my
other Printed Books, which Answer I have in Manuscript writ 30 Years ago,
Copies of which are in several Hands, and which I shall be ready to show to any
sober Enquirers. And what pitiful, unsound, and odd, as well as new
Distinctions, has G. Whitehead used, to excuse G. Fox his saying, Your Gospel,
Matthew, Mark, Luke, and John, are Dust and the Serpents Meat: He saying, It
was to be meant of the Ink and Paper which would turn to Dust. But who did ever
call the Ink and Paper the Gospel? or who did ever think that the Serpent,
which is the Devil, does eat Ink and Paper? Oh for shame! let these Men cease
to blame me for new Distinctions, when they have made so many False and
Nonsensical new Distinctions, more Foolish than ever were heard of. And his
excusing Solomon Eccles Blasphemy, in saying, The Blood that came out of
Christ's Side, was no more than the Blood of another Saint: Behold his most
Unlearned and Foolish Distinction, inconsistent with and contradictory to that
known great Principle of the People called Quakers, That Christ dyed for all
Men, and shed his Blood for all: His meaning was, said G. Whitehead, as to
Papists and you, viz. Baptists, whose Minds are Carnol. But another idle
impertinent Cavil they make against the distinction of express Knowledge of
Christ's Death etc. and implicit, is, 'That I use that Word express as a word
of Course, and of no 'Force, as when I said, That many of Adam's Posterity
suffer disadvantage by his 'Disobedience, who never knew it expressly. But that
ever any perished by Adam's Sin, who never knew it either expressly, or
implicitly, as they allege, seeing they bring no proof of it, I reject as
false and fictitious: It is evident from the Heathen Philosophers Writings, and
particularly from Plato, that they knew at least implicitiy the Fall of Man,
and the degeneration of Mankind in general, for Plato not only mentions the
Fall of Man but To (...), i. e. an imbred Evil in Men, that is born with them.
And how can any Impartial Reader that reads my Books, when I so often caution,
restrict and limit the Words on that subject, with the term Express; and at
other times, with the Words clear Distinct Knowledge; and at other times, with
the Words Historical, Outward Knowledge; all which, and the like Words, R.
Barelay has used in several Places of his Apology, after my Method, and diverse
Years after I used that Method of Expression; and I well know we were of One
Mind in that thing, and I published his Latin Theses in Holland first of all,
and carried them over with me out of Scotland, at his desire; whereof I can
bring sufficient Witness; and we used to Discourse together frequently on that
Subject, and both of us on purpose used these Cautions and Restricted Words, as
express, clear, distinct, historical, outward, and in the outward (viz. in the
outward History, or Letter) to signify, that we did not intend that any were
saved with Eternal Salvation without all Knowledge or Faith of Christ without,
though without the express they might, and still may, where it is not revealed.
And they are as Nonsensical and Ignorant, in seeking to mar my Distinction (by
falsely alleging, I have marred it) by their dictator-like, saying, There is no
Medium between knowing very darkly in Vails, and Figures (implicitly in a very
obscure Degree) and not knowing at all, page 15. But to confute their
Ignorance, let any Man of common Sense answer me; Is there no Medium between
knowing very Darkly, and not knowing at all? Is the Particle or little Word
[very] Superlative in the highest Degree? or is it not rather Comparative? Is
there no medium betwixt a Man's being very ignorant, and knowing nothing at all?
If there be none, then by George Whitehead's Logic, (who has either writ this
Book that I answer, or approved it) because he is very Ignorant, (as I have
sufficiently proved) he knows nothing at all. But surely the most ignorant
may and do know some things; therefore G. W. is as ignorant in true Logic, as
in true Divinity.

Another Forgery and Perversion they put upon my Words, in page 15. when they
make me say, Men have been saved without the express Knowledge of the one, viz.
Christ's outward coming, but not of the other, viz. his inward coming. But I
never said or thought any such thing, I have judged charitably, and so I still
judge that many have been saved, and may be saved without the express
Knowledge, as truly of his inward coming as of his outward; for many have felt
and enjoyed the blessed Virtue and Power of Christ within them, and so have had
an implicit knowledge of it, and it has been saving to them, though they had
not that clear and express knowledge to call it by all, or many of these Names
that the Scriptures call it by expressly; and shall we say they must all perish,
who though they own the Grace and Spirit of Christ, and its operation in them,
yet are shy and fearful to call it Christ in them; and to be sure, as few of
the Gentiles knew this inward Principle of Truth in them, by the express
Knowledge and Names of Jesus and Christ, as knew him to be Man in the outward
by these Names. And here Note, that ten several times at least in the Words and
Passages they have quoted out of my Books, they bring me in, using the Word
Express still, saying, The Express Knowledge and Faith of Christ's Death is not
universally necessary to Men's Salvation. And seeing in all my late Books, and
also at present, I say the same. I appeal to all moderate Persons of common
sense, if this be any contradiction, or rather does not this false and unfair
way of their Arguing, evidently prove them wonderfully ignorant and blinded
with Prejudice against me: and let any Schoolboy, or Tiro, or Person of Common
Sense judge, if these two Propositions held by me, and thousands more are
contradictory, The express Knowledge and Faith of Christ is not necessary to
all that shall be saved. Some Knowledge and Faith of Christ is necessary to all
that shall be saved: Even as whether these two Propositions be contradictory,
The clear Light of Sun, Moon, Fire or Candle, is not necessary to see and read
with? Some light of Sun, Moon, Fire, or Candle is necessary to see and read
with.

Their next Head is, page 23. That I said in my former Books, the Inward
Principle is to be Preached in the first place, and the Effects thereof.

Answ. This I grant still, and how and in what sense, in the Words aforegoing I
have sufficiently declared, and I further add, That some true knowledge of God
springing from the Inward Principle, in concurrence with the serious
Consideration of the Works of Creation and Providence is necessary as previous
and prior to the knowledge of Christ's Death and Sufferings for our Sins; for
in God's ordinary way, we are first taught that there is a God, before we are
taught that there is one only Son of God, that proceeded from him by an Eternal
Generation, and who became the Son of Man by Generation in the Fullness of
Time. The first of these Lessons or Doctrines belong to all Men to know; and
they are rather Bruits than Men who know it not. The second of these Lessons is
proper and peculiar to Christians, and may well be called at least one of the
first things needful to be preached, known and believed among them called
Christians; and as the Doctrine of Christ's outward coming is truly and duly
Preached by enlightened and well qualified Preachers, that more excellent and
peculiar Influence and Ministration of the Spirit, that accompanies the Faith
of Christ crucified, is also preached; and not only preached, but freely given
and imparted by God, through Christ, to all such who hear it and believe it
sincerely as it is preached. Therefore what is necessary in the first place to
be preached to them that have little or no true Knowledge of God, or of an
Inward Principle, is one thing, and what is first to be preached in order to
bring Men to the Christian Faith and Religion more immedately and proximately,
is another: as what is necessary in the first place to be Preached, to Men,
that they may know God, and believe in him, as a Creator, King, and Lord over
all, is one thing; and what is necessary to be preached to Men in the first
place, that they may know God, and believe in him as a Gracious Father,
pardoning their Sins freely for Christ's sake, and accepting them in him and
that also they may believe in Christ crucified, is another thing: All which
proves sufficiently what I have delivered both in my former and latter Books,
to be well consistent on this very Head, viz. That the Faith of Christ's Death
and Sufferings is one of the first Principles of the Christian Religion, and
therefore is so to be preached, together with the Resurrection of the Dead, and
Eternal Judgment, and Repentance from dead Works, according to Heb. 6. 1, 2.
which according to the Greek, is there called The Word of the Beginning of
Christ. But what do my Adversaries bring against me on this Head, to prove my
Self-contradiction? Nothing at all; therefore they show themselves stronger in
Falsely Accusing, than in justly Proving.

Their following Head is page 25. Where they charge me with a
Self-contradiction in saying, The Gentiles were savingly enlightened, who knew
not the History of Christ's outward coming, etc. And they think I contradict my
self, when I said in my Book, called A further Discovery, page 10. of one
called a Friend, that lately Preached, That he was a bold ignorant Soul, for
preaching, that the Blood which cleanses from all Sin, was the Life, and the
Life is the Light, calling it a perverse Exposition.

I Answer; That it is a perverse Exposition, and that he who gave it, was a
bold ignorant Soul, I still affirm, and I charge them to be guilty of gross
Forgery, until they prove that I have said the same, and gave that Exposition
on that place of Scriptrue, 1 John 1. 7. which I do not in the least remember;
but no proof they bring any where that I have so said; and their Argument is
Fallacious and Deceitful like themselves, that because I have said, It is the
Life that saves, Romans 5. 10. citing page 115. of my Book called Universal
Grace, therefore that by Blood in that place 1 John 1. 7. I did mean the Life,
which is the Light within: And the Fallacy and Sophistry of their Argument
lies in this, that because I have granted the Life within saves, or cleanses
from Sin, that therefore the Blood mentioned, 1 John 1. 7. is the Life. Now if
I had said, Nothing but the Life within saves, or cleanses from all Sin, they
might have justly so argued: But seeing I ever held as I do at present hold,
that there are several concurring Causes in the great Work of our Salvation,
and cleansing from Sin, which though agreeing in one Harmony, yet the one Cause
is not the other, therefore their Argument is as vain and false, as who did
argue, the little Mustard Seed causes the Herb Mustard to grow, and the Earth
in which it is sown causes it to grow, and the Sun and Rain cause it to grow,
therefore that little Seed is the Earth, is the Sun, and is the Rain. Our
Salvation and cleansing from Sin, depends on diverse Causes; 1st. chiefly on
God, who gave his Son to Dye for us; 2dly. on Christ, who shed his Blood
outwardly to cleanse us from Sin; 3dly. on the Spirit, Life and Grace of Christ
inwardly given us, helping and enabling us by a Living Faith, to apply the
Merit, Virtue, and Efficacy of that Blood of Christ outwardly-shed, for our
Salvation, and cleansing both from the guilt of Sin, and the inward filth and
stain of it. But before I finish my Answer to this Head, let me give Notice to
the Reader of several gross Perversions, Falsities, and Abuses they put on my
Sound Words, cited in their several pages, on these last Heads, from page 15.
to page 33. First, in page 16. they pervert my Plain Words, where I said,
Though Prophets and Apostles preached him as in the Form of a Man; yet they
preached him also, and that more generally, as a Light to the Gentiles, yea,
and to Jews also: Where they put a false and perverse sense upon the Word more
generally, as if I did signify by it more frequently, which I did not; but by
more generally, I did and do understand, that his Inward Appearance by his
Light and Grace in Men, is, and ever was more general than his Outward
Appearance, in the outward and visible form of a Man; therefore what was in it
self more general they Preached it to be so; but this does not infer that they
Preached him more frequently within Men, than without them, for if they
preached, as they wrote, in their Writings, where once we read of Christ
within, we read some Scores of times, of Christ, as he was outwardly manifest,
was Born, Dyed, Buried, Rose again, Ascended, and is gone into Heaven, where he
remains our Advocate, and Mediator with the Father. Secondly, They perversely
infer from my Words, that whereas I formerly made the Knowledge and Faith of
the History of Christ's outward coming not essential to Religion, now I did
make it essential. But in this they are guilty of palbable Forgery; for as none
of the citations they bring, prove it, so I do not remember that ever I so said
or writ; but the Knowledge and Faith of the History is one thing; and the
implicit Knowledge and Faith of Christ, as he is without us, is another thing;
and therefore for them thus to confound thing, so differing, argues great
Ignorance, or Prejudice; and however it argues great Falsity and Unfair
Dealing. Thirdly, That they make it an Inconsistency and Contradiction in me to
have formerly said, Cornelius was a Devout and Religious Man, one whose Prayer
God heard; and yet of late to have said, Cornelius had not the Holy Ghost in
his Gentile estate, although he had a great measure of Gentile Sincerity and
Righteousness. But this is no real Contradiction, although it may seem so to
their Ignorance and Darkness; it is easy to show out of Scripture, that none
had the Holy Ghost, or are said to have the Holy Ghost, but Believers in Christ
Crucified, who did witness that special Office of the Holy Ghost to sanctify
them, by giving them the Holy Faith in Christ crucified. And though the Holy
Ghost is holy, as well in his Nature, as in his special Office of sanctifying
them, who witness his indwelling in them, and union with him, yet he is
commonly called so in Scripture, by virtue of his special Office and ^nfluence
in the Hearts of Believers; and therefore as he is not said to be the Holy
Ghost or Holy Spirit in wicked men, so nor in pious Gentiles, or in such only,
as are but as Servants, and under the first Ministration of the Spirit, and G.
Whitehead's distinction, how Christ is not in all men, will serve in this case
as well for me, as for him, to wit, by Union, which I think was mine in Print,
before it was in Print his, according to which as Christ is only said to live
and dwell in true Believers in Christ, even CHRIST Crucified, and none but such
have Christ by a real Interest in him, and right to him, as a Woman has to her
true Husband; So none but true Believers have the Holy Ghost, or the Spirit of
Christ, to wit, by Union, Right and Interest, for that is only the Portion of
Children not of Servants, as it was said of Abraham, he gave Gifts to the
Children of Keturah, but he gave All, to wit, the Inheritance to Isaac: so God
gives Gifts to such as are but only Servants in his House, but gives himself,
and his dear Son, and Holy Spirit, to be the Inheritance of his Children.

And as to their Question, which they think in their Ignorance is unanswerable,
'Whether any Prayer is heard by God, but what is put by his Spirit?

I Answer, Nay, but Servants and Pious Gentiles, such as Cornelius was in his
Gentile state, may be, and are helped to Pray by the Spirit, having the
Influence of the first Ministration of the Spirit, which though remotely
Preparatory, yet does not instate the Soul into union with the Spirit, that
being reserved for the second Ministration of the Spirit, that is more noble,
and enableth the Soul that has it, not only to Pray more effectually and
acceptably, but also to perform all other Acts of Love and Obedience. And were
not my Adversaries extreme blind and ignorant, they might understand how the
Apostle calls one and the same Spirit, in them who are but Servants, the
Spirit of servitude (so the Greek) and in them who are Sons, the Spirit of
Adoption Romans 18. 5. And elsewhere he distinguishes thus, calling the one the
Spirit of Fear and the other the Spirit of Power, of Love, and of a Sound Mind,
1. Tim. 1. 7. Which are thus distinguished, not in Nature and Being, but in
Office. And here let it be noted, how by these men's arguing, That Men may be
eternally saved, perfectly sanctified, and endued with the Holy Ghost, who have
no Faith or Knowledge of Christ without them; do sufficiently declare what
Heathens they are, and of what little value they make the Faith and Knowledge
of Christ crucified, and that their Religion is nothing but Deisne, under a
Mask and Disguise of a Christian Profession.

Fourthly, They make it an Inconsistency and Contradiction in me, to have said,
page 22. That many who never had the Scriptures, if they have been faithful
unto God, in what he has revealed unto them, by the Light of Christ in them;
who dare or can say, that they have not been accepted, yet not without Faith in
Christ in some measure; for they that believe in the Light believe in Christ,
who is that Light. Citing Rector Corrected, page 150. But where is my
Contradiction here? Did I ever say, That men may believe in the Light, or
Christ within, and never at any time from first to last believe in Christ
without, either expressly, or implicitly: For this they bring no proof, and I
believe they can bring none.

Fifthly, In page 26. they most Ignorantly and Antichristianly blame my sound
Christian Assertion, where I say, The work of Sanctification is ascribed in
Scripture to Christ's Blood and Sufferings, as well as to his Inward
Appearance, and to both indispensably necessary, and to Faith therein. Thus we
see plainly they place all upon Christ within, and nothing upon Christ without.
O bold Antichristianism! published in the Face of a Nation prosessing
Christianity: But wherein I have contradicted that Assertion, they show not.

6thly. They bring me in guilty of a Contradiction, for saying, Nor is the
outward Name that which saves, but the inward Nature, Virtue and Power
signified thereby, which was made manifest in them etc. But they no where show
how I contradict this. I say still, It is not the outward Name either of God,
or Christ, that saves, without the Inward Nature, Virtue and Power; which
Inward Nature, Virtue and Power, dwelt and dwells in all Fullness in the Man
Christ Jesus, and of whose fullness we all receive, and Grace for Grace; and
all that believe in him, who has the fullness, they receive rich supplies out
of his Fullness daily of more Grace; which they that do not believe in him, do
not receive.

Seventhly, They charge me with Contradiction, because formerly I said, That
these Gentiles had the Gospel preached unto them, who were not under any
outward Administration of the Gospel. But they bring no place to prove where I
contradict this Assertion, as I do not at present contradict it, but own it in
a true sense; and the former Distinction will serve here, of express and
implicit, and I still grant, that the Gospel implicitly is Preached to all Men,
in some measure, after some sort (Samuel Fisher calls it a Gospel-Dram,
somewhere in his Rusticus ad Academicos, as I have read it in him) but few have
obeyed it, as so preached; but whoever did obey it, I question not, but they
were accepted. But here let it be Noted, that whereas they would divert the
Main Part and Branch of the Question which was and is betwixt them and me, of
the Necessity of our Faith in Christ crucified to our Salvation who are
professed Christians, wholly to the Case and State of the Gentiles, who have it
not outwardly Preached to them by the Ministry of Men, or Books, I have
sufficiently proved against them at our late Meeting at Turners-Hall, 11th. of
the 4th. Month, 1696. And in the printed Narrative, that they have affirmed,
That it is not necessary to our Salvation, to believe that Christ dyed for us,
etc. This Charge lies at their Door, which is the main Thing in Question. But
how the most Pious and Upright among the Gentiles were saved by Faith in Christ
Crucified, who had not Faith outwardly Preached, is neither the great or chief
Question, nor so proper for us to determine, seeing God has ways to have done
it, unknown to us, whose Ways are above our Ways, as the Heavens are above the
Earth; and it may be one of these Secret things that belong to God, and not to
us, till he please to reveal it.

Eighthly, page 30. They charge me with a Contradiction, for saying, He (Christ)
left not the other Nations destitute of the Main and Principal Thing, even the
Manifestation of the Light, etc. which would have given them the Knowledge of
God, etc But if they think, or would have others to think, that by the Main and
Principal Thing, I meant the Light within, compared with Christ without, in
whom all fullness of Light and Grace dwells, they both deceive themselves and
seek to deceive others; For by my following words, it is manifest, I call the
Light within the Main Thing, in Comparison with outward Things, as is plain
from my following words, cited by them, out of my Book, page 12. Universal
Grace, and not in Comparison with Christ without, in whom the Fullness of Light
dwells.

As for their suggestion of my holding the Revolution of Humane Souls, in page
31. and more particularly in page 3. of G. Whitehead's Postscript, who calls it
my Notion of Twelve Revolutions of Humane Souls, they have rendered themselves
so foolishly impertinent as well as malicious, thinking thereby to cast a great
Odium upon me, for holding such an odd Opinion, that I need say little or
nothing in answer to them, having so fully and plainly in the openness of my
Heart answered to that Charge, in my Printed Treatise, called, Truth and
Innocence Defended, in Answer to John Delavall, who was one of the first that
charged me with the same, and since that, no less than Four several Persons
have charged me with it in Print, whereby they have sufficiently manifested
both their Folly and Malice, besides the many Whisperings and Mutterings they
have used, and spread abroad against me, far and near on that account, their
Folly is sufficiently manifested, that not one of all my Accusers have brought
the least Authentic Evidence against me, to prove their Charge. And as I have
fully cleared my self in the case, in my Answer abovementioned, Printed at
Philadelphia some Years ago; so in my Appendix to the Book, called, The General
History of the Quakers, lately Printed at London, in this Year 1696. But let us
hear G. W. his Evidence, to prove his Charge against me: He says, That I
argued from these Scriptures, John 11. 9. Psalm. 90. 4. 2 Pet. 3. 8. and some
others, If I mistake not, says he, (Is this like Infallible George Whitehead?)
If he says I do, let him give us a plain State of his own Opinion herein. Now
would such an imperfect and lame Evidence pass current before any Judicatory,
The thing is so and so, if I mistake not. And as to the Manuscript he mentions
that I showed him; it is true, there was such a Manuscript, which I read both
to him and George Fox, wherein I did undertake to Answer to some Objections
against the Universal Principle; and there were some things in that Manuscript
modestly proposed, concerning the Revolutions of some Souls, but no ways as any
positive Conclusion, but simply as an Hypothesis, or Supposition; and if such a
Manuscript, or the Contents of it were such a Crime in G. K. to render me an
Apostate, and gone from Truth, why did not G. Whitehead before twelve Years
past, (for so long ago it is since that Manuscript was read to him) deal with
me, by giving me Gospel Order, since what I had writ in that Manuscript was so
offensive to him, after his telling me my Fault in private, and I not amending,
should he not have observed Christ's order to have taken with him one or two
more, Matthew. 18. 6. And if I did neglect to hear them, to tell it to the
Church, that they might have dealt with me. But he having done none of this
(only showing somewhat of his private dissatisfaction with the Hypothesis,
which he could not charge upon me as positive, as neither he did) Is not he
much more blameworthy? and has he not brought a great Reflection on himself,
and also on George Fox, that they did so Connive at my supposed great Error,
and so long, yea, and for all that time thereafter to own me as a Friend in
Truth, as they both did, and writ to me from England to America, calling me
dear George Keith (yea, G. Fox in his Letter, particularly desired me to visit
Friends in New England, and to travel in the Service of Truth in that Country;
as accordingly I did) until now, that G. Whitehead has risen up against me,
and raised up also many with him against me, for no other Cause, as is well
known, but for opposing the Vile Errors I found among them, both there in
America, and here in England. And whereas some in Print and George Whitehead in
writing has accused me of Hypocrisy, for having formerly called him dear
George Whitehead, and since that I have changed my thoughts concerning him; If
it be no Hypocrisy in him, to have formerly called me so, and yet now to have
other thoughts of me; why should he make it hypocrisy in me, to have done but
that to him, which he has done to me? Does not this prove him guilty of
Hypocrisy with a witness. But leaving G. Whitehead a while, let me return a
little to the Book.

Postscript, page 32. When they cannot by fair and direct means, prove their
charge against me, to render me odious, they essay to do it by unfair, that is
by their Consequences, not so much from my Words, but from the Words of
Scripture, as from my saying, in Truth Advanced, page 23. As it is observed by
some, neither Adam, nor any of his Posterity, living a complete Thousand Years,
which in Scripture signifies sometimes a Day, Psalm. 90. It may be said, he
lived not a whole Day: Now (say they) that this is a Principle of the
Revolutionists, is plain to all that know their Principles and that it is his
also, is manifest. But what a lame Evidence and Argument is this, let all
intelligent Persons judge: If they had said, It is the alone Principle of the
Revolutionists, and proved it so, they had argued somewhat to the purpose. Sure
I am Just in Martyr held it, for I have read it in him; Does it therefore
follow that he was a Revolutionist? If it does, then the Notion of the
Revolutions is not so great a Crime, as to render a Man an Apostate, or gone
from Truth: And not only Justin Martyr, but many others, Worthy, Ancient, and
late Christian Writers have held the same Principle, that a thousand Years in
Scripture sometimes signifies a Day, and particularly the renowned L. Neper of
Mareheston, in his Exposition on the Revelation. Surely these Men have greatly
missed their aim, who thinking to disgrace and reproach me with the
Revolutions, by allowing me so good company, Men highly esteemed for their
Christian Piety, have rather contrary to their Designs, greatly honored me;
but Malice is always Blind, and throws its Possessor into the Ditch, he makes
for another. And if the reckoning a Thousand Years for a Day, prove the
Revolutions, I shall not only have the abovenamed worthy Persons for my
Companions, but David, or (as others think Moses, see the Title of that Psalm)
and Peter, who both so reckoned Psalm 90. 4. compared with 2 Pet. 3. 8. But
that these Men may still give me more good Company, they will needs have Paul
to bear me company in the Notion of the Revolutions, and long after him Beza, a
Renowned Man among Prot stants, both for Piety and Learning: for thus they
argue from my Words, or rather the Words of Paul and Beza's Translation, page
42. Truth Adv. who are under the Law, and obey it, according to what their
Ability does reach, they are held there as in a Custody, or Place of Safety, as
the Man slayer in the City of Refuge, in the time of the Law, till the Faith
came to be revealed. This Word, (say they) till the Faith came to be revealed,
is a plain Indication of his Notion, though he dare not defend it; for they
dying in this City of Refuge (say they) when should the Faith be revealed to
them, except in some other Revolution. Now that they make Paul and Beza equally
alike guilty with me, in the case of the Revolutions, will be plain, if the
Words of Paul, Gal. 3. 22. 23. be but well considered. Let us look back a
little to the 19th. Verse, Wherefore then serves the Law, it wa^ added because
of Transgressions, till the Seed should come, to whom the^ Promise was made.
[This Seed was Christ, according to the Flesh, together with the Spiritual
Blessings of Life that accompanied him] Then Verse. 22. But the Scripture has
concluded all under Sin, (not only Jews, but Gentiles, who had no other Law,
but the Law within] that the promise by Faith of Jesus Christ might be given to
them that believe. But before Faith came, we were kept under the Law, [Note,
Beza does excellently well translate it, according to the Greek, sub legis
presidio in his Latin Transsation, i. e. Under the safeguard of the Law we were
kept] shut up unto the Faith which should afterward be revealed. Where a
manifest Allusion is made, or rather a real Exposition, by way of Antitype,
answering to that Old Testament-Type of the Manslayer, that was kept safe in
the Custody of the City of Refuge, though as a Prisoner, or confined, until he
heard of the Death of the High Priest. Now let the Intelligent Reader judge,
whether there be any real difference in Sense betwixt Paul's Words, Unto the
Faith which should afterward be revealed, and my Words, Till the Faith come to
be revealed; and if my Words infer the Revolutions, do not Paul's Words infer
them as much, or rather more? he using the Word afterward, which I use not.
Well, if they judge me guilty of the Revolutions, and condemn me to be an
Apostate, and gone from Truth on that account, while they give me so good
Company, as Moses, David, Peter and Paul, I need not fear great Reproach to
fall on me for the same. But in very deed, they said well, that I dare not
defend it, as I never did; but this not daring to defend it, did not proceed in
me, nor does from fear of being defamed; for if I were persuaded and assured of
it, as I am of the great Truths of the Christian Faith, I should not fear to
avouch it. But seeing I pretend to no such assurance in the case, as I never
did, nor ever was positive to conclude it so much as in my secret thoughts,
therefore I let it alone, neither justifying nor condemning what I have no
certain knowledge of. And but that it would be too tedious a digression, and
not so proper here I could easily show how weak their Arguments are against it,
as it is common to them as well as others, to use weak Arguments to defend
Truth, and oppose what they call Error. And let them make the worst of it they
can, suppose that twelve Years ago, most of which time since they have owned me
in Unity with them, I was in an Error in holding the Revolutions, will that
prove I hold them still? And seeing they judge me changed greatly in my
Principles of late Years, why may they not judge me also changed in that? Or
what ground have they to think I am not? If they say, because I have not
cleared my self of the Charge: I say, I have done it sufficiently several times
in Print, and often by Word of Mouth, That I hold it not either as any Article of
the Christian Faith, or as any positive Dogma in Philosophy; yet I dare not,
nor will not positively condemn it universally, until I see better and stronger
Arguments than they have as yet brought against it. And if it be so great and
dangerous an Error, why do they not refute it in Print, and Answer to all these
things brought in favor of it, as a probable Hypothesis in the 200 Queries,
which has been in Print upwards of 12 Years? For they have Scribled and
Printed many Books, on Matters far less material than this is. But since G.
Whitehead has Printed that which I committed to him as a Secrecy, without my
Consent, its well it was no such Matter as might have brought any real Infamy
on me, its too probable if he could have revealed any Secret that would have
taken away my Life, he would have done it. But I had no such Secret to impart
to him, or any, that I need be afraid or ashamed for their revealing it.

Page 33. In their Head on the Glorified Bodies of Christ and the Saints, they
are Guilty of such gross Perversions, as none but Men infatuated would be: They
infer, That I have very Carnal Conceptions of the Resurrection at present, like
those Sadduces, Matthew 22 29. And why? Because I say in Truth Adv. page 11. Paul
distinguishes between the Belly and the Body, saying, God will destroy the
Belly, but he does not say he will destroy the Body; for seeing after the
Resurrection of the Dead, Men shall need none of the Meats of this corruptible
World, nor shall they need a Belly to put them in, as Guts, and Draught, or any
gross parts as Men have now.

Let the Reader observe these men's Infatuation and Nonsense: Do these Words
prove that I have Carnal Conceptions of the Resurrection, like those Sadduces?
Did not the Sadduces altogether deny the Resurrection? But does my saying, that
after the Resurrection of the Dead, they shall need neither Belly, Guts, nor
Draught, nor any gross parts, prove that they shall have them? O astonishing
Blindness! And they are again guilty of the same Perversion, or rather
downright Forgery, in their page 34. ad finem, by their most false insinuating
against me, as if I did hold, That the Resurrection-Bodies of the Saints shall
have Belly, Guts and Draught: For (say they) had G. K. retained these
Sentiments (of Spiritual Bodies) when he wrote his bulky Book, styled Truth
Advanced, he needed not have told us of Belly, Guts, and Draught. But how did I
tell them, that Men after the Resurrection shall have them? By no means, but
that they should not have them, because they shall have no need of them; and
surely what they need not, they shall not have; as not to need, in
Scripture Phrase, is not to have, Rev. 21. 23. But that I remain in my Ancient
Faith of the Resurrection-Body as formerly, is clear from that very Book, cited
by them, to wit, That the Body that is raised shall be a Spiritual Body, not
gross material Flesh, but wonderfully changed in manner and condition, yet
retaining the same Substance, the Husk or drosly part excepted; see
particularly page 113, and 119. ad finem. And that this was my Faith thirty
Years ago, is evident from my Answer to the 30 Queries of the Bishop of
Aberdene abovementioned, and particularly noticed in the Collection of R.
Barclay's Books, called Truth Triumphant, page 2. In which Answer that was
extant thirty Years ago, I expressly say, in answer to the Bishop's Question,
which was, Shall that same Body in Substance which dies, be raised again at
the last Day? Answer, Yea, as far as a Natural Body, and Spiritual Body is the
same: It is sown a Natural Body, it is raised a Spiritual Body. Where it is
plain, I both believed and declared, it shall be the same Body in Substance
that dies, and shall be raised, though wonderfully changed in Condition and
Quality from Natural to Spiritual. And this Answer was given in the Year 1666.
being the third Year after I came among the Quakers, and which I gave, conform
to John Crooks Words in his Truths Principles, wherein I judged him (before
ever I saw him) to be of the same Mind and Faith with me, in that great Article
of the Christian Faith, as well as in others; and since that, I have spoke with
him, and had it from his own Mouth.

Page 35. As to their 5th Head, concerning Water Baptism and the Supper,
whereon they spend seven pages, reciting some Passages in my former Books, with
their Uncharitable Observations, and they are at great pains to show an
Inconsistency and Contradiction betwixt my former Books, and my late Book,
called Truth Advanced, in reference to Water Baptism, and the Supper, and that
from some few Queries I proposed at the end of that Book, only proposed by way
of Query, and not as Positive Conclusions; for I expressly distinguish them from
the Positive Conclusions going before, being each ten in number. And as to the
Ten Positions, I judge many or most called Quakers, of the more intelligent
sort will stand by them, and may well enough own them, without any
Inconsistency to their former Principles. And here I appeal to the Impartial
Readers, whither it be not great disingenuity in them, to charge these Queries
(simply proposed by me as Queries, but plainly distinguished from Positions)
upon me, as plain Positions when to some of their unsound Assertions expressed
as Queries, but whose plain Sense did import them to be Positions, they have
made that excuse, They did but Query, as lately at Turners-Hall some of G.
Whitehead's Advocates did plead in his behalf. Is this to do as they would be
done by? And how extremely Uncharitable they show themselves, not to me only,
but to all Christendom, in so severely accusing me, for my Charitable Title to
these Queries, saying -- tending to Love, Peace, and Unity among all the
Sincere Professors of the Lord Jesus Christ; who hold the Head, and build on
the true Foundation, and yet differ in some lesser matters, they so severely
tax me for this, as by their Censure it is evident, they think none such to be
found in all Christendom, but themselves, who hold the Head, and build on the
true Foundation: for thus they say, Which whosoever pleases to bestow the
reading on, will see whose Communion he labors to insinuate himself into next,
as holding the Head, and only differing in some lesser Matters. But unless they
be so Unchristianly uncharitable, (as they too evidently show they are) as to
judge none in Christendom differing from them in Profession, to hold the Head,
or are sincere Professors of the Lord Jesus Christ, but they only) Why should I
be blamed for owning my Christian Communion with them, in things that are not
simply unlawful? Ought I not to be of David's Mind, who said, I am a Companion
of all them that fear thee? etc.

But more particularly as to the Case of Water Baptism, and the Supper, as I
have freely declared of late Years, viva voce, so now as freely I publish it in
Print, That I am not ashamed to own my general Mistakes I have been under
concerning diverse Places of Scriptures, particularly relative to Water Baptism
and the Supper, as Matthew. 28. 19. and 1 Cor. 11. 26. and some other places of
Scripture, relative to some other matters, especially in the Misapplication of
some places, to prove certain Truths, which these places did not prove, (a
thing but too common to many Writers, and to none more than to some called
Quakers) for though every place of Scripture prove some Truth, yet every place
proves not that Truth in particular which some may bring for to prove it; and I
am so far from being ashamed to publish this Confession, that I have great
Peace and Joy in it; and I also declare, that I am justly ashamed, that I have
been so long deceived and biased with such weak Arguments, as both they called
Friends and I have used, (being too much influenced and biased by their
pretended authority) to persuade and draw away the Minds of People from the
true Sense of these places of Scripture. And the Arguments that we have mostly
used against these two things, are so weak, that they have the same force
against the Bible it self, and all Books and outward Testimonies, and outward
acts of Worship, and therefore are void in themselves; for seeing they have no
force against the latter, they have as little against the former. However I
continue in my faithful Testimony against the abuse of these things, and the
dead, empty and formal way that too many practice them; and except the Lord be
found to bless and accompany them who use them, with his Power and Spirit, they
are but as empty Shadows, and Shells: But who find the Lord to bless them with
his Presence, I judge them not; and in this I am not singular, for diverse of
good Note among the People called Quakers, even Preachers, have said the same,
or equivalent, as particularly John Crook, and Robert Barclay: And it can no
more be an evidence of my Apostasy, to correct my former Mistakes on these two
places of Scripture, Matthew. 28. 19. and 1 Cor. 11. 26 Which mistakes of mine,
were, That I judged the Apostles were not commanded to practice these things,
and did not practice them by Command, but by Permission, of which I am now
convinced of the contrary, more than it will prove John Crook an Apostate,
which they will not dare to say, who has owned the same, viz. 'That the
Apostles and Primitive Believers did do these things by Command. And J. N. in
his Love to the Lost, has said as much: Yea, both J. N. and Stephen Crisp,
allow the practice of the Supper at this Day to weak Believers, as is evident
from their Books in Print.

Page 43. They blame me for opposing it as an Error, That the Garden of
Paradise was some part of this visible Earth; and for my saying the Hebrew Word
translated to dress, signifies to Work in it, blaming my saying, It cannot be
well understood that it needed Dressing after the manner of our common Gardens.
Now whereas G. Whitehead has approved this Book, and boasts that I have fallen
into other Hands to deal with me, etc. Let us see how their Hands at present
agree: Ye see they blame me for opposing it as an Error, that the Garden of
Paradise was some part of this Visible Earth, and will needs have that it
needed Dressing, after the manner of our common Gardens. But in plain
Contradiction to this, G. Whitehead in his Printed Book, called, A Serious
Account, in 35 Reasons, etc. Gives this as one of his 35 Reasons, why the
People called Quakers have left the Men called Priests, page 23. Reas. 9. Also
the Priests Ignorance and Gross Darkness (says he) has appeared, who have
affirmed, That the forbidden Fruit, which the Serpent tempted Eve to eat of,
was an Apple: From which Dream of theirs the picture of a Snake, and an Apple
in its Mouth in a Tree, with the Image of a Man a Woman, are set up at the
beginning of Bibles, and in many other places; from which some have imagined
that the Serpent which beguiled Eve was a Visible Creature or Beast of the
Field, which for that time had power to speak, and to present an Apple to
deceive Eve withal; when as God said to Man and Woman before the Fall, Behold I
have given you every Herb, hearing Seed, which is upon the face of all the
Earth; and every Tree, in the which is the fruit of a Tree yielding seed, to
you it sha'l be for Meat, Genesis 1. 29. and the fruit of such a Tree that bears
seed, is an Apple; So that could not be the Forbidden Fruit And the Serpent was
that which tempted Man from the Simplicity of the Truth, and through subtilty
led him out from the Innocence and Life (wherein God had placed him) to feed
upon the fruit of the Tree of Knowledge, which was desirable to the Carnal, or
Woman's part, that was not content with the pure, innocent and simple Being
wherein God at first placed Man over the rest of the Creation. Now if the Trees
of the Garden were not visible, and particularly the Tree of the forbidden
Fruit, as G. W. says it was not, then to be sure the Garden by his judgment
was not visible, as an Apple, or any other visible Fruit growing on this
visible Earth; and seeing he gives this as a Reason, why he left the Men he
calls Priests: And it is now his own Faith, by the same Reason, all the
Quakers should leave him. In the next place, let us hear what G. Fox says in
that famous Book, called his Journal, page 17. ad finem. Now (says he) was, I
come up in Spirit through the Flaming Sword into the Paradise of God, all
things were new, etc. I appeal to all Intelligent Readers, whether G. F. did
mean by the Paradise or Garden, here any part of this Visible Earth? And if any
think, he meant it of any part of this visible Earth; What that part was?
unless they will say, it was that Mountain in Yorkshire, he mentions, where he
had his Vision; but surely that could not be Paradise, for the Barrenness of
it. A third Evidence for me and against these Men that have given out this
Book, is William Shown, a great Man among them, lately deceased, who to
persuade us of his Infallibility, has told us, Treatise of Thoughts, page 14.
That he cannot write contrary to Scripture, being in unity with them. And page
19, 20. plainly tells us, That the Man was not deceived with the Beauty of an
Apple; or some other outward Fruit, nor by the Talk or Persuasion of any
Creature, like our English Snakes, as vain Man in his carnal Mind imagins. So
we see his Censure of G. Whitehead and J. Pennington, that they are vain, who
have so imagined in their Carnal Minds How G. Whitehead will clear himself of
this and many other gross Self-contradictions, I leave to the Trial.

Page 36. Their Abuse and Perverson is manifest, in seeking to fix a
Contradiction on me for affirming in my Book, Help in time of Need, That the
Scriptures are not that Word, [to wit, that living essential Word] more than a
Map or Description of Rome or London, is Rome or London; or the Image of Caesar
is Caesar, or Bread and Wine is the Body and Blood of Christ. And for Querying,
Truth Advanced, Que. 5. Whether it may not be said, there is one Baptism, as
that there is one Land ca led America, though the Map or Figure of it is also
called America, even as there is but one Spiritual Baptism, with the Holy
Ghost, though the outward Baptism with Water is also called Baptism. Now beside
that this last is only a Query, but let it pass for a Position, let the
Intelligent judge what Contradiction is here, or least Inconsistency.
Contradictories can never be true, but both these are true. 1. The Scriptures
are not that Living and Essential Word which is Christ, this is a Truth that
all called Christians acknowledge: But that they may be called the Word, as a
Map of America is called America, I never denied; but have often said, and which
is agreeable to many Protestant Writers, who have used such a phrase, a Map or
Scheme of the Gospel. Nor is the Bread and Wine the Body and Blood of Christ,
though it be so called: Now if these Men deny this to be a Truth, they must
hold with Papists, that the Bread and Wine is really the Body and Blood of
Christ. 2. That though there is but one Spiritual Baptism, yet that the outward
Baptism with Water, is also called Baptism, is also true; for John's Baptism
with Water is called in Scripture the Baptism of John. And after they have thus
shown their own Folly and Ignorance, in a scoffing Spirit, they call me Rabby,
though its the known way of the Quakers not to call a Man Master, that is in
Hebrew Rabbi, Matthew. 23. 7, 8. yet to Indulge a Scoffing Humor, they will
transgress their Rule. Here this Rabbi (say they) has foiled himself sorely.
But let the Intelligent judge, whether they have not foiled themselves sorely
all along their abusive and scandalous Book, that [excepting these Sound
Passages and Testimonies, they have collected out of my Books, which greatly
make for me, and show that I am constant in my Principles, as to the Faith of
Christ] contains little else, than a heap of Falsities, and Perversions. But
that they say, He once boasted (in his Serious Appeal) page 29. That he has
the Gifts both of Sound Knowledge and Expression, with manifold other Mercies
bestowed on him: In this they falsely accuse me. for there is nothing in that
place, that either expresses or implies any boast in the least. For whereas my
Opponent had charged me with marveous Ignorance, Falsehood and Giddiness I said
[among other things] I doubt not but judicious and impartial Readers, who
compare his Books and mine, will have another judgment concerning me and
acknowledge to God's praise, the Gifts both of Sound Knowledge and Expression,
with his manifold other Mercies bestowed on m, for which I desire to Praise him
forever. But to make it look like a Boast, they leave out these last Words, and
also the foregoing Words; and its evident I used these Words only
Comparatively, and not Absolutely; for I never judged my self absolutely
Infallible, nor have been a Self-Praiser, as too many of them are; and I may
now say, let their Books who have appeared against me of late, as W. Penn G.
Whitehead, T. Ellwood, and others be compared with mine, and I doubt not but
judicious and impartial Readers will have another judgment concerning me, than
these my prejudiced Adversaries, and acknowledge to God's Praise, the Gifts of
sound Knowledge and Expression that God has given me, for which I desire
forever to Praise him; but this I understand only Comparatively, for I never
had such thoughts of my self, nor have, but that the Sentiments of my Mind, and
Expressions of my Mouth and Pen, in diverse things, may admit of Correction,
though as to the main, every true Christian as well as I, may say, We have a
Sound Knowledge and Faith. And whereas they pass another Scoff upon me, page
34. calling my Book, Truth Advanced, His bulky Book; which is but of small bulk
in comparison of the bulky Volumns of G. Whitehead, W Penn, and diverse others:
I am not doubtful to say, that Intelligent Readers who compare their great
bulky Books with that one small bulky Book of mine, will say, there is more
Sound matter of Doctrine in it, and the Contents of it are more for
Edification, than in their great bulky Books: Yet I have been so modest (a
thing I never found in any of them to acknowledge, that in some things I may
receive some Correction, and better information. See my Pref. Truth Adv. page
45.

Page 44. They quarrel my expounding Adam and Eve's hiding themselves among the
Trees of the Garden, to be in a Tree of the Garden, and that one Tree may be
well understood, to be the divine Mercy or Clemency.

I had said in my Book, Truth Adv. the Hebrew does bear it, in a Tree of the
Garden, page 25. But I must excuse their Ignorance in the Hebrew, that they
will not admit of this true Translation: And are they not Carnally Minded, to
think that Adam thought he could hide himself either among the Trees of an
outward Garden, or in any one Tree of it, so as God might not see him; this is
to think, at least, that Adam was an Anthropomorphit or Mugletonian, as having
such a gross Opinion, that God had bodily Eyes as a Man, and that an outward
Tree could hide him from God. And their Argument is as foolish, against my
saying, That Tree might be the Divine Mercy or Clemency, They say, The Divine
Mercy is in Christ Jesus, and if they were got there, when they heard the Voice
of the Lord God walking in the Garden, they should not have been afraid, for
they were already saefe. But does not the Scripture say, God's Mercies are over
all his Works? and does not the Clemency and Mercy of God extend to them that
are not yet in Christ? have they not that understanding, to distinguish betwixt
the Mercy of God in general to all Men, and his Mercy in special to Believers;
and seeing they will needs have this Place where Adam hid, some outward Trees
on this Earth, by the same Carnal Mind they must understand, that this walking
of God, was an outward and Bodily walking, and his Voice an outward and Bodily
Voice: and so they make not only Adam, but Moses who writ these Words, to be an
Anthropomorphit and Mugletonian, or rather the Father and Founder of the
Anthropomorphits and Mugletonians; for Mugleton himself draws his Arguments
from his Carnal Understanding of these Places, as these Men do.

Page 44 They also blame me, for saying, Adam and Eve's Nakedness was the fruit
of Transgression. And they argue against it, by Quering, What Sign or Token of
Impudence is it in People to endeavor to cover their Nakedness.

I Answer; Taking Nakedness Metaphorically, as I do in that place, Genesis 2. as
it is taken, Rev. 3. 17, 18. It is a sign of Impudence to endeavor to cover
their Nakedness: Have not some called Quakers gone naked through the Streets,
as a sign of the People's Nakedness: And what Nakedness was that? Is not Sin a
Nakedness, metaphorically taken? and when Men cover their Sins, with false and
sinful Excuses, it is a sign of their Impudence, as is too manifest in these
men, George Whitehead and John Pennington* And what Nakedness was that of the
Serpent, Genesis 3. 1. for as I said in Truth Adv. p. 25. the Hebrew Word is the
same in both places, viz. Genesis 2. 25. and 3. 1. Was it bodily Nakedness that he
wanted some outward Garment to cover it? And can we suppose, that God who
cloatheth every Lily of the Field, made Adam without a suitable Clothing; Did
he not Crown him with Glory and Honor? Psalm. 8. 5. And if his Head was not
naked how could his Body be naked? But it is not to be supposed, that Aadm's
Clothing before the Fall was any other than that Beauty and Glory that God had
put on him, both with respect to Soul and Body; but this gross Ignorance of
these Men here, touching Adam's state before the Fall, is like that of their
Ignorant Brother of the Ministry, Jacob Talner, who asserted in a late Meeting
at Turner's -Hall, before some hundreds That Adam before the Fall, had neither
Holiness nor Wisdom, nor Righteousness; and denied that either Spiritual or
Temporal Death was the effect of Adam's Fall; and used the very same Argument
against G. K s Ministry, that the Papists used against the People called
Quakers, and all Protestant Ministers, calling for Miracles, or
Church Authority. Another most foolish and ignorant Argument they bring against
my saying, God clothed them inwardly with the Righteousness of the Lamb. They
say, Did he cloth them with the Righteousness of the Lamb, and yet at the same
time debar them access to the Tree of Life? See Genesis 3 21, 22. What strange
Doctrine is this. But at the same time is their addition: If by the same time,
they mean the same Instant, or Hour: I say nay. But the time was not long
betwixt their Fall, and their Restoration, so far as they had access to Christ,
signified by the Tree of Life. What they call monstrous Doctrine, of a Body a
top of a Body, is none of mine, but their own invention, and foolish arguing.
Is a Mass, wherein there is a mixture of Gold and Dross, a Body a top of a
Body? They quarrel with my Translation, for rendering the Word Rib to be Side;
and though I bring several places of Scripture to prove it a true Translation,
they bring nothing to disprove it. Surely a Side of Adam bears more proportion
for Adam's Wife, than a Rib. Plato a Heathen, had a better understanding of
Man's state before the Fall, then these Men have, for all their high pretense
to high divine Illumination, and they who in their conceit are first in the
rank of Christians, are last in many respects for their extreme Ignorance,
beyond most Professors of Christianity,

I shall not need to Notice his idle and impertinent Clamor, against what he
calls my Arbitrary and Extrajudicial Proceedings, and new Court of
Judicatory, and as contrary to the intent of the Law, having sufficiently
answered it in any Preface to the Printed Narrative. But I cannot but observe
his great Hypocrisy and Impudence in his saying, He is not conscious to
himself of Error, either in reference to the Resurrection, Christ's
Satisfaction, or Sacrifice, or his visible coming again, in his glorified Body
without us, to raise the Dead at the Great Day of Judgment. Seeing I have
proved him Guilty in all these things, as manifestly as the Light at Noonday
in the Printed Narrative, and in that Meeting at Turners-Hall, 11th. 4th.
Month, 1696. to which I expect his Answer, before they Print any more. But
whereas he accuses me, That I have dealt very unfairly by him, in leaving out
[Blood and Bones] after the Words, Body of Flesh. I Answer, There was no
unfairness in it, seeing it was no designed Omission, but an oversight either
in the Print, or Transscribing; and the adding Blood and Bones to the Word
Flesh, does not in the least excuse his gross Error. For if Christ did rise
with the Substance of his Flesh, so did he with the Substanc of Blood and
Bones; for he could not eat and drink after his Resurrection, without Blood in
his Body: and if he has the Substance of his Flesh now in Heaven, though
wonderfully changed in Conditon from Animal to Spiritual, surely he has also
the Substance of his Blood [so much as remained in his Body] and also of his
Bones. But that he seems, page 6. to apply my words, the Husk, or Drossy part,
not the true Body, to Christ's Body; as if I held his Body had any husk or
dross in it, is unfair in him, for I hold no such thing, nor ever did.

He is very impertinent and weak in his complaining, That I gave them no Copy
of that he falsely calls the Particulars of my Indictment, or Charge before
Trial, or of the Books and Pages referred unto therein for a due preparation to
answer, alleging, I would not be so served or surprised. I sent them, and
particularly I sent him to his House, a printed Copy of the Advertisement,
wherein the Four Heads were particularly expressed, that I charged them with,
and which I have made good against them. G. W. that prosesseth so great skill
in Law, and has more Law than true Gospel in his Books, knows that it is not
the manner of Indictments, suppose my printed Advertisement had been such as it
was not, to put in the Evidence against the Delinquents or Criminals, and were
they armed with Truth and Righteousness, they needed not have complained of
want of due preparation (its odd and a new sort of Language for one called a
Quaker, to tell us of his not being prepared) the Scripture says (1 Pet. 3.
15.) Be ready always to give an Answer to every Man that asks you a Reason of
the Hope that is in you. When I was most falsely and uncharitably accused by
John Voughton, John Field, and Thomas Ellwood, at the Yearly Meeting, 1694. I
sought no Particulars of Quotations, and Pages referred unto, nor did any
intimate to me beforehand the particular Passages in my Books that they justly
excepted against, I entirely relied on the Assistance of God to help me, what
to answer to the many false Accusations and Perversions, that my Accusers used
against me. and I found him a present help to me. I had offered in Print before
to Tho. Elwood, that he would appoint Time and Place, and I would stand to his
Appointment: And I make the same Offer to you again, I freely allow you to
serve me, as I have served you; Give out your Advertisement in Print, appoint
your Time and Place, and let me have your Charge without your Proofs until we
meet, and then bring them forth against me; I premise (God permitting) to meet
you, provided the Meeting be free and open to all Sober Persons.

A POSTSCRIPT,
Containing an Earnest Expostulation with the most Pious and Learned, whether
in the Church of England, or among other Protestant Dissenters; and a serious
Invitation unto them, to employ some of their Time and Labor, by their Pious
and Learned Writings, to oppose and refute those vile Errors boldly avowed, and
publicly broached, in the late Printed Books of some Leading Men among a Gang
and sort of Quakers.

IT may seem strange, how it comes to pass, that while so many Pious and
Learned Men are judged to be found in this Nation, not only of the Church of
England, but among the Dissenters and Nonconformists, there are found so few
among them all, that do employ their Gifts to oppose such Vile Errors as are
boldly and avowedly promoted among a sort and Gang of the People called
Quakers, not only as bad as any Popery, but much worse than the worst of
Popery, in diverse respects; and I am confident if such Antichristian Errors and
Heresies were but the tenth part so avowedly broached in the City of Rome, or
any where else, in Popish Countries, these esteemed Watchmen among them, would
be more alarmed to oppose them by Word and Writing, than most among Protestants
do, which would seem to cast a great Reflection on the Protestant Churches, if
some able Men, and of good esteem among them, both for Piety and Sound
Knowledge, be not awakened to bestow some of their time and labor by their
Writings to oppose such Vile Errors; and such a Work would be so far from
unbecoming the ablest and most valuable Persons in this Nation, for Piety and
Learning, that it would turn much to their Honor and real Advantage, to bestir
themselves in this Work. It frequently happens, that Books are more valued,
and the Contents of them the more regarded and considered, and the more
universally read and recommended, that Persons of public Note and Fame, when
Pious and Learned are the Authors of them.

And whereas many of the chiefest Teachers and Leaders among the People called
Quakers, have formerly with great boldness, provoked such as have differed from
them to public Disputes, viva voce, and have often gloried over them, who
refused to answer them, that their Cause was bad, and that they had not Truth
on their side; and in these days there was no such Cry to be heard from them,
as now, That such public Disputes will offend Authority, and break the Civil
Peace; yea, how often have some of their Teachers assaulted the National
Ministers in the Face of their Congregations, and provoked them to dispute with
them; and on their refusal, have cried out against them to be Fugitives and
Hirelings when the said National Ministers way of Religion and Worship was
approved by Authority, and that of the People called Quakers was not: Would it
not therefore be a most equal, reasonable, and commendable Practice for any
Persons of true Piety and solid Learning, moved with the Zeal of God's Glory,
and love of Truth, and with a Holy Indignation against these Vile Errors that
are publicly avouched by some Leading Men among the Quakers, as appears both
by their former and later Printed Books, and with a tender Compassion to the
Souls of so many Thousands in this Nation, that are in danger to perish by the
Infection of these Errors, openly and publicly to call them forth to a public
Hearing, and to press them by earnest Persuasions, to retract and condemn those
vile and damnable Errors contained in their Books, or if they continue to
justify them, to refute them openly in the Face of their own Meetings, and in
the presence of them that do so much admire and follow them. And thus to serve
them, at they have served others; and with what Measure they have met to
others, with the sone to mete to them again. And it would be a Commendable and
Praiseworthy thing, for the Civil Authority, to encourage such a Practice
throughout the Nation, that Men of true Piety and solid Learning might be
allowed and Countenanced to Refute these Vile and Abominable Errors of these
chief Teachers and Leaders anong them called Quakers, in their Meeting Houses,
at the end of their Meetings, or at other fit times: Surely such a Practice as
this, as it is no ways inconsistent with the Civil Peace, and Liberty of
Conscience granted to Dissenting Protestants, (notwithstanding of the idle
Clamor of such Men, who have an Evil Conscience and a lad Cause) would be more
effectual to Preserve the True Protestant Christian Religion in these three
Nations, than all the severe ways in former times used against then, of Fines,
Imprisonments, etc. And though it is far from me to desire the least Sufferings
to come on these Men's Persons or Estates, yet if such a zeal were raised in
them bearing Authority in this Nation, to give order that all such Books of
them called Quakers, as can readily be found, (as great store of such there
are) that contan such Vile and Abominable Errors, to the dishonor of the
worthy Name of Christ and the Christian Religion, and the great danger of many
Souls, be diligently searched and examined by the most Pious and Judicious
Persons in the Nation, and after due search and Examination, be found guilty;
that by public Authority all such Books may be suppressed and witnessed
against. I may freely say, these Men should have no just Cause to Complain,
that their Books should be so dealt with, for they have done the like to Books
that have opposed their gross Errors, witness a Parcel of Books writ (by me)
some Four Years ago, that came to London from Pensilvania, opposing the gross
Errors of some called Quakers in that Province, which were designed to have
been Sold in single Books, and dispersed through City and Country for a general
Service: But the Quakers here at London gave large Money to the Man that had
them, that they might get them all into their Hands, on purpose to suppress
them; as accordingly they did, and hinder the Service of them; and these very
Books generally lie in these Men's Custody suppressed unto this very Day, and
some of them have burned, others have torn, and trod under Feet in open view,
Books that have opposed their vile Errors.

Advertisement.
WHereas there is lately Printed a Scandalous Libel against me, with this
Title, Master George Keith at Turners-Hall in Philpot -Lane, London, in 1696.
contradicting, etc. Signed only with two Letters, W. C. wherein he labors in
vain to prove my Inconsistency and Contradiction, betwixt my Book of Immediate
Revelation, and the late Exact Narrative; the Author of which Scandalous Libel,
seems to profess himself to be a Member of the Church of England, but his
Speech bewrays him to be a Counterfeit, and rather one of that Gang and sort
of Antichrist -Quakers, abovementioned, seeing he does so eagerly patronize
them, against the known Doctrine of the Church of England, as well as of all
true Christians. I give this public Intimation, that I desire this W. C. to
appear and meet me at any convenient time, at our Meeting Place at
Turners-Hall, which time I allow him to appoint, and give Notice of
beforehand; and I doubt not but by God's Assistance, to prove him guilty of
diverse Forgeries, and palpable Falsities, Perversions, and Wrestings of my
Sound Woros, contained in his said Scandalous Libel, together with his base
Reflections and False Surmises against me. And if he refuse this my fair
Proposal it will be manifest he is a Cowardly Spirit, and smiter in the dark,
and as well Unmanly as Unchristian, thus in a Clandestine way by palpable
Falsities and Perversions, to seek to deceive his unwary Readers, and to divert
me from a Business of greater Concern by his trifling. And I judge no Impartial
Observer of the state of this Controversy betwixt my open and professed
Adversaries, G. W. and W. P. and others of their party and me, will think me
obliged to Print Answers to such Clandestine Enemies, and Smiters in the dark,
or to regard their Nameless Libels, which might prove as much an Unprofitable
as an Endless Work.

I also desire the Friendly Reader to take notice, that the Corrections and
Explanations of some Passages contained in my former Books (which I have freely
declared, did need Correction in some things, and Explanation in others) are in
great part already given in this Treatise; and indeed the greatest Mistakes
that I find I have been under, were my misunderstanding these places of
Scripture, Matthew. 28. 19. and 1 Cor. 11. 26. and others the like places
relating to these outward Practices of Baptism and the Supper, which in the
foregoing Treatise I have freely acknowledged; and this may suffice at present
to silence the Clamor of such that cry out, I should first acknowledge my own
Errors, before I charge others with their Errors: For as I had done it in
general in the first place, so since I have done it in particular in great
part, and may yet more fully do it, as God shall be pleased to give me an
Opportunity. But I bless God I have no such Errors to retract or correct, as my
Adversaries have; for put all my Mistakes and Errors together in one Bundle,
and they will not weigh the one thousand part of the weight that one of these
four Errors do weigh, that I have proved my Adversaries guilty of, both in the
Exact Narrative, and in this foregoing Treatise, and in other late Treatises.
And were but my Adversaries so sincere and ingenuous to acknowledge either in
general, or in any particulars wherein they have been mistaken, and need to
correct their Sentiments, it would give great Satisfaction to many, as well as
to me. But this they will hardly do, nay, it is impossible they can do it, so
long as they seek to keep up in their credulous Followers, their esteem of
their Infallibility; and beside, to own that they are changed from their former
Sentiments, would be either to acknowledge themselves as great Apostates, as
they now charge me to be for some small change in me, touching lesser Matters,
or rather to clear me of that foul Charge of Apostasy they have so invidiously
cast upon me. And it is great dis-ingenuity in them, and Hypocrisy, to blame
me for saying, I did not know they held such Principles, till of late times;
for it is certain, that as these their Erroneous Principles were unknown to me,
which I call Antichristian and Sadducean; so what they call my Presbyterian
and Priestly Principles, were unknown to them; or if they did know them, they
were great Hypocrites if they judged them false, not to discover them before
now. For whereas now they commonly say I hold Priests and Professors
Principles; I know no such Priests and Professors Principles that I now hold,
but I am able to prove, I have held them ever since I came among the People
called Quakers, as touching all the Articles of Faith, commonly called the
simpliciter credenda; and wherein I am changed in my Judgment, as to the Sense
of these places of Scripture, relating to Baptism and the Supper, I can prove
my agreement with some of chiefest Note among the People called Quakers,
therefore for that I am no Apostate.

Some of the Chiefest of these False Contradictions, the foresaid Libeller has
unjustly charged upon me, that prove him extremely Ignorant or wickedly
Impudent.
Page 5. That an Unbelieving Jew is no Christian. That a Believing Jew in Moses
time was a Christian. That which makes one a true Christian, is the Spirit of
Christ, the anointing in him. Faith in Christ without us, wrought by the Spirit
of Christ in us, is universally necessary to make Men true Christians. Page 6.
The History, or Historical and express Knowledge and Faith of Christ crucified,
is not universally necessary to make Men true Christians. Some Knowledge and
Faith of Christ crucified (though not the Express and Historical, yet Implicit)
is universally necessary to make Men true Christians. The Manifestation of God
in the Flesh of Christ, and his Incarnation, is a greater Mystery than men's
Regeneration. Christ's inward Ministry and Teaching by the Spirit in our
Hearts, is more than his outward Ministering and Speaking was to them who
outwardly heard him and saw him. Page 7. Christ crucified in whom the Fullness,
dwells, is a greater Mystery than Christ in the Gentiles. Jesus Christ
revealed in Man is the Foundation of the true Church. Note, I did not say
Christ only within, etc. Page 8. Christ without us, as he is both God and Man,
the Emmanuel, as well as his inward Appearance in us, is the Object of Saving
Faith. The Internal Revelation of Christ is the formal Object of Faith Note His
Ignorance, in not understanding the distinction betwixt the material Object of
Faith, and the formal Object, also betwixt the objectum formale quod, and
objectum formale quo, makes him think the two abovementioned Passages to be
Contradictions; but for his Instruction, I send him to R. B. his Apology on
that Head, and his and my Answer to the Students of Aberdene. Page 11. The
wisdom described, Prove 8. is Christ the very fullness of God. Note, His
abominable Forgeries and Falsities, in saying, I give all these Names he
mentions p 11 to the Light within, which is a notorious Falsehood, as the Reader
will see, that will be at the pains to view the several pages he refers to; for
though some of these Names I give to the Light within, yet not all of them, but
some I give to Christ, as he is both God and Man; and I diverse times in that
same Book, and near to these places that he cites, call the Light within a
Measure of that Fullness of Life and Spirit, whose Fullness is in the Man Christ
without us. The Light in us is the Voice of Wisdom, the Path of Wisdom, a
Measure of that Fullness. See my Book, Immediate Revel. page 117. 243, 245.
Mary was the Mother of Christ, according to the Flesh, and in that respect
Christ is the Seed of the Woman in the literal sense of Genesis 3. 15. G. W.
guilty of: But this Libeller has proved no such thing on me; and he is most
shamefully deceitful, in saying, the Word away, we must justly drop on both
sides, I having accused G. W. that he has Allegorised away Christ's Births,
Burial, Resurrectionn, and proved him guilty of so doing in my Narrative, by
Allegorising away the Literal Sense of these places of Scripture, Isaiah 9. 6,
53. 9. and 1 Cor. 15. 8. Believers are the Mother of Christ in an Allegorical
Sense, not grounded on Gen 3. 15. but on Matthew. 49. 50. and Rev. 1^. 5. And in
this Allegorical Sense, Christ is formed in the Saints, Gal. 4. 19. and by his
Power in them, he (the Seed of the Woman) bruiseth the Serpent's Head.

London, the 24th. of the Month called July, 1696. G. K.

ERRATA.
Page 9. line 29. for servants read parents. p. 11. l. 17. after is, r. a part
in. p. 22. l. 50. r. ad finem. p. 26. l. 11. after books, r but think that I
did so distinguish. p. 29. l. 40. r. deisme. p. 34. last line, for general r
several. p. 35. l 47. r. Man and Woman.


