The Causeless Ground of Surmises, Jealousies and unjust Offenses removed, in a
full clearing of faithful Friends, and a sober vindication of my Innocence, and
the Friends concerned with me; in relation to the late Religious Differences
and Breaches among some of the People called QUAKERS in America.
I Tenderly entreat and desire that none apply, or construe any Words contained
in these following, Lines, as intended by me in way of Reflection, Blame or
Charge, against either the Body of Friends in general, or any particular
Meeting, or Meetings of Friends in particular, or against any singular,
faithful Friend or Friends whatsoever; being only a full Clearing of Faithful
Friends, and a sober Vindication of my Innocence, and Christian Testimony,
freely recommended to the tender Consciences of such as may read them.

I Find weighty Concern upon me to publish this following Declaration, to
silence and remove these evil Surmises, Jealousies and unjust Offenses taken
both against many faithful Friends in general, and Me in particular, upon the
Misconstructions, and Misapplications that some have made of some Passages in
my late Printed Books.

And in the first place I cannot but greatly blame them, who have reprinted
diverse of my late Books, with other Titles than the Titles first given them,
as An account of the Divisions among the Quakers in Pensilvania, A further
Account of the Divisions among the Quakers in Pensilvania: And to a small
Treatise of mine concerning the Resurrection, this new Title is given, The
Christian Quaker, or George Kieth 's eyes opened, as if the Name Christian
Quaker were peculiar to me and some few others called Quakers; or as if I had
been formerly Blind till of late days, both which I disown, for whatever I have
delivered in any of my late Printed Books, touching either the Resurrection of
the Dead, or any other Principles of Christian Doctrine; it has been my Faith
ever since I came among the people called Quakers, which is upwards of thirty
Years past, and it is my charitable sincere Persuasion, that the worthy Name of
Christian does truly belong to very many of that People as well as unto me,
having an experimental Proof, through intimate conversation, and frequent
verbal Communication with many of them, that they are sincere in the Christian
Faith, and whose Life and Conversation does Seal unto the sincerity of their
Christian Profession.

And whereas it has been said, that I have Printed several Books against the
people called Quakers, charging them with holding and cloaking more damnable
Heresies and Doctrines of Devils, than any Protestant Profession would
tolerate, I answer, a great search having been made by many into all my
Printed Books, it has not been found; and I say, it is not to be found, that
any where in all my Books I have charged the people called Quakers, either in
general, or in the plurality, with any such thing. And by a Manuscript given
forth by some of them that so charged me, it is made apparent, that I charged
but a few, and these few did not at most exceed thirteen when I did so charge
them. And that my innocence may appear in this Matter, I need but recite some
of the printed Passages in my late Books, where I am so far from charging the
People called Quakers in general, or the Body of them, that I purposely, and
with great care and industry have cleared them; see for this in the Book called
Some Reasons and Causes of the late Separation, page 17. l. 14. where I say,
That we remain in dear unity with the Body of our faithful Friends, all of
them, in all parts of the World, and p. 23. l. 13. of the same Book, We declare
we are one with our faithful Brethren, in all parts of the World, both in
Spirit, Doctrine and Practice of true Christianity: And we faithfully believe
that our Faith in all things does well agree to all our faithful Brethren
everywhere, and is the real, sound and upright Faith, as it has been received,
not only by ancient Christians in all Ages of the World, but also by the most
sound, ancient, and present Friends of Truth, called in scorn Quakers. Diverse
other Passages of the like nature might be cited out of my late Books, but
these may suffice at present, and it is greatly to be noticed, that
notwithstanding the objections and severe Accusations that some have made
against my late Books, as being hurtful to Truth and Friends of it, and giving
advantage and strength to Adversaries of Truth; Yet after great search into my
Books, and a strict Examination of them, by some that have so complained, there
is not any Line or Sentence in any of them, that they have made to appear to
contain any untruth or falsehood in them, either in matter of Doctrine or Fact:
And as I have told them, and answered diverse times, Generals prove nothing, it
is not enough to say my Books have done hurt, unless they can instance
particular Untruths or Falsehoods in them of Doctrine or matter of Fact, which
they have not done. I have also desired them who have so charged me, to
distinguish betwixt a proper and accidental Cause of an effect; as even some of
them have been put so to distinguish, with respect to some of their own
Writings, an evil use being made of them, by some ill minded men. I have
granted that some of my late Books might have been an improper and accidental
cause of Hurt and Grief to Friends, and of strengthening Adversaries, but
unless it can be proved that they are the proper and direct Cause of such
Effects, which has not been proved, it does not follow, that they are to be
blamed; for as they might have been the improper and accidental Cause of Grief
to some, so as can well be proved, they have been of great service to many, yea
to Hundreds of Friends, which they have acknowledge: and have signified their
great satisfaction and joy, that God had raised me up, and some others with me,
to appear in a zealous, plain and clear testimony to those great Truths of
Christianity, plainly asserted in my late Books, and in opposition to those
vile and gross Errors boldly asserted by some, that went under the same
outward denomination: And as this has had a Service to many sincere hearted
Friends of the same profession with us, who have blessed God, on our behalf,
for his giving us Zeal and Courage to appear in such a public Testimony to
these great Truths of Christ that had been as it were buried in silence by
some, and opposed by others; the reviving and raising up of which, God was
pleased to show me in a Heavenly Vision, and that he would make me an
Instrument thereof, with some others concerned, for which, and for all his
other great Mercies, I desire for ever to praise him, so it has had a great
Service to many of almost all other Professions who had been jealous of us, and
did frequently accuse us in general, as being unsound, touching these great
Truths of the Christian Doctrine and Faith, who are now in great measure
satisfied, and on that account their Love and Charity is the more extended
toward us, which I am well persuaded will, by the Blessing of God, be made a
means to many of them to bring them nearer to us, and to open their Hearts to
receive our Testimony, in what we have from God, to declare unto them for their
good: And many of all sorts that frequent our Meetings, of other Professions,
are well affected with our Testimony, to the inward appearance of God and
Christ, together with the holy Spirit in Men's hearts, wh^le they find us warm
and Zealous in our Testimony to the other great Doctrine of the Christian
Faith, held in common with them, as particularly, that the Faith of Christ, as
he dyed for our sins, and rose again, is necessary to our Christianity and
Salvation, that God does justify us and pardon our Sins for Christ's sake, who
dyed for us, through our Faith in him, that is, always, ^ccompanied with
sincere Repentance, reformation of Life and new obedien^^, that the Man Christ
Jesus, even the same that dyed for our Sins, rose again, and is ascended, and
is in Being in the true and perfect Nature of Man, having the true Soul and
Body of man, in Heaven, wonderfully Glorified and Exalted; our High Priest,
Mediator and Advocate with the Father, by and through whom God does give the
holy Spirit, and all Spiritual Blessings, and Influences of Grace, Peace, Life
and Light, and Wisdom, and Power, and every new supply and increase of the
same, to true Believers in him, as he is thus glorified and exalted; and by and
through whom God does Graciously accept us, and our Services, Worship, and
thanksgiving, and whole obedience; and by this Man Jesus Christ, God will raise
the Dead and Judge the World at the last Day: And that the deceased Saints have
not yet (generally) received the Resurrection of the Body, but wait for it at
Christ's last coming and appearance without us in his glorified Body, to Judge
the quick and the dead. The plain asserting of these, and other great Truths of
Christianity in my late Books, and that with Zeal and fervency of Spirit, in
the sincerity of my heart (in which I have had great Peace and Comfort, and
still have by the Spirit of God in my heart, notwithstanding the rash and
uncharitable Censures of some) have been, and yet will more and more be of
great Service, not only to many of the same Profession and Denomination with
us, but to many of other Professions in Christendom, for the clearing the
Truth, and faithful Friends of it, and for the removing these Jealousies and
Dissatisfactions that many of all other Professions have entertained against
us, occasioned either by the obscure and unwary Expressions of some of the same
Profession with us, or by the ignorance and unsoundness of some others, which
yet ought not to be charged upon the whole, nor upon any that are innocent, as
touching these things. But if any should go about to cover, cloak or excuse
these Errors, or any Guilty of them, and neglect to pass a due censure upon
them, after due notice given them, they are in so far chargeable with them. And
therefore, that I and others joined with me in our late Printed Testimonies,
might be clear of the Guilt of these Errors, and of such as did hold them, we
did find our selves weightily concerned to appear in such a public Testimony,
to the Honor of God and his dear Son Jesus Christ, and the peace of our
Consciences, and also to the clearing of faithful Friends every where, and for
the credit of our Profession, which was our sincere intention to remove all
offenses and Stumbling Blocks out of the way, as we have plainly declared in
our Printed Treatise, called Some Reasons and Causes of the late Separation,
page 24. line 24. where we say, to prevent Truth and faithful Friends being
defamed by Adversaries, we are weightily concerned in this Testimony. It was
therefore a great surprisal to us, and remains so to be, to find some so to
misconstrue our real and sincere intention, and so greatly to misunderstand us,
as to charge it upon us, that our late Printed Books have tended to give great
occasion of Offense, and stumbling to many. etc. opening the mouths of our
Adversaries, Professors and others, to reproach the Truth and Friends thereof.
But it is strange to us, that our faithful and zealous witnessing for the
Truth, and against Error, should be construed to be to the reproach of Truth
and Friends of it: does one contrary produce naturally another, or does Truth
produce Error? if nay, no more can our zealous Testimony to Truth, produce the
bringing reproach upon Truth and the Friends of it; or rather, is it not more
apparent, that to pass by in silence, without any censure or public Testimony,
gross and vile Errors (some of which not only no Protestant Profession would
tolerate, but even the Church of Rome would not tolerate, but publicly Judge
and Condemn) does bring a Reproach upon Truth and Friends thereof, and does
open the Mouths of Adversaries to reproach us, as being guilty of cloaking such
gross Errors amongst us, for if we are guilty of blame for exposing these men's
gross Errors (after due Gospel order used toward them, as has been
sufficiently proved out of our late Printed Books, and great endeavors used to
reclaim them, convince them, and better inform them, which they have rejected,
and notwithstanding their Scripture Confessions still persisted in their
Errors, as I have made appear out of their own Papers and Manuscripts, signed
with their own hands, since their pretended Scripture Confession,) what is the
Consequence that many will make from this, but that to pass by in silence,
cover and cloak such vile and gross Errors among us, and to lessen and
extenuate them, with the smooth names of Weakness, is esteemed a Virtue by us,
but let it be far from us, to give any such occasion of Argument against us.
But as we have impartially in Print as well as other ways, witnessed against
that Judged by us gross Errors in other Professions, not covering them with
the smooth name of Weakness, so that we may approve our selves endued with that
wisdom from above, that is without partiality and respect of Persons, let the
gross Errors, or any other defaults and Immoralities that any among us are
guilty of, be impartially witnessed against in Print or otherwise, after due
Gospel Order and Discipline has been exercised toward them, as is the present
case, for we Printed not a Line against them, until by Christ's established
Discipline in his Church professed by all Friends, they had made themselves to
us as Heathens and Publicans, by their rejecting and denying the sound and
seasonable Judgment of the Monthly Meeting, whereof they were Members, and
denying that Meeting to be a Meeting, tho it was the only Monthly Meeting that
then was in Philadelphia, and the only Representative of the Church in that
place at that time; and also until they had rejected all our Endeavors and
Proposals unto them, in order to Reconciliation. See a Copy of the said
Judgment in the Printed Treatise, called Some Reasons and Causes of the late
Separation, p. 10. And if that particular Meeting or Assembly that they belong
unto, pass no due censure against them, the Errors and defaults of the
particulars are justly imputed to the particular Meeting or Assembly they
belong unto, as we have largely proved both from Scripture and large Citations
out of R. Barclays Book called The Anarchy of the Ranters, etc. well approved
by Friends, as particularly page 32.33, 34, 48, 49, 51, 52* to which I refer.

Next as to the Separation (which some charge the blame of upon us, and lay at
my door, and them joined with me, in our zealous Christian Testimony for these
great Truths of Christianity, and against the opposite Errors) as setting up
Separate Meetings in Pensilvania, or any where else in America. It has not
been proved against us by any sufficient Evidence, nor can it be proved that
either we began it, or continued it; for the first Separate Meeting at
Philadelphia, we began it not, but they of the other side, as I have made to
appear before many Witnesses: And there was no other Separation or Separate
Meetings amongst us any where in Pensilvania, or elsewhere, until I, and they
concerned with me in our Christian Testimony were denied and disowned by them
of the other side, by a public Judgment given out against us, and me in
particular, signed by twenty eight Men, called Ministers and that without all
Conviction or Trial: And after this I and other Friends of the Ministry joined
with me, proffering to offer our Gift among them, were universally rejected,
and disowned by a Party in these parts, which many Friends seeing and noticing
did occasion them to own us and our Testimony, and thus the breach happened in
many Meetings. But had we made the Separation, we had been warranted so to do
both by Scripture and the express Doctrine of R.B. his Book above mentioned, in
page 33, 49, etc. to which I refer, and to the particular large Citations
quoted, and Observations thereupon in the Printed Treatise, called Some Reasons
and Causes of the late Separation. and it had been but reasonable and
convenient for such as have so positively blamed me and them concerned with me,
both for the Printing and the Separation to have answered our Reasons from
Scripture, and R. Barclays Book in our Vindication, and to have shown the
Invalidity of them, and also to have given us plain Reasons and Proofs from
Scripture, whereby to* convince us of Sin, and that we were not acted in Gods
Wisdom and Counsel therein, which they have not yet done, and until they so do,
we must crave leave to differ in our Judgment from them in this particular
Matter, though we desire to remain in Love and Charity toward them, and in
unity with the Faithful in the main every where; for they must convince us by
stronger and better Arguments, than to say, It is their clear and general
Sense. (But we do well know it is not the General Sense of Friends to blame us)
for we are well persuaded, that no Divine Sense ever will or can contradict, or
condemn what plain Scripture Precepts and Testimonies do justify, as in the
present Case we have, as also the Example of our ancient Friends, who have
Printed against lesser Errors in others, who differed from them, and have also
Separated from them, though thereby Papists have been gratified, and Gloried
over all Protestant Professions in general, and have strengthened themselves
thereby, as much as any have against us by our late Printed Books, and have
said, Lo how Heretics and Schismatics, since they have left the Mother Church
of Rome, have gone into endless Separations, and expose one another, and
contend against one another, seeking to destroy one another by their endless
Contentions, and thereby concluding, that neither their Printing against others
Errors, nor the Separation of one from another, or from the Church of Rome, is
of God, or is acted in the Wisdom and Consel of God, as some do so Argue
against us. But if they know how to answer the Papists Arguments in this Case
against themselves, they may know how to answer the like Arguments against us.

And as concerning Unity, we greatly value it, to wit, that Unity that is built
on Truth and Righteousness (without which Unity is but an empty name and an
Idol,) and when we are agreed in the main, so as to be one in the principal
things of Faith and Doctrine, and feel the Spirit of Life and Love in Christ
Jesus to knit our hearts together, A difference of Judgment in lesser Matters
should not break out Unity, and without breach of Unity we ought to bear and
receive the Word of Exhortation, or reproof that any have from the Spirit of
Truth to deliver unto us, without gainsaying, strife or alienation of mind.

As to the Charge of some concerning Falsehood of Doctrine, or innovation of
Doctrine brought in by me or others joined with me; they who have so charged
us, being mostly convinced of their rashness, proceeding from their own
Ignorance and mistakes, I shall not need to say any thing for our Vindication*
all the more judicious and understanding among us, both of the Ministry and
others, being generally satisfied with the Manner of Doctrine held forth by me,
either in my late Printed Books, or public Assemblies of the People called
Quakers. And as to the charge of my imposing a Faith upon my Brethren in
Pensilvania, or elsewhere, in my own Terms, I have sufficiently cleared my
Innocence in that respect, and none have yet sufficiently proved it against me,
nor ever will be able so to do. I know no Terms of mine, that I ever used in
Faith and Doctrine, I am no Inventor of any new Words, or Terms, being well
satisfied with the sound Words used in Scripture, and other Words and Terms
used (in the savory Life and Spirit of Christ in Harmony with the Holy
Scriptures,) by all sound Christians in all Ages in General and faithful
Friends of the same Profession with me in particular. And as for that called An
account of our sincere Faith, writ by me, and Printed at Philadelphia, by the
general consent and request of Friends joined with me, in these American parts;
received by the general consent of some Meetings of the People called Quakers
there, and by the general consent of that called our Yearly Meeting, held at
Burrlington 7 th of Month 7: 1692. I say, I never imposed that Form of
Confession, on any there, or elsewhere in the World, but am fully satisfied,
that if any here, or there see not fit to declare their Faith, in that form of
Words as there declared, they may exercise their Christian Liberty, to use any
other terms or words, that the Spirit of Truth furnishes them withal, or
gives them liberty to make use of out of the Holy Scriptures, for the Faith
may be one and the same received and confessed by many thousands, and yet not
the same Forms and Words used by them all, but all these Words and Forms will
have the same sense and signification, and be of the same importance, if the
Faith be one, and the Spirit be one in them all. But that some Principles and
Doctrines, and Points of Faith are necessary to be agreed upon, together with
the practices necessarily depending thereupon, and to be owned, professed and
declared by us, to be as it were, the Terms that draw us together, and the Bond
by which we become centred into one Body and Fellowship, and distinguished from
others, yet not this so the Bond, but that we have a more inward and invisible,
to wit, the Life of Righteousness is the express Doctrine and Testimony of R.
Barclay his Book above mentioned, page 48. And whether Friends do not make some
Principles and Doctrines of Faith, yea, and lesser matters, (called by some,
The form of Truth,) as plain Language and plain habit, refusing to Salute with
the Hat and Knee, and some Matters belonging to Church Discipline, as Men's and
Women's Meetings, Terms of their Communion, I appeal to all intelligent Friends.
And how it is that the greatest and most necessary Articles of the Christian
Faith, professed and owned by us, and declared to be necessary to be owned,
professed, and confessed by us, (as that Faith in the Man Christ as he dyed for
our Sins and rose again, is necessary to our Christianity, Regeneration,
Sanctification, Justification, and Eternal Salvation, as well as to believe the
Inward Appearance of God and Christ, by his Grace, Light, Life and Spirit in
our Hearts, and that therefore none is a true and perfect Christian in kind and
Nature, without this Faith, and that we must not place our whole Salvation upon
any Light, Gift or Grace within us, so as to say it is sufficient to Salvation,
without any thing else, as some have said, thereby to exclude the Man Christ
Jesus, in whom the fullness of Grace and Truth dwells, and of whose fullness we
receive, and Grace for Grace, even every new and fresh Supply and increase of
more Grace, with many other the greatest and most necessary Articles of the
Christian Faith,) must be called Imposition, and refused to be Terms of our
Communion, and yet far less Matters, (as these abovementioned, of Plain
Language, Habit, Salutation, etc. Men's and Women's Meetings) must be made such
Terms of Communion, so as to exclude them by such a severe Penalty, as not to
own them to be in Unity with us, and yet allow them to be in Unity with us,
that may differ from us in great and weighty Matters of the Christian Faith,
for ought we know, if they have but the Policy to conceal their unbelief, or if
they express it as some have done, to call it but a Weakness, whereas to deny
or oppose the other lesser things abovementioned, is not reckoned by many a
Weakness, but such a Matter as for which a Man is Worthy to be denied, for my
part, I see not the Consistency of these things, and so I Judge, nor do many
more. And whereas some have charged me with Imposition, for modestly presenting
a Paper, called Gospel Order and Discipline improved, etc. some years ago, to
the Yearly Meeting at Burlington in West Jersey, delivered only by way of
Proposition and Query, being read in the hearing of many Witnesses very lately)
I see not why any should call it an Imposition, which is only proposed by way
of Query, and was never urged or pressed by me at any time; but the Paper it
self is so fair and innocent, and so free of any thing that looks like
Imposition, that several Friends that have seen and heard it read, are well
affected with it, and do wish that Friends might find it convenient to practice
the things therein mentioned, they being generally agreeable to Scripture, and
well Warranted by either General or Particular Precepts of Scripture, and
therefore cannot be called Imposition. And whereas some through ignorance and
shortness of understanding, have blamed some of the ten Articles or Heads of
Doctrine, having this Title, some of our Principles to which if ye agree
(lately read before many Witnesses, but no ways contradicted) I have in
readiness to Print a Collection of Testimonies out of Friends Printed Books, to
prove every one of these ten Articles, (as well as I have elsewhere proved them
out of the Holy Scriptures) diverse of which have been so much opposed by some,
and questioned by others; and seeing there has been of late so much querying
about Principles by some. Is it not high time that by the general Consent,
Advice and approbation of the most judicious, wise and understanding of Friends
now alive, all the most necessary Principles and Doctrines of our Faith, both
common and peculiar, should be published and made known, for the great good,
Service and benefit of Men in General, as well as for the Good of Us and our
Posterity in particular; that in our universal and harmonious Testimony both
with the Scriptures, and with sound Christians in all Ages, and with one
another, the Posterity that is to come after us and our Children that are
growing up, may have the benefit thereof, and thereby have occasion to bless
God on our behalf. And also, that whatever weak and unsound or unjustifiable
Expressions, Sayings or Passages are to be found in any Books among us that
have happened through humane weakness, or inadvertency, that are offensive and
stumbling to other Professions, and hurtful to the Weak among our selves may be
Noted, Corrected and amended, without partiality and respect of Persons, and in
so doing we shall not only show our Love to Truth, but also to those Men, not
by cloaking, but by amending what is amiss in them, which is the best way of
covering them, (as God covers us when he amendeth and reformeth us) after the
worthy Example of them that have been the Successors of those called Fathers in
the Church, since the Apostles days, who having highly esteemed and loved them
for their Works sake, yet have corrected their Errors impartially, having in
so doing imitated the Example of Blessed Sem and Japhet, who taking a Garment
went backward and covered their Fathers Nakedness.

And as concerning the Advice given me by some to retract the bitter or severe
Language that I have given to some of my opposers, in some of the late Printed
Books, which advice they gave with telling me, and many others, that I have
confessed my human Imperfections and Passions: to this I answer, some who have
so advised me, should give me their good Example, by retracting their much more
bitter Language, and more hard and severe Names they have given to some who
have differed from them in less Matters. But why do they not give the same
advice to my Opposers, who have far exceeded me, as appears by their three
Judgments, and other their Papers and Manuscripts against me. As also, why do
they advise me to call in my Printed Books, and yet give them of the other side
no advice to call in their false Judgments given out against me, without all
Conviction, Hearing or Trial. However let them particularly tell me what the
hard Words are, that I have given to any that I cannot prove to be due unto
them, and I shall yield to their Advice. And as to my confessing my Humane
Imperfections, it is not well so to glory over me, and thereby to lessen my
Reputation and Christian Testimony among Friends, while they are silent wholly
of some of their own far greater Imperfections and passionate behavior used
toward me, before many Witnesses. I Judge it is more Christian, and a greater
Argument of a Man's grouth toward Perfection to achnowledge his sinful
Infirmities in the sight of God or men, and to be humbled under the sense of
them, than like the proud Pharisee to justify ones self, when he may be, and
is really guilty of greater Evils. But as I have again and again said unto
them, For my inward Defects and Infirmities I am only accountable unto God,
whose tender Mercies and Forgiveness for Christ's sake, I have humbly sought and
obtained, and have a firm Faith and Hope in due time to overcome them all, and
be made more than a Conqueror through him that has loved me, but to Men I am
only accountable for my Words and Deeds; and as I have not acknowleged unto any
(nor seen just cause so to do) so they have not proved me guilty of either
Words or Deeds, that the Truth condemns in relation to these Matters, whereof
some have accused me; and it is not well to misconstrue my sincere and Godly
Zeal, in my boldly and sharply reproving gross and vile Errors, as well as
wicked Practices, and to call it passion, sinful anger and wrath, but it is a
small thing for me to be Judged of Men, seeing he that Judges me is the Lord,
whose Peace, Love, Favor and Approbation, as to the main I enjoy, to my
unspeakable comfort, strength and supporting, who knows the Righteousness of
my Cause, and the sincerity of my heart, whatever humane Weaknesses have
attended me, which are greater and more in some that do so accuse me, though
they have neither the sincerity nor humility to acknowledge it.

And lastly as to that advise given me by so me to labor to make up the bleach
that is already made among them called Quakers in these American parts, I hope
I shall endeavor it, but it can never effectually be done but in Truths Way,
and on Truths Terms; and they who so advise me should advise and admonish them
of the other side, that they call in the many false Judgments given out
against me, from diverse Provinces in America, without all Hearing, Trial or
Conviction, and particularly that of the 28 false Judges from Pensilvania,
which is the rotten Basis and Foundation of all the rest, and which was given
out against me, without all Hearing, Conviction or Trial; and also they should
advise them to give out a Testimony, aknowleging their Error, first in giving
out a Proclamation against me, signed by S.J. and others of their Ministry and
Elders, which they caused to be cried against me, by the Common Crier at the
Market place in Philadelphia, without all Conviction or Trial, contrary to the
Fundamental Laws of all Nations, to the danger of my Life, as well as of my
Reputation, wherein they charge me with Words in a Printed Sheet called an
Appeal having a tendency to Sedition, and disturbance of the peace and
subversion of the (then) present Government in Pensilvania, (but I produced a
Certificate signed by the deputy Governor and Consul of Philadelphia, clearing
me of all these Charges, and amply declaring my Innocence, and Peaceable
Behavior toward the Government, and them in Authority at that time, which was
Solemnly read before many Witnesses of the People called Quakers, that gave
great content) and all this only for asserting, or rather Querying concerning
the Inconsistency of the late Practices of some of them, with the professed
Principles of the People called in scorn Quakers in these parts, as did
sufficiently appear, when solemnly read before many Witnesses, with my answer
to the said Proclamation. Secondly, in Fining Thomas Budd and me, each of us
Five Pounds a piece, for Reproving S.J. his pride, in our just Defense in
answer to his false defamatory Judgment against us, saying concerning him, that
He was too high and Imperious both in Friends Meetings and Wordly Courts, and
of His being an Ignorant, Presumptuous and Insolent Man, which last Words did
no wise respect his Magistracy, but his being a Minister, and by profession,
one called a Quaker, which I do declare we did Conscientiously, and have
sufficiently proved to be true, and is but too well known to be true among the
Neighborhood in that part of the World, and which he did most palpably
discover (when going out of the Court, where we were Fined for reproving his
Pride) in the high Street, to the observation and hearing of diverse honest
persons that have attested it, stretching out his hand, he said to some of our
Friends that were expostulating the case with him, If I draw forth my hand, I
will not pull it in again until I have quelled you all; as also for his
Committing to Prison two Friends of truth, for uttering or publishing the said
Printed Sheet, called An Appeal; now if this be not impartially censured and
judged, and that he, without giving any public Testimony of his Repentance,
and owning his Iniquity in these matters, be permitted or allowed to Preach and
Pray in Meetings, after solemn Complaint has been made against him in an
orderly way; what will the People in New England say, who have formerly
Persecuted our Friends there; and what will others say, that have fresh in
Memory the frequent Outcries and Complaints of Friends against Persecution in
former days; and how often have many Friends both in Print and otherwise reproved
the Pride, and Imperious behavior of Magistrates in former days, and yet we
find not, that the Magistrates have Persecuted any, by Fining or Imprisoning
them for so saying or Printing, nor do we find it in any Law, either in
England, or America; that it is Penal to call a Justice of Peace, High or
Imperious, especially when he is not in the exercise of his Office, and when
our Complaint has been made in an orderly way, against the said S.J. and the
Record of the Court produced and read in their hearing, and signed with the
Clarks own hand, the verity of which S.J. denied not; why should any put it off
with saying the Legality or Illegality of these Proceedings, according to Men,
it appears not proper for them to meddle with; but since they have greatly
meddled with the illegality, and arbitrary Proceedings of other Courts, against
the People called Quakers h^rein England, as Witness their many Printed Books,
and diverse Printed Trials to that effect; why will they not meddle with the
illegality of the Proceedings of that Court in Pensilvania; and particularly
S.J. being personally present before them when complained against. If it be
said, what they did, they did by a Law, as that Law has not been, nor can be
produced, so it will be said, that they in New England had a Law when they put
our Friends to Death, and the Jews said, they had a Law, when they put our
Blessed Savior to Death. But if they do not think it proper to meddle with the
illegality of these Proceedings as to Men why do they not at least meddle with
the illegality of it, as to God, and Truth and Righteousness, to remove the
Scandal and offense out of the Minds and Consciences of Many tender Friends
that are greatly wounded and scandalized to hear S.J. Preach and Pray in the
Meetings of the People called Quakers, and to be Countenanced and allowed so to
do, without his having given the least evidence of his Repentance for those
Evils; whereas for much lesser matters men have been disowned, and a Judgment
in Writ given out, and Recorded against them, and chiefly in order to make up
the Breach in America, and to prevent any hurt here, they ought to pass an
express Censure and Judgment upon all and every one of these gross and vile
Errors that I have proved diverse of them guilty of in Pensilvania, by
Manuscripts, and Papers signed with their own hands, and to procure the persons
guilty of these Errors, to Condemn them, otherwise not to own them as Friends
and Brethren. And whereas some say, wherein G. Keith apprehends himself injured
or aggreived by any particular persons, he ought to exercise a Spirit of
Forgiveness, etc. I Answer, And so I hope I do, toward them, and all Men who
have wronged me; yet does, or can my so doing clear S.J. (and his Brethren) who
have so apparently Injured me without his and their Repentance? And if this be
the Method and way to answer all the Complaints of Injured and Oppressed
Persons who cry and complain against the Injuries and Oppressions done to them,
and lay it before Meetings, appointed for the Exercise of Church Discipline,
who profess to hear and judge impartially in all cases of Complaint, to tell
them, they must exercise a Spirit of Forgiveness toward them, whom they
apprehend to have wronged them, without requiring the persons that have done
the wrong, to clear themselves by some Testimony of their Repentance; then why
is it, that in all other, or most cases of less Importance, they require them
that are Guilty, to Write Papers of Condemnation, that they may be Recorded for
the clearing the Truth; yea, what need of any Meetings for Discipline at all,
if this method and way take place, to tell them that are wronged, they must
exercise a Spirit of forgiveness toward such who have wronged them, without
either giving due Judgment against the Guilty, or requiring them to Judge
themselves for the same, or if they give any Judgment against them, yet in such
a manner, as without any public Testimony of their Repentance, to allow and
countenance them as Brethren, and in unity with them.

But why should any represent me as the provoker, and them as the provoked?
Where as the plain Contrary is true, that the Provocation began on their side,
and what I said of Samuel Jennings, or any of them, was in defense of my
Christian Testimony and Innocence.

FINIS.
POSTSCRIPT.
I Declare my real and sincere Intention to remain in unity with all faithful
friends and Brethren every where, and to continue to meet with them, and to
exercise my gift of Ministry among them, as God shall be pleased to enable me
in a Spirit of Love and Peace, so long as I can have the free Exercise of my
gift among them, without interruption or disturbance, as it is not my purpose,
nor has it been my way, nor I hope shall it be, to use any interruption or
disturbance toward any, but to behave my self orderly and peaceably toward
all; and I would have none to entertain Jealousies and evil thoughts concerning
me, as if I did design any breach among faithful friends, having so long
labored for 30 years past in the work of the Ministry, by preaching and
writing; and God having blessed my Labors with great success, in being an
Instrument to the bringing many into the blessed unity and fellowship with his
Spirit, and one with another in the same, and my Love remaining entire toward
many, and their Love so remaining toward me; why should any be jealous over
me, as if I did intend a breach among the faithful, or to scatter what I have
been endeavoring with many brethren, in much labor of mind and body, and
great sufferings, to gather; or to destroy what I have by the Grace and help of
God been building up: I earnestly request and beseech all faithful friends and
brethren every where, who have had any former true knowledge of me in the truth,
and more especially those who have received any spiritual profiting and
edification, and Consolation by my Ministry and Testimony, or Writings to have
Charity toward me, and keep in that Love that thinks no evil; for I have had
great, and still have so great an interest, room and place, in the Christian
Love and Esteem of many Friends and Brethren, by my Christian Testimony, and
innocent manner of Conversation, and spiritual Fellowship with them, in the
Life and Spirit of Truth, that I cannot be so easily separated from them, as
some may suggest, and I hope I never shall, whatever some may surmise to the
contrary; but as I neither intend, nor desire any breach among faithful
Friends, so I freely declare, I greatly desire and hope for a greater degree of
Reformation to take place among us in general, and for a greater growth and
increase in Grace, and in Knowledge and in Holiness, than is yet attained to by
us; and it is my belief, and hope with earnest expectations, and desires, and
frequent Prayer and Supplication unto God, that he will be pleased more and
more to refine us, to make us every way a more Pure People to himself, and to
separate and purge out from among us, the many Impurities and Imperfections
that cleave to many of us, as well as the many hyocrites, and otherwise
unqualified persons that are among us, that the many stumbling blocks and
offenses that are in the way of many, that hinder them from receiving our
Testimony, and joining with us in the same, may be removed, being firmly
persuaded in a sincere Faith, that the Lord is about to make a short and speedy
work in the Earth, even to refine all professions on Earth, and to gather out
of them all a pure and holy seed, and people to himself. Amen.

George Keith.

LONDON, Printed for R. Levis, 1694.


