AN ESSAY For the Discovery of Some NEW Geometrical Problems, (Judged by some
Learned Men, Impracticable) Concerning ANGULAR SECTIONS, Beginning with the
GEOMETRICAL TRISECTION of any Right Lined Angle, by Plain Geometry of Right
Lines and Arches of Circles,

With RVLE and COMPASS only, without all Conick Sections, and Cubick Aequations.

Whether the following Praxis, and apparent demonstration thereof does not only
make it Practicable, but easy to the Understanding of a Tiro, who but
understands a little in true Geometrical Learning.

Which lays a Foundation of a Plain Method how to Sect any Angle into any
other Number of Parts required, Even as 4. 6. 8. 10; or Uneven, as 5. 7. 9. 11.
etc. As also to divide a Circle into any number Even, or Uneven of equal parts.

All which have great Uses in the Improvement of the Mathematical Sciences,
some of which are here specified.

Proposed and Submitted to the Impartial Trial and Examination of the Right
Reason of such Artists, to whose Hands it may come.

By G. K.

London, Printed 1697. And to be Sold by the Author, at his House in
Pudding-Lane, at the Sign of he Golden-Ball, near the Monument; And by B.
Aylmer at the Three Pigeons over against the Royal Exchange.

Some New Geometrical Problems, etc.
ALthough the Trisection of a right lined Angle and also its Section into any
parts required, to a true Mathematical exactness, is denied to be practicable
by plain Geometry (of right Lines and Arches of Circles, with Rule and Compass
only, without all Conick Sections, and Algebra Equations) by some learned
Artists; yet others as learned are not so positive, but acknowledge the
Practice of it is not as yet discovered, among whom is the learned Is. Barrow,
who has writ thus, in Corol. ad. 9. 1. elem. Eucl.

Methodus vero regula and Circino angulos secandi in aequales quotcunque
hactenus Geometras latuit. and in Schol. ad 16. 4. Elem. Coeterum divisio
circumferentiae in parts datas etiamnum desideratur.

The Praxis of the Trisection of any given Angle.
Suppose the given Angle to be the Angle of 150 Degrees, made by the addition
of 90 d. the Quadrant, and 60 d. the of the Circle, whose exact Mathematical
quantity is known. And let that Angle be in the subsequent Figure, the Angle
BAC. whose Cord is BC, and the Arch answering to that Cord BFC.

1. Divide the Cord BC into 3 equal Parts, as BE=EE=EC by 10. 6. elem. Euclid.
and draw the 2 Perpendiculars OF. OF.

2. With the extent of of the Cord as EC measure on the Arch from C to G, and
draw the Line or Cord GC=EC.

3. With another Radius less than AC, viz. AK draw a second arch as KL, until
it cut the perpendicular OF, and let the Radius AK be so long, that the extent
of the Cord betwixt K and L be somewhat longer than EC, and with the same
extent EC measure on this second arch KR=EC.

4. From G to R draw a straight Line by post 1. 1. elem. and produce the same
by post 2. until it cut the Perpendiculars at I and O.

5. Draw the straight lines AI and AO, and extend them to H on both sides, so
that the one line shall be AIH, and the other AOH, which two Lines shall sect
the given angle BAC into three parts or angles, viz. BAH, HAH, HAC.

The Question, or Problem to be resolved is, whether these three angles are not
equal, and consequently that the angle BAC is trisected into equal angles.

The apparent demonstration that is here proposed to prove it, follows.

In order to the apparent following demonstration, by way of Preparation,

1. Draw the line OI, which shall be parallel to EE by 28. 1. elem. and extend
it on both sides, from I to N on the one side, and from O to N on the other,
making IN=ON=EC=OI.

2. With Radius IN, and ON, describe the arches on both sides NM until these
arches cut the lines AC and AB, so shall the lines or cords drawn betwixt I and
M and O and M, viz. IM and OM=EC.

3. Make the angle IMP=angle MIN by 23. 1. elem. and OMP=MON, and extend the
line MP, until it cut the line AI at P, and AO at P.

4. Draw the line OP parallel to IM, until it cut MP, whence the perfect
Rhombus OMPI shall be formed, having the opposite side; parallel and equal, for
PM by construction is parallel with OI, and OP with IM and that the Line OP
drawn parallel to IM can cut the Line PM no where but at P on the line AI is
proved thus. Suppose it cut the line PM any where else, than on the line AI on
either side, it should make PM either longer or shorter than its opposite side
(for the arch drawn by the radius MI, and cutting the line AI at P proves
MP=MI by def. 15. 1. elem.) as also OP should be longer or shorter than IM, (as
the like arch conceived to be drawn by radius OI, and cutting AI at P, proves
OI=OP by the same, def. 15. 1. elem.) but both these Consequences are absurd,
making the opposite sides of a Paralellogram to be unequal, contrary to 34. 1.
elem.

Because the Figure OPMI is proved to be a perfect Rhombus, having all the
sides equal, whereof the line PI is the diagonal, (it being proved that OP and
PM terminate on AI) therefore the angle OIP (=OIA)=PIM=(AIM) by 8. and 4. 1.
elem.

Lastly, these two Triangles OAI and IAM shall be according to the 4th. prop.
1. elem. and so shall OAI and OAM, for OI=IM as above proved, and AI is common
to both, and the Angle OIA=AIM as is above proved, therefore by 4. 1. elem.
AM=AO =AI, and consequently by 8. 1. the angles IAM=OAI=OAM, therefore the
given angle BAC is Geometrically trisected by the Lines AO and AI extended to
H. Q. E. D.

Here Note, let the Radius be ever so much changed betwixt M and C, taking it
at any extent from A, and let ever so many Concentrick Arches be drawn from the
Center A betwixt IM and GC, their Cords terminating on the straight Lines MC on
the one side, and IG on the other shall all be equal, one to another, and to
the Cord GC=^BC. as the demonstration above given proves, for the reason that
proves the Cords of any 3 Concentrick Arches, terminating on two straight
Lines to be equal within the limits MI and GC, being a Trapezia, proves any
other 3 to be equal within the same limits. But if we draw any Concentrick
Arches without the Trapezia IGCM, as with a less Radius, than AM, or with a
greater Radius, than AC, the Case is altered, and the equal Cords will not
terminate on the straight Line IG, but diviate or depart therefrom, as both
true Reason does prove, and even ocular inspection does show; for though the
Eye is not able to judge of a straight Line, yet when a Line is visibly
apparent to make an Angle with another Line, these two Lines cannot be a
straight Line. I call the Figure IMCG a Trapezia, for it is not any
Paralellogram, because the side IG, is not parallel to the side MC, but very
unparalel, which makes the side IG to be longer than the side MC, but this does
not hinder that all the Cords of the Concentrick Arches drawn betwixt IG and MC
are equal, for let them be ever so many within the limits IM and GC, they are
all equal, though their Arches are unequal being from a differing Radius. And
though the demonstration above given may seem sufficient to prove it, yet for a
further proof, let a Line be drawn, or conceived to be drawn (as in this Figure
it is only conceived) from I Parallel to AC, toward FC and beyond it, all the
extreme Points of the Cords of the Concentick Arches, above mentioned,
terminating on the straight line IG, do gradually still more and more depart
from that parallel toward the perpendicular IF within the aforesaid limits, IM
and GC, on the first Arch, which I call the primitive Arch; but if we draw any
Arch, without GC by a longer Radius than AC, or within IM by a shorter Radius
than AM, the Cords of those concentrick Arches, if equal, shall deviate from
the straight line IG, and come nearer to the Parallel above mentioned, but that
within the Trapezia above said IMCG, the equal Cords of all these Arches shall
terminate on the straight line IGI thus further prove. Draw, (or conceive as
drawn in this Figure) a straight Line from C to H parallel to IM, and take a
Cord of any of those Concentrick Arches = of the Cord BC=IM, I say it must
terminate on the line IG, and neither go without it, nor within it, otherwise
the same extent cutting the parallel Lines, viz. the one parallel to MC, the
other to IM, shall make the opposite sides of a Paralellogram unequal contrary
to 34. 1. elem. Eucl. as the due Cosideration of the Figure Will show, and the
part equal to the whole.

I have in the Example of Trisection used an obtuse Angle, because it is more
commodious and easy to be done by Manual Operation in an obtuse Angle than in
an Acute as Experience will show, though the demonstration is the same both in
the Obtuse and Acute. Nor is it any just exception, that some acute Angles
being small, can hardly be trisected by this Method; for when Angles are very
acute, they can hardly be bisected. But the proper Remedy for both is, when the
Angle is small, double or quadruple it, and then bisect or trisect it, as
occasion requires.

The Praxis of the Trisection has these following great Uses.

By the Trisection of the Angle of 120 degrees we have the true Mathematical
Cord of 40 degrees, and seeing it is demonstrated in 11. 4. elem. Euclid. to
find the Cord of of the Circle,=72 degrees the =36 by substracting 36d. from
40d. we have the true Cord of 4 degrees, that bisected gives the Cord of 2
degrees and that again bisected gives the Cord of I degree. Also 40 degrees
twice bisected gives 10 degrees, and that again bisected gives 5. and thus by
the Trisection of 120 or 60 degrees, and certain other bisections a line of
Cords truly Geometrical or Mathematical can be made by plain Geometry, without
all conick Sections or Algebra Aequations, and tedious Extractions of Roots,
and also without any Table of natural Sines, which never hitherto has been
taught (so far as I ever heard or read) in a plain method, by plain Geometry,
so as to be made intelligible to any Tiro or Young Artist; and yet such a
method is altogether necessary for the perfection of Geometry and Mathematical
Learning, that the way to trisect any Angle be known by plain Geometry, seeing
many things in plain Geometry require a true line of Cords, and a true line of
Cords cannot be found without the Trisection of certain Angles, or some other
Section than Bisection; and to refer a Tiro, or Young Scholar, to the conick
Sections, and tedious Algebra Aequations and Resolutions how to trisect an
Angle, or understand how to make a true Geometrical Line of Cords is altogether
immethodical, even as much or more as to referr him to some of the difficultest
Problems in Euclid's Elements to understand the demonstration of one of the
first Propositions in those Elements. Seeing therefore Geometry as it is one of
the best natural Sciences for certainty and use, so for good Method; and the
nature of good Method requires that in reaching we proceed to the more unknown
from and by the more known, therefore to presuppose the knowledge of conick
Sections to the knowledge of some necessary Problems in plain Geometry, is
greatly incongruous and an immethodical Hysteron Proteron, which this new
Praxis does Remedy.

2. By this Praxis of Trisection a Foundation of Method is Iaid to sect any
Angle given into any other equal parts whatsoever, even as 4. 6. 8. 10. or
uneven as 5. 7. 9. 11. etc. and an universal Cannon is formed, as by trisection
of the Cord of an Angle, that Angle is trisected, so by quinquisection of the
Cord of an Angle it is quinquisected, and the like of all others.

3. By the like method a Circle is divided into any number of equal parts even
or uneven.

4. And, by the like Method, the quantity of any Right-lined Angle can be found
in degrees, and odd Minutes, without any line of Cords by a line of equal parts
only, as the diagonal Scale of Inch, or half Inch or to a far greater exactness
than by a line of Cords.

5. By the same, a way is taught how to protract or project any Angle, whose
degrees and odd Minutes are given.

6. Having any one Angle given in any Triangle, and the Ratio of the 2 other
Angles, without any side given, to find the other 2 Angles, and truly to
protract them.

7. From a point given on any line given to raise an Isosceles Triangle, one of
whose sides being produced below that line given shall terminate on any Point,
given below the same, the which has special use to solve some new Problems in
Surveying, Geography, Architecture, Navigation.

8. As this method of Praxis saves the pains of finding out Trisection of an
Angle by a conick Section, and Algebra Aequations, by teaching the same more
easily by plain Geometry, so it is probable it may prove of great use, both in
conick Sections, Algebra Questions, and other abstruse Theorems to improve the
Mathematical Sciences.

9. How to find the natural Cord, Sine, Tangent, Secant of any Angle given in
degrees and Minutes, in true Lines, more exactly, than by any common Line of
Cords.

Here follows another Demonstration of the same Praxis of the Trisection. In
a Second Figure.
BY the method of the foregoing Praxis, let the points I and O be found, and
the lines AI and AO, which I say shall trisect the Angle NAK=BAC, Geometically
into three equal parts.

In order to the demonstration of which, extend the line AI to D on the arch
BFC. and AO to X.

Again, with the extent AI on the center I describe the circle ASHT. and with
the same Radius describe the arch KLON.

Again, draw IH parallel to AK, extending IH to the Circumference of the Circle
ASHT.

Again, draw AS parallel and equal to OI, which shall cut the circle at S,
because OI=AS cuts the arch KION, having the same Radius.

Again, from the point S on the circumference, draw the line SH parallel to AI,
which shall necessarily cut the line IH on the circumference at the point H,
because by construction IH is parallel to AK, and KH to AI, which makes the
Parallogram AKHI, whose opposite sides are equal, but if SH, and IH did meet any
where else than on the circumference, as either within, or without it, the
opposite sides of the Parallogram should not be equal contrary to 34. 1. Eucl.
elem.

Again, draw the line SI, and extend the line OI from I to K until it cut SH at
K, which shall form another Parallogram ASKI, which being divided by the
Diagonal line SI, shall give two equal Isosceies Triangles AIS(=OAI) ISK.

The Demonstration.
In the Isoceles triangle ISH (whose sides IS=IH by 15. def. 1. elem.) the
angle IHS=ISH by 5. 1. elem. and IHS=IAK by 8. 1. elem. therefore IAK=ISH. but
ISH=AIS=OAI being alternate Angles betwixt Parallels by 29. 1. elem. and
therefore lasty, OAI=IAK, and by the like method OAI is proved=OAN drawing the
like parallel Lines on the other side of the Triangle OAI, and therefore the
angle BAC is trisected by 3 equal angles NAO=OAI=IAK= BAX=XAD=DAC. Q. E. D.



The Praxis of the Section of a Right Lined Angle into Six equal parts.
BEcause of the affinity of the Figure of the Trisection with the Figure of the
Sextisection, I shall begin with the Sextisection, and then proceed to the
Quinquisection.

In the 3d figure, let the given angle be BAC, as above, whose Cord is BC, and
its arch BEFGC.

1. Divide the Cord BC into 6 equal parts, which Divisions are marked with
*****. and on the middle division draw the line ADI to the arch BEFGC.

2. With the extent of one of the Divisions, on the given arch measure from C
to F, and with the same extent from F to E, and from E to G, marking the points
E. F. G. and with the same extent measure from B to E, from E to F, and from F
to G marking the points EFG.

3. With a less Radius than AC as AK draw a second Arch as KLHLK. which Radius
must be so long that the extent of the 16th of the Cord thrice repeated, may
fall short of reaching the line ADI.

4. With the same extent on this 2d. arch, measure from AC, and from AB to K,
and from K to L, and from L to H, by a threefold repitition of the same extent.

5. From the point G on the first arch to the point H on the second arch, draw
a straight line, and produce it until it cut the line ADI at the point I.

6. With the Radius AI draw a 3d. concentrick Arch, betwixt the lines AB and
AC, I say the extent of the 16th part of the cord BC= MC, being 6 times
repeated shall cut the said 3d arch into six Equal parts to every one of which
straight lines drawn from the Center A, and produced to the outmost arch, shall
divide the given angle BAC into six equal parts orangles, marked with 1. 2. 3.
4. 5. 6.

In order to the demonstration of the Praxis of this Section of an angle into 6
equal parts, on the point 5, making it a center with Radius 5A describe the
circle AOPQRS.

2. From the point 5 draw the line 5R parallel to AC.

3. From R draw the line RT parallel to 5A

4. Draw the line AT from A to T

5. Draw the line T5, and draw 5V parallel to AT

The Demonstration.
In the triangle T5R being an Isosceles, the angle 5TR=5RT. by 5. 1. elem. and
5RT=(5R6) 5A6 therefore 5T6=5A6. Again 5 T6=(5TV) A5T, and A5T=5A4 by 34.1. and
therefore lastly 5 A4=5 AV. and as these 2 angles are proved equal by the like
reasoning, all the other angles can be proved equal by changing the center of
the Circle from 5 to 4, and from 4 to 3, and from 3 to 2, and from 2 to 1. This
demonstration having such affinity with the former of Trisection, and which can
as easily be demonstrated both ways, as that of Trisection, I shall not enlarge
upon it, for he who understands and assents to the verity of the former, by the
same evidence will assent to the later.

The Praxis of the Quinquisection.
1. ACcording to the former method, divide the cord of the given angle, BE into
5=parts.

2. On the middle part marked with CD, draw the lines CH and DH cutting the
cord at right angles and parallel one to another.

3. On the arch of the given angle BFG take the of the cord= CD and set it from
E to F, and from F to G, also do the like from B to F, and from F to G.

4. Draw a second arch, with a less radius as AK, so as the radius may be so
long that the extent of the of the cord twice taken on that second arch may not
reach to the perpendicular DH.

5. With the same extent twice taken, as from K to * from * to * measure on the
second arch to the second *.

6. From G to * draw a straight line, until it cut the perpendicular line DH at
H; lastly with the radius AH describe the third arch IHHI, and draw the lines
AH AH which shall make the angle HAH=BAE.

The Demonstration of this, or any other Section, being after the same method
with the former, as also the Praxis, it were superfluous to enlarge upon it, or
to add any new Problems, showing how to sect any angle into any other parts
given, as 7. 8. 9. 10. 11. etc. for he who understands by the foregoing Method
and Praxis to sect any angle into 3. 5. 6. as is above showed, will by the like
Method and Praxis be able to sect any angle into 7. 8. 9. 10. etc. equal parts,
and also to demonstrate the same.

Wherefore in the next place I shall proceed to show how a Semicircle may be
sected into any number of equal parts, even as 4. 6. 8. 10, etc. or uneven, as
5. 7. 9. 11.



The Praxis of a Section of a Semicircle into 9 equal parts.
LEt the Semicircle given be BRSC, whose diameter is BC. and whose center is A.

1. Divide the diameter BC into 9 equal parts.

2. From the center A set off AO and AN, making NO=1/9 of the diameter: and
draw the perpendiculars NR. OS.

3. With the extent NO measure from C to I, from 1 to 2, from 2 to three, from
3 to 4, marking the points 1. 2. 3. 4. and do the like from B to 1. 2. 3. 4.

4. With less radius as AP describe the Semicircle PP, and from P to 1 with the
same extent on that 2d. arch measure form P, P1= 1. 2=2. 3=3. 4. and do the
like from P on the other side. This lesser Radius must be so long, that the
extent=NO four times repeated do not reach the Perpendiculars.

5. From 4 to 4 draw a straight line, and produce it until it cut OS at 4. and
NR at 9.

6. Draw the 3d arch QQ with radius A 4, and draw the straight lines 4 A 4,
which shall make an angle=a 9th part of the semicircle. The demonstration
whereof is apparent from these precedent.

From the above delivered Praxis of the various Sections of angles, into any
equal given parts, I shall draw these few plain Corolaries.

1. Corol. Having in any right lined triangles, any one angle given, and the
ratio of the other 2 angles to find these 2 angles, in degrees and minutes. e.
g. let the given angle of a triangle be 110 degrees. and the ratio of the other two
angles be as 3 to 2. Q. What are the other 2 angles. Ans. Take the complement
of 110 to 180, which is 70, and sect it into 5 equal parts by the method above
delivered, =14, this multiplied by 3 gives 42, and by 2 gives 28, wherefore the
greater angle shall be 42, and the less 28. demonstrate 110+42+28 =180 and 3 2
42 28.

2. Cor. From a Point given on a Line given, to erect an Isosceles triangle,
one of whose sides produced shall come to a point given. (See the figure) let
the point given be A, the line given AF, the limited point given below the line
AF let the point be point D. the Praxis.

1. With radius AD describe the semicircle GFDE, so that GA shall cut AF at a
right angle, and AE the like.

2. Draw the line AD, and cut the angle EAD into 3=parts.

3. Make the angle GAB= of EAD, and from B to D draw the line BD, cutting the
line AF at C, the triangle ABC is an Isosceles, whose side BC is produced to D.
The demonstration is evident from the trisection, and it has singular uses in
Architecture, and affording new Problems in Geography and Navigation, which I
shall not at present enlarge upon, but leave to the ingenious Student to devise.

3. Corol. To measure any given angle in degrees and odd minutes, (if it have
any) by a line of equal parts without a line of cords. Let the given angle be
KAL (see the figure) with radius AL describe the quadrant LKL, and on that arch
take the extent of the cord KL, and set it on the other side from L to a point
on that arch.

Again, take the cord of that middle arch betwixt the point and K, an all these
3 cords join them together in a straight line, which make the cord of the
quadrant (by a longer radius) as BC, which is easily done Geometrically.

Then because in each Quadrant there are 5400 minutes, divide the line BC by the
Diagonal Scale into 5400 equal parts, and by the same Diagonal Scale measure on
the line BC the length of the cord of KL, and whatever number of parts it
gives, that is the just quantity of that angle in minutes, which divided by 60
gives the degrees, and if there be any Remainder, they are the odd minutes.

4. Corol. To project any angle without a line of cords, by a Diagonal Line of
equal parts, whose quantity is given in degrees and minutes. Let the given angle
to be projected, contain 36 degrees. and 1 min. reduce the degrees into minutes,
multiplying 36 by 60, the product is 2160, to which adding the odd minut, the
sum is 2161.

Praxis.
Take off from the cord of the quadrant BC 2161 from C to D. on the point D
erect the perpendicular ED, which extend to G, with the extent CD measure on
the arch of the quadrant, from C to H.

Again, draw another arch with a less radius as AM (so that the radius be so
long that the extent of DC reach not to EDG) and with that extent measure from
M to I on that 2d arch.

4. From H to I draw a straight line, and produce it until it cut the
perpendicular at K.

5. Draw the line AK, which shall give the angle required KAL=FAC. the
demonstration whereof is apparent from the foregoing Problems.

If any discreet Persons desire further satisfaction or Information about these
New Problems, if they please to call at my House, I shall be ready to endeavor
to satisfy them; and whereas, to me the Method and Demonstration of these
Matters, seem sufficiently evident, yet I have called the whole Praxis and
Method here delivered, but an Essay, until it be found approved by able
Artists, and have proposed it rather Problematically than Thetically, as is
usual in such cases.

G. Keith.

ADVERTISEMENT.
Geometry, Surveying, Navigation, Astronomy, Dyaling, and other Mathematical
Arts are taught by G. Keith at his House in Pudding Lane, near the
Monument-London.


