A Sermon Preached at the Parish Church OF St. Helen's, LONDON, MAY the 19th.
1700.

By GEORGE KEITH.

Being his Third Sermon after Ordination.

LONDON, Printed for J. Gwillim, against Crossby-Square in Bishopsgate-street,
1700.

Mr. KEITH's SERMON, Preached at St. HELEN's, LONDON, May the 19th. 1700.

A SERMON, Preached at the Parish Church of St. Helen's LONDON.
2 Cor. V. 14, 15. For the Love of Christ constrains us, because we thus
Judge, that if one Died for all, then were all Dead. And that he Died for all,
that they which Live, should not henceforth Live unto themselves, but unto him
who Died for them, and Rose again.


I Shall not take up much time to Explain the Words of the Text, they being
plain enough to ordinary intelligent Christians, only I intend to take notice
of the force of the Greek word that is here Translated Constrains, which is
(...)* that is variously Translated in the New Testament; and though I find no
fault with the Translation of it, as it is in the Text, yet there is more
understood by it, than what either the word Constrains, or any other one word
of the English Language can express. A Learned Author Translates it thus, The
Love of Christ, nos totos possidet, i. e. Possesses us whole; does as it were,
fill our Hearts up to the top, that there is no room left in them for the love
of Sin.

The same Greek word I find in St. Luke 8.45. where it is said, The multitude
Throng thee, and Press thee, and say thou, Who Touched me? Again, in St.
Luke 22.63. I find the same Greek word, where it is said;, The Men that held
Jesus, i. e. That kept him Prisoner, Mocked him, and Smote him. And in St. Luke
19.43. there is the same Greek word, where it is said, by our Savior, who
Prophesied concerning Jerusalem, and was accordingly fulfilled, For the days
shall come upon thee* that thine Enemies shall cast a Trench about thee, and
compass thee round, and keep thee in on every side.

And in St. Luke 4.38. where it is said. Simon' s Wives Mother was taken with a
great Fever.

And Lastly, to mention no more at present, Phil. 1.23. where St. Paul said, I
am in a strait betwixt, two, etc.

In all these places there* is the same word, or theme in the Greek, and in all
the several Significations of it; in the places mentioned, it may be understood
here, as importing the great influence that the Love of Christ has upon
sincere Believers, and then had upon St. Paul and his Brethren.

The love of Christ constrains us, i. e. It takes the whole possession of
our Souls, and leaves no room empty, to receive the love of Sin. The love of
Christ does so throng and press upon us, that there is not access for Satan, or
the World, to prevail against us.

The Love of Christ does hold us, and make us Prisoners, puts us in her
Chains, that we cannot get out, no more than a Man can get out of a strong
Prison; they are very Blessed, who by Experience witness such a State, that the
Love of Christ has such a powerful Influence, and such mighty Effects upon
them; thus to fill them; thus to throng and press in upon them; thus to
imprison them, and captivate them; such Captivity is the greatest and most
perfect Freedom; thus to Besiege and Compass them round, and keep them in on
every side, that they cannot easily get to their old Lovers, their formerly
beloved Lusts, that the Love of Christ, like a Celestial Fire, does take hold
of them (as a Fiery Fever takes hold of such as are afflicted with it) and
raises a vehement thirst in them after Holiness, and those Divine Consolations
which are to be found in Christ: Such sort of a Heavenly Burning, or Fever, had
the Spouse, Cant. 2.5. That is the Church, and every Faithful Soul that is very
inwardly and deeply touched and affected with the Love of Christ, when she
said, Stay me with Flaggons, comfort me with Apples, for I am sick of Love. As
when one is very Thirsty, it is not a little Drink that will quench, or satisfy
his Thirst; no less than Flaggons will do it. These, and the like things, are
the experiences of faithful, well-grown and advanced Christians; and they are
Blessed who find it so to be with them; and all should endeavor to attain to
such a State, and Growth.

There are Three things, which I shall (God willing, and assisting me)
particularly take notice of, unto you, from the Words.

First, The High and Excellent Privilege, and Dignity of a Christian, that he
is called unto; and his High Calling, as it is called, Phil. 3.15. And Holy
Calling, 2 Timothy 1.9. And Heavenly Calling, Heb. 3.1. The which is held forth in
the words of the Text. 1. Negatively, That we should not henceforth live unto
our selves. -- 2. Positively, and Affirmatively, But unto him who Dyed for us,
and Rose again.

Secondly, The Author, by whom we are, called, and made capable to attain unto
this high Dignity, viz. The Lord Jesus Christ, who Dyed, and Rose again, who is
both God and Man.

Thirdly, The Means by which he calls us, and enableth us to attain unto it.
1. By his Death and Resurrection. 2. By his Love, which was the moving and
impulsive Cause, that moved and constrained him to Dye for us: As his Love to
us ought to constrain us to Live to him, who Dyed for us, so his Love to us did
constrain him to that undertaking; as he said, Luke 12.50. I have ^ Baptism to
be Baptized with, and how am I straightened till it be accomplished! Here again is
the same Greek word, as is mentioned both in the Text, and in the other places
above recited; this was the Baptism of his Death and Sufferings, whereby he was
Baptized, as with his own Blood, that he might wash us with the same; as it is
said of him, That he has loved us, and washed us from our Sins in his own
Blood, Rev. 1.5. His being thus straightened until this his Baptism of Sufferings
should be accomplished, does signify his exceeding great desire, out of his
great love to us, to suffer Death for us; as also, when he said, Luke 22.15.
With desire I have desired to eat this Passover with you before I Suffer: For
then it was immediately after the Passover, that he was to Institute the Holy
Memorials of his Death and Passion, to wit, the Sacrament of the Lords Supper,
which was to continue until his last coming.

This Love of Christ, we are to consider it as a twofold Love, the one of his
Godhead, the other of his Manhood; for as Christ had, and still has, a
twofold Nature, distinct, but not divided; and a twofold Will, the one as
God, the other as Man; so he had, and still has, a twofold Love toward Men,
called, the Philanthropie, Tit. 3.4. i. e. His Man-Love, or his Love to Men,
not only as he was, and is God, but as he was, and is Man, yet one Christ, in
two distinct Natures, but undivided, and most Gloriously, and Inseparably
United for ever.

It was an Ancient Heresy, most justly Condemned above Twelve hundred Years
ago, by the Orthodox Fathers, That Christ had but one Will; from which they
were called Monothelites, i. e. such as did hold that Heresy, That Christ had
but one Will.

They were also called Eutychians, from Eutyches, the Author of it. They
conceited, that Christ's Manhood-Nature was transmuted, or melted into his
Godhead-Nature; and consequently, that the Will of his Manhood was transmuted,
or melted into the Will of his Godhead, which is an abominable Error; for the
Transmutation of any one Created Substance, into another Created Substance, is
impossible; then surely as impossible is it, that the Substance of Christ's
Manhood can be transmuted, or changed into his Godhead.

It is to be feared, that too many do not well Consider, nor well and duly
Meditate upon this twofold Love of Christ, so as to have their Thoughts fixed
upon it, that it may have the greater influence upon them. If ye rightly
understand, and consider, and deeply ponder this twofold Love of Christ, the
one where with he loves you as God, (and that love of his is one and the same
in nature with the Father's Love) and the other, wherewith he Loves you as Man,
as he is now Glorified in Heaven, in the true entire Glorified Nature of Man,
consisting of a Glorified Soul and Body, the same for Substance he had on
Earth, though wonderfully changed in Manner and Qualities, yet no ways changed in
his Love toward Man, but rather heightened and increased, that will have a
double force and influence upon you, much greater than if ye should consider
his Love singly, either as he is God, or as he is Man.

As they have not a right knowledge and belief of Christ, who only believe that
he is God, and do not believe that he is Man also, and will not allow that his
Manhood, having a created Soul and Body, is any part of him, whereof he
consists, as the entire Christ, and Savior: Nor have others a right
knowledge and belief of Christ, who only believe that he is Man, and not God
also, both such sorts of men have not the true Faith, but Err greatly,
concerning the Faith; and too many of both sorts are now in this Nation; so
they have not a right knowledge and belief of the Love of Christ, who do not
believe it in both respects above mentioned.

Thus then we are with true Faith, Love, and Devotion, to consider our Lord
Jesus Christ in his twofold Nature, as he is both God and Man; and as each
Nature acted its part in the work of our Redemption, and that it behoved so to
be, that the Author of our Eternal Salvation, should be both God and Man: Had
he not been Man, he could not have died for us, which the justice of Gods Law
required, that he who should be our Savior should dye for us, and undergo the
Curse that was due to us for our Sins, as accordingly he did; and had he not
been God, his Death and Sufferings had not been of that Merit and Value before
his Father, for our Reconciliation and Eternal Salvation.

But yet more particularly, I think to lay before you how, and after what
manner the Death and Sufferings of Christ, and also how, and after what manner
the Love of Christ, are the effectual means whereby he brings true Believers
to this high Dignity and Privilege, and High, and Holy, and Heavenly Calling,
not to live unto themselves, but unto Him who Died for them, and Rose again.
His Death and Resurrection are only expressed in the Text, but by a Synecdoche,
of the part put for the whole, his whole Active and Passive Obedience is
understood, from his Descent and Conception in the Virgins Womb, to his
Ascension, and Glorification in the Heavens: But his Death, being a principal
part, that is it; which here, and elsewhere, is most frequently mentioned in
Scripture.

First, The Death of our blessed Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, was an
effectual means to advance us to this high Dignity above mentioned, that it was
a perfect Atonement for us, wherein he made a full and plenary satisfaction,
to Divine Justice for our Sins; and did purchase and procure, by way of Merit,
our Reconciliation with God, Having made Peace through the Blood of his Cross,
and having Reconciled us in his Body of Flesh through Death, to present us
Holy, and Unblameable, and Vnreproveable in his sight, Col. 1.20, 21. And by the
Merit of his Death, having obtained the Remission and Pardon of our Sins, for
he dyed in our stead, the Just suffering for the Unjust; and being our Surety,
he paid our Debt, and became a Curse for us.

But this is not so to be understood, that any are actually Pardoned,
Justified, or Reconciled unto God, before that Faith, and Repentance, and a
real work of Conversion is wrought in them, but the Pardon was then purchased
for all, though it is not given unto any, until they be actually Converted, and
sincere Faith and Repentance is wrought in them.

Secondly, That the Merit of our Saviors Death, and shedding of his precious
Blood, did procure and purchase to us the Holy Spirit, with the saving and
sanctifying Graces thereof, by which he applies to us the virtue and efficacy
of the same for our Conversion, Regeneration, Justification, and Eternal
Salvation.

Now it was necessary that what Christ Did and Suffered for us, should be done
in Love, as accordingly it was done, in the highest Love, both to God, and also
to us. As it was this his exceeding great and high Love, that made it so
acceptable unto the Father, so it is the same that does most effectually work
upon our Hearts and Souls, to Love him, and to Live unto him who Died for us,
and Rose again.

That the Apostle adds to Christ's Dying, his Rising again, does Instruct us,
That his Resurection was as necessary as his Death: If Christ had Died, and had
not Rose again from the Dead, he could not have been our Savior; He was
delivered for our Offenses, and Rose again for our Justification. He behoved to
overcome Death, by rising from the Dead, and not only by his Rising, but by his
Ascending to the Father, he gave full evidence that what he Did and Suffered
for the Sons of Men, was fully accepted by his Father; and that he was a
Sacrifice of a sweet smell unto God.

But what ever Virtue, Merit, or Efficacy Christ's Death, and the Love which
moved him to dye for us, has before God, in order to procure or purchase our
Reconciliation with God, Pardon and Justification, and the Grace of
Sanctification, yet it has not that influence upon us, or any, to cause us to
live to him, and to God through him, but as his Death and Sufferings, and Love,
which moved him to dye for us, are made known to us.

In the time of our Ignorance of this great Mystery, how God so loved us, that
he gave his only Begotten for us; the Word to be made Flesh, and God manifest
in the flesh; and how Christ so loved us, that he gave himself for us; who, as
he was the Father's Gift, was also his own Gift to us; he gave himself for us,
to redeem us from all Iniquity: Before this Love, and the great effects of it,
upon our blessed Lord, were made known to us, we felt not that influence of it
upon our Hearts, to move us to live to him; but while we were ignorant of those
things, we lived to our selves, and to the World. Life and Immortality was to
be brought to the Light of our Knowledge; the Kindness and Love of God our
Savior, was first to appear to us, and come to our knowledge, before we could
be gained upon to Love him, and to Live to him, who Died for us, and Rose again.

But the next thing that is to be Enquired, and Resolved is, How this great
Mystery of Christ's Death, and his great Love, that moved him to lay down his
Life for us, is made known to us.

This Question I shall Answer in the following Particulars.

First, Christ's Death, and Love, wherewith he so Loved us, that he died for
us, is made known to us by the Doctrine of the Gospel, more especially as it is
Preached to us, and also as we Read, or hear it Read to us out of the Holy
Scriptures, Life and Immortality is brought to light by the Gospel, 2. Tim.
1.10. The Mystery which was hid in God, before the World began, came to be
gradually revealed; after Adam's fall, first more obscurely; and implicitly,
but afterward more clearly, and explicitly, by the Scriptures of the Old
Testament, Romans 16.26. And Lastly, most clearly and explicitly, by the whole
Scriptures, both of the Old and New Testaments, all which are given by Divine
Inspiration, and are able to make us Wise unto Salvation, through Faith in
Christ Jesus, 2 Timothy 3.15, 16. Both consisting in excellent Harmony; and the
New Testament being both a Fulfilling and Exposition of the Old Testament.

The great design of the Scriptures, both of the Old and New Testament, is to
set forth the great Love of God to Men, in giving his Son for their Salvation;
and also the great Love of Christ, who gave himself for the same: The way and
manner how it is accomplished, how this Love is the Love of the whole Trinity,
and how each Person is concerned in the work of our Salvation, jointly and
severally; and of the Duty that Men owe to God, for that great Love, and to
Christ, considered not as God only, but as God Incarnate, i. e. as both God and
Man, having two Natures, as above mentioned, but one Person, one entire Jesus
Christ our Savior.

This commends to us the Holy Scriptures, Incomparably above all Writings of
Men, above all Writings and Books of the greatest Natural and Moral
Philosophers, whether Greeks or Romans, or of whatever other Nations, whatever
true things they Taught or Writ, either from true Reason, or common
Illumination, assisting and strengthening their Reason, that might be, and were
useful to Mankind, yet they fell short of the discovery of this great Mystery,
That Christ so loved us, that he Died for us; and that he Died for us, that we
might not Live to our selves, but to him who died for us. Nothing but special
Revelation, such as he gave to his holy Prophets from time to time, from the of
the World, in the gradual discoveries of it, and which are Recorded in the holy
Scriptures of the Old and New Testament, could have given us this knowledge;
and for this cause it is, that we ought highly to value the Holy Scriptures, as
a special Treasure, of greater worth incomparably than all the Gold and Silver,
and Wealth and Riches of the whole World.

Secondly, The same is made known to us by the Holy Spirit's internal
Illumination and Inspiration, persuading us of the truth of the Holy
Scriptures, and of thhis great Mystery, That Christ so Loved us, that he Died
for us, that is so fully Recorded in the Scriptures, and also opening our
Understandings to understand it, and give us to see the great Riches, Glory,
and Beauty of the wonderful Love, Wisdom, Power, and Holiness, and other the
Glorious Attributes of God in the way of our Salvation, in all the various
steps of it. God has so appointed it, that by his Words as Outwardly delivered
by the Holy Prophets, by Christ, when he came in the Flesh, and by his Holy
Evangelists and Apostles, which are now on Record in the writings of the holy
Scriptures, and by his Holy Spirit Inwardly Enlightening and Inspiring us, we
should be both Taught, and Helped to Believe and Understand Savingly, the great
Mystery of our Salvation; according to Isaiah 59.21. The words which God gave
unto Christ, Christ has given them to the Apostles and Evangelists, and they
have faithfully Recorded them; and by these Records of the Holy Scripture, they
are given to us, while we daily hear them in Preaching and Reading, John 17.8,
20. And for this cause it is, that St. Paul calls the Gospel, The Power of God
to Salvation, to every one that Believes; For that the Power of the Spirit of
God accompanies the Doctrine of the Gospel, to whomsoever it is Preached, to
enable such who hear it, both to Believe and Understand it; Faith is thereby
offered unto them; and the Holy Spirit accompanying the Doctrine, offers his
help to All who hear it; tho All do not receive it, yet many do, and shall.
Christ stands at the door of your Hearts and knocks, as he said to them of
Laodicea, If any Man will hear my Voice, and open unto me, I will come in to
him; and will sup with him, and he with me. This calling and knocking of Christ
at the door of your Hearts, is both Outwardly by the Gospel, as outwardly
Preached, or Read; and Inwardly by his Spirit: The Word Outwardly delivered, is
as the Hammer, but the Spirit Inwardly accompanying, is the Hand that moves it.

If any should bring the strongest Arguments to prove the Scriptures to be
True, and of Divine Authority, suppose they should be as Demonstrative as any
Theorem in a natural Science, yet all this could produce no more than an Humane
Assent, or Faith, without the Spirit work together with the Word and Doctrine,
Inwardly to seal to the Truth of the Scripture, and work a Divine Faith in us
of the Truth of them. For true Saving Faith is the gift and work of Gods Spirit
and Power; It is by the Spirit's working, together with the written Word
Preached, or Read, that we know the things that are freely given us of God.

If any Object, What need of both? If we are Taught by the Word and Doctrine
Outwardly, as delivered in the Holy Scriptures, what need we to be Taught by
the Spirit Inwardly? Or if we be Taught by the Spirit Inwardly, what need we be
Taught by the Word and Doctrine Outwardly? Is not the Inward Teaching of the
Spirit, or Light within, sufficient, without any other thing? So some do Argue.

To this I Answer, It is one thing what God could, or can do; it is far another
thing what he is pleased to do. He could Teach us all without the written Word,
as well as he Taught the Apostles, before the Word was committed to Writing,
but he has not seen meet so to do; he has a regard to our Weakness: A
Schoolmaster that is able, can Teach his Scholars without Books, but they
cannot so well Learn without Books; therefore he Teaches them with, and by
Books, to condescend to their weak Capacity. When God Almighty spoke from
Heaven, by an Audible Voice to the People of Israel, they were so afraid, that
they prayed that God would not Speak to them, viz. immediately, they were not
able to bear it; but that God would speak to Moses, and by Moses to them; which
was granted. Many who pretend to the same Inspirations in Prophecy that the
Apostles had, should God Inspire them, as he did them, in that Extraordinary
and Miraculous way and manner as he did the Prophets of old, they should find,
they could not be able to bear it; Such Miraculous and Extraordinary
Inspirations that God gave to the Prophets, would be like new Wine in their old
Bottles, that would burst and break them asunder. What God has joined
together, we ought not to put asunder; he has so ordered it, most Wisely and
Graciously, that the Spirit of God, as the principal Agent, should Teach us,
and work all Saving Knowledge and Faith in us, by the Written Word Preached, or
Read, as his Instrument.

Thirdly, The Death of Christ, and his Love in Dying for us, is made known to
us by the Holy Spirit, his Inspiring and Imprinting into our Hearts a sense of
his Love; He sheds abroad his Love into our Hearts by the Holy Spirit that he
has given us; according to Romans 5.5. Christ in his Prayer to his Father, St.
John 17.26. Prayed in behalf of all that should Believe in him to the end of
the World, even for us, as well as for them who were then with him, That the
Love wherewith thou have Loved me, may be in them, and I in them. It ought
greatly to affect our Hearts, to consider and think, that he had us in his
Heart and Thoughts at that very time, when he prayed this Prayer to his Father;
and he still has us in his thoughts, who ever Lives to make Intercession for
us, that the Love wherewith the Father has Loved us may be in us, and he in
us: Not that the Love wherewith the Father Loved the Son could be (strictly and
properly speaking) contained in us, or comprehended by us; for that being an
infinite Love, how could, or can it be contained in us, who are poor finite
Creatures; or comprehended by us? How can a Finite thing contain that which is
Infinite? But the Holy Spirit, which is called in Scripture, The Spirit of
Love, works some Inward sense and impression of the Love of God and Christ,
in the Soul, whereby the Soul that has this Inward sense and impression may
know it.

Fourthly, The Love of Christ is made known to us, and has its Influence upon
us, by his Infusing and Inspiring into our Hearts and Souls (If we be true
Believers) a vigorous and active Principle of Love and Charity, that becomes in
us a Principle of a Holy and Virtuous Life, mightily inclining us to Love both
God and Christ, and also to Love our Neighbors, and all Men, even our very
Enemies, after the example of our Saviors Love. And we being acted by that
Principle of Love, we are thereby enabled, with great freedom and readiness,
with great joy and cheerfulness, to perform our respective Duties both to God
and Man. This Principle of Charity Infused, or Inspired into the Soul, is all
one with that which is called, The Grace of God in the Soul, the Grace of
Sanctification, that includes all the Virtues in it; and though the Operations be
various and manifold, yet they all proceed from one Root, Seed, and Principle.
This Principle of God's Grace some do not distinguish it from the Holy Ghost,
but hold it to be one and the same therewith; but this is a great Error, and
dangerous. The Holy Ghost is one and the same God with the Father, and with the
Son; the Grace of God, and the God of Grace, are distinct, as the Effect and
the Efficient, the Gift and the Giver; Grace is weaker or stronger, greater or
lesser, has its several measures; therefore it cannot be God himself, which is
an Infinite Being, and has neither Parts nor Passions, to whom nothing can be
added, and from whom nothing can be diminished. This Principle of Love that is
in Believers, inclining them to Love God and Christ; it is, so to speak, the
reflection, shadow, or image of the Love of God, and of Christ, toward us; As
when we look into a Looking-Glass, the Glass reflects the image, or shadow of
the Face back again upon the Beholder, the which image has a likeness to the
Original, but is as far short of it, as a shadow is to the Body, or Substance,
whose shadow it is: Or like the Echo, which is nothing but the reflection of
the Voice, or Word of the Speaker. Therefore it is that St. John said, We Love
him, because he has Loved us; our Love to him being the reflection of his Love
to us, and as it were, the Daughter; and his Love to us, as the Mother.

But to the end that his Love may work this powerful constraint upon us, it
must not only be known by us, but after it is known, we must (by the help of
the Holy Spirit which is given to us) frequently Meditate upon it, and upon the
Death of Christ, which his Love constrained him to undergo for us; that by
frequent Meditation thereof, we may have it fixed in our Hearts, and become as
a burning Fire in us, according to that in Psalm. 39.4. My Heart was hot within
me, while I was Musing (i. e. Meditating) the Fire Burned. This is also clear
from the words in the Text; The Love of Christ constrains us, because we thus
judge. *God Almighty is pleased to work upon our Hearts by his Gospel
Outwardly, and by his Spirit Inwardly, as we are Reasonable Creatures, enabling
us to form a sound and firm Judgment of things, both of Causes and Effects; and
to view and consider the excellent Order and Harmony of them, that the Wisdom
of God has appointed. Had God only infused a Spiritual and Supernatural
Principle of Grace into our Hearts, mightily inclining us to Love and Obey him,
without affording us certain Arguments and Reasons, Convincing and Persuading
our Reasonable Understandings why we should so do, on that supposition our Love
and Obedience had not been such a rational and free Love and Obedience, suiting
our rational Nature and Faculties, as now it is, he having given us most
excellent Arguments and Reasons why we should so do; the greatest of which are
taken from these words, which are contained in the Text, Because God so Loved
us, that he gave his Son for us unto Death; and Christ so Loved us, that he
gave himself to Die for us; therefore we ought to Love him, and Serve him, and
Live to him, who Died for us, and Rose again; and also to God the Father,
through him, and with him. Christ's Dying for us, is such an Argument why we
should be wholly his, and wholly Love him, and Live to him; That it is our Duty
so to do, not only in point of Gratitude, but in point of Justice; and this
both St. Paul and St. Peter did argue, with them to whom they writ, 1 Cor.
6.20. For ye are bought with a price, therefore glorify God in your Body and
in your Spirit, which are God's. And v. 19. Ye are not your own. And 1 Pet.
1.18. For as much as ye know ye were not Redeemed with Corruptible things, as
Silver and Gold, from your vain Conversation, received by Tradition from your
Fathers, but with the precious Blood of Christ, as of a Lamb without Blemish
and without Spot. And 1 Pet. 2.24. Who his own self bore our Sins in his own
Body, on the Tree, that we being Dead to Sin, should Live unto Righteousness,
by whose Strength ye are Healed.

The Love and Bounty of God in our Creation and Preservation, and all the
Blessings of this Life, are arguments very convincing and persuading, why we
should Serve and Glorify God; and the consideration of his Glorious Greatness,
and Power, in his Creating all things, and Upholding them, and of his most
Wise, and Just, and Powerful Providence, in the Government of the World,
obvious and apparent to the Eyes of all Mankind, ought greatly to move all Men
to Fear, and Reverence him, as well as to Love and Serve him, to their utmost
ability and knowledge. But the Light of the Gospel, wherewith God has been
pleased to enlighten us Christians, not only furnishes to us all these
Arguments, taken from the Power, Wisdom, Goodness, and Justice of God, and
other his Glorious Attributes that are clearly to be seen by his works of
Creation and Providence, obvious to Heathens, both more clearly and abundantly
out of the Holy Scriptures; but with greater Arguments than these, taken from
the great work of our Redemption, by Christ's Dying for us; etc. It moves us
to Love and Fear God, and Live to him, and to Christ who Died for us; and is
both his own, and the Fathers Gift unto us, most freely given, for our Eternal
Salvation.

But that the Argument taken from the Death of Christ may be the more effectual
to persuade us to Live to him who Died for us, let us Consider the excellent
way of the Apostles Arguing here in the Text, which he does from the Extent of
it* Because, said he, we thus judge, that if one Died for all, then were all
Dead. There are some that say, Christ Died not for all, but for some; to wit,
such only as shall be Converted, from the beginning of the World, to the end of
it; and by his Dying for all, they say, must be meant Genera Singulorum, but
not Singula Generum; i. e. all kinds of Men, Jews and Greeks, Scythians and
Barbarians, Noble and Ignoble, Bond and Free; but not all individuals of Men.
But this cannot be the meaning here, otherwise the Apostles Argument would not
be Convincing, Because Christ Died for All, therefore All were Dead; The word
All, in the Proposition, must have the same Signification with the word All in
the Conclusion, which is deduced from the Proposition, otherwise St. Paul's
Argument would not be Logical, and sufficient. Now the word All in the
Conclusion, signifies all Individuals of Mankind. All are Dead in Adam; Death
both Spiritual and Temporal is come upon all Adam's Posterity, by his Sin and
Fall, which the Apostle here proves from this, That Christ Died for All, for if
All had not been Dead in Sin and Transgression, as well as subject to Bodily
Death, Christ had not Died for All, for it was not needful that he should Die
for them, who were not Dead.

It is a good Rule in Divinity, That the words of Scripture ought to be
understood in their proper and full Signification and Extent, except some
necessary Reason can be given to the contrary, which cannot be given in this
case. But diverse strong Reasons can be given, why they should be understood as
above mentioned: By Christ's Dying for All, an offer is made unto All, to whom
the Gospel is Preached, to receive that high Dignity and Privilege to which
they are called, and without this Universal Offer to All, who have the Gospel
Preached unto them, a ground of Doubt would be laid, whether this Love extends
to us, if it does not extend to All; as it is said in the 17th Article of the
Church of England, We must receive Gods Promises in such wise as they be
generally set forth to us in Holy Scripture. But to teach, that Christ Died not
for All, is (I think) some hinderance for us to receive Gods Promises in such
wise as they be generally set forth in Holy Scripture.

It is true, all have not Salvation by Christ's Death, even to whom it is
Preached; but who have it not, it is their own fault. Nor are the Benefits of
Christ's Death equally extended to All. And though I believe, according to the
Holy Scripture, That there is a Predestination to Life, yet I no where find in
Scripture, that God by any absolute Decree has made Salvation impossible to
any part of Mankind; for such an absolute Decree were utterly inconsistent with
Christ's Dying for all Men. The Decrees of God, some are Absolute, and some are
Conditional: I mean Conditional, not Subjectively, but Objectively, i. e. Not
that there are two Wills or Decrees in God, the latter depending upon the
former Conditionally, but by one and the same Eternal Act of Gods Will and
Purpose, he has Decreed such an order of Causes and Effects; and of some
things to follow after others Conditionally, that will, or will not come to
pass, as the Conditions do, or do not go before; as Plowing and Sowing, before
Reaping; Repentance and Faith, before Remission of Sins, and Eternal Salvation.

Thus having shown, That the Death of Christ, as having Died for All, will be
the more effectual to work upon us, by the Grace of God, to move us to Live to
him who Died for us; That we believe he Died for all, and Consequently for us;
and that in Love to all. Let me a little yet further set forth his Love to us,
that it may have its Influence upon us: Greater Love has no man than this,
(said Christ) that a man lay down his Life for his Friends, John 15.13. But God
commended his Love to us, in giving his Son to Die for us, who were Enemies,
Romans 5.8, 9, 10. If you ask, How were we Enemies, when Christ Died, seeing we
were not Born many Years after that Christ Died? I Answer, We were Enemies as
in the Loins of our Forefathers; Not only up to them who were then Living, but
up to our Forefather Adam, as the Scripture testifies; That in Adam all are
Dead; and by the offense of One, Condemnation is come upon All.

The Love of Christ toward Men, exceeds all Examples; as David said of
Jonathan's Love, It exceeded the Love of Women. It may be said of Christ's Love
to us Men, Sinners and Enemies, it exceeds all Examples, either in Scripture
or elsewhere, as of that Grecian Zaleucus, King of the Locretians, who, both to
answer the Justice of the Law, and show his Love to his Son, parted with one of
his Eyes, that his Son might not lose both his Eyes, which was the Penalty that
the Law required for his Sons Crime of committing Adultry. As also that Example
of Codrus King of Athens, who being told by the Oracle, That if he was Killed
by the Peloponesians, who had Besieged Athens with a mihgty Army, the Athenians
should Overcome; and that by his Death they should Live: Whereupon he put off
his Royal Apparel, and put on the Habit of a Common Soldier, and rushed into
the Battle where it was hottest, and was Killed; after which, according to the
Oracle, the Athenians had the Victory, and the Enemy was Routed. This he did
out of Love to his Subjects, as what the other did was out of Love to his Son;
but what our Blessed Lord Did and Suffered, was out of Love to his Enemies; who
being in the form of a God, and counted it no Robbery to be Equal to God, but
made himself of no Reputation, and took upon him the form of a Servant, etc. He
did not (properly speaking) denude himself of his Glory, that being impossible,
being Essential to him as God, but he hid it within the Vail of his Flesh, and
gave up himself most willingly and freely to Suffer for us; such was his Love
to us, that constrained him thus to Die for us; and therefore his Love ought to
constrain us to Live not to our selves henceforth, after that his Love in Dying
for us is made known to us, but to him who Died and Rose again.

In the next place I intend, as Briefly as I can, to show you,

First, What it is not to Live to our Selves. And

Secondly, What it is to Live to him who Died for us, and Rose again, according
to the words of the Text, which I shall deliver in the following Particulars.

1. Not to Live to our selves, is, not to Live to any Beastly Lusts of
Uncleanness or Sensuality.

2. Not to gratify our Outward and Bodily Senses in things that are materially
Lawful, so as to make that gratification the end of our Living, which makes Men
no better than some more tame and innocent sort of Beasts; and yet how many do
so? As if they lived only to gratify their outward Senses, as their Sight, in
pleasing it with Visible Objects, as fine Houses, Orchards, and Gardens; their
Hearing, with delightful Music; their Taste, with delicious Meats and Drinks;
their Smelling, with odoriferous Perfumes and Smells; their Feeling, with Soft
Raiment, and soft Beds of Down, which are commonly the Entertainment of some
that are Rich in this World, as if they were born, and did live in the World
only to gratify the Sensual Life.

3. Not to make the highest gratifications of our Reasons in the highest
Knowledge of Natural things, our End and Felicity.

4. Not to make our highest Knowledge, even in Spiritual Things and Mysteries,
our Objective Happiness and Felicity; for that is to put our Knowledge in the
Place of God himself* and his Gifts in the room and place of the Giver, which
ought not to be, for it is a sort of Spiritual Idolatry: Our formal Happiness
does indeed partly consist in the knowledge of God, begun here, and perfected
hereafter, and in the fruition of him by Love and Joy; but we must not make
either of them the Object of our Happiness, but God alone, in, and through, and
together with Jesus Christ, and the Holy Spirit, our supreme and highest Good.

5. Not to make our own Will and Pleasure our End and Aim, but wholly to submit
our Wills to the Will of God, in all things; and wholly to trust in him.

Secondly, To Live to him, who Died for us, is

1. To Live a Life of Love to God and Christ, and from that Love to Serve and
Obey him, in all his Commandments, with all sincere Resolutions and Endeavors
to keep and observe them all our days, by our continual endeavoring to attain
more and more to a Conformity to him, imitating his Virtues and Perfections
daily more and more, like a Scholar, that every day Writing after his Copy,
Writes better and better, though still he comes not up to the perfection of his
Copy.

2. To Live to God and Christ, is to live a life of Communion and Fellowship
with God and Christ, and in a true and real Enjoyment of them, as St. John
said, The Life was manifested, and we have seen it, and declared it unto you,
(which Life is Christ, both God and Man) that ye may have fellowship with us;
and truly our fellowship is with the Father, and the Son. The which Fellowship
and Enjoyment is actually begun here, and tobe perfected hereafter, in the
World to come.

The Fellowship that the Faithful have with God and Christ here in the Mortal
Body, and the Enjoyment they have of God and Christ, though it is not either in
that immediate, or clear and perfect manner as it shall be in the World to
come, yet it is a true and real Fellowship and Communion with God and Christ,
and also with the Holy Spirit; and a real Divine Enjoyment, affording an
incomparable inward joy, sweetness, and satisfaction to such who really have
it. Nor ought the False and Counterfeit Pretenses of too many, who boast they
have it, and yet their Vile Errors and Unchristian Practices sufficiently prove
they have it not, make any to disbelieve such a thing, that is so great a
Blessing and Privilege to the Faithful.

The which Divine Enjoyment, and Communion with God, and Christ, and the Holy
Spirit, is by an Inhabitation of the Holy and Blessed Trinity in the Faithful,
as God has Promised, I will Dwell in them, and Walk in them: And by real
inward operations and communications of Grace, Virtue, and quickening and
refreshing Influences, generally given and imparted to the Faithful, in the
frequent and diligent use of the ordinary means of Salvation, as the Word and
Sacraments, Meditation, Prayer; and in the daily and continual course of our
Obedience to all Gods Commands; by these means, as by Conduits and Pipes, the
Living Waters, i. e. Life and Virtue, flow into the Souls of the Faithful from
Christ, and from God in Christ, in whom the Fullness dwells, and of whose
Fullness we all receive, and Grace for Grace.

The Beatifical Vision, i. e. To see God in the same Immediateness, and
Clearness, and Perfection, as the Glorious Saints see him in Heaven, is
reserved for the Life to come; as God said to Moses, Thou can not see my Face
and Live, our State of Mortality is not capable of it.

The way and manner of Gods showing himself to the Faithful, in this state of
Mortality, is as Cant. 2.9. He looks forth at the Windows, showing himself
through the Lattice: [That is] all the usual and ordinary means of Grace
abovementioned; we see here but darkly, as in a Glass; for we walk by Faith,
and not by Sight; i. e. Such a clear sight as we shall have in the Future State.

The Prophetical Vision, even of Moses, or any others, did not amount to the
Beatifical Vision; but was presented by some Mediums, sometimes External, and
sometimes Internal, to their outward, and inward Senses.

The which Communications of the Spirit, being generally received in the use of
the Word and Sacraments, and other Holy Duties; as Wine, or any other Cordial,
is received into the Mouth by some Vessel, yet the Vessel goes not into the
Stomach to nourish the Body, but the Wine, or Cordial; so it is the Life and
Virtue that is conveyed by the outward Word and Sacraments, that Nourishes and
Feeds, Refreshes and Strengthens the Soul; and is like the Bread and Water
that the Prophet Elijah received by the Angel, in the strength whereof he was
to go Forty Days. The like inward Comfort and Strength the Reverend Hearers of
the Word, and Worthy (i. e. duly Qualified) Receivers of the Lords Supper, do
experience, which will abide with them for many days, and for ever.

I do therefore recommend to you, the Diligent and Frequent Use of all the
means of Grace, with earnest Prayer to Almighty God, for his Grace, and help of
his Spirit to make them effectual. Hear the Word with Reverence, receive it
with Meekness and Love; Meditate upon it, and after ye have heard it in
Public, recollect, and call it to remembrance in Private. And ye that are
Masters of Families, call your Children and Servants to account what they
remember of it, that it may be more deeply engrafted and rooted in all your
Hearts, and bring forth fruit in you. And thus going on, and walking in a
continual course of Holy Duties, and Holy Living, we shall go from Strength to
Strength, until we appear before God in Zion, viz. the Heavenly Zion above,
where God is to be seen Face to Face.

And may we all feel the Love of Christ, more and more to Constrain us to Love
him, and Live to him, who Died for us, until we come to be with him, where he
is, to behold his Glory, and have a full Enjoyment of him. Which God grant, for
Christ's sake. Amen.

THE END.
Advertisement.
THIS is to give Notice, That a Printed Sheet, called, Mr. George Keith' s
Account of a National Church, etc. Humbly Presented to the Bishop of London,
Published by Tacy Soul, the Quaker Printer, which she has delivered to the
Hawkers, (as one of them told me) to cry about the Streets, is a Quaker-Cheat,
Writ and Published altogether without my Consent or Knowledge; and the whole
containing some unsound, imperfect, and lame Quotations out of my former Books,
wrote by me when I was among them, and in these, and some other things Deceived
by them, is long since Retracted and Disowned by me, in a Book published,
called, George Keith's Retractations; The which being Retracted by me, does no
more affect me, but them who have Published them against me, to Defame me for
my Retracting them. However this their Cheat and Abuse has this Service, That
thereby they declare, in the face of the Nation, that they are still chargeable
with these Errors, and that Uncharitableness, which, I thank God, I have
Retracted. And it is an evidence, that their Cause and Case is bad, when they
have no better Weapons wherewith to fight against me, but the Errors which I
have Retracted, and which they still hold, with many more, and much greater,
whereof I never was guilty, and which I have proved them guilty of, in my
Fourth Narative, Printed this present Year 1700, in above Two Hundred and Fifty
Quotations, faithfully Collected out of their Approved Authors, to which they
have given no Reply, nor are ever like to give to any purpose, nor to diverse
others I have Published against them.

What Blindness, and Hardness of Heart, and Obstinacy has befallen them, who
instead of Retracting their own Errors, or seeking to clear themselves thereof,
seek to Defame and Abuse me, for my Retracting mine! But the Abuse and Shame
they cast out against me, falls upon themselves.

G. K.


