A Christian Catechism, For the Instruction of Youth, And others to whom it
may be Useful In the Grounds of Christian Religion, and Practice of Christian
Piety. Wherein the Twelve Articles of the Christian Creed, and the Godhead and
Manhood Natures of Christ, and His Prophetical, Priestly, and Kingly Office are
briefly explained.

And the true Christian Doctrine,

Concerning CHRIST His being a SUFFICIENT SAVIOR, as he is both God and Man;
and, with respect to both the absolute Necessity, and excellent Consistencie of
His Outward Coming in the Flesh, and of His Inward Coming, and Spiritual
Appearance in our Hearts, through Faith in Him, and Love and Obedience to Him,
in Order to our Eternal Salvation, Declared and Demonstrated by Testimonies of
Holy Scripture.

And the Divine Excellency of the LIGHT WITHIN, in distinction from Humane
Reason, Asserted and Vindicated; and the Question concerning its Sufficiency to
Salvation, truly stated and resolved.

Where also, many other Gospel Doctrins, and Practical Christian Truths and
Duties are held forth.

By George Keith.

London, Printed for Brabazon Aylmer, at the Three Pigeous in Cornhill,
over against the Royal Exchange. School.

To The READER.
Friendly Reader,
THere are a few things of which I thought fit to give thee notice in relation
to the following Treatise. First, If thou happen to find some few things in it
asserted, (which touch not any of the great Doctrins of the Christian Faith)
that do not seem well to consist with some passages in some of my former Books,
I desire thee to reckon them among the things since Retracted by me, in my late
Book of Explications and Retractations, Printed in the Year 1697. which I have
done with a sincere Conscience, God having been graciously pleased, of late
times, further to enlighten me, I know not one thing here delivered in this
Treatise, that may seem to have any inconsistency with any of my former Books,
but is contained within those Retractations, as to Matter and Substance. As to
the Doctrine of the holy Trinity, namely, the Oneness of the Essence of the
Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, and their true distinction, by their
Relative Attributes, I thank God, I have always had the sound Faith thereof,
wherein I have fully agreed with all Orthodox Christians, in opposition to
either Arianum, or Sabellianism, or any other Heretical Opinion; but I
acknowledge my weakness in being too scrupulous to own the manner of expressing
that distinction, by calling them three Persons, as other sound Christians,
upon good ground, have called them; the which scruple, upon good consideration
and advisement, I have now laid aside, and have found freedom to use those
terms, with all other Orthodox Professors of Christianity, for reasons
sufficient (as I judge) I have given on that Head in my following Treatise; but
this does not argue in me any change of my Faith, seeing, as my former Books
sufficiently testify, I had the same Faith formerly as touching that great and
glorious Mystery, that I now have. And providing that any do own the truth of
the Mystery, though they scruple to use the terms of Three Persons, I agree
with many other charitable Christians, not to impose those terms upon them, or
to charge them with Heresy, simply for their scrupling the terms; though a
needless and singular scrupulosity, without any just ground, is no wise
commendable in any, but such who seek to cloak their gross Error by only
pretending a scrupulosity to use the terms, as the Arguments that stand on
Record in Print to this day, never Retracted by them, evidently prove, (who
have argued not only against the Names or Terms Three Persons, but against
their being Three, and against any distinction betwixt them, other than
Nominal, or in Manifestations and Operations in time) are no wise excusable,
until they retract their former Error: For thus they have argued, as it stands
in some of their Printed Books, Either they are three nothings, or three
somethings; if three somethings, they are three Gods. And why should they
scruple the word Persons, more than the word Trinity; since after great
Cavillation against Trinity, as well as Persons, for their not being express
Scripture Words, some of chief Note among them have said in Print, they own the
Scripture Trinity; and surely they were never desired to own any other, nor
blamed for not owning any other. It is most certain that all the other parts of
Christian Doctrine are built on this great Fundamental, that the Father, the
Son, and the Holy Ghost, are one God, having one Essence, and yet truly
distinct in their relative Attributes and Properties; and to deny their true
distinction, is fully as great an Error, as to deny the Oneness of their
Essence and Godhead; nor can the true Christian Faith be ever truly taught, or
understood, without that Doctrine; therefore it was that Christ commanded his
Apostles to Baptize all, who should become his Disciples in the Name of the
Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost; which to be sure they would not do, before
they did in some measure instruct them in the knowledge of this great Mystery.
From which it is evident that the Doctrine it self is a main Fundamental of the
Christian Religion, the denial of which is a plain overthrowing of the
Christian Faith, as is likewise the denial of the Twofold Nature of Christ, the
one of his Godhead, the other of his Manhood, by a personal Union constituting
one Christ, (which I have always sincerely believed, whereof my former Books
are a sufficient witness;) without those Doctrins, it is impossible that the
way and manner of Man's Redemption by Christ, and how he is given and sent of
the Father unto us, and how by and through him, the Faithful receive remission
of Sin, and the holy Spirit, with his saving Gifts and Graces, both from the
Father and the Son, can ever be truly understood; and the denial of those
Doctrins directly tend to establish Deism and Heathenism, and subvert totally
the Christian Religion. Another thing I desire the Reader to notice, That
whereas I have not so particularly and fully treated of the Moral Part of
Christianity, as of the other Part, respecting matters of Faith, I request the
Reader not to construe, that he had any occasion thereby to judge of me, that I
laid not as great weight upon the necessary practice of the one, viz. the moral
Part (in the careful observation of all God's Commands) as upon the necessary
Faith and Knowledge of the other in order to our attaining Eternal Life and
Happiness; for, indeed, I hold them both equally necessary to that end. All
true Christian Morality is built on the true Christian Faith, and draws its
greatest motives and obligations to virtuous Living from thence, whereby as
great a distinction is made betwixt the Christians Virtues, and these of the
Heathen Virtues, as betwixt Silver and Iron, or Gold and Brass. The great
reason therefore of my not treating, at present, so particularly and fully on
the Moral Part is, because the necessity of the Moral Part is generally owned
and acknowledged, among all professed Christians, of the several Denominations
and Communions in Christendom, (as also in great measure many among sober
Heathens, though they have not the knowledge of these great and noble Motives
and Obligations to practice the Moral Part that all true Christians have.) And
because I know there are many who want more to be well taught and helped in the
Doctrinal Part of the Christian Faith than in the Moral Part, therefore, with
respect to these, I have chiefly undertaken this Work, that what Morality is
found among them, who are short in the true Knowledge and Faith of Christian
Doctrine, may be advanced to the true pitch of true Christian Morality, by their
receiving the sound Christian Faith, as God shall be pleased to work it in them
by his holy Spirit, in the use of outward means and helps afforded and offered
unto them. The which my sincere Christian Labor, in this undertaking, for
their good, and the good of any others, to whom it may be of service, I commit
and recommend to Almighty God (with my sincere Prayers and Wishes) that he may
please to bless it with success, To their spiritual profit and advantage, Amen.

George Keith.

THE CONTENTS.
SECT. I. Concerning the Christian Religion, and the holy Scriptures; whether
they are the Word of God, and why Christ is called the Word. SECT. II.
Concerning God and his Attributes; the distinction of the Father, the Son, and
the Holy Ghost, by their Relative Attributes and Properties; the Words Trinity
and Three Persons inoffensive, and agreeable to Scripture: No saving Knowledge
of God, without his Divine Illumination. SECT. III. Concerning the Works of
Creation and Providence; Angels, Adam and Eve; their state before they sinned;
their Sin and the Effects of it. SECT. IV. Concerning the Lord Jesus Christ,
the Redeemer; his Godhead-nature; and Manhood-nature, really distinct, and how.
Christ is both God and Man, yet but one Christ; the Woman's Seed. SECT. V.
Concerning his Prophetical Office. SECT. VI. Concerning his Priestly Office;
his Satisfaction to Divine Justice, by his Obedience, Death and Sufferings.
SECT. VII. Concerning his Kingly Office. SECT. VIII. Concerning the two
Covenants; the Covenant of Works, and the Covenant of Grace, Faith, Repentance,
remission of Sin, Justification, etc. SECT. IX. Concerning the Light Within;
its distinction from Humane Reason, and excellency above it, being a true Cause
of our Salvation, but not the only Cause, as within us, but also as in Christ,
God-man without us, and together with him. SECT. X. Concerning the difference
betwixt the Law writ in the hearts of Unbelievers, and that writ in the hearts
of Believers: God and Christ, considered as the Word; their Essential Presence,
and Operation in all things, and in all men; God and Christ, and the Holy
Ghost, in all the Faithful, by Union and Communion, and Inhabitation by Faith,
and Love, but not so in Unbelievers; how Christ in the Saints is the hope of
Glory, not as within, them only, but without them also: As Christ, without them
and within them is but one Christ, so one Mystery, the greater part of which
Mystery is God manifest in the Flesh; of Christ without them. SECT. XI.
Concerning Prayer, and Worship, External and Internal; Internal Silence and
Meditation. Religious observation of the Lord's day, and solemn times of
Thanksgiving. SECT. XII. Concerning the Church. Concerning Pasting. SECT. XIII.
Concerning Baptism and the Supper External. SECT. XIV. Concerning Baptism and
the Supper Internal.
Note, The Twelve Articles of the Creed, are found in the Sections thus,

The First Article in Section 1. 2. 3. The other Articles, in the following
Sections.

A Christian Catechism,
For the Instruction of Youth and other Persons, to whom it may be useful, in
the Grounds of Christian Religion, and Practice of Christian Piety.

SECTION I.
Q. WHat is a Christian Catechism?

A. It is an Instruction concerning the Grounds of Christian Religion, and
Practice of Christian Piety, Luke 1. 4.

Q. What is the Christian Religion?

A. It is a Knowledge, Belief and Practice of certain things, by means of which
we may attain to eternal Life and Happiness, John 20. 31. Romans 6. 22.

Q. Where are these things taught us?

A. In the holy Scriptures of the Old and New Testament, John 5. 39. Romans 15.
4. Rom 16. 26.

Q. Which are these things necessary to be known and believed by us?

A. First, Concerning God, and his Works of Creation and Providence. Secondly,
Concerning Christ, his only begotten Son, and our Redemption by and through
him. Thirdly, Concerning the Holy Spirit, and the Gifts and Graces thereof, by
which, through his lively Operation in us, we enjoy the Fruit of that
Redemption, and are enabled savingly to know, believe, and practice what is
required of us, Heb. 11. 3. 6. 2 Timothy 3. 16. 1 Timothy 3. 16. John 17. 3. 1 Cor.
2. 9, 10, 11, 12.

Q. Which are these things necessary to be practiced by us?

A. The Commandments of God, briefly contained in the Ten Precepts of the Moral
Law, and some other Commandments given us by Christ in the New Testament, Exodus
20. 1. Matthew. 28. 20.

Q Whence came the Holy Scriptures of the Old and new Testament?

A. They came from God, who did inspire and move holy Men to commit them to
Writing for our Instruction, 2 Timothy 3. 16.

Q. Are the Scriptures the Words of God?

A. Yea, John 17. 8.

Q. Are they not also the Word of God, and are not the Doctrines delivered to
us in the Holy Scriptures of the Old and New Testament, concerning the way of
Life and Salvation, frequently called the Word in Scripture? John 17. 20. Acts
13. 26. 1 Cor. 4. 20. Gal. 6. 6. Phil. 1. 14. 2 Timothy 4. 2. 2 Timothy 2. 15.

A. Yea, as where Paul bid Timothy Preach the Word, it is certain he meant the
whole Doctrine of Salvation by Christ, and Christ himself called a short
Sentence in one of the Psalms of David, the written Word, John 15. 25.

Q. It is any Lie, or Falsehood, as some have argued, to call the Scriptures,
which are many Words, the Word.

A. Nay, as it is no lie to call many Letters the Letter, but is an ordinary
manner of Speech, both in Scripture and other Books.

Q. But seeing Christ is called the Word, and the Word is said to be God, is it
not absurd to call the Scriptures, or the Doctrine contained in them, the Word?
Romans 2. 27, 7, 6.

A. Nay, no more than it is absurd to call the Sun, Light, because God is
called Light in Scripture; for many words have diverse Significations in
Scripture, as not only the word Light, but Spirit, Life, Flesh, Milk, Wine,
Oil, Bread, Waeter, have diverse Significations in Scripture.

Q. How then may the word be distinguished?

A. Into the essential word, mentioned, John 1. 1. And the declarative word,
that may also be called the doctrinal word, and that again may be distinguished
into the word, that is, either Vocal, (i. e. uttered by the Mouth or Voice) or
Written.

Q. Why is Christ called the word?

A. Because as the Word or Speech of a Man makes known his Mind and Will to the
Hearers, and is the Interpreter of his Mind; so Christ the Essential and
Eternal Word, makes known the Mind and Will of God to Angels and Men, and is
the Interpreter of his Mind, and Counsel unto them, Which as he did from the
beginning, by his. Holy Inspirations in the Prophets; so especially when that
Word became Flesh, and delivered the Mind and Will of God most fully and
clearly by the words of his Mouth, in his Body of Flesh upon Earth.

Q Does the Scripture contain all things belonging to Faith and Practice?

A. Yea, 2 Timothy 3. 15.

SECT. II.
Q. WHat does the Scripture teach us concerning God?

A. That he is a Spirit of Infinite Understanding, Power and Goodness,
unchangeable without beginning or end, Omniscient, Omnipotent, Omnipresent,
Merciful and Gracious, and long Suffering, Faithful, Just and Holy, that he is
Light, and in him is no Darkness at all, the Fountain of living Waters, the one
only living and true God, without Body, Parts or Passions, John 4. 24. Psalm.
147. 5. Psalm. 62. 11. 1 Chronicles. 29. 11. Genesis 17. 1. Romans 1. 20. Romans 2. 4. Psalm.
31. 19. Mal. 3. 6. Psalm. 33. 11. Psalm. 139. 1. to 12. Exodus 34. 6. 7. Deuteronomy. 32.
4. Deuteronomy. 7 9. 1 John 1. 5. Jerem. 2. 13. Deuteronomy. 4. 6. Jer. 10. 10. Numb. 23. 19.

Q What does the Scripture further teach us concerning God?

A. That this one God is the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, and these
three are one God, one Essence and Being, equal in Wisdom, Goodness, Power and
Glory, 1 John 5. 7.

Q. How are these three distinguished?

A. By their relative Attributes and Properties.

Q. What is the relative Attribute and Property of the Father?

A. That he has begot the Son from everlasting before all Ages and Times, and
before all Creatures, but he himself is begot of none, Prove. 8. 22. Psalm. 2. 7.
Prove. 30. 4. Micah 5. 2.

Q. What is the relative Attribute and Property of the Son?

A. That he was begot of the Father alone, from all Eternity, or before all
Ages and Times, and Creatures; and therefore he is called his only begotten
Son, and the word that was in the beginning with God, and that word was and is
God, John 1. 1, 14. John 17. 5. John 8. 42.

Q. What is the relative Attribute and Property of the Holy Ghost?

A. That he has proceeded from the Father, and from the Son, from all
Eternity, and before all Ages and Times, and Creatures; and therefore he is
called the Spirit of the Father and of the Son, John 15 26. John 16. 8.

Q. Is it not therefore a great Error in them, who say, these three are only
distinct in Name, and are only three Manifestations and Operations in Time?

A. Yea.

Q Does the Scripture call them three Persons?

A. Though the express Names of three Persons are not in the Scriptures, yet
the equivalent to these Names are in the Scriptures; for Personal Acts and
Properties are attributed to them distinctly in Scripture, the Father is
brought in, saying, Thou art my Son this day have I begotten thee, Psalm. 2. 7.
Here is I denoting the first Person, who is the Father, and thou and thee
denoting the second Person, who is the Son. Again, the Lord said unto my Lord
sit thou at my right hand, until I make thy enemies thy footstool, Psalm. 110.
1. Here is I the first Person, who is the Father, speaking to the Son, who is
the second Person. Again the Father is said in Scripture to know the Son, and
the Son is said to know the Father; and the Father is said to love the Son, and
the Son is said to love the Father, Matthew. 11. 27. John 3. 35. John 14. 31. Now
to know and love are personal Acts and Properties, and can belong to none but
distinct Persons; also the Father is said to give the Son, and to send the Son,
and the Son is said to be given and sent of the Father, or to proceed or come
from the Father; and the Holy Ghost is said to hear and to speak, and is sent
both by the Father and the Son, and the Spirit is said to search all things,
even the deep things of God, all which are Personal Acts and Properties, and
plainly denote three Persons, John 16. 13. 1 Cor. 2. 10.

Q. But as Peter, James and John, are not only three Persons, but three
distinct and separate Men, why are not the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost,
(if they be three Persons) three Gods?

A. Because Peter, James, and John, are three separate Persons, having three
distinct separate Beings and Essences, and are in three distinct separate
Places, having three distinct separate Minds and Wills, therefore they are
three distinct Men; but the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost are not three
distinct separate Persons having distinct Beings and Essences, in distinct and
separate Places, and having distinct Minds and Wills, but they have one
Essence, Mind and Will, and where ever one is, there is the other; the Father,
the Son, and the Holy Ghost are in all things, and over all, and through all,
and their Operations and Effects in and over all the Creatures, are the same,
the Father works all things by the Son, and the Father and the Son work all
things by the Holy Spirit.

Q. What is the true English of the word Trinity?

A. Three and one, from the compounded Latin word, tri unit as, signifying God
to be one in Essence, and yet to be three, not in Essence, but in their
Personal and Relative Attributes and Properties.

Q. Is there then any just occasion of Offense to say, the Father, the Son, and
the Holy Spirit, is the Holy Trinity?

A. Nay.

Q. Whence then has come so great Offense, in some to find fault with those
sound words, as Trinity, and three Persons?

A. It has partly come (in some) from their not understanding the true
signification of the words, and it has partly (in others) come from too great
a scrupulosity, because they are not express Scripture words, whereas those
very scrupulous Persons use many other words, in giving the account of their
Faith and Principles, that are not express Scripture words; and in others it
has come from a prejudice against the true Doctrine and Faith of the Mystery
it self, not only denying the three Persons, but denying any distinction
betwixt them, other than three Names, or three Manifestations, and Operations
in time; and lastly, in some it has come from a Spirit of contradiction,
affecting singularity, and to seem wiser than others, whereof many other
instances can be given in other Cases; and particularly their finding fault
with the word Humanity, or Humane Nature of Christ, which of late these very
Persons have owned, so that it may be expected, that as they are become so tame
and conformable to own the word, Humanity, and Humane Nature of Christ,
formerly blamed by them, they may also as freely use the words three Persons,
or Trinity of Persons.

Q. Can the Holy Scriptures give to Men any saving Knowledge of God, without
his Divine Illumination, and inward Teaching and Operation by his Spirit in
their hearts?

A. Nay. Psalm. 119. 18. 1 Cor. 2. 12. 2 Cor. 4. 4. 6.

Q. Is there not a Knowledge of God, given to the Faithful, by the Spirit, that
is beyond all report, or demonstration of words, by inward spiritual feeling
and sense, and by spiritual sight and taste, and by inward hearing and learning
of the Father, and by a divine and spiritual savor.

A. Yea, 1 Cor. 2. 9. Acts 17. 27. Ephesians. 4. 19. Psa. ^8. Joh. 6. 45. Heb. 6.
4. 1 Pet. 2. 3. Mat. 16. 23. 2 Cor. 2. 14. Cant. 1. 3.

SECT. III.
Q. WHich are God's Works of Creation?

A. All things Visible and Invisible, the Visible Heavens and Earth, the Sea,
and Rivers and Fountains of Water, and all Visible things contained in them,
Genesis 1. 1. Coloss. 1. 16.

Q Which are the Invisible Works of Creation?

A. Angels, which are many, and Souls or Spirits of Men, which also are many.

Q. Are Devils and unclean Spirits, works of God's Creation?

A. They were not originally created Devils or unclean Spirits, but good and
pure, but they became so by their voluntary transgression, 2 Pet. 2. 4. Jude 6.

Q Are the Works of God, whither Visible or Invisible, any part or parts of God?

A. Nay.

Q. Are they then distinct Beings (though not separate) from God?

A. Yea, But such as have a most necessary dependence on God, both for their
preservation and action.

Q. Were they Created of any eternally preexistent matter, that did co-exist
with him from all Eternity?

A. Nay.

Q. How are all things said to be of God?

A. As the Author and efficient cause of them, but not as the material cause,
Romans 11. 36.

Q Does not the Scripture sometimes distinguish betwixt things Created and Made?

A. Yea; for things made, are made out of a pre-existent matter, or subject,
whereas things created had no pre-existent matter.

Q. Give some example in the Case?

A. The Grass, Herbs, and Trees were made out of the Earth on the third day,
the Fishes and Fowls were made out of the Waters on the fifth day, and the
four-footed Beasts, and creeping things, and Body of Man was made out of the
Earth on the sixth day, Genesis 1.

Q. By whom did God create and make all things?

A. By his word (his eternally begotten Son) and Spirit, Joh. 1. 2. Ephesians. 3.
9. Psalm. 33. 6.

Q Was it any difficulty to God, to create and make all things?

A. Nay, for he spoke and it was done, he commanded and they were Created,
Psalm. 33. 9.

Q. How is it then to be understood, that God rested from all his Works, which
he had made, and that on the seventh day?

A. His resting, was his ceasing to Create, and Finishing his Works of
Creation, which he had Created and made in six days, Genesis 2. 2.

Q. What other Works does God Work, since the Creation?

A. His Works of Providence, whereby he sustaineth and upholdeth all his
Creatures, orders, and disposes, and over rules them all according to his
good pleasure, for his own Glory, and blesses them with fruitfulness and
increase, and especially his gracious Providence throughout over his Church and
People, Joh. 5. 17. Heb. 1. 3. Pet. 3. 7. Psalm. 103. 19. 21, Psalm. 104. Genesis 1.
22. Matthew. 10. 29. 30. 31. Deuteronomy. 11. 12. Heb. 13. 5. Ephesians. 1. 11. Rev. 4. 11.

Q. What is to be understood by God's Eyes, Ears, Mouth, Hands, etc. in
Scripture.

A. Not any bodily Members or Parts, but his glorious Attributes and
Perfections of Wisdom, Power, and Goodness, etc.

Q. Whence come all Men and Women of all Nations?

A. They are descended of Adam our Common Father, and of Eve our Common Mother
by ordinary Generation, Acts 17. 26. Romans 5. 12.

Q. In what Estate did God make them?

A. In his Image, and after his Likeness, Holy, Upright, Wise and Good, with
Dominion over the Creatures, Genesis 1. 26. 27. Coloss. 3. 10. Ephesians. 4. 24.
Eccles. 7. 29.

Q. Of what parts did they consist?

A. Of Soul and Body, Matthew. 10. 28.

Q Was the Soul of the Earth, as the Body was?

A. Nay, for God breathed into him the Breath of Life, and he became a living
Soul, Genesis 2. 7.

Q. When God Created them Male and Female, did he indue them with his Spirit,
and the Gifts and Graces thereof?

A. Yea.

Q. Where did he place them?

A. In the Garden, to labor in it, and to keep it.

Q. Did he give him a Law of Obedience, Genesis 2. 15. 16.

A. Yea, which was, that of every Tree of the Garden he might or should eat,
but that he should not eat of the Tree of Knowledge of Good and Evil.

Q. Why did God forbid him to eat of that Tree?

A. To try his Obedience, as well as for other Causes known to him, Deuteronomy, 13.
3. Exodus 20. 20.

Q. What was the threatened Punishment, if he did Transgress?

A. That in the Day he eat thereof he should surely Die, Genesis 2. 17.

Q. Did he Die in that Day, wherein he did Transgress?

A. He Died a Spiritual Death, and his Body became Mortal and subject to
Sickness and Death, John 5. 25. Ephesians. 2. 1.

Q. What was the Spiritual Death?

A. That he Died unto Holiness and Righteousness, lost Communion with God, and
sell under his Judgment and Wrath, Isaiah 59. 2. Romans 2. 8. Genesis 3. 19.

Q. Had he died the bodily Death, if he had not sinned?

A. Nay.

Q. Did Man need any Clothes, or Garments to cover him, had he not Sinned?

A. Nay, For his Body was so endued with Vigor, Strength, and Honor; that as
nothing could hurt him, of Heat, or Cold, so there was nothing in him, whereof
he could be ashamed, Psalm. 8. 5, 6, 7, 8. Psalm. 49. 12, 20.

Q. What Effects brought his sin and fall into the World?

A. It not only brought a Curse upon the Earth, but Guilt and Condemnation, and
a Sinful Defilement, and Death, both Spiritual and Temporal on all his
Posterity, Genesis 3. 17. Romans 5. 12, 18. Psalm. 51. 5. Genesis 8. 21. Romans 6. 23.

Q. Does the Soul of Man die with the Body?

A. Nay, Matthew. 10. 28. 2 Pet. 14.

SECT. IV.
Q. WHO is the Redeemer of lost Men?

A. The Lord Jesus Christ, Job 19. 25.

Q. Who is Jesus Christ?

A. He is the Son of God, begotten of the Father, and one God with the Father,
before all Time and Creatures, and the Son of Man, the Son of David and of
Abraham, Conceived by the Holy Ghost, and Born of the Virgin Mary, in the
fullness of Time, very and true God, and very and true Man, and yet one Jesus
Christ, the Word made Flesh, Matthew. 16. 16. John 3. 14. Matthew. 1. 1, 20, 25. 1
Cor. 8. 6. John 1. 14.

Q. How many Natures has Christ Jesus?

A. Two, his Godhead Nature, and his Manhood-Nature.

Q. How are these Natures distinguished?

A. His Godhead nature is the same with the Godhead nature of the Father, and
of the Holy Ghost, which was before all Time, and before all Creatures, having
all Infinity Perfections of Power, Wisdom, and Goodness, etc. His Manhood,
Nature was Created in time, and of the same kind, with the Nature of other Men.

Q. How can two such differing Natures Constitute one Christ?

A. By the Personal (or Hypostatical) Union of the two Natures, which is a
great Mystery; yet no wise Contradictory to true Reason, as neither is the
Mystery of the Holy Trinity, nor any other Mystery of the Christian Faith.

Q. Have we any weak or obscure Resemblance of it in our selves?

A. Yea, Every Man is Constituted (so to speak) of two Natures, the one of the
Body, which is Visible, Material and Mortal; the other of the Soul, which is
Visible, Intellectual, and Immortal, and yet these two, by a Personal Union,
are but one Man.

Q. Has the Manhood-nature of Christ a Created Soul, and a Created Body, as
other Men?

A. Yea.

Q. Was the Father, or the Holy Ghost, Personally United to the Manhood-nature
of Christ, or only the Son, or Word?

A. Only the Son, or Word, as the Scripture testifies, the Word was made
Flesh, and did Tabernacle among us, John 1. 14.

Q. Had the Man Christ any Sinful Defilement, or Guilt of Adam's Sin, at his
Conception, or Birth in the Flesh?

A. Nay, Heb. 4. 15.

Q. Why was Christ Born of a Virgin?

A. That by his extraordinary manner of Generation, it might be manifest that
he was without all Guilt, or Defilement of Adam's Sin, and also that he might
have no immediate Father but God.

Q. How was he then the Son of David and Abraham?

A. Because the Virgin Mary of whom he was Born, was Descended of David and
Abraham.

Q. Did Christ really partake of Mary's Substance?

A. Yea.

Q. Is it not therefore a great Error in them, who say, that Christ's Body
which was Born of the Virgin, was altogether from Heaven, having nothing of her
bodily Substance in it?

A. Yea.

Q. Is it not also another great Error in them, who say, because Christ was
Conceived by the Holy Ghost; that therefore as Man he was not Created, or that
his Manhood was not any created Being, or Nature?

A. Yea.

Q. Is it not another great Error in them, that say, Christ is only a Man, and
had no Being or Existence before all Time and Creatures?

A. Yea.

Q. Is it not also a great Error in them, who say, Christ is only God, and that
neither his Flesh nor Soul was any part of him, but only as a Garment, as a
Man's Garment is no part of him?

A. Yea.

Q. Is it not also a great Error, for any to say, Christ is nothing else but
the Light within every Man, or the Word within?

A. Yea.

Q. Is it not also a great Error, to say, Christ is the Holy Ghost, or the Holy
Ghost is Christ?

A. Yea.

Q. How is Christ called the everlasting Father in Scripture? Isaiah 9. 6.

A. With respect to Men, he is the Father of all Faithful Men, and of his
Church, but not that he is his own Father.

Q. Was it foretold by any of the Prophets that Christ should be Born of a
Virgin?

A. Yea, by the Prophet, Isaiah 7. 14. Behold a Virgin shall conceive and bear
a Son, and shall call his Name Immanuel, i. e. God with us. And also by
Jeremiah 31. 22. The Lord has created a new thing in the earth, a woman shall
compass a man.

Q. Was it not foretold by God himself, to our first Parents after the Fall, in
these words, That the seed of the woman should bruise the serpents seed? Genesis
3. 15.

A. Yea, For because he was called the Seed of the Woman, it did intimate, that
he was to be made or born of a Woman, without her knowledge of a Man.

Q. How can it be proved from Scripture, that he who was Born of the Virgin,
was not a mere Man, but God as well as Man?

A. By the Names given him in Scripture, the Testimonies concerning him, his
Miracles, and the Worship given him by Angels and Men.

Q. What Names given him, prove that he is God?

A. His Name shall be called (to wit of the Child born) Wonderful, Councellor,
the mighty God, the Everlasting Father, the Prince of Peace, Isaiah 9. 6. and
Jer. 23. 5, 6. I will raise unto Davida righteous branch, and a King shall
reign and prosper. And this is the Name whereby he shall be called the Lord our
Righteousness; and the Name Emmanuel, is in English, God with us.

Q. What are the Testimonies of Scripture, that prove him to be God?

A. Such as Romans 9. 5. -- Of whom as concerning the Flesh, Christ came, who is
over all, God Blessed for ever, John 1. 1. The word was God, and verse 14. And
that word was made flesh, Heb. 1. 1, 2. God has in these last Days spoke to us
by his Son, whom he has appointed Heir of all things, by whom also he made the
Worlds, (or Ages) verse 8. Unto the Son he says, Thy throne O God is for ever
and ever.

Q. How do his Miracles prove that he is God, seeing Moses, and others of the
Prophets wrought Miracles?

A. They wrought Miracles only as Servants, and did not work them in their own
Name; but Christ wrought his Miracles in his own Name; and as the Lord of, and
over all the Creatures, he commanded the Winds and the Seas, and they obeyed
him; he rebuked the Diseases, and the unclean Spirits, and so Cured the
Diseased and Possessed, Heb. 3. 5, Matthew. 8. 26, 27. Mark 1. 25. Luke 4. 39.

Q. What places of Scripture do prove that the Angels do Worship him?

A. Heb. 1. 6. And let all the Angels of God worship him, Phil. 2. 10. God has
highly exalted him, and given him a name, which is above every name, that at
the name of Jesus every knee shall bow, of things in heaven, and things on
earth. This shows, that as he is Worshipped by Angels, so he ought to be
Worshipped by all Men. And 1 Cor. 1. 2. The believing Corinthians, and all the
Saints every where called upon the name of Jesus Christ, both their Lord and
ours.

SECT. V.
Q HOW many Offices has Christ?

A. Three, the Office of a Prophet, of a Priest, and of a King.

Q Has he not many other Offices, as of a Head, Husband, Mediator, Advocate,
Bishop, Shepherd, Captain, Physician, etc.

A. They are all contained under these three, and reducible to them.

Q. How does he perform the Office of a Prophet?

A. Teaching us by his Doctrine, outwardly delivered to us in the Holy
Scriptures, either as Read, or as Opened and Expounded unto us in Preaching by
Men well and duly gifted and qualified with Ability of true Knowledge, and who
are good Examples in Life and Conversation; and also by his inward Teaching in
our Hearts, by his holy Spirit, Light and Grace.

Q What is the need of both the outward Teaching by Men, or the Scriptures, and
Christ 's inward Teaching by his Spirit, Light and Grace?

A. God has so appointed it, that as God and Christ by the Holy Spirit in our
Hearts, should be the principal Teacher; so the Scriptures, and Men Teaching
according to the Scriptures, should be Instrumental, in the Spirit's Teaching
us, and Working in us the saving Knowledge and Faith of the Christian Doctrine.

Q Have Men no Knowledge of God without the Scriptures?

A. Yea, many have some Knowledge of God, and of his Will in some things
without the Scriptures; and all Men may know some things of God, and of his
Will without the Scriptures, by what God is pleased to make known of himself,
by some Manifestation within them, and by his Works of Creation and Providence
without them, Romans 1. 19, 20.

Q. But are these peculiar Doctrins of the Christian Religion revealed to
Mankind without Scriptures, or some outward Means of Instruction?

A. Nay.

Q Are no Doctrins of Christian Faith and Practice inwardly Taught and Revealed
by the Spirit, but what are delivered us in the holy Scriptures?

A. Nay.

Q. Are then the holy Scriptures the only public authentic Standard and Rule,
to which all Doctrins of Men, and professed Inspirations are to be subjected,
and by them examined, and if found contrary to be rejected?

A. Yea, Isaiah 8. 20. 2 Timothy 3. 16, 17.

Q. How was the Doctrine of Salvation by Christ made known to Men, before the
Letter of the Scripture was extant.

A. By outward Teaching of Good and Holy Men, with word of Mouth, in the
several Ages, from Adam to Moses, which was accompanied with the inward
Teaching of the Spirit of God in all the Faithful.

Q. Whence, or how had they that Doctrine outwardly conveyed unto them?

A. The Prophets had it by special Revelations, and others who were not
Prophets had it delivered to them, by means of the Prophets.

Q. When did Christ begin to perform the Office of a Prophet?

A. From the beginning of the World, and in all Ages, both before and since he
came in the Flesh, but most especially and evidently, and in the most ample and
clear manner, when he came in the Flesh by his Ministry and Preaching when he
was on Earth, which was about three Years and an half.

Q. How did he perform the Office of a Prophet in those Ages, before he came in
the Flesh?

A. Because it was his Spirit in the Prophets, 1 Pet. 1. 11. By which they
Prophesied and Preached; which Spirit, with all the Gifts of it, and saving
Graces thereof were given to them, and to the Church, for Christ's sake, and
for the Merit of his most holy Obedience unto Death, when he should come to
perform that Obedience.

Q Is not the Doctrine of Salvation by Christ Jesus, in a true and proper Sense
the Gospel of Christ?

A. Yea.

Q. Has not therefore the Gospel been Preached in all Ages of the World, and
ever will, by which God has ever had a Church in the World, and ever will have
to the World's end?

A. Yea, Matthew. 16. 18.

Q. But have they had the Gospel of Christ Preached to them, who have had no
discovery of Salvation by Christ, or free Remission of Sins, for his sake,
either by outward Instruction, or inward Revelation?

A. Nay.

Q. Do they not therefore greatly Err, who Teach, that the common Illumination,
wherewith every Man is Enlighted, is the Gospel of Christ, yea, the whole
Gospel, without any thing else?

A. Yea.

Q. How are Paul's Words to be understood, that the Gospel has been Preached
to every Creature under Heaven? Col. 1. 23.

A. They cannot be universally understood (...) all and every particular Man
throughout (...) whole World, more than where in the (...), within a few lines,
he said, that he (...) Brethren did warn every Man, and teach every Man, Col.
1. 28. Yet none can say, with any color of Truth, that they did teach every
Man that either then lived in the World, or had before, or since lived in the
World; the Gospel therefore its being Preached to every Creature, or to every
Man has this Sense, that without exception the Gospel was Preached to every
Man, of whatever Nation, Kindred, or Family, where the Gospel came by an
outward Ministry.

Q. Why is the Gospel called by Paul, the Power of God to Salvation? Romans 1. 16.

A. Because wherever it is faithfully and sincerely Preached, it comes not in
word only, or in a bare Form of Doctrine, but in Power, and in the Holy Ghost,
and in much assurance to them who do sincerely and truly believe it and
receive it, by which Gospel they are saved. 1 Thessalonians. 1. 5. 1 Cor. 15. 2.

Q. Is the Gospel of the Kingdom to be Preached in all the World, before the
end of the World come?

A. Yea, as Christ has expressly foretold, Matthew. 24. 19.

Q. Do they not Preach another Gospel than Christ and the Apostles and Prophets
Preached, who Teach, that the Doctrine and Message of Remission of Sin, and of
eternal Life and Salvation by Christ Crucified and raised again, is no part of
the Gospel of Salvation, and in so doing, bring themselves under the Curse?

A. Yea, Gal. 8. 9.

Q. What does the word Evangel, [Translated in English Gospel] signify?

A. A good or joyful Message concerning Christ the Savior, who was born at
Bethlehem, as the Angel declared to the Shepherds. Behold, (said he) I bring
you good tidings of great joy, that shall be to all people; for unto you is
born this day in the City of David, a Savior, which is Christ the Lord, Micah
5. 2. Luke 2. 10.

Q. Was it foretold in the Old Testament, at what time Christ should come in
the Flesh?

A. Yea, in Jacob's Prophecy, The scepter shall not depart from Judah, nor a
lawgiver from between his feet, until Shiloh come, and unto him shall the
gathering of the people be, Genesis 49. 10. This Shiloh is Christ, who was to come
of Judah, the Hebrew word Shiloh, (as the most Learned in the Hebrew Language
say) signifies his Son, and such a Son, as should be born of a Virgin; as also
it signifies Peaceful; and the most Judicious of the Jewish Writers understand
it of the Messiah, which is Christ, that signifies Anointed, and the word
Jesus signifies Savior.

Q. Did the Government among the Jews cease at that time, when Christ came in
the Flesh?

A. Yea, as both the Scriptures and Writings of the Jews plainly declare; for
though the Jews had been some time before the coming of Christ, under the Roman
Government, yet their great Council, called the Sanedrin, had the Power to
judge of Life and Death, continued unto them until Herod (an Alien) who was
Contemporary with Christ took it away, and the Jews confessed, that at that
time it was not Lawful for them to put any Man to Death, which was a clear
fulfilling of Jacob's Prophecy.

Q. What other Prophecies in the Old Testament, did foretell the time of
Christ's coming?

A. Danicl's Prophecy of the 70 Weeks, and the Prophecy of Haggai, 2. 6, 7, 8,
9. Where it was plainly foretold, that Christ the desire of all Nations should
come into the second Temple, and that should make it is Glory greater than the
Glory of the former Temple, which was accordingly fulfilled; the which Temple,
was together with the City of Jerusalem, destroyed about forty years after
Christ's Passion, the Destruction of which he foretold; all which, confirms, he
was that true Prophet, of whom Moses Prophesied; and because the Generality of
the Jews did not believe in him; therefore according to Moses's Prophecy, they
were cut off from being owned to be the true Church of God.

Q. What other principal Things did Christ that great Prophet foretell?

A. That he should be put to Death, and the third day should rise again, that
he should ascend into Heaven, and that after some days his Disciples should
receive the Holy Ghost, and be endewed with power from on High, all which was
accordingly fulfilled, Matthew. 16. 21. John 3. 13. Acts 1. 5. That he should
raise the Dead, and judge the World at the last day, John 11. 24, 25. Matthew.
26, 64. Matthew. 25. 40. Matthew. 7. 23.

Q. About what time of the World's Age from Adam's Creation did Christ suffer
Death?

A. About the end of Four Thousand Years from thence, by the best account of
Time.

SECT. VI.
Q. HOW did Christ perform the Office of a Priest?

A. In his Offering up Himself, by his Death, a Sacrifice of a sweet smell unto
God for our Sins, and by his continual Mediation and Intercession for us in
Heaven, Ephesians. 5. 2. Heb. 9. 26. Heb. 7. 25.

Q. Why was it necessary that Christ should Offer up Himself a Sacrifice to
God, by His Death, for our Sins?

A. To reconcile us unto God, and to make satisfaction to His Justice, and to
His just and holy Law, which we had transgressed, Ephesians. 2. 16. Coloss. 1. 20.

Q Why was the Justice of God to be satisfied for our Sins?

A. Because our Sins are a Debt, and the Justice of God required that this Debt
should be paid by us, or some other for us, as our Surety, Heb. 7. 22.

Q. Has then Christ paid to the Justice of God the Debt of our Sins?

A. Yea.

Q. How did he pay it?

A. By dying for us, and giving his Life a Ransom for us, Matthew. 20. 28. 1 Timothy
2. 6.

Q. What is a Ransom?

A. A Price that is paid for the Redemption of Captives.

Q. What was his Life that he gave for us?

A. The Life of his Manhood, that he laid down, when he dyed for us.

Q. Why was it necessary that He should dye for us?

A. Because Death was the Punishment that was due to us for our Sins, as it is
written, The Soul that sins shall dye; and Christ becoming Surety for us, by
his Death, he redeems and delivers us from Death.

Q. Whereas the Scripture says, Christ has redeemed us by his Blood, and has
Bought us with His Precious Blood, as of a Lamb without spot, has purchased us
with his Blood, and that we are justified, cleansed, and sanctified by His
Blood; what Blood is meant there, and in other such places of Scripture, that
mention remission of Sins by His Blood, Romans 3. 25. Romans 5. 9. Ephesians. 1. 6. Luke
22. 20. Acts 20. 28. Heb. 13. 12. 1 John 1. 7. Rev. 1. 5. 1 Pet. 1. 2.

A. The real Blood of his Body, that was shed on the Tree of the Cross, when
his Hands, and his Feet were nailed to the Cross, and his Side pierced, so that
Water and Blood came out of his Side John 19. 34

Q. Was His Blood the only Sacrifice and Atonement for our Sins?

A. It was but a part of the Sacrifice and Atonement, for he gave his Flesh, as
well as his Blood, for the Life of the World; and his Soul was made an Offering
for Sin. And, indeed, the Sufferings of his Soul were the greatest Sufferings.
My Soul (said he) is exceeding sorrowful unto death, Matthew. 28. 36. Coloss. 1.
21, 22. John 6. 51.

Q. What signifies the Word Atonement, Romans 5. 11.

A. Reconciling, Uniting, and making One, by a firm and close Union; as when
the Boards or Pieces of a Vessel are united 'by Glue or Pitch, that the Vessel
Lake not, from the Hebrew word Kopher, that signifies Pitch; also Ransom,
Redemption, Reconciliation.

Q. If his Blood was but a part, why is our Redemption, remission of our Sins,
Justification and Sanctification, so much attributed to his Blood?

A. By an ordinary Figure, or manner of Speech, when a part is put for the
whole; and as the Blood of the Beast is called [in Scripture] the Life of the
Beast, so the Blood of the Man Christ, was his Life, to wit, the Life of his
Manhood, which he gave a Ransom for our Sins.

Q. Is it not therefore a great Error in them, who say, the Blood whereby we
are Redeemed, Cleansed, Justified, is the Life, which is the Light in every Man?

A. Yea.

Q. Is the Life, which is the Light, even in the Saints, that Blood of
sprinkling, whereby they are Redeemed, Cleansed, Justified?

A. Nay, For any inward Gift or Grace of Light and Life in the Saints, is but
the Effect or Fruit, purchased and procured by the Blood of Christ, as the
Cause; but the Cause and the Effect should not be confounded, but distinctly
considered; although by the Figure of Metonymie, sometimes the Name of the
Cause is given to the Effect, as Exodus 21. 21. A Man's Servant is called his
Money, because his Money bought or purchased him.

Q. How did Christ Redeem, Reconcile, Justify and Sanctify Men by his Death,
and shedding of his Blood for them on the Tree of the Cross? Are Men simply, by
what he then did and suffered for them, Reconciled, Justified and Sanctified,
before true Faith, Repentance, and Conversion is wrought in them?

A. Men are not either Reconciled, Justified, or Sanctified, until true Faith,
Repentance, and Conversion is wrought in them, Romans 4. 5, 6. Acts 2. 38. Acts
3. 19. Acts 5. 30, 31. But Christ, by the merit of his Death, and shedding of
his Blood, and by all that he did and suffered for us without us, procured and
purchased for us, Redemption, Remission, Justification, and the inward Grace of
Sanctification; yea, Faith and Repentance, together with the Indwelling of the
Holy Spirit, and the spiritual Presence of Christ with all his saving Gifts and
Graces, all which in the time appointed of God are received and witnessed by
all them, who are or shall be saved, Psalm. 6. 18. Ephesians. 4. 4. Acts 5. 31.

Q. What is the chief thing that is to be considered in the Death and
Sufferings of Christ?

A. His most perfect, and most holy Obedience, and Resignation unto the Will of
his Father; for because he thus humbled himself, and became obedient unto
Death, even the Death of the Cross, therefore God has highly exalted him to be
a Prince and a Savior, Philip. 2. 8. 9.

Q. What made his Obedience of so great merit and worth?

A. Because he offered himself through the Eternal Spirit, Heb. 9. 14. and that
he was both God and Man, his Godhead gave that great dignity, worth, and value
to his obedience: That as the disobedience of one Man (to wit Adam) brought sin
and guilt upon all, so the obedience of one Man (to wit Jesus Christ the second
Adam) should make satisfaction to God, for the Sins of all; and as the
Judgment, was by one to Condemnation, so the free gift is of many Offenses unto
Justification, Romans 5. 16. 18.

Q. Why did not God forgive Men's Sins without a satisfaction to his Justice,
seeing Men can and do often forgive a debt of money, without payment, or the least
satisfaction.

A. The case is not alike betwixt the debt of money and the debt of Men's Sins; a
Man may forgive a debt of money, without requiring any satisfaction, but the Sin
of Murder, no Man can forgive it, without a satisfaction of life for life, and
God has expressly required it by his Law, which may help us to understand how
the Justice and just Law of God required a satisfaction; and if Christ would
make that satisfaction for us, he was to give his life for us, the just
suffering for the unjust, that he might bring us unto God, God having laid on
him the Iniquities of us all, who did bear our Sins on the Tree of the Cross,
by whose stripes we are healed, that being dead unto Sin, we might live unto
Righteousness, Isaiah 53. 6. 1 Pet. 2. 24. 1 Pet. 3. 18. By which satisfaction
that Christ has made to God for our Sins, not only the justice of God is
demonstrated, but his Holiness and Purity; for thereby he is made known to be a
God, that so loves Righteousness, and hates Iniquity, that the very Holiness
and Purity of his Nature, as well as the Righteousness of his Law required that
satisfaction to be made, that the Sins of Men might be pardoned, and God and
Men might be reconciled, and thus both the Holiness of God's Nature is
demonstrated, and the due Honor of his holy Law is preserved, Hab. 1. 13.
Isaiah 42. 21.

Q. Does not Christ his making satisfaction to the Justice of God for our Sins,
hinder the free forgiveness of our sins? How can a debt be fully paid, and yet
freely forgiven?

A. The forgiveness of our Sins, Romans 3. 24. is still a most free forgiveness
to us, because God freely gave us his dear Son Christ Jesus (out of his
abundant love) to make that satisfaction for us, and also that the Justice of
God accepted that satisfaction from Christ, which in strict instice might have
been required of us. Thus the wonderful Harmony of God's mercy and justice, and
also of his wisdom and power is demonstrated in the way of Men's Redemption,
Joh. 3. 16. Psalm. 85. 10.

Q. Did not Christ also give himself for our Redemption?

A. Yea, Gal. 1. 4. Titus 2. 14.

Q. Does it hinder God's free forgiveness, that he forgiveth none their Sins,
without Faith, Repentance and Conversion?

A. Nay, which may help us to understand, that as Repentance and Faith on our
part does not hinder the forgiveness of God to be free to us, and of his rich
free Grace, so nor does the satisfaction of Christ to God's justice, on
Christ's part hinder the same.

Q. But if Christ has suffered Death, being the Punishment of our Sin, why
should men dye? should the same debt and payment be exacted both from us and
our surety?

A. By Christ's dying for us, the Death of the Body cease to be a punishment
(strictly speaking) though it is a consequence of Adam's Sin still remaining
unto the Faithful; the sting of Death (which is Sin) being removed, Death is
changed from being a Punishment to the Faithful, to be a blessed and sanctified
means to put an end to the Sorrows, Tentations, and Evils of this mortal life,
and to be unto them a passage and entrance into eternal life, 1 Cor. 15. 55. 56.

Q. Who were the chief acters that put Christ to Death.

A. The Jews, who being filled with envy, accused him, of diverse things, and
particularly for saying, he was the Son of God, which they accounted Blasphemy,
and of his being the King of the Jews, and the Messiah or Christ, Matthew. 27.
18. John 10. 36. John 19. 7. 12. Matthew. 26. 63. 65.

Q. Under whom did Christ suffer Death?

A. Under Pontius Pilate a Roman Governor, John. 19. 1.

Q. Why under him?

A. Because the Jews at that time had their power taken away by the Romans, so
that they said to Pilate it was not lawful for them to put any Man to death,
John 18. 31.

Q. Was there not a great hand of Providence in this?

A. Yea, It having been foretold, by some of the Prophets that the manner of
Christ's Death, should be by Crucifying and Hanging on a Tree; therefore that
manner of death was called (in the Old Testament) accursed, Deuteronomy. 21. 23. to
signify beforehand, that Christ should become a Curse for us, and dye for us,
the accursed death of the Cross; and also it was foretold by David in the
second Psalm, that both Jews and Gentiles should gather together and take
counsel against the Lord, and against his Anointed.

Q. How was it foretold by any of the Prophets, that Christ should be Hanged,
or Crucified on a Tree?

A. David Prophesied, that his Hands and Feet should be pierced, which was
accordingly fulfilled, and was only used, in that manner of death; and Moses
lifting up the Brazen Serpent on the Pole, or Tree, was a Figure of Christ his
being lifted up on the Tree of the Cross, as Christ himself deolared, John 3.
14. Psalm. 22. 16.

Q. Were not all other things concerning Christ of the chiefest moment,
recorded in the New Testament, as his Doctrine, Miracles, manner of Birth, Life,
Death, Burial, Resurrection and Ascension, foretold by the Prophets, and
recorded in the Old Testament?

A. Yea, Acts 26. 22. 23. Luke 24. 44. 45. 46.

Q. Why was it so ordered by the Lord?

A. To give the greater Evidence, that Jesus, who was Born of the Virgin Mary
was the Christ, seeing to him only, and to none else, could all these things
agree, which were prophesied of him; as also to show the excellent Harmony of
the Scriptures of the Old and New Testament, being all given forth by one and
the same Spirit.

Q. What discovery of Christ's Death, Resurrection, and victory over Sin, and
the Devil, and of Salvation from Sin by Christ, had the Faithful, from the
beginning of the World?

A. By the first promise, that God gave to our first Parents after the Fall,
Genesis 3. 15. That he would put enmity betwixt the Serpent and the Woman, and
between his Seed and her Seed, and that the Woman's Seed should bruise the head
of the Serpent, but he should bruise his heel; and also by the Sacrifices,
which God taught them to offer, which were Types and Figures of Christ's
Sacrifice, that was to come, Heb. 11. 4.

Q. Who is here meant by the Serpent?

A. The Devil, according to Revel. 20. 2.

Q. What is meant by his Seed?

A. That inward Principle of defilement, and Seed of Sin, that was then sown by
the Devil in our first Parents, and through their Loins transmitted to their
Posterity, and that which is born of it, called in Scripture, the Old Man, and
the Body of Sin and Death.

Q. What is meant by the Serpents bruising the heel of the Woman's Seed?

A. That by means of the Devil, who instigated the Jews against him, Christ
should suffer Death in his Manhood Nature, but his Head, that is, his Godhead,
neither did nor could suffer any thing.

Q. What is meant by the Woman's Seed his bruising the Head of the Serpent?

A. His Victory over the Devil, by his Resurrection from the Dead, and that by
virtue of his Death, and Resurrection, the Power of Christ, by his Spirit in
all the Faithful, should destroy the Devils Power and Kingdom of Sin, flay the
Old Man, and Crucify the Body of Sin in them, and in due time, wholly deliver
them from Sin, and all the effects an^ (...) ^equences of it, Heb. 2. 14.
Coloss. 2. 15. 1 (...).

Q. When are the ^^^^^ful to be fully and completely delivered from all the
effects and consequences of Sin?

A. At the Resurrection of the Dead, at which time, that first promise shall
have its full accomplishment, 1 Cor. 15. ^4.

Q. What places of Scripture prove that the Sacrifices under the Law, were
Types of Christ's Sacrifice, and that the Blood of those Sacrifices, signified
the Blood of Christ, by which remission of Sin is obtained?

A. There are diverse, as Colos. 2. 16. 17. Heb. 8. 5. and 9. 9. 23. and 10. 4.
5. 6. 7. 8. 9. 10. 11. 12. 16 17.

Q What is meant by that place in Zach. 9. 11. As for thee also, by the blood
of thy Covenant I have sent forth the Prisoners out of the Pit, wherein is no
water. Is not that Blood the Blood of Christ that was to be shed, and was
accordingly shed, when he suffered on the Cross, by virtue of which, all the
Faithful, who once were Satan's Prisoners, are translated out of his Kingdom of
Darkness, (fitly signified by the Pit, wherein no Water is) and brought into
the Kingdom of the dear Son of God, where is Righteousness, Peace, and Joy,
Light, Life, Love and Liberty, and where Springs of living Waters flow?

A. Yea, Colos. 1. 13. Romans 14. 17. Isaiah 12. 3.

Q. Was not the Passover a Type of Christ, and as the (Exodus 12. 7.) Blood of
the Slain Lamb being sprinkled on the Lintels and Posts of the Doors of the
Israelites, saved them from the destroying Angel, so does not the Blood of
Christ the Lamb of God that was slain for us, sprinkled on our Hearts and
Consciences (not by any visible or material application, but) by Faith applied
to us, save us from the Wrath of God, and destruction?

A. Yea, 1 Cor. 5. 7. 8. Heb. 12. 24. 1 Pet. 1. 2. Heb. 10. 22.

Q. As the Israelites were to eat the Flesh of the Passover, so are not the
Faithful (not by a bodily eating but) by Faith, to eat the Flesh of Christ's
slain Body, that they may have Eternal Life?

A. Yea, John 6 53.

Q What places of Scripture prove that Christ was to be a Priest, and that the
Priesthood of the Law and first Covenant, was to end and give way to Christ's
Priesthood, that is unchangable and to remain for ever?

A. Psalm. 110. 4. The Lord has sworn and will not repent, thou art a Priest
for ever, after the order of Melchisedeck compared with Heb. 7. 11. 12. 24.

Q. How is Christ a Priest for ever, seeing the Sacrifice of himself, he did
offer but once, when he suffered Death on the Cross; and by one Offering, once
offered, he has for ever perfected them that are sanctified? Heb. 7. 27. Heb.
9. 28. Heb. 10. 14.

A. Because the virtue, merit, worth and efficacy of that one Offering, once
made, was sufficient for the expiation, and taking away the guilt of the Sins
of the Faithful, from the beginning of the World, unto the end of it, Heb. 9.
15.

Q. How is Christ a Priest after the Order of Melchisedeck?

A. Because Melchisedeck, which signifies King of Righteousness, was not only
a King, but a Priest also, so Christ is both King of Righteousness and King of
Salem, which signifies Peace, and also a Priest, and as Melchisedeck's
Priesthood did far excel the Priesthood of Levi, so does the Priesthood of
Christ far excel it.

Q. In what respects does Christ's Priesthood excel that of Levi, and differ
from it?

A. In many respects, as they are excellently set forth in the Epistle to the
Hebrews, Cap. 7. 8, 9, 10. As First, Christ arose a High Priest out of the
Tribe Judah. 2. He was made by Oath. 3. Not after the Law of a carnal
Commandment, but after the power of an endless Life, 4. These of the Levitical
Priesthood offered many Sacrifices yearly for Sin, but Christ, our High Priest,
offered Himself a Sacrifice but once. 5. They were sinners themselves, and
needed to offer for their own Sins as well as for the Sins of others; but
Christ was without all Sin, and only offered the Sacrifice of Himself for the
Sins of others, not only for the Jews, but for the whole World. 6. By reason of
death, they were not suffered to continue, but Christ continues for ever,
having once dyed, he dies no more. 7. They offered the Bodies, Fat, and Blood
of Beasts; but Christ offered up his whole Body of Flesh and Blood, together
with his Soul, an Offering for our Sins. 8. Their Offerings were but the
Figure, Type, and Shadow, his was the Substance, and thing signified. 9.
Christ, by virtue of his Priesthood, was made surety of a better Testament, and
of a better Covenant, which was Established upon better Promises. 10. None of
all their Offerings could take away Sin, or purge the Conscience from Sin, but
this his Offering once, did, to all that sincerely believe, and repent of their
Sins. 11. The High Priest on the day of Atonement, being the 10th. day of the
7th. Month, every Year, entered the Holy Place made with Hands, but Christ our
High Priest by his Atonement, has entered into Heaven it self, and has made
open and manifest the way thereunto, unto all true Believers and Followers of
him. 12. The Jews paid the Tithes or Tenths of their Increase to the Priests
and Levites, and they paid out of their Tenth a Tenth to the High Priest; but
the true Christians, which are the true spiritual Jews, give both themselves,
and their All to Christ their High Priest, and are ready to serve Him, and his
Gospel, with their All, for the propagation and service of his Gospel; and if
need be, and occasion requires, freely to give more than the Jews gave for the
service of the Gospel.

Q. What is signified by Christ's descent into Hell, according to the words of
the Creed (commonly called the Apostolical Creed and the 10th. Psalm, Thou will
not leave my Soul in Hell.

A. That he remained in the State and Condition of the Dead, all that time
betwixt his Death and Resurrection, in which interval of time he did further
Conquer and Overcome the Powers of Hell and Death, and made a glorious Triumph
over them, both at his Death and after his Death, (being free among the Dead,
Psalm. 88. 5.) And at his Resurrection and Ascension into Heaven, having led
Captivity Captive, Psalm. 68. 18.

Q. How, or in what Sense, did he lead Captivity Captive?

A. By his powerful and victorious Conquest over the Devil, Death, and Hell,
having loosed the pains of Death, it being impossible he could be held or
detained by them: He overcame the Devil and all his Angels, who had Captivated
so many Souls, and made a Captive of him; by means of which, many Thousands of
many Nations, by the Power of Christ, through the Preaching of the Gospel, soon
after Christ's Ascension, were rescued from the Devil's Bondage, and from
serving him by their abominable Idolatries, and other vile Sins and Lusts, and
became Servants of God and of Christ; and by the same Victory then obtained,
the Kingdom of Sin and Satan will be more and more weakened, until it be utterly
destroyed, and the Kingdom of God and Christ, in Truth, and Righteousness, and
Holiness, advanced until its perfect State.

Q. Was the Guilt of our Sins laid upon Christ, and imputed to him, when he
suffered Death for our Sins?

A. As Guilt signifies obligation to Punishment it was laid upon him, and
imputed to him, but not strictly and properly speaking, as it signifies the
blame or the culpableness of them: As when that Grocian King, with his free
consent and desire, suffered Punishment for his Son, to lose one of his Eyes
for his Sons Adultery, another Eye being taken from his Son, that the honor
and justice of his own Law might be preserved; yet, who will say, that the
blame of his Son's Crime was his, or that he was blameworthy on that account?

Q. How is that place of Scripture to be understood, Is. 53. 9. With his
Stripes we are healed? Were not these Stripes his Sufferings both of Soul and
Body as Man, that he suffered without us?

A. Yea, with, or by which we are healed, because they were of that merit and
efficacy, that by them he procured and purchased that inward Virtue and Grace
to be given us, by which the Wound and hurt that Sin had given us is healed,
and by means of which, that pure healing Balsam and Oil comes from him into our
Souls for their healing.

Q. What Figure or Type of this was given in the Old Testament?

A. The beaten Oil, that by the beating and bruising of the Olive, came out of
it, which was commanded, together with the fine Flower that came out of the
Wheat, by its being ground, to be offered with the daily Sacrifices, and (...)
the Wine that was to be offered, with the (...) ring, which was the Blood of
the Wine (...) after it was pressed; also the Water that (...) out of the Rock,
being struck by Moses (...) that refreshed the Israelites, when they were ready
to dye for thirst, has the like (...) ^tion; the beaten Oil, the fine Flower,
and the Wine, in these Offerings, did all of them signify, as well as the
Water that came out of the Rock, when struck by Moses's Rod, the healing,
nourishing, and refreshing Virtue of Christ's Grace, which is given us by his
Sufferings, Exodus 29. 38, 39, 40, 41.

Q. Is it not therefore a gross perversion of that place of Scripture, to
understand by the Stripes of Christ, wherewith we are healed (as some have
understood them) the Stripes wherewith Men by their Sins stripe Christ in
themselves, wound and bruise him, as some affirm, or yet the stripes that he
(The Light Within) gives them in their Consciences when they sin?

A. Yea.

Q. Did Christ's Body in the Grave see Corruption?

A. Nay. Acts. 2. 31.

Q. Did it really rise on the third day?

A. Yea.

Q. Was it his real Body which appeared to his Disciples after his
Resurrection, which spoke unto them, and did Eat and Drink with them?

A. Yea.

Q. What Sign or Figure of Christ's Restirrection in the third day did Christ
himself give out of the Old Testament?

A. The Sign of Jonas, Matthew. 12. 39, 40. That as Jonas was three days and
three nights in the Whale's Belly, so should the Son of Man be three days and
three nights in the heart of the Earth.

Q. What Figure in the Old Testament did signify that Christ should rise from
the dead on the first day of the Week, being the next day after the Sabbath,
and be the first Fruits of the Resurrection?

A. The sneaf of the first Fruits of their Harvest, Levit. 23. 10. 11. which
they were to bring to the Priest, and which he was to wave before the Lord, on
the morrow after the Sabbath, that answers to the first day of the Week wherein
Christ rose from the dead, and became the first Fruits of them that sleep.

Q What signified the waving of the Sheaf?

A. The waving of it was the Priest's moving it Southward and Northward,
Eastward and Westward, signifying the Redemption and Salvation of all the Elect
by Christ Jesus, from the South, North, East and West Parts of the World,
called, the four Winds of Heaven, Luke 13. 29.

Q. What other Type in the Old Testament, signified our Redemption by the Death
of Christ, our high Priest?

A. The Release of the Manslayer, out of the City of Refuge, by the Death of
the high Priest, so that he had liberty to return to his ancient Inheritance.

Q. What did the year of Jubilee, that was each fiftieth year, signify wherein
they had their former Inheritances restored, after they were sold?

A. Our Restoration by Christ, who came in the fiftieth Generation, from the
Flood of Noah, which was as a beginning of the new World; for from Arphaxad,
(who was the first that was born after the Flood) to Abraham are eight
Generations, and from Abraham to Christ, forty two Generations, making in all
fifty Generations, Genesis 11. 12. Matthew. 1. 17. Beside what Mystery lies hid in
the number Fifty.

Q. Is it not a great Error in them, who say, that Christ 's Body evanished, or
was changed in Substance, and did not ascend, but another Body in its place and
stead?

A. Yea.

Q. What is the hurt and evil Consequence of that Error?

A. It overturns, not only all the Ground of the Hope of the Resurrection of
our Bodies, but of our whole Salvation; for it Christ be not risen, they that
are sallen asleep in Christ are perished, and all their Faith is vain, and
Preaching vain, and all Men are yet in their Sins. and the Apostles are false
Witnesses, and Christ 's Prophecy, (who foretold his Resurrection on the third
Day) has failed, 1 Cor. 15. 13, 14, 15.

Q. But may not his Resurrection be owned, and not his Ascension into Heaven
with the same Body?

A. The one cannot be owned without the other; for if Christ 's Body did not
ascend, it did evanish or return to Dust, and Christ Dyed again, and his Body
suffered Corruption, (which could not be) for the Scripture witnesses, that
Christ having once dyed, dies no more, Death has no more dominion over him.

Q What Scriptures in the Old Testament, foretold Christ 's Ascension?

A. Diverse places, such as Psalm. 24. 7, 8, 9, 10. Psalm. 47. 5. Psalm. 68. 18.
Isaiah. 52. 13. Genesis 49 9.

Q. What Figure in the Old Testament did signify Christ 's Ascension?

A. The burnt Offering, the Smoke of which ascended straight upwards, whence it
has its name in the Hebrew, from a word that signifies to ascend?

Q Was not Isaack's being said on the Altar, and afterward being raised alive,
a Figure of Christ 's Death and Resurrection, according to Heb. 11. 19.

Q. Is there a real place above the Earth, called Heaven, into which Christ
has entered with his Body, and whole glorified Manhood of Soul and Body?

A. Yea.

Q How does this agree with Scripture, that says, Flesh and blood cannot
inherit the kingdom of God? 1 Cor. 15. 50.

A. It is the same Body in Substance, though changed greatly in Manner and
Qualities, from Natural or Animal, Genesis 11. 12. Matthew. 1. 17. to Spiritual,
from Mortal to Immortal; such as the Bodies of the Saints shall be at the
Resurrection.

Q. Why do we not see that Heavens with our bodily Eyes, into which Christ 's
Body is entered?

A. Because of the Weakness and Grossness of our Flesh, and of our fleshly
Sight, which can scarce see the Body of the Air, that we breath in, nor behold
the brightness of the Sun; but when our Bodies shall be changed, and made
Spiritual at the Resurrection, we shall see the glorious Heavens, and also the
glorious Body of Christ, and the glorified Bodies of all the Saints in Heaven.

Q. Is there also a real place, called Hell, into which the Wicked both Soul
and Body shall be cast at the Day of Judgment?

A. Yea, which is that called Tophet, Isaiah 30. 33. Which has been ordained
of old, he has made it deep and large, the Pile thereof is Fire and much Wood,
the Breath of the Lord like a stream of Brimstone does kindle it.

Q. What signifies Tophet, and why is it so called?

A. Tophet signifies the beating of a Drum, and was the place where the
Idolatrous Israelites burned their Children, and Sacrificed them alive to their
Idol Molech, where they used to beat Drums, to hinder them from hearing the
pitiful Cry of their Children; therefore by a Metaphor, Hell is called Tophet,
and by the like Metaphor, Hell is called by Christ in the N. Testament,
Gehenna, i. e. the Land or Field of Hinnon, where all the Filth of the City of
Jerusalem was cast into, that piece of Ground having formerly belonged to a Man
called Hinnon.

Q. Why has God so ordered it, that as the place of Reward to the Saints, and
of Punishment to the Wicked, should not be seen by us in this Life, nor
apprehended by any of our outward Senses; so that none should come from the
Dead, to tell us of these things?

A. That thereby we might have the greater occasion for the Exercise of our
Faith, which is the Evidence of things not seen, Heb. 11. 1. We have not only
Moses and the Prophets Testimony concerning future Rewards and Punishments, but
the Testimony of Christ himself, who rose from the Dead, and has given us in
the Records of the holy Evangelists and Apostles in the New Testament, full and
sufficient Ground of Faith, to believe these things, to which the Spirit of
Truth does bear an inward Witness, and who will not believe on such great
Evidences, nor would they believe, if any should rise from the Dead to tell
them, Luke 16 31.

Q. How is Christ the Object of our Faith, for Remission of Sin and
Justification; is it as his Blood is shed, in us, and as he offers up himself a
Sacrifice in us (as some say) to appease the Wrath of God?

A. Nay, for all such Notion of Christ 's blood being shed in us, and his
offering up himself in us a Sacrifice for Sin, to appease the Wrath of God, is
false, and contrary to Scripture, etc.

Q Is then Jesus Christ considered as he died for us without us, and rose
again, and as he was the Sacrifice for our Sins by his Death, and Blood that
was outwardly shed, the Object of our Faith, for Remission of Sins and
Justification?

A. Yea, Romans 10. 9, 10. Coloss. 1. 20. Heb 12. 2. Acts 10. 41.

SECT. VII.
Q. HOW does Christ perform his Kingly Office?

A. By his various Administrations of it in the several Parts thereof.

Q. Which are the several Parts of it?

A. First, Such as respect Angels, both good and bad, and the whole Creation.
Secondly, Such as respect the World, or that part of Mankind that do not belong
to his Church. Thirdly, Such as belong to his Church.

Q. Has Christ a Kingly Power and Government over all the good and holy Angels?

A. Yea, Heb. 1. 6, 7. Col. 2. 10. Ephesians. 1. 21. Phil. 2. 10. Mark 1. 25, 9, 25.
Luke 4. 35, 9, 42.

Q. Has he also a Power and Government over the evil Angels, and all evil and
unclean Spirits, and the Devil the Prince of them?

A. Yea, as plainly appeared, by the Power and Authority he used to cast forth
the unclean Spirits out of the Bodies of many that were Possessed.

Q. Has Christ also a Kingly Power and Government over Heaven and Earth, and
the whole Creation?

A. Yea, as is evident from his own words, that all Power in Heaven and Earth
was his, being given him of the Father, Matthew. 28. 18. Matthew. 8. 26, 27. Mark
2. 27, 28. Acts 10. 36. And which he showed by his commanding the Winds and the
Seas, and the great Miracles which he wrought, who, as he was Lord of the
Sabbath, so he was Lord of all Creatures?

Q. How does Christ put forth his Kingly Power and Government over Devils and
wicked Men, seeing they are Disobedient to him?

A. By restraining and limiting their Power, overruling their evil Designs and
Actions, and causing them to turn to his Glory, and the Glory of his Father,
and to the good of his chosen; and lastly, by Judging and Punishing them at the
last day, Psalm. 76. 10. Romans 8. 28. Acts 17. 31. Matthew. 8. 29.

Q. How does Christ perform his Kingly Office over the World, or that part of
Mankind, that do not belong to his Church, and neither are, nor shall become
Members of it, but remain Impenitent to the last?

A. By giving them a righteous Law, universally in their Consciences for the
Transgression of which, they are liable to his Judgment, Romans 2. 12. As well as
they, who have transgressed against the outward written Law or Gospel.

Q. What places of Scripture prove, that the Gentiles, or that part of Mankind,
which have not the outward written Law, nor Gospel, have a righteous Law placed
by God and Christ in their Hearts and Consciences, according to which, they are
liable to be Judged?

A. There are many, such as Genesis 6. 3. Psalm. 94. 10. Job 28. 28. Micah 6. 8.
John 1. 4, 5, 9. Romans 1. 18, 19, 20, 21. Romans 2. 14, 15.

Q. Is that Law in Men's Consciences, universally any other than the mere
Reason of Man, commonly called human Reason, and the Use or Improvement of it
by its mere natural Actings?

A. Yea, for it is really Divine, being given them of God to Rule and Govern
all the natural Faculties of Man's Soul; even his Reason it self, which is out
Corrupted, and dictateth false and corrupt things to Man in his corrupt State;
but this Law of Righteousness, writ by God's Finger in his Heart, neither is,
nor can be Corrupted; it is a Light given to enlighten his Reason, and as a
Lamp to him in his night State, or as the Light of the Moon and Stars in the
night Season, Romans 1. 13, 12. 1 Thessalonians. 5.

Q. If any Men should be found, who have Obeyed this Law, or Light in their
Consciences, universally, should they be saved, not having Faith in Christ
Crucified?

A. First, it is an improper and unfit Supposition, because, never any have
universally Obeyed it in all Points; for according to the Scriptures Testimony,
all have sinned, and fallen short of the Glory of God, and the Scripture has
concluded all under Sin; for he who Transgresses in one Point, is guilty of
the whole Law, and whatsoever the Law says, (whether outwardly or inwardly
written) it says to them that are under it, that every mouth may be stopped,
and the whole world become guilty before God, Romans 3. 9. 10. 19. 23. Jam. 2.
10. Secondly, upon that supposition, Men could not be saved with Eternal Life
and Salvation, by their best works and most perfect obedience, to any Law or
Light in them, because Eternal Life is the gift of God through Jesus Christ our
Lord, and not the wages of Men's obedience, nay, not of the Saints (in a strict
sense) for (as says Paul) the Scripture has concluded all under Sin, that the
promise (to wit of Eternal Life and Salvation) by Faith of Jesus Christ might
be given to them that believe, Gal. 3. 22.

Q. But did not Paul say, that the doers of the Law are justified, and that
some of the Gentiles, who had not the outward Law, were doers of the Law, or
did by Nature the things contained in the Law, and that their thoughts accused,
or excused one another? Romans 2. 13. 14. 15.

A. Though they did some things contained in the Law, yet they did not all
things, but failed in diverse respects, (as often even the Faithful do) and that
their, thoughts excused them at some times, as well as at other times accused
them, this proves, they did nor perfectly fulfill the Law, wherein they were
excused, it was but in part, and in comparison of greater Sinners, as Christ
said, concerning Tire and Sidon, Sodom and Gomorrah, that should rise up in
judgment against the Jews; yea, excusing in the largest sense is far short of
justification before God, which none but Believers in Christ Jesus have.

Q. How then are Peter's words to be understood, that God is no respecter of
Persons? But in every Nation, he that f^areth him and works righteousness is
accepted with him?

A. There is a twofold acceptance, the one of a Servant, the other of a Son:
Cornelius and his Household being pious Gentiles, who did fear God and work
Righteousness, were accepted in that State as Servants, but this was short of
the justification and acceptance of Sons, and of being in a State of Salvation,
which none have, but through Faith in Christ Jesus; and that Cornelius, before
Peter Preached Christ to him, (as he dyed and rose again) was not in the State
of Salvation, with respect to Eternal Life, is evident from the Angels words to
him, how that Peter should Preach words to him, whereby he and all his House
should be saved. Moreover that through faith in Christ, as he dyed and rose
again Peter Preached remission of Sins to Cornelius, and not through his
Obedience in respect of what he did formerly, is clear from Acts 10. 43. To him
(said Peter) gave all the Prophets witness, that through his Name, whosoever
believes in him shall receive remission of sins.

Q. Does it from hence follow, that all the Heathens, however so virtuous, and
all others of Mankind, who have not had Christ and the Gospel outwardly
Preached to them, and have not outwardly heard it, are perished, and shall be
damned?

A. Nay, it no wise follows, for though Gods ordinary way of Salvation is by
the outward means of the Word outwardly preached or read; yet this hinders not,
but that others may be, and shall be saved, who have not outwardly heard, God
working by his Spirit, when, where, and how he pleases.

Q. Does not this therefore lay a foundation of a judgment of Charity, for such
upright and virtuous Gentiles as Cornelius was, before, Peter Preached Christ
to him, of whom we read in the New Testament, and as Abimelech was, of whom,
and of his uprightness we read in the Old Testament, Genesis 20. 5. 6. who have
not had the Scriptures and other outward means of Salvation, afforded unto
them, that Christendom has, that they are not without a possibility of
Salvation, (though not on the account of their Works) through Faith in Christ
Jesus, seeing God who is Light (and in a true sense may be said to be the Light
in them, as being the Author and Fountain of all true Light, or illumination,
whether common or special) is abundantly sufficient to give them what degree of
Faith in Christ Jesus, either implicit or explicit, for Eternal Salvation, he
thinks needful to them.

A. Yea.

Q. But it is one thing, what God can do, or is sufficient and able to do, and
another what he does, or is pleased to do. Have any such a degree of Faith,
either explicit or implicit, given them of God, by his inward teaching and
illummation, without the Scriptures, as does suffice to their Eternal Salvation.

A. Abraham, Job, and diverse others have so bad it, and all the Heirs of
Salvation, wheresoever scattered, shall have it, when and how God pleases,
whose ways are above our ways, as the Heavens are above the Earth; for as there
is no Name under Heaven, whereby Men must be saved, but the Name of Jesus, even
him that dyed and rose again, neither (as Peter said) is there Salvation in any
other, Acts 4. 12. so nor is there any promise of Salvation to any but through
Faith in that same Jesus; for it is one God that justifies the Circumcision
(i. e. the Jews) by Faith, and the Uncircumcision, Romans 3, 30 (...) c. the
Gentiles) through Faith, and another way than by Faith (or without Faith, in
Christ Jesus, the scriptures do not hold (...) for attaining Eternal Life and
Salvation.

Q. How does Christ perform his Kingly Office in and over his Church?

A. By converting them, and ^^^hering them out from among the Dross an^ ^^^ish
of the World to himself, (God having (...) in Christ Jesus before the
Foundation of the World, that they should be holy, and having given them to
him, Ephesians. 1. 4. Joh. 6. 37. 39. Joh. 1^. 6.) by giving them the Holy-Spirit,
and the saving Gifts and Graces thereof to sanctify, renew, and regenerate
them, into his own Image and Likeness, and to crucify and mortify the Old Man
in them, with his deeds, by pardoning their Sins and justifying them, by giving
them his Laws, and writing them in their hearts, by protecting and defending
them, and ruling them by his spiritual Presence and Indwelling in their hearts,
and by subduing his and their Enemies, Matthew. 1. 21. Acts 3. 26. 1 John 3. 58.
Jer. 31. 18. 19. 33. 34. John 11. 92. Isa. 11. 12. Isa. 43. 5. 6. 7. John 16.
7. 8. 9. 10. 11. 12. 13. 14. Titus 3. 4 5. 6. Mark 2. 10 John 10. 28. 29. Isa
9. 6. 7. John 17. 23. 26. Psalm. 110. 1. 2. 3. 5. 6. Coloss. 2. 11. 12.

Q. Was not Christ's Resurrection from the Dead, and his Ascension into Heaven,
as well as his giving, and sending down the Holy Ghost upon his Disciples, on
the day of Pentecost, all great and glorious Acts of his Kingly Office and
Power?

A. Yea, John 10. 17, 18. Psalm. 68. 18. Ephesians. 4. 8, 12, 13.

Q. What place of Scripture in the Old Testament was a Figure of Christ's
giving the Holy Ghost on the day of Pentecost, which was the fif^^^th day from
his Resurrection?

A. The Feast of Weeks, that was commanded to be kept on the fiftieth day from
the day, (...) Sheaf of the first Fruits was offered Levit. 23. 15. 16.

Q. Is Christ to come from Heaven to judge all Men that ever lived, or shall
live, even the quick and the dead?

A. Yea, as the Scriptures plainly testify, 2 Timothy 4. 1. John 5. 27, 28, 29.

Q. Will his coming and appearance be without us in his glorified Body, and
true Manhood Nature?

A. Yea. Acts 1. 11.

Q. When will that time be that he will so come?

A. Of that Day and Hour knows no Man, nor the Angels in Heaven, Matthew. 24.
36, 42, 44. The coming of Christ is infallibly certain, but the particular time
of it, God would not have made known unto Men, that we may be continually
watching, and give no way to security or sloth, but be always preparing for
our Lord's coming.

Q. How, or in what manner will Christ come?

A. He will come with great Power and Glory (by which Power he will raise the
dead Bodies of all Men, both Just and Unjust) in the Glory of his Father, and
of his holy Angels, with the Voice of the Archangel, and the mighty sound of a
Trumpet, in Kingly. Power and Majesty, who is King of Kings and Lord of Lords,
Matthew. 15. 27. Mark 8. 38. 2 Thessalonians. 7. 8, 9, 10. 1 Thessalonians. 4 16.

Q. Is then his coming to raise the dead, and to judge the quick and the dead,
a part of his Kingly Office?

A. Yea, Matthew. 25. 34, 40. Rev. 19. 16.

SECT. VIII.
Q. WHat did the Covenant of Works, or the Law of Works, require of Men?

A. The Law and Covenant of Works required of Men perfect and perpetual
Obedience in their own Persons, and does so still require of all that are under
it; so that the breach of it, and the transgression against it, in the least
point, brings under Wrath and Condemnation, and the Curse, without any promise
of forgiveness; the terms of which are, Do and Live, Romans 10. 5. Gal. 3. 10,
12, 13.

Q. Were not many of the Jews and Twelve Tribes of Israel, under the Covenant
of Works?

A. Yea.

Q. What was that Covenant of Works?

A. The Moral Law, delivered to them in the two Tables of Stone from the Lord
himself by the Hand of Moses (the which Law written and engraven in Stones,
though Glorious, is called by Paul the Ministration of Death and Condemnation.
2 Cor. 3. 7, 9.) and some other positive and special Laws, as contained in the
Books of Moses.

Q. Was the Law of Circumcision, the Passover, the Sacrifices of Sin Offerings,
any part of the Covenant of Works?

A. Strictly considered they were not, but according to the design of God, and
their true signification, they all belonged to the Covenant of Grace, as it was
then administered, as Signs and Seals thereof; being a part of the more obscure
Administration and Dispensation of it for that time, as under Vails and
Figures, during that state of Minority, as it were of the Church.

Q. But such as relied and rested upon their Obedience that they performed to
these Laws, and had not Faith in Christ, and relied not upon the free Love,
Mercy, and Grace of God, in and through Christ; did they not make it a Law of
Works to themselves, and so fell short of Justification?

A. Yea, Romans 10. 3.

Q. And are not many, called Christians, in the same danger, if they rely and
rest upon their Obedience to any Law, either Outwardly or Inwardly given them,
as the Foundation of their Justification?

A. Yea.

Q. Are the Gentiles, who have not either Law or Gospel outwardly Preached or
Administered to them, under any other Covenant of God, than that made at first
with Adam?

A. They are not under any other Covenant, but they are under the Law of
Righteousness, writ or placed by God in their Hearts and Consciences, Romans 2.
15.

Q. Why may not the Gentiles, in their mere Gentile-dispensation, be strictly
said to be under a Covenant of Works, without respect to Adam?

A. Because all Covenants that ever God made since with Men, both were by some
special Revelation, and had some external Figure or Signs given by God for its
Confirmation; but so is not this Law universally put in all Men.

Q. May not this divine Law or Light, put in all Men, be called the Law or
Light of Nature, which seems warranted by Rom 2. 14. where it is said, The
Gentiles do by Nature the things contained in the Law?

A. If by Nature, in that place, we understand the Nature of Man, to be the
subject of Reception, and not the efficient Cause and Author of it, it may be
in called: But though Man's Nature is the subject of it, yet it is God, and the
eternal Word that is the efficient Cause, Author, and Original of it, and not
the corrupted and defiled Nature of Man.

Q. What is the nature of the Covenant of Grace, called the New Covenant?

A. It holds forth Remission of Sin, and Justification freely, by the Grace and
Favor of God, through Jesus Christ the Mediator of it, the promise of the
Spirit, and the saving Graces and Gifts thereof, for our Sanctification,
Regeneration, and Renovation, and for our mortifying and crucifying the Old
Man, and the body of the Sins of the Flesh, the taking away the heart of Stone,
and giving us a heart of Flesh, God's writing his Laws in those hearts of
Flesh, and giving us his special teachings and special Illuminations,
Operations, and influences of his Holy Spirit, working in us Faith, Hope, and
Love, and filial Fear, and all other Virtues and Fruits of the Spirit, and true
Gospel Repentance all suited to the Gospel and new Covenant Dispensation, and
all this freely by, and through, and for Jesus Christ's sake, together with the
promise of Eternal Life and Salvation, Jer. 31. 33. 34. Jer. 32. 39. 40. Ezekiel.
11. 19. 20. 36. 25. 26. 37. 26. 27. Gal. 4. 24. 26. 28. Heb. 12. 24. Isa. 44.
3. 4. 59. 21.

Q. But does not the Covenant of Grace require any terms or conditions on our
part, as Faith and Repentance, and new Obedience?

A. It requires nothing of the true Subjects of it, as terms and conditions,
but such as God promises freely to give, the Faith and Repentance and
Obedience that it requires, God has promised freely to give; by virtue of his
Covenant; and no condition, or terms, that Men can perform, are any the least
moving cause, to move God, to enable us to perform those conditions.

Q. But is there not an Order, in the way and manner of God's giving his many
several Favors, Gifts, and Blessings, to the Children of the New Covenant, as
remission of Sin, Justification, Adoption, and Eternal Salvation?

A. Yea, There is an excellent Order, of some things to go before, and other
things to follow; some of which go before, and others follow only in order of
Nature, and others in order of time, as plowing and sowing the Ground goes
before Harvest and Reaping; yet neither the plowing or sowing are the moving
cause to move God, to give the Fruit and Increase.

Q Does then Faith and Repentance, in order of Nature go before remission of
Sin, and Justification, though they are together in time?

A. Yea.

Q. How does this appear from Scripture?

A. By many plain testimonies of Scripture, as first, concerning the necessity
of Conversion and Faith, in order both to forgiveness of Sin, Justification,
and Salvation. This was Paul's Commission given him by Christ unto both Jews
and Gentiles, Acts 26. 18. To open their eyes, and to turn them from darkness
to light, and from the Power of Satan unto God, that they may receive
forgiveness of sins, and inheritance among them, which are sanctified through
faith that is in Christ Jesus; and Romans 10. 6. The righteousness which is of
faith, speaks on this wise, say not in thy heart, etc, v. 7. but what says
it, the word is nigh thee, even in thy mouth, and in thy heart, that is the
word of faith, which we preach, that if thou shall confess with thy mouth the
Lord Jesus, and shall believe in thine heart, that God has raised him from the
dead, thou shall be saved; for, with the heart man believes unto
righteousness, etc. Again, Romans 8. 29, 30. In that excellent golden Chain,
containing several Links that follow one after another: There is Predestination
going before Calling, and Calling before Justifying, and Justifying before
Glorifying. The Calling (that is, not an outward Calling only, but chiefly an
inward Calling, and inward Work of God's Holy Spirit enlightening the
understanding, and moving the Heart and Will to answer the Call) is not the
proper Cause of either Justification or Glorification, but a necessary
antecedent of it in order of Nature, as the holding out of the Hand is
antecedent in order of Nature, to receive a free gift from him who freely
gives; for Faith has no causality, in order to receive forgiveness of Sin, and
Justification, more than the Hand has to receive a rich and free Gift, which
Faith is also the free Gift of God. Again, Acts 10. 43. Said Peter in his
Preacing to Cornelius and his Friends, To him, (viz. Christ Jesus,) even him
whom they Slew, and Hanged on a Tree, gave all the Prophets witness, that
through his Name, whosoever believes in him shall receive remission of Sins.
Secondly, As to Repentance, its being necessary in order to forgiveness and
blotting out of Sins, Peter's words are plain, Acts 3. 19. Repent ye therefore
and be converted, that your sins may be blotted out, etc. And Acts 5. 30, 31.
The God of our fathers raised up Jesus, whom ye slew and hanged on a tree, him
has God exalted with his right hand, to be a Prince and a Savior, for to give
repentance unto Israel, and forgiveness of sins. And Luke 24. 47. Christ, after
his Resurrection, taught the Disciples the true Method and Order of Preaching,
That repentance and remission of sins should be preached in his Name, among all
Nations, beginning at Jerusalem. Thus we see how though Repentance and
Remission of Sins are joined together in those places, yet in order, Repentance
is put antecedent to Remission of Sins.

Q. But is not Repentance a proper effect of remission of Sin, as the Soul has
a lively sense of it wrought by the Spirit of God in the Soul, as it was said
of Mary Magdalen, she loved much, because much was forgiven her, who was a deep
and great Penitent?

A. As some degree of Repentance is antecedent to forgiveness, not as its
Cause, so there are other degrees of it that are consequents thereof, and may
be called the effects of it.

Q. Are the Infant Children of believing Parents within the Covenant of Grace,
together with their Parents, so that the Promise is to them and their Children?

A. Yea, Act. 2. 39. Gal, 4. 28. Genesis 17. 7. 1 Cor. 7. 14.

Q. What is the alone meritorious and material Cause of Men's Justification
before God? Is it not the Righteousness of Christ's most holy and perfect
Obedience (unto Death, and the shedding of his most precious Blood) done and
performed by him without us, freely of God imputed to us, and received by Faith?

A. Yea.

Q. What places of Scripture in the Old Testament hold forth the Justification
of the Faithful, and their eternal Salvation by Faith?

A. That in Genesis 15. 6. compared with Romans 4. 2, 3. Abraham believed in the
Lord, and it was counted to him for Righteousness; from whence Paul inferred,
that Abraham was not justified by Works, though he was a very holy Man, but by
Faith. And though Abraham's Faith is not expressly said to have been in Christ,
as he was to come and suffer Death for our Sins in the Flesh, yet it is
certainly implied, for the great Promise of God to Abraham was, That in his
seed all nations of the earth should be blessed, and therefore Abraham also was
blessed in that seed, which seed was Christ, as he came in the Flesh, out of
Abraham's Loins, [and not the Light within, or inward Principle and Seed of God
in Men's Hearts, as some have most perversely construed] a great part of which
Blessing was forgiveness of Sins, and Justification through the Righteousness
of Christ, without us, freely imputed to us, for that Abraham believed in
Christ, as he was to come and suffer death in the Flesh, and rise again, is
clear, Abraham saw my day and rejoiced (said Christ,) yea, he received Isaac
after he had laid him on the Altar, in a Figure that signified his Faith, that
Christ should not only suffer Death, but be rais^d from the Dead. And for
Justification, by Faith in Christ, given to the holy Ancients, Paul Cites that
place of the Old Testament, in Habukkuk 2. 4. The just shall live by his faith
And Peter qu^^es a place in Isaiah 2. 8 16. 1 Pet. 2. 6. Behold I lay in Zion a
chief Corner Stone, Elect: Precious, and he that believes on him shall not be
confounded. And that Cloud of Witnesses mentioned Heb. 11. Who are all said to
have dyed in Faith; their Faith did certainly respect Christ Jesus, as he was
to suffer death, and rise again, because he was, and is the sure Foundation, to
whom all the Prophets gave witness, that whosoever believes in him should
receive remission of Sins.

Q. How then is James to be understood, who says Abraham was justified by
Works, and Rachab?

A. Not in the sight of God, but as an evidence both to themselves and others,
that they were justified.

Q. Are they not very fallacious, who Teach Justification, by the Righteousness
of Christ imputed to the Faithful, and mean thereby the inward Work of
Righteousness, or Sanctification wrought in them?

A. Yea.

Q. And is it not Popish, and contrary to Scripture to Teach, that the Works
which Christ works in us, or which we work by the help of his Spirit, are
meritorious of Justification, seeing Abraham, whose Works were such, was not
justified by his Works?

A. Yea.

Q. And is not the ground of their so Teaching false, and proceeding from great
Ignorance; whereas they ^y, the Works that Christ or the Spirit works in us are
not ours, but Christ's? for though Christ, by his Spirit, is the efficient
Cause of them, yet he is not the only efficient, for we also work with him, and
we are the only formal Cause of them; it is not Christ in us, that Repents,
Believes, Obeys, but we, by his help and assistance; and therefore, though Christ
is a perfect Agent, yet while we are not perfect, the Work is not perfect; for
the nature of the Effect follows the imperfect Cause, especially the formal
Cause. An Effect altogether good, must have all its Causes perfectly good;
otherwise, if there be a defect but in one of them, the Effect is imperfect?

A. Yea.

SECT. IX.
Q. WHat use has that inward Law of Righteousness, or Illumination in all Men,
given them by Christ, if no Man can be eternally Saved by it, without Faith in
Christ Crucified?

A. It is of great use, as it is a preparatory Ministration of the Spirit, in a
lower degree and kind of Operation, for convincing of Sin, and giving the
knowledge of Sin, and working in the Soul a sense of God's Wrath and Judgment
for Sin, that is of that service to Men; as when Men are Condemned to dye for
their Crimes, and afterward hear of the King's gracious and free Pardon, their
former Condemnation makes the Pardon the more precious and acceptable to them.
That was it that Paul calls the Ministration of Death and Condemnation, 2 Cor.
3. 7, 9. that was glorious in its Season, that is, antecedent and preparatory
to the Ministration of Justification that follows, and is much more glorious:
For as God led Israel of old by Sin^^i, where the Law was given with terror, to
Sion and Jerusalem, that signifies the Vision of Peace; and where the Temple
was built, without the noise of a Hammer, 1 Kings 6. 7. So God now leads his
Israel through the inward Ministration of the Law, to the inward Ministration
of the Gospel and New Covenant of Grace, of Life and Peace.

Q. What other use has it, especially to the Faithful, who are come under the
New Covenant?

A. So far as the dictates and teaching, Light and Knowledge of it extends, it
serves for a Rule of Life (together with the Scriptures) in things of moral
Honesty, Justice, and Temperance; for if our Reason as Men be still of great
use to us, in things of Reason, certainly that Law or Light in us, and in all
Men, that is greater and more excellent, than Humane Reason, is of great use
and service to the most Faithful. And Obedience to it, as a Rule of moral Life,
is so necessary, that no Man can be saved without sincere Obedience to it.

Q. But does not the more special Light and Illumination of Faith, given to the
Faithful under the New Covenant, make the other void and useless, and as it
were extinguish it, as the Light of the Day seems to extinguish the Light of
the Night?

A. Nay: For as Christ said he came not to destroy the Law and the Prophets,
but to fulfill them; so he is not come, either Outwardly, or Inwardly to destroy
either our Reason, as Men, or any former Light or Illumination, that he had
given; nor does the Light of the Day extinguish the Light of the Night,
strictly speaking, though it may seem so to do, but does rather strengthen it,
and better it. And why should the more excellent Light of Faith extinguish this
other Light of Moral Justice, more than it does extinguish our Reason as Men,
which by experience is not so found, but the contrary, that the more we are
enlightened by, or with, the Light of Faith, our Reason is the more refined,
pure, and clear, strong and vigorous.

Q. What ground of Scripture is there for Two Lights, or more than one? Is
there not rather one only Light, which is God, and the Word Christ, which is
one with him, that inwardly shines in the hearts of all Men?

A. The Light originally is but one, and that is God, and Christ the Eternal
Word, the Fountain of all Light, Wisdom, Grace, and Goodness; yet this one
Fountain sends forth its various Streams according to his good Pleasure; and
though there is but one God, yet there is diversity of Operations, and but one
Christ, yet diversity of Ministrations, and but one Spirit, yet diversity of
Gifts, as the Scripture plainly declares; hence we find in Scripture, that God
is called the Father of Lights, and the God of all Grace; also we read both of
the manifold Wisdom of God, and his manifold Grace; and of the seven Spirits of
God, answering to the seven Lamps, or Lights in the Sanctuary, which Solomon,
according to the Wisdom given him of God, increased the number of unto Ten.

Q. But can God, or Christ, as he is the Word, be said to be a Light in Men,
either universally in all Men, or specially in faithful Men?

A. Yea, both universally in all Men, and more specially in the Faithful, it
being generally acknowledged, not only by Christians, but by Heathen Poets,
Orators, and Philosophers, that God, and his Word and Spirit, is in all the
Creatures; and as it is said in the Book called Wisdom, Gods incorruptible
Spirit is in all things, Wisdom 12. 1 So that there is no Goodness, or Virtue,
or Excellency, that is in either Stone, Metal, Vegetable or Animal, but God is
the Author and first Cause of it; and that, not as at a distance, or without
things only, but as near, yea, so near, that, as God is in all things, so all
things are in him; and in him we live, and move, and have our Being; and
therefore, as God is Light essentially in, and to himself, so by an easy
Metonymie, God and Christ may be said to be a Light to, and in all Men, as the
Cause and Author of all the Light that Men have universally; and more
especially he is in, and to the Faithful their Light, (as David said, The Lord
is my Light and my Salvation, Psalm. 27. 1.) enlightening them with greater and
more high and noble Illuminations and Lights, than he does other Men, and so is
a true Cause of their Salvation, as their Light in them, but not the only
Cause, as within them, but also as in Christ Godman without them, and together
with him, their great High Priest, Mediator, Advocate, Head of divine Influence
and spiritual Nourishment, etc.

Q. But if God and Christ be a Light in Men, then what need is there of any
thing else without Men? What need of Christ God-man without them, to enlighten
them, seeing they have God and Christ in them?

A. The Presence and In-being of one Cause takes not away the Influence,
Virtue, and Operation of another Cause; as it were a false Argument to say, God
is in a Field of Earth, as the great Cause of its fruitfulness, and therefore
that Field will produce Corn, without Seed, and without Dew and Rain from
Heaven, and without the Influence of the Sun, all which are external second
Causes; even as false it is to argue, God and Christ considered as the Word, is
in every Man, and in the Saints, and Operates in them; therefore they need not
Christ considered as God-man, the Word made Flesh, their High Priest, Mediator,
Advocate, and Propitiation in Heaven without them, or any influence of heavenly
Dow, Rain, or Warmth from him, that Sun of Righteousness, in whom the Fullness
of the Godhead dwells bodily, who is full of Grace and Truth; and of whose
Fullness (as said John) we all receive, and Grace for Grace.

Q. I^ it not therefore a great Error in them, who blame that assertion, that
the Light Within, whether in Saints or Heathens is not sufficient to Salvation
without something else, that something else being understood to be the Man
Christ (who is both God and Man) and the Sacrifice of himself, by his Death on
the Cross, his Resurrection, Ascension, and Intercession for us in Heaven; all
which are something else than the Light Within, whether in Saints or Heathens?

A. Yea, and it is a downright setting Deism and Hethenism in opposition to
Christianity, and a subversion of it.

Q. But did not Christ say to Paul, 2 Cor. 12. 9. My grace is sufficient for
thee, and was not that Grace in Paul, and if sufficient, what need any thing
else?

A. The Grace of Christ was in Paul, but in measure, and in Christ in all
fullness; and though the present measure of Grace that was in Paul was sufficient
for that present time, yet not without Christ; as a Man's Hand is sufficient to
handle a Pen, and Write, or do other Work, but not without the Man himself; nor
was that measure sufficient for all time to come, but Paul needed a daily
supply of more Grace out of Christ's fullness; as the Bread we received last
Work, and the Drink we then drank, will not satisfy us now, without a new
supply of daily Bread and Drink, so nor will the measure of Grace given the
last Week or Day suffice to Day, but we need daily to pray, in respect of our
spiritual Bread from Heaven, Give us this day our daily Bread, or as some think
it better translated, Give us this day the Bread of our Sustinence, or
Sustentation.

Q. Has the Grace of God and of Christ then, as it signifies an inward
Principle, that he gives to Men, its several measures?

A. Yea, it has, as Paul said, to every of us ^s Grace given, according to the
measure of the Gift of Christ, Ephesians. 4. 7.

Q. Has the Spirit of God any measures or parts?

A. Properly speaking, nay, For the Spirit of God is one and the same Infinite
Being with God, and God has no Measures, Parts, nor Passions.

Q. Is then the Grace of God a distinct thing from the Spirit of God?

A. Yea, though not divided or separated therefrom.

Q. How then are we to understand that manner of Speech used by some that, one
has a greater or lesser measure of the Spirit than another?

A. Not as with respect to himself, but with respect to the Gifts and Graces
thereof; also when the Spirit is said to be quenched, that cannot be understood
of the Spirit himself, but of his Operations.

Q. How is the Scripture to be understood, that says, the Holy Ghost was sent
down by Christ upon the Apostles? for seeing the Holy Ghost is that Infinite
Spirit, and is every where present, he is not capable of any local motion of
Descent or Ascent?

A. That Descent is also to be understood, not with respect to himself, but his
Gifts and Graces.

Q. What are the saving Graces and Gifts of Christ, and of the Holy Spirit? Are
they not an inward Seed and Principle of a spiritual and holy Life, (the same
that John calls the Seed of God, 1 John 3. 9. and Peter the Incorruptible Seed,
of which the Children of God are Born, 1 Pet. 1. 23.) containing all the
Virtues, Graces, and Fruits of the Spirit in it Seminally; as Faith, Hope,
Love, Temperance, Patience, Humility, Meekness, etc. Even as the several Parts
and Fruits of a Tree are contained in the S^^d o^ it, which Seed, is by Christ
Jesus infused into the Souls of the Faithful, to be in them a Principle of
spiritual Life, and of holy Living and Acting?

A. Yea.

Q. But is not the Word and Doctrine of the Gospel, outwardly Preached, called
the Seed by Christ himself? Matthew. 13. 19.

A. It is so called, partly Metaphorically, and partly by a Metonymie, where
the Thing containing receives the Name of the thing contained; the External
Word and Doctrine being as it were, the Conduit whereby the Seed of God's Grace
is conveyed into the Soul, and whereby that Seed does Operate in the Souls of
Men, for their Regeneration, who receive it with Faith and Love.

Q. How, and whence have the Faithful the Holy Spirit given unto them of God?
Is it not by and through Christ, considered as he is both God and Man; our
Elect High Priest, Prophet, and King, Head and Mediator, without us in Heaven;
and as our Faith is exercised on him thus, as its Object, flowing into us, and
imparting unto us, both the Holy Spirit, and his saving Gifts and Graces, and
the daily increase of them?

A. Yea.

Q. By what Figure or Type was this signified under the Law?

A. By the Oil that was poured on Aaron's Head, and did run down from his Head
and Beard, to the lower Skirts of his Garments.

Q. What Testimonies of Holy Scripture have we for this?

A. Many both in the Old and New Testament, as Isa. 32* ^, 2. Isa. 59, 21. John
1. 14, 16. John 7. 38, 39 John 4. 14. John 15. 26. Acts 2. 33. Ephesians. 4. 7, 8, 15.

Q. Can it then be supposed, that they have the Holy Spirit, or the saving
Gifts and Graces thereof, who have not Faith in Christ, as he is both God and
Man without them in Heaven, seeing the Promises are only to them that believe
in him as such?

A. Nay.

Q. Do not such who think they have all within them needful to Happiness and
eternal Salvation, make themselves equal with Christ, and as near to God, in
way of Union and Communion, as Christ? And are not such guilty of great
Idolatry and Blasphemy?

A. Yea.

Q. Is Christ God-man without us, the Head of all gracious Influences, not only
as the procurer and purchaser of them, by the dignity and merits of his most
holy Obedience unto Death, but also, as the real dispenser of them, out of the
fullness of all Grace and Truth that is in himself, so as that he is the great
Storehouse of Grace, out of whom, God the Father, who dwells in him in all
Fullness, supplyeth the Church, and every true Member thereof?

A. Yea, Ephesians. 4. 7. 8. 15. 16. Coloss. 2. 19. Joh. 1. 16. Col. 1. 19. 2. 3. 9.

Q. What are these divine Influences, Gifts, and Graces, which the Faithful
receive of God, out of Christ, and which come down from above from the Father
of Lights, and descend as the Rain upon the mown Grass?

A. It is far better to know and enjoy them by spiritual gust, taste and
feeling, than by any nice and dry Speculation of them. They are like the Manna
from Heaven, which though the Children of Israel fed on, yet they knew not what
it was, Exodus 16. 15. Rev. 2. 17. Let it suffice us to know them by the Names
which the Scripture calls them, Streams of Life, living Waters, Rain and Dew
from Heaven, divine Powers, Lights, and Virtues (like the Virtue that went out
of Christ, that healed the Woman of her Issue of Blood) Gifts and Graces, Milk,
Honey, Bread, Wine and Oil, a Feast of Fat things; all which though borrowed and
metaphorical Names, yet signify more excellent and precious things than all
worldly Treasure, for they are the true and incorruptible Substance and Riches
which never fade away, nor never take Wings to fly from them that love them,
and him of whom, and by whom they have them, Isa. 12. 3. 55. 1. 25. 6. Psalm.
68. 9. Hos. 14. 5. Psalm 81. 16. Prove. 8. 21.

SECT. X.
Q. WHat are the Laws that God does write in the Hearts of his People, Jerem.
31. 33. Are they not the same that are writ in the holy Scriptures, excepting
the Ceremonial part that is abolished, and some other Laws peculiar to the Jews?

A. Yea.

Q. How does he write them in their Hearts? Is it without all use of outward
means?

A. Nay.

Q. Then are not the Laws, writ in the Hearts of the Faithful, by the Spirit,
in the use of outward means, as a Transcript or Copy from the holy Scriptures
themselves?

A. Yea.

Q What is the difference betwixt the Law writ in the Hearts of the Faithful,
and the Law writ in the Hearts of the Unfaithful?

A. There is a great difference, the one has the Law writ in Stony Hearts, the
other has it in Hearts of Flesh, that are made by the Lord soft and tender.

Q Of what service are the Promises contained in the Scripture to the Faithful?

A. Of exceeding great use and service, for by them, through the Operation of
the Spirit, we are made partakers of the divine Nature.

Q. What is the difference betwixt the manner of God and Christ their being in
the Saints and true Believers, and the manner of their being in Unbelievers,
and Unconverted Persons?

A. As to the essential Presence of God, and the essential Word and Spirit,
that is the same every where, and in all things, but in respect of
Manifestations and Operations, the difference is great; for the Faithful have
peculiar and special Manifestations and Operations of God and Christ in them,
which none others have. Again, God and Christ, and the Holy Spirit, are in the
Faithful by Union and Communion, and Inhabitation, or In-dwelling by Faith and
Love, but not so in unbelievers and unsanctified Persons. Hence it is that
unbelievers are said to be without God and Christ in the World, without Hope,
Strangers and Aliens from the Commonwealth of Israel.

Q. How is Christ in the Saints their Hope of Glory? Coloss. 1. 27.

A. It is not so to be understood, as if Christ were only their Hope, or the
Object and Author of it only as within them, and not as without them, as he is
God-man, the great High Priest, Mediator and Advocate, and as their Head; for
he is the Saints Hope both ways considered; for Paul gave thanks to God for the
Hope laid up for the believing Colossians in Heaven, 1 Coloss. 3. 4. 5. And
surely that was more, or something else, than what they enjoyed of Christ
within them, unless Men will say (as some have said) that there is no Heaven at
all without Men, but only within them, nor any Hell but within them, which is
abominable Ranterism; but we cannot have the saving knowledge of him, nor that
sweet and comfortable experience and enjoyment of him, and of his Love and Life
and spiritual Blessings, but as the Mystery of him is inwardly revealed in us,
and his Love and Life inwardly felt by us; for as Christ within the Saints, and
without them, is but one Christ, so it is but one great Mystery, which yet may
be distinguished into two parts, the greater part being God manifest in the
Flesh (to wit, in the Flesh of Christ, as he outwardly suffered) justified in
the Spirit, seen of Angels, Preached to the Gentiles, believed on in the World,
received up into Glory, which Paul said, was without Controversy, the great
Mystery of Godliness, and without all doubt is the greater part of the Mystery;
for the best of the Saints have not the Fullness in them, it is only the
glorified Man Christ Jesus, without them, who has that Fullness; but every one
of the Saints have a measure of the Gift of Grace out of that Fullness, as the
Water in the Cistern is but a sinall part of that which is in the River; and
though there be ever so much good Water in the River without me, yet if I drink
not of it, and have not some of it within me, I cannot be refreshed, nor
satisfied, nor can I live by all the Water that is in the River or Fountain
without me, unless I receive of it within me to refresh me: But if there were
no Water in the River without me, I could have none to drink and receive within
me, but behoved to perish for thirst.

SECT. XI.
Q. WHen we feel a great thirst and want of the Water of Life within us, how
are we to receive a supply, to refresh and satisfy our thirsty Souls?

A. By asking it of God, through Christ, and praying to God, in the Name of
Christ, with true Faith.

Q. How are we to pray to God and Christ, whether as God and Christ are within
us, or without us, or as both within us and without us?

A. We are to pray to God, as he is Omnipresent, who is above All, and through
All, and in All, as well as that he is Omniscient, i. e. knowing all things,
and Omnipotent, i. e. able to do all things; and as the Saints (Recorded in
Scripture) prayed to God in Heaven, because that is the most glorious Place,
where he reveals his greatest Glory, and is his Throne, so they prayed to him,
who is the Great and Holy One in the midst of them: And Christ promised to be
in the midst of them, that should meet together in his Name, according to his
spiritual Presence with them and in them, Ephesians. 4. 6. 1 Kings 8. 23. 30. 39. 43.
49. 2 Chronicles. 6. 14. 21. 23. 25. Psalm. 46. 5. Psa. 12. 6. Zeph. 3. 5. 17. Joel.
2. 27. Ezekiel. 43. 7. Zech. 2. 10. 11. Matthew. 18. 20.

Q. Ought we not in all our Prayers, Adorations and Thanksgivings, to direct
the Eyes of our Minds by Faith to God, especially as dwelling in the glorified
Manhood-nature of Christ without us in Heaven, and also to Christ, Godman in
Heaven, who in respect of his Bodily Presence is only in Heaven, and is in us
by his Spiritual Presence, and gracious Influences?

A. Yea.

Q. What Type was there of this in the Old Testament?

A. The Children of Israel, whenever they prayed, being remote from it, were
to direct their Faces toward the Temple of Jerusalem, 1 Kings 8. 29. 30. 38.
42. 48. Which Temple was a Type of our Lord's Body and Manhood-nature in
Heaven, to which our Minds, by Faith and Love, should be turned, when we pray
to God and Christ; which yet does not hinder, but that we should and ought to
pray to God and Christ, spiritually Present with us and in us, whose Presence
fills Heavens and Earth, and who is not a God afar off only, but a God nigh
at hand, a present and ready help to help and relieve us at all times.

Q. What Type was there in the Old Testament, of Christ's Intercession for us
in Heaven?

A. Moses's Intercession for the Children of Israel in the Mount, who prevailed
against Amaleck their great Adversary below, while Moses in the Mount held up
his Hands, Exodus 17. 11. 12. making Intercession for them; even so, by Christ's
continual Intercession for us in Heaven, we have not only acceptance of God,
but receive power to overcome our Sins and Lusts, and the Devil and all his
Tentations that assault us here on Earth, which were it not for Christ's
continual Intercession for us in Heaven, we could never do.

Q. Does the Man Christ, now in Heaven, hear our Prayers, whether uttered in
Words, or conceived in our Minds, and knows all our afflictions, trials, and
exercises?

A. Yea certainly, and his tender Heart and Soul is touched therewith; for we
have not an High Priest which cannot be touched with the feeling of our
Infirmities, Heb. 4. 15. And seeing we have this great High Priest that is
passed into the Heavens, let us hold fast our Profession, and let us come
boldly unto the Throne of Grace, that we may obtain Mercy, and find Grace to
help in time of need, Heb. 4. 14. 16.

Q. Are Saints or Angels to be prayed unto?

A. Nay, Rev. 22. 9.

Q. Seeing we cannot pray acceptably to God, nor profitably to our selves,
without the present Aid and Assistance of the Spirit of God, ought we not at
all times to wait with inward attention to that Assistance to help us to pray,
and in our praying?

A. Yea, Ephesians. 6. 18.

Q. Is that Aid and Assistance of the Spirit perceptible to the Souls of the
Faithful, so as to be felt and discerned by them?

A. Yea, when the Mind is in a right frame.

Q. Seeing it is possible, that a Man may take that for an inward assistance of
the Spirit of God, which is not really such, but some deception of Satan, or
strong imagination, and on that mistake, may have a false joy, and counterfeit
refreshment, how is he to be helped in that Case?

A. Though the use of outward means is good in their place, as Reading,
Conference, Advice from others of greater Spiritual Experience and Seize,
and examining both the Case, and a Man's own Sincerity, by the outward help of
the holy Scriptures, yet a Spiritual discerning given of God, is most necessary
for his help, (...) prevent a Man's being deceived, and ^^^ceived to discover
the deception to him, Heb. 5. 14.

Q. Can it be supposed that any of the Faithful will want that assistance of
the Spirit, either to pray, or give thanks, or perform any religious Service
that is their Duty to perform to God, upon all occasions that their state and
condition requires of them, whether in private or public, in some measure or
degree, that God will accept?

A. Nay.

Q. Is it not therefore a great Error and Sin in them, who omit Prayer, and
Thanksgiving, and other religious Exercises, upon that pretense and excuse,
that they want the motion and assistance of the Spirit thereunto?

A. Yea, Jerem. 10. 25.

Q. But ought we not to take great Care to have our Hearts and Minds in some
prepared frame in order to Prayer, or any other religious Exercise?

A. Yea.

Q. How is that Preparation obtained?

A. Partly by internal Silence, and partly by Meditation.

Q. How by internal Silence?

A. By suppressing and silencing, not only all worldly Thoughts, but all
Self-thinking, Selfwilling, and Self-acting whatsoever; [Note, by
Self-thinking, Self-willing, and Self-acting here, is understood, whatever a
Man Thinks, Wills, or Acts, by his mere natural strength of Mind, without the
gracious Aids and Assistances of the Holy Spirit,] all which do but Cloud and
Vail the understanding, and weaken and hinder the exercise of our Graces, and
the more Noble Faculties and Powers of our Souls, and quench the Motions and
Operations of the Holy Spirit.

Q. Is such an internal Silence possible, and have any attained to it?

A. It is not only possible, but many have attained to it; and it is very
necessary to attain to it, which is gradually obtained, and the difficulty
comes gradually to be removed; and such an attainment, becomes exceeding
delightful and sweet, as well as profitable to the Soul; surely David had
attained it, when he said, Truly my Soul is silent on God, Psalm. 62. 1. as the
best translation is, and, Unto thee, O Lord, silence praise in Zion, Psalm. 65.
1. As intimating, that as God is praised in silence, so praise cannot be truly
performed unto God, while the Mind is unsettled, disquieted, and discomposed,
which it will needs be until it come to true Silence; as also when he said, My
heart is fixed, O God, my heart is fixed, Psalm. 57. 7. and then it follows, I
will Sing and give Praise, and diverse places of Scripture hold forth not only
the duty of inward Silence, or ceasing from all Self-actings, whether of the
Understanding or Will, but also the great profit and benefit of it, Lam. 3. 27
28. Psalm. 4. 4. 46. 10. Isa. 30. 7. 19.

Q. How by Meditation?

A. After the Mind is cleared and disburdened of all Self-disquieting thoughts
and actings, then (as a fruitful Soil, having good Seed sown in it, and being
watered with Rain from above, and warmed with the Sun's heat, brings forth
plenty of sweet smelling Herbs and Flowers, both pleasant to the Sight, and
profitable for Use, which it could not do while it was loaded with Rubbish)
being helped with the Rain and Warmth of God's Holy Spirit, it brings forth
with ease and pleasure, precious and wholesome Meditations, and Thoughts most
suitable and proper to its present state, upon variety of objects, all which do
greatly conduce to dispose the Soul for Prayer and Thanksgiving, and any other
religious Duty.

Q. Does the holy Spirit help us in Meditation, without all use of outward
means of Instruction, as Reading in the holy Scriptures, Hearing Conference?

A. Nay, but by using frequently these outward means, the Holy Spirit by his
holy Inspirations and Motions, brings seasonably to our remembrance what we
have formerly heard or read, and have been taught out of the holy Scriptures of
divine Truth, and also brings to our frequent remembrance the great Love and
the many Mercies of God to us both Spiritual and Temporal, and his great and
manifold Deliverances, Preservations, and gracious Providence, which afford us
matter of Praise and Thanksgiving unto God, which ought to be offered up with
our Prayers.

Q. What things more particularly, are the proper and necessary matter and
subject of our Meditation?

A. The Works of Creation and Providence, both in general and particular, (and
more especially, the Psalm. 77. 10. 11. Psalm. 143. 5. Eccles. 12. 1.) great Work
of our Redemption, and the great Glory of God, that is wonderfully demonstrated
therein, in his great Attributes of Mercy, and Justice, Wisdom, and Power, in
most excellent Harmony and how the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost are all
concerned in that great Work; the Father did not dye for us, but he so loved
us, that he spared not his dear Son, but gave him freely to dye for us; and
Christ so loved us, that he freely gave himself for us, to suffer the cursed
Death of the Cross, in our stead; and the Holy Ghost so loved us, that he is
come to be a true and faithful (...) so us in our hearts, to assure us that
Christ dyed for us, and to apply to us, the great Worth, Essicacy, and Merit of
what Christ has done and suffered for us, who is the free gift both of the
Father and the Son to us, and also freely gives himself to us, by whom, God
through Christ, does work the true convincement in us of our sin and misery,
and the true Conversion from it, begotting in us true Faith, Hope, and Charity,
and all other Evangelical Virtues and Fruits, which are therefore called the
Fruits of the Spirit; all which ought to be the most frequent matter and
subject of our most serious and devout Meditation; together with the exceeding
great obligation of duty that lies upon us, of Love and Obedience, as the
reasonable return of such exceeding great and rich favor, love and mercy
freely bestowed upon us, which are the great motives to Christian Obedience;
also the Laws and Commandments of God and Christ (to the end we may obey them,)
ought to be our daily study and meditation; in the doing of which we may expect
the Blessedness and Promises of God, to be fulfilled to us Psalm. 1. throughout;
and likewise the precious Promises of God recorded in Scripture, ought to be
frequently in our Meditations, that by them we may be encouraged, to pray to
God, for the performance of them: And we ought not only to have continually
before the eyes of our Minds, the great Love of Christ, in his dying for us,
but his most holy Example, in his most perfect Obedience, Resignation,
Patience, Humility, Self-denial, Love to his Enemies, that we may follow his
Steps, 1 Pet. 2. 21. Moreover the frequent consideration of our State, past,
present, and future, with the most diligent and impartial examination of our
selves, and of our daily conversation, both exterior and interior, is most
necessary for us, that wherein we have failed in our duty, either to God, to
our selves, or our neighbors, we may be humbled and sorry for it, confess our
sins to God, and ask forgiveness of God, for Christ's sake, and wherein we have
been helped by his Spirit and Grace, to advance, in the ways of Holiness to
bless and praise God through Christ Jesus for the same; also the frequent
meditation of Death and Judgment, the vanity of the World, with all its Prouts,
Pleasures, Honors and Preferments, and the exceeding great advantage of
Godliness, which has both the Promises of this Life, and of the life to come
is exceeding both profitable, and necessary to us, in all which, or whatever is
necessary to be remembered by us, Cant. 1. 4. Psalm. 8. 3. 4. Psalm. 63. 5. 6.
Psalm. 119. 23. 48. 148. 1 Timothy 4. 15. 2 Timothy 2. 8. Psalm. 104. 34. and made the
subject of our frequent meditation, the faithful may expect the assistance of
God's blessed Spirit, in the diligent use of the means and helps that God has
offered to us.

Q. To whom are we to pray and give thanks, as the one entire object of Divine
Worship, Prayer, and Thanksgiving?

A. To God the Father the Son Jesus Christ God Man, and the Holy Spirit, and
who is also the one entire object of our Faith, 1 Cor. 1. 2. 3. Revel. 1. 4 5.
6.

Q. Are we to make use of any Images in Divine Worship?

A. Nay, Exodus 20. 4. 5. Acts 17. 25. 29. 30.

Q. How are we to pray, and give thanks so as to be accepted?

A. In Spirit and Truth, in sincerity of heart, in Faith without doubting, in
humility, in holy fear with understanding, with love and fervency of heart,
with frequency and constancy, to all which we need the continual help of God's
Spirit and Grace to aid and assist us, John 4. 23. 1 Timothy 2. 8. Genesis 18. 27.
Genesis 32. 10. 1 Thessalonians. 5. 17. 1 Cor. 14. 15. Heb. 12. 28. Jam. 5. 16.

Q. Is not private Prayer alone by our selves, in secret a necessary duty daily
to be practi^ed by us?

A. Yea, Matthew. 6. 6.

Q. Is not also Prayer with others, in Families, and especially in public,
where the Faithful meet together a necessary Duty?

A. Yea, Jerem. 10. 25. Matthew. 18. 20. Acts 13. 3.

Q. What are the things for which we are chiefly to pray?

A. They are briefly contained in that excellent form of Prayer, which Christ
taught his Disciples, saying, Our Father, etc. all other Prayers throughout the
Scriptures, containing nothing for substance, but what is comprehended in that
Prayer, and may be reduced to some Head thereof, Matthew. 6. 9.

Q. Is not external Worship (with our Bodies and outward Man) as Vocal Prayer
with our Mouths, and the reverend behavior of our Bodies, as in bowing,
kneeling, standing, when we Worship God with Prayer and Thanksgiving, a
necessary part of Worship, as well as the internal of the Heart and Mind, and
commanded of God? 1 Cor. 6 20. Ephesians. 3. 14. Romans 15. 6.

A. Yea.

Q Is it necessary and proper for the best of Men to confess their Sins, and
pray for forgiveness of them?

A. Yea, 1 John 1. 9.

Q. Why should they pray for forgiveness of Sin, who have received it already?

A. They have the same cause, as to pray for their daily Bread, who have it
already; beside that, the great and most solemn and public forgiveness of Sin
is yet to come, at the day of Judgment: And the frequent sinful defects and
imperfections that we fall into (as James said, In many things w^ offend all)
require and call for our frequent confession, and asking of God the forgiveness
of our Sins, Acts 3. 19. James 3. 2.

Q. For whom are we to pray?

A. Not only for our selves, but for all Men; for our Enemies, for our Friends
and Relations, and Neighbors, for the King and all in Authority, for the whole
Church of God, and all the Faithful every where, and for all such of God's
Elect as are yet unconverted and scattered, that they may be converted and
gathered, for the prosperity and success of the Gospel, that Truth,
Righteousness, and Peace may be advanced, Error, and every false Way brought
down, Deceivers may be discovered, and the Deceived recovered and reclaimed, 1 Timothy 2. 2. Psalm. 51. 18. Psalm. 7. 9. Matthew. 5. 44. 2 Thessalonians. 3. 1.

Q. Does the Spirit of God teach us to pray, without all outward means of
Instruction, or use of the holy Scriptures?

A. Nay, but in the use of them the Spirit of God working Faith in us, and
inflaming our Hearts with fervent Love and Affections (wherein the very
Substance and Life of Prayer does chiefly consist) and bringing to our
remembrance words of the holy Scripture, or the matter thereof, suitable to our
present states and conditions.

Q. But does not the Spirit at times give new words to a Man that has a
spiritual Gift of Prayer?

A. Not new coined words, for that would be a new I anguage, but the Spirit
may, and does at times, help a Man to apply and accommodate words already in
use, both Scripture words and others, suitable and seasonable to the matter of
his Prayer.

Q. Must be who prays by the Spirit, every time that he prays, use variety
of different Expressions?

A. This is not always needful, for Christ who had the Spirit above all Men
that ever were or shall be, prayed three several times, using the same words,
Matthew. 26. 44 Mark 14. 39.

Q. Is there not a true Prayer of the Mind and Heart, that is very acceptable
to God, and also very profitable to the Faithful, when they do not utter
audible words, and there is not a proper season to utter them?

A. Yea, as the Scriptures plainly testify, Lam. 2. 18. Genesis 24. 45. 1 Samuel 1.
13.

Q. Is there not also a true Prayer in the Hearts of the Faithful very
frequently, without all words so much as conceived in the Mind, as a Man may
feel a hunger and thirst after Meat and Drink, without saying in his Heart,
that he is hungry or thirsty?

A. Yea, which Prayer is the true Spiritual hunger and thirst after God and
Christ, to enjoy still more and more of his Love, Life, and Holiness; and is
the continual motion and ascent of the Soul unto God and Christ by Love and
Desire, and is the most principal thing in Prayer, which is often without all
words, either outwardly expressed, or inwardly conceived; and after this manner
the Faithful pray continually and without ceasing, as the Heart is in a
continual motion by the natural Life that is in it, so the Mind and Soul of
every Faithful Man, is in a continual motion by the spiritual and divine Life
of God and Christ in it, that it may still more and more approach to God, and
be made conformable to him, Psalm. 42. 1. 2. Psalm. 63. 8.

Q. Though the Faithful are not to expect any new Articles or Doctrins of Faith
to be revealed unto them by the Spirit, nor any new Laws or Rules of moral Life
but what are contained in the Scriptures, yet such as are spiritual and holy
Livers, and walk with God in their daily Conversation, both as to the exterior
and interior part of it, with great exactness, diligence, and circumspection,
regarding God and the leadings and guidings of his Spirit, that leads into all
Truth, according to the plain Institution and Rules of the holy Scripture, both
in Faith and Practice, may they not hope, pray, and wait for, and certainly
find, clear and certain dire^tions of God's holy Spirit in their Hearts and
Souls (which they may certainly know to be such) to direct and guide them
safely and comfortably in the contingent and doubtful affairs and intricacies
of humane Life, respecting matters in themselves indifferent, neither commanded
nor forbidden in Scripture, which often cannot be resolved by the best dictates
of mere humane Reason, helped and assisted by general Rules of moral Prudence;
and has not the experience of many good and holy Men in all Ages confirmed the
truth of it; and are there not Promises of God in the Scripture, that he will
give such direction and guidance to such whom he counts worthy of it, and who
in Faith and Humility pray and wait for it?

A. Yea, (although it is great presumption in any that are but Carnal and lax
in their manner of Life to expect such inward Direction, Counsel and Conduct)
for which see the following Scriptures, Psalm. 37. 23. Prove. 3. 58. Prove. 4. 12.
8. 9. Jam. 1. 5.

Q. Ought not the first day of the Week, on which our Lord Rose from the Dead,
be observed and kept, so as to be solemnly set apart for the Service and
Worship of God, both in Public and Private, with abstinence from servile
Labor and from worldly Affairs, both in commemoration of our Lord's
Resurrection on that day, and also in commemoration of the six days work of
Creation, and the 7th. day of Rest, the first day of the Week being one day in
seven?

A. Yea.

Q. What Reasons are to be given for the Observation of the first day?

A. The example of the Faithful in the Apostles days, whereof we have diverse
Testimonies in Scripture and the constant practice of the Church in (...) ever
since: As also that the Lord's day mentioned by John in the Revelation whereon
he had his Revelation, was esteemed by the Ancient Christians that lived near
to the Apostles days, to be the first day of the Week, as Justin Martyr plainly
testifies; and that on that day the Faithful met for the solemn Worship of
God; and it was called the Lord's day, not simply because our Lord arose on
that day, but because he commanded it to be kept in commemoration of his
Resurrection; as the Supper is called the Lord's Supper, because he commanded
it in commemoration of his Passion; and Christ honored the first day above
others, with his appearing several times to his Disciples after his
Resurrection (before he Ascended) on that day; and on that day gave the Holy
Ghost, being the fiftieth day from his Resurrection, which did fall on the
first day, and still so falls. Matthew. 28. 1. John. 20. 1. 19. Acts 20. 7. 1
Cor. 36. 2. Rev. 1. 10.

Q. Are not also solemn times of thanksgiving to be observed by the Faithful,
where not only in Private, but in Public Assemblies, they ought to give thanks
to God for solemn and more than ordinary Mercies, Deliverances, and
Preservations?

A. Yea, Exodus 5. 1. etc. Jerem. 30. 18. 19. Dan. 4. 35. 36. 37. Rev. 5. 9.
Rev. 15. 3. 4. Rev. 19. 1. 2. 5. Nehem. 12. 27. John 10. 22. compare Mar. 1. 4.
52. 53. 54. 55. 56.

SECT. XII.
Q. WHat is the Catholic Church?

A. It is the whole Multitude of the Faithful wherever to be found, having
one Faith, one Lord, one Baptism, who are one Body (though many Members) having
one Spirit, and Hope of their Calling, and one God and Father, over All,
through All, and in them All, Ephesians. 4. 45. 6.

Q. What are the best marks of the true Church?

A. Purity of Doctrine, a due and right observation and practice of all the
Institutions and Ordinances of Christ under the Gospel, and Holiness of Life
and Conversation, Matthew. 7. 24. Ephesians. 2. 20. 21. 22.

Q. Are Hypocrites and bare formal Professors, who have nothing of the inward
Life and Power of Religion, Members of the Church?

A. Nay, as the Tares are not Corn, yet as the Tares are mixed often with Corn,
and until the Harvest hardly discernible from the Corn, Matthew. 13. 38. so there
may be, and are Hypocrites mingled among the Faithful, under the same visible
Profession with them, like the foolish Virgins among the wise, Matthew. 25. 2.
And such, until they discover themselves either by Words or Deeds that are
scandalous, neither can, nor ought to be rejected or disowned upon whatever
pretense of a Spirit of discerning but the Rule that Christ has given is to be
kept to, to judge the Tree by its Fruit, Matthew. 7. 16. And whatever inward
sense or discerning Men have (or think they have) they ought to have it to
themselves (as Paul said in a certain Case of Faith, Romans 14. 22.) and accuse
none, but such whom they can prove guilty, by their Words or Deeds, and that by
credible Witnesses.

Q. Is every error in Judgment, or fault in Practice, sufficient ground of
disowning or rejecting a Person from being a Member of the Church of Christ?

A. Nay, but such Error or Errors as oppose some Fundamental Doctrine of the
Christian Faith, and such evil Practice as is scandalous, Philip. 3. 15. 16.

Q. Ought we not therefore to receive one another as Christian Brethren, and
have mutual Charity, and in that Charity Worship God together, though differing
in judgment in lesser matters, endeavoring to become all things to all Men, so
far as the Truth and a good Conscience does permit us?

A. Yea, 1 Cor. 19. 20. 21. 22.

Q. Is it not therefore a great Sin to be so uncharitable, as to revile others
by base and reproachful Names, calling them the World, Children of the Devil,
Idolaters, false Worshipers, who may be, and are as good, and possibly better
Christians than our selves, and can demonstrate that they are so, by their
Words and Works?

A. Yea, 1 Timothy 6. 4. Romans 14. 10. 1 Cor. 6. 10.

Q. Ought any Men to be received or owned to be Members of the Church of
Christ, who do not give some proof of their Christian Faith, by the confession
of their Mouth and good conversation, before they be received and owned?

A. Nay, 1 Timothy 6. 12. 13. Heb. 3. 1. Heb. 4. 14. 10. 23. 2 Cor. 9. 13.

Q. Wherein does the Communion of the Faithful consist?

A. Partly in Internals, and partly in Externals.

Q. How does it consist in Internals, and in what?

A. In the Communion of the Gifts and Graces of God, Philemon 5. 6. 7. whereby
they are mutually edified, refreshed, and strengthened by, and with one another,
through their partaking of one and the same Holy Spirit, by their union with
Christ their one Head, and one with another, from which Head, the whole Body
fitly joined together, and compacted by that which every Joint supplyeth,
according to the effectual working in the measure of every part, makes
increase of the Body, unto the edifying it self in Love, Ephesians. 4. 16. And from
which all the Body, by Joints and Bands having nourishment ministered and knit
together, Increases with the Increase of God, Col. 2. 19.

Q. Which are these Joints and Bands?

A. Every one of the Faithful, but most especially, the most Eminent for
Knowledge and Piety, and ministerial Gifts; such as the holy Prophets and
Apostles were, and such as their true Successors are, who succeed them in the
same Doctrine, Spirit, and holy Life.

Q. How does it consist in Externals, and in what?

A. In the profession of the same Faith, and visibly joining together in
Christian Assemblies, to hear the Doctrine of the Gospel Preached, Worshipping
God together with Prayer and Thanksgiving, and in the due Practice and
Observation of Christ's Institutions and Ordinances under the Gospel, also in
mutual acts of Piety and Charity?

Q. Is Fasting any necessary duty to be performed by the Faithful under the
Gospel?

A. Not simply by or for it self, but as it is a help to prepare and dispose
them for more solemn Prayer, Humiliation and Confession of Sin, either in
Private or Public, when some more than ordinary Occasion or Providence
requires it, or some more than ordinary Service is proposed for the good of the
Church in general, or some Member, or Members in particular, Matthew. 6. 17. 18.
Acts 13. 2. 3. Jonah 3. 5.

SECT. XIII.
Q. WHat other public and visible Institutions and Ordinances has Christ
appointed to be practiced by the Faithful, beside the preaching and hearing of
the Word, and Prayer, and Thanksgiving?

A. Baptism with Water, in the Name of the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost;
and the celebration of the Supper, in the use of the external Elements of Bread
and Wine, with Prayer and Thanksgiving, to remember and show forth the Lord's
Death till he come; both which are not only proper means to preserve the
Doctrine of the Christian Faith, being duly practiced, but are means of Grace,
Seals of God's Govenant of Grace, and Signs of our Union and Communion with
Christ, and one with another in him, Matthew. 28. 19. Matthew. 26. 27. 28. 29. 1.
Cor. 10. 16. 1 Cor. 11. 23.

Q. To whom is Baptism to be administered?

A. To none but such, as, in the judgment of Charity, may be reckoned Members
of Christ and of his Church.

Q. Is it to be administered to any, more than once?

A. Nay, but once, to the same Person.

Q. Why but once?

A. Because that signifies our ingrafting into Christ, and our entrance into
the Church, as into a new World or Kingdom, which is but once.

Q. Is the Supper to be frequently administered to the Faithful?

A. Yea, as frequently, as with possible convenience it can be done.

Q. Why is it to be administered frequently?

A. Because we need to be but once Regenerated or born again, whereof Baptism
with Water is a Sign, but being once Regenerated, we need to be frequently
nourished, of which the Supper is a Sign that frequently ought to be used, as
appears both by the Command of Christ (As often as ye eat, etc. and the example
of the Faithful, in the Acts of the Apostles.)

Q. Does not Baptism signify remission of Sin, and our Justification by
Christ, and his precious Blood shed for us, as well as our Regeneration, and
the mortification and crucifying the Old Man with his Deeds?

A. Yea.

Q. And does not the Supper signify remission of Sin, and our Justification by
Christ, as well as our spiritual Nourishment by Christ's Body and Blood, and
holy Spirit, with the saving Gifts and Graces thereof?

A. Yea.

Q. Is the participation of the Body and Blood of Christ, together with the
holy Spirit, and his saving Gifts and Graces, so tied and confined to the use
of the external Elements, that none can have the things signified without these
outward Signs?

A. Nay.

Q. What need is there then to use them?

A. Because of Christ's Command, and the great Spiritual profit that the
Faithful have by the due use of them, where they can be duly had, even as in
the Case of hearing the Word Preached by word of Mouth, the ordinary means of
Faith; yet such hearing i^ not of such absolute necessity, so as none can have
Faith without hearing a Minister Preach; for many have had Faith wrought in
them by the Word or Doctrine read by them, or by others read to them, who
perhaps never heard the Word duly Preached by any Man.

Q. How are the words of Christ to be understood, this Cup is the New Testament
in my Blood shed for the remission of the Sins of many? How is the Cup the New
Testament?

A. By the Cup is meant the Wine in the Cup, by an ordinary Figure in Speech
called a Metonymie, where the Name of the thing containing is given to the
thing contained.

Q. How is the Wine in the Cup the New Testament in Christ's Blood?

A. By another Metonymie, as Circumcision was called God's Covenant under the
Law, being the Seal of it, so the Wine (as well as the Bread) in the Supper is
called by Christ, the New Testament, as being the outward Seal of it.

Q. But what is the need or use of an external Seal of the New Testament or
Covenant, seeing the Faithful have the inward Seal of the Spirit?

A. The inward does no more take away the use and benefit of the outward to the
Faithful now, than the inward Seal of the Spirit to Faithful Abraham did take
away the use of the outward Seal of Circumcision from him, which was given him
of God to be a Seal of the Righteousness of Faith.

Q. What is meant by Christ's New Testament? and whether it is one and the same
with the New Covenant?

A. It is the same for Matter and Substance, but that it further denotes
Christ's Legacy, left us in his Will and Testament, and confirmed by those
outward Seals, appointed by himself, that being the Nature of all Wills and
Testaments, to be in force by the Death of the Testator.

Q. How does it appear, that these outward things, as Water in Baptism, and the
Bread and Wine in the Supper, are Seals of the New Testament or Covenant of
Grace?

A. Because the nature and manner of all Covenants require some external Signs
or Seals for their stronger confirmation; and as it is the usual manner of
Nations, to confirm their Covenants by or with outward Signs or Seals, so it
has been always God's way, in all his Covenanting with Men, or with any
People, to confirm it by some outward Signs or Seals, as the Sacrifices before
the Law, and Circumcision, and the Passover, and the Sacrifices under the Law,
Psalm 50 5.

Q Is it not therefore a great Sin, and highly provoking to God Almighty, and
doing contempt to our blessed Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, not only to reject
the Seals of his Covenant and Testament from practicing them, so that they can
be duly had, but to deny and vilify them, with the reproachful Names of
beggarly Elements, and worldly Rudiments? yea, if God be not very merciful to
them, to provoke him, to deprive them of the spiritual Blessings of his
Covenant, for their so great contempt, through their great Ignorance, (God
grant that it may not be wilful in some.) And do they not act as foolishly in
the Case, as if one that had a rich Legacy left him by the Will of his elder
Brother, should in his folly tear away the Seal of it, which in Law renders it
null and void?

A. Yea.

Q. How do the faithful the eat the Flesh and drink the Blood of Christ?

A. Not by the bodily Mouth, but by a true Faith, and sincere and servent Love
and Devotion.

Q. But may not Persons feed upon the inward Life and Spirit of Christ, without
feeding by Faith on the Flesh and Blood of Christ?

A. Nay, according to Christ's plain and express words, Joh. 6. 53. Unless ye
eat my Flesh and drink my Blood, ye have no Life in you; the Flesh and Blood of
the Son of Man, together with the Fat and Marrow of the inward Life and Spirit
of Christ, even whole Christ God man is the Food of the Faithful; by him, if an
e^^er in (the true door) he shall go in and out and find Pastore, without in
his Flesh and Manhood, within in his Spirit and Godhead, as Augustine and other
spiritual Writers have applied those words, John 10. 9.

Q. Does not this hold forth the necessity of Faith in Christ, as he was
outwardly crucified, as for remission of Sin, and Justification, so for
Regeneration and the new Birth?

A. Yea, which sufficiently shows the great ignorance of some, that teach,
how Paul labored more to bring People to know, or have Christ formed in them,
than to bring them to have a Belief in Christ without them, as he was
crucified, etc. For there is no other way to have Christ formed in us, but by
having a saving Faith in Christ crucified without us, wrought in us by the
Spirit of God; therefore Paul called Christ crucified, the Power of God, and
the Wisdom of God. 1 Cor. 1. 23. 24

SECT. XIV.
Q. Does the Baptism of the Holy Ghost and of Fire, which Christ promised to
his Disciples, still remain in the Church?

A. In respect of the saving Operation, and saving Gifts and Graces thereof it
does, though not in respect of its miraculous and extraordinary visible
Effects, as the Gift of Tongues, and the visible appearance of Cloven Tongues,
like as of Fire, that sat upon each of them. Acts 2. 3.

Q With what Fire does Christ Baptize them that believe in him?

A. With his Spirit of Judgment and Burning, whereby (according to God's
Promise) their silthiness is purged away, and with his living internal Word,
that is as a Hammer that breaks the Rock in pieces, and as a Sword cutteth
down, and slaveth the earthly Members of the Body of the Sins of the Flesh, and
as a Fire to burn them up, together with the Hay, Wood and Stubble, the Briers
and Thorns, and all the combustible matter that cannot dwell with that
devouring Fire, and everlasting Burnings. Isa. 33. 14. 15.

Q Is that the Fire whereof the Scripture mentions, whereby a Man shall be
Saved, according to which, God (even the God of the Faithful) is called a
consuming Fire, and Christ (viz. with respect to his inward appearance, and
spiritual Operation in Believers) was promised to be like a Refiner's Fire, and
like Fullers Soap, and that he shall sit as a refiner and purifier of Silver;
and he shall purify the Sons of Levy, and purge them as Gold and Silver, that
they may offer unto the Lord an Offering in Righteousness; and that then the
Offering of Judah and Jerusalem shall be pleasant unto the Lord, as in the days
of old, and as in former years? 1 Cor. 3. 15.

A. Yea. Heb. 12. 29. Mal. 3. 2. 3. 4.

Q. Why is the Spiritual Appearance and Operation of Christ in Believers
compared to Fire, and metaphorically so called?

A. Because of the resemblance and likeness of the natural and outward Fire to
the inward and spiritual; for, as the outward Fire both enlightens and consumes
what is combustible, as Wood and Stubble, but melts, purifies and refines, Gold
and Silver, so the inward and spiritual Fire both enlightens the
Uunderstanding, to see what Sins and Lusts are in the Heart that are to be
destroyed, and is as powerful and mighty to destroy them, yet does no hurt to
the Creature, but refineth, purges and purifieth it, as Gold and Silver is
purged from the dross. Again, as the operation of the Fire, upon the Flesh of
any living Creature, is sensibly painful and afflicting, so is the operation of
this inward and spiritual (...), upon the fleshly Lusts of Men, (that have been
as their living fleshly Members) even sensibly painful and afflicting, with a
spiritual sensible pain. And as the Fire has not this operation, but as there
is a due application, and bringing near of the things that the Fire is to
operate upon, unto the Fire, so there must be an inward application of the
Heart and Soul of the Man, that is to be thus purified, and have his Sins and
Lusts destroyed to this inward and spiritual Fire, which is to be felt in his
Heart and Soul; and though for a season great inward pain and affliction, and
suffering is here felt, as when a Cancer is cut out of a Man's Flesh, yet it
ought to be born with all possible quiet; patience, and stilness, and even then
there is a present inward spiritual Joy, Ease, and Refreshment felt in the
Soul, that accompanies the pain; as when a Person is Cut for the Stone, the
case of having the Stone taken away is greater then the pain of the Wound.

Q. As there is an inward Baptism, which Christ and not Man gives, so is there
not an inward Supper that Christ gives, and not Man, o^ both which, the
outward Baptism and Supper are Sign; even as the Word outwardly Preached in
the outward Ears of Men, is a Sign of that inward Word Preached by Christ
himself in the Heart; and as the inward Word and Preaching of Christ in the
Heart, makes not the outward Word, that is a Sign of the inward, null and void,
or unprofitable, but there is a good and excellent consistency betwixt them, so
is there not as good and excellent consistency betwixt the outward Baptism and
Supper, which are the Signs, and the inward and spiritual?

A. Yea.

Q. Who are they that partake of the inward Baptism and Supper?

A. None but true Believers in Christ as he was outwardly Crucified, and who
hear his Voice, and open the Door to his knocking, etc. by has spiritual
appearance at the door of their Hearts. All such, and none but such, Sup with
him, and he with them.

Q. What is their Supping with him?

A. His giving them his Flesh to Eat and his Blood to Drink, that is, his
teaching and enabling them by his Spirit to apply the Merit, Virtue, and
Efficacy of his Flesh and Blood, which, together with his Soul, he offered up
to God a Sacrifice for our Sins; by which application and union through Faith,
Believers receive remission of Sin and his holy Spirit, with the gracious
Influences thereof.

Q. What is his Supping with them?

A. Their Faith in him, and Love to him, together with the lively exercise of
all their Graces, which are acceptable to him, as a Supper to a hungry Man.

Q. But Christ said, it is the Spirit that quickens, the Flesh profits nothing:
This is brought by some as an Argument against the necessity of Faith in Christ
as he suffered death in the Flesh by them who think that Faith is not necessary?

A. If their Argument had any weight, it would prove that Faith not only not
necessary, but nothing profitable, though some of them distinguish, and say,
they confess it is profitable, but not necessary. But the Argument is built on
a false supposition and perversion of our Savior's words, which was an answer
to the carnal Jews, their objecting, How can this Man give us his Flesh to Eat?
which they meant of bodily Eating, by the bodily Mouth; but Christ meant it of
a spiritual Eating, by the spiritual Mouth of he Soul, to wit, by Faith, which
the Spirit gives, and their carnal understanding was that Flesh which did not
profit, as neither would (on supposition) their eating of his Flesh with their
bodily Mouths, if they could have done it.

Q. Another Objection is often made by some, against the necessity of Faith in
Christ as he suffered in the Flesh, that Paul said, He knew Christ no more
after the Flesh; how is this Objection to be answered? 2 Cor. 5. 16.

A. The words after the Flesh, do not refer to Christ's Flesh; as if Paul had
renounced and quite buried in oblivion, all Knowledge, Faith, and Remembrance
of Christ's Death and Sufferings in the Flesh, and Resurrection, the contrary
of which is evident from many places throughout his Epistles, and particularly
from his words a little before in that same Chapter; v. 14, 15. but his carnal
knowledge of Christ, such as he had when a Pharisee, which was but a knowledge
of Christ after the Flesh, he did justly reject.

Q But have not some felt an inward spiritual Fire, and had experience of the
good Effects of it, who are so far from having had Faith in Christ, as he
outwardly suffered Death in the Flesh, that they are prejudiced against it, and
have openly, before many Witnesses, opposed it, as unnecessary and
unprofitable; yea, hurtful, as drawing from the Gift of God within?

A. As the Law at Mount Sinai, Exodus 19 1. 16. 12. 2. 6. was given in Fire, on
the 50th day after the Children of Israel came out of Egypt, so the Holy Ghost
was given in Fire, on the 50th day from Christ's Resurrection, Acts 2. 1. 2. 3.
And as these two outward Fires differed, so there are two inward Ministrations
of Fire, as it were two Fires; the first Legal the second Evangelical; and
whatever good Effects the Legal Fire produces, it makes none the Children of
the New Covenant, or brings to that Perfection and Purification, and true and
real Sanctification, that the Gospel ministration brings unto, the Effects of
the last and first as much differing, as Gold and Silver differs from Brass and
Iron.

Q. What is the Everlasting Life?

A. It is the full enjoyment of God and Christ, together with the holy Spirit,
by Vision, Love, and Delight; together with the complete Glorification of the
Souls and Bodies of all the Faithful, eternally and without all end in the
Kingdom of Heaven; and where they shall enjoy the blessed Society of all the
holy Angels and glorified Saints, Matthew. 5. 8. 1 Cor. 13. 12. 1 John 3. 2. Rev.
22. 4. Philip 3. 21. Luke 20. 36. Heb. 12. 22.

Q. Is there an Earnest or first Fruits of Eternal Life, that the Faithful do
enjoy here on Earth in the mortal Body?

A. Yea, John 6. 47. 58. Romans 8. 23. 2 Cor. 1. 22. 5. 5. Ephesians. 1. 14.

Q. What is that Faith in Christ Jesus, whereby the Faithful eat his Flesh and
drink his Blood, that they may have Eternal Life?

A. It is not only the assent of the understanding to the truth of Christ, as
he came in the Flesh, and gave his Body of Flesh to be broken, and his Blood to
be sued for us, but is a most cheerful, ready, and free consent of the Heart
and Will, whereby every true Believer, with great desire, receives, accepts,
and relyeth upon Christ; trusts and consideth in him (and in God the Father
through him) for remission of Sin, Justification, and Eternal Life and
Salvation, and all the Spiritual blessings promised in the Gospel; and by which
free act of the Will, the Faithful choose God to be their God and Father, and
Christ to be their Redeemer and Savior, Head and Husband, King and Lord, as
well as Priest and Propitiation for Sin. The Believer having thus acted Faith
on him, is as truly refreshed, comforted, strengthened, fed and satisfied with
him, as a hungry Man is with Meat; therefore, by a Metaphor, believing in
Christ is called an eating of him; both which assent of the Understanding, and
consent and choice of the Heart and Will, is wrought in the Soul by the Spirit
of Christ, by means of the Word and Doctrine delivered in the holy Scriptures;
and, by the like Metaphor, it is called, a looking to him, a coming to him, a
resting and abiding in him, a being joined to him, as the Members are joined to
the Head, a being grafted in him, Romans 11. 17. Joh. 15. 4. and built upon him,
as on a sure Foundation; also a being married to him, by which Faith, as they
abide and dwell in him, so he abides and dwells in them, Heb. 12. 2. Isa.
45. 21. 22. Matthew. 11. 28. Isa. 11. 10. John 15. 7. Ephesians. 2. 6. 3. 17. 1 Cor. 6.
17. Ephesians. 2. 20. Romans 7. 4. Yea, not only his Spirit and Life dwells in them,
but he himself, the Man Christ Jesus, who dyed and rose again, by Faith
dwells in them, not by his bodily Presence, but by their having him in their
constant thoughts and remembrance, and in their love and affections, as the
loving Wife has her loving Husband in her thoughts and affections, when he is
bodily absent; and as Paul said to the Corinthians, 2 Cor. 7. 3. You are in our
hearts to dye and to live with you.

Q. But it is objected by some, that they find a difficulty, if not an
impossibility in it, to believe in the Man Christ without them, whom they have
never, at any time, heard or seen; they cannot frame a conception of him in the
mind, as the Wife can of the Husband, whom she has both heard and seen, and
immediately conversed with?

A. The account that the holy Scriptures give us of him, and of his most holy
Life, and Virtues, and wonderful Excellencies, does better help us to frame a
Conception of him in our minds, as the holy Spirit that we receive from him,
gives life to that Conception by his powerful Operation in us, than if we had
only seen him and heard him outwardly; as the true and accurate description of
a Man's Life and Virtues gives us a better account of him, than the bodily
sight and hearing of him; therefore it was that our Lord said to Thomas,
Blessed are they that have not seen, and yet have believed, Joh. 20. 29. There
is no Man who has received some extraordinary favor from a Person that he
has not seen, but by the favor which he has received from him, he will be
helped to frame a very lovely Conception of him in his Heart and Soul. And the
faithful who had not seen Christ with their bodily Eyes more than we, to whom
Peter writ unto, did both believe in Christ, and love him whom they had not
seen, and rejoiced in him with great joy, even joy unspeakable and full of
glory, 1 Pet. 1. 6. With what dearness of love and affection do we love the
Saints, whose holy Lives and Virtues are so lively set forth to us in the
Scriptures, and the holy Martyrs in Church History, though we believe not in
them: But we could not love them, unless we had some true Conception or Idea of
them; for love does as much require a lively Conception of the Object beloved,
as Faith requires a lively Conception of the Object believed. Therefore, if
the Man Christ can be loved, without having outwardly seen him or heard him; by
the same reason, he can be believed, and trusted in, without the outward sight
and hearing of him.

For further Information concerning Baptism and the Supper, I refer to my Book,
called, The Arguments, etc. against Baptism and the Supper, Examined and
Refuted. Printed, School.

The CREED.
I Believe in God the Father Almighty, maker of Heaven and Earth; and in Jesus
Christ his only Son our Lord, who was conceived by the Holy Ghost, born of the
Virgin Mary, suffered under Pontius Pilate, was crucified, dead and buried, he
descended into Hell; The third day he rose again from the dead, he ascended
into Heaven, and sits on the right Hand of God the Father Almighty; from
thence he shall come to judge the quich and the dead.

I believe in the Holy Ghost; the holy Catholic, Church; the Communion of
Saints; the forgiveness of Sins; the Resurrection of the Body, and the Life
Everlasting. Amen.

The Ten Commandments. XX. Chap. Exodus.
I. GOD spoke all these words, saying, I am the Lord thy God: Thou shall have
none other Gods but me. II. Thou shall not make to thy self any graven Image,
nor the likeness of any thing that is in Heaven above, or in the Earth beneath,
or in the Water under the Earth. Thou shall not bow down to them, nor worship
them; for I the Lord thy God, am a jealous God, visiting the sins of the
Fathers upon the Children, unto the third and fourth Generation of them that
hate me, and showing mercy unto thousands of them that love me, and keep my
Commandments. III. Thou shall not take the Name of the Lord, thy God in vain:
For the Lord will not hold him guiltless that takes his Name in vain. IV.
Remember that thou keep holy the Sabbath day. Six days shall thou labor, and
do all that thou have to do; but the seventh day is the Sabbath of the Lord thy
God. In it thou shall do no manner of work, thou, nor thy Son, nor thy
daughter, thy manservant, nor thy maidservant, nor thy cattle, nor thy
stranger that is within thy gates. For in six days the Lord made Heaven and
Earth, the Sea, and all that in them is, and rested the seventh day; wherefore
the Lord blessed the seventh day, and hallowed it. V. Honor thy father and thy
mother, that thy days may be long in the land which the Lord thy God gives
thee. VI. Thou shall do no murder. VII. Thou shall not commit adultery. VIII.
Thou shall not steal. IX. Thou shall not bear false witness against thy
neighbor. X. Thou shall not covet thy neighbor's house, thou shall not covet
thy neighbor's wife, nor his servant, nor his maid, nor his ox, nor his ass,
nor any thing that is his.
The Lord's Prayer.
OUR Father, which art in Heaven; Hallowed be thy Name. Thy kingdom come. Thy
will be done in earth, as it is in heaven. Give us this day our daily bread.
And forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive them that trespass against us. And
lead us not into temptation; but deliver us from evil; for thine is the
Kingdom, and the Power, and the Glory, for ever and ever.

Amen.
FINIS.
POSTSCRIPT.
BEcause I know there are many who will not allow, that there is any Light
generally in Men, but that of mere Humane Reason; and esteem any who think
otherwise to be Fanatic and Enthusiastical, I shall here insert some words out
of a Printed Sermon of D. South, on Luke 11. 35. vol. 3. which I judge worthy
to be noticed, well agreeing with what I have delivered in my foregoing
Catechism on that Subject, Page 47. 63. 64. 65. Other Protestant Authors I
could cite, asserting the same.

Page 68. Vol. 3. Some of the ablest of the Peripatetick School (not without
countenance from Aristotle himself, in the 5th Chapter of his 3d Book (...))
hold, That besides the Native Inherent Light of the Intellect (which is
essential to it, as it is a Faculty made to apprehend, and take in its Object
after a spiritual way) there is also another Light in the Nature of a Medium,
bearning in upon it by a continual efflux and emanation from the Great Fountain
of Light, and irradiating this intellectual Faculty, together with Species and
Representations of things imprinted thereupon. According to which Doctrine, it
seems, with great reason, to follow; That whatsoever interposes between the
Mind, and those irradiations from God (as all Sin more or less certainly does)
must needs hinder the entrance and admission of them into the Mind, and then
darkness must by necessary consequence ensue, as being nothing else but the
absence or privation of Light.

For the further illustration of which Notion, we may observe, that the
Understanding, the Mind, or Conscience of Man (which we shall here take for the
same thing) seem to bear much the same respect to God, which Glass or Christial
does to the Light or Sun, which appears indeed to the Eye, a bright and shining
thing; nevertheless this shining is not so much from any essential Light or
Brightness existing in the Glass it self (supposing that that there be any such
in it) as it is from the Porousness of its Body, rendering it Diaphanous, and
thereby fit to receive and transmit those Rays of Light, which falling upon
it, and passing through it, represent it to common view, as a Luminous Body.
But now, let any thing of dirt or foulness fully this Glass, and so much of the
Shine of Brightness of it is presently gone, because so much of the Light is
thereby hindered from entering into it, and making its way through it. In like
manner, every act of Sin, every degree of Guilt, does in its proportion cast a
kind of soil and foulness upon the intellectual part of the Soul, and thereby
intercepts those blessed irradiations, which the Divine Nature is continually
darting in upon it -- a little after. -- I will not affirm this to be a perfect
exemplification of the Case before us, but I am sure it is a lively
illustration of it, and may be of no small use to such as shall thoroughly
consider it.

And concerning the donation of a certain determinate number of Persons made to
Christ, to be his People, by an Eternal Compact or Transaction between the
Father and the Son; by virtue of which Agreement or Transaction, he was in the
Fullness of Time to suffer for them, and to accomplish the whole Work of their
Redemption, from first to last. See page 415. of his Sermon on Isa. 53. 8.
[where he has these following words, greatly worthy of notice.] For to affirm
that Christ dyed only to verisie a Proposition [That whosoever Believed should
be Saved] but in the mean time to leave the whole issue of things, in reference
to Persons, so loose and undetermined, That it was a question whether ever any
should actually Believe, and very possible that none ever might, and
consequently, that after Christ had suffered, had been stricken; and dyed for
Transgression, yet for any thing he had done, in all this he might never have
had a People; this certainly is a strange and new Gospel, and such as the
Doctrine of our Church seems utterly unacquainted with.

See page 51. 56. of the foregoing Catechism, well agreeing to this.

ERRATA.
PAge 14. Line 8. r. invissible, p. 16. l. 10. r. Serpent's Head, p. 42. l. 27.
after Heb. 11. 19. r. A. Yea, p. 60. l. 31. r. Isaiah 28. p. 61. sor sy r. say,
p. 88. l. ult. after the begin the Parenthesis, p. 7. l. 24. sor is r. are, p.
89. l. 16. r. 1 Mac. 4.


