A SALUTATION OF Dear and tender Love to THE Seed of God Arising in ABERDEEN,
IN TWO EPISTLES. Directed unto Friends of truth in that Place, whom the Lord
has called, and is calling forth to bear their Testimony for his Glorious
Truth, (against an evil, adulterous, and Persecuting Generation) with others
their dear Friends in these Nations.

Writ by George Keith Prisoner for the said Testimony in the Tolbooth of
Aberdeen.

Isa. 60. 22. A little one shall become a thousand, and a small one a strong
Nation, I the Lord will hasten it in his time.

Isa. 30. 17. One thousand shall flee at the rebuke of one; ^t the rebuke of
five shall ye flee, till ye be lest as a Beacon upon the top of a Mountain, and
as an ensign ^n a hill.

Isa. 62. 1. For Zions sake will I not hold my peace, and for Ierusalems sake I
will not rest, until the Righteousness thereof, go forth as brightness, and
the Salvation thereof as a Lamp that burns.

Isa 62. 10, 11, 12. Go thorough, go thorough the gates, prepare you the way of
the People, cast up, cast up the high way, gather out the stones, lift up a
standard for the People. B^hold, the Lo^d has p^ocla^med to the end of the
wo^ld, say ye to the Daught^r of Zion, b^hold thy Salvation comes, behold his
reward is with him, and his work before him. And they shall call them the holy
People, the redeemed of the Lord, and thou shall be called sought out, a City
not fo^saken.

Printed in the Year 1665.

To Friends in ABERDEEN.
Dear Friends,
THere is a precious Seed among you, in love to which several of the Lords
Servants have been drawn to come, and visit the Seed, and preach the
Everlasting Gospel thereto, which is the power of God unto Salvation; and the
Seed has been reached, and we have been made manifest in your Consciences, the
witness of God in your Consciences has answered our Testimony that we are of
God, and that which we declared unto you, was not a cunningly devised Fable,
but the living Truth of the Living God, which has been revealed to us, and
which we have learned from the Spirit of Truth, and our Testimony among you
has been, that the Son of God is come, and his Kingdom revealed with power and
great Glory, even the Kingdom of God, which is Righteousness, peace and joy in
the Holy Ghost, and now has the Sun of Righteousness arisen with healing under
his wings, and the glorious light thereof has shined forth upon the Earth, and
the Inhabitants thereof, after the long dark night of Ap^stacy that has been;
wherein many poor things who have had true breathings and desires after the
Lord, have lamented after him, and sought him whom their souls loved, and
longed for, but could not find him; and the thick Egiptian darkness has
choked them, and the living breathings in many has been suffocated and
killed, and Babylon the mother of Fornications has bewitched the whole Earth
with the cup of her Sorceries, who has given her self forth to be the Church
and spouse of Christ, but indeed a Harlot; and her Merchants who have handed
forth the Cup of her abominations have past in this time of darkness and
ignorance for the Ministers of Christ, and Pastors of the flock, now it pleased
the Lord out of his rich mercy and love a hundred years ago, or thereby, to
send forth some beams of his Heavenly light into the Souls of people, whereby
the more gross abominations of the Whore were disc^vered and quit; and no
question many have been accepted of the Lord in that day according to their
faithfulness: But alas, there has been a great backsliding, and defection
since, which some of the Lords servants then saw, that it would come, and that
Christ should be again crucified in Scotland; and now its my Testimony, and the
testimony of hundreds and thousands that he is again arisen in this Island, and
in other parts of the Earth, and all the wit and policy of Satan and his
Instruments shall not be able to hold him from the setting up of his Kingdom in
the Earth, Truth is planted and taken root in the Earth, yea even in Scotland,
and it shall grow and prosper, and spread and fill the Earth, and every Plant
which is not of the Lords planting shall be rooted out, and their folly shall
be made manifest to all, who set themselves against the truth. And Friends,
think it not strange that truth has such opposition from many who have even
had a great profession thereof, this day has abundantly discovered them, that
their glorying has been but in the flesh, and that they are not come to live
in the truth, but have had the form of Godliness, and denied (yea been
altogether strangers unto) the power thereof; now they not being in the truth,
which is living, and gives the discerning but in the form of it, which is but a
dead thing, how could they but Or not Know.
misken truth in its appearance, and the children and vessels thereof, and yet
there is a precious seed even in many hundreds, which the Lord will raise up in
his own appointed time, who may be for the present through ignorance, and their
being deceived with false appea^ances, enemies to truth, and reproachers of it.
Now the faithful testimony of such whom the Lord has gathered, and is
gathering into the truth, shall have a shril and loud sound even to the
awakening and quickening of such, and they shall be made to build up, that which
once they were endeavoring to destroy. And therefore dear F^iends, be faithful
to the Lord God in your testimony for his truth in every particular, according
to the knowledge thereof, which ye have received from God, for thereby ye shall
both save yourselve and others, having the eye of your souls continually fixed
upon the Lo^d to see whither he will farther lead you, being res^lved (and
re^^gned up to him) even to follow whethersoever he leads, though it may be
much in the cross to flesh and blood; for this I testify unto you, that its
such, and such only, who are of that spirit (whereof honest Joshua and Caleb
were) to follow the Lord fully even in all things to the least circumstance of
his requirings, who shall get an entrance into the blessed Land of promise,
whereinto many can set to their seal, and witness it, that they have entered
(among whom I am one) even into that good Land that flows with milk and
honey, yea with streams of joy, peace, and consolation from the presence of the
Lord, and from the glory of his power, and this you shall all come to witness
in your selves in the Lords good time, as you keep faithful to him, and grow up
more and more in a resignation to his will in all things, sparing nothing,
against which the Lords controversy and indignation is, but giving up all to a
hope that is contrary to his will, that it may be burnt up, and slain by the
judgment of the Lord, and you delivered therefrom, for this is only that which
stands in the way, and lets your entrance into Gods Kingdom, even somewhat more
or less, that is contrary to the holy and pure nature of God, and against his
will cleaved unto, and lived in, which till ye be rid of; the flaming sword
will turn every way against you, so that ye cannot get into the Paradise of
God, though ye should never so earnestly desire it. And such of you whom the
Lord has in some measure persuaded to quit many things, and ye purpose to quit
more, as he shall discover them to be evil unto you; faint not in your minds,
though ye cannot get the desires of your minds and souls accomplished, and
though ye cannot see the good Land, nor get so much as a taste of the Wine that
grows there: I say faint not, nor be discouraged, for a day of blessed
refreshment from the Lord is abiding you, wherein ye shall see the King of
Glory in his beauty, and ye shall be made to drink of the river of his
pleasure, and to eat of the feast of fat things upon the mountain of the Lord,
and the Wine well refined from the lees shall be given unto you, even the new
Wine in the Fathers Kingdom, and ye shall eat and drink, and praise the name of
the Lord, which I declare unto you not of my self, but of the Lord, who has
brought me (through the riches of his goodness) to know such a state in a
measure, and has shed abroad his love in my heart, in the which love I have
felt the bowels of the Lords compassion flowing forth toward you also, and the
blessings of Gods heavenly Kingdom ready to be show^ed down upon you, which ye
shall come to know when that which lets shall be taken out of the way, for ye
must pass through the judgment of the Lord, and be rid of all that cannot dwell
with everlasting burnings, for our God is a consuming fire, and the throne of
iniquity can have no fellowship with him, and the Lord is to try you with a
Wilderness, even a dry and barren Land, wherein is no water, whereby your
desires after him may be the more enlivened and enlarged, and your faith and
patience must be tried (which has been the Lords dealing with us also, for
which be endless glory and praise unto his Name) and there in the Wilderness he
will allure you, and speak comfortably unto you, and give you Vineyards from
thence, and the Valley of Achor for a door of hope: Therefore, think not
strange of the fiery trial, which shall try you, wherein the Lord will plead
with all that is of Flesh within you, and ye must be brought down to the Valley
of Iehoshaphat, which is as much as the Valley of decision, or off-cuting,
wherein ye must come to know the Circumcision, even the cutting off of that
which is but flesh, before you enter the promised Land, and the Sun must be
turned into darkness, and the Moon loose her light before the notable day of
the Lord come, and all that has been the delight of your eyes must be taken
from you, and you left stripped and naked, as in the day ye were born, and then
will the Lord cast the skirts of his love over you, and say unto you, live, and
ye shall live, and ye shall become beautiful with his comeliness, that he shall
put upon you, even the robes of his unspoted Righteousness, and the garments of
his Salvation, wherewith ye shall be clothed, and in that day ye shall
understand the sense and meaning of these Scriptures, that blessed are the
poor, for their's is the Kingdom of Heaven, and blessed are the pure in heart,
for they shall see God, and that God is truly good to Israel, even to such as
are upright in heart. And dear Friends, as I have spoke unto you, so it is in
my heart to put you again [by writing] in remembrance thereof, though ye may
know it, how that the Lord is making a narrow and deep search in this day, even
beyond what has been these many ages ago, he is now arisen to take vengeance
upon the many inventions with which he has borne long, and has winked at them
(so to speak) in the days of ignorance, and has suffered many even of the
faithful in former days to keep many things, against which the Lord has
pronounced his indignation in this day, for now is the day broken up, and the
Sun arisen, and the more refined garments of the Whore, which formerly past for
upright in the twy-light, are now discerned to be but counterfeit, and blessed
are they, and shall be who are made willing to see, and seeks not to cover or
spare what the Lord requires to be given up, and parted with, though it be a
hard thing for flesh and blood, but I can assure you the love of God when ye
come to feel it shed abroad in your hearts, will a thousand fold recompense all
that ye can forsake for his names sake, and the reproach of Christ shall become
unto you more precious then all the treasures of Egypt. And as I have formerly
told you, so it is with me again to remind you, even to exercise all
forbearance in all things, but in so far as it lies upon you from the Lord,
according to the manifestation of his light and spirit in your hearts; ceasing,
ceasing, forever from every thing, but what ye manifestly know to be agreeable
with the Lords will, not hazarding to be found in any thing whatsoever, because
ye see it not evil or sinful; nay, that is not enough, the path and way of God
is yet narrower, though large and broad enough to the children of God, even to
let things alone, but as you see them in the openings and manifestation of the
Spirit of life within you to be good, innocent, profitable, suitable to truth,
so that you savor a good savor in them, and others of the Lords children with
you, this ends all disputations and reasonings, and here is peace, joy,
liberty, even true Christian liberty and freedom, yea, victory and Dominion;
whereas to do things not knowing the Lords will and approbation therein, is but
at best to do doubtingly, and such are condemned, and weakness and confusion
enters them, and the seed of God is burdened; yea, I say it again, blessed are
they who are come here even to be afraid to meddle with any thing though never
so plausible in the eyes of men, but as they find and feel in themselves the
approbation and allowance of the Lords Spirit therein, else to forbear, and let
alone, even to take up the cross to every work and word, yea to every desire
and thought of the heart, which is not manifestly known to be of the Lord, the
blessed experience whereof, I have often found, and daily finds, waiting and
earnestly desiring of the Lord that the mystery of his Cross I may more and
more learn, that I may become crucified even to all that is of the World, and
alive to him, ceasing from my own works, not being able to do, nor daring to do
any thing without him, which is not only my testimony, but the testimony of all
that are come to live in any measure of truth. And dear Friends, keep to any
measure of testimony ye have attained unto, for I can say it, the Lord regards
the same, and it has a good savor before him, and grow up in faithfulness and
resignation to the Lord in all things; for this is it which makes your
testimony strong, and valid, and acceptable to God, that it be universal in
every circumstance, that the enemy have nothing wherewith to charge you, and
this is it which will make you able to stand it out in the day of trial, the
having your loins girded about with truth, having truth to encompass you
round, you being found in the truth in all things, but who are out of truth in
any thing though never so small, here there is an open to let in the enemy,
and it will be hard for such to stand. And Friends, let not the terror of your
enemies afright you from keeping your Meetings, but sanctify the Lord God in
your hearts, and let him be your fear, and this will put away the fear of man
that shall die, and become as the dust of the earth, and as you assemble
together in Gods fear and name, and in true love one with another, the Lord
will be among you, and ye shall be made to feel his living presence, and he
will show you where he feeds his flock, and makes it rest at noonday, and he
will bring you into the banqueting house, and display the banner of his love
over you, and make you a terror to your enemies. And I have felt the sweet
blessing and presence of God among you, and I can assure you his Salvation is
near to come, and his Righteousness to be revealed to the upright and single
hearted: And keep your Meetings in the silence of all flesh, and the shout of
the King the Lord of Hoasts shall be heard among you, and he will give in due
time the opening of the mo^th in the midst of you. And dear Friends, my love in
the bowels of Jesus Christ is toward you all, and with a sweet measure of his
blessed presence have I largely written unto you, and the Lord is with me by
night and by day, and makes my Prison very acceptable to me, Farewell dear
Friends.

From the Tolbooth of Aberdeen the 9th of the 10th Mont. 1664. Your very dear
and loving Friend, George Keith.
As it may conveniently be done, I am willing that this be read among Friends
met together.



For Friends in Aberdeen to be read in their Meeting.
Dear Friends,
BLessed, blessed is the opportunity, the Lord is putting in your hands to bear
a Testimony for his Name, and living glorious Truth in this day. O be faithful
to him, and rich shall be your reward, rich, unspeakably rich, even beyond what
eye can see, or ear hear, or the heart be able to comprehend, the love of God,
which passes knowledge, the peace that passes understanding, the joy
unspeakable, and full of glory, the por^ion of such: the joy as in the time of
harvest, or as when the strong divide the spoil. Oh who can declare the
blessed lot and inheritance that shall be given them who give up all, sparing
nothing, nothing to a hoof, or Pin point, which the Lord requires to be
delivered, and parted with, assuredly they shall obtain an hundred fold in this
life, and life eternal for ever more. Dear Friends, thus I write who in this
day, and daily do witness, the hundredth fold, do possess it, even the love, the
joy, the peace of God, which is my strength, my portion, my crown, which none
can take from me, so that I am made to sing in a Prison, even in a Prison the
Lines are fallen to me in a pleasant place, I have a good heritage: And this is
the doing of the Lord, and it is wondrous in mine eyes, I am even as one that
dreams, Glory to his Name for ever, for his unspeakable gift, and rich mercy,
and free love, which has visited my poor soul, shut up in the blackness of
darkness, the region and shadow of death, the Pit wherein is no water: the hand
of love has reached me, and brought me out of the woeful Prison, and loosed my
bands, and delivered my soul, and given me to drink of the Cup of Salvation,
and now hereto do I set my seal: worthy, worthy is the Lamb; to suffer for,
ignominy, reproach, hatred (even of the dearest relations) persecution,
prisonment, killing, tortering, or what ever the cruelty of Man can be
permitted to inflict: Worthy is he for his sake to be killed all the day long,
and counted as Sheep for the slaughter, his Love will sweetly recompense all:
and worthy is he to be waited for, to be credited and trusted, and believed in,
and in and through the faith, and hope, which enters through the dark and
thick vail, which may be over for the time, so that little or no sensible
enjoyment is pe^ceived, yet even then, in and through the faith (the believing
when there is not a seeing or possessing) to adventure upon the Lord, and to
follow him, car^ying his Cross, and his reproach: The Lord is near to such,
with invisible, insensible support, and refreshment, which though the Vessels
feel it not, yet the seed does, and light is sown, which shall spring up, and
in due time become a Founta^n, a Wellspring of endless joy and consolation,
the glorious Lord a place of broad Rivers, this I do declare for the comfort of
the single, simple, upright hearted. The Child of Light, walking for the
present in darkness, the Seed having sore and grievous travel through the many
impediments, and lets, in its way to the God of its l^fe. O trust in the Lord,
trust in his name, trust, though shut up in the Caves of the Earth, trust
though hedged up as it were with hewn stone, trust, trust, though in the belly
of Hell, the Whal^s belly, poor distressed Jonah shall come to land, the Seed
shall be redeemed, that which mourns shall obtain joy and gladness, and come
to Zion with Songs of deliverance, and sorrow and sighing shall flee away: Yea,
let the single-hearted trust in the Lord; be strong, be strong, strengthen the
weak hands, confirm the f^eble knees; has the God of my life said unto me, and
given a word in season to the weary distressed Soul. Even God who has showed
my self sore and great trouble, and new has raised me up from the gates of
death, and girded me with gladness, and comforted me on every side, that with
the comfort wherewith I am comforted of him, I may comfort others, that they
may therein partake with me. And dear Friends, as far as in you lies, remove
every heavy burden that lies upon the seed in your own particulars, if ye (any
of you) be found in the least jot or circumstance in any thing, which the light
of Christ in its manifestation in the heart discovers to be sinful. Oh this
will be a mountain on the seed, yea, the being but found in whatsoever, ye do
not know your app^obation, justification of God in the manifestation; will lie
upon the seed, as a talent of lead, therefore come into obedience in all
things, come into forbearance, come into the cleanly well ordered conversation,
come into a final, total d^c^sion of all particula^s betwixt God and your
souls, and I can assure you his Salvation is near to such, and his
righteousness, and the Kingdom which comes with power and great glory is at
hand, even at hand to be revealed unto them.

This from your dear Friend, George Keith.
The 22 of the 11 month 1664.

