A FURTHER DISCOVERY Of the SPIRIT of Falsehood and Persecution IN Sam.
Jennings, And his Party that joined with him in Pensilvania; and some Abettors
that cloak and defend him here in England: In Answer to his scandalous Book,
called, The State of the Case.
IN Order to this further Discovery, I think fit to follow this Method; First,
to set down in order, the grossest Falsehoods and Untruths I find in his Book;
and for which he gives no other Proof, but his and their bare Affirmation who
are his Confederates, which ought to be of no Authority, or Credit with them,
who know him and them to be our prejudiced Adversaries in the Case, and whom I
can, and doubt not to prove both him and them guilty of affirming diverse gross
falsehoods in this following Treatise; and for brevity sake, to give little
other Answer to many of the whole Sum, Number, or Tale of them, but this, That
they are gross downright Falsehoods, Fictions, and Forgeries of his and their
devising, hatched and invented by him and them, whereby, as with so many
Fig Leaves, to cover his and their Nakedness: And, as I go along, to answer
particularly, to his seeming Reasons, so far as they may seem to weak and
unwary Readers, to be some sort of covering to him, and his Party; and his
particular Charges against me, so far as they seem to contain any thing of
Truth in them in matter of Fact, briefly to reply unto.

For the first, some of the grossest downright Falsehoods and Untruths, Fictions
and Forgeries asserted by him, are these in order following.

I. That he says in his Title page, The state of the Case impartially given,
etc. [he had said more truly, The state of the Case partially, falsely and
perversely given, etc.]

II. That some few have been seduced by me, into a separation, etc. [but on the
contrary, I have not seduced any, but have been made an Instrument of God, (for
which I desire to praise him) to preserve many, and to recover some from being
deceived.]

III. That we are backsliders, and have reproached, and abused him. [This is
his own Character, and not ours.]

IV. That he might have made his Innocence his Sanctuary. [But instead of that,
he makes Falsehoods and Fictions his Sanctuary.]

V. That I said to him, That it was not for any love I had to him, that I had
sought his Friendship, etc. [This I solemnly declare is utterly false; and I
acknowledge, I did love him, and still love him, as I ought to love my Enemies,
but the bond of brotherly love he himself broke it, and not I.]

VI. That I flatter to gain him to my Party. This is false.

VII. That I consult the old Proverb, Throw Dirt enough, and some will stick.
[This most truly belongs to himself.]

VIII. That it is matter of Malice, and not Conscience, that has occasioned me
to appear against him. [But my appearing against him, was only in my just
defense; and what I have said or Printed against him, respecting some former
Passages of his Life, before he appeared an unjust Adversary against me, were
such as I had not the full knowledge, and certainty of them before; and beside,
they were of that nat^^e or quality, that had it not been for his intolerable
Pride, and Arrogance, as well as Injustice, in charging me, ^hen Innocent, of
what he was most guilty himself, they might have been buried, even with them
that knew him to be guilty, more than I did; and it might have been hoped, that
he had repented of such things; but he proceeding to show himself worse then
formerly, not amending, but more degenerating, might give just occasion, in our
just defense, to let him know what sort of Captain these twenty seven false
Judges had chosen to follow, in that unjust War they had undertaken. His
Argumentum ad hominem, shows him as ignorant in fair Reasoning, as he knows
himself to be in the Latin Tongue, which yet he would make some show of, as if
he skilled it; for his transferring my Complaint against Arthur Cook, (citing
Reasons and Causes of the Separation, page 18.) to his Complaint against me, is
not para^lel, nor equal. But so heedless he is, in what he writes, (as in what
he says) that he miscites the Book; for that Complaint of mine against Arthur
Cook, is not in Reasons and Causes, etc. but in the Plea of the Innocent, that
was in Answer to his, and his Brethrens Paper of false Judgment against me; for
my Complaint against A. C. was, That he transgrest Gospel Order in concealing a
matter so many years, and then bringing it forth against me, while I was in the
same Profession of Church Membership with them, when he so accused me; and the
matter it self was also false. But what I blamed Sam. Jennings for, with
respect to some years past, was only in way of my just defense, and was most
properly, Argumentum ad hominem, it being most unreasonable in him, to require
an absolute Submission from me, in the greatest matters of Faith and
Conscience, when he refused to submit in some worldly matters; and I made not
this Complaint against him, in my just defense, until by his, and his Parties
false Judgment given out against me, We were no more of one Society; and it
stands well consistent with Scripture, That if a Man depart from his
Righteousness, not only his former Righteousness is to be forgotten, but his
former Unrighteousness may be justly remembered against him.

IX. That the noise we make of Persecution, he doubts not but the Reader will
find, by what follows, is a sham, and abuse put upon the World. [And I refer it
to the Impartial Reader, whether this, his Book, be not a sham put upon the
World? and whether, the Sufferings, we did undergo, for matters purely of
Conscience, were not really Persecution, as much as what many Friends have
suffered here in England, in former times. That he says, page 3. of his
Preface, How can any thing deserve to be called a Suffering or Persecution,
that is so much desired and sought for, shows him extremely ignorant, what
true Suffering is; and that he is better acquainted with the Spirit of
Persecution, than with the Spirit of Suffering; and also, that he is little
conversant, either in Scripture or Church History; for Christ, the Prophets,
Apostles, and Martyrs, not only desired to suffer for Righteousness sake,
(knowing the Blessedness that belonged to that State) but rejoiced at their
Suffering, not simply for the Suffering, but that God might be honored, and
the Truth advanced; nor did they desire Suffering in any evil will toward
Persecutors, but prayed for them; as so I have done, and have them for my
Example.

X. That my, and our greatest Suffering from the Government, was, That we could
not provoke them to do more against us. [This is utterly false; we neither gave
them just Provocation, nor desired to provoke them.]

XI. That our Crimes were so gross and enormous, as no other Government would
have been guilty of such Impunity, (I suppose he means Iniquity) to suffer to
pass with so slight a Correction. [This Assertion is so extravagantly false,
that it may be justly questioned, whether ever any Government in the English
Dominions, was so extremely severe, ridgid, and cruel, to punish Men for
asserting the same Principles, in common professed, both by the Punishers, and
punished, as was our Case. For it is well known, it is a professed Principle
among the People called Quakers, That it is lawful to reprove Pride, or any
other Sin, in a Magistrate, as Injustice, arbitrary and unlawful Proceedings of
Magistrates; also, it is their known Principle, neither to fight, nor to hire
Men to fight; and yet for our practicing the former, viz, Reproving Pride in
Sam. Jennings, and asserting the latter, as the Quakers Principle, we were
persecuted by him, and his Party. And I know not, if many Instances or Examples
can be found in England, or in the Kings Dominions in America, that they did
punish any called a Quaker, for his simply reproving Pride, or other the like
Sins in Magistrates. But there is not wanting plenty of Examples out of the
Printed Books of the People called Quakers, that they have largely and much
more aggravatingly reproved Pride, Oppression, Injustice, and arbitrary
Proceedings in Magistrates, than what we have done in Pensilvania.] See for
proof, G. F. his Letter to Justice Savrey, in his Journal, page 94. Will. Pen,
and Will. Meeds Trial, and G. W. his Trial at Norwich.

XII. He charge it to be Deceit, in the Penman of the Book of the Trial; to
assert it, that Will. Bradford, and John Micomb, were under any hard usage, or
close confinement, after they were put in Prison; and for this he brings only
the Credit of John White, then Sheriff and Jailor both, as well as a prejudiced
Adversary; and who had appeared Attorney against us, a Man of as bad Credit as
Sam. Jennings himself. [But it is well known to many in Philadelphia, who came
to see them in Prison, That they were kept for some time so close in Prison,
that by no Entreaty, they could have their Freedom, to go home to visit their
Families, though John Micembs Family greatly needed him, his Wife being newly
brought to Bed, and dangerously ill.

XIII. That John White offered them, upon their first coming in, if they would
promise to come to him, upon notice given them, they might go about their
business till then. [This is notoriously false, and is easily proved to be so
by the express words of the Mittimus signed by Sam. Jennings, and Robert Ewer,
both Preachers, that says, the said Persons being required to give security to
answer it at the next Court, but they refusing so to do, etc. Now can it be
supposed, that the Justices refusing them liberty to go home without giving
Security, that the Jailor would dare to contradict their strict Order, the very
first Night they were committed to Prison. But that they refused to give
Security, by entering into Bonds for their Appearance, is that which Friends
generally have refused to do, when they have been committed to Prison, both
here in England, and elsewhere; and as these two honest Men, viz. Will.
Bradford, and John Micomb, acted like faithful Friends, in refusing to enter
into Bonds, having done nothing worthy of Imprisonment; So their Persecutors,
whereof Sam. Jennings was the chief, acted like the worst of our Persecutors
here in England, formerly in requiring such Security of them. But it seems
after some time their proud Hearts fell, and without requiring any Bonds of
them, they had more liberty allowed them afterward, more regarding the cry of
the generality of the People, both in Town and Country, against such notorious
Injustice and Oppression, than any real Mercy and Compassion toward the
Prisoners they had in Custody. But what cloak has he, to cover the other parts
of their Cruelty acted on these two honest Persons, having from the one, viz.
John Micomb, taken his License, which he paid dear for, before the time was
expired for which he paid; the said License being to keep an Ordinary, the
outward means of his Livelihood; and having taken from the other, viz. Will.
Bradford, so much of his Printing Letter as was in value worth about Ten
Pounds, to his great detriment; and was not restored to him, so long as these
unjust and violent Men possessed the Government. But after they went out, by
Order of the new Governor, his Printing Letter was restored to him, to their
great shame that had so long unjustly and cruelly detained it. And also, by
another Order of the said New Governor, Peter Bosse, after a Months unjust and
undue Imprisonment, upon the change of the Government, was set at Liberty; and
diverse other abuses were then rectified. And what says he to that act of both
Injustice and Cruelty, that he, viz. Sam. Jennings, and his Party, did take
away from Will. Bradford, the Printer, his yearly Salary of Forty Pounds per
Annum, they had bound themselves by Indenture to pay him, for some years to
come, without the least just occasion given them; or the last breach of the
Indenture on his part, the only pretense they made, being his Printing the
Sheet, called, The Christian Faith of the People of God called in scorn,
Quakers in Rhode Island, etc. A Paper which has been well received by many
Friends here in England, and elsewhere: And his Printing it without their
License or Knowledge, they made so highly criminal in him, as to take from him
Forty Pounds per Annum, for some years to come, being such an unparalled
Instance of Oppression, that I think few parts in Europe, in a thing of that
Nature, can produce the like, he being left at liberty by the express Terms of
the written Indenture betwixt him and them, to Print what he pleased, or might
be for his Profit, that was not against the Government, as nothing of this
could, or was pretended to be, (nor indeed was ever any thing that he
afterward Printed, in the least against it) he never refusing to print for
them, whatever they required, which none of them can say he did; but showed
himself always most willing to serve them, in his Art of Printing. And it is
but Deceit in Sam. Jennings, to charge these two honest Friends with Deceit,
for their Signing a Paper from the Prison, when they signed it in the Entry,
common to the Prison, and the next House; for the Entry belonging to the
Prison, it was no Deceit nor Lie, to sign it from the Prison, it happening at
that time, they had a little Liberty to go home, and they being Prisoners still
by order of the Justices, it was most proper for them to sign their Paper from
the Prison, being, if I well remember, a Paper to the Justices, requesting
farther Liberty; and the Prisonhouse Room happening to be shut at that time, who
can blame them with Deceit, for signing it in any place or part belonging to
the Prison, except such as Sam. Jennings; who, to hide his own Deceit,
labors to represent an innocent Act, as if it were deceit. And so much in
answer to his Falsehoods and Misrepresentations contained in his Preface.

XIV. page 1. In the beginning of his Book, he tells a great Falsehood, viz.
That the publishing the Breach made in Pensilvania, seems designed to gratify
the Adversaries of Truth. [For the design of its publishing was only to bear
our faithful Testimony against the vile Antichristian Errors boldly maintained
by some there, and cloaked by others; and in Vindication of our Innocence,
which they of the other side had labored to defame.

XV. page 2. He most falsely and injuriously charge me with a slight of the
Spirits Teachings. [For I greatly honor and value the Spirits Teachings; but
the false and vain Pretensions of ignorant Persons, to the Spirits Teachings, I
disown and witness against, as the true Prophets did witness against the false
Pretenses of the false Prophets, who said, thus says the Lord, when the Lord
had not spoke unto them.]

XVI. page 2. He falsely charge me, That my charge against some Preachers in
Pensilvania, is couched in bare generals. [But in Contradiction to himself,
within a few Lines, he acknowledges the Particulars, wherewith I did charge
them, viz. That T. Fitswater had accused me, For denying the Sufficiency of the
Light, because I said, as was alleged by the four Evidences, That the Light
within was not sufficient without something else. Now if this be matter of just
Accusation against me, it must to them be a false Assertion; and the
contradictory Assertion must be true, viz. That the Light within is sufficient
to Salvation, without any thing else; which most evidently excludes the Person
of Christ, viz. His Manhood, Death, and Sufferings, and shedding of his
precious Blood, and Intercession for us in Heaven, all which are something else
than the Light within. But whereas he says, may it not seem strange, that I
who had been among them Twenty Eight Years, and most of the Time a Preacher,
and a Vindicator of them, should not discover this, (viz. That some among them
were guilty of vile Errors.) But to this it is easily answered, I had but a
very few Years, or rather Months been among them in Pensilvania, when I had
discovered some among them guilty of vile Errors; and labored much among them
in love to recover them, which was not without Success to some, though others
were hardened. And for the Time I was among the People called Quakers, before I
came into America, mostly in Scotland, my Native Country, and sometimes in
England, and elsewhere, it is well known to some now alive in this City, that
many years ago, I had discovered some here in England, guilty of some gross
Errors, such as of late I had discovered in Pensilvania) and had also
complained of them; and diverse Meetings were had, where my Complaint was
heard, and these Meetings giving due and impartial Judgment in the Case, and
standing up for the Truth, and putting to silence these Men for that time, this
made things quiet, and prevented a breach; and had these to whom I complained
in Pensilvania, done the like Justice there, they might have prevented the
breach that happened, therefore the guilt of it lies at their door; and
especially upon S. J. who has been a principal Defender and Upholder of the
Persons guilty of those vile Errors. But what if I did not discover the Error^
that I find too many guilty of now, both in America, and here also in Europe,
not having had the opportunity of intitimate Communication with them, by verbal
Conference, perhaps not one of a hundred; nor having read very many of Friends
Books in those former days. But since our Differences began in America, this
has given me (...) occasion, both of verbal Conference with many, and also of
more frequent reading in Friends Books than formerly, and upon the whole I can
say, I find the whole Doctrine asserted by me, in all particulars, well
confirmed out of Friends Books, even in those things, wherein I have been
contradicted by some, both in America, and here in England; and am able to
prove all the parts of Doctrine asserted by me, out of the Holy Scripture, and
Friends Books; though I must needs also acknowledge, that by some others it is
contradicted in some other Books, for which cause I did judge, and I still so
do, that diverse Books among us need Correction in diverse Places, because they
both contradict the Holy Scriptures in some Places, and also they contradict
the Books and printed Testimonies of other Friends; and these palpable
Contradictions have done, and will do great hurt, (until corrected) both to
weak Friends, and other friendly People, tending to darken some, and stumble
others.

XVII. page 2. His false Prophecy or Presumption concerning me, which he
says, he believes a very little time will try or discover; as also his false
Insinuation against me, That I am not real in my professing, my being in dear
Unity with all faithful Friends; or that any thing of my Deportment has
discovered the contrary. [For I have differed with none here, or elsewhere, but
so far as they have differed from Truth; and if I remain in Unity with the
Truth, (as I do, and he, nor any else cannot prove the contrary) I remain in
Unity with all the faithful Friends of it. Nor do I judge that every small
difference in Judgment does break the Unity of faithful Friends, when
Sincerity, and the Love of the Truth is kept to in the main.

XVIII. page 3. His falsely asserting the sufficiency of W. Stockdales Evidence
against me, who was notoriously known to be a prejudiced Person, by his falsely
accusing me, Of being guilty of Preaching two Christ's, which Sam. Jennings has
been forced to confess was proved against him, and accordingly gave at last a
Judgment against him, though it was as an Abortive out of due Season.

XIX. His perverting my words, saying, Diverse present cleared him, viz. G. K.
that they heard him, both then, and at all occasions that he delivered his Mind
on that Subject, always bear his Testimony to the sufficiency of the Light to
Salvation. [But this he makes so great a difficulty or impossibility, viz. to
prove a Negative; most perversely arguing, or rather, qui^ling, How could they
hear him at all times, when he delivered his Mind on that Subject. [But my
words do plainly enough bare this sense, That they heard me at all such times,
when W. Stockdale heard me; to wit, either in public Meetings, where some of
them were always present at Philadelphia; or at that Meeting at the House of S.
Carp. where and when he did fals^ly so accuse me. And if a Negative Evidence be
to S. J. such a difficulty or impossibility, How is it, that he is put to bring
a negative Evidence to prove he was not drunk in East Jersey; See page 69. May
it not be replied to him, Was that Person always with him? and had such a
perfect knowledge of him, that he was not drunk, or at least elevated with
Drink, seeing some have asserted that he was; and one, being ^uled by
Affection, ^ay judge a Man not to be drunk, when another Man may judge, and
perhaps more duly, that he is. But whether he was, or was not drunk, as I did
not accuse him, so it is not my present business, to prove or disprove it, only
I thought fit to take notice how partial S. J. is, to reject these diverse
Evidences on my side, that proved a Negative, and yet defend himself, by one
Person that proved a Negative on his side.

XX. page. 3. His Perversion, and perversely quibling against the Monthly
Meeting that gave Judgment against T. Fish; As, first, That some had been
there, that were not in the Profession of Truth, a thing he says, not usual in
solemn Monthly Meetings. [But this quibble is easily answered, The Report
spread abroad concerning our Differences, occasioned diverse to come, even to
other Monthly Meetings as well as that; yea, and to their Yearly Meeting too,
that were not in the Profession of Truth: And it can be proved, that some have
signed to some false Judgments given out against me, that were not in the
Profession of Truth. But however S. J. does take notice, that these that were
not in the Profession of Truth, were said to have gone away, before any
Judgment was given. Another silly quibble of his is, That most of them that
gave that Judgment at the adjourned Monthly Meeting, were such as afterward
went into the Separation with G. K. page 4. But here he only begs the question,
without all shadow of Proof, that they or I either, went into the Separation;
for on the contrary I have sufficiently proved it, both in my former Books, and
also in my last Book in Answer to T. E. his scandalous Defamation, That they of
the other side began the Separation, and are guilty of continuing it.

XXI. page 4. He most palpably perverteth the matter, when he says, I make a
mischievous use of the Evidence given by them called the four credible
Witnesses, and strain consequences from it; he alleging, It was not the thing
in question, Whether the Light was sufficient, without something else; but
whether G. K. had said so or not, which was proved he had. [But take notice
Reader, of this Man's gross Forgery and Prevarication, (enough to discredit his
whole Book, and all his other audacious false Affirmations) the thing in
question was, Whether G. K. was guilty of denying the Sufficiency of the Light
within to Salvation, Th. Fishwater having accused him, of such a Crime or
Error, as is confessed by the Judgment of that Monthly Meeting, that took the
Evidences of that four Persons (which they took most disorderly, G. K. being
absent, and having no call nor notice given him to be present;) and to prove
his charge against G. K. he brings four Witnesses to prove that they heard me
say, The Light was not sufficient to Salvation, without something else; this
the said Meeting takes for a sufficient Evidence to clear T. F. and therefore
without the least strain, according to them, G. K. is guilty of a great Error,
for saving, The Light [within] is not sufficient to Salvation, without
something else. But seeing by their Judgment this is an Error, the
contradictory Assertion to it must need^ be true, viz. That the Light within is
sufficient to Salvation, without any thing else; which excludes the (...)
Christ, his Death and Sufferings, Blood and Intercession for as in Heaven* all
which are something else than the Light within, as all Men of common sense must
needs confess, That the outward Body or Person of the Man Christ, and his
Death, Blood, and Intercession without us, are not the Light in us; and
therefore something else, though Christ is but one, both without us and within
us, even as the Godhead and Manhood of Christ is but one Christ, and yet his
Manhood is not his Godhead, but something else; for his Godhead did not suffer
Death, but his Manhood.

XXII. page 4, 5. His palpable Perversion, and bewraying his gross Ignonorance,
or Deceit, in charging me with Inconsistency, for saying, The Light is
sufficient to Salvation, and yet to affirm it is not sufficient without
something else; as if these two Assertions were inconsistent, or contradictory.
Whereas the least ordinary Christian, of the smallest Capacity, cannot but see,
both the Consistency and Truth of these two sound Assertions, as much as when I
say, my Hand is sufficient to write, or ^old a Book, but not without my Body,
which is something else; and my Eye is sufficient to see, but not without my
Head; and a thousand such Examples may be given. And the Grace of Christ is
sufficient to save me, but not without the Man Christ; nor is Christ
sufficient, without the Father, for he said himself, I can do nothing of my
self; but together with the Father, he is our All-sufficient Savior. And who
will dare to say, but the Man Christ without us, that was born of the Virgin,
is sufficient to save us, yet not without his inward appearance in our Hearts;
it pitties me to deal with such an ignorant Adversary. Oh! for shame, that ever
such an ignorant Person should pass with any, for a Minister of Christ, that
sees not, or is so deceitful, that he will not acknowledge, that he sees such
a thing, as the good Consistency betwixt these two Assertions aforesaid.

XXIII. His gross Perversion, in charging my Words, I spoke at the Yearly
Meeting, and which were too mincingly, and unduly repeated in that Paper,
called, A true Account of the Proceedings of the Yearly Meeting at London, etc.
As if they did infer the same Consequence against my self, the substance of my
words being, viz. That the Light within, being God, the Word, the Spirit, in
every Man, is sufficient to reveal to every Man, all that is needful to his
Eternal Salvation. [But let the Reader of the least true Capacity, judge
whether these words can admit of any such Consequence, That the Light within us
is sufficient to Salvation without any thing else, seeing as is above showed,
these two Assertions are well consisting; and Sam. Jennings knows in his
Conscience, that I spoke the words more fully, than he has related them, viz.
by adding, yet not excluding the Man Christ Jesus, his Death, Sufferings, etc.
and Intercession, etc. from being jointly concerned in our Salvation; as also
my saying, That the Faith of Christ, as he died for us, etc. is necessary to
our Christianity and Salvation. But further, to manifest the great Ignorance,
or rather Deceit of S. J. in this particular, he intimating it was not the
thing in question, Whether the Light is not sufficient to Salvation, without
something else; G. K. meaning by that something else, The Manhood of Christ,
his Death and Sufferings, and Intercession. He knows in his Conscience, that
some time after John Delawal accused me in a public Meeting, of being guilty
of Heresy, for saying, The Light within was not sufficient to Salvation,
without something else; at which time S. Jennings most shamefully, as is known
to many, set the Christian and the Quaker at odds in the public Meeting,
saying, the question betwixt us and G. K. is not, Who is the best Christian,
but who is the best Quaker? And also S. J. knows in his Conscience, that I
produced two Manuscripts of John Delawal, that was read in the yearly Meeting
at London, wherein he accuses me of Heresy, and of denying the fundamental
Principle of the Quakers, for saying, The Light within is not sufficito
Salvation, without something else; and concerning the Debate betwixt John
Delawal and me, upon that head, I refer to the Printed Treatise, called,
Heresy and Hatred, etc. the which if any have a mind to see, or buy, let them
come to me, and I shall acquaint them where they may have them.

XXIV. page 6. His gross Perversion and Insinuation against me, saying, It Is
well if he have not sinned against Knowledge in this matter, they of the other
side having so often and solemnly told me, that they did believe all that is
Recorded is Sacred Writ, concerning our Blessed Savior, etc. [But how could I
believe them to be sincere in their Affirmation, any more than I can believe a
Papist or Mugletonian; who will say the same in general, That they believe all
that is Recorded in Sacred Writ concerning our Blessed Savior, and yet many of
their Doctrines contradict Sacred Writ. For to be sure, it contradicts Sacred
Writ, to say, it is a fundamental Error and Heresy, That the Light within is
not sufficient to Salvation, without something else; which was publicly
asserted by one of their chief Preachers, and Rulers of their side, viz. send
Delawall, and which his Manuscripts under his own Hand, read at the yearly
Meeting, fully prove; and for which they did never pass any due censure against
him, nor against John Humphreys, for saying in his Letter, read at the yearly
Meeting at London, He was grieved to hear some say, they expect to be justi^c^
by that Blood that was shed at Jerusalem. And though Sam. Jenings mention the
the precious Blood of Christ, with which Christ has purchased that Inheritance
for us, etc. Yet he does not tell what that Precious Blood is, or what he means
by it, seeing not only John Humphrey in Pensilvania, but some here in England,
by the Blood which with God expiates for Sin, and cleanses from Sin, do not
mean the Blood of Christ's Manhood, or Humanity, but the Life, which is the
Light, as one Frances Ftheridge, a bold ignorant Soul, lately, in my hearing,
and in the hearing of many, at a public Meeting, on a First day, at Dev^shire,
in the Forenoon, affirmed, That the Blood (John 1. 1. 7.) that cleanses from
all Sin, was the Life, and the Life is the Light; and this perverse Exposition
goes current among too many here in England, as well as in America. But in
Opposition to his unchristian and uncharitable Insinuation, I say, I have
charged them with nothing against my Knowledge, but what is most perfectly
consistent with my Knowledge.

XXV. page ^. His gross Perversion, in laboring to make void the Credit of the
two Persons, viz. W. Bradford, and John Macomb, in giving Evidence against W.
St. that he accused me of being guilty of Preaching two Christ's, alleging they
were much at my Devotion, and my Creatures, to use them as I pleased; which is
a false and base Insinuation. But if their Evidence is not to be credited,
because they did afterward join with me in their Christian Testimony, to
oppose the vile Errors held by some of their side, by the same Reason, these he
calls the four credible Witnesses of their side, ought to be rejected; and
with as much color of Reason, or rather much more, they might be said to be at
the Devotion of Sam. Jennings, and Th. Lloyd, and used by them, as they
pleased. But the Judgment of the monthly adjourned Meeting that was given out
against Will. Stockdale, did not depend upon the bare Credit of these two
Persons, though Men sufficiently credible. But the Meeting it self, consisting
of above Sixty Persons, declares, that at that monthly Meeting he did say,
That what he had formerly said in his Charge against G. K. he did yet stand by
and justify; upon which, that Meeting gave judgment against him, That the said
W. Stockdale should condemn his unrighteous Charge publicly, etc.

XXVI. His gross Perversion, in laboring to defame these two honest Friends,
most falsely accusing W. Bradford with Baseness and Treachery to his Benefactors
in Pensilvania; who at no inconsiderable Cost encouraged the Press there, etc.
But let the Impartial Reader judge whether Sam. Jennings does not basely accuse
him, for an innocent Act, he not being under the least tie or limitation, by
them he calls his Benefactors, not to print to G. K. as well as to them, G.
K. being engaged in the same Testimony for Conscience Sake with him. But S.
Jennings may be ashamed, to call them his Benefactors, who were his Persecutors
and Oppressors, and dealt treacherously with him, by breaking their Indenture
with him, and taking away his Forty Pounds per Annum, from him, that they had
covenanted to give him, for about seven years to come, which he had little
above one year paid him; so exposing his Family to Want and Ruin, had not
Providence opened another way to him. And as is above said, they took his
Salary from him, for printing that sheet from Rhode Island, which was before
any thing of our Differences in Pensilvania were exposed in Print; so that
could it be supposed, that his printing the Differences among us in
Pensilvania, had given some just occasion of Offense to them, (which it did
not) yet they taking away his Salary from him, before that supposed Offense,
was most unjust, seeing, according to all Justice, the Punishment never goes
before the Offense, but follows it. His other Story of John Macomb, is false
in d^vers things, as his (viz. J. M.) being under strong Obligations to W. S
for his Care of him, in that time when he wanted it. But I have heard J. M.
deny it solemnly, that ever he was so much obliged to W. S. as W. S. was to
him: And it is well known, that W. S. was not under such Circumstances, either
in Pensilvania, or elsewhere, as very liberally to supply the wants of other,
but rather needed, and had supply from others; and as for J. M. he was no
Servant to W. S. but to R.T. who is kno^n to be both able (...) and
sufficiently enough disposed to do well by his Servants, and to h^^p them to
live comfortably, after the time of their Service is expired; so that this
Suggestion of John Macombs want, being supplied by W. S. as S. J. would have it
believed, is more probable to be a Fiction than any truth, and we have no other
Authority for it, but that S. J. or W. S. said so; and J.M. his denying it,
with the circumstances related, is sufficient to counter-ball^nce* But
supposing it to be true, what is alleged of W. S. being so kind to J. M. it is
false, what S. J. relates, that J. M. used any fly, unmanly, or ungrateful way,
in a Visit to W. S. to pump him by questions, concerning G. K. For the said J.
M. came to me next morning after the discourse that past betwixt them, and told
it to me, no ways, as one that sought any occasion against W. S. but simply, as
one much grieved in Spirit, to find so great a difference in Judgment betwixt
W.S. and me, in a thing of so great moment, and he told me also, the Visit and
Discourse were both occasional; and it came altogether from W.S. of his own
accord, without any such thing as pumping him by questions, as S. J. falsely
alleges.

XXVII. p. 8. He grossly prevaricates, in falsely accusing me, That I liberally
bestow my Anathema Maranatha upon W.S. without more a-do, telling him, he was
an ignorant Heathen, not worthy of any place in the Assembly of Friends. [For I
never pronounced an Anathema upon W.S. or any other of them, tho some of them
have pronounced many woes upon me, in the Hearing of many, together with their
false Prophecies, which God has frustrated, and (my faith is in him) he will
still frustrate. But S. Jennings is very ignorant, that he knows not an
Anathema Maranatha is one thing, being a very severe Curse; and to tell a man,
If he believe not in Christ without him, as well as in Christ within him, which
were my words to W. S. he is but an ignorant Heathen, and not worthy of any
place among Friends; which I still affirm to be true, and is the true character
of one so grossly ignorant.

XXVIII. It is a gross perversion, and false accusation in him, to say, Because
Judgment was not given against W.S. in my way and time (although (as he falsely
alleges) my own turbulency was the great obstruction) he therefore sticks not
to unchristian many, etc. [For I have sufficiently showed in my printed books,
and now lately in my Answer to T.E. That they gave no due judgment or censure
at all against him to this day; and the shadow, or bare formality of judgment
the^ published at last against him, was like Mustard after Meat, and at an
(...) or one born out of due time, being 9 months after my complaint made to
the Yearly meeting, and about 13 months after my first complaint, made to a
meeting of Ministering Friends, at the house of Robert Ewer, and several months
after the breach began at Philadelphia. And it is a most deceitful Excuse, to
say, my own turbulency was the great obstruction; which is merely said, but not
proved, after long and much earnest Reasoning and expostulating the matter with
them, at the Yearly meeting at Philadelphia. At their desire I went out of the
meeting, that they might agree upon a Judgment among themselves; (tho T. E.
grossly printeth a falsehood, in the face of the world, citing my book, Some
Reasons and Causes of the Separation, That I refused to go out; and my book, p.
18. says expressly, I did go out at the meetings desire) and yet they would not
suffer any Judgment to be intimated to me, neither at that time, nor for many
months thereafter: Yea, the Judgment that was duly given by the monthly meeting
adjourned, they denied it to be a due Judgment, and disowned the meeting that
gave it, as is showed in my former printed books, and particularly in my late
Answer to T.E. However, he acknowledges, That judgment was not given against
W.S. and gives the Reason, why, because they would not give it in my way and
time. But I say, they gave it not in Truths way and time, but delayed it most
unreasonably and unchristianly, till the time was expired; and at last what
they gave, was but a shadow.

XXIX. p. 9. He boldly, but most falsely charge me, That I have falsely accused
the innocent, and that knowingly too, because, as he alleges, I have heard
very many of them often declare their Faith in the aforesaid particulars, and
what else is necessary to be believed and owned by true Christians. [But I
deny, that ever I heard any of them give a satisfactory account of their Faith
in the particular things of Controversy, but generally from time to time,
increased our just dissatisfaction, both by their most unchristian and unsound
expressions, and doubtful and equivocous terms: Yea, both I, and many others,
do well remember that we have heard Sam. Jennings, himself, declare in a
public meeting at Philadelphia, That Friends were not gathered by the faith of
Christ, as he came outwardly to die for us, but by faith in the power of God,
inwardly revealed* Thus setting things asunder that go together: And diverse
others of them have declared to the same effect; and John Willford, to the
offense of many, declared, in the Hearing of Hundreds, at Philadelphia, That he
had the true faith of Christ's Death and Sufferings, before he came among
Friends; but it did not gather him to God, but left him in his sins.

XXX. p. 10. His boldly, and most perversely challenging me, to name the person
among us, that any orderly complaint has been made against, and the matter
proved, that has been cloaked; yea, that has not been testified against.
[What greater impudence can be supposed in a man, than for Him thus to
challenge me, when he not only knows in his conscience, but does confess in
this his scandalous Pamphlet, the complaints I made against both William
Stockdale, and Thomas Fitswaters, from meeting to meeting, and yet they never
did any thing effectually to pass due Judgment against them: And as for Thomas
Fitswaters, their monthly meeting at Philadelphia, instead of passing a due
Censure on him, for his falsely accusing me, That I denied the sufficiency of
the Light to salvation, did clear him, from the Evidence given by four persons
of their own Party, that said, They heard me affirm, the Light was not
sufficient to salvation, without something else: But this was no proof to
confirm his accusation: for the thing they should have proved against me, was,
That I denied the sufficiency of the Light to salvation: But instead of proving
that, they gave Evidence to prove another thing, quite different; even as far
different as to say, Sam. Jennings is not an honest man, without honest
dealing; and to say simply, he is not an honest man; For the first is certainly
true, tho the second were questioned. Besides, he knows in his conscience,
that I complained to their Quarte^ly meeting, upon the unsound and vile
expressions in John Humphreys Letters, (the Original Copy of which was read at
the meeting at London, last 1694.) and yet I received no Answer, but a mere
abuse, S. Jennings being present, who told me, I was none of them; and what had
I to do to hinder the Affairs of the Meeting? I told them, if I were Turk or
Jew, they ought to hear my just Complaint against one of their Church Members.

XXXI. And he but deceitfully tells, in his page 10. That at the last Yearly
Meeting at Philadelphia, a Minute was made, That great care should be taken,
that if any amongst us had given any just cause of Offense, they should be
orderly deals withal, that Truth might be cleared, and the Offense removed;
whence he deceitfully inters, saying, So that I think all his pretenses of
Friends cloaking, etc. in America, are taken away, and will be no more a Cloak
for him to cover his false accusations against them. [But he should have given
some Example, or instance, when, or where they did execute that Minute, or
Order of their Last Yearly meeting, so that these who had given just cause of
Offense, had been dealt withal; but nothing of this being produced, nor that
can be produced, shows his and their great deceit, being like to some bad
Rulers, who make some good Laws, but fail to put them into execution. And
suppose they made such a Minute at the last Yearly meeting at Philadelphia,
about 18 months at lea^^, after the separation and breach was begun, occasioned
by their cloaking persons guilty of such vile Errors; this proves not, That
they were not guilty of c^oaking those persons before that time; but in
reality, they are as guilty since as before; and their making such a Minute, as
he alleges, if any such thing was made, is but a mere blind or Cloak, whereby
to deceive such simple souls, as are willing to be deceived by them.

XXXII. p. 11. He falsely accuses me, bitterly to envy against Thomas Lloid,
and that I abuse and misrepresent him, in charging him, how at the
School-House-Meeting, as well as at those other Meetings aforesaid, Thomas
Lloid argued, That Faith in Christ without us, as be died for our sins, etc.
and rose again, was not necessary to our salvation. He confesleth, He was not
at the School-house Meeting, but at other times, (he says) and once
especially, he was present at a discourse relating to that matter; but the
Question was not, Whether Faith in Christ without us, as be died for our sins,
and rose again, was not necessary to our salvation? But, Whether that Faith
were indispensibly necessary to all Mankind? and that none could be saved
without it, tho they had not the Means, Opportunity or Capacity to know or
receive it, which (he says) will include a great part of Mankind; as namely,
all those that have not the use of the Holy Scriptures, nor the advantage of
hearing it preached to them, which will affect many great Nations, as also all
Infants, deaf and dumb persons, etc. [But tho S. J. here takes on him the
defense of Thomas Lloid, and falsely accuses me of bitterly e^^^ying against
him; His Vindication of Him in this particular matter, is utterly deceitful,
and grounded on a gross falsehood; as if Thomas Lloid were not guilty of any
such charge as above-related. He confesses, he was not present at that
School-house Meeting; so can be no witness in the case, if he were supposed to
be free of all prejudice and partiality, as he is not.

But I have many Witnesses, some whereof are here in England, and at London,
that are ready to declare solemnly, They heard him, viz. Thomas Lloid, not only
then but at other times, boldly assert, That faith in Christ without us, as he
d^ed for our sins, and rose again, was not necessary to our salvation. And the
circumstances, and manner of his arguing, together with the Proofs that he
brought to prove his absurd assertion, are so fresh in the minds of many that
heard him, as well as in my mind, that sufficiently make it evident, that he is
guilty of the charge: for he argued, to prove his assertion, from two places of
Scripture; viz. Micah 6. 8. He has showed thee, O Man! what is good, and what
does the Lord require of thee, but to do Justice, and to love Mercy, and to
walk humbly with thy God: and Eccles. 12. 13. Fear God and keep his
Commandments; for this is the whole duty of man: on which he thus argued; That
nothing here is required to believe that Christ died for us, and rose again: To
which I answered; That tho that faith is not expressed in these places of
Scripture, nor in many other, yet it is implied, and implicitly understood; for
how can we walk humbly with God, if we be lifted up so in pride, as to think
that we need not to have our sins pardoned for Christ's sake; who died for our
sins, that they might be forgiven us freely for his sake through faith in him
who died for us: And at the very same time his Son in Law, John Delawall,
openly opposed him, tho afterward he joined with him against my Christian
Testimony; citing for a Proof against his Antichristian assertion, that place
of Scripture in Romans 10. 9. (and reading it out of a small Pocket-bible) If
thou shall confess with thy mouth the Lord Jesus, and shall believe in thine
heart that God has raised him from the dead, thou shall be saved. And it is
evident as the Sun at Noonday, That his Essay to prove his Antichristian
assertion from these places of Scripture, makes it good against him, that he
did hold, That faith in Christ, as he died for us, and rose again, was not
necessary to our salvation; seeing none will say, but that these places of
Scripture have an universal reference to all mankind; and include us as well as
these not called Christians.

Another Proof brought by him at that very time, at the School-house Meeting,
which is yet a further Evidence of my charge, was the late Act of Parliament
for Toleration, made under the present Reign; where a short Test is required of
Justices of the Peace and others, concerning their faith in God and in Christ,
and in the Holy Ghost; and because nothing in that short Test is mentioned of
faith in Christ, as he died for us, therefore Tho. Lloid did argue, that faith
was not necessary to our salvation. Now it is to be considered, That this short
Test is only designed, and was only made for such as profess Christianity; and
not for professed Heathens; which makes it sufficiently evident, that Tho.
Lloid's assertion, and the matter of dispute betwixt him and me, was not
concerning Heathens at that time, but professed Christians: for it cannot be
supposed that the Parliament's Act did extend to professed Heathens, Turks or
Je^s. And here I earnestly i^treat the Readers to excuse my exposing things so
particularly, in relation to Thomas Lloid, seeing I am brought upon the
Necessity of doing it, in the just defense of my Innocence and Christian
Reputation, which this prejudiced Advesary, Sam* Jennings, seeks, and most
unchristianly endeavors, by his false Accusations, to take from me. But for
a further proof of Sam. Jennings his insincerity in this particular, he knows
in his consience how Tho. Lloid has defended and justified John Hemphrey from
time to time, in his Antichristian assertion, that he was grieved to hear some
say, they expected to be justified by that blood that was shed at Jerusalem;
which most evidently proves, that neither J. H^^er Tho. Lloid did believe it
was necessary for them to have that faith, that we are Justified by that blood:
Yea, S. Jennings his charging me with an inconsistency in my two Assertions;
the one being, that: the light within is sufficient to salvation; the other
being, that the light within is not sufficient to salvation without something
else; I having always declared, that by that something else I mean the Man
Christ Jesus, and his Death and Sufferings, Blood, Resurrection and
Intercession, etc. does sufficiently prove him guilty, that he does not believe
it necessary to his salvation that Christ died for him; for if the light within
be sufficient to salvation, without the Death of Christ (which is a part of
that something else understood by me) then it is not necessary to our
salvation, to believe that Christ died for us; and the Death of Christ has no
part or share in our salvation, by this his Antichristian assertion. But now in
reference to the question, as stated by him, he alleging, that I have
affirmed, that this faith is indispensibly necessary to all, viz. in order to
eternal salvation, to believe in Christ, as he died for us, and rose again. I
freely own it, that I have so Affirmed, and do still so affirm; but however,
that was neither the only, nor the principal question or matter of Debate
betwixt Th. Lloid and me; but a second branch of the question occasionally
happening, that at sometimes was also discoursed betwixt us: But as concerning
the indispensible necessity of Faith in Christ, as he died for us, and rose
again, as universally necessary to salvation, how and in what sense I have
affirmed, I have fully explained in diverse of my late printed books relating to
our late differences; where I have distinguished betwixt the express, or
explicit knowledge and faith of Christ's Death, in order to eternal salvation,
and the implicit knowledge and faith of it; asserting this last, but not the
first, as universally and indispensibly necessary: And in this my Christian
Testimony, as I agree with the Holy Scriptures, and all my former books
(notwithstanding of the Insinuations of some ignorant prejudiced persons
against me; so with the Printed Books and Testimonies of diverse friends of good
Repute among the people called Quakers; and with the General Doctrine of all
moderate Christian VVriters throughout Christendom: See my aforesaid
Explication of my Assertion, particularly in my Two late Printed Treatises; the
one called, Truth and Innocence defended, from page 10. to page 20. where I
largely open the said distinction of faith in Christ explicit and implicit; and
also my other, called, Heresy and Hatred, page 13. As for what he objecteth
concerning the strange Notion of the Revolution of humane souls, and his
insinuation, of my countenancing it; having so fully answered to it in the Two
aforementioned Treatises in Print, to which I refer, I need say nothing here,
further than to tell him, and also to inform the Reader, that his thinking, or
insinuation, that my holding the faith of Christ's Death indispensibly
necessary to all that shall be saved, does oblige me to held, that all to whom
that faith is not outwardly preached, or who have not the outward means, or
outward opportunity of receiving it, must needs live again, by Revolution, in
order to have it preached unto them, otherwise they cannot be saved; does
sufficiently prove him extremely ignorant, and that he has neither the true
faith, nor a true Notion of the sufficiency of the Light within. And howbeit he
labors, in his Prejudice and Enmity, to represent me, as one undervaluing
the sufficiency of the Light within, it plainly appears, Io^n the sufficiency
of the Light within more than he does, or any of his Party, who thus do falsely
accuse me; for I say, as I have often formerly said, the Light within (in the
highest sense) being God and Christ, the Eternal Word, and the Spirit in every
man, is sufficient to reveal and give the Knowledge and Faith of Christ as he
died for all men, and rose again, unto all men, without all outward means of
outward Preaching, or Reading, and consequently without the Revolutions of
Humane Souls for even. Such who favor the Revolution of Humane Souls, as a
probable Hypothesis, do it not upon that supposition, as if the Light within
were insufficient to give the Knowledge and Faith of Christ without as well as
within; for the sufficiency of the Light within, has not a dependence upon the
Revolutions, nor upon any outward means of Preaching, Hearing or Reading:
Insomuch therefore that Sam. Jennings does suppose, that to affirm the Faith of
Christ's Death to be indispensibly necessary to salvation to all that shall be
eternally saved; is to infer the necessity of the Revolution of Humane Souls:
And also that he does positively affirm, that many have not the means,
opportunity or capacity to know or receive it; which (he says) will include a
great part of Mankind. From this it plainly follows, that he thinks the
Light within is not sufficient or able to reveal or give that Knowledge or
Faith of Christ's Death, which I affirm it is, being God, the Word and the
Spirit; and therefore I have a better belief of the sufficiency of the Light
within than he has, or his Party that is joined with him against my Christian
Testimony; and to say, the Light within is not sufficient as fully to reveal
and give the Knowledge and Faith of Christ's Death without, as of his Life
within, is a degree of Blasphemy against God, who is that Light within, and
sounds as harsh and offensive to Christian Ears, as to say, God is not
sufficient to reveal, or give to all men the Knowledge and Faith of Christ's
Death, by Internal Revelation, without all outward means of Instruction; which
yet I think no sound Christian will dare to affirm. But, as I have often said, it
is one thing what God, who is Light, and is in all men, is sufficient, or able
to do, who is able of stones to raise up children to Abraham; and who can work
by his Spirit, when, where, how, and in whom he pleases, even without outward
means, whether in Infants, or deaf and dumb persons, or in them that never
heard the Fame of Christ with their outward Ears: and it is another thing, what
he is pleased to do in his ordinary way of working. But it ought well to be
considered, that our full and perfect salvation depends not wholly upon what
God either can, or pleases to reveal in us; but also in great part, upon what
the Man Christ has done and suffered for us on Earth, especially in dying, and
shedding his precions Blood for us, and his interced on for us now in Heaven;
for that is no small part of our salvation, to be saved from Wrath, and from
the guilt of sin, and from that fearful sentence of Condemnation, and the Curse
of the Law, due to us for sin; and no Internal Revelation can save us from that
Curse, Condemnation and Wrath; but it was necessary that Christ should suffer
for us in the true Nature of Man, that cursins might be forgiven, and we might
be saved from the Wrath of God, and the Curse and Condemnation of the Law of
God, and Christ's suffering Death, and sheading his precious Blood for us, was
not only necessary to our Justification, but to our Sanctification, because by
his Obedience unto Death, and precious Blood, he has procured and pur^^^sed
for us that inward principle of God's Grace, whereby we are sanctified; and we
are sanctified through a living Faith in Christ, as he died for us; and that
Faith is necessary to men's Regeneration and Sanctification, as well as to
Remission of sins; and therefore is necessary to all. But that he says, a
great part of Mankind will be included, who have not had the means, opportunity
or capacity to know or receive it; which carries with it a very harsh and
uncharitable Judgment upon all that part of mankind.

Answ. But where is then the sufficiency of the Light he and many others seem
so warmly to plead for, if it be not sufficient not only to make them capable,
but also to give them the Knowledge of it; viz. the Death of Christ? But why
should this sound more harsh and uncharitable, to say, a great part of mankind
die as much without the Knowledge of Christ within as of Christ without; for as
Christ came in the flesh, is called a great m^stery in Scripture, so is Christ
within also called a great mystery; yea, the mystery that had been hid from
Ages and Generations: and he cannot give me an Instance of any that ever knew
the mystery of Christ within, but also knew in some measure the mystery of
Christ without; for that which is able to reveal the one, is able to reveal the
other. But that any are saved without the knowledge of Christ within, I suppose
he will not say, seeing the Scripture says, Know ye not that Jesus Christ is
in you, unless ye be Reprobates? Or rather, disapproved, or want a Proof. But
the Scripture also says, That it is one God who shall justify the
circumcision; i.e. the Jews, by Faith; and the circumcision; i. e. the
Gentiles, through Faith. And the true Faith is one, whereby both Jews and
Gentiles are justified; which is a Faith in Christ, as he died for us, as well
as that he does inwardly enlighten us. But to suppose a Faith in Christ, that
does not respect his outward coming in the Flesh, and Death and sufferings, but
only and alone that inward common illumination that is in all mankind; is to
set up an unscriptural and Antichristian Faith, opposite to the true Christian
Faith; which I charge on Sam. Jennings, and on all that join with him in this
his absurd Doctrine, to be a pernicious Error, tending to make v^id the true
Faith of Christ, and the Doctrine of the Holy Scriptures, and to teach men to
rely upon their Obedience to the Law, or Light within, for Salvation, and Life
Eternal, without the Faith of Christ crucified; that s^p^ain contrary to the
Holy Scripture, that says, Both Jews and Gentiles were all under sin, and
whatsoever the Law says; it says to them that are under the Law, that every
mouth may be stopped, and the whole world become guilty before God. Now this
Law that steppeth every mouth, and makes the whole world guilty before God, is
the Law, or Light in these Gentiles who have not the Scriptures, or written Law
without: and whatever feigned pretense of Charity S. J. or any others that hold
this gross Error, That men may be eternally saved without all knowledge and
faith of Christ crucified; may have toward that part of mankind who have not
had Christ outwardly preached unto them; yet it is a real undervaluing, and
seeking to undermine the Christian Disp^nsation, and make it as a mee^
Indifferent thing; yea, unprofitable to be under it: for if men commonly obtain
Eternal Life and Salvation, without all knowledge and faith of Christ
crucified, and raised again; and can be perfectly sanctified without it; then
there is no need to have that Faith at all: But for such who say, it is
needful, because it is preached; they use a deceitful, but silly evasion; for
if it is only needful, because it is preached, then the way is not to preach it,
that it may not be needful; and if so, why did the Apostles, and many other
faithful men preach it, and seal to it with their blood? Surely this is the way
to lead people generally both to neglect preaching Christ crucified, and to
hear it preached; yea, and if they destroy, or bury the Bible in oblivion, from
their posterity, by this wicked doing they shall excuse them from being under a
Necessity to believe the Death of Christ in order to salvation. But whereas
some say, it is profitable, tho not absolutely necessary to salvation. to have
the Faith of Christ's Death; but seeing they say, men are commonly saved
eternally without it, as well as with it; they cannot show wherein it is
profitable, unless it be necessary: Indeed, they may as well say, with
Pelagians and Socinians, that inward Grace, or the Spirit's inward operation,
is only profitable, but not absolutely necessary to men's salvation. But we find
the Terms of salvation universally without exception, set down, Romans 10. 9, 10.
that plainly holds it forth, that to believe that Christ rose from the dead,
and that with the heart, as well as to confess it with the mouth, is necessary
to all that shall be saved: And tho this Faith is wrought in men in God's
ordinary way, by an outward Ministry, yet the Word, or Light within, is
suffitient to work it without an outward Ministry; and does so work it when God
pleases, as he wrought it in Abraham, Job, and many others. But that S.J.
says, page 12. he has heard T. Lloid affirm, he did believe it to be our
duty, who had the advantage of having the Holy Scriptures, and hearing the
Faith preached, to receive and believe it. This, I suppose, is possible; but
when was it that he did so profess to believe? viz. after that the Public
Letter signed by G.W. and others, from London, came to them and us, holding
forth that Faith as necessary: but before that Letter came, it is well known to
many, as well as to me, that he had often denied it; but before that the Breach
was made: And since it was made, tho we, for our part, used great Endeavors to
be reconciled to them in the Truth, yet we could never effect it in Truth's way.

XXXIII. page^ 3. He proceeds in the next place to show (which most deceitfully
and falsely he says he will do, heartily, cautiously and truly) the general
cause of this unhappy breach and difference: The General Cause (says he) I
take to be an unbounded Ambition in G. K. But he gives no proof of this his
unchristian and uncharitable assertion; and therefore I return it on him, as
false and fictitious.

XXXIV. His perversion, in making it a Crime in me, to have some Religious
Controversy with some called Preachers in New England, and challenging some of
them to dispute with me; alleging. that I managed it with great Heat and Rage,
and common Ins^lts, when I thought I had advantage, designing Victory and Vain
Glory, rather than Edification. And of this he brings no proof, but his bare
Authority, he being then in New England with me. But he should have brought
either some of my Words or Actions to prove me guilty of his charge; which he
not doing, proves him to be evidently guilty of deep Prejudice, as well as
gross Hypocrisy; for he being with me, and judging me so guilty, as he
alleges, he was unfaithful, in not admonishing me seasonably; which he cannot
justly say, that he ever did, all that time we were together; but professed
great Unity with me. And for my book of Controversy against some Preachers at
Boston in New England, called, The Presbyterian and Independent Visible
Churches brought to the Test, etc. before it was printed, the most of it, if
not all of it, was read in his hearing, and in nothing disapproved by him, and
was generally approved by all that heard it read, being an appointed Number of
them called Friends of the Ministry; the which book was so well accepted by
Friends at London, and over England, that it being Reprinted at London, most
of them were sold, and many Friends bought of them; and tho I have heard diverse
both in City and Country speak well of it, I have not heard any show the least
dissatisfaction against it; yea, diverse of the professing people in N. England
spoke well of it; and tho I used some sharp Words toward some Preachers at
Boston, who did too much justify the Persecution raised against Friends in N.
E. yet (as any that have a spiritual savor to judge, who read my book, will
say) I writ with great moderation, and sincere expressions of Love and charity
toward many of the people; and I think I can say it without Vanity, few have
exceeded me in moderation, in my way of writing Controversy, among the people
called Quakers. But if seeking to dispute with persons of other Professions, be
an argument of Vain Glory, by the same way of Arguing, he makes some of the
best Account of the Speakers among the people called Quakers, equally guilty.
And that he says, how little it redounded to Truth's advantage, he is a
witness, he being then in N. E. with me. If it be enough to make a man guilty
by the single Evidence of a prejudiced Adversary, he has hit the Mark; but if
otherwise, he only shows his Enmity and Prejudice. But that my Labor in N.
E. was not without success, there are at this day in N. E. who will bear
witness to it, as also the Certificate I had from the Meeting in Rhode Island,
declaring the Unity they had with me, and the great benefit they had by my
labor of love among them; which Certificate I can produce; but the witness of
God in my conscience has always been unto me, and ever shall be, more than all
witness of men, and is a sufficient defense unto me against this prejudiced
adversary, and others of his Stamp,

XXXV. page 13, 14. His falsely accusing me of a Spirit of Wrath and Bitterness,
and hating my Brother, etc. [But sharp Words of Reproof against them to whom
they duly belong, are no Argument of Hatred, or that I had not then, or now
have not the true Love of God in my Heart: For let my books in these late
differences, as well as any others, be compared with most of the Friends books
that have writ against Adversaries, and it will be found they have generally
exceeded me in sharp Words; and how far Sam. Jennings, and his Party, have
exceeded me in sharp Words, the printed sheet, called, An Expostulation, etc.
does sufficiently prove. And tho sharp words of Reproof be no infallible
Argument of Hatred, or of an unchristian Spirit yet to be sure Persecution, in
fining or imprisoning men for matters of conscience, is; whereof S. Jen. has
showed Himself sufficiently guilty, and who has discovered Himself, Esau-like,
not only by his threatening words, but by his rough hands.

XXXIV. His unjustly complaining against me, for my just complaint of too great
a laxiness of Church Discipline among them, and my presenting a Paper to
Ministering Friends, in order to have it amended. [But he mentions nothing
wherein that Paper is reprovable; and until He, or some for Him, can show the
default of it, his blaming me for it, is but another Instance and Evidence of
his Prejudice and Enmity against me.

XXXVII. His unjustly accusing me of impeaching (as he terms it) Friends
Testimony, and way of preaching, publicly as well as privately. [And what
could I do less, hearing so frequently such false Doctrine preached, and the
Scriptures so grossly perverted, to the public Scandal of Strangers, that were
not of our Profession. Nor was I forward to do any such thing, but very
sparingly and modestly did at times correct their false Doctrine; and most of
the Opposition that ever I showed to them in public, was in defense of the
Truth of the Christian Doctrine and Testimony I did bear, which they did boldly
contradict; and I dealt orderly with them, by private Admonition, which they
rejected: And when after I made my complaint to them called, Friends of the
Ministry, they did not regard it, so as to pass any due censure upon the
guilty, as is sufficiently made apparent in my former printed books, as well as
from what is in this beforementioned.

XXXVIII. page 15. His accusing me of tedious, dry and insipid Discourses in
their Meetings at Philadelphia; is as false as it is improper for him so to
accuse me; for how can it be expected, that such a professed Adversary, and
open Persecutor, will speak well of me? But when the Jews accused our blessed
Lord of Blasphemy, I need not think strange that Sam. Jennings accuses me. But
for dry and insipid disccurses, he may take it home to himself; for very many
affirm it to be true of himself; and how an open Persecutor, that rather
glories in his Wickedness, than repents of it, can have any other Ministry but
dry, insipid, yea and burdening, is easy to judge, and which some have judged
him for; and some that have been too much prejudiced against me, yet have
disliked him, that they have publicly disowned his Prayer. But however, I may
be to him, and some like him, a favor of Death, as the true Ministers of
Christ were to some formerly; yet to such as have Salt in themselves, I have
been, and still am, (through God's mercy) a savor of Life unto Life.

XXXIX. His falsely accusing me, that I said to a meeting of Ministering Friends,
There were more damnable Heresies, and Doctrines of Devils among the Quakers,
than among any Profession of the Protestants, which, he says, was taken from
my own mouth at that Meeting, and a Minute read to me, and not denied by me;
tho since (he says) I endeavor to evade it. [But he brings no other Proof
for this, but his, and his Parties bare Allegation; which, as I have formerly
denied, so I still deny, that ever I charged it indefinitely upon the Quakers,
or yet upon that Meeting, viz. met at Burlington, first month, 1691. but only
upon a Party in that Meeting, there being in that Meeting about a 3d part of
them, that stood with me, and for my Christian Testimony, particularly George
Hutcheson,* and Thomas Budd, who have declared, that I said not the Quakers
indefinitely; but them, viz. a Faction of that Meeting, who had sufficiently
showed themselves guilty of the charge, both then and formerly. Yea, as I took
notice at the Yearly Meeting at London, 3d month last, 1694. when that Paper he
has now printed, to his shame, was read in the Yearly Meeting, and a Copy of
it delivered to me, to answer: In my Answer to it, I showed them, how that
notwithstanding S. J. had named the Name of God, in asserting, I had charged
the Quakers; yet that very Paper, signed by S. J. in contradiction both to it
self and to him, does clear me, that my words were, That they were met together
(see his printed book, page 18. from line 14. where they say, they repeated my
words to me, and I declared the same again) to cloak Heresies and Deceits; and
that there were more damnable Heresies, and Doctrines of Devils among them;
(Note, it is not said, amongst the Quakers, but them) which word them, did only
relate to a Party or Faction of that Meeting, Or, suppose it did relate to that
whole Meeting (which it did not), yet unless they will say, that meeting did
represent the Body of the people called Quakers, (which I judge they will not
say) over all parts of the World where they are, it is evident to be a false
accusation, to put the word Quakers for them, not exceeding in number above 13
persons; which is as false and injurious, as to charge the English with a thing
that only 13, or a few are guilty of. And when I re-minded both S.J. and also
the Yearly meeting, that he named the Name of God to a Falsehood, which many
present did greatly notice, and some did charge him with, he had no other
Evasion, but that by them was meant the Quakers; which is as palpable a
perversion, as to charge the English with a Fault that only 13 persons are
guilty of: And I at the same time, with true Reverence, naming the Name of God,
to clear my Innocence, saying in the presence of God, to the best of my
remembrance, I said not the Quakers, but them; some of the Yearly meeting did
severely speak to us, one saying, we had rent the Name of God betwixt us;
another saying, one of us two behoved to be greatly guilty, S. J. having said,
in the fear of God, he affirmed that I said the Quakers. And afterward I
produced the Paper of their meeting, signed by S. J. bearing date the 6th of
the 7th month, 1672. wherein they declare, that my words were as
abovementioned; which, they say, the two Friends repeated unto me, Now,
Reader, judge what small credit S. J. is worthy of, who by his own declaration,
has printed himself guilty of falsely accusing me, by perverting my words,
putting, most fraudulently, Quakers for them; when yet in the Paper of that
meeting, signed by him, he and they declare my words; were as I have
abovementioned them.

XL. And as concerning that Paper, called, The present Case, etc. he has
printed to his own shame, in his book with other the like shameful Papers, as
standing Monuments of his unchristian Proceedings given out by his Party, 20th
of the 4th month, and signed by himself, it containing palpable contradiction,
and giving the ^ie to it self, as is above noted. I need not say much to it,
but to deny what they falsely charge me with, as that in a wrathful and better
Spirit, I reviled and abused the said Meeting, they charging me with
brittleness of disposition; (but my being preserved by my gracious God,
constant in my Christian Testimony, and Conversation, proves them false
accusers in this, as in other things; for had I been brittle, their unchristian
Practices toward me had long a-go broken me; but God has mercifully preserved
me, and to him alone I give the praise) charging me with the breach whereof
they, and not I, were guilty; and with calumniating several persons, not giving
them Gospel Order in any Church Way; all which are false charges. As also, that
they say in their Paper, Notice was given me of the time to which the Meeting
was adjourned, viz. to a fortnight longer, having appointed some Friends to
visit me. But in this they use great prevarication, hiding their deceit in
ambiguous Words. That two came to me in the Evening of that Meeting, before
their fortnight Adjournment, I own it; but that they told me either the precise
day, hour or place of their meeting, I altogether deny it; or that they did in
the least desire me to come to it; yea, their Paper signifies no such thing;
but only that Notice was given me of the time; but what particular time or
place, they mention not; for that called a Fortnight, sometimes includes 14
days, sometimes 15 or 16: But what if I had known the precise day, hour and
place, which I did not, (for sometimes they met at one place and sometimes at
another, and sometime at one part of the day and sometime at another) is that
enough to excuse their proceeding so violently and furiously against me,
without calling me to hear things charged and proved against me? But their
Paper does not so much as alledg, that I had any call to come to their meeting;
therefore it is a plain case, they are fallacious, and seek to deceive the
simple with their fallacious words. And what if they had called me, and I had
refused to come, as was not so? If they had been endued with the patient and
long-suffering Spirit of Christ, they would have again and again, at least
twice or thrice, called me, before they had past such a severe Judgment against
me, as not only to Un-Minister and Un-Christian me, but to represent me as one
of the worst of men; was this like the restoring me in a spirit of meekness? Do
not humane Judicatories condemn them in this case, who commonly, before they
pass censure, in many cases, call, or summons them twice or thrice, who are
accused as guilty persons; and in case of not appearance, on the first
^^tation, do not pass a positive sentence against them, till they have another
citation, or some considerable time allowed to make their appearance, in case
of absence, which was my case.

XLI. He falsely accuses my printed Treatise, called, The Plea of the Lu^^cent,
and so does his Party (see his book, page 20.) to be a furious condemntion
against them. [But it was only a Just Defense and Vindication of my Innocence
and Christian Testimony, and Reputation, which they most ^nchristianly had
labored to destroy, with their most false Accusations, and bi^ter Revilings
and Invectives. And yet S.J. is so impudent, as to call th^s scandalous Paper
of their meeting aforesaid, signed by himself only, The Act of such a Meeting
as cannot in charity be suspected to be partial or unjust therein. But it is
now new thing to hear Darkness called Light, Falsehood Truth, etc.

XLII. In their Postscript to their said Paper, there are also a great many
Fallacies and Falsehoods, too tedious to enumerate; To give an instance in some
particulars, 1. That one of my followers (as he scornfully calls him) read
part of our Paper that he calls a Challenge, while Thomas Jauney was at
Prayer. Here they use a Fallacy; for while that person was civilly reading that
Paper, to interrupt his reading, as was usual to them in other cases, T. J.
kneeled down to prayer; so the disorder was in T. J. not in that other person:
And his standing up in the Window, was but in order to be heard: And if he did
come in at the Window, being as open as the Door, which I know not that he did,
it is like it was, that the throng of People was so great in the Door, that he
could not have access. Are not these silly and pitiful things to print, so as
to make such small innocent circumstances to be crimes. But when he wants
better stuff, he must build with straw and stubble. 2. They say, They promised
to give me a suitable hearing to my Appeal, provided I would stay till the day
appointed for business. But this was nothing but a mere evasion; for they knew
in their conscience, that many Friends, as well as Friendly People, would be
gone home before that time they appointed: besides, they had no power to
appoint a time to us, and to delay a matter of such great concern to the last
day of the meeting, which would have required several days to have things
fairly heard and examined. 3. That we refused to hear them that were sent of
their side, with a Message to us. But their fallacy is great in this, that they
conceal the rude carriage of those they call Messengers, that while one of our
Friends was reading a Paper, these called Messengers came in a most tumultuous
manner, and one of them stood up on a bench, and read his Paper, while our
Friend was reading; and they that came in with him, or them, called Messengers,
raised such an hideous Noise with Voice and Feet, that was a great shame to
hear of; and this was the occasion of our removing, not willing to stay to see
such disorder. 4. Their saying in their Paper, That we set up those who made
little or no profession of Truth, for our Judges; is both a falsehood and a
fallacy. It happened that one person set his Name to the Paper (unknown to us
generally) that was not under the profession of Truth; but after we knew of it,
we razed out his Name: but I never heard, nor knew of any more, being all,
generally, not only under a profession of the Truth long before the separation,
but of Good Report among Friends. But we can prove, and have proved, that
diverse of them that signed their scandalous Paper of their Yearly meeting
against us, were guilty of scandalous conversation. 5. That that Paper given
out from our Yearly meeting, was drawn up and completed according to my
direction. This is an absolute falsehood. 6. As for some hard words that I gave
some of them, on extraordinary provocation, they have far exceeded me, as have
been sufficiently proved, calling me not only Hypocrite, but Raunter, wi^ed
man, even when I have been at prayer, in great tenderness; and S. J. owneth,
that he called me Apostate; and at the same time when he professed to come and
visit me in Love, and deal with me by admonition in a Churchway, he called me
not only Apostate, but worse than profane. And is it not great Hypocrisy in S.
J. so to aggravate some hard words of mine, and to pass by so many, much more
hard, as well as more in number of theirs, without the least noticing. Do a few
hard words of mine, prove me a wicked man, as S. J. and his party conclnde, and
yet their many more, and more hard words against me, prove them to be Saints?
But let the merit of the cause be examined, and a just account be cast up, and
I fear not but S. J. and his party, will be found to have far exceeded, in
giving hard words. But whereas they labor to represent me, as extraordinary
passionate, and impatient, they are most unfair and partial Judges in the case:
It is known to many that well know me, that God has endued me with a good
measure of patience; and what I have born with much patience, is best known to
God. As for the Terms, Blood-thirsty Hounds, it is well known to many on what
occasion I gave it to some, that accused me in a public meeting, of a thing
most falsely, that had it been believed against me, tended to destroy my Natural
Life; and I might as well call such Blood-thirsty Hounds, as Fox, in his Book
of Martyrs, called some Papists, Hell Hounds, who sought to destroy the Natural
Lives of some good Christians, in the days of the Martyrs. The man I called
impudent Rascal, I meant it in the Scripture-sence, to wit, as being a vile
person; the Hebrew word Nebal, translated vile person in our English Bible,
signifying properly Nebulo in Latin, and that is Rascal in English, and this
for boldly asserting a vile Error, having said before diverse Witnesses, he did
not believe to be saved by that which died at Jerusalem; and most unchristianly
falling upon me, in a monthly meeting, saying, Does the Spirit speak in Trees?
I Having asserted, that God was present in all the Creatures, as Trees, Herbs,
Grass, which some of that meeting, even Ministers, did dispute against; and the
abovementioned Person, with others, urging me most unchristianly, to promise
an absolute submission to the Judgment of that meeting; and I not giving, they
refused to give any Judgment in the case, tho I have appealed to them: And at
this Meeting S.J. was present; but takes no notice of the Blasphemy some of
that Meeting was guilty of* against both God and Christ; but only of some hard
words given to one or two men; which is a great Argument of his Hypocrisy, and
that to him, Blasphemy against God and Christ is a lesser offense than an hard
word against man. Beside, is it not great hypocrisy in S.J. to accuse me for
calling one Rascal who was guilty of vile Blasphemy, whereas he called an
honest Friend, viz. John Smith, several times Rascal, Rascally Fellow, and
worse than an Infidel, without any Just Provocation, as J.S. has declared in
print. See page. 21. of the Trial. As for the words they allege I said, Cut me
in Collops, fry me, eat me, he is most unfair and partial, in not telling the
occasion, which was their extreme threatening me with their Magistratical Power,
and saying, I deserved to be punished, thinking to put me in fear; but I
feeling great boldness and courage given me, uttered some such words,
remembering, yea and mentioning at that very time, the like words of the Martyr
La^rentius, cited in Fox's Book of Martyrs; and why should this be supposed a
Crime in me, which was judged a Virtue in him; and G.F. in his Journal, page
86. declares, That after some of the rude multitude had beat him on his Head,
Aims and Shoulders, etc. stretching out his Arms among them, he said with a
loud Voice, Strike again, here are my Arms, my Head and my Cheeks. But this,
according to S.J. his way of Reasoning, could be no persecution that G. F.
suffered, because he so much desired it, as to bid them strike again. See page
3. of S.J. his book. [ Sam. Jennings does further bewray his great ignorance
and perverseness, in making it a Crime in me, that after I had given some of
them some hard words, which were but their due, I should say, I was like our
Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, comparing my self to a Dove, a Lamb, while I
thus appeared (as he alleges, in a great transport of heat and passion. For
are not all the Followers of the Lord Jesus like him, whereof I am one? And he
has not, nor can prove the contrary, that I am not; and all his Followers are
compared in Scripture to Doves and Lambs, which may well consist with great
warmth of Christian Zeal against vile Errors and wicked Practices, whereof S.
J. and his party were guilty, and of which they have showed no Repentance. But
suppose I had bewrayed at that time, some sinful passion, on great provocation,
does that prove me, that I did not belong to Christ, or had nothing of the true
Nature of a Christian alive in me? Surely if every sinful passion unchristian
men, Sam. Jennings and his party, have fully unchristianed themselves. But let
the Impartial judge, whether Sam. Jennings, or I, be most unlike the true
Christian; I, for giving him and his Party only some hard words, or he for not
only giving me hard words, but for persecuting me and others with Fines and
Imprisonments for matters of conscience? It is a common observation, that
Woolves hunt the Sheep, but never that the Sheep hunt the Woolves; and he that
was born after the flesh (as says the Scripture) did persecute him that was
born after the spirit. 8. Their reproaching, and falsely accusing the sober and
true-hearted Friends of our meeting at Philadelphia, which are known by many,
not only to equal, but to exceed most of the other side, in Christian
Conversation, calling them Apostates. But that some of the more loose sort of
other Professions come to our meetings, can be no fault; for they generally
come to all Friends meetings every where; and Friends never did forbid them,
but rather did allow them to come, hoping they might be benefitted by their
coming, as many have been. But their calling diverse sober and friendly people
that came to our meetings, the Rabble, is neither Christ an nor prudent; for it
drove them away from their meetings; thus acting like unskillful I i^hers, that
drive away the Fish from the Net, instead of gathering them. 9. The Instances I
gave, mentioned by S. J. page 24. of their not having that infallible
discerning they pretended to, of ones being guilty of Drunkenness, another of
Adultery, was in answer to their falsely boasting of such an high discerning
that some of them at that time laid claim unto. But that ever I charged the
Light within as not being able to give an infallible discerning, as is
insinuated, I altogether deny. 10. That it is alleged by them, I called Thomas
Everdon, Hypocrite, etc. and yet the day before, said, I had good Unity with
him: that I called him hypocrite, I own it, and have sufficiently proved it, in
that printed sheet, called, False Judgments reprehended, and a just Reproof to
Tho. Everdon. But that the day before I said, I had Good Unity with him, is
false; for I remember well, that I said, having heard him declare some words in
the meeting, that I owned the words, or matter of his Declaration at that time,
to be true, and had Unity with the said matter; but that I had Unity with his
Spirit, or so said, I altogether deny. And I return this, together with many
other Untruths, boldly affirmed (but not at all proved) by him and them against
me. 11. His and their alleging, that I left the Gallery, is a gross fallacy
and perversion; for they drove me out of it, as many can witness; so that I had
not room, nor convenience to stand in it, by their pressing me with the
strength of their bodies, from the place where I stood in it, which some of our
Friends observing, that used not to sit in the Gallery, went once or twice into
the Gallery, to keep them off from so pressing me. 12. Their saying, I laughed
at the pulling down of their Gallery, is another Perversion and Abuse: The case
was thus; One of their side said to me, They were come to break down my Idol,
diverse of them having Axes and Saws in their hand, to break down the New
Gallery, which one of them falsely called my Idol: I replied with a smiling
countenance, it was not my Idol. 13. Their alleging, that losing ground by my
extreme passion and ill conduct in these meetings, I left them, and retired to
our separate meeting; which is also a gross perversion and misrepresentation.
[For as they first drove me out of the Gallery, and otherwise grossly abused me
in it, (many of them speaking to me at once, by way of interruption, in my
peaceable Testimony, tho it was not my way to interrupt them, in their
Declaration, as many can witness) so at last, while I stood on the stair, on
the other side of the house, one of their Church Members punched me with his
Feet, which I acquainting them with, gave such dissatisfaction to some
strangers present, that they were like to have cast him down the stairs, some
crying, throw him down; so for Peace-sake, and to prevent these disorders for
time to come, we left the Meeting House, to which we had equal Right with them,
that we might enjoy our meetings peaceably, 14. Their alleging, That a great
part of our meeting times was spent in my personal Vindication, and in rendering
Friends as odious and contemptible as the Malice and Lies of the worst of our
Adversaries would have us to be, is extremely false and abusive: It was but
little I said in defense of my, and our Christian Testimony; much of our time
was spent in silent waiting upon the Lord, a thing little practiced amongst
them; and when I, or any other declared, in our meetings, it was generally in a
Doctrinal way, and sometimes in way of Exhortation, without meddling with
personal Reflections. 15. Their alleging, that the several established
meetings in the 3 Provinces, have disowned me, is a fallacy and perversion,
like the former; for only their Faction. in these 3 Provinces have so done; but
many Friends still own me in all the 3 Provinces, and have their established
meetings. 16. Their saying, I hurried all on a start for England, is also
false; for I had made it known to many long before I went away, and d^d it with
great deliberation, having intended for England before the separation began.
And Lastly, their charging me with great Apostasy, and persecuting Christ in
his followers, I reject as false, and most properly belonging to them, who have
been active, some of the chiefest of them, and especially (...) in persecuting
us both with Tongue and Hands, and the rest approving them in so doing. And
thus I have answered to most of the things contained in their said Paper and
Postscript they call, The present Case truly stated, etc. and which was te^d at
the Yearly meeting at London, 1694. But it does not appear, by that called, A
true account of the Proceedings of the Yearly Meeting, that they gave any great
credit to it; nor do they pass any such sentence against me, as to Judge me
Apostate, nor confirm the false Judgments given cut in Pensilvania, and
elsewhere, against me; but owned me in Fellowship with them; and when I prayed
at an appointed meeting, in the upper Room in
Grace-Church-street-Meeting-house, when many, or most of the Ministering Friends
of the Yearly Meeting were present, they generally Joined with me, in being
discovered when I prayed; which if they had Judged me to be an Apostate, to be
sure they would not have done; and at the Yearly meeting, many of the Ministry
declared, they were refreshed and comforted in my Testimony I did bear among
them, and took me kindly by the hand after meeting; all which sufficiently
prove the Yearly Meeting did not Judge me worthy of that Character which this
scurrilous Paper I have now answered, does seem to fix on me. Yea, and after
that Friends at London had heard of the separation, in their Letters to us,
writing particularly to George Hutcheson and me, as well as to Thomas Lloid and
Sam. Jennings, they call us, Dear Friends and Brethren, and declare their
dissatisfaction with our denying one another, as the Letters I have to produce,
do sufficiently show.

But that they insinuate it as a Reason of their not Printing against me, page
24. about the middle of the page, hoping (say they) to have somewhat thereby
kept this unhappy difference from being made more public by us, as much as in
us lay, and as well aswe could. [This I proved to be a notorious Falsehood, at
the yearly Meeting, by producing a Letter of John Delawal, one of their chief
Persons that gave out that Paper called, The present Case truly stated, etc.
signed with his own Hand, which was then read; where he gives the reason of
their not printing against me, That they had not an impartial Printer, which if
they had, they would have printed against me. His words are expressly these. If
there had been an impartial Printer here, thy scurrility and notorious
Calumnies against us, who never merited it from thee, would long e're this have
been detected; the date of his Letter is Philadelphia, 2d. 11th. Month, 1692.
Beside, it is manifest Hypocrisy in them, to say, they hoped to have kept this
unhappy difference from being made more public by them, as much as in them
lay, and as long as they could; when on the contrary, as much as in them lay,
they made it public all ways imaginable, (Printing excepted; and that because
of their prejudice against the Printer) by causing, and in most Places forcing
this false Judgment of theirs to be read and published against us in all the
Meetings of the three Provinces; and sending Copies of it far and near, to
remote Places, and over to England, which arrived before any of our printed
Books; and by causing a Proclamation to be read against me at the Market Pl^ce;
and many other malicious and invective Papers and Letters in Manuscripts they
sent out against me to Berbadoes, Jamaica, Virginia, New England and Old
England, which I never saw; and as I often told them, their manner of fighting
against me, was like the Indians, that skulk behind T^e^s, and shoot at Men in
the open Field; for most of their work against me, was by a clandestine way of
backbiting me, and calumniating me by false Stories, Lies and Forgeries; a
most shameful Libel, and bundle of them being read against me at the yearly
Meeting last at London, without any Name to them, at which, some in the Meeting
said, it was a shame that such a shameless Libel should be read against me.

XLIII. page 28. In his following Pages, from 28 to 31, for want of Matter, he
but repeateth the same things, formerly mentioned by him for most part, and
which I have so fully answered, I need not spend time, nor Paper, to repeat my
Answers to them. But that he says, the two Friends appointed from the Meeting
to visit me, viz. himself, and Griffith Owen, desired me to be present at the
next Meeting, I utterly deny to be true; and as he has none to prove it to be
true, so I have some to prove it to be false, who were present so far as a
negative can be proved, there having been three present, who all declared they
heard no such thing, one of them being now in England, the other two in
America. My taking occasion to be out of Town, as alleged by him, to slight
the Meeting, is another gross falsehood; for I went out of Town upon my
necessary Occasion, having no knowledge either of the particular time, or place
of their Meeting. His Complaint against the Judgment concerning W.S. page 30.
is invalid; for he refused to come, being sent for, and in Town; and beside,
the Judgment was very moderate concerning him, they neither denying his
Ministry, nor Christi^nity; but desiring him to desist from exercising his Gift
till he did own his Error, etc. And his Complaint against the judgment of our
yearly Meeting at Burlington, is as invalid, for they had sufficient notice by
our printed Appeal, and the Messengers that we sent to them, from time to time,
which they rejected. Beside, that at that time they neither owned our
Judicatory, nor we theirs.

XLIV. page 30. That he says, the yearly Meeting at London has determined it,
viz. That the Separation lies at my door; his meaning being, that by their
Judgment the only fault of it lies at my door, is a Falsehood and Perversion;
for I have shown in my Answer to Tho. Elwood, that they lay not the whole blame
of it upon me, but in part, if not mainly, upon them; see my Book called, A
seasonable Information, page 26, And what he calls a clear Demonstration,
done by T. E. charging me with the blame of the Separation, I have sufficiently
demonstrated to be no such thing, but a demonstration of his Ignorance, Folly
and Perversion.

XLV. page 31. He proceeds in some new Charges against me, some of which are
partly true, and partly false; and some of them utterly false. 1. That I said
to John Wilsford, Friends were not the People, but that there must come another
People: That I said these express words I remember not; but if it be meant,
that I did or do expect, that there will be a People raised up, more pure then
that greatly mixed People that are called by the common Name of Quakers; and
are generally known by the single Language of Thee and Thou to one Person;
plain Habit, and other small (...) called by some, but most improperly, The
form of Truth; bearing as (...) proportion to the form of Truth, as a piece of
the outmost skirt of a Man's Garment does to the whole Garment. I freely
declare, I do exp^^t that God will raise up a purer People, than the generality
that go under that Name; it being generally owned and lamented by the faithful
among us, that there is a great mixture among us, both of Ignorance and evil
Conversation. But when a greater Reformation comes, I hope, and believe that
faithful Friends will still belong to that more reformed and refined People,
who shall then be found alive. 2. That I told Caleb Pusie and others, That
there were not six Friends in America, nor in England, (...) in the whole
World, that preached Christ aright. This I disown as an absolute Forgery; my
words were, That I knew not six in Pensilvania, that preached Christ aright at
that time; and no more I did. 3. That I had that to preach, that was never yet
preached by any Quaker. But what if I had so said, (...) meaning any new
fundamental Principle, but some further opening of some Places of Scripture,
not yet understood perhaps by any other among us. If this be a Crime in me,
then they must needs judge, they are come to the highest degree and top of all
divine Knowledge, and nothing is further to be discovered. But who think so, I
cannot but pity their great Ignorance, as well as Arrogance and Presumption.
4. That I had l^ss now against water Baptism than formerly; I do not remember
the words. It is known by my former printed Books, I have been moderate in my
Judgment concerning both water Baptism, and the Supper, in the outward use of
Bread and Wine, chiefly blaming the great formality in Men's pra^tising these
things, and resting in the outward Practice of them; but not universally
judging or concluding, that God neither did, nor would move any ^y his Spirit
to practi^e them, since the Apostles days; but rather allowing, it might be
possible, that some were or might be moved; wherein I have the printed
Testimonies both of John Crook, and Geo. Bishop, in their Treatises concerning
Friends Principles; and also the Testimonies of other Friends to the same
effect concurring with me. And if I had so said, as is alleged, what great
Offense could it be, considering that I did find too many in these American
parts, that together with rejecting these Outward signs, have rejected the
things signified by them, viz. the Body and Blood of Christ, as being any
Necessary matter to be believed for Justification and Salvation; And I have
said, and say again, it is far better to receive both, viz. the signs, and
things signified by them, than to reject both, as some do. 5. That I saw now,
that Hicks and Faldo had more Reason to write as they did, concerning the
Quakers; than I then thought they had. But this is an absolute falsehood, as
laid down. It is like I have said, If they had but charged only some
particulars, called Quakers, some of their charges would have proved true; for
I have found some of them true, to my sad Experience; but I ever blamed them,
and (...), that they charged these things universally, which, I know, (...),
and some of them falsely charged upon me. 6. That if I should appear in
opposition to friends, I could do more hurt than all that yet had appeared
against them. It is a false and invidious charge, which I utterly ^eject and
abhor; I hope I shall never appear in opposition to faithful ^^ends, nor ever
was it in my heart to hurt any, nor ever, I hope, shall it be. But if it be any
hurt, by word and writ, to testify against vile Errors and wicked Practices,
it is only to hurt the Devil's Kingdom. But that he says, All these things
will be proved against me, if I deny them, and much more of a like tendency: I
ask him, Why has he not now done it? For until he prove them, None that are
impartial, will believe them. Beside, by whom will be prove them, seeing he
has none but his own Party to give proof in the case? which, as it is no
Authentic Proof among men, so especially not in this case, whom I have
sufficiently proved partial and unfair. For his unchristian and uncharitable
insinuations against me, in the latter part of his page 31. grounded upon
falsehoods and perversion, I pass, as not worth further noticing.

XLVI: page 32. He falsely insinuates against me, not only that I am gone from
Truth, but that I have dealt treacherously with the Yearly Meeting, by
appearing in print against them, instead of submitting to their Advise and
Judgment. [But there is nothing appears in that called, The Judgment of the
Yearly Meeting, as if it were their sense that I am gone from Truth. And it is
a most false suggestion, that I have dealt treacherously with them' for I took
their Advice, in clearing Truth and faithful Friends, by what I printed: And
that I printed any thing against the Yearly meeting, I deny; and he cannot
prove it. But if I have printed against them, it could not be called Treachery,
seeing Treachery signifies some breach of promise, or underhand dealing, none
of which I am guilty of; for what I have printed, I declared before them that
gave forth that Paper, that I had a mind to do it, for clearing the Truth and
my innocence.

XLVII. He grossly perverteth, and abuses his Reader, when he accuses me* and
them with me at the Yearly Meeting, that we shrunk from the charge, when called
upon in the Yearly meeting at London, to make it good, none of us having
courage enough to own, or st^nd by that (as he calls it) malicious, scandalous
Libel, called, New England*s Spirit of Persecution, etc. for I freely declared
in that meeting, That I was not the Author of all that book; but that that part
that concerned my own. Trial, was mine. But that I charged him either with
Drunkenn^ss, or Riding an Horse-Race, or some other things simply narrated, by
way of Relation in that book, as is common in books called Trials, etc. I deny
it; and he cannot prove it; therefore I did not shrink from my charge; nor do I
know that any of them that were so concerned with me, did so charge him; our
charge being against him, that he had given false Judgment against us, and was
guilty of Persecution, and acting unchristianly and unjustly toward us; which
charge we did not shrink from, but sufficiently proved against him; and all his
silly Evasions and Quibbles have not cleared him, nor ever can clear him. Nor
do I find, that the said book of the Trial does positively charge him either
with Drunkenness or Horse-Racing, but simply, as to that, narrates the
Proceedings of the Court, how things did pass there,

XLVIII. p. 33. He perversely accuses us, as doing neither manly nor honestly,
for not declaring who were the Authors of the rest of that book, because some
of us gave this for our Reason of our concealment, That S. J. might take the
advantage of the Law against them. And he querieth, Will they, to defame a
person, do that which shall subject them to the correction of the Law, yet do
it clandestinely, to avoid the stroke of Justice, and plead conscience and
Christian constraint for it too? I answer to his Query, 1. I know nothing in
all that book, that does defame, or wrong him, if his own Actions had not
defamed him; for books that give an account of men's Trials at Sessions and
Assizes, being commonly simple Narratives, cannot be said to defame the Persons
tried, if they do no other but give a true Relation of things. 2. The
concealing the Authors Name, or Names, was not to avoid the stroke of Justice,
but to avoid any farther occasion of S. J. his Injustice, and Persecuting them
unjustly; for I know not that the Authors of that book have writ any thing in
it that can justly, in the least, submit them to the correction of the Law. But
we know how often men abuse the Law, and under pretense of Justice, act unjustly,
as S. J. has manifestly done. But if concealing men's Names, lest Persecutors
be gratified, be such a Crime, by the same Argument S. J. makes many Friends
guilty, yea, many Friends of the Ministry, who have concealed their Names, when
asked in a meeting, when they have been declaring, when the Act of 20l. for
preaching in an unlawful Assembly (as it was called) was in force: Also diverse
Friends that have writ books of Trials, and Court-Proceedings, have concealed
their Names; witness W. Pen's and W. Mede's Trial: and by S. J. his false
Logic, this was done to defame persons, and a doing of that which did subject
them to the correction of the Law, and done clandestinely to avoid the stroke
of Justice. But if his Logic be bad in the last ( as doubtless it is) it is so
in the first.

XLIX. He most falsely accuses me, That I knew that diverse matters of charge
against him therein were false: whereupon he infers, that I have finned
against Knowledge, and ma^^^iously and premeditately abused him. But his
Antecedent is false (and he brings no shadow of Proof for it) and therefore so
is his Consequent.

L. He most uniustly blames me, for spreading some of the said Books, called,
The Trial. But until he prove, that the Authors of that book have any way
wronged him, he is unjust in blaming me, for spreading of them; nor will the
spreading of them (if I had so done) entitle me to own all to be true that is
in every Line of that book; for he is so confident, that he has Reprinted the
private Letter of Peter Bosse, sent to him, which was also printed in the book
called, The Trial; and yet he will not say, that does entitle him to own every
thing charged on him in that Letter. Therefore his Reason, as a man, (not to
say his true Logic; for he is innocent of that) in this, as in other things,
has utterly failed him; for his prejudice blinds him, and takes away from him
the use of his common Reason, as a man, as any may see that is not as blind as
himself.

LI. page 34. That he says, He can prove me guilty of that called a Liar,
proves himself guilty of it, until he bring his proof, which yet he has not
done; for no man ought to be accused of a thing, and for a Gro^^^ of his
Accusation, say, he can prove the thing true for which he is accused, and yet
give no proof: for at this rate he may accuse a man of Felony (...) Murder, and
give no other Ground for his Accusation, but to say, he can prove it.

LII. p. 34. He most impudently, and as with a Forehead of Brass, does justify
his calling me, an Apostate, and worse than profane; all his proof being, that
it is so evident, that to go about to prove it, were a work of Supererrogation.
But at this rate, he might have spared all his pains, and so may every one,
when his proof fails him, say, it is so evident, that to prove it, were a work
of Supererrogation. But this is merely to trif^le, and more like a man that
either has not common sense or shame. But if the thing be so evident, that I
am an Apostate, and worse than profane, how is it that the Yearly meeting has
been so far from passing any such Judgment on me, that they did not in the
least forbid Friends to receive my Ministry, but rather recommended it to them,
to be kind to me; and most of the Ministering Friends at the Yearly meeting at
London, (as abovementioned) joined with me in Prayer; and so have
City-Friends, at some of the public meetings of Friends in London. Does he not
here grievously reflect on them all, as being guilty of joining with a man in
Prayer, that is an Apostate, and worse than profane. But he has not showed,
nor can he show, wherein my Apostasy does appear, either in Doctrine or
Practice.

LIII. He is guilty of gross perversion, in misconstruing my just charge
against him, in my calling it Rank Popery in him and his Faction, to require an
absolute submission from me, to the Judgment of their Meeting, in a matter of
Faith and Conscience, as that was: for that it is Rank Popery, all sincere
Protestants will say, to require an absolute submission to the Judgment of any
man or meeting, in a matter of Faith and Conscience; for no Profession in
Christendom, that I know, but the Papal Church, requires absolute submission
to her Judgment in matters of Faith; for to require it, implies, that such who
require it, think themselves absolutely infallible, which is another branch of
Rank Popery. Now his misconstruction is this, that my allowing a conditional
submission in the case, has this sense, if the Party, or Parties like the
Judgment, they will yield to it, but not otherwise. But I gave him no Ground
for this gross perversion and misconstruction of my words; for persons may like
or dislike a thing, without any just cause. The true sense of a conditional
submission in that case is, that so far as the Judgment of any meeting, whereof
a man is a member, is according to the Judgment of the Spirit of Truth, (the
only supreme Judge of matters of Faith) and the Testimony of the Holy
Scriptures, the greatest outward Test, and Rule of Trial; so far, and no
farther, is he to submit to them, ^^eing no meeting is absolutely, and in all
cases and respects, infallible, as Francis Hongel has well asserted and
proved, in one of his printed Treatises, against a (...) bound up with his
other books, in Folio. And seeing S. j, has (...) ^^cted a conditional
submission, as insufficient, he must needs (...)lute submission of men's Faith
and Conscience, to the meeting (...) ^f they (...), which, I say again, is Rank
Popery, and a very great Apostasy from one of the great fundamental Principles
of the People called Quakers, that hold the Light in every man's Conscience, to
be the Supreme Judge and Rule of Judgment in matters of Religion; for it was an
ordinary manner of speech among the Ministers among us, To the Light in every
Conscience I speak; and they did not direct Friends to the Light in others
without them; for that to be sure derogates from the sufficiency of the Light
in our selves, to tell us, we must not believe what the Light in our selves
convinces us of, if it happen to contradict the Judgment of men that call
themselves the Church.

LIVE. He confesses, he said somewhat to that effect, as was charged against
him by me, viz. That to do God's business we needed Gods Wisdom and Power; but
to do our own business, as men, we needed it not. But he alleges, I pervert
his intention therein, wherein he falsely charge me; for he makes me put this
gloss upon his words, as if he thought we had a self-sufficiency to do our own
business, as men; he adds, I know that all our strength and abilities are from
God. But as I put no such gloss on his words, so he still equivocates, not
defining what he means by Strength and Ability; for if he mean but Natural
Strength and Ability, which is also from God, as to eat, walk., etc. he says
no more than any Pelagian will say. But if he mean a supernatural Power and
influence of the Spirit of God, to guide us in our common affairs, he must
recant and retract his former gross Error. But he not only f^lly accuses me,
but perverteth the state of the Question; which was not ^s he now stated it,
Whether there be not a greater Necessity to wait for it, viz. the Power and
Wisdom of the Word of Life, to manage the outward part of Church Affairs, than
our common Affairs. But I leave it to all spiritually minded, whether even to
manage our common Affairs, it be not necessary to wait for the Power and Wisdom
of the Word of Life, to guide us, as much as is po^sible for us, even at all
times; and no more to be remiss in the one than in the other.

LV. page* 36. In his excusing his not submiting to the Judgment of the Men's
Meeting, in a worldly Matter betwixt T. Budd and him, he perverts the case to
c^^ak his Partiality, by alleging, Its improper for any Religious Society to
interrupt or alter the Will of the Deceased. But he has not showed, and I
suppose cannot show, that that Meeting required any such thing of him; or
whether that was it which was to be submitted; the which if it were, he makes
to be a great reflection on the Injustice of the Meeting. But if it be improper
for a Meeting to require a Submission, tending to alter the Will of the
Deceased; How much more improper was it in S. J. to require me to submit my
Faith and Conscience to him, and them of that Meeting, whereof only Christ and
God is Lord and Sovereign? And if the Will of mortal Man iss not to be altered,
much less the Will and Testament of our blessed Lord; a part whereof is to
stand fast in the Liberty where^^th Christ has made us free, and not to submit
our Faith and Conscience to fasllible Men.

LVI. He perverts the Case again, in his Answer to that other charge, of his
refusing to submit to the Judgment of Friends at London, in the difference
betwixt Edward Billing and him. 1. He says he did submit so far as he had
power, else, how came a Judgment to be given in the matter; against which, he
says, I never heard him open his Mouth? But these are poor Evasions. A
Judgment might be given, and he not submit to the Equity and Justice of it;
yea, he knows in his Conscience, he did not submit to the Equity of it, but
still justified his Proceedings, in throwing off the Trust committed to him by
his Master Edw. Billings; and that I never heard him open his Mouth against it,
is no Argument, he did submit to the Justice of it. I did not say I heard him
open his Mouth against it, but others heard him; and the thing is sufficiently
known, that he has all along justified his throwing off his Trust committed to
him from Ed. Billing, and taking a new Trust or Commission from the People. 2.
That he says, the difference lay not betwixt Edw. Billing and him, but betwixt
Edw. Billing and the Province of West Jersey, is notoriously false; for it lay
not only betwixt the Province and E. B. but also, and that greatly, betwixt E.
B. and him. 3. Whereas he says, it is false, that the Meeting judged him
guilty of betraying his Trust to E. B. It is not enough for him to say it is
false, but he should prove it to be false. 4. Whereas he says, There is no
such thing in their Judgment, which he says he has still by him: Let him
produce a true Copy of that Judgment, and if there be no such thing in it,
either expressly, or to that effect, then I shall acknowledge, I did unadvisedly
so charge him; but till then he must have me excused, to remain in my sense,
that I justly charged him, having it from such that I have cause better to
trust, then I have to trust him, whom I have proved guilty of Prevarication.
But seeing he confesses a Judgment was given, it cannot be supposed it was
against E. B. for Friends at that time assisted E. B. to recover the
Government, and to appoint a new Deputy, as accordingly he did, and S. J. was
turned out, as the general Observation of the Country was. And if it was not
against E. B. it was against S. J. for if it was against the Province of West
Jersey, it was against him, seeing if the Province did ill, to make S. J. the
Governor, it necessarily follows, he did ill to accept of it; and he knows,
that when he did go to purge himself in the yearly Meeting at London, in
relation to that Judgment, some that knew well enough what that Judgment was,
did oppose him in that respect. But I did not meddle with the Merit of the
Cause in my so charging him, whether he did ill in that Affair above mentioned;
only I did argue ad bo^inem, that seeing S. J. did refuse to submit to the
Equity of that Judgment, in a worldly Matter, it was most unreasonable in him
to require ^f me an absolute Submi^sion, in a Matter that is Spiritual, viz.
Fait^ and Conscience. For his Reflections on my worthy Friend Geo. (...), I
pa^s them, as not worth answering; for they contain nothing of any real Matter
against him, but (...) railing; and I question not (...) G. H. can well enough
answer to any thing S. J. has objected against him. But that he sath it is a
notorious (...) and ^^nder, that he went (...) Disunity with the most faithful
Friends; he boldly indeed says it, but without all proof or probability. For
it is much more probable, that it is true than false; for he not owning the
Equity of their Judgment, in so far at least he was in Disunity with them, and
it was not about a Trifle, but a matter of great weight, wherein Sentence or
Judgment was given against him. And whereas he says, he knows it to be
false, and there is not a syllable to prove it, that the People were generally
weary of his too severe Government. I answer, it being charged on him, where
the Book was printed, viz. in America, and where he exercised his Government,
it is unreasonable in him, to demand it to be proved here, as diverse other
things of that Nature cannot in reason be demanded to be proved here. But if it
were to be proved in west Jersey it self, I doubt not, but I should get scores
to assert it, and prove it also, and that sufficiently. But in part it can be
proved here, for some here in London, are ready to witness, how most
unmercifully he caused one to whip a Friends Son, for a very small Trespass;
and caused a Man to sell his Horse to him, after he had sold him to another Man.

LVII. He grossly perverts the Case also, in excusing his saying, That though I
denied their Judgment, yet they would judge me; saying, I could not trample
upon it as false, before I knew what it was. For he speaking these words in a
menacing insolent manner, wholly unbecoming a Judge, did sufficiently show,
they intended a Judgment of Condemnation against me, as the event proved; and I
could expect no other from such prejudiced Persons; therefore I say still, I
might well say, I did trample upon it, etc. being false.

LVIII. His perverse way of reasoning, That their Judgment of the 28th is ^rue,
first from Friends in all Places being so unanimous in it. [But this is
palpably false, hundreds of faithful Friends in dive^s Places have not owne^
it; and I know not that he can show one Meeting of Friends in all England, that
does own it, that is either monthly, quarterly, or yearly Meeting; for the
Paper called, The Judgment of the yearly Meeting at London, does not own it;
however, in some things, they blame both sides; yet they did not disown me, or
render me gone from truth, as the Judgment of the 28th does. But his second
Argument is as false and weak as the first, viz. from my and our Measures under
it. But ought we not to be uneasy under your Wickedness, and false Judgment,
ought not the Sins of others to be a burden to us? Was not Crist grieved and
burdened with the Wickedness and Enmity of the Jews against him, and were not
the true Prophets and Apostles grieved with the wickedness and false Judgments
of false Prophets and Apostles? Oh! how carnal and unsensible seems this Man to
be, as if he had never known or felt the burden of other Men's Sins, too great
an Argument, he never duly felt the burden of his own Sins; for, who feel the
one, will, no doubt, feel the other. And how could we but be grieved and
uneasy to see so many blinded and deceived by that false Judgment given out
against us? so that our Ministry, that formerly was well received by them, came
to be rejected; and they did what they could, by their false Judgment, wholly
to make void our Work and Service in the Lords Vineyard? this, and other evil
Effects, together with the great breach it made among all the Meetings in these
three Provin^^s, that were not broken till then, how could it but grieve and
burden (...)* But notwithstanding our Griefs, we can say, and I do say for my
particular, as my Afflictions and Griefs have been great, because of your fa^^e
^udgment, and the evil Effects of it, so my Comforts have been great, in that
God has been pleased to honor me, to suffer so much for his Name sake, and
the Name of his dear Son Christ Jesus; and his blessed Spirit in my Heart has
often made these words comfortable to me, Math. 5. 11. Blessed are ye when Men
shall revile you, etc. But lastly, how inconsiderate is this Man in his way of
arguing against us. Has not he been uneasy under what has been said and
printed by us against him, his Book bespeaks it sufficiently; and if so by his
own Argument, all that we have said or printed against him, is a true Judgment.
But note Reader, that S. J. (Papist like in this, as in other things) brings
not his Satisfaction of the Truth of the Judgment the 28th, gave out against us
from the Light or Spirit within, but from Men without; making multitude or
plurality the greatest mark of Truth, and of the true Church, as the Papists
do; and by his Argument, Paul was a bad Man, because not only some particular
Churches, but all Asia had forsaken him.

LIX. He is miserably put to it, by twisting, and perverting, and feigning
great untruths to excuse their endeavoring to bear us down in religious
Matters, by their Power as Magistrates, whereof I give an Instance in Plea,
etc. p. 16, 17. They imposing upon the true Liberty and Right of the Meeting,
by encouraging to read it, against the Mind of most of the Friends present, it
being an established Act of the monthly Meeting, as well as of diverse other
monthly Meetings, that nothing ought to be read in their Meeting, without the
general consent of the Meeting. And one of them did threaten to bind an honest
Friend to the Peace, without the least occasion given him, S. J. calling out
for a Constable. 1. He grants that the said Persons being Magistrates, were
at that Meeting, though none belonged to it, as Members thereof, but S. R. 2.
He argues, why should they be said to countenance the reading of it more than
G. K. and those with him to discountenance it. I answer, let it be granted that
we did discountenance it, as much as they countenanced it, but we came not with
Magistrates Power, calling for a Constable to keep the Peace; and we had more
cause to discountenance it, than they to countenance it, because it was not
read by the general consent of the Meeting, as well as for other Reasons. 3. He
ouerieth, where was the bl^^e of putting the Paper into the Hand of W. P. he was
the Clerk of the Meeting. Answ. The blame was to put it into his Hand, and
biding (...) read it without the general consent of the Meeting. 4. He says,
that the greatest part or the Meeting was against the reading of it, he cannot
believe to be true, ^^ccording to his Observation. But this does not ^^prove
it, for others observation was as good and better as his, that observed many
more forbidding it than desiring it to be read. But suppose they were the
lesser part, it is argument enough that it was an imposition upon their Liberty
and Right, to read it, against their Consent, as is well known, through all
Meetings it is the order, that what is done be with general Consent. 5. His
reflection on Joseph Fisher, charging him with heading a Party, with more Rage,
than true Zeal or Knowledge, seeing it is only an abusive reviling a Man of
known Moderation, and a chief Member of that Meeting, and who kept Meetings at
his House, and Hospitably entertained traveling Friends; I let pass without
thinking it worthy of further noticing. 6. Take notice Readers, his haughty and
supercilious manner of reviling me, his words are. But met^inks, says he, G.
K. should blush to style any Man unruly and d^sorderly, though it were true,
since its hard to find any thing of Mankind, (especially pretending to
Learning, and a civil Education) that in that respect can equal himself. But I
appeal to all impartial Readers, whether S. J. has not far exceeded me in hard
words and Censures, which he construeth to be unruly and disorderly; beside his
wicked Practices of Persecution, etc. And therefore by his Argument, He is not
any thing of Mankind. But its well he is not a Justice of Peace, or President
in any Court here in England, or else I might know what I might expect from
him, who labors to render me thus invidiously. Is this his Christianity or
Civility, to make me worse than any thing of Mankind, as before he has
justified his Expression, in calling me worse th^n profane. Can any thing of
Bill^ngs-gate Rhetoric exceed this of his? He grants he did enquire, if there
were a Constable there. Is not this proof sufficient, they sought to bear us
down by their Magistratical Power. What instance can be given, that ever any
Friend in a monthly Meeting called for a Constable? Does not (...) the Crown of
Pride, and Antichrist's Horns of Persecution, plainly (...) ^ut he pretends it
was to keep the Peace; for the Woman of the House (...) him, under much
concern, and told him, she feared there would be (...) chi^^. And must a ^i^ly
woman's idle imagination be an excuse to him to do such an extraordinary thing,
as the like, I think, has not been known in a Friends meeting. 9. He says, Tho
they did not strike, yet in their r^ge, there were (...) catch at the Paper, to
have torn it (...) had so (...), that they had no assurance, but they could
fight, as (...). But that any did snatch at the Paper in a Rage, is (...) I,
can witness the contrary; only one or two did civilly and (...) their Hand on
the man's Arm, desiring him not to (...) will not men get to justify (...), he
says, but they would fight; (...) and by the same Argument ^e (...) Meeting
h^^ in Engl^nd, to keep the Peace when (...) Truth: H^w would this (...)?
Lastly, (...) his (...) again and (...), I have already answered (...). But the
(...) Magistrate in that part of the Country, more than S. J. (...) he was
such any where. But what difference is betwixt Impudent Rascal, (the word
Rascal signifying no more than what the English Bible translateth Vile Person)
and the Term he gives me, viz. ^orse than profane, and to which any thing of
Mankind is hard to be equaled, let the Impartial judge; more especially
considering I so termed him for his Blasphemy against Christ, whereof I have
sufficient Witness in that part of the World: but no such thing can be charged
against me. For his denying that he called G. J. Nonsensical Puppy, does not
sufficiently clear him, seeing it was affirmed by two Witnesses, both of good
Credit, and one of them, viz. Tho. Tresse, a member of that monthly meeting at
that time, and not then disowned by them. But his Redection on G. J. (saying of
him, what G. is for a Churchmember, he supposes is well known here as well as
elsewhere), he had better have spared, G. J. not being here to answer for
himself. But if he thought not G. J. qualified to be one of their
Church Members, he reflects greatly on their meeting, who admitted him to be a
member of it. But G. J. has as many, or rather more, in that Country, that
will speak well of him, as S. J. has.

LX. His perversion in excusing, or clearing himself, of charging me, that I
said, there were more damnable heresies, etc. among the Quakers, I have
sufficiently discovered above; see Number. 39.

LXI. p. 43. His perversion in excusing, or diminishing his Fault, in saying,
if he draw forth his hand, he will not pull it in again, until he has quelled
us all, is easily perceived. He confesses, something to this effect he did
say, which he acknowledges to be unadvisedly spoken; but why not proudly and
ambitiously, and that in an extraordinary manner, I appeal to all impartial
Readers, and sensible men, who can savor words, whether they rankly smell not
of Height of Pride, and savor not of great Presumption? as if it were in his
power, as he did think, to do so much against us, in a time to come, as would
quell us all, not beleiving, or not considering, that no mortal man did know
what Power he had, in any time to come, and by the Divine Providence, his Power
that he gloried so vainly in, was taken from him not long after. But his
meaning he gives his insolent words, still smell rankly both of Pride and
Persecution, as I appeal to all sensible and impartial Readers, if they do not,
being this, (...) if I (...) engage, and make use of the Power I have, in the
S^a^ion I stand, I will not desist, till I have (...) you to a better
behavior. Note, he says, I will not desist: but knows he that he will not
desist till he has reduced us to that he thinks better behavior, but that he
thought his Power was in his own hand? But Sovereign Providence taught him, he
was either a false Prophet, or spoke from a false Spirit; for he was made to
desist from his Violence against us, by being turned out of his station, of
Magistracy, wherein he gloried. And it is a plain case, he continues of that
persecuting Spirit, that if any reprove his Pride, or other his insolent
infirmities, he will punish them for their so doing, under the Notion of
reviling Magistracy, if he happen to be re-installed. But such as shall happen
to re-install him, will do (...) to advise him to more moderation, or put some
Curb upon him. But at this rate, many Friends, and particularly G. F. is guilty
of reviling Magistracy, who more sharply and severely reproved Pride and
Injustice in some Justices of Peace here in England, than ever we did his Pride
in Pensilvania. And if G, F. had been living in the body, and been then in
Pensyvania, and had but done the like to S. J. (...) must have expected he
would have used him as he had done us, to reduce him to better behavior: See
G. F. his Letter to Justice Sawrey, charging him with Persecution, Pride,
Hypocrisy, p. 94. of his Journal; and his (...) Letter to the Magistrates of
Derby, charging them with Oppression, Injustice and Covetousness, p. 51. But
that he says, our Friends, John Macomb and Ralph Ward, did rail and snarl
intolerably at them, as they were going (...) the Court to Dinner; seeing he
tells not what that intolerable railing was, nor gives any proof of it, may be
rejected, with many other his falsehoods, invented by him to cover his evil
practices. His instance is not the least shadow of proof, that they said, they
thanked God they could not take their Lives away; but they coveted their Goods.
Have not our Friends here in England, said as much to Justices here, who have
fined them, and streined their Goods, as they did to some of us in Pensylvania,
and in particular to W. Bradford, who being fined six shillings for refusing to
be a Jury-man, it being a matter of conscience to him, to promise in the
Presence of God, he judging it of the Nature of an Oath, had Writing-Paper,
worth 9 s. taken from him, which was carried to Sam. Jennings his Shop to be
sold, which VV. B. told me. Pray let the Reader judge, if this was not
Covetousness and Oppression both?

LXII. p. 45. His perversion, in using that fallacious distinction, given by
all Persecutors, even the worst sort, Papists as well as others, viz. That they
did not persecute us, but prosecuted us by Law, for our abuses to the
Government. [His great defense is then, that we have egregiously transgressed
the Law, and did endeavor to raise Sedition, and subvert the Government. And
for proof of this, he prints at large that scandalous Proclamation given forth
by him and others against me (which I have fully answered in Print, and so need
not answer it again here) at Philadelphia, 25th 6th mo. 1692. and the
Presentiments of the Grand Jury against us. But if to indict and accuse, be
sufficient proof, without any other evidence, who but shall be guilty, tho the
most innocent? However, here we have him acknowledging matter of fact, which
will be of some service to many that would not believe, that ever there was any
such thing done to us in Pensyvania, as fining and imprisonment, for things
that we have always declared to be to us matters of conscience.

LXIII. But to cloak his Persecution, he gives us a wrong Description of it;
and I believe the general^ty of the people called Quakers, will say so:
Persecution, says he, is a suffering inflicted upon the sufferers for the
discharge of their duty to God. This, I say, according to the People called
Quakers, and all others, that are f^r due liberty of conscience, is a wrong
description of persecution, as being far too Narrow, as not including such
suffering as is inflicted upon men, that may be in error, and hold erroneous
Doctrines and Principles, it having been all (...) our Plea, (witness what VV.
Penn, and diverse ot^ers, h^ve printed at great length, concerning the due
bounds of (...) of conscience, that seeing we live peaceably under the
Government, without doing Injury to any Man, we ought not to suffer, even
though we be in an Error, whether our Error relate to matters of Faith, or
Practice. But according to this Popish definition of Persecution given by S. J.
Men ought to suffer for their Errors, and be whipped out of them; for to be in
Error, or to practice an erroneous Worship, is no discharge of Men's Duty to
God; and therefore if they be punished for their Errors in Principles, or
Practices, they are not persecuted, but prosecuted according to Law. And by
this his Popish definition of Persecution, it will be a great question with
many, whether any Man called a Quaker, ever suffered any Persecution, either in
old England or new, until that be out of question, that the People called
Quakers, held no Errors? But according to the true description of Persecution,
as given by W. Penn, and many others, the People called Quakers were persecuted
by Suffering, Fining, and Imprisonment, for not conforming to the Worship
established by Law, supposing they were in an Error; for they who are rightly
principled against Persecution, and for due liberty of Conscience, say, Men are
not to be whipped out of their Errors, but persuaded, and better informed; and if
they reject due Information, they are to be left to God, the only Lord and
Sovereign over Conscience. The true definition therefore of Persecution is a
suffering inflicted upon the Sufferers, not only for the discharge of their
Duty to God, but for all that a Man thinks to be his Duty to God. Suppose he is
in an Error, if his Error be no Injury to his Neighbor, or a breach of that
commonly called the second Table of the Decalogue. And by this true definition
of Persecution, it is out of question, that the People called Quakers, as well
as others, of other Nonconformists, did suffer great Persecution, even suppose
they did hold Errors, and suffered for them, and acted contrary to some Laws
which are now abolished and repealed.

LXIV. In his laboring to clear himself and his Party of Persecution, and to
make the World believe it was not Persecution, but a Prosecution, in his
definition of Prosecution, which he would make applicable to us, he falsely
accuses us, but gives no effectual Proof; Prosecution, says he, is a justice
done on Transgressors of the Law, for their Injuries done to Men, or their
Blasphemies to God; and then he concludes, that we were prosecuted by Law, for
our Abuses to the Government. [But all that, that ever was duly proved in
particular against us, was, That Tho. Budd and I, in a printed Paper, in our
just defense, reprove Sam. Jennings's Pride, saying of him, he was too high and
imperious in Friends Meetings, and worldly Courts, calling him an ignorant,
presumptuous, and insolent Man, which last words did not relate to his
Magistracy, as I have formerly declared, but to his religious Profession as a
Quaker. And that we queried, in our printed Appeal, Whether hiring Men to
fight, and giving them a Commission to fight, be not a manifest Transgression
of the Quakers Principle. Now if to reprove Pride, and other Sins, as
Injustice, Oppression, etc. in Magistrates, be an abuse done to the Government.
and worthy of Punishment, then many Friends of best Note among us, are equally
guilty, or rather indeed more guilty, by S. J. his Argument, as G. F. who has
more severely charged Justice Sawry, and the Magistrates of Derby, with such
things, than ever we did any of the Magistrates in Pensilvania. See also a
printed Book called, The second part of the Peoples ancient and just Liberties,
asserted in the Proceedings against, and Trials of Francis Moor, Richard M^w,
John Boulton, Job Boltoun, and diverse others, at the Sessions begun and held at
the Old Bailey in Land, 6th mo. 1670. where the Publishers of that Book, charge
the Magistrates more severely, than ever we did, they saying, that in the said
Book, their Oppression and Injustice are manifested, their Wickedness and
Corruption detected. See also the Trial of W. P. and W. M. and the Trial of G.
W. at Norwich; and generally it has been the way of Friends, in their printed
Books of Trials at Sessions, to charge the Justices with Injustice, and
Arbitrary Proceedings, etc. And seeing this was no abuse to Magistracy, but
their Christian Complaint, and bearing witness conscienciously against Men's
Sins, as holy Men of old did, as is largely recorded in holy Scriptures, no
more can it be esteemed in us, any abuse to Government, to have reproved S. J.
for his Pride. And as concerning our querying, or witnessing against some
called Quakers in Philadelphia, in our printed appeal, for hiring Men to fight;
this can be no Sedition, nor having any tendency to Sedition, or to the
subversion of the Government, seeing it is well known, for manyyears past, that
the People called Quakers, have declared it to be their Principle, That it is
not lawful for them to fight, and yet the Government has been so tender here
in England, that they have not charged them with being guilty of Sedition, or
subversion of the Government, for asserting any such Principle; and the like
tenderness and moderation have the States of Holland showed to the M^n^ste
there, who are a great People, and have publicly asserted it to be their
Principle, (as well as the People called Quakers here) neither to fight, nor to
swear; yea, and learned Grotius, who has writ a learned Treatise, de jure
belli, and pacis, reckons it at least among the Evangelical Counsels, (which
any Man may lawfully obey) not to fight, or make War. Is it not therefore a
very strange thing, that a Justice of Peace in Pensilvania, and others of his
Party, shall make that to be Sedition, or a subversion of the Government there,
viz, our publicly asserting it to be our Principle not to fight, and yet the
Government here to charge nothing upon us but to be tendet to us in that
respect, as well as in other things of Nonconformity. Does not this show an
extraordinary height of Ambition in them, as well as degeneration from their
former Principle? and will it not too much confirm the Jealousy that some have
had, that if the Government shall happen to come into the hands of some of that
People called (...), they will persecute others for Conscience sake, although
they have cried out against their being persecuted for Conscience sake, unless
some public Testimony be given forth against these severe, and unfair
Proceedings of these Men against us in Pensilvania, and that by some solemn
declaration in print, given forth in behalf of that People.

LXV. His Perve^^ion in bringing his and their most illegal and scandalous
Proclamation against me, which they caused to be read at the Market Place by
the common Crier; and after that, posted it up both in Town and Country, as a
proof of my being guilty, of endeavoring to raise Sedition, and to subvert the
Government. Certainly, if this Man were not past all fear or shame, he would
not have dared to print such an illegal and scandalous Paper, that makes so
much against him, and expose it in the face of the World, the which I having so
fully answered in Print, to the several Falsehoods, Fallacies, and Perversions
in it, I shall not now repeat; only I think fit to notice one particular, that
does sufficiently show their illegal, unjust, and Arbitrary Proceedings, that
whereas they say, It has been proved before them, that G. K. being a Resident
there, did, contrary to his Duty, publicly revile the said Deputy Governor.
[Note Reader, they say, It has been proved before them, etc. But they
fallacionsly omit to tell, that I was not called before them, to have that, or
any other thing proved against me, but that they did, was altogether in my
absence, in and without the least Summons, Call, or Citation to come before
them, at that they call their private Sessions, (which may rather be called a
private Conspiracy to subvert Law and Justice) though I was known to be at home
in the same Town. And whereas they have called two other Justices of Peace,
viz. Lacy Cock, a Lutheran, and John Homes, a Baptist, to connive with them in
this work of Darkness, viz. to proclaim me at the Market Place, a Person so
highly Criminal, without all Conviction, or calling me before them, to hear any
thing proved against me, these two Justices aforesaid, acting like men of
Conscience, as well as Understanding what was legal, refused to join with them,
in signing such a Proclamation, because it was done without any Conviction, or
legal procedure. But they desired I might be called for, and legally convicted;
and if I were found guilty, they should join with them, to punish me
accordingly. But this not being granted, without them, they gave forth that
scandalous Proclamation against me; and I appeal not only to all Persons called
Quakers, but to all others, who may hear or read concerning this Matter, and
especially to all, that are in the least acquainted either with the English
Laws, or with the Law of Nations, whether their thus proceeding against me, be
so severe a Penalty, as to proclaim me, at the Market Place, etc. a Person so
highly Cr^^in^, without all Conviction; and whether to take the Evidence of
(...) against me, in my absence, without any call to be present, is not wholly
(...), and contrary to the fundamental Laws of England.

LXVI. page 46. His Perversion in making the presentment of the Grand (...) at
Philadelphia, an Evidence or Proof against Th. Budd, and me, of (...) being
guilty of reviling the Magistrate, and endeavoring to raise Sedition, an^
subvert the Government, and to do this to his own shame, and as an instance of
hi^ sol^y, he prints the Presentiments of the said Grand Jury against T. Budd
and me, and against W. Bradford, see his page 52. Now let us see, how unlike a
Magistrate, or a man of common Sense, he does argue. The Grand Jury has
presented us to be guilty of reviling S. J. being a Magistrate, therefore we
are guilty. But if this be a true conclusion, without any further proof, then
it follows by the same Argument, that what ever any Grand Jury presents a man
to be guilty of, that man is guilty of the same; and if so, there is no room
left for any further Trial of a Petty ^ury; which is another perversion of the
fundamental Laws of England. But why S. J. is wholly silent of the Verdict that
the Petty Jury gave in the case of Th. Budd (I having pleaded in the Court,
that I was not present^ble, being my only Plea, the thing being No Nuisance to
the County, nor Offense against the Government, they fined me, without any more
a-do) is ^afie to conjecture, their Verdict not being any Verdict against Th.
Budd, in the Terms or Words of the Presentment, but a special Verdict in these
following words, viz. That Thomas Budd was guilty of saying Sam. Jennings had
behaved himself too highly and imperiously in worldly Courts. But this was no
proof that T. B. was guilty of reviling Magistracy, more than the special
Verdict of the Jury at the Old Baily, that W. P. was guilty of speaking in
Grace-Chuack-Street, was any Verdict against him, of being guilty of a Riot,
Rout, or unlawful Assembly.

LXVII. p. 54. His perversion, in blaming me, and some others Joined with me,
in our exposing their defects (if they were so) to the world before ever we had
spoken to the Parties thus abused by us, as he phraseth it. But for answer,
what he calls, our exposing their defects, was but in the just defense of our
Innocence and Christianity, which he, and 27. unjust Judges, had endeavored to
rob us of, by exposing to the world, tho not in print, yet publicly enough
otherwise) their false Judgment against us, and causing it to be read in all
the Meetings, not only in the Province of Pensilvania, but in the Meetings of
the Neighboring Provinces. And it is false, that we had not spoke to them; for
we had made our complaint, and shown our dislike, at a monthly meeting at
Philadelphia, where they read their False Judgment against us, and at several
other Meetings, before we printed a line against them; but received no Redress,
but abusive language: And herein we have done but what many other good and
worthy men have done, in the like case, when oppressed, and they could have no
Remedy, Printing being the last Remedy. And this Remedy has been used by many
Friends of good Account among us, who having been oppressed, and unjustly dealt
with by Justices of Peace, have exposed their Injustice in print to the world,
some of their books having this Title, The Cry of the Oppressed. Nor can this
be called, the exposing of our brethrens weakness; for they had denied us to be
their brethren, before either the book called, The Plea of the Innocent, or the
Appeal, or the book called, The Trial, was printed; and they had begun the
Separation, and refused and rejected all Gospel Order, before we ever printed a
line against them; therefore Sam. Jennings his words in p. 54. I may justly
retort upon himself, which touch not us: What conscience is in this (for him to
fill his book with so many falsehoods, forgeries and perversions) I leave to
any, but a feared conscience, to determine.

LXVIII. His perversion, in taking great pains to prove, that some part of my
worhs did respect his Magistracy; and that therefore I am guilty of reviling
his Magistracy. Now the part of my words which he labors to prove did
respect his Magistracy, was, That he had behaved himself too high and
imperious, both in friends Meetings, and worldly Courts. And will this prove,
that I reviled Magistracy, any more than that he who writ W. Pea's and VV.
Me^e's Trial, which some say, was W. P. himself, was guilty of reviling
Magistracy; or that Friends, who have been oppressed and injured by proud and
oppre ^sive Magistrates, in former times, that have charged them in print both
with Pride and Persecution? or will it follow, that the true Prophets were
guilty of reviling Magistracy, because they did witness publicly against Pride
and Oppression in Judges and Rulers in former days? Surely these men in
Pensylvania were come to an extraordinary height of Ambition, to think, that
their place of Magistracy had raised them up so high, as to be above all
Reproof, or witnessing against their Pride, Injustice and other sins, when
many, far greater in Authority here in England, have born all that, and much
more than we have said against them in Pensylvania, without the least noticing
it by such severity; a great shame to such men, who pretending to be Teachers
of others in the great Christian Duties of Patience and long-suffering, should
fall so short in the practice of it, beneath many who make not so high
Profession. And it is but a poor excuse and evasion for him, or any other, that
may be supposed to have assisted him in this Work, to say, as he or they do, p.
45. In the Infancy of the settlement of Pensilvania, the Legislators saw cause
to make provision, by a Law, to secure the Reputation of the Magistrates from
the contempt of others; foreseeing, no doubt, (and perhaps perceiving something
of it then) that people, by reason of their equality in other things, might be
under greater tentations, to run into this evil there, than where the condition
of the Magistrates had raised them above, and set them at a greater distance
from the common people: It was therefore enacted (says he), That whosoever
should speak contemptuously, or slightingly of a Magistrate, should be punished
by a fine, according to the Nature of the Offense. [But was this consideration
enough to raise the Magistrates in Pensylvania, so far above their Brethren,
who are otherwise not only equal to them, but some, perhaps, far above them,
that tho a man do ever so conscientiously reprove their Pride, Injustice and
Oppression, in case such a thing happen, as is not impossible, he must not do
it; otherwise he must be punished, as a reviler of Magistracy? Were it not much
more advisable, that the Magistrates in Pensylvania, did labor to excel and
exceed all others in that Province, in all Christian and civil Virtues, who are
otherwise equal to them, than Sh^bna- like, to grave them out an habitation, in
so high a Rock, that no Man dare reprove them, tho ever so conscientiously, or
having ever such just cause so to do; such Height was the forerunner of S. J.
and his Brethrens ^^lly, in being soon after driven out of their station, as
God threatened Shebna, Isa. 22. 16, 19. And if they happen to be promoted again,
they will do well to behave themselves more moderately and Christianly. To
revile Magistracy, I acknowledge, is a great sin, but (...) the reproving of
Pride and Injustice in a Magistrate, when he is not in the public discharge of
his Magistracy, (as sitting in the seat of Justice) especially, is no reviling
of Magistracy, so far as I can learn, either out of the Law of God, revealed in
Scripture, or any Laws of England, or other Nation, professing Christianity,
whatsoever.

But why were they so partial, and showed so great Zeal for their own Honor,
and so little for the Honor of God and Christ, that they made a Law to fine a
man that spoke slightingly of a Magistrate, to any sum they please, provided it
b^ not less than 20 s. (and for our supposed Offense, fined us each five
pounds); but for Blesphemy against God and Christ, as blasphemous Oaths, and
Cur^ings, their Law was not above five shillings: And it is but a poor excuse
for this inequality, given by some, that blasphemous cursing and swearing might
be so common, that had the L^w exacted a great fine for every guilty person,
they would not have been able to pay it. But then might not the Legislators
have made a Law to put them to some corporal punishment, or to work in the
House of Correction, for such a time, as their Law is in other cases? But that
Sam. Jennings was gui^ty of Pride, and too great height of Spirit, in his
Proceedings against us, (...) Paper called, An Account of the Proceedings, etc.
is an evidence; therefore to call him so, was no reviling.

LXIX. His perversion, in slighting, and seeking to make void the Certificate
given me from the Deputy Governor and Council of Philadelphia, clearing me of
all these charges, amply declaring my Innocence, and peacea^^e be^aviour
toward the Government, and them in Authority at that time: Who is it (says
he) that does not know the propensity that commonly appears (on any turn or
change) in those that s^ccced in place and power, to censure and exp^se such as
were before under the same charge, etc. Hence he concludes ^^eir Certificate
will not do me much service, nor weigh much with thinki^g people. [Now I appeal
to impartial Readers, if this be not a speaking (...) of the present
Magistrates there, (for which S. J. by his own Argument. ought to be punished)
and possibly now in Pensilvania, as well as a severe Reflection on them, of
their Injustice, Partiality, yea and disloyalty, to give me a Certificate,
clearing me of any such Crime laid to my charge, as endeavoring to raise
Sedition, and subvert the Government in Pensilvania; for what is this, but to
say, that the Magistrates then in Trust with the Government, has cleared a
guilty person from an heinous Crime, affecting the Government? for it is an Act
of as great Injustice, and Male Administration of Government, to acquit and
clear the guilty, as to condemn the innocent. But he is fallacious in this
also, that he insinuates, these that gave m^ that Certificate, aid succeed him
and his party in the Government; whereas ^^me of them, and particularly Robert
Turner, who signed to my Certificate, was then in the Government, as well as S.
J. and did publicly witness against their unjust proceedings, as well formerly
as since.

LXX. His pervertion and f^llacy, to make void his Crime of persecution, (...)
our (...) what did he, or Thomas Budd suffer? were (...) them whipped, or
imprisoned? No such matter. They were (...) Court; were adjudged guilty, and
had a (...) let upon them, which was never levied; for which, if they (...),
they onght to acknowledge the clemency of the Government, and particularly such
as might have exacted it. [But it was a great suffering, thus to expose us in
the face of the Court, and of both Town and Country, as so heinously guilty,
to defame us, being innocent persons; and tho we were not imprisoned, yet our
Two Friends, viz. W. Bradford and John Macomb, were most unjustly imprisoned,
and some of W. B. his Utensils, detained from him; and W. B. was presented npon
a Statute in Old England, That no book shall be printed without the Printer's
Name to it; And tho his Defense was, That most of Friends books were printed
without the Printer's Name to them; yet their partiality was such, they did not
regard it: And that our fine was not levied, we owe no thanks to them, who
passed that false Judgment against us ( their tender mercies, as the Scripture
says of some being cruel), but to Divine Providence, that restrained them for
a little season; and the fear that possibly they were under, lest both the
generality of the people of Town and Country should cry out, shame, shame upon
them, still more loudly, who had already concluded them to have dealt
unchristianly toward us; and after some little season, their Power was taken
from them. But their most cruel detaining our Friend Peter Bosse, in prison,
for his fine, until they were put out of their power, does sufficiently show it
was no Clemency in them to Th. Budd and me, that restrained them from levying
our fines.

LXXI. His Perversion in telling a Story, page 35. That some in west Jersey
heard me say, that they should hear, before it was long, that I were either
whipped, or imprisoned, and rather than I would appear a false Prophet, I did
what I could to procure it. [But that I did Prophecy any such thing, is a
gross Forgery; or that I did in the least do any thing to procure it; but it is
probable I might say to some, by way of probability, they would hear ere long,
I were either whipped or imprisoned; which I spoke not in the least by way of
Prophecy, but of strong probability, considering the Cruelty that appeared in
them, against some of my Friends, whom they imprisoned, their Rage being
greater against me, than them, but Providence hindered them to execute all that
was in their Hearts. And what less could be expected from S. J. who for a small
default of a poor Boy that did throw a little Dirt or Earth at a Constable,
caused him to be whipped most cruelly at Burlington in west Jersey, with thirty
five lashes on the naked Body, with a Horse-whip, and caused to put the Boys
Master in the Stocks, for calling him, the said S. J. Prick-louse-Taylor; this
an honest P^^son of good Credit here in Town, who saw it, and was one that
begged S. J. to show mercy to the poor Boy, is ready to witness, a sufficient
Evidence of his too severe Government in west Jersey. And many having begged S.
J. who was then Governor, for the poor Boy, as well as he himself ^^gged most
lamentably for mercy, he being a Friends Son, yet he would not be entreated.
And also considering the new Presentiments given in against me, being about
seven in number, which were read at the yearly Meeting l^st at London, with my
Answers to them, diverse of which were such, as the (...) charged in the said
Presentiments, had I been guilty, deserved not only Imprisonment, but other
corporal Punishment; and which probably enough might have reached to sentence
of Death against me, had not their most cruel Designs been disappointed by the
merciful Divine Providence, considering the cruel minds that they generally had
against me; and that their Juries, both grand and petty, were such, as we know
to be prejudiced; and many of which had signed to false Judgments against me,
in their Men's Meetings. But whereas he alleges, p. 55. That I called Tho.
Lloid pitiful Governor, I remember no such thing; and he giving no proof of
it, but his bare say so, the impartial Reader will not believe it. But that I
said, my Back itched for their Whip, I own I said so, in a public Meeting, on
a first day, after they had interrupted me, in my Christian Testimony, and did
most extraordinarily threaten me, with their magistratical Power, I appeal to
all who know, what godly Zeal has moved men to, whether I might not say these
words, in a Christian Spirit, implying no more, but a desire to suffer for
Righteousness sake; to which Christ has pronounced a blessing, as well as what
Lawrence the Martyr said to the Tyrant that persecuted him, when he caused to
roast him on a Grid-Iron, for which saying he was greatly commended. He bid him
turn up the other side, the former being roasted enough, to see which was the
best Meat: (Persecutors in Scripture being compared to Man-eaters) and what G.
F. said, as above noted, to a man that struck him cruelly, strike again; and
what Edw. Borough said and writ in Lines, to his Persecutors, Our backs are
ready for your blows; and many other such bold Expressions that godly Zeal, and
holy boldness has moved many better than I, to give to threatening Persecutors:
Yea, did not our Savior say to Judas, what thou do, do quickly. But it seems
S. J. was never acquainted with any flame of holy Zeal, to suffer for
Righteousness sake, his Zeal being to persecute, but not to be persecuted for
Righteousness sake. However, I have never justified all the words I have said
to there my Adversaries, but readily have granted, that it is possible I have at
times exceeded, on great Provocation. But S. J. and his Parties Hypocrisy is
great, who not only have far exceeded me in hard words, but made it their work
(as is well known) to provoke me excessively. But my gracious God, for which,
and for all his many Mercies, and Deliverances, I desire to praise him, has
preserved me, as to the main; and my great comfort is, that whatever human
weaknesses have attended me as to some Circumstances, which have been greater
on their part, my cause and ground of de^^te against them ^in bearing Testimony
against their vile (...) held by some of them, and cloaked by others o^ them,
and (...) wicked Pract^ses of Persecution and Injustice) is good, and with a
since^e and upright Heart, as to the main, I have managed it, and I have P^^ce
from my gr^cious God in so doing, as well as a sense of his pardoning Mercy
wherein I have failed in some particular Circumstances; and this is more than
ever any of my Adversaries that I know have acknowledged; who, proud Pharisee
like, do justify themselves, But whereas S. J. has (...) to charge me more
than once, with acting against my Conscience, I declare sincerely and solemnly,
it is a groundless Calumnly.

As for his Answer to Peter B osse his Letter, I could show several gross
prevarications in it; but having increased my Answer to a far greater bulk
already than I intended, I think to say little at present to it, reserving a
more full Answer to another opportunity, if need be, or to Peter B osse
himself, to whom it is most proper to give the Answer; but he being absent in
America, his answer at present cannot be expected; only I desire the Reader to
notice these following Particulars. 1. S. J. takes no other way to clear
himself of P. B. his charging me with an unsavory Life, (expressed by his
unsavory carriage and words to his Neighbors, equal or superior to himself, at
least some of them; as when he said to John S^^n, who had been Governor of west
Jersey, and was then in the Magistracy, Thou pitiful whip Jack, I despise
thee;) but by charging him in general, without mentioning any particular matter
of Fact. 2. Let it be considered; whether it was fair or orderly in S. J. so to
pursue P. B. he being a Church Member with him, and not at that time denied or
disowned by them, to sue him in open Court, for a private Letter sent to him,
to the public scandal of his and their Profession; and gratifying Adversaries,
who would, and did say, See how Quakers go to Law with Quakers, contrary to
their Profession and Principle. Nor does his evasion excuse him, that he, viz.
P. B. was one of my Party, and denied together with me. But this is barely
alleged, and not proved; he belonged to Burlington Meeting in west Jersey, and
had not that I know, been at any of our Meetings falsely called separate
Meetings, before that time, but was generally owned by Friends of that Meeting
he belonged to. And his other evasion is as weak, That the Paper or Letter came
to him open. Does that prove, that he sent it open? Or if he had sent it
unsealed, was that such a Crime, to query into such things as Men have
reprinted of one another, and that in a Neighbourly way. 3. For his being
drunk, and running a Horse-Race, it was not positively charged on him, but
queried; and was, by the manner of Evidences, brought against him by some
honest Persons, being compared with the negative Evidence of one single Man,
(whom I own to be an honest man) I leave it to be weighed, by the Readers,
which has most probability. 4. As for his clearing himself of Surveying a Tract
of Land, that John Antrum had actually began to do; and of his taking away the
Meadow of Rich. Mathews, he but poorly and lamely comes off. Its well known in
west Jersey, that John Antrum complan'd greatly on S. J. for his so doing;
(...) defense about Rich. Matthew (...) M^^dow, is more sophistical than (...);
saying, either it was surveyed (...) R. (...) or it was not; if it were, then
he has it. [But how has he it, (...) S. J. has sold, or may hereafter tell it
to some other Person? It^s well known of what ill fame it is, and (...) great
Injustice, to survey another Man's Land, and so to appropriate it to him. And
for his exception against the Record of the Survey by (...) it is idle and
^illy. It is ordinary in Surveyes in that Country, where no such exactness ^^
commonly used, (as here in England,) and when large allowance is given for
barren Land, and high ways, to mention a s^all gushet of Up-land, or Meadow,
without telling the cou^^e or di^^ance, when it lies adjoining to a greater
Tract, more particularly surveyed. And were all such Surveys made void of small
gushets, and pieces of Meadow, or Up land that have not the course or distance
particularly mentioned, belonging to that part, it would make a great Confusion
in many Surveys in that Country, and perhaps might give occasion to have some
of his Land of Meadow to be questioned. But it is not a new thing for S. J. to
pretend himself skilful in what he is grossly ignorant of. 5. For his Abuses
done to John Shen, and especially his base and scurrilous reviling him, as
above mentioned, being then a Magistrate, is so well known, that I think S. J.
has scare the Confidence to deny the unsavory Expression he gave him, and
which was mentioned in the book of the Trial. 6. For his blaming me, that I
enqui^ed at John Shorum, about S. J. his being drunk, I appeal to the Readers,
what blame could this be in me, so to enquire, I having heard it commonly
reported. An^ if John Shorum denied it to me, having affirmed it to others, it
was little to me, whether he did affirm it or not, I made no matter of it, and
saw no need to give Evidence in the Case, for it would have signified nothing
to clear him; and I heeded little what J. S. said in the Case, for what I spoke
to him, was merely occasional, as I happened to meet him on the way. 7. What S.
J. does allege, that Robert Cole told me, he knew no such thing by S. J. as
that he was drunk at his House, and spewed in the Bed, I declare is a falsehood;
it is true, he said ( viz. R. Cole) that he was drunk; but that he said he knew
no such thing by S. J. I remember not in the least; but on the contrary, both I
and my Wife do well remember, that he said, the thing he had said to Peter
Bosse was true, but he blamed his being drunk, that made him speak so freely;
(as commonly Men will be more free to reveal a matter when drunk;) but said
Cole, I dare not appear a Witness against S. J. he being a Magistrate, for he
will ruin me; and this I sincerely declare, to the best of my Knowledge and
Rememberance. And lastly, as to his severe usage toward his Servants, and
especially toward his Maid, whom he most cruelly whipped in Bed, with a
Horse-whip, is most true, and is sufficiently proved against him in the Book of
the Trial, as to the first part, witness the printed Testimonies of John Smith,
and James Silver against him. And as to that of his most unmerciful, and
obscene way of beating his Maid Servant, an honest Friend here in Town,
declares he had it from the Maids Mother, and the Maid her self has declared
it to diverse.

POSTSCRIPT.
AND thus I have fully answered to all that seemed any way material in his
Charges in his book against me, and my Friends, passing by several other things
not worth noticing, of his false charges, and possibly some may think I have
mentioned too many, and taken too much time and paper to Answer them, being in
more general and subdivided Heads, under the more general Heads, above an
hundred in all; but having thus for once bestowed so much time, paper, labor
and cost to clear me of these false charges T. E. and S. J. have labored to
bespatter and defame me with, it is possible, and probable also, (tho I come
under no tie in the case that I may let them Answer) again, and bark on, till
they be weary, without much noticing them for time to come; for indeed any
further debate in print touching these matters, seems to me, and I judge, will
to many, but little profitable to the Readers; The things for most part charged
and recharged, being of words and transactions alleged to have been said or
done in Pensilvania, or other parts of America, and the Evidences on both sides
being confessedly Parties, which are no proper witnesses in these things, as I
declared at the Yearly Meeting last at London, 1694. Nor did I any further make
us^ of Evidences of that sort, but to make a Balance against the Evidences of
their side and party, my Evidences being fully as Credible persons as theirs,
yea and more Credible, because I have disproved some of their Evidences, by
their contra^ictions one to another, and other clear circumstances! But that
which, as to the main, casts the balance, as I declared at the Yearly Meeting
last at London, was the Manuscripts of my opposite party, under their own
hands, which I have to produce at large, and which, as I see great occasion for
may be made public. But how little, or indeed, nothing to the purpose, Sam.
Jennings has washed himself clean, of the dirt, not that we have thrown on
him, but what he has daubed himself with, I leave to impartial Readers to
Judge, and whether his Labor to clear himself of it, be not with as little
success, as if an Ethiopian would labor to wash himself white. If any place
were for my Advice to him, the best way for him to clear himself of these
things, is to repent sincerely of his Falsehood, Hypocrisy, Pride and Spirit of
Persecution, and all other his great sins, that are too too manifest, however
h^ seeks to cover them, and however some here in England that have espoused his
unrighteous cause, seek to cloak him. And as for his Certificate which he has
received from his Party and Associates that are guilty with him in many of the
things charged against him; I judge no impartial Readers will think it of any
weight; and to counterballance it, I could produce a more full and ample
Certificate to clear me, signed by thrice as many Hands, and Persons generally
of as good, and many of better Credit, as any that have signed to his. But
Certificates from Parties signify little; and when a man's own words and actions
cry aloud that he is guilty, paper Certificates can never have that force to
make him innocent.

George Keith.

London: Printed for R. Levis, 1694.


