THE WAY To the CITY of GOD Described, OR, A PLAIN DECLARATION How any man may
within the day of Visitation given him of God, pass out of the Unrighteous,
into the Righteous state: As also, how he may go forward, in the Way of
Holiness and Righteousness, and so be fitted for the Kingdom of God, and the
beholding and enjoying thereof.

WHEREIN Diverse things, which occur to them, that enter into this way, with
respect to their inward Trials, Temptations, and Difficulties, are pointed at,
and Directions intimated, how to carry themselves therein: and how to apply
themselves to the Works and Exercises of Religion, so as to find Acceptance
with God. With diverse other weighty particulars, which may be of service to
Inquirers and Beginners.

Written by GEORGE KEITH, in the Year 1669. In the time of his being a close
Prisoner in the Tolbooth at Edinburgh. Whereunto is added,

The way to discern the Convictions, Motions, etc of the Spirit of God, and
Divine Principle in us, from those of a man's own Natural Reason, etc.

Written in the time of his Confinement in Aberdeen, in the Year 1676. With a
Preface to the whole, written this Year.

Printed in the Year, 1678.

Isa. 62.10. -- cast up, cast up the highway, gather out the stones, etc.

and 57.14. -- Cast ye up, cast ye up, prepare the way, etc.

and 40.3. -- Prepare ye the way of the Lord, make straight in the Desert a
Highway for our God.

1 Ioh. 2.6. He, that says he abides in him, ought himself also so to walk,
even as he walked.

1 Ioh. 3.2. -- but we know, that when he shall appear, we shall be like him;
for we shall see him as he is.

Joan. Picus mir and. Conclus.

Qui perfect in animam redierit, primae formae suam formam aequaverit.

Englished thus.

He, that shall perfectly return into his own Soul, shall make his own frame
[or mould] like unto the first.

Friendly READER,
IF thou art brought unto any sense of thy inward state, and art come to feel
thy absolute need of Christ, so as nothing less can satisfy thee than the true
and real enjoyment of him in thy Heart and Soul; and thou can no longer
content thy self with the bare report of Christ, until thou feel the virtue of
his Blood to sprinkle thy Conscience from dead works, to serve the Living God:
And, if thou breathest for Life, and to have the living knowledge of God, and
art weary of all that knowledge, which thou have gathered by bare hear say, or
reading, while thou wast ignorant of the Life of Christ in thy heart: And if
thou desire Holiness it self more than a naked form or profession of it, and
hungrest and thirstest after Righteousness, and so art a true inquirer after
the Kingdom of God: To thee I hope this small Treatise will be acceptable, and
of service, and indeed to such as thee it was mainly directed and intended. I
wrote it some years ago, when I was by an outward restraint for diverse months
separated, for most part, from the company of all men, for my testimony to the
Truth. But the Lord was near unto me, and in the enjoyment of his Presence I
had more satisfaction, than all worldly things could afford me. And being made
use of by some in Manuscripts, to whom it was serviceable, they desired it
might be made public for a more general good, and the rather, because there
was little or nothing, after the manner of controversy with any particular
adversary in it, but that for the most part it was practical and experimental;
(which some, who have not a desire to read controversy, are willing to read)
and that the whole aim and scope of it was to help and assist such, who desire
sincerely to live a godly life in their journey and travel, as the title of it
imports, which is, A Description of the Way to the City of God, for thither
should all our endeavors and labors tend, for we have here no abiding City.
And, seeing, without Holiness none can see God, and unless a man be born again,
he cannot enter into the Kingdom of God: therefore this whole Treatise does
hold forth diverse necessary and useful things, concerning the Nature of
Regeneration, how, and after what manner, it is begun, and carried on. So that
the various steps of the Spiritual Traveller, are set down from the beginning,
until a good growth and progress be attained in the new birth or life of
Holiness it self. And who are thus far advanced, they are more s^fe, and more
out of danger to miscarry and miss their way, than beginners are: And therefore
it is mainly intended for beginners, and such as have made no great progress as
yet in this Divine Travel.

What I have here delivered of the practical part, or of experience, is my own;
and my Spirit and Soul have traveled, in some measure, in all these steps,
herein mentioned: and I have found the experimental good and advantage of all
those advertisements, cautions, warnings and considerations delivered in the
same. And, because it was not fit to burden the understanding or memory of
Readers with many things, I have only aimed, for the Readers good, to set down
some clear and plain directions, concerning the most needful things; and those,
which although they be most necessary, are most neglected, and especially to
call back transgressors to the heart, according to Isaiah, 46.8. as the Hebrew
has it; or as otherwise it is rendered, but to the same purpose, Return unto
the heart, O ye transgressors! and that is the import of the word
[introversion] which is a turning-in to find and feel after God and Christ in
the heart, to wait to see him, as he appears there, and to hear him, as he
speaks there, and to be sensible of his walkings, goings, and movings, as he is
found there; as he has promised, I will dwell in them, and walk, in them,
says the Lord, Lev. 26.12. 2. Cor. 6.16. For we are to seek after Wisdom, as
Silver, and to search for understanding, as hid treasures, Prove. 2.4. Which
seeking and searching, in the first place, must be in our hearts, and inward
parts, for there has God placed this hidden treasure, which is Christ Jesus,
to wit, a measure of his Divine Spirit, Life, and Light: and, if thou find
it in thy self, thou will then find it in others, and also thou will savor of
that Divine Life and Spirit, both in the Scriptures, and also in all writings,
that in the least measure, have proceeded from the same Spirit in others. And
whatever testimony has, at any time, proceeded from him, and remains upon
record, the same witnesses unto that testimony in all, unto all, to whom it
comes; and all, who have a sense of that Divine Spirit and Life in themselves,
can, and do fell and discern that it has proceeded of God, and is owned by
him. And to such the Scripture, or any other writing, that has been written,
in the least measure of a Divine motion, or drawing are no dead Letter, but a
living Testimony in their place and order: for to none is the Testimony of
Truth a dead thing, but to such as are de^d, and are alienated from that life,
which gave it forth. Yet thou art not to rest in any sense or savor of Life,
that thou feel'st in the outward testimony, but by the same thou art to be led
in, into thy own Heart and Soul, to wait for the arising and springing up of
it, within thy self, for thou needst Life to be nearer thee, than in any
outward testimony, that thou may enjoy it, as a Fountain, and Well of Living
Water, springing up unto eternal Life, in thy Belly and inward parts; and, as
this Fountain springs up in th^^ it will flow forth into all thy senses, and
into all the powers of thy Soul, and make them alive, and it will quicken thy
understanding and memory, as also thy will and affections, and give Life unto
thy thoughts and meditations; and it will cause thee, when, at any time, thou
readst the Scriptures, as this Living Fountain opens in thee, to read them
livingly, and with a living sense and understanding; a^^, when thou hear'st
them read, to hear with Life also, and in a living sense; and when thou do
meditate upon them, or upon the things declared in them, as upon the Love of
God, and Christ Jesus, and what Christ has done and suffered for thee, and how
he died, and rose again, and is gone to Heaven, there to appear in the presence
of God for us, and that he is to return again to judge the quick and the dead,
and to give the reward of Everlasting Life to all that have served him, but to
punish with everlasting destruction all, that have not believed in him, nor
been obedient unto his Gospel, or whatever other things, recorded in the
Scriptures, the Fountain of Life in thy self will give Life unto all those
Meditations, as thou wait'st for the free openings of it; and they will be
living and sweet unto thy Soul, yea, sweeter than the honey and the honeycomb,
and thou will be truly edified, refreshed, and strengthened, in the Scriptures
Testimony. But, if thou go about to seek Life in the Scriptures, as the Jews
did of old, and in the mean time neglect to come unto Christ, who is the Life,
and the Fountain of it, thou can not expect to find Life in the Scriptures,
or any blessing of God in thy reading or meditating in them. For, as none can
enjoy the light and good of the outward Sun, that shines without, or abroad,
who shut their Eyes against it, and let it have no place in them; so no more
can thou enjoy the Light and Good of Christ Jesus, that Sun of Righteousness,
if thou shut'st thy inward eyes against his Light, that shines in thee.

Moreover, I must inform thee a little further, why I have not, in this
Treatise, insisted upon, or scarcely so much as mentioned, many particular
duties, that are altogether necessary unto every true Christian, As, giving
alms to the poor, visiting the sick and imprisioned, the widow and fatherless;
Nor the many respective duties, that we owe to one another, as we stand related
together in the world: Nor have I set down a particular enumeration of all the
commands, prohibitio^s, promises, and threatenings of God, contained in the
Scripture: Nor have I mentioned all the Christian Virtues, far less defined or
described them, in a particular manner: Nor have I set ^own a catalogue of all
the sins and vices, recorded in the Scripture: Nor have I recommended unto
people the reading of the Scriptures, conference, and meditation upon them, nor
frequenting the Assemblies of God's People, where the Lord is waited upon, the
Word of God is preached, and living worship, prayer, and thanksgiving is
offered up unto him in Spirit and in Truth.

Now, the reason, why I have not so particularly mentioned these things, was
not any wilful omission or neglect, as if I did not lay any weight upon these
things, or made any ^light of any of them: Nay, all this was, and is, far from
me; but my design being only in short, and as briefly, as well could be, to
point at some general things, and also at these particulars, which are the
main, and are the most necessary, for the right and acceptable performance of
those other things, above mentioned. My great care was to l^^ the Foundation
well, and to put my Reader in mind of the first and most necessary things,
which I ^id find so much neglected by most of Professors of Christianity: my
end singly being, that people might be brought to have the true Nature, Life,
and Spirit of Christianity to abound, and have place in them, and then all
these other things will easily and naturally follow. And I could not well
mention these things, without having insisted more largely upon them, than the
nature of so small a Treatise would admit. For I did not design a complete
system of Practical Divinity, but only, as it were, to put a Primar or Rudiment
into the hands of a young beginner. And as for many of the above mentioned
Particulars, they are generally acknowledged among all, that profess the Name
of Christ. But yet the right hearing, the right reading, the right meditating,
the right preaching, the right praying, and singing, either private or public,
the right giving of alms, the right visiting of the sick, the prisoner, the
fatherless, and widow, and the right practicing of all other Christian duties,
is a great and rare thing, and few there are, among those, called Christians,
who do indeed rightly practice them, and go about them. Now, though all these,
and other particulars be not expressly mentioned in this Treatise, yet the right
manner and way, how they are to be gone about and performed, is not only
expressed here, but it is the main design of the whole, and that is, that
People may come to know the true Life of God, and of Godliness to live in them,
and the True Spirit of Christ, and of Christianity to reign and rule in them,
and in all things to order and guide and enable them, that so, whatsoever they
do, they may do it in the Life, in the Spirit, in the Power, in the Light, and
in the Love of God, and then they do it in the Name of God, and of Christ, and
in Faith, and so they do it aright, and it is acceptable unto God, and
serviceable unto men.

There is one thing further, which I cannot well omit, and that is, to answer
an objection, which may be strong in the minds of some, who have not experience
in the case. That, whereas I recommend so much the place of silence, and of
being so passive, still, and quiet, to wait for and attend unto the Divine
working and moving of God and of Christ, by the Holy Spirit in the Soul, it is
like some will be ready to say, that

Obj. Such a thing leads into a stupidity or lethargy of mind, if not into
something worse; for the mind of man, striving to bring it self into such a
composure and quietness, and not attaining unto it, is the more disquieted, and
this may be feared to turn into rage, or natural distemper; for which c^^se
some have both had a great aversion unto such a thing, and also have dissuaded
others from attempting it, and some have concluded it, as an impossible thing,
to attain unto a perfect silence from all our own thoughts, seeing it is as
natural to the mind to think, as it is for the fire to burn, or the light to
shine.

Answ. To the last part of this objection I answer, that by a perfect silence
from all our own thoughts, do not understand, that the Soul is to be without
all sense, or remembrance, or thoughts of all kind: for I distinguish of
thoughts, thus, There are thoughts, which are brought forth in us, without any
Divine or Supernatural Concurrence, motion, and assistance of the Holy Spirit,
which are but the bare and mere product of our own minds. Also there are
thoughts, which arise in us from suggestions of Satan, and of the Flesh, which
when we consent unto them, and entertain them, may be called ours. And thirdly,
there are thoughts, that are begotten and excited in us by a Divine and
Supernatural motion, concurrence and assistance of the Holy Spirit, which l^st
kind of thoughts are only profitable unto the Souls Spiritual growth and
progress: but the former, especially the second kind, which are too frequent,
are hurtful and evil.

Now, when I say, the Soul, or mind of man should be silent from all its own
thoughts, I mean, all thoughts of the first and second kind, which are merely
natural, carnal, and devilish; and, when all these thoughts are silenced, the
other thoughts, which may be well called divine thoughts, as having a Divine
Original, to wit, the Divine Spirit, Life, and Light of Christ in the Soul, do
instantly spring up, and abound, which are unspeakably sweet, refreshing and
pr^fitable. And therefore we persuade none to abst^in from such Divine
Thoughts, or shut them out, but, on the contrary, we exhort all to entertain
them, and abound in them, as much as possible: in order to which, they must
diligently abstain from all their own thoughts, especially such as arise in
them, from Satan and the Flesh, for they are contrary to one another, and wa^
against one another in the Soul. And whatever thoughts are most loved,
received, and entertained in the Soul, these do most prevail, and bear sway, to
the excluding the contrary.

Again, Of Divine Thoughts there are sundry kinds, as when we meditate upon any
subject in words, and propositions that are mental, or when we discourse
mentally, as the Divine Spirit does move and assist us; which kind of thoughts
are very precious and useful unto us. But there is also another kind of Divine
Thoughts, which is many times wholly abstract from all words, terms,
propositions, argumentations, so much as mental, and are simply Divine
Sensations, as seeing, hearing, smelling, tasting, and feeling, whose object is
not words, nor discourse in the mind, but simply the Divine Spirit, Power,
Light, and Life of God, and his Divine Goodness, Love, Mercy, Kindness, and
Compassion, revealed to us in Christ Jesus: and this kind of divine thoughts
(if so be it is proper to call them thoughts, for they are as real sentations,
as the outward and natural sentations are) are the more excellent of the two,
and, when they do most abound in the Soul, they, as it were, swallow up the
former, as the greater Light and Glory does the lesser.

And to the first part of the objection I answer, that the blessed experience
of many thousands at this day, who are come to such a silence, and silent
waiting upon the Lord, is testimony sufficient unto the contrary, who have
found, and do find continually the unspeakable advantage of it, on a Spiritual
account, and that it is so far from having any real tendency to work a natural
distemper upon the mind, that we, who have tried and experienced it for many
years, never found any thing more profitable unto us, to work a right and solid
natural composure and settlement of mind, as well as Spiritual, whereby our
very natural strength is renewed, and we made more fit for outward occasions
and affairs, than by meat, drink, sleep, or any other bodily refreshment
whatsoever. And to our experience we can add the experience of the Holy Men of
God, recorded in Scripture, especially the Prophets and Apostles, to whom the
Word of God came immediately, and in w^om the Lord did immediately appear, and
who, on that account, waited in silence for the same, as Habakkuk said, I will
stand upon my watch Tower, and will watch to see what he will say in me, Hab.
2.1. and Psalm. 85.8. I will hear what God the Lord will speak, said David: and
said Jeremiah, It is good both to hope, and quietl^ [or, in si^ence] to wait
for the Salvation of God, Lam. 3.26. And, though such a posture of mind be
exceeding tedious, unpleasant, and irksome to the carnal part, yet let us hear
further what the Prophet says, ver. 27. It is good for a man that he bear the
yoke in his youth, he sits alone and keeps silence, because he has born
it upon him. And by bearing the yoke, in this particular* as well as in other
things, many can say, It is now become light and easy unto them, the carnal
part, that made it so uneasy, being overcome. And we are not ignorant how all
seriousness, and indeed the whole practice of self-denial, and mortification of
the deeds of the flesh, is equally liable to the same exceptions. (which yet
has no just ground) For do they not readily object, when any man becomes
serious, and effectually sets about the work of mortification, Such a man i^
become melancholic, he is in some distemper, and is in hazard to turn fool,
^o^, or distracted? And indeed to forsake our own thoughts (which the Scripture
says are all only and continually evil, Genesis 6.5, 12.) and to kill and
crucify them is no small part of true mortification. For what is a man's own
thoughts, but the product and fruit of a carnal mind? And therefore they are
but flesh, which must die and be crucified.

But to prevent all hazard of receiving any hurt, I say unto all, who desire to
attain unto the said Silence, that they apply themselves diligently unto
outward affairs, in a sober way, and in the fear of God: for nothing is a
greater enemy or hinderance to the true Silence or Peace of the Soul, than to
be idle, and have no business or labor: whereas to be honestly and soberly
exercised in business, and to labor with the hands is a great help and
furtherance to attain unto it. And let none strain, or use any violence or
force to nature, to compass it, for no m^n, of himself, can attain unto it, but
as he is assisted and enabled of the Lord, who is near at all times, to help
the traveling Soul, but yet there are some times more especially, wherein the
Lord does give more abundant access and opportunity unto the Soul, which every
one is to observe within himself, and improve the same.

Let none therefore strive, or wrestle, in their own will, or natural strength,
to attain to this Silence, but let them be faithful to God, in what they know
to be his will, and be diligent in some honest and lawful employment, and
carefully attend the meetings of the faithful, when they meet together to wait
upon the Lord, and speak the Word of the Lord to one another, as they are
moved, and to worship and call upon him in Spirit and in Truth. For the Life of
the faithful and of such, as are near unto the Lord, who are become strong men
in Christ, has an exceeding great influence upon the weak, to help them, and
gather them to the true silence, and the presence of the Lord is more
abundantly manifest, where the faithful meet together in his Name, as ^e has
promised, whereunto many can set their seal.

And thus every one, who is sincere and faithful to what they know and have
received, will naturally, and, as it were, by a natural growth in the Truth,
attain by degrees more and more unto such a state, until they perfectly come to
enjoy and possess it, so as to see Jerusalem a quiet habitation, and to behold
the King in his beauty, and see his goings in the Sanctuary: which will cause
the Soul to sing with David, and to say, as it is Psalm. 84. ver. 1, 10. How
amiable are thy Tabernacles, O Lord of Hosts! For a day in thy Court is better
than a thousand.

But of this I warn thee, that, if thou have time enough to spare, as thou
think, to rest from all outward affairs, that thou may, the more
abundantly, apply thy self to this Silence, and silent waiting: yet thou may
exceed* through a wrong and blind zeal, and so may endanger and hurt thy
self. For such a silence, as does not allow us to mind and be employed in our
honest and lawful affairs, is not always required of us, but at certain times,
that we set apart unto that end, either in private, or public, as the Wisdom
of God does teach us, and his Spirit does move. Which times, although they be
frequent, yet ordinarily are not to be of long continuance: for it is the will
of God, that, so long as we are in these earthly tabernacles, we be exercised
in bodily and external actions, whereof Christ himself gave us an example, who
went about doing good, and at times retired with his Disciples, and sometimes
alone, to watch and to pray, and again returned unto the people to minister
unto them, both in Soul and Body, what they had need of. Nor does the moderate
use and exercise of the body in lawful affairs hinder, as is said, the true
silence, in some degree, that is sufficient for the present time, but does
rather help and contribute unto the same: but the highest degree of it is
neither always required of us, nor is indeed at all times possible to be
performed by us, for unto all things there is a measure, and what is within
measure is good, but to exceed is hurtful and dangerous.

GEORGE KEITH.
In the Prison of Aberdeen, the 15 of the 4 month, 1678.
The Way to the CITY OF GOD.
CHAP. I.
Holding forth

Certain Doctrinal Principles of the TRVTH, whereof a M^n being convinced by
the Spirit of God, it contributes much to his making a right entrance into the
way of Holiness.

A Man does not (nor can he) enter into the way of Holiness, but he must first
have his understanding some way opened by the Spirit of Truth, so as to receive
some convincement of certain Principles of Truth. For how can a man enter into
a way, and know nothing thereof, neither more nor less? It is the usual method
and order of the Spirit of God, first to convince a man of diverse things before
he proceed further, so as to convert him into the way of Holiness, or carry him
on wards therein.

Therefore I shall in the first place lay down a few certain Principles, the
knowledge of which is of great advantage unto beginners for their first entrance
into Holiness: and I shall at this time but name, and suppose them as known,
rather than prove them, referring their probation to other Treatises. And
though I may not say that none ever attained unto any measure of Holiness,
without the clear, distinct and explicit knowledge of all these Principles
hereafter delivered; yet I am very free to say, that the knowledge of them all
does very much conduce to beginners for their entrance into Holiness, and the
ignorance of them has been a grievous let to many a Soul, which, though it
has not made the entrance absolutely impossible, yet has it made it extreme
difficult, even much more by far than it is indeed and in Truth, or is found to
be by those, whose Understandings are well informed in these Principles.

I. That all men in their natural and unregenerate state, are unholy and
unrighteous altogether, and so as such, unable to do any thing acceptable to
GOD, and unfit for fellowship and communion with him.

II. That GOD has not left men wholly in this condition, but has given unto
all and every one of them an occasion in a day or time of Visitation, whereby
it is possible for them, to come out of their first state of unholiness and
unrighteousness, which is also a state of Spiritual blindness and death, into a
state of holiness and righteousness, which is a state of enjoying spiritual
Light and Life of GOD.

III. That this occasion is ministered unto every one, through Jesus Christ, who
is freely given of the Father, unto every man that comes into the world for
Salvation, as attainable by every man through him.

IV. That the coming of Jesus Christ into the world both outwardly and
inwardly, was necessary unto man's Salvation, so that the one is not to be
understood in opposition to the other, for that both have their great uses and
blessings unto men. Hence all, who are saved, are saved no less by the benefit
and grace of his outward coming, in his becoming man, suffering, dying and
resurrection, then by that of his inward coming as a Light, and quickening
Spirit, etc. Yet that the knowledge of his inward coming is that which is the
more needful, and in the first place, as being that, by which the true and
comfortable use of his outward coming is alone sufficiently understood.

V. That the Lord JESUS according to his inward coming, is come a Light into
the world, lightning every man that comes into the world, that all through him
might believe, and by believing might have eternal life.

VI. That his coming in the inward is in a Divine and Heavenly SEED, which the
Father has given from Heaven unto every man, and has sown in the heart of
every man. In, and through which Seed, the Divine Light, Life and Power or
Virtue and Glory of Jesus Christ, is only revealed unto men in a saving way, by
the Holy Spirit.

VII. That this SEED in the hearts of unholy men, is the least of all Seeds;
but as the mind comes to be turned toward it, in faith and love, it grows up
to become greater and greater, till it be the greatest of all.

VIII. That according to the arising and growth of this Seed in men's hearts,
the Divine Light and Life, etc. of Jesus Christ comes more and more to be
revealed, and made manifest even unto the perfect day.

IX. That there is some manifestation and revelation of the Divine Light and
Life in this Heavenly and Divine Seed in the hearts and minds of the most
unholy and unrighteous, unto their Salvation, in a day or time of Visitation
given them of GOD.

X. That the nature of this Seed is so unchangeable, holy, pure, and
incorruptible, that it can admit no unclean thing to enter into it, nor unite
therewith, nor can it be defiled with any uncleanness of the spirit of man, but
works always against the uncleanness, and every unclean, unholy and
unrighteous thing in man, through that Divine Virtue and Power, that is in it,
to destroy and consume the same, and work it out of the heart and mind of man.

XI. That the manifestation, revelation, and shining of the Divine Light in
this Divine Seed in unholy men, is not of the same manner and kind, as in the
holy; for in the holy the Divine Light shines in the immediate manifestation of
the love, joy, peace, goodness and glory of God, which does (after a manner
unconceiveable to unholy men) refresh and comfort the Souls of the holy, and
does admit them to approach thereunto, and unite therewith, so as to live and
walk therein, and have the fruition thereof. But the Divine Light shines in
the unholy, but in remote manifestations of the love and mercy of God, and that
also but as it were by glimpses and flashes, and as through a vail. The
manifestation of the Divine Light in an immediate way, that is proper unto
unholy and unrighteous Souls, being that of judgment, reproof, convictions and
condemnation, the Divine Word working in them, as a Hammer, a Sword and a Fire,
even as the Refiners Fire and the Fullers Soap* for their mortification and
cleansing.

XII. Now it is fit, that in this place I should give some description of
Holiness, seeing it is improper to declare of the way of attaining unto
Holiness, and yet not to declare what Holiness is. Therefore at present
(referring the more large description of it, to what will be afterward more
fully treated of) I shall only in these few words describe it.

HOLINESS (as a man can be partaker of it) is a man's being like unto GOD, so
far as he can receive a likeness unto him, which is by receiving the Image of
God in its complete form, and having his heart, soul, mind and spirit, with the
understanding, will, affections, and all the powers thereof, according to the
capacity of each, impressed or stamped therewith. So that the whole Soul, in
all its powers answer unto this holy Image, as the wax answers unto the seal,
or as the Cloth that is put into the Diers fat, answers in color or die unto
that, in which it is dipped, which is the baptism that saves, not the putting
away the filthiness of the flesh, but the answer of a good conscience, or mind,
toward God, as aforesaid.

XIII. This Divine Image is (according to the Lord's ordinary way of working in
the hearts of his people) not found or begotten in an instant, but raised up by
degrees from the Divine Seed; the formation of which, as it requires the Divine
and Supernatural Concurrence of God as a Father, and as the principal cause and
worker, so does it also require the Concurrence of the Soul on the other hand
(so to speak) as the Mother to conceive it in its most inwards (as the Mother
conceives the Child in her Womb) which is a Divine Birth, and in Scripture is
called Christ formed within, and, the Flesh and Blood of Christ, because his
Divine Light and Spirit dwells and tabernacleth therein, and there through
conveigheth the manifestation of it unto the Soul.

XIV. Now a man's regeneration is not simply the having this Divine Image raised
and formed in him, but it is somewhat consequential thereunto; for it is by
this Image, through the mighty operation of God therein, that the Soul comes to
be regenerate: And so the regeneration of the Soul is distinguishable
therefrom, as the effect from the cause; yet where ever this Image is raised or
formed, in any measure, in a man's heart, that man in some measure
proportionable, is thereby regenerated and renewed; for the Divine Image is no
sooner formed in any measure, but it does in some measure effigiate or impress
the Soul, and infuse its pure tincture, Blood and Spirit into all its Powers,
which the Soul drinking in, it becomes assimilated or l^kened thereunto, yet
still retaining its own original essence. A very plain and clear Example
whereof we have in Cloth, which being dipped in the Diers Fat, drinks in the
tincture or die, even substantially, and yet it retains its own essence, so
that it is the same Cloth still, only has another die and color from the
tincture, which it has drunk in, and substantially got it incorporated in it
self.

XV. But before this Divine Image can be formed in the Soul, or that the Soul
can be tinctured or leavened therewith, the Soul must be cleansed and purified
from the pollution and defilement it has received from the contrary Image,
which is that of the Serpent; even as (according to the former Example) before
the Cloth can receive the die, it must be washed and made clean; also the
Image of God and of the devil, are of so contrary natures, that they cannot
live in one and the same place of the Soul, wherefore there must be some room
prepared in the Soul in its most inwards, out of which the Serpentine Image
must be expelled, before the Divine can spring up: and there must be some place
in the Soul cleansed and purified for it to be conceived in, for it cannot be
conceived nor grow, but in a clean and pure matrix or womb, according to which
doctrine it is evident, that mortification must go before regeneration, in some
measure. But I do not say, that the mortification must be total, and pass ove^
the whole Soul, and all sin and unrighteousness in it, before it attain unto
any measure of regeneration, for that is contrary unto all experience, for that
we find both the Images having some place in us for some time, but they cannot
have one and the same place to live in, because of their exceeding contrariety:
and indeed the mortification and regeneration of the Soul go on proportionably,
so that where the regeneration is but in part, it is because the mortification
is but in part, and where the mortification is become whole, there the
regeneration becomes whole also: for that which hinders the Image of God to
spring up in its whole growth and statu^^ readily and speedily, is the contrary
Image, which will let, till it be taken out of the way.

XVI. And the Divine Power and Spirit appears in the Divine SEED, and works
therein, even in the Souls of those who are wholly unholy and unrighteous, in
whom Satan's Image possesses the whole place: First to mortify some place in
the Soul, and to cleanse and purify it, and to expel the Serpents Image out
of it, that so the Divine Image may begin to be formed and conceived. The
Divine Seed therefore (through the Divine Power, which works therein) must
first destroy and consume its contrary, before it can take root, and plant it
self, and spring up in the heart, which is diligently to be observed, and of
this the Seed of God in the outward, viz. Israel after the Flesh was a type,
for before they could plant themselves in the Land of Canaan, they behoved to
destroy their enemies, which inhabited the same, and gradually as they consumed
their enemies, they planted themselves in it, and took root, till they filled
it all over, like a great tree overshaddowing the whole Land with its Branches,
and filling it with its Fruits.

I shall not add more particulars at present, being unwilling to burden the
weak understanding of a beginner with many things at the en^rance. There are
many more Doctrinal Principles, but they will come in time enough afterward.
These well known and understood will satisfy to begin with: of the truth of
which things let none imagine they can be sufficiently certified through this
declaration, or any other that can be outwardly given, only it may be an
occasion for them to observe the truth of these things, sprung up in their own
understanding, from a measure of the same Spirit, from which they are declared.

CHAP. II.
Showing,

That the Soul converting it self unto GOD in the Divine Seed within its self,
through the Influence of the Divine Power upon it, for that effect is the very
first thing that is requisite unto it, in order to its entering into the way of
Holiness.

I Say the very first thing, the Soul is to do in order to its entering into the
way of Holiness is, to convert or turn it self unto the Divine Presence of God,
and of Jesus Christ, as revealed in the Divine Seed; for this was the message
which Paul received to declare unto the Gentiles, to turn them from darkness
unto Light, and from the power of Satan unto God. So he preached God near, even
unto them, who were yet in darkness and unbelief, as among the Athenians, who
were Idolaters. Him (said he) whom ye ignorantly worship, I declare unto you,
etc. who is not far from every one of us, for in him we live, and move, and
have our being, etc. Also unto the Lycaonians, who were Idolaters, he preached
after this manner, that they should turn from their vanities unto the living
God. Now it is that, which generally passes among People, that men should turn
unto God, and that conversion is a turning unto God and unto Jesus Christ. But
that they are to turn unto him, as he does inwardly manifest and reveal himself
by his Holy Spirit in men's hearts, this they have not been instructed in, for
that generally all of them, except those called the Mysticks, deny that there
is such a thing in these days, as the Immediate Revelation of God in men's
hearts; and as for the Mysticks, though they grant that the Divine Presence
does immediately reveal it self in men's hearts, and that men are to turn in
their minds unto it, which they call Introversion; yet they deny that men are
to do this at first, as while they are polluted in their gross abominations and
lusts, to turn in unto the Divine Presence, they judge a thing both
presumptuous and vain; presumptuous, because it is altogether unsuitable and
unbecoming, that a soul polluted in its gross abominations and lusts, should
approach and draw near unto God, and vain, because though they should attempt
to do it, they will find it as impossible, as for a Bird that is tied with a
strong Cord to the Earth, to flee upward to heaven from Earth. Wherefore they
require that the Soul have attained unto some qualifications and dispositions,
which cleanse it from its gross impurities, particularly the abnegation of all
Creatures, and of its own self, before it adventure to convert or turn it self
inwards unto the Divine Presence. But this proceeds from a great mistake in
them, for that they do not judge aright of the diverse manifestations and
workings of God in the Souls of Men, according to their different states and
conditions, for though the Presence of God be one, yet it has its
manifestations, after different manners, in the unholy and unclean, and in the
holy and clean souls, as is somewhat above declared, for in the holy, he
reveals himself immediately, in great love, peace, joy, meekness, sweetness,
and beauty, and suffers the Soul to approach so near unto him* as even to
join in an union with him; after a manner unconceiveable to unholy Souls. And
indeed for unholy Souls to approach unto God, so as to find him after this
manner, I confess, were both presumptuous and vain, as aforesaid. But in the
unholy and unclean, yea, even in the worst of men, who are most averted from
God, the Lord is present in them in such a manifestation, as is not unsuitable
to his Glory, nor improper to their present conditions, whose merciful and
gracious visitation reaches toward all men in Jesus Christ, even the worst,
in a day, or time, given them of him for their conversion and turning unto God,
according to which Paul said, that God was in Christ reconciling the world unto
himself. Which manifestation of God in them, in Jesus Christ, is in wrath and
judgment, yet mixed and qualified with mercy, so that the Lord does appear in
them, in the Divine Seed, as in a Fire, not simply to consume and destroy them,
but to consume and destroy the corruptions and evils that are in them, to kill
and destroy sin in them, even that birth and body or sin and death, which is in
every unholy man, and is the Image of the Serpent and of Satan, yea, and is
that Serpent, whom the Seed of the Woman bruiseth in the head, and destroys.
For, as is formerly said, this Serpentine Image and the Image of God, cannot
live together in one place in the Soul, nor can they flourish both in one and
the same Soul, because of their enmity, for they are in continual strife,
waring against each other, and as the one loses ground, the other gains, and
on the contrary.

The first thing therefore that a man is to do, after he is convinced of the
Truth, that God in Jesus Christ, is so near him, as to be in him in a Seed, as
in fire, for his cleansing and delivering of him from this woeful Image and from
the impressions and dispositions it has wrought in him through Satan) is to
turn his Soul and mind inwards unto God, and Christ, as he does there manifest
himself. Even as the Father of the Child* which was bodily possessed with the
Devil, brought him unto Christ, that he might cast him out, so the Soul is to
come unto Christ, who is spiritually present in it, that he may cast out this
Devil out of it; for this woeful Image is a very Devil, and by it the Devil
possesses the Souls of the unholy. The Soul must not bethink with it self that
because it is so unclean and sinful, that therefore it ought not to come unto
Christ, for indeed one main end of Christ his coming into the world, is to do
good unto such, to cleanse the unclean, and to save the sinful from their sins.
Therefore let not the consideration of thy uncleanness and naughtiness prevail,
to let or hinder thee from coming* or turning inwards to him.

Perhaps the Soul may say, I do not find God or Christ in me, how then can I
turn unto him whom I cannot find? If I could once but plainly find him, I would
think it a great step. Answ. Do not thou find somewhat in thy very heart
discovering the evils and pollutions thereof in some measure? Is there nothing
in thee, that in some measure manifests thy condition to be evil and naught,
and gives thee some knowledge of it, upon which thou art made at times to say,
Oh! I am unclean, unclean and evil? Yea further, do not thou find somewhat,
secretly stirring in thy heart, and moving in thee against particular evils,
which are under thy observation, and in some measure pricking, and smiting
thee? And yet further, have thou never observed it drawing thy heart inward,
unto it self, though faintly and weakly? Also are there not times, wherein thou
can observe this to manifest it self more strongly, then at other times? Yea,
are there not times that thou find'st it lie as a burden and load upon thy very
heart? Yea, would thou not think thou feltst something in thy heart cutting
it, and making gashes therein, yea, and that as a fire burning in it, which
greatly paineth and afflicts thee, so that at such times no outward pleasures
can comfort or ease thee? Furthermore, do thou not find at times somewhat
arising as it were in the midst of thy heart, and sending forth a secret
virtue, whereby it seeks to pierce thy whole heart, and so far as it pierces
or enters, it somewhat softeneth thy heart, and works some little relenting
in thee; but because of the badness of thy heart, it is hindered from entering
so far as it essayed to do? Sure I am there is no man, however bad, but has
had some experience, more or less, of these and such like workings in him: Thou
may say, I find indeed somewhat working in my heart, after the manner as is
declared, and that frequently; but most especially when I am most quiet, and
still in mind, but I never apprehended this to be any other thing then the
light of nature checking me in my conscience, as I have been always informed
by my Teachers. But I say unto thee, therein thou have been misinformed, as in
many other particulars; for this thing that works in thee, after the
aforesaid manner, is the very Seed of God, or the Divine Seed, in which God in
Jesus Christ is really present in thee, and in, and through the Seed works in
this manner in thee, for the Salvation of thy Soul: neither ought thou to
think it so strange that he works, in thee, in such a small and weak manner
of manifestation, for this is in great part because of thy weakness, for thou
art not able to bear great and powerful workings and manifestations in this
state. And seeing that the way which the Lord takes for the saving of Souls,
is after the sort of a real generation (such as regeneration is) it is most
proper to begin it from a Seed, and it were an easy thing for the Lord to
appear in this Seed, by such manifestation of power, as on a sudden to remove
all impediments, and instantly to cause it to spring up into its full stature,
growth and proportion. But it has pleased him to do otherways, for he can
bring Glory to himself the more in the Creatures Salvation, that he begins
it, yea, and carries it on in a weak and foolish appearance to the natural
eye. Now this is it which Christ himself taught, that the Kingdom of God in
man, at first is like unto a grain of Mustard Seed, the least of all Seeds, but
after it is grown up, it becomes the greatest of all Herbs. Wherefore despise
it not, though it be a very little thing in thee, for as little as it is, it is
the Kingdom of God, for God and Christ is present in it, and manifests his
Power therein, as a King does in his Kingdom. And because the Seed is little,
therefore the Power of God works but in little and small manifestations, to
bear a proportion unto the Seed, and according to the growth and increase of
the Seed, by the same proportion the Divine Power becomes greater and greater
in its manifestation. But how small and mean soever the working of the Divine
Power in this little Seed does appear, yet it is abundantly sufficient to begin
the work of thy Salvation, and still where more power and more powerful working
from God, is needful to carry on this work, it will be seasonably afforded.

But a man may readily object, that he does essay to convert or turn himself
unto God, but cannot get it done, because of his weakness and impotency,
finding himself bound, as with a strong Iron Chain, yea, with many Chains,
which does so avert and hold him back, that he cannot convert himself. Answ. To
require any man to convert himself, as by himself, without power given him from
God for that effect, were to lay a burden upon the Soul, too grievous to be
born; but indeed the Lord, who is present in this little Seed, sends forth at
times, yea, very frequently, some secret Divine influence and virtue upon the
Soul, through the Seed, to enable it to convert or turn unto him, and he
touches the bonds and fetters, in which it is bound, at times, and shakes
them off, so far, that the Soul may turn unto God; yea, the Lord is the chief
and principal Worker here, and man but the instrumental. So that the Soul its
converting it self, is through the Lord's converting it, that is to say,
inclining it, by a Divine and gracious touch, and influence upon its will, to
convert; and in a manner I may call it, upon the Souls part, rather a suffering
it self to be turned by the Lord, according to these words, in the Scripture,
Turn thou me, and I shall be turned. But now many, when the Lord touches them,
and by his touch infuseth a certain secret virtue, sufficient to turn them, or
whereby they may turn, yea, when he draws and pulls them very sensibly, do
resist and continue in their aversion, and of such the Scriptures say, they
draw back, and that they resist the Truth, and resist the Holy Ghost, whose
damnation is just, seeing he would have healed them, but they refused. Be not
therefore discouraged, or driven into despair, because thou find'st such
weakness and inability to convert thy Soul unto God, as aforesaid; nor yet
because thou find'st so little virtue or power administered unto thee, from the
Divine influence, for thy enabling; for, by what is from the Lord administered
unto thee, it is possible for thee, to convert, though at first, and for a
considerable time afterward it will be difficult, for strait is the gate, and
narrow is the way, that leads unto life.

This converting the Soul, after the manner declared, unto the Divine Presence,
is the true faith and believing in God and Christ, so much required in
Scripture, in order unto Salvation; which is the Soul's coming unto God and
Christ, as he said, Come unto me, etc. and the Soul's taking hold of him and
cleaving unto him. And indeed the Latin word Credo does significantly express
it, which is as much as to say, A giving the heart unto God. And how does a man
give his heart unto him, but by turning it toward him? Which conversion, or
believing, is not simply of one power of the Soul, but of both, viz. the
understanding and will, yea, of the whole Soul, with all its powers, when the
conversion is through and total.

CHAP. III.
Showing,

How the Soul ought to persist and continue in its Conversion toward God and
Christ: and of the effects, which follow at first thereupon: as also of the
inward trials and troubles it usually meets with therein.

NOw after the Soul has got it self converted or turned inwards, by the Divine
influence and assistance, unto the Divine Seed, and to God and Christ present
therein; then it is to be careful that it persist and continue in its
conversion: and the LORD, who by his Divine Grace has enabled it to convert
after the former manner, does, and will also enable it to persevere therein.

For it is in the Soul's persisting and continuing in its conversion, and
application unto the Divine Word, Light, and Life in the Divine Seed, that it
comes to receive and be partaker of the blessed effects thereof. An outward
example whereof we have very plain in our holding any thing to the Fire, which
if suddenly we remove again, it scarce produces any effect in it: as if we
would purify or refine any Metal from its dross, by the Fire, we must not only
apply it intimately to the Fire, but hold it in it a good time, that it may
melt, and the dross may separate from it. So thou must not only turn thy Soul
to this Fire of God in thee, but must persist and continue in so doing, and by
that means thou will quickly begin to be a partaker of its blessed effects.

Some of which effects, as they follow at first upon the Soul's converting unto
this Divine Principle, I find it with me to mention.

As first: Thou will by thy conversion thereunto, receive a more clear and full
convincement and discovery of thy sins, and sinful polluted nature, then
formerly; so that thou will come to see sin to be exceeding sinful, and how
thou art compassed about with it, as with a thick cloud, which hinders thee
from enjoying the sweet and comfortable presence of God; yea, thou will come to
feel thy poor Soul imbodied or incorporated in a very body of sin, having many
members, and how near and dear they are unto thee, some as a right Eye, some as
a right Hand, etc. Then thou will know that such things are sins, which have
place in thee, more than by any words, even of Scripture; for the manifestation
of the Spirit and Light of Christ in the little Seed, will greatly convince
thee thereof, and let thee see thy sins, and the nature or root that brings
them forth, in their monstrous and hellish forms and shapes.

II. Thou will also feel and perceive how the displeasure, wrath and
indignation of God, is against every sin in thee, even all ungodliness and
unrighteousness, the whole body of it, with all its members, root, and fruit
and branches: and how also the wrath of God is against men, because of sin, to
which they are joined. And so thou will find how all men, in a sinful and
unrenewed condition are miserable, as being under the wrath and displeasure of
God, and how sin is the root and fountain of the whole misery of man, and how
man stands before God, in a state of judgment and condemnation while in sin,
imbodied and drowned in it; as it were over head and ears.

III. Thou will have occasion to observe the mercy of the Lord, in the midst of
all this wrath and judgment, after a wonderful manner, which will raise in thy
mind amazing and astonishing thoughts, whereby, thou will wonder and admire,
that thou art not consumed in the midst of all this wrath: yea, then thou will
be made to see somewhat like that of Moses, how the Fire burnt in the B^sh, and
it was not consumed.

IV. Thou will find that this fire is only sent down from Heaven to burn and
consume that beastly and sinful nature, wherewith thou art inwardly clothed as
with a body; and that the fruit of all this burning and kindling is to take
away thy sin, and purge away thy filthiness and dross.

V. And so as thou remainest and continuest introverted, or converted toward
that Divine Principle, aforesaid, thou will find it as a Sword, a Fire, and a
Hammer, in thee, knocking down, and killing and consuming this body of sin with
its members; yea, a flame will issue forth from it, and will enter into the
body of sin, killing and burning so far as it enters.

VI. By the operation of this Heavenly Fire thou will find a very sensible and
grievous pain in thy inward man, as verily, as if the outward fire were burning
in thy outward body. So thou may conceive how thou would be affected, if
the tenderest and most sensible part of thy outward body were held close unto a
burning flame; even such sensible and grievous pain will thou find inwardly:
for indeed thy Soul dwells as really in the body of sin, and is united with
it, as it does in the outward body. Therefore it is sensible of whatever
hurts it, and finds pain, till it have put it off, and then it has no more
sympathy with it.

VII. Great fear and terror will take hold upon thee, because of these things,
which thou will have occasion inwardly to observe, the like whereof before thou
were never acquainted with; for this does answer unto the ministration of the
Law by Moses upon Mount Sinai, where the appearance of God on the top of a
Mountain was dreadful, in clouds, and darkness, and fire and the sound of a
Trumpet, and a Voice, that did shake the earth, where the sight was so
terrible, that Moses said, I exceedingly fear and quake. For all these things
had a signification of the inward ministration of the Spirit, in its first
workings in men's hearts. Hence are these quakings and tremblings, which are
witnessed to come upon many, through the inward dread and terror, which
arises in them, through the workings of the Spirit of God upon them in this
state and condition. Now the fear and terror is a most certain and infallible
effect, in all, who do truly convert or turn in their minds unto the appearance
of God in them, as aforesaid. But as for the bodily tremblings, some may have
them in a great measure, others in a less, and some have none at all, so as to
fall under outward observation, and yet the work of God in them may be as real
and true, as in others, who have them most. For it is much the same with bodily
tremblings, as tears, some will be made to shed tears in abundance, others but
little, and others perhaps none at all, where the work may be real, even as
much as where they are most abundant.

VIII. Also this Heavenly and Divine fire, as thou continuest in the
application of thy mind and heart unto it, will kindle in thee some beginnings
of true and real repentance toward God; for even as the fire melts the Wax,
and softneth it, and makes it to run and flow, so will this Divine fire melt
and soften thy heart into a true tenderness, and thou will find a true sorrow
and grief in thee to arise, because of thy degeneration from God. Also thou will even loath and abhor thy self in the presence of God, and count thy self
most unworthy of his mercy and favor, yea thou will judge and condemn thy
self, because of thy sins and sinful nature, so as to reckon the most grievous
afflictions and punishments from the Lord (should he inflict them upon thee) to
be less, than thy deservings. Also thou will become humble in thy own sight,
and be apt to judge thy self as bad, or worse than any* yea thou will be
greatly ashamed of thy self, seeing and beholding thy self imbodied in such a
monstrous and filthy body, as the body of sin is. Furthermore, thou will be
made even to hate sin in its body and members, root and fruit, as a most vile
and abominable thing, so that an indignation will rise in thee against it, and
the very sins, which have been dear and pleasant unto thee, as thy right eye
and right hand, thou will willingly devote them, and give them up unto the
devouring Flames of this Heavenly fire, and sacrifice them before the Lord, as
a sacrifice of a burnt offering. As I remember it is reported of one of the
Martyrs, who having shrunk from his Testimony, and afterward recovered
strength to own it, and so was condemned to be burnt, he stretched forth his
right hand (which had subscribed some Paper against the Truth) and with a
certain holy indignation thrust it into the fire. So thou will even find to do
the same with thy lusts, which the Apostle calls the members upon Earth, to
devote and give them up to the fire, that they may be mortified and consumed,
sparing none of them more than another: yea and some tender breathings and
desires will arise in thee toward the Lord, that he may yet more discover and
pursue Iniquity in thy heart, and kill it, sparing nothing, no not a hoof; yea
thou will even desire to be dissolved, and freed from the whole body of sin,
with all its members, saying in thy heart, Miserable man that I am, who shall
deliver me, etc. And thus thou will find in thee some beginnings of a true
aversion from sin, so that thou will witness a change both in thy judgment and
will, in relation to sin, so as to have contrary thoughts of it to what thou
had formerly, and thy affections to run and flow in another path and channel
than formerly.

IX. Also thou will begin to find some true and real beginnings of
mortification, or of a spiritual death unto sin, whereas thy heart was formerly
wholly filled with sin, which oppressed and burdened the Divine Seed, and
hindered it to conceive, or bud in thee; thou will now begin to find some
little and small emptyness in thy heart, even in the most inwards of it, called
by some the fund of the Soul, that is to say, the ground or bottom of it, and
there will be some little room or place in thy heart mortified and purified,
through the operation of the power of God in the Divine Seed, which, through
its mortification and purification from sin, becomes a fit and prepared matrix
or womb for the Divine Seed to conceive and bud therein, an to receive some
formation. For, as is said, the Seed cannot conceive but in a pure matrix and
womb. Indeed it may be as a fire, and is so in that part of the heart, which is
unclean, but it can never grow, bud or conceive in it as a plant, till it be
cleansed. Therefore is it, that it works as a fire in the heart, as
aforesaid, to the end it may prepare some place for it self to take root in,
and therein to bud and conceive, that it may spring up and blossom, and bring
forth its precious fruit.

X. And as the heart and mind persisteth in its conversion aforesaid, there
will be by this time, some tender buds of the Divine and Holy Seed appearing,
so far as way is made for them, through the purification or mortification
aforesaid, and some real and true beginnings not only of some, but of all
Christian Virtues will appear, such as of love, joy, peace, gentleness,
meekness, patience, temperance, etc. and other fruits of the Spirit; for even
as it is frequently in natural operations, so in this spiritual it is also,
that after the destruction of one thing, immediately follows the generation
of another, life hastening as swiftly after death as possibly as can be
conceived, so that no distance or space of time is admitted betwixt them.

Thus I have briefly pointed at diverse good and precious effects, which do
follow upon the Souls converting unto the Divine Presence, and the Light and
Power thereof in the Holy Seed, and upon its continuing or abiding therein. If
there be any other not expressly mentioned, they may be reduced unto them, or
implicitly understood in them, which are particularly mentioned; of all which
the Soul must expect at first, yea and for some considerable time afterward,
but some certain beginnings, which will increase and become more and more
observable, according unto its continuance in the conversion aforesaid.

And much of all these effects, excepting somewhat as to the latter, do answer
rather unto the ministration of the Law, than of the Gospel, yet we must not
too nicely or subtly distinguish them, far less divide them, for the
ministration of the Law in the Spirit is never administered in that rigor or
severity by the Lord, unto men, in order to their Salvation, but it has
somewhat more or less of the Gospel mixed with it, even as in the midst of
wrath he remembers mercy: and so as Law and Gospel, Judgment and Mercy are
mixed and complicated together, in like manner the effects are mixed also,
partaking of both, but most of the former at first, and for some considerable
time following.

Now these and such like effects, as do follow upon the Souls first converting
unto God, in the Divine Seed, we do usually comprehend under this term the work
of Judgment. And as the Spirit of the LORD has its diverse names, according to
its diverse workings, so in this it is called the Spirit of Judgment and of
Burning, as in Isa. 4.4. Others also not unfitly (if rightly understood) have
called it the work of the Law, and Legal ministration in Spirit: also it may be
called Repentance, or the baptism of repentance in Spirit and by Fire. And tho
I have mostly insisted upon comparing the operation of the Spirit in this
administration, unto fire, which similitude is most used in Scripture, yet it
is not to exclude other resemblances, as that of Water and of Soap, mentioned
also in Scripture: and it is also likened unto that of a Hammer and Sword, and
that also of a Cross very significantly: in relation to which term, the work of
the Spirit here is fitly called a crucifiction or being crucified, often also
used in Scripture; and Mortification, which, tho it takes its beginning from
the Law, yet is consummated or perfected by the Gospel.

As touching the inward trials or troubles, the Soul usually meets with, in
this state, they are diverse, proceeding partly from its own weakness, partly
from its corruptions, and partly from Satan. First, from its own Weakness, for
the Soul entering into a new way, it knew nothing of formerly, and meeting with
many strange and wonderful things, with which it was never acquainted
heretofore, cannot but occasion great inward trials and troubles unto it, even
as if in the outward a man should be brought unto some violent bodily death, as
Burning, or Crucifying, etc. Yea, it is represented in the Scripture, under
such terms, as of the Suns losing his light, the Moons becoming black, the
Stars falling from Heaven, the Earth shaking, and such like dreadful and
astonishing things. 2. From its corruptions, which beginning to be assaulted
and set upon, for their destruction, will combine all their forces, to avert
and turn back the Soul from its progress in this new way: also they will call
in for the aid and assistance of flesh and blood, which in its corrupt state is
a very great impediment to the poor Soul in this way, whereof flesh and blood
has no liking at all, for it perceives it will be greatly straightened and
restrained from its wonted liberty it rrceived by sin and corruption, and put
to endure great and many hardships, through the Souls entering into the way of
mortification and holiness. 3. From Satan, who, as the strong man, has formerly
kept the house in peace, and now another coming to cast him out, he will use
many methods and ways with the Soul, to turn it aside and divert it from it is
new way, that he may keep his place in it; for it is as torment to him to be
cast out, and lose his usurped possession. He will suggest unto the Soul the
novelty of its way, the difficulty of it, and how few take such a course: Also
he will allege unto it, that it may get to Heaven, by easier means; yea he
will endeavor to persuade the poor Soul, that the Light within is but some
fancy or Imagination, or at best some insufficient thing, and that the very
works the Soul feels begun in it, by and through the Power of that Light, are
but melancholic imaginations, and that the fire the Soul finds kindled in it,
is but the heat of the fancy, or sparks of its own kindling: or if he cannot
prevail that way, but that the Soul still persists in its conversion unto this
Sacred and Divine fire, then especially, when he perceives that the Souls feels
it great force, he will be tempting to despair, telling it that God has kindled
this fire in it, for its utter destruction and torment. And if he cannot
prevail thus, then he will tempt it with hard thoughts of God, as if the Lord
were too severe and rigid, in using such ways with it. Also he will endeavor
to stir up in it impatience, grudging and fretting, weariness and discontent,
and a longing to return unto the fleshpots of Egypt, even to its former evil
and licentious way of life in sin. These and many such like troubles and trials
will the poor Soul meet with, besides many outward occasions from the World,
both of pleasures and afflictions, to divert it and turn it aside from its
persisting in its conversion unto God, in the Divine Seed. By reason of these
and such like inward trials and troubles, diverse after some measure of a real
and true application and conversion of their minds unto God and Christ in the
Divine Seed, have turned back again, and not continued in their begun
conversion, even like some unwise and cowardly patients, who at first give
themselves up unto the Physian, to be lanced and tented and scarrified, but
afterward finding the pain and anxiety thereof, shrink back and choose rather
to remain in their wounds and distempers, though it should cost them the losing
of their life, then endure a little trouble and pain for their cure. Therefore
it is said, in relation to this, Mal. c. 3. v. 2. Who may abide the day of his
coming, and who shall stand when he appears, for he shall be as the refiners
fire and fullers Soap? Which words do import, that some may receive his first
appearance, but not abide it, nor stand it out, nor endure unto the end of the
fiery trial, which comes by it; for to abide and to stand are words signifying
continuance and persisting.

But notwithstanding all these things, thou must persist and continue therein,
with a stout and bold resolution, which will be given thee of the Lord, if thou
be not wanting on thy part to receive it, and if thou persist not, the work of
thy Salvation will be stopped. It is much better for thee to endure these inward
trials and difficulties, then to lose thy own Soul, and be cast into endless
torment hereafter for thy negligence and carnal ease: better thou go maimed
into Heaven, losing a right eye, a right hand, then that thy whole body should
go into Hell fire. The cure is worthy all the pain and much more: A woman when
she is in travail has sorrow and pain, but after she has brought forth her
Man-child, she remembers it no more, for her gladness swalloweth it up, so
that she does not rue nor repent of her Travel and Labor she endured.

Now methinks I (as it were) hear some poor souls objecting after this manner,
which indeed has been of the objection of my own heart, and I know also of
others. Oh! (say they) that we could find this Divine fire kindled in us for
the consumption of our sins, and the purification of our Souls therefrom; we
are so weary of sin, and have such a desire to be rid of it, that we would
rejoice with great joy, to feel this sacred fire burning in us, tho it should
pain us, as if our outward bodies were cast alive into outward flames! We find
(say they) somewhat as Light from God in our hearts, letting us see many vile
and abominable things in them, but as for this fire, we do not as yet find it!
To which I Answer, that ye find that which discovers and makes manifest
these evils in your hearts, is matter of encouragement, for that is indeed the
true Light, Ephesians. 5.13. Joh. 3.20. Now turn in or convert your minds unto it,
and persist therein, as aforesaid, and ye shall find in due time that this
Light shall become a fire in you, according to these words, which I may well
apply at least by way of Analogy unto this matter, Isa. 10.17. And the Light of
Israel shall be for a fire, and his Holy One for a flame, and it shall burn and
destroy his thorns and his briars in one day. For this self same Light of God,
which ye find in your hearts, has in it the virtue and property of fire, no
less than of Light, yea much more at first, and for a good time following: but
the reason why ye do not find its operation of fire to burn and consume the
evils in your hearts, as ye find that of Light to discover them, is, because
your hearts are not so nearly and intimately applied and converted thereunto,
as is requisite, even as it is in relation to the outward fire, for if we stand
at a distance from it, and but look to it afar off, it will only make us
perceive its light, so as to give us a discovery of things, but we will know
nothing of its fieriness, more than if it were not fire at all; but if we come
nearer unto it, so as to hold our hand or any other member of our body, nigh
unto it, we will then find it to be a fire, and be very sensible of its fiery
operation, so that if we take not away the member applied, the fire will kindle
in it, and consume it, which is a plain and fit example of this thing, to
represent it by. Therefore it thou would find this Divine Principle, and the
appearance of GOD and of CHRIST therein, to be as a fire in thee, turn in thy
mind and heart unto it yet more nearly and intimately, and persist therein, and
thou will find it not only to be in thee a shining Light, but a burning Light
also, yea at first and for some time following, rather burning than shining.
Wherefore turning in and converting not only thy understanding unto it, but thy
will and affections; thou will find its Power, even to kill and destroy the
evils of thy heart, no less than to discover them, and hereby thou will
receive, not only an informed judgment and understanding, but a reformed will
and affections. And this Divine Principle will work mightily in thee, to work
out the errors, as well out of thy will, as out of thy judgment, for the
errors are great in both. And now many are greatly deficient in this matter,
who do somewhat apply their understanding unto the Divine Light, and thereby
they receive some discoveries of things, far beyond others, but they do not
apply their wills unto it, and so they remain as bad and evil in heart, as the
most ignorant, yea many times they are worse, for what they know naturally as
brute beasts, they corrupt themselves therein, these are they who hold the
Truth in unrighteousness, more then any others, they imprison it in their
understandings, but will not permit it to sink down into their hearts, and
diffuse it self into their wills and affections. These are they also, of whom
the Apostle speaks, who receive not the Truth in Love: they would have it to
shine in their heads, but cannot endure it should burn and diffuse its sacred
flames in their hearts, yet the knowledge of all such persons, though even from
the openings of the Principle of Truth, is not the solid, substantial, pure
knowledge, which those have, who receive this Divine Principle into their
hearts, and suffer it to diffuse it self into their wills and affections, as
aforesaid, for the solid, substantial and holy knowledge is only received from
the Light of that Life, which is seated and implanted in the most inwards of
the will and affections, and from thence diffuseth it self into all the powers
of the Soul.

CHAP. IV.
Showing

How the Soul, after its converting unto God and Jesus Christ in the Divine
Seed, must, in its persisting and continuance therein, stand in great
passi^eness, stillness and quietness, bearing and forbearing, before it enter
upon its operative exercises.

I Say the Soul, after its first converting unto the Divine Presence in the
Divine Seed, must, in its persisting and continuance therein, stand in great
passiveness, stilness or qu^terness (otherwise called Silence) for that its
place, at present, is more to be passive than active, yea, excepting only its
simple act, or acts of Conversion, for sometime, as much as possibly it can, to
be wholly passive. The reason of which is very evident and demonstrative, as I
do thus make appear: If it would be active, and give it self unto operative
exercises, as to matters of Holiness and Religion, it must first be somewhat
delivered and freed from the positive impediments and lets, which hinder all
such actions and operative exercises, which belong, or pertain unto Holiness.
2. It must be clothed or endued with such a power, as whereby, it is
impossible for it, in some measure, more or less, to perform them, as for
example, I cannot perform the operations of sense, but I must be endued with
the ^ensual powers, as I cannot see, but I must be endued with the power of
seeing, also I cannot walk, or go but I must be endued with the loco-motive
^aculty or power, without which also I can not move my hands to write, or do
any other bodily occupation; also without the power of speech I cannot use my
tongue, to express or declare my mind: Moreover, I cannot exercise my self in
operative acts of Reason, unless I be endued with the power of Reason: Hence it
is, that a tree cannot perform the sensual operations of a beast, because it
has only the life of vegetation, and not of sensation: therefore, tho by its
growth it can shoot upwards, from the vegetable life, yet it cannot remove its
whole body from the place it stands in, for that it wants the sensual life and
loco-motive power. Again, among these creatures, who are endued with the
sensitive and loco-motive powers, we find a great difference, as to their
motions, and bodily exercises; some are beasts, which go upon all four, and
some creep upon the belly; others are Fowls flying in the Air, and others are
Fishes swimming in the Sea and Rivers. Now, tho the Beasts, such as the Horse
and Ass, can move upon four, and run with a good pace, yet they cannot fly, as
the Fowls of the Air: neither can the Fishes move upon dry Land? and we would
judge it a most unnatural and ridiculous thing, to observe a Horse essaying to
mount up into the Air, and Fly like a Fowl, or a Fish to move on dry land: the
reason of all which, is, because these motions are of different kinds, and
proceed from different powers of the sensual life, and require different
organs, for their performing, as the Fowl its wings, the Fish its fins or
scales, etc. Beasts their four feet or legs. Furthermore, a Beast cannot
perform the natural operations of Man, even as a natural man, such as to build,
plant, write, speak, discourse, for these are the operations proceeding from
the reasonable power, which beasts want. Now as to the other part, to clear it
also by example, Suppose I have the locomotive power, and organs, yet if there
be such strong impediments, as do universally hinder either the one, or the
other, I cannot move, as if the body were in some Lethargy, or Swarf, or
universal Gout, which stops the power of motion, or if the power were free, yet
if some external impediment be on the organ, as the hands, or feet bound with
fetters, they cannot move, etc. I have the more fully insisted on these
examples, because they do very pertinently hold forth the thing in hand, for
indeed as impossible as it is for a man to perform the works and operations of
Holiness, without he be endued and clothed with the life and power of
holiness, and receive the organs requisite thereunto, as it is for a tree to
walk, or an horse to fly like an eagle, or a fish to run upon dry land, or for
a brute to understand and discourse the things of reason, like a man: for the
life and power of holiness stands in a region above the life of the natural
reason and the natural powers of manhood, as much i^ not more, as the life and
power of natural reason and manhood stands in a region above the sensual
life and powers of brutes. Now man in his natural, or unrenewed, or
unregenerate state, does not live the life of holiness, is but a natural man,
and not a Saint. Therefore it is as impossible for him, to do the works of a
Saint, as it is for a beast to do the works of a man. Indeed a natural and
unrenewed man may counterfeit the works of the Saints, speak and do something
like them, as to outward appearance, but they cannot truly perform; there is as
great a difference betwixt the actions and motions of the one and the other, as
betwixt the flight of a living Dove, which comes from a principle of life in
her, and the flight of that Mechanical dove of Architas, which he is reported
to have made fly, from some inward Mechanic springs and devices very
artificially composed: The motion of the one being living and natural, and that
of the other dead and artificial: So it is, as to the Motions and works of the
Saints, and those who are not Saints; the Saints works and motions are living,
and do savor of that holy and precious Life, which produces them, but the
motions and works of the unholy and unrenewed, are dead, having no savor, nor
virtue of the holy life in them. Every man acts, according to that principle
and power of Life, with which he is endued; ^o the holy man acts from the
power and life of holiness, which endueth and cloatheth him, and puts a seal
or impression of it self upon every work, more or less, which proceeds
therefrom, that he, which has the spiritual eye, can read, without any
difficulty; but the unholy man, the life and power of unholiness enduing and
clothing him, and being predominant over all in him, all his works and
operative exercises are unholy, and have their seal and impression also;
UNHOLINESS is written in great lette^s upon them all, let them Preach, Pray,
Confess, or do any other work, as to Religion, all is unholy and unclean, and
so are neither accepted of God, nor profitable to themselves, nor any other.

Yea, they are so far from being profitable unto him or them, who use them,
that they are a great hurt and impediment, which will let them from their
entrance into a holy life, or making progress therein; for whatever works of
that kind they produce, its from that principle, life and spirit, which is
contrary unto the Principle of God, and therefore choaks and burdens it: also
the Soul being so inwardly converted to this evil principle, through its
workings thereby and therefrom, cannot so convert it self, or persist in its
conversion, till it come to passiveness, or forbearance.

So from all this i^ is manifest, that the Soul ought to be passive, and
forbear its workings, and operative exercises, until, at least through its
conversion unto the Divine Presence in the Divine Seed, and i^s cont^nuance
therein for some time, it come to be endued and clothed with the power and
life of Holiness in some measure, which it drinks in from these Divine
touches of God and Christ present in it, in the Divine S^^d, as it abides in
its conversion thereu^^o, even as the needle, by its being touched by the
Lodestone, and being for some time applied thereunto, drinks in a Magnetic
power, and virtue, whereby it moves toward the North, and tho by some violence
it should be moved out of its line, it returns to it again, through the
innate i^clination begot in it, by the virtue it has drunk in from the
Lodestone, wherewith it was touched.

Now such is the state of the Soul, before it has drunk in this virtue and
power of an holy life, from the Divine Presence in the Divine Seed in it, that
it not only wants altogether these powers, whereby it can move in holy actions,
but it is also clothed with many powers of a contrary life, which in no wise
would permit it to move truly in any holy action, tho we could suppose it
otherwise to have both the powers and organs requisite thereunto. There is a
body of sin and death, with many members, which hang upon it, and cover it all
over, and lies so heavy upon it, even as so many talents of lead, that it
cannot move in holy actions, more than a body, that has an hundred stone
weight of Iron, loading it, can walk: indeed with these weights of sin it can
move swiftly and vigorously in unholy actions and exercises; also it can use
Legerdemain, and by hypocritical tricks and knacks, counterfeit holy actions,
but it cannot perform them by any means, till it begin to receive some measure
of deliverance from these powers of sin, which hold it in bondage; its Tongue
is bound, that it cannot speak the holy language, so is its heart, that it
cannot meditate or conceive holy thoughts, nor exercise it self in these
operative exercises of the will and affections, which holy Souls have power to
do.

Now in the Souls being thus passive and quiet, standing still in a cessation
from all its operativeness, but simply persisting in its conversion, the Divine
fire receives a great opportunity more and more to enkindle it self in the
Soul* and so to kill and consume the lusts and evils, that are in it, for by
its activeness and operative exercises it quenches this Divine Fire, and
hinders it to burn, and by its doings and workings, it is like unto a man,
who coming unto a Chyrurgion, to get some infectious member of his body cut
off, when the Chyrurgion comes to cut off the member, or grate it off with his
Tool, be it a Leg, or an Arm, should with all his power struggle and work to
resist the man he comes unto for his cure, whereas he should be passive and
still, and busied in nothing, but in holding the infectious Member steadily and
stoutly unto the Chyrurgions hand, bearing patiently the pain of the Cure, and
forbearing all these things, which do any ways hinder its more speedy
accomplishment. So should thou come before the Lord, and convert or turn thy
infectious Members of sin, which hang upon thee, toward the LORD's hand, and
arm of power revealed in thee, to destroy them, yea thou should stand as
passively, and receive the stroke, as the condemned person, to have his head
cut off, stands, or applies himself quietly, without wrangling, or moving,
to receive the blow: and it will be a great happiness for thee, so to be killed
and slain by the Lord, for if he kill thee* it is but as unto sin, which
separateth thee from enjoying him, that he may make thee alive unto holiness,
so as to live in him, and with him, in blessedness everlasting.

Besides, the Souls being so operative does not only weaken, and quench the
Divine fire, that is ki^dled in it, for its mortification, but does also
strengthen the life of sin and unrighteousness, for even as the fire goes out,
if it be hindered from its motion, and the life of any thing dies, if it be not
suffered to breath, or perform its vital actions, but if it have scope and
liberty to act and move, it gathers strength, so the life of sin is greatly
strengthened by its being permitted to act, for its actions are like unto the
pouring of Oil upon a flame, which causes it to burn more vehemently. Would
thou have therefore this unholy fire to be extinguished in thee, then keep Oil
from it, that is to say, keep thy self from thy operative excesses, as
aforesaid, which, in this thy present state, are but the works of the unholy
life and power, the holy life not yet being formed or begotten in thee. Behold
how a fowl keeps it self up in the air, by its motion, and waving of its wings,
whereas, if it ceased to work, and wave, as it does, it would suddenly fall
down to the earth, or water. Now thy thinkings and willings and doings keep
thee aloft in that unholy and impure air, where Satan has dominion, cease but
from them, and as the bird falls down, so thou should find thy self, after
a wonderful manner, to sink, and fall out of that element, thou were in, into
another, even into a river of living water, which kills every unclean thing,
but afterward reviveth and quickens it again, with a pure and holy life; by
which River I understand the Divine Power and Spirit, that is nearer unto thee,
then the air, thou breathst in, but because of thy impurity at present, thou
can not enjoy the sweetness and glory thereof; thou must first fall into it,
and die ere thou can live.

But perhaps some may say, Is not Conversion a being operative, how then do
thou require us to convert, and cease from being operative?

The answer to this is plain, for the conversion of the Soul to this Divine
fire and Principle in it, is so simple and so little operative upon the Souls
part, that it is rather a being (so to speak) passive, then active: and if it
offend, or seem harsh unto any, that I bid them convert, in the Active Mood,
then it may be converted into the Passive, as Peter said unto the Jews, Be
converted, says he; so I say, I thou can not convert thy self, be converted,
or suffer the Divine Power to convert thee unto it self; and whether the first
step of conversion be active, or passive, or whether most of the two, this is
certain, that by the touch and attract of the Divine Power upon any Soul, were
it never so impotent and lame, it is possible for it, to convert or turn
thereunto, and may be able to convert it self, by such a simple act, by the
Divine and gracious touch, and yet at that present not able for any other acts.

The example of the needle and the loadstone will here be of use, for though
the needle, before it be touched by the loadstone, cannot direct or move it
self, toward the pole, albeit being influenced by the stone, it be brought
near unto it, yet in virtue of that influence it can convert it self unto the
stone.

Thou may perhaps say, It does not convert it self, but is by the lodestone
drawn or attracted to it.

But be it so, the matter is not much: for whether it be said, that, the Soul
in the first step of its conversion, does not actively convert, but is
converted by the Divine touch or influence: o^ that she is both passive and
active, in that step; Passive as being touched or influenced by the Divine
Grace; Active as receiving and drinking it in, and so may be understood to have
that inclination begot in it, by which it can actively convert or turn it self
unto God. The matter, I say, is not much, for the Children of Light have large
experience of it, that they find an ability given them many times, to perform
simple acts of conversion, when they are not able to do others, as to speak, or
pray, or meditate divinely, or spiritually; yea when we find an inability, as
to these things, and some impediment in our way, or any hurt or blemish, by
converting or turning in our minds unto the Divine Power, we will find our
strength renewed, and ability given us to do these things, which formerly we
could not, and the impediments removed, and the hurt or bruise taken away, and
so in like manner proportionably, it may be with beginners.

Again, it may be objected, that the Soul would willingly come unto this
passiveness and forbearance and silence of mind, but it cannot at^ain unto it,
the powers of nature and sin so strongly set it upon working.

Answ. Indeed the difficulty is great, because both the powers of nature and
sin work strongly, and join their forces together unto acting and doing; and
besides, nature is so unacquainted with such a thing, that it is very impatient
of it, yet, I say, it is not impossible, and if thou do rightly perform the
simple acts of conversion, turning thy mind still nearer and nearer unto the
Divine Prefence in the Holy and Divine Seed, thou will find by degrees thy
heart to come into this passiveness and forbearance, and to continue or persist
therein for a time.

CHAP. V.
Showing,

How the Soul, after its Conversion unto GOD, and continuance therein, in
passiveness and forbearance, for some small time, becomes a partaker of the
Holy and Divine Life, and the Powers thereof, in some measure, through some
beginnings of a Spiritual Death and Regeneration, by which it attaineth unto
some measure of union with God and Christ, and thereby is put in some capacity
for operative exercises of Holiness, unto which it ought to apply; and that any
other way of entering upon these exercises is but freigned and hypocritical.

[ OPerari sequitur esse, that is to say] Working follows being, is a maxim
in Naturals; it holds as much in Spirituals. So that, before a man can do the
works of ^olines^, he must be a partaker of the Life and Power of Holiness, and
that not in a notion, or imagination, but in substance, or being: And before
that a man can work his works in God, he must have a being in God, in some
measure, through his attaining an union with him; for even as the body cannot
cooperate with the Soul, in natural actions, unless it be a partaker of the
Soul's Life, and be in union with it, so nor can the Soul cooperate with God,
in spiritual and holy actions, till it be a partaker of his Life, and attain
unto some union with him.

Now I have showed above, that the Soul, through its converting unto God, and
continuance therein, in passiveness and forbearance, as aforesaid, were it but
for a very small time, becomes a partaker of some beginnings of a spiritual
Death and Regeneration. For, when the Soul converteth unto God, and Christ, in
the Divine Seed, and persisteth, were it but for a little, therein it beginning
to feel the Divine fire to inkindle in it in the Divine Seed, which mortifieth
and purifieth some place in the heart, whereby it becomes a fit matrix or womb
for the Divine Seed, to take root in and for to spring up, and p^t forth some
tender buds and beginnings of a Holy and Spiritual Life, which do no sooner
appear, but they do impress and endue the Soul, in some measure, with their
powers and virtues, by which it is put in some capacity for operative exercises
of Holiness, unto which it ought to apply.

It is generally granted, that Faith is, as it were the Root of all holy and
spiritual actions; and the Scriptures do hold it forth plainly that, Faith or
believing is the first step unto a holy life, and the very entrance thereinto,
and that Fa^^h, by a natural order, is to go before Works, for for without
Faith it is impossible to please God, though men should do never so many
things; for it is Faith, which, drawing Spirit and Life from God, infuseth the
same into works, which makes them living: and therefore, as the Apostle James
said, -- Faith without works is dead, so it is no less true, works without
faith are dead. Faith without works is dead, because, if it want works, it is
an infallible sign, that it is but a dead and false faith, for the true and
living faith is operative and working, and cannot forbear, but it must be
breathing forth its life in holy actions. Works without ^aith are dead, because
it is faith, which, drawing life from God, infuseth it into them: and, as I
have showed above, this faith is the Soul's converting or turning unto God,
through the Divine and gracious touch and influence of the Spirit of God upon
it, in the Divine Seed, by which a man comes to be partaker of Holiness and
Right^ousness; according to which the ungodly are said to be justified, not by
working, but by believing, which is to be understood unquestionably of these
works, which men endeavor and go about to perform, in the natural and
unconverted state, whereby they seek to work themselves into holiness, which is
impossible, for that were to invert the very order of Nature, both in Naturals
and Spirituals, which sets the being of a thing before its operation, but
not the operation before the being, as who would say, The Fruit makes the Tree,
whereas on the contrary, it is the Tree which makes the Fruit. And hereunto
will agree these words of Augustine, Bona opera non praecedunt justificandum,
sed sequuntur justificatum, that is to say, Good works go not before the making
of a man righteous, but do follow a man's being made righteous. Also when the
Jews came unto Christ, asking, what they should do, that they might work the
works of God, he bid them believe, This, says he, is the work of God, that ye
believe in him, whom he has sent. Furthermore he said unto them, While ye have
the Light, believe in it, that ye may become the Children of the Light. And
thus Peter exhorted them, who were come to be partakers of the precious faith,
Add unto your faith virtue, etc. Whereby it appears, that faith (which is the
mind's turning in unto God, with both its understanding, will, and other
powers) is the first step or entrance into a holy Life. And when these Jews,
Acts 2. inquired of him what they should do to be saved, he bid them Repent and
be baptized* And p. 3.19. he said again unto others, Repent and be converted.
So that Faith (which is one and the same with conversion) and Repentance a^e
the two first principles of the Doctrine of Christ and his Apostles, and are
plainly so called, Heb. 6.1. and are said to be the very foundation or first
beginning of the Christian Life, of which foundation or groundwork Jesus
Christ is the foundation; for the word foundation signifies sometimes the
ground, whereon a House is built, and in this sense Christ is the alone
foundation: other whiles it signifies the groundwork, or, as it were, the
first beginnings of the building on the foundation, and in this sense Faith and
Repentance are the foundation or fundamentals of a Christian Life.

Now Repentance is the Soul's entering not only into a sorrow for sin, and an
aversion therefrom, but also into a spiritual death unto sin, and a
regeneration into a new life: and so much does the Greek word (...) (which is
rendered into English, Repentance) plainly import, for its as much as to say, as
a change of the mind, which change is nothing else but its dying into sin, and
becoming alive unto holiness, which is also the true Spiritual Baptism, that
christeneth or makes a Christian in Spirit and in truth.

And of these two Principles, to wit, Faith and Repentance, Faith is the first,
in the order of Nature, for by it Repentance comes to be wrought in the heart,
as is above declared, how that by the Soul's converting unto God, in the Divine
Seed, and turning it self unto the Light of Jesus Christ, therein it comes to
find that Light to become a fire in it, which, by its operation, produces some
beginnings of a spiritual death and holy life, as aforesaid.

But notwithstanding that Faith and Repentance, are commonly acknowledged both
by Papists and Protestants, to be the foundation or ground work of a Christian
life, as also that Faith is the first step unto a holy life, and as it were the
spring and root of holy actions; yet how contrary unto this acknowledgment is,
not only the common practice, but also the common principle, that goes current
among them, whereby they set the unbelievers and ungodly, who have not so much
as tasted of the least beginnings of true Faith and Repentance, upon working
and operative exercises of the Christian Religion, such as to pray and to sing
psalms, which are holy and spiritual exercises, and can only be performed by a
holy life, and no otherwise. Their principle is this, that even unbelievers and
ungodly, who have not the least measure or grain of saving Faith and Holiness,
should pray and sing Psalms, in the very state and frame they are in, and that
this is a probable way to attain unto Holiness, wresting and abusing that
Scripture, to prove it by, The Fathers will give the holy Spirit to them, who
ask him: ask and ye shall find. But it is neither here, nor elsewhere said in
Scripture, that the Father will give it to them, who ask in unbelief, but plain
contrary James says, Let not him, that asks not in faith, think that he
shall receive any thing of the Lord. Indeed I willingly acknowledge all
unbelievers and ungodly should pray, and worship God, but I say it should be in
the order and way commanded of God, and not as they practice, viz. They should
convert and pray, repent and pray, believe and pray, etc. for God has joined
these together, and forbids that any man should attempt to separate them, yea
they cannot be separated.

This woeful error both in their principle and practice, is a most grievous let
and impediment unto Peoples attaining unto holiness, for as much as their
praying and singing, or any other exercises in relation to the service of God,
are not the true and real practices of Religion, but a mere counterfeit
formality and show, or imitation of these things; for true prayer and
thanksgiving can only commonly proceed from the true and real power of a holy
Life, even as singing and writing naturally can only proceed from the power of
a natural life.

And besides, They most lamentably cheat their own Souls, for by these and such
like operative exercises and practices, which are but hypocritical formalities
and shows, as is said, and through their continuance therein, they acquire a
certain natural habit or disposition more and more and easily and finely to
perform them, which natural habit they set up in their hearts, as it were, as
the great power of God or Godliness, and many, no doubt, apprehend it to be so,
so that when at any time they are acted or enabled to perform such and the like
exercises somewhat more finely and easily, than at first, and with some heat
perhaps in the imagination and inferior powers of the Soul, they impu^e it to
the very principle of Godliness, and look upon themselves as grown or advanced
Christians in the way of Godliness, for by the power of this acquired habit,
they will find many times thoughts spring up into their understandings, of God
and Christ, which will seem unto them as Divine contemplations and acts of true
adoration. Also by the same the affections will be stirred sometimes greatly,
and as it were a fire kindled in them, yet it is but the sparks of their own
kindling, and not that true Divine and Sacred fire aforementioned, which comes
down from Heaven, however it may appear to them so to be.

Such men are not unfitly by some called Habitualistae, or Habitualists, who go
about to frame or form unto themselves the power of Godliness, whereby to
perform holy exercises, through working themselves into a habit, by such
counterfeit and hypocritical actions, as aforesaid.

But true and real holiness is not attained unto, by the frequent workings (tho
never so sublime) of the mere natural powers of the Soul, neither is it a habit
produced of these workings, but is a spiritual and supernatural power springing
up from the Divine Seed, as it comes to take root and bud in the Soul. Yet if
we shall take an impartial view of that, which is called and accounted Holiness
amongst Professors commonly, we shall find it to be no other but such a habit,
as is demonstrable from these two or three Instances.

1. How have they come by this Holiness? Was it by a true or real converting or
turning in their minds unto the Light and Power of Jesus Christ inwardly
revealed in them in the Divine Seed, by which they felt the Divine fire kindled
in the very ground or bottom of their hearts, which purified a place in them
for the Divine Seed to conceive and bring forth the buds of a holy life and the
powers thereof?

Nay, Such a way they have not known, and they commonly call it fancy, error,
and what not? Or did they attain unto their holiness by falling instantly upon
working and operative exercises, as their Parents, or Masters have taught them?
Being nothing acquainted with these ways of inward conversion or recollection
of mind unto a Divine Principle in their Souls objectively present, never
expecting nor looking after it, as judging it to be ceased. If so, then I say,
there is no difference betwixt their praying or plowing, or writing or singing
common musical Songs or common purposes; for the power of doing both the one
and the other is but an habit acquired by natural working, for such kind of
actions, as to plow, write, sing, require no other principle but the natural
powers of a man, which at the first can begin to do a little, and so by
degrees, through repeated acts, acquire a habit, which becomes a power in them,
to enable them the more readily and finely to perform them, and with greater
ease.

A second Instance is this, that this power, whereby they exercise themselves
in the operative exercises, as in Praying, Singing, Preaching, or the like,
they can use in their own wills and times, they have it wholly at their own
dispose, and can command it as they list, pray when they will, meditate and
preach when they will: which is an in^allible instance that it is but a habit,
merely acquired by the on^y workings of the natural powers of the Soul; for the
supernatural power to do these things is never subject unto man's command and
will, but alone unto the will and command of God. And thus we find it to be in
our experience, as did the holy men of Old, who spoke and preached* and prayed
and wrote declarations of the Truth, as they were moved of the Holy Ghost, so
their using this power stood in the will of God* and not in their own.

A third Instance is this, that this power in them, judged by them to be the
power of Godliness, in its greatest growth and height is very compatible and
consistant with many evil thoughts, desires, words and actions, yea, it can
very easily be reconciled unto many sins, and has not so much as an appearance
of enmity at such sins as are not contrary unto these acts, which have produced
it: as ye shall find, that a man who has got a strong habit or custom of
praying twice or thrice a day, if he omit this practice at a time, how will he
be troubled for it? and what is the matter of his trouble? his habit strongly
inclines him to it, and gives him no peace nor rest till it be done; and this
inclination he may readily judge to be from the Spirit of God (whereas it is
but from his own habit) and so be the more troubled, as supposing he resists
the Spirit by this forbearance: but now if he omit the necessary performance of
other things he is not accustomed to, he will not be troubled at all. And thus
how many care not to omit the duties of Faithfulness and Righteousness toward
their Neighbors, who are at a great care to say their Prayers. But verily that
power in man, which inclines him to some things good in themselves, and not to
all other good things and practices, and which is not as a fire, a sword and a
hammer in him against every evil way and work, yea, the least evil motion in
the mind, is not the true power of godliness; it may well be a habit, as
aforesaid.

Yet by what is said let none suppose that I judge all, who have not in such a
clear, distinct and explicit way, been acquainted with these aforesaid steps of
inward conversion to the Light, continuance therein, and passiveness and
forbearance abovementioned in the said continuance, as if they were utterly
devoid of the power of godliness, having nothing but a natural habit, in the
room of it. For as I am fully persuaded that many, or most, have no other but
the natural habit, so I verily believe there are some hidden ones (hidden many
ways) who are truly partakers of some measure of the power of godliness, which
at times stirs and moves hiddenly in them, and by which they act diverse
practices of Religion, as by a certain secret instinct, as it were, unknown to
themselves: but they are such babes (poor souls!) who know not the right hand
from the left, that is to say, cannot distinguish plainly betwixt the true
power of godliness, and that which is but the natural habit, and so act
sometimes from the one, and sometimes from the other, yea, more from the habit,
then from the true power, ten or an hundred to one perhaps: and many times
that, which they are aptest to judge to be the true power, is but the natural
habit; for the habit is great and strong in them perhaps, but the true power is
a weak and tender thing, even as a smoking flax and bruised reed, to which the
habit is an enemy always in its actings, and the devil seats himself in the
habit, and fights against the true power in the Soul, by the acts of the habit,
he concurring therewith. And truly ere the true power can become strong in the
Soul, so as to have the dominion, the habit, or habitual power, must be broken
down, for it is but an image of the beast. And glory to the Lord for ever, who
is giving to a remnant the victory over this Image, and raising up the power of
his own Holy Life over it, to its brusing and destroying. Now albeit such souls
have not (as to a distinct reflection and knowledge of the way of their
attaining unto these small beginnings of the true power of holiness) passed
through these steps of inward recollection, conversion, passiveness and
forbearance; yet after some secret and hidden manner unknown to themselves, in
some measure, they have no doubt flid through them, the darkness so far
prevailing, that they could not observe their way: but surely where one has
got through this way, a thousand have missed, stuck at the entrance, and never
got truly into it. Therefore I may warrantably say, the want of the plain and
clear understanding of these steps, has made the way unto Holiness, if not
altogether impossible, yet very difficult, and much more, then it is in deed
and in truth.

CHAP. VI.
Wherein diverse things, needful to be known by them, who do, or would, enter
into the way of Holiness, in relation to the nature of Conversion,
Regeneration, of the Life and Powers of Holiness, and of Union with God, are
opened; and the gross mistakes of most Professors, touching these things,
discovered and cleared.

GReat and woeful have been the mistakes and misconceptions of the Professors,
whether of one sort or another, touching these tings, which have occasioned
great hurts and impediments both unto their entrance into Holiness, and
progress therein; the clearing of which would be of great use and profit.

Therefore I find it with me to declear somewhat touching them, according to
the understanding given me of God: not that any thing said by me, can suffice
simply to the clearing of any, it being the Spirit of the Lord who only can do
that; yet the declaration hereof may be an occasion, as the Lord shall bless
it, for them to weigh and consider these things in the true Light, whereby they
may come truly to judge of them.

I. As touching Conversion and Regeneration, It is supposed simply to consist
in the Lord's infusing certain supernatural habits of Grace into the Soul,
which sometimes they express under this term, the Seed of Grace or the Seed of
God: so that that they judge that instantly at the infusing of this Seed the
Soul is converted; and that all these Souls, into whom this Seed is infused,
are instantly converted and regenerated, which is a gross error.

II. They suppose that Conversion and Regeneration is wholly done in an
instant, and that at the very first instant the Seed spreads it self, or is
spread and diffused through every power of the Soul wholly, which is another
great error.

III. They suppose that God works so irresistibly in all men, in whom this Seed
is sown or infused, that it is impossible for them to resist, but converted or
regenerated they must be, which is a third. For though the Lord can so work, or
may do so in some, yet it is certain, he does not so in all, but in this they
contend among themselves.

IV. They judge that this Seed of God is only some supernatural accident or
quality, but not a substance; and that the life of Grace or Holiness is no
substantial life, such as the vegetative, sensitive or rational Life or Soul
is, which is a fourth error, and is indeed the foundation of all the other
three abovementioned, otherwise it might be thought no materal thing, nor
worth the while to contend whether the Seed and Life of Grace and Holiness, be
a substance or accident, it seems rather to be a question of Philosophy, and so
not needful to be determined the one way or the other by them, who meddle not
in such matters. But I say, this makes the thing the more needful to be opened,
because the other three errors, and diverse others, are built on it; for say
they, If the Seed of God be an accident, it cannot be in the Soul, but it must
denominate it according to its own qualities or properties, so that the Soul
must be Holy, Righteous, Pure, etc. because the Seed is such. Also, it cannot
be in the Soul but it must be in union therewith, because the essence or being
of every accident, consists in its being in union with its subject. But, say
they, the Seed of God is an accident, Therefore, etc.

Now the first proposition of this Argument is certain, and cannot be denied;
but the second is false, which is the foundation of diverse other gross errors,
and so their whole superstructure false.

And for the refutation of it, and the confirmation of the Truth, viz. That the
Seed of God is a Substance, and the Life of Holiness and Grace is substantial,
I shall no^ enter into Philosophical niceties, but produce a few plain
Arguments, obvious to any clear and sound understanding, as 1. Even as we do
infer from the variety and nobility of the operations of the rational life and
soul, that it is a substance, and no accident; So both from the great variety,
and also the great nobility (much greater than that of the rational soul or
life) of its operations, we conclude that it, to wit, the Seed of God, is a
Substance. 2. It is the root and sp^ing of the spiritual senses, whereby we
see, hear, taste, savor, and feel spiritual and heavenly Objects, therefore it
is a Substance. 3. And seeing it is commonly granted that the life of
vegetation, the life of sensation, the life of Reason are all substances, shall
we deny that the life of Grace or Holiness, which is far above all these lives,
and does passingly excel them, yea is the very crown and glory of Man, is a
Substance? 4. When God made Man, he made him according to his own Image; and
this was man's dignity above the Beasts, that he was made capable to receive the
impressions of this Divine Image, which the brutes were not. Now this Image is
the holy and Spiritual Life, by which as by a s^^l, he does impress, or
effigiate the Soul of man, Therefore it is a Substance. For it were absurd to
say, that the Soul of Man, or Man himse^f was made according unto or after the
pattern of an accident. 5. This Seed, and that by which it is nourished, God
gives from Heaven, as the Scriptures do plainly declare, Therefore it is a
Substance: for, if it were an accident, it could not come from Heaven, because
the Maxim is an Accident cannot pass from one subject into another. 6. It is
called often in Scripture the body of Christ and his flesh blood, which the Soul
feeding upon, it becomes clothed therewith, as with a body, and thereby
dwells in Christ, and lives in him, as the branch in the Vine; Therefore it
is a Substance, and has a substantial life and spirit: For what an absurd
thing were it to call the body of Christ an accident? 7. The Saints feel it in
them as really to be a part or particle of the very substance of Heaven, viz.
of that spiritual and invisile Heavens where the Saints live, as they do feel
the body of their outward man to be a part or particle of the sustance of this
outward world. 8. It receives the names of all these things which are
substances, but never the name of an accident, in Scripture, Therefore, etc.


But some may say, that by this it would appear, that we judge the S^ed and
Divine birth, as we call it, not only a Sub^tance, but that it is a composed
Substance of body and Spirit.

To which I answer: Yea, it is so: for its body is the vehicle or vessel of its
Spirit; for as every natural seed and birth has its body and pirit, so has
this Spiritual Seed, and it is the body that is the vessel, which contains or
conveighs the Spirit. And so the Seed of Corn has its Spirit or Virtue in its
Body; and so every other Seed and Herb and Tree of the Field, as the
Apple Tree, the Vine-Tree, whose fruit have both Body and Spirit. As Wine has
its Spirit, and so any other Liquor, which evaporated or extracted, leaves its
body dead: so this Spiritual Seed and Vine has its Body and Spirit, containing
in it manifold most noble and excellent Powers and Virtues, which Spirit is a
measure of the Spirit or Soul of Christ the Heavenly Man.

And thus having got through this Particular, I pass unto another, which is to
show that regeneration is not simply the infusion of the Seed of God into the
Soul: For indeed as it is in natural seeds and births, so is it here in the
spiritual. Now in naturals the seed is not the birth, nor is a thing said to be
generate, when its seed is sown; the seed of an Apple Tree is not ^he Tree it
self, but a principle, out of which the Tree with its spirit, life and powers
does spring: And the seed of a man is not a man, yea the seed may be cast into
the womb, and by some impediment no conception follow, and in the very
conceiving may be marred: And indeed the words of Christ are plain, how that
the Seed of the Kingdom, after it is sown, springs up like the Corn, which
may be choked by impediments; but where it is not choked, it springs up
first to the Blade, then the Ear, then to the full Corn, and that is its
g^^^ration. Now ^hen a thing is but in the See^, the Life, Spirit and Powers or
Virtues of its nature are hid, and as it were buried within the body of the
Seed, which, because the Seed has not a body so large, nor so organized, as
they require; therefore they do not appear, till it have received, in some
measure, a larger and organized body, and the more the Body grows up, and
becomes organized, its Spirit Life and Powers do manifest themselves more and
more, which in the Seed lay as it were dead and buried, and altogether unable
to perform their operations, as being confined, as in Fetters in so narrow a
room. Yea further, their being is so little and diminutive, that, though they
had room, they could not perform the operations of their nature, till by their
more through generation and formation they be increased and augmented. And thus
the little embryo or conception in the Womb, be it of Man or Beast, cannot
perform the operations of a Man or Beast, nay, though the Child be born and
come into the world, how little do the powers of manhood appear in it? But as
the Body of the Child grows up, the powers of manhood do more and more
appear, as of Understanding, Speech, Memory, and the like. And so it is much
what, in some manner as to the Divine and Spiritual Seed: or if the Soul does
not receive it and convert unto it, as aforesaid, and that it be not permitted
to take root and plant it self in the Soul, its life and powers will not be
generated or raised up. And so the Spiritual generation of the Seed is the
raising up of its life and Powers, and bringing them into manifestation in the
Soul, which the Soul drinking in, it comes to be regenerated or renewed
thereby, and still more and more, according to the growth and increase of the
Seed, endued therewith. Now the Powers of the Seed of God, which proceed or
flow from its Life and Spirit, are these noble and heroic Christian Virtues,
enduing both the understanding and will, yea, and all the other powers of the
Soul, according to the capacity of each, such as love, joy, peace, gentleness,
meekness, temperance, righteousness, fortitude, patience, and holy wisdom and
understanding, and the like; upon the distinct and particular enumeration of
all which, I shall not now insist. These are the powers of the Holy Life, which
are as natural to it, as the natural passions and affections are unto the
natural Life and Soul, and by these Powers man can only perform the exercises
and practices of Holiness and Righteousness, which powers, and the Life, which
is their root, are not in all men, though the Seed of them be in all, as is
said, and is elsewhere demonstrated.

Now it is through the generation of the holy Life and Powers thereof in the
Divine Seed and Birth, that the Soul comes to have union with God; for the
Divine Birth with the Life and Powers or Virtues thereof, is that noble chain,
which tyeth and joyneth the Soul unto God, being of a middle or mean nature,
betwixt God and the Soul, and so the more apt for such an effect. For as it is
inferior unto the Godhead, so is is superior unto the Soul, being Christ the
Image of God, according to which the Soul is made, and by it enobled and
dignified. And the excellency of this Holy Life and Seed above the Soul appears
greatly in this, that, whereas the Soul can corrupt and degenerate with all its
gowers, this holy life can never in the least admit of any corruption, for it
ever abhors all sin, it may indeed be killed or crucified by it, but never
corrupted. And so it is a most fit medium or mean to unite the Soul unto God,
and the Powers and Virtues thereof are as so many Chains, whereby the Lord does
unite the pure and righteous Souls unto him. Ye must understand therefore the
Soul's union with God, is not simply immediate but mediate, through this Seed,
for no Man, nor Soul, save Jesus Christ alone, by his Soul and Manhood
conceived by the Power of the Holy Ghost, in the Womb of the Virgin Mary, has
this dignity to be immediately united with God; for which cause God has highly
exalted him, even the whole Manhood of our Blessed Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ, above every Creature, not only Men, but Angels, that at the Name of
Jesus every knee may bow, to whom be Glory, Power and Dominion for ever.

This union of the Soul with the Seed, and the Holy Life and Powers thereof
(through which the Soul becomes united unto God) is gradual, and becomes more
and more intimate and near, as the Soul advances in Holiness and
Righteousness, and, until the leaven of the Holy Life has diffused its pure
Virtue through the whole Soul and all its powers, the union cannot be total nor
through, but in part, even until all sin and iniquity be wrought out, for there
can be no union with that which is holy with that which is unholy. Wherefore if
there be but a part of the Soul, as it were, purified only, that part receives
union with the Holy Seed and with God therein. Therefore the first step and
degree of the Soul's Conversion unto the Holy Seed, and to God and Christ
therein, is not, to speak properly, union, for the Soul at its first step of
conversion, brings it self or converteth unto God, as it is, viz. all filthy
and unclean with sin, yea, it brings its sins and sinful Members unto God,
that he may kindle his Fire in them, for their destruction; but there is no
union, until the Soul be cleansed in some measure: but when the Soul converted
unto God, in that part or measure of it which is purified, its conversion so
far may be called, and is truly, an union with God.

Furthermore, it is to be observed, that the Soul's union with God, consists
not simply in mere acts, as when it exercises acts of conversion toward God,
these and other acts of the Soul, by the powers of the Holy Life, do contribute
and conduce unto this union, and begets it, yet the Soul enjoys a more
constant and permanent union with God, then by acts whether of one or all its
powers: for if the Soul's union consisted only in acts, then, when it did not
act, but were wholly suspended in its actings toward God, the union should
cease, which is false, for when a righteous man sleeps, so that perhaps his
Soul exercises no acts, yet his union remains with him: bu^, because the
Soul enjo^eth an union with God, by its acts of conversion, as aforesaid,
proceeding from the Holy Life and its Powers, therefore this union enjoyed by
acts, may be called Actual Union, and the other, which abides without acts, or
while acts are suspended, may be called Potential, because the Soul remains in
union with God, simply through its powers, being as it were glewed unto or
cemented with the powers of the Holy Life. Now any sin, which the Soul
commits, does certainly break off its actual union with God, but though the
infinite mercy and Grace of God, does not quite break off the potential, though
it weaken, and many sins weaken it much, yea, some sins may break it quite off;
but the^ it has been but partial and not through and total, for if it had been
total, the Soul could not have committed such sins, as could occasion the
breaking it quite off.

Moreover it is to be noted, that, when at times we say God is the Life of the
Soul as to its Spiritual Actions, and at other times, the Life of the Soul is
begotten of God from a Seed, we understand this in different respects; as thus,
God is the Life of our Souls, as an efficient c^use of Life, and that
originally and immediately, but not as the informing or formal cause thereof,
such as the Holy Life begot of the Holy Seed is, which is, even the formal
cause of it.

CHAP. VII.
Showing

How the Soul is to reflect upon it self, and enter into Trial and Examination
of it self, whether it has truly passed through the aforesaid steps of
Conversion, and continuance therein in passiveness and forbearance: and whether
it has attained unto any beginnings of the Divine and Holy Life, and the
powers thereof, before it enter upon other operative Exercises, and how, or by
what Rule or Touchstone it may infallibly know the same.

THe service which the Lord requires of us, and which we ought to perform unto
him, is our reasonable service, as the Scriptures declare, and expressly call
it; which (beside other things, which might be mentioned) does import this
especially, that, whatsoever service or work we go about to do unto the Lord,
we do it with a true and certain knowledge that we are indeed serving him, and
not our selves, nor any other. For, if I do any work, and yet do not know
certainly to whom I am working, my work cannot be called reasonable, for to do
a thing reasonably is to do it with a certain knowledge and judgment; and herein
is man's excellency above the other Creatures, which are unreasonable, that,
whereas they work only according to that, which either inwardly or outwardly
moves them, not knowing what they do, so as to make a judgment of discretion
betwixt causes and cau^es, man is to do all his works with such a discretive
judgment and understanding, that he certainly knows both the end, unto which
he works, and also the principle from which, otherwise his work is rather
brutal than rational. And so, as we are required to praise the Lord with
understanding, as the Scriptures declare, so we ought to serve the Lord in
every particular step with understanding also, so as to be able to give a
rational account of our service, that it is indeed unto the Lord; and this we
cannot do, unless we certainly know that what we do is by the Power of his Holy
Life and Spirit assisting us, for it is the Lord, who gives us both to will
and to do, and without him we can do nothing, not so much as say that JESUS is
the LORD, but by the Holy Ghost divinely and supernaturally assisting us:
indeed we may repeat the bare words without any supernatural assistance, but
here they are no wise regarded of the Lord; for, if they be not expressed with
the supernatural assistance of his Spirit, as aforesaid, they are but dead and
empty of that Life and Virtue, which renders them acceptable unto him. And so
any other work, if we do not work it in him and by him supernaturally
assisting, we do it not to him, and if we know not that we do so, it is not our
reasonable service, which he requires.

Moreover, whatever we do as a service unto the Lord, we ought to do it in
faith, but, if we do not certainly know from what principle or power we do any
thing, we are left in a suspense and doubtfulness, and have nothing but
conjecture at best to build upon, which is far from faith. Also he that does a
thing doubtfully, does both displease the Lord, who forbids it, and brings
weakness and confusion upon himself, for he, that doubts, is damned, as says
the Scripture.

Now to the end that a man may know whether the work, or works, which he is
about to do, be indeed unto the Lord, he is to reflect upon himself, and to
enter upon an impartial examination and trial of his own Soul, whether he has
passed truly through the aforesaid steps of conversion and continuance therein
in passiveness and forbearance, and so whether he has attained unto any true
beginnings of the Divine and Holy Life and the Powers thereof, and that before
he enter upon other operative exercises, because that, unless in some measure
he has truly passed through these steps, he cannot perform any work rightly
and acceptably unto God.

And this examination and reflection is the more needful, for that even these
steps may be counterfeited, no less then other things. A Soul may even seem to
it self to have converted or turned it self inwards unto the Divine Presence,
etc. and yet not have truly converted thereunto. Yea I will say a great word,
but that which is a very certain truth, Many do inwardly convert as unto God,
but it is not to the true God, but a false, even an Image of their own framing
and deviseing, and as unto Christ, but indeed it is unto Antichrist. And
surely this is, as it were, the very beginning of the working of the Mystery of
iniquity, when Satan puts on the appearance of God, and Antichrist of
Christ, sitting down in the Temple of God, and being axalted above every thing
that is called God.

Now to open this a little more, we are to consider, that all men have some
notion or image of God in their minds, by which when they speak hear, or read
of him, they some way think, and form their thoughts and conceptions of him,
according to that objective notion or Idea with which they are acquainted. Now
though it is also certain, that there is in some measure a true objective
concept or Idea of God put or planted by God himself in every man's mind, which
is in and of the Divine Seed, sown in every man, yet the usual knowledge that
men commonly have of God, does not proceed from this true Idea in the Divine
Seed, nor is it the pattern or example, according to which they usually frame
the thoughts and conceptions of their minds, when they usually speak, read,
hear, or consider of him in their minds, forasmuch as the Divine Seed, in and
through which the true Idea is received, in most men, yea in all wicked men and
unconverted, is greatly burdened and oppressed, through the lusts and
iniquities, which prevail in them; whereby it comes to pass, that frequently
that true object concept or Idea or manifestation of God in the Divine Seed,
which in Scripture is called (...) i. e. that which may be known of God, is
veiled and clouded in them, so that the Soul does no more apprehend it, then if
it were not. And when by the Power of the Lord in his Visitation upon the Soul
this objective concept, as aforesaid, is brought into some measure of
manifestation, yet the Soul is so intently taken up with its sinful lusts and
pleasures, that it does little observe it, and many times not at all; even as
if some friend passed by before me in my view, yet I being much taken up with
looking at some other persons or things, should know nothing of his being so
near: And indeed it is even so as to this matter, the Lord does often visit the
Soul, and passes by it, and so far draws by the curtain or vail, that he
makes somewhat of himself plainly manifest in the Soul, calls, yea pusheth
and pricketh it, as it were, with a sharp pointed goad, that it may be made
sensible and convert the intention of its mind unto him, which calls and
touches it; and if at any time the Soul converteth or turns it self toward
him, that so calls and touches it, how speedily does it turn back again? For
it likes better to be taken up with its sinful pleasures, then to remain in
its conversion to hear the Lord expostulate with it, by the reproofs and
convictions of his Spirit. Whereby it may appear, that it is a great matter for
the Soul to convert unto the true and real appearance of God in the Divine
Seed, for sometimes it is so veiled, that it cannot perceive at all, as is
said, and at other times, when it is made manifest in some measure, it is so
intent upon other objects, that it does not observe it, tho it could.

And thirdly, Though at sometimes it be made to observe it, even will it, nill
it, yet it is so unpleasant and ungrateful a thing, to convert or turn unto it,
that it is very unwilling, even more than the Schoolboy, whom his Master
finds at his play, and calls him back to be reproved or whipped therefore.

But now as for that Image or Idea, which the Soul has framed unto it self of
God, the God of its own making, which it has made like unto it self, the Soul
can without difficulty convert or turn it self unto such a God, and continue in
its conversion therewith long enough, and so be taken up with the
contemplations of it, that it, as it were, stands in great passiveness, and
forbearance from all these exercises which would avert it from the
contemplation thereof. So that with great reason and wisdom the Lord put this,
as the first of all the Commandments engraven in Stone with his own Finger,
Thou shall not have any other God before me, and this the second, Thou shall
not make unto thy self the Image or likeness of any thing, which does plainly
import, that among all sins, which men are readiest to commit, the very first
is to have some other God then the true, and to make and frame a God like unto
themselves. And though many do not this outwardly, as others who are more
gross, yet how many do it inwardly? So that the object of all their
contemplations and adorations is in no wise the true God, but an Idol: And in
this Idol Satan seats himself, as God, yea he has helped the Soul to form it
after a very sublime and artificial manner; and truly this is the God, whom
many in their conversions do contemplate and adore, and with whom they do
converse at times with great intentness of mind, yea are, as it were, so
occupied with their interior recollections toward him, as if they were wholly
taken up therewith, and stood in a total passiveness and silence and
forbearance as to other things.

Again, The Soul may be altogether defective in the way and manner of its
converting it self, even while it endeavors to do it unto the true God, as if
it labor to perform its acts of conversion simply by its own natural Powers,
which is impossible for it to do: For only when the Lord visits and calls
it, and moves and touches it inwardly, is it put into a capacity to convert
and turn truly, and unto the true God, as aforesaid, which times of the Lord's
visitation are frequent enough within the day of their continuance, yea many
times in one day, or one hour, yea they are so frequent, that they cannot be
numbered, or particularly determined by us, how often they come, and how long
they continue, being much what like unto the lightning, which often appears
and disappeareth in a short space.

Some may say, If these things be so, then who can be saved? We are almost
quite discouraged, to hear of these difficulties and hazards of being deceived
in the very entrance.

ANSW. This is no more but what Christ has taught himself, Strait is the gate,
and narrow is the way, which leads unto life, etc. Yet these things are not
mentioned for the discouragement of any poor Soul, but indeed to be an occasion
unto it, that it may apply unto these steps, with the more diligence and
circumspection, and may get the more safely into the true way, and not divert
into some by-path. And for thy more encouragement (poor soul^) I have this to
tell thee, the Entrance though somewhat difficult, yet is not impossible for
thee, yea it is very possible, and on some account very easy and plain,
forasmuch as he, who offers himself to be thy Guide and Leader, is the Lord
strong and mighty, even IMMANVEL, God with us in Jesus Christ, whose Spirit is
given even unto the blind, and to those who are out of the way, to lead them
into it, and no less to begin them in the way of Holiliness, then to carry them
on therein. And yet for thy further encouragement, I say unto thee, Many have
found this way, and have got a safe and sure entrance into it, and do walk
safely and surely therein, who at first were as unacquainted with it, as thou
art now, yea as blind and dark, and as weak and indisposed every way, as thy
self. And seeing the same help is administered unto thee, which was unto them,
why may thou not find it, and enter thereinto as well?

But thou may say, Are there not some signs and marks, whereby I may discern
whether I have truly converted unto the true God, and to his true appearance in
his own Seed, yea or nay? As also, Whether or not I have passed truly through
the other steps aforesaid, in some measure? And, whether I am become a partaker
of the Holy Life, and Powers thereof, yea or nay?

Answ. Yea, there are certain infallible signs, which, if thou can truly and
plainly read them, will discover unto thee, if thou have truly converted unto
the true and real Presence and Appearance of God in his own Seed, and these are
the aforesaid effects and consequences of the true Conversion, which are
particularly mentioned in the 3 chapter. And if thou have truly these effects
in any measure, thou may be sure thou have truly converted or been converted,
and passed truly through the aforesaid steps, in some measure.

But thou may reply, that yet the difficulty remains, how the Soul may know
that it has such effects wrought in it, yea or nay, seeing there may be
counterfeit resemblances and likenesses of these effects wrought in the Soul,
by its own hammerings and toolings, and the sparks of its own kindling, the
enemy concurring therewith.

Answ. Indeed this is a very weighty objection, for there may be counterfeit
effects, insomuch that the Lord scarce does any thing in the Soul, but Satan
labors to counterfeit it, that he may deceive the Soul: therefore it is said
in the Revelation, that he shall work lying and false wonders, and cause Fire
to come down from Heaven, videlicit, in appearance, to deceive them who dwell
upon the earth. Yet we have a plain and ready answer to this objection, which
is this, The Presence of the Lord in the Soul, in the Divine Seed, does send
forth such a manifestation of his own Light and Spirit in it, which discovers
infallibly the works and deeds, which are wrought in the Soul, whether they be
of God, yea or nay; and puts the Soul into a capacity infallibly to discern
them, and to know whose they are. And though the Enemy be never so near in his
subtle workings to deceive thee, the Lord is as near, and nearer, to reveal
him. But as for them, who deny Immediate Revelation in these days, they leave
the Soul at an utter uncertainty, that it cannot know the work of God in it
from the work of the Enemy. For, seeing they deny that the operations of his
Spirit are objective and objectively manifest, they are but as certain blind or
blank lines and impressions drawn upon paper, which no man can read or
perceive. But having showed this at more length elsewhere, I shall not further
proceed in it at present.

Now, if thou would desire to know the truth of thy Conversion, by a way
prior to that of effects, which is needful, yea, it were needful for thee to
know in the very first instant, in which thou setst about to perform thy acts
of Conversion, whether they be true, yea, or no; Also whether that be the true
presence or manifestation of God, unto which thou do convert, or but that
false and framed god abovementioned, or Satan transforming himself into the
likeness of God; thou shall know thus:

If it be the true God and the true Christ, he does manifest himself so to be,
for God is Light, and Christ is the Light of the world, which lightens every
man that comes into the world, that they may believe and turn unto God. Now as
there is no way to know the Light (even that which is outward) but by it self,
and the manifestation that comes from it, so there is no other way, so certain,
to know God and Christ, but by the Light and Spirit of manifestation which
proceed from them. And of this I am verily persuaded, that there is no man upon
the face of the earth, but that there is some manifestation of God so plainly
and evidently set before him, as that he cannot but be convinced that it is the
LORD, and that frequently, whose appearance in the heart is so far different
from every false appearance of Satan, or any god or image of him, which the
Soul makes to it self, or can make, that it may very plainly and infallibly
distinguish the one from the other, and needs not to be deceived, unless it
wittingly and wilfully give up it self to be deceived.

And if thou ask, Wherein does the appearance of the one from the other so far
differ, that it may be so easily discerned?

I answer, In this, the true appearance of God and Christ Jesus is against
every sin more or less in thee, whether of Flesh or Spirit, and by it thou art
reproved of every sin in some measure, yea, and it works (as Fire against the
Bria^s and Thorns) against every sin in thee, and the body and root of it,
though at first thou will not be so sensible of it, as to have a particular
observation of all thy sins, yet thou will find it working against them all, as
it were, in a heap, sparing none of them, nor reconcilable to any of them. So
that, what ever particular sin is brought under thy particular observation,
thou will find the appearance of Christ against it, as much as any.

But now the false god, which a man makes unto himself in his mind, is very
reconcilable to many sins, which thou art plainly convinced to be sins, and he
can dwell with them, and let them flourish and grow largely in the heart, and
not be a devouring fire against them, yea, the false and counterfeit god is an
enemy t^ no sin at all, and would never reprove or dissuade thee from any sin,
but o(...) thee. And this is the hypocri^es (...), and the high flown
notionists god, whom they in some sort stand in awe to offend, as to some ^ross
outward acts, or even some inward also, because they have shaped him in such
and such a form, as is contrary in appearance to such and such sins. But as for
thee, love him that reproves every sin in thought or desire, word or work, and
is dreadful unto every transgressour more or less, yea, is as a devouring fire
against them, for that is the true God.

Now this appearance of God thou shall observe to manifest it self in a little
small Seed, the least of all Seeds, in the very inwards of thy heart, which is
meek and holy, and pure and harmless, and is contrary unto nothing but sin, can
be reconciled with any thing save sin, but with no sin in any measure.

I have found it with me the more to insist on this particular, for that I
certainly know, there are many, who are woefully bewitched with a mystery of
Iniquity, in relation to this matter, being like Capernanum exalted to the
Heavens, as it were, in their notions about God, so as to think they daily
contemplate and enjoy him: and yet it is but an Idol, and by the children of
Light they are seen and felt to be it* darkness, and the Seed is felt to suffer
in them, and to ^e in the very bonds of death, notwithstanding all their high
and lofty imaginations.

Now, if the Seed be raised in thee, so that the Holy Life and Powers thereof
become formed, though but a little, thou will feel it and its powers as
manifest to move, stir and spring in thee, as ever the Mother felt the Child to
spring in her Womb; so that thou can no less doubt of the one, then she can
of the other, and so by the stirrings and movings thereof thou will begin to be
acquainted with the Spiritual refreshments and joys of the Children of God.

CHAP. VIII.
Wherein diverse Advertisements and Cautions are given unto the Soul, in
relation unto its applying it self unto Works, or operative Exercises, inward
or outward, through the Holy Life and the Powers thereof.

WE are his Workmanship (said the Apostle) created unto Christ Jesus unto good
works, that we should walk in them. So that the Lord gives not unto any man
the being of a holy life, with its powers in vain, or for no effect, but that
he should make use of it and them, to bring forth good works, even as the
Husbandman planteth his Vines and other Trees, that they may bring forth Fruit.
We must improve and make use of our Masters Money, to profit withal, that our
Talent may increase to the honor of him, who has given it unto us, and to our
own happiness and comfort: and unto this that maxim in Naturals does well
answer, Esse est propter operari, Being is for working, for to that end has
every thing received its being and powers of a Natural Life, that it may reduce
them into act, and perform the operations, which are proper unto them.

So if we shall take a survey of the whole Creation, and of all things in it,
in the Heavens, the earth, and the other elements, we shall find them all upon
motion, and working the works, which belong unto the powers of their natural
being. And thus the crea^ures do in some sort resemble their Maker, who not
only wrought the creatures into a being by creation, but continues still
working, to preserve, uphold and govern them, according to which the Lord said,
My Father works hitherto and I work.

Now if thou have in any measure passed through the aforesaid steps of
Conversion and continuance therein in passiveness and forbearance, were it but
for a very small time, thou art by this time become a partaker of the holy Life
and its Powers in some measure, and so art entered at ^east into the way and
path of holiness, and art come unto a true and sound beginning, being come unto
Christ, who is the Beginning and the End, both the Alpha and the Omega, the
Way, the Truth, and the Life, the Door into the Sheepfold and House of God. So
having entered by him, thou art no Intruder, no Thief, nor Robber, but a true
Servant of the House of God; wherein thou art to work the works of God, and
having received Christ, so must thou walk in him* being now planted into him,
as the branch into the Vine-tree, and made a real partaker of the virtue of the
Root, and hereby joined to the tree as a natural branch thou must now bring
^orth the fruit of good works, and being come to live in the Spirit, thou must
also walk in the Spirit, and work and do all thy works in him and through him.

But some may say, According to this method and way of proceeding, a man is
kept long off from working, for it may be a long time ere he pass through these
steps, and so during this time (suppose it were a years time, or more) shall he
proceed to no operative exercises of Religion, but remain as a cipher or blank,
till he has got through these steps? May it not be said unto him, Why standst
thou so long idle?

Answ. This is an Objection, which is much with many, and has deep place in
the minds of some newly convinced ones, and who are but beginning, they would
fain be a doing and working, as others, yea and the hypocritical part and
spirit, which has its life in dead performances and works, will still be
dogging and pricking them forward unto the doing of things before the time.

Now learn a Parable of a Fruit-tree, be it an Apple Tree, or the like, into
which a graft is imped, being cut off from another Tree, where it did grow as a
natural branch, and did bud green, and flourish, and bring forth Fruit, but
such Fruit as was naught. Now suppose that such is the good nature of the Tree
into which it is grafted, that it makes the graft bring forth other sort of
fruit than formerly, even good fruit and that in abundance: it is true it is not
so with the common Trees in the outward, for they do not change the grafts,
imped on them, into their own nature, but rather the imp changes the sap and
virtue of spirit of the Tree, that it causes the Tree to bring forth fruit,
according to the kind of the graft it self. But it is otherwise betwixt Christ
and us men, for we being planted or grafted into him, he changes the nature of
our Fruit, from evil to good, otherwise the comparison holds very well. Now
when the graft is cut off from its natural stock, it was very g^^en and full of
life, yea suppose it was full of blossoms or fruit, yet when by the hand of the
Husbandman it is cut off from its natural stock, and grafted into another, it
does not instantly spring, and green, and flourish, as before, far less bear
new fruit, but first of all dies, its greenness and flourish withers, and
its fruits fall off, so that it remains very bare and empty-like for some
time: yet the powers of nature are not altogether idle in it, for by little and
little the power of life in the Tree, into which it is ingrafted, does infuse
and insinuate it self into it, by which it uniteth and knitteth the graft to
the Tree by a natural union, and then in process of time the graft begins to
green and flourish again, and bring forth fruit, both much better and more
abundant, as is said. And here we may observe somewhat of all these steps in a
similitude, which the graft passes through, before it comes to bear fruit, as
1. The power of the life in the Tree insinuating it self into the graft takes
hold of the faint and dead powers of nature in the graft, and conve^teth or
turns them into it self. 2. The graft being thus turned or joined to the Tree
not by any outward bonds, but by the influence of the Tree continues and
persisteth therein, which if it did not, it could not receive life from the
Tree. 3. In this continuance it remains very passive, doing nothing, but
secretly drinking in the virtue and power of life from the Tree, into which it
is grafted; and so by this means it becomes in due time as a natural branch of
the Tree, and brings forth its fruits, as aforesaid: now such is the discretion
of the Husband man, that he requires not present fruit from the Tree, neither
is he offended with it, that it yields not present fruit, but patiently waits
for the fruit in the season of it.

Even such is the discretion of the Lord (yea and much more) toward men, that
if they convert and turn into the true Vine and Tree of Life, not resisting the
Power of Life therein, but suffering it to work in them, to kill the unholy
life, by which they live and bring forth fruit unto sin; and if they continue
thus converted, in a passive and forbearing way, suffering the Spirit and Power
of God in the Divine Seed in them, to do in it what him pleases, this is
acceptable unto the Lord, even thus to die in him, and blessed are such, for
their works shall follow them in due time. And this is according to what our
Lord taught himself, Unless, said he, a grain of Wheat fall into the ground and
die, it remains alone, but if it die, it brings forth much fruit: this he
spoke in relation to himself, but it holds good also in relation to others.
Would thou indeed bring forth the fruits of good works unto the Lord? then
thou must fall into the ground and die like a grain of Wheat, and afterward
thou will live again, and spring up, bearing friut both good and abundant, and
the Lord, who is the Husbandman requires not fruit of thee before the season,
but patiently waits for it.

Yet the time is not so long betwixt the time of the first converting and the
season of bearing fruits, and producing good works, as thou may think, if
thou pass truly and faithfully through these few steps, thou may come to bear
some fruit, that is to say; to be able and fit to do some good works in a very
short space, much less than a year, yea much less than a Month, yea what if I
say, than the space of one day? Nay I add further, it may be possible for thee
within an hours space, and yet less, after thou have truly converted unto the
Lord, and touched, as it were, the hem of his Garment, and drunk in virtue
therefrom, to do some good works, in a true measure of acceptance unto the
Lord: yea the time may be so short, wherein, after thy conversion, thou may
be put into a capacity to do something both inwardly and outwardly, that we
cannot determine the least bound or limit of it, for it is an easy thing for
the Lord to raise his holy life in thee in an instant, or the twinkling of an
eye. And indeed the ways of the Lord, with men, in this respect, are very
wonderful and past finding out, as in many others: in some he raises life, as
it were, instantly, in others he takes a longer time to do it, in others yet a
longer, etc. For he is the unlimitted Holy One of Israel, who limiteth us, but
will not, nor ought he to be limited by us. And tho he may raise this life
sooner in one than another, where that other is no more wanting, as to the
aforesaid steps, than his Neighbor; yet usually these, who with most diligence
and faithfulness cleave unto the Lord in his appearing in them in his own Seed,
do most readily and speedily find the holy life raised in them, and the Powers
thereof sensibly moving in their inward parts.

Now I find it with me yet more particularly to point at some advertisements
and cautions in relation unto the Souls applying it self unto works and
operative exercises, after it has attained unto some measure of life and
power, whereby it is put in some capacity to perform them, which I may not call
Rules and Prescriptions, as proceeding from me, (tho herein I know the mind and
counsel of God) but advertisements, being only of use to point the Soul inwards
unto the manifestations of Truth in the springings up of life in its own
particular, where it will see the use and need of these things, more than what
it can hear or read of them, from another declaration. And truly they are such
things, that the want of the true knowledge, sense and observation of them has
been a grievous block in the way of many in their pro^ress in holiness, yea has
hindered them from growing up to any considerable pitch or perfection in
holiness, that they have continued as Weaklings and Babes there-through,
whereas otherwise they might have been strong men in Christ.

I. Having now attained unto a measure of the Holy Life and the Powers thereof,
so that thou findst the Powers of this Life in thy heart, as it were a wheel
within a wheel, or as a Soul within a Soul, (yea it is truly so) and that also
thou findst thy Soul in a measure of pure union with it, and every power of thy
Soul affected and touched with the powers of this Holy Life in pure embraces,
every one, as it were, kissing each other; and hereby thou will feel thy self
strong, in some measure, to do some things pertaining unto a holy Life, yea
thou will even so find it with thee, as if thou were cured of a bodyly
lameness, or as if thy tongue were loosed, which was formerly bound: then thou
art to stand in great fear and reverence, and be very cautious that thou fall
not upon doing any thing, or things, less or more, at all adventures or hand
over head, as they use to say, as to set about any performance in thy own
natural and selfish will, because thou find strength in thee, as thou
conceivest, to perform it, for if thou so do, thou will provoke the Lord, and
grieve that holy life, which has sprung and appeared in thee, not at all to be
ruled or led into any action by thy will, but by the will of the Lord alone.
And if thou go about to do any thing in such a manner, though thou findst
both clearness and strength of mind with thee at first, yet afterward thou will, to thy great loss, feel weakness and confusion to enter thee, and a thick
cloud of darkness will come betwixt the eye of thy Soul and that pure Light of
Life, which shined in thee, yea a vail of death will come over the tender Life
in some measure: and thou will find the pure Life in thee burdened and
oppressed, which will occasion pain and grief of Soul unto thee, which cannot
be uttered. And of these things we have had experience diverse times, so that
had not the Lord in tender mercy recovered us, we had gone down into the grave,
after some measure of quickening.

The reason of all this is, because of man by his own will usurping and
presuming to lead forth the holy life, which usurpation it cannot endure, so as
to yield or consent unto it: Therefore it withdraws its holy powers of Light
and Life from the powers of the Soul, concentring them within its own
particular being. And thus the Soul is left in darkness, confusion and
weakness, and the tender Life is both grieved and burdened, as aforesaid: For
whatever seeks to move it from its perfect unity with the will of God, does
hurt it, for it stands for ever incorruptible with the Divine will, and that
which seeks to move it to the contrary may well bruise and wound, yea kill
it, while it is but young and tender, but it can never draw it to consent. When
therefore at any time thou find it well with thy Soul, and thy heart is
strengthened as with bread, or with some strong cordial or liquor by the
springings forth and effusions of the streams of this holy Life in thee, then
thou art to stand in a passiveness and forbearance, waiting upon the will and
motions of this holy Life, which is for every one with the will of God, that
thou may do such or such things, which that Life requires of thee, and then
whatever thou sets about to do, not in thy own natural will, but in the will of
this which is the will of God, thou shall find thy clearness, thy peace and
strength, which formerly thou had, not only to be continued with thee, but to
be multiplied and abound.

II. And yet more particularly know, or consider it, that thou art to do
nothing without a clear and infallible knowledge of thy warrant, and that from
this inward Guide, the Holy Life of Christ, and his blessed Spirit now raised
and formed in thee. For this is he, whom the Lord has given thee for a Leader
and a Commander, and he is worthy to have this place, for that he is an
infallible Guide, Instructor, Counselor, and Teacher, which never sinned, nor
can sin; and him has the Father given unto thee for a Head that in all things
thou should obey him, and do nothing but in his will. Even as it is in the
natural body and life and powers thereof, for the powers of Life, which are in
the head and heart being supreme over the powers, which are in the other
members, do rule and command them, and the members, in which they are. And so
it should be here: and where the inferior powers of the natural life do not
obey the superior powers of the same, there is confusion and disorder in
nature, as indeed it has fallen out through men's disobedience to this holy
Life, because man's supreamist power of Life, videlicet, his will has not
stood in subjection to the Powers of this Holy Life, which is its supreme;
therefore has its power been taken from it in great part, that it cannot rule
its inferior powers, as of the natural passions and affections* but they often
rebel against it. So that many times a man is led by his very animal passions
into things against his very will, which would not be so, were his will brought
into a perfect subjection unto the will of this Hol^ Life, its supreme and
higher power, for then it would give it a perfect victory and dominion over
them.

Now when I speak of the absolute need, that the Soul has, to know its warrant
from its inward Guide and Leader, viz, this Holy Life, and God, who is so
therein, and so in conjunction therewith that, when I speak of the one, it is
never to be understood but in conjunction with the other. By this warrant, I
say, I do not conceive that the Soul for every thing it does, is to have an
absolute and possitive command? nay, but it must have either that, or at least
an inward felt permission, allowance or liberty given to it, in and from the
same; and where this is clearly and distinctly received and known, it is
warrant sufficient unto such, who have it. And whosoever do any thing, or
things, in this inward and felt liberty of the Holy Life and Spirit of Jesus
Christ, do the same in true faith, and gruonded upon the known will of God,
either mandatory, or permissory. And if this permission or liberty be not
granted unto thee, thou will sensibly feel in thy heart the Holy Life, with its
powers repugnant thereunto, so that it will sensibly move and stir in thy heart
against the thing, thou have before thee to do.

III. And as thou art not, forwardly or rashly in thy own will, to do any thing
without the warrant aforesaid, of the Holy Life, mandatory or permissory; ^o
thou art to be as careful that thou be not backward, negligent, or unwilling to
answer the will of this Holy Life, in doing those things, which it moves and
inclines thee unto, and requires of thee, for the hurt is one and the same in
both, viz. in going about to do a thing, or things, contrary to the will of
God, and forbearing to do that, or those things, which he requires of thee;
the one is the sin of commission, the other is the sin of emission, both of
them the sin of disobedience against God, and so both of them provoke the Lord,
burden and grieve his Holy Life and Spirit, and both of them bring weakness,
con^usion, deadness and darkness upon the Soul.

IV. Do nothing doubtfully and with unclearness and confusion of mind, but
exercise a perfect passiveness and forbearance as to all these things, which
are not cleared up unto thee to be the mind and will of the Lord. The right
knowledge, use and observation of this, is of both great comfort and advantage
unto the Soul, as we have often found by great and good experience.

1. It is of great comfort, for it signifies the great lenity and moderation
of the Lord toward us, that, if we be singly given up in our minds, having a
willingness of heart, in simplicity and uprightness to know the will of God
perfectly in all things, if some things (even of great importance) be unclear
unto us, he spares to charge the guiltiness of disobedience upon us (till we
be clear) tho we be ^ound in the forbearance of them, which is great gentleness
upon the Lords part.

2. Again, It is of great advantage to us, for

First, It riddeth us of many superstitious fears, which others have, whilst
one while they suppose they should do this; other while the contrary, and still
imagine God to be angry with them one way or other, which begets most woeful
superstitious fears in the Soul; and indeed I may say, the ground of all
superstition is the unclearness and confusion of mind as to the understanding
the will of God, one while over-rating things, and judging it self bound in
things, wherein the Lord has left it free; and then again, imagining (but both
doubtfully) to please the Lord, in things he does not regard.

Secondly, It reduces our whole work, as it were, within a narrow or small
compass, and yet not narrower than the Lord allows; for according to this
advertisement concerning the many things, that come before us as duty by way of
consideration, if we stand in a true and single resignation unto the will of
God in all things, or truly aim thereat, we may thus reason with our own hearts.

Either such a thing is made clear unto me from the Lord, by the manifestation
of his Holy Life in my heart, or, after singly waiting upon him, it is not as
yet made clear unto me: If the former, then it is my work to do it, and I must
not forbear, whatever trouble from the enemy without, or within, I meet with,
in the practice thereof: If the latter, I have nothing more to do with it, at
present, but to wait upon the Lord, if he shall afterward clear it up unto me,
and so I may let it alone, with a quiet and peaceable Conscience.

And thus ye may see there is a great difference betwixt doing and forbearing;
for unclearness of mind in the thing may be a ground for me to forbear it, but
I must not do any thing upon the ground of unclearness.

A third advantage is, that thereby our minds are kept clear, and pure, and
open, even like a free and clear air, which does with readiness receive the
light, that shines in it, and every impression made in it thereby: whereas
doing things in the unclearness, and doubtfulness confuseth and disordereth the
mind, yea makes it muddy and gross, brings darkness and death over it, for
he, that doubts, is condemned in his own heart.

Fourthly, It gives us an opportunity to cut short the work in righteousness,
touching the doing or forbearing of diverse things, which are called in question
and debated among people in this day.

But now for the further opening of this Particular, I find it with me to add
somewhat more, as

1. When I say Do nothing doubtfully, I do not understand it so, that thou art
not to do a thing, if there be any objections, which thou findst arising
against it, either from thy carnal reason, or unbelieving part, till thou get
rid of them: for notwithstanding them, thou may find a good clearness in thy
mind, which shuts them out, or puts them under. And so thou may proceed upon
thy clearness from the Lord in thy mind, notwithstanding these objections,
although thou can not give them any direct and positive answer, but this, that
thou art clear of the Lord to the contrary: yet if the objections should so far
prevail, as quite to cloud thy clearness, so that thou losest sight of it, this
is indeed thy sin so to have permitted them to do, yet, till thou get them in
some measure removed, and clearness in some measure be given thee from the
Lord, thy safety is to forbear.

Again: Whereas some wrong Spirits may take an occasion from this unjustly to
shelter themselves under a cover, in their omissions and neglects of those
things, which the Lord requires, saying, they find not clearness to do them,
therefore I must add this also, that if thy unclearness proceed from a wrong
and deceitful part of thy heart, which is unwilling to be cleared, because it
is unwilling to obey, it is another case, for then thy forbearance is thy sin,
though thou be unclear, because thou might have been clear, had thou stood
singly, and yet if thou do things in this unclearness, thou sinst also.

Thou may say then, What shall I do? For this is a strait ^^se.

I answer, Come unto the Light, and turn to it, in singleness, and that will
clear thee, and so thou art to do them.

V. Be careful to keep thy heart and mind in a sense and feeling of the Holy
Life and Powers thereof, at all times, as much as is possible. I know, at
first, and for some time, it will be hard for thee; yea at times, till thou
witness a further growth, and become more inwardly acquainted with the enemies
workings, thou will, as it were, lose much what all and clear and distinct
sense, feeling and discerning of the Life, as if it were not in thee. But this
is, as it were, a fit of a Lethargy, a fainting or falling into a swarf, for
even the Spiritual Life suffers these things at times, especially when it is
young and tender, no less than the natural. But now as one live in the natural
Life, does what in him lies to be kept out of such fits, which bereave him of
the present use of his natural senses, and does greatly desire always to have
the free and lively use of his natural senses, which are very needful unto him,
for his preservation from outward dangers, even so one, who is come to live in
the Spiritual Life, and has once received the powers of of the Spiritual
Senses, whereby to hear, see, taste, smell, and feel heavenly objects, as also
to have a sense of what hurts from the contrary life and powers thereof, he
will and ought to be very careful to preserve the free and lively exercise of
them, for they are given unto him both for his comfort, and also to be helps
unto him, whereby he may know things good and evil, profitable and hurtful unto
his spiritual condition, that so he may choose and embrace the good, and refu^e
the evil. Now if he run out from the inward sense and feeling of the Holy Life
and its Powers, till he be restored again into the sense thereof, he is out of
any true capacity to know either the things he should do, or the manner how to
do them.

Therefore it plainly appears how needful it is unto a man, who is come to be a
partaker of the Holy Life, to be very careful to live always in the sense and
feeling of the same, and the powers thereof, and this he shall the more readily
attain unto by the due and right use and observance of the former
Advertisements, and those which yet remain to be mentioned.

This particular is contrary unto the Doctrine, that passes generally among the
Professors, who are taught to say, that they should not seek to live by sense,
but by faith, alleging the Apostle's words; but this is a mere abuse of his
words, for he does not say, We walk by faith, and not by sense, but thus, and
not by sight, whereas a man may have the exercise of diverse other senses, and
yet at present have not the exercise of his sight.

Now there are diverse other spiritual senses besides the sight, whi^^ is the
clearest manifestation, and it is true that many times the Children of the Holy
Life can believe, when in some sort they do not see, yet I altogether deny,
that any can believe without some inward spiritual sense or another, whereby
that which they should believe, is proposed unto them objectively, for
otherwise it were a groundless faith. Also by these works, We walk by faith and
not by sense, may be understood the outward senses, or the inward, which reside
only in the lower parts of the Soul, which are wrought upon by natural and
outward objects: by these we are not to walk, nor expect to have the Lord to
propose himself unto us, in order to satisfy us, by our outward senses, or by
the inward sensible affections in the lower parts of the Soul, for it is the
excellency of a Christian Life, that gives us to walk with God, both
confidently and comfortably, to follow him in the ways of obedience, when we
have nothing from these inferior senses, to help or encourage us, but many
times to the contrary. And as for that, which they call sensible devotion,
which some say, we must not much seek after, if by sensible devotion they
understand that, which only affects the inferior sensible powers of the
Soul, such as the fancy and imagination, whereby the inferior affections of
love, joy, fear, grief, etc. are moved and stirred, which can be do^e by some
pathetick discourse or de^cription of things by a form of words, I agree unto
what they say. But if by sensible devotion they understand that, which moves
the very spirit and will of man with the supreme affections of the Soul, by the
workings of the Holy Life and the powers thereof, upon its spiritual senses; I
say this, Devotion is most needful in some measure, and is to be sought after,
by all, for it is the highest and noblest kind of Devotion, and the most
rational, even that we have a real sense and feeling upon our hearts, of the
power of the Holy Life, of the only and true God, when we worship him, so as to
be inwardly melted into a holy tenderness before him, through what we feel and
taste, and savor of his Divine Power and Goodness. And if the inferior powers
and affections of the Soul be also therewithal moved, and with the words, which
proceed therefrom, it is a good thing and comfortable in its place, but not too
much to be looked after. But we are to be careful that we keep them in such
stedfastness, as not to suffer them to be moved simply, or barely by mere words
or outward works, when the Holy Life does not move upon them, and that
principally, for all such motions are hurtful, and not profitable. It is the
Coal from the Altar, that is to say, such a heat or warmth, that comes from the
Holy Life, th^^ does only work the true impressions on the affections, whether
by words or without them, or does only qualify and concoct them, (so to speak)
after the right manner, working out the evil, crude and beastly humors and
dispositions out of them.

VI. Thou art also to know, that, though thy present condition admit thee to do
some things, yea, diverse works, both inward and outward, pertaining to a Holy
Life, as being come in measure to be a partaker thereof, yet thou art in this
time of thy weakness and childhood in the Spiritual Life, more to be passive
than active, except as to the simple acts of conversion, wherein thou art
constantly, so much as possible, to be found: for thereby thou will be still
drinking in from the Living Fountain the Waters of Life, by which thou will
live and increase more and more in the Holy Life, so as to grow up from
childhood unto youth-head, and from that unto a perfect man in Christ Jesus.
Therefore it will be altogether fit and needful for thee, to be often repeating
these former steps of conversion, and persisting therein in great passiveness
and forbearance, not only from all evil things, but even from these, which are
not clear unto thee to be good, or at least harmless and innocent. And as thou
know that the several ages and states of a man, of infancy, childhood,
youth-head, and perfect manhood, have their several works and exercises proper
unto them (beside what is proper unto all these four) so it is much what here:
for indeed the spiritual man also has his four states, as, his infancy, his
childhood, youth-head, and perfect manhood. Now if thou be yet but in the
infancy of a spiritual Life, thou can do but little, unless to turn thee to
thy Mother's Breast, which has conceived thee, that is to say, to the Divine
and Holy Life, and abide in thy conversion thereunto, drinking in the sincere
milk of the Word, that thou may grow thereby. And if thou be come up to a
state of childhood, as out of infancy, yet thou can as yet not do many, nor
great things; but this is a good time for thee to go unto the School of the
Holy Ghost, and learn the things of God, in his immediate teachings, so as to
drink in a solid sound and digested knowledge of them, in some measure, before
thou much speak of them to others, being swift to hear, but slow to speak. But
if thou be come up to the state of a young man, yet thou can not do all those
things, which a man of perfect age can, neither is it given, nor required of
thee.

VII. Be very mindful to regard thy own measure of Life, so that thou be not
drawn forth, or lifted up to do greater things, or any things, in a greater or
higher strain, then thy present ability of Life permits; for if thou bend, or
screw, or wind up the Powers of thy Soul too high, above thy measure, yea, if
in any thing above it, it will much mar and spoil the work that thou art about,
and displease the Lord, and grieve his Holy Spirit and Life, even as the
winding of some string or strings, on a musical instrument, above what may keep
in true concord with other strings, does quite spoil the harmony, and render it
ungrateful unto discerning ears. Yea, many hereby have suffered great loss, and
brought many grievous burdens upon that Holy Life, and also upon their own
Souls in so doing. And let not the greater measure of another be an occasion to
draw thee forth from thy own, as seeking to do things equally with him, or to
go beyond him; also to mind and reflect by an inward observation, when the Life
or Powers thereof begin to cease or shut up, that so thou may therein also
follow them, so as to cease at their ceasing, to be shut up with them, and
opened with them, and keep time and measure and touches with them, that thou
may not be left doing alone; for if so, thou art not doing the Lords's work
but thy own.

VIII. Thou art to learn to distinguish betwixt the powers given thee from the
Holy Life to do such and such things, and the exercise of that Power; for,
though the Power may be said, after a sort always to remain with thee, while
the Life it self remains, yet thou have not the exercise of this Power at thy
will and dispose: and so thou may observe a great difference betwixt thy
exercising thy natural Powers, and these Spiritual, for the natural thou can
use, when thou wiltst, as to speak, write, sing naturally, etc. But thou can
not use the spiritual powers (though they be in thee) in thy own will.
Therefore thou art to wait upon the Lord, that he may give thee the use of
them, by the new and actual influence of his Spirit upon them, which is, as it
were, the key, which opens them, otherwise they are shut up and locked.

IX. And lastly, Watch against the enemy, who lies near thee, in all thy
workings, one way or other, to mar them. For indeed so long as the body of sin
lives in thee, in any measure, so far has Satan a place in thee; for this body
with its members, and powers of its unholy life, is the very Kingdom and Throne
of Satan, in which he lives and rules, after a sort, as the Lord does in his
Kingdom, which is the heavenly Body and Birth with the Members and Powers
thereof: and as the Lord does work mightily in his own Kingdom and place, which
he has gained in the Soul, and strongly moves the Soul with its Powers, to
concur and cooperate with him: so the enemy works strongly in opposition to
the Lord, and also moves the Soul with its powers, to concur and co-operat
with him. And thus the poor Soul is set, as betwixt two contrary streams, the
one seeking to carry it one way, and the other to carry it to the contrary: and
on this account it is, that the Soul sometime obeys the one, and sometime the
other; sometime it is carried forward, and sometimes backward, yea, and
sometimes it does the Lord's work, and sometimes the work of the enemy; and at
other times the works, which it does, are (so to speak) mixed, or stands in a
mixture, so that one part of its work may be of and in the Lord, and done in
his Power and Spirit, and the other part may be of the enemy; yea, the Soul may
begin to do something well, and in the Spirit, and yet end it in the Flesh,
through its weakness and inadvertency.

Nevertheless we must not conceive any such mixture possible, as if what the
Lord does in the Soul, and what the Soul does with him and by his Power and
Spirit, could be corrupted and defiled by the Enemy. Nay, for the work of the
Lord is still pure, so far as it goes. But now the Soul giving way to the
Enemy he enters, and so puts a stop to the Lord's work at that time, but he
can never defile or corrupt it. And thus the Lord's part of the work is still
his, and the Enemy has no share in it, nor any influence upon it, so as to
defile it, but he may stop it, as the Lord permits him, and as the Soul gives
him way so to do.

Now one may readily object, According to this, it would seem, that so long as
sin has any life or power in the Soul, it being as is said, the Devils
Kingdom, it were impossible for it to do any work unto the Lord, and in him,
from first to last, but that it should be marred, and stand in the mixture as
aforesaid, for the very state and condition of the Soul being in the mixture,
as partly the Holy Life and its Powers having place therein, and partly the
unholy life and its powers, How can it be, but that the work it self should
stand in the mixture also, and that proportionally, according to the mixture of
the Souls own state and condition? For while the Soul is working that, which is
good, by the Powers of the Holy Life, in and with the Lord, will the powers of
the unholy life be idle and asleep, or rather will they not work in opposition?
Yea, will not the Devil move strongly in them, to resist and mar the work of
the Lord?

Answ. This objection indeed does evince, that the things is somewhat
difficult, but not impossible; It Is true, the powers of the unholy life, do of
their own nature, incline to work in opposition to the work of the Lord, and
Satan will never be wanting, as much as he can, to move and stir them up; but
this answers it plainly, that, as the Soul turns unto the Lord, and breaths
unto him, through the Powers of his own Life and Spirit, for preservation, and
continues thus inwardly, turned and converted unto him, in fear, watchfulness,
and singleness, the Power of the Lord God comes over the unholy Life and its
Powers, yea, and over the whole power of the enemy therein, and does bind and
captivate them, that they can no more prevail, to hinder the Soul from doing
the work of the Lord, in purity and perfection, in a measure, then if they had
no such place in it. Even as in the outward, if I were doing a piece of work,
and some strong bodied man, had a resolution to stop or mar me, yet if a
stronger than he come, and bind him up, I may do the work completely, maugre
him, he may fret, and make a noise, like a mad Dog, or Lion upon a Chain, but
he can do no more. And truly we have found the truth of this many times in our
own experience, that, as we have kept diligent nigh unto the Lord, with our
minds toward him, in tender breathings and desires, that we might be
preserved, we have found him chained as aforesaid. But when we have but a
little become remiss, and suffered our minds to slide back from that diligence
and watchfulness, as was requisite, then the Lord suffered the enemy somewhat,
as it were, to break loose upon us, and use his strength, in some measure
against us, to the end that thereby we might be stirred up unto the more
watchfulness. And indeed many times we find it so with us, in this matter, as
it was with the Jews, at the rebuilding of the City, who were so put to it;
that, while they builded with the one hand, they behooved to fight against the
adversary with the other. Thus ye may see that there is a time, wherein sin and
its powers may be captivated, before it be utterly slain, and the strong man
may be bound, before he be utterly cast out.

CHAP. IX.
Showing

How that, though Works can have no great influence upon the very first
beginnings of a Holy Life, that being only received through a receptive Faith,
yet they do greatly conduce unto the growth and continuance thereof, also unto
the killing and mortification of the sinful and unholy Life, with its powers
more and more, till it be utterly slain: where also the distinction of a
twofold property of Faith, viz. Receptive and operative, is somewhat opened.

WOrk out your Salvation (said the Apostle) with fear and trembling: It is
observable, he did not bid them begin their Salvation with works, but that they
should work it out, or proceed in it through works; which is a manifest proof,
that works have a great use and service, promoting and carrying on the
Salvation of the Soul, though they cannot begin it; and concerning the great
use they have unto this effect, Paul the same Apostle said again, Romans 8. If ye
live after the flesh, ye shall die, but if ye through the Spirit do mortify
the deeds of the body, ye shall live. Wherein these two things are plainly
implied.

1. That carnal and evil works (that is, a living after the flesh, occasion
death upon them, who are come to some measure of spiritual life: evil and
unholy works are deadning and killing, they are like a canke^, which eat out
the life of the Soul.

2. That good and holy works serve not only to preserve the measure of the holy
life already attained, but to increase and improve it.

And this same the parable of the Talents does plainly hold forth, for he, who
received but two Talents, yet improving the same, and putting them to use, they
became multiplied into four, so he, who received the five, by using them gained
other five. Many other Scripture exa^mples could be brought to prove the Tr^^^
of it, but these shall at present suffice.

Moreover the very nature of the thing does also demonstrate it, for it is here
the same as to the spiritual life, as it is in the natural, for the natural
life and the powers thereof become stronger and stronger, the more it is upon
motion and exercise, as we see by daily experience, but there is this
difference, that the natural Life, after it has come to its height, does
decay, and even spends or consumes it self, in its motions or workings, for
it is but a temporary thing. Whereas the spiritual life is eternal, and does
never at any time decay, or diminish through its workings, but is thereby
perpetuated. It is such a good plant, that it ever grows and flourishes, and
brings forth twelve manner of fruits every Month, where it is well occupied
or improved, and never of its own nature decays, or waxes barren, but the
more abundant fruit it brings forth this Month, or year, the yet more
abundantly it bring forth the next. Yea its life is so much in working, and
bringing forth fruit, that if it be hindered in its movings and workings, it
dies, even as the fire goes out, if it be stopped from burning, and the water
dies, if it be kept from running.

Besides, The Lord is so well pleased in the Soul, that is diligent in good
works through his own holy Life and Spirit, that he does reward it with a
further measure, and takes delight to water the Soul, that is fruitful
therein, the more abundantly, with his heavenly virtue and Spirit, even as the
Husbandman does his garden, which yields him good fruit. But the Vineyard,
which brings not forth Good Grapes, but the Sour and Bitter Grapes of evil
works, see what he does to it, Isa. 5. I will lay it wast, says the Lord, it
shall not be pruned nor dug, etc. I will also command the clouds, that they
rain no rain upon it.

But it may be said, Is not faith a work? and is not believing working? And yet
thou grants, that the Soul comes to attain unto the first beginning or
beginnings of a holy and spiritual life through faith and believing.

Unto this I answer, that there is a twofold property of Faith.

1. Receptive, or receiving. 2. Operative, or working.
Now the Soul does not attain unto the beginning of a holy Life, through the
property of faith, which is opperative, but through that, which is receptive.
And least any should think this distinction too nice or subtle, I shall prove
it from the express words of Scripture.

1. That faith is operative, is clear from that Scripture, where it is said,
Faith works by Love; and where it is said to purify the Heart, and do a
great many good things, in many other places.

2. That it is receptive, I shall go no further then Ioh. 1.12. For proof, To
as many as received him, to them gave he power to become the sons of God. And
that this receiving Christ is a believing in him, is plain from the words
immediately following, even (said he) to them, that believe in his Name. So
here is the receptive faith, for receptive is as much as to say in English,
receiving. Nor are there many examples wanting in natural things, to show that
a thing may have the receptive power, when as yet it has not the operative,
yea that the receptive makes way for the operative, as to instance in some.

1. The needle of the compass must first receive its virtue from the load
stone, being touched with it, before it can direct it self toward the pole.

2. The branch, that is cut off from its own natural stock, and grafted into
another, it first receives life and virtue from the stock, into which it is
grafted, and drinks it in, before it proceed to send forth either leaves or
flourish, or fruit.

3. The womb first receives seed, before the powers of nature in it proceed in
their operation, for its conception and formation.

4. The Stomach first receives the meat into it, before by the powers of
nature therein, it digest and turn it into the nourishment of the body. And
indeed this last example does with great clearness hold forth the thing in
hand. For suppose now a man through hunger were even faint, and as it were,
dead, so that he were able to do nothing, yet receiving a little food, the
virtue of it does suddenly revive him, and gives him natural strength, whereby
he may do and work, as formerly. And thus the Soul receiving and drinking in
that divine virtue of life that is in the divine Seed, is thereby quickened and
strengthened to do the things, that pertain unto an holy Life, in some measure.

All which examples, and many more, which could be adduced, prove, that a thing
may have a receptive power, and not the operative, yea that the receptive
makes way for the operative. And to this purpose, these words of Christ are
observable, He that believes in me, (says he) though he were dead, yet shall
he live: which imports, that a Soul, though it be dead, may believe, that is to
say, receive the Seed and principle of Life into it; for this Divine Principle
is of an insinuating and penetrating nature, it does make way for its own
reception in the heart, insinuating, and, as it were, winding it self
thereinto, as the Fire does into Wood, or any combustible matter. But now when
this Principle does labor to work it self into the Soul and its powers, the
Soul may resist, and does so many times, whereby it remains dead, though
otherwise it might have lived, by giving way unto, or receiving this Divine
Principle and Seed.

And thus that subtle objection may be answered, which is thus:

Believing, or Faith is an act of Spiritual Life, indwelling in the Soul, and
can only proceed from the Soul, that lives a Spiritual Life. For as a dead
Body cannot walk or move, so nor can a dead Soul believe.

From this it is inferred, That the Soul must first live, before it can
believe, or have Faith, and consequently, that none others can have Faith, but
they, who are already partakers of a Spiritual Life, which is contrary to what
ye say, that it is possible for all men to believe, while yet ye grant, all men
are not spiritually alive.

But this is answered by the former distinction of the twofold property of
Faith.

Therefore unto that proposition, on which the whole strength of the objection
lies, viz. that Faith is an act of Spiritual Life indwelling in the Soul, I
thus answer:

That the Operative Faith or Believing, is an act of Spiritual Life indwelling,
I grant: but as for the receptive property of Faith, through it the Soul is
made a partaker of the Spiritual Life, by which it comes to indwell in the
Soul, and therefore the Soul cannot be conceived to live Spiritually, before
the receptive Faith.

This receptive Faith is the same with the Soul's converting or turning, or
being converted or turned inwardly by the Lord, unto the Divine Seed and
Principle in it, and to the Divine Presence of God and Christ Jesus therein,
whereof I have said somewhat, chap. 4. And whether the Soul be supposed only to
be passive in this receptive Faith, or partly passive and partly active, the
matter is not much, provided it be acknowledged, that it cannot so much as
believe, even according to the receptive Faith, but as it is enabled and
assisted, after a supernatural manner, by the Lord.

Also some may object, This Doctrine seems contrary to what ye seem to hold,
when ye say, That it is possible for all men to do the things, that God
requires of them, and that no man perishes for want of power to do the will of
God.

Answ. There is no contrariety herein, for when we say, it is possible for all
men to do the things, that God requires of them, we understand not this simply
and absolutely, but conditionally, to wit, upon their believing: for they, who
believe, receive power to do the will of God, whereas the unbelievers want this
power, because of their unbelief, and forasmuch as it is possible for all men to
believe, at such times when the Lord does visit them, and touch their hearts,
by the gracious influence of his Holy Spirit, therefore we do justly say, that
all men may do the will of God, according to the restriction aforesaid.

CHAP. X.
Of the great Influence, that the Coming of our Lord Jesus Christ in the
outward, in his Birth, Life, Doctrine, Works, Sufferings, Death, Resurrection,
Ascension, Glorification, etc. Has upon our mortification to sin, and
regeneration unto Holiness, even unto Perfection: and after what manner we
should improve the same effectually, in order thereunto.

GReat and excellent are the Benefits, which do come upon men, through the
coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, even in the outward, but through a Spirit of
Deceit and Hypocrisy; which has deeply entered the most of Professors, and
leavened them. Great and woeful are the abuses, which they have put both upon
his outward coming, and the benefits thereof, while they do both grievously
misunderstand and misapply the end of his coming.

For, whereas the main and principle end of his coming is, to reconcile Men
unto God, and make peace betwixt them, through his purging their Consciences
from dead works, taking away the Sins and Pollutions of their Hearts, and
defacing and blotting out that unholy Image of Satan, begot in them, through
unrighteousness, and enduing them with the Heavenly and Righteous Image of God;
they on the contrary have supposed, or dreamed, that his end, in coming, was to
reconcile them to God, and justify them, while remaining in their sins. Yea,
and so far they have proceeded herein, as to imagine, that there is no need of
Holiness at all, for Justification and Reconciliation, but only for making them
meet for Heaven, as they term it. Whereby it would seem, they suppose, that,
whereas Heaven can be at no peace with unholy men, yet God can; as if God were
more reconcilable with Iniquity than Heaven is. But surely neither Heaven, nor
the God of Heaven (much less) can ever be reconciled, or at peace, with
unholiness, or those, who live in it.

Now the ground of this their supposition is an unfound ^otion, they have
drunken in, that Christ is come, or put in their stead, to fulfill the Law of
God, for them, in his own person, both actively and passively, by which they
are wholly justified ^n the sight of God, through his satisfaction, though they
remain in much sinfulness and unholiness in their own particular.

But tho we do truly acknowledge the full and perfect satisfaction of Christ
unto the Father, both in his doings and sufferings; yet we deny that notion of
it, as unsound and unscrip^ural. For the true sense of the satisfaction of
Christ, both as we read it outwardly in the Scriptures testimony, and feel and
know it inwardly, in the work and testimony of his Spirit, Light and Life in
our hearts, is after, and according to the manner, as follows.

I. When man sinned against God, and became corrupt and unclean in his heart
before him, through transgession, the peace betwixt God and him was broken; and
so man, who in his innocent state was justified and at peace with God, now
through his sin became unjustified, and the wrath of God kindled against him
both in his Soul and body, in great measure.

II. This wrath of God would have burnt, in such a violent and forcible manner,
had not he provided a way in his infinite mercy, in some measure, to abate and
qualify it, that it would have sunk man into endless and irrecoverable torment
and misery. But God prepared a way both to qualify this wrath, and also in due
time wholly to quench it, and bring man into perfect peace and reconciliation
with God, as at the beginning, yea and to establish him therein for ever.

III. Now the way and remedy, he provided, both for the qualifying it at first,
and afterward for the total quenching of it, was the coming of the Lord Jesus
Christ his only begotten Son in a Holy Seed, conception and birth, out of which
should spring such a gentle, meek, and qualifying Spirit and Life, that it
should stand up in the way betwixt the wrath of God and men, first to abate and
qualify the wrath toward men, even while they are in their sins, but not to
remove it, and that for a certain time or day of visitation, given them of God,
to repent and come out of their sins and sinful nature and spirit, into
holiness and the nature and (...) thereof; and then quite to remove and quench
it, at their being made free from sin, an^ perfected in holiness. And truly
this great and unspeakable benefit from Christ have all unholy men, in the day
of their visitation, that through his sweet and quallifying Life, the wrath of
God is in a great measure born up, from falling upon them, to the uttermost,
which if it did, would instantly sink them into the pit, from whence there is
no recovery. Nevertheless the wrath of God abides upon all unholy men, but
through the meek Life of Christ in the Holy Seed, it is greatly suspended or
born off.

IV. Now that the Lord Jesus might be, the more universally and thoroughly, a
Savior unto man, for his recovery out of the misery and bondage and vanity,
into which he had thrown himself, it pleased the Father, yea and the Son both,
that he should come (to wit, Christ) in a holy Seed both inwardly, and
outwardly, for the deliverance of both the inward and outward man, yea and for
the deliverance of the whole outward creation, from the vanity and corruption
it was made subject unto, through the sin of Man. And thus even from the
beginning, yea upon man's fall, God was in Christ reconciling the World to
himself, and Christ was manifest in the holy Seed inwardly, and so stood in the
way to ward off the wrath from the sinners and unholy, that it might not come
upon them to the uttermost, during the day of their visitation. For even at
man's fall, the Seed of the woman was given, not only to bruise the Serpents
head, but also to be a Lamb or Sacrifice, to atone and pacify the wrath of
God, toward men. And this is the Lamb, that was slain from the beginning of
the World.

V. And through the coming of Jesus Christ thus in the inward, even before he
was outwardly come, or manifest, many were saved, and attained unto perfect
peace and reconciliation with God in their Souls, yet not in unholiness, but in
departing therefrom, and becoming holy and sanctified unto God. Now, tho from
the beginning he was not outwardly come, nevertheless his purpose of coming
outwardly was from the beginning: and also he had a certain fore-knowledg and
sense of what he was to suffer, and how he was to be delivered up into the
hands of sinners, to be so dealt with, as it came to pass in the fullness of
time. And according to this in a true sense it may be said, that he bore the
weight of his outward sufferings, in great measure, from the very beginning. As
even among us men, what we do certainly foresee of sufferings or trials to come
upon us for the future, does affect us with no less weight many times in the
foresight of them, then in their accomplishment, yea sometimes more, as every
one knows by some experience. And that he was given up and resigned in the
very beginning to come into the World outwardly, and suffer those indignities
and cruelties with many other deep trials, was certainly a sacrifice of a sweet
smell before the Lord, and was very acceptable and satisfactory unto him.

VI. And thus according to the plain and genuine sense above mentioned, obvious
to the weakest capacity, we may truly say, that all the benefits and blessings,
which come upon men or have come upon them from the very beginning, for either
their justification or sanctification, have a spiritual relation and respect
unto Jesus Christ, both in his inward and outward coming, and his doings and
sufferings in both, by which he gave perfect obedience unto his Father; and
thereby he has obtained the free Gift to come upon all, unto justification of
life.

Therefore we are not too nicely to distinguish betwixt the influence of his
inward and outward coming and the effects thereof, but rather to take them
conjunctly, as in a perfect conjunction, having a perfect influence upon all
mankind, for their reconciliation and renovation unto God, as obtaining that
measure of Light and Grace from God unto all and every one, whereby it is
possible for them in a day to be saved.

VII. And indeed we do very freely and willingly acknowledge, that the (...)
aforesaid by his obedience and suff^^^ngs, even in the outward, has by his
satisfaction un^o God obtained it, that man may come into justification and
favor with God, but not any otherwise, but upon these terms, viz. upon their
Faith and Repentance, Mortification or dying unto sin, and living a new life of
holiness and righteousness unto God, otherwise all p^etence unto Justification,
by Christ his Satisfaction, is but a deceit, and a cloak for men to sooth and
gratify themselves in their sins and lusts: for the Lord justifies only his
own Seed, and them, who are begotten and born of it, in whom the righteousness
of the Law is fulfilled through the Power, Life and Spirit of Christ manifest
in them, who walk not after the flesh, but after the Spirit, to whom there is
no condemnation. And these terms, videlicet, Faith and Holiness are very gentle
and easy, forasmuch as Christ is freely given of the Father unto all men, to
enable them to the full performance thereof.

Also here is another great error and mistake among Professors generally, that
they do not conceive that Christ did really suffer, for, and by men's sins, but
only at his outward coming; which mistake is grounded upon this other mistake,
that Christ had no being, as man, but at his coming into the outward, and
consequently could not suffer; which consequence behoved to be admitted, if the
ground on which it was built were true: but it is utterly false, for it is most
certain from the Scriptures Testimony, that he suffered all along by men's
iniquities, as where it is said, I am pressed under them, etc. Amos 2.13. and
that he was the Lamb slain from the foundation of the World, yea that he
endured the old world with much long-suffering, and many other places. For even
from the beginning he was Mediator: therefore he is said to be the beginning of
the creation of God, the firstborn of all creatures. And why might not Christ
suffer in men, before his outward coming, as he does now suffer in them, long
after it? even as Paul speaks of the sufferings of Christ, which remained to
be accomplished in him, for the Seed (which is Christ, according to his
participation with the Creatures) has been the same in all Ages, and has had
its sufferings under, by, and for the sins of men, in them all, for the
removing and abolishing of them.

This outward coming of the Lord Jesus and his Conception, Birth, Life,
Sufferings, Death, Resurrection and Ascension, etc. is one of the greatest and
profoundest mysteries of the Christian Faith, and has an exceeding much deeper
sense and consideration, than most apprehend, or than any can apprehend, but as
it is opened unto them in the Life, Light and Spirit of Christ in their own
particulars.

And therefore I do admonish and warn all, yea I obtest them, in the Power and
Spirit of Jesus Christ, that they do not make any slight account of it, or
undervalue this great and glorious mystery, that shall be the eternal object of
the Saints contemplation, for which (as among other things) they shall
eternally adore, and admire the infinite goodness, wisdom, mercy, and power of
the Lord in and over all his works. And if the mystery be not opened unto them,
as aforesaid, let them be silent, and hold their peace, not meddling to measure
the mysteries, nor this mystery of God, with the weak and shallow capacity of
their own apprehensions. And seeing the Lord has given me some in-sight and
knowledge thereof in a measure, and that by the Revelation of the Spirit and
Life of his Son in my heart, I may not forbear to mention and declare somewhat
of it unto others, which I warn and admonish all, that shall read or hear of
it, to beware of judging of the same, but in the express sense, feeling, and
opening of the same Life and Spirit in their own particulars.

It has been commonly taught and supposed, that the coming of Jesus in the
outward, and his becoming man, had no further in it, but that the WORD, which
was from everlasting, did assume the true nature of man in Soul and Body unto
an immediate union with it self, (commonly called the Hypostatical or Personal
Union) and that this Manhood of Christ was conceived in a miraculous way, by
the Power of the Holy Ghost in the Virgins Womb. All which is willingly
granted, and truly and cordially believed by me. But I say, there is yet a
further thing in it, than they yet speak of, or apprehend, and it is this,

That even that holy Birth and Conception, as it had the real and true nature
of man, so it had much more, viz. a certain Divine Perfection, (as I may so
call it, through the wisdom given me of God) whereby it was not only the whole
and entire Nature, or Birth of Manhood, but was more, yea much more than a man.
It Is true, it is commonly granted, that Christ was more than a man, yea both
God and man, which is true: but yet they do not apprehend the thing, whereof I
speak. For, tho they grant Christ was both God and man, yet they do not
apprehend nor acknowledge, that that Birth had any thing of its own nature,
more than the Birth of any other man, which, I say, it had, according to the
Revelation of God given me, concerning it. And this is demonstrable also from
Scripture: ^

But I shall soon put an end to both these reasonings, and yet also speak or
declare freely that which is given me concerning the same, (and in plainness so
far as the nature of the thing can admit.) I say then, that neither is the
Godhead it self conceived or born in this Birth, nor yet is it a particle or
portion thereof. For I confess, to say either of these two, were very unsound,
and is altogether contrary unto and inconsistent with the dignity and Glory of
God. And as for the Godhead (to speak properly) it is not discerpible into
particles.

And thus I have plainly cleared my self of the least ground of suspicion of
Blasphemy or unsoundness, as to the nature and dignity of the Godhead, that
is, without all variableness or shadow of change.

And now to that question, viz. If that Birth have in it, (and that
substantially) and in its very nature somewhat above the common nature of man,
what can it be but the Godhead it self.

I answer: Yea it has, and yet it is not the Godhead it self, but a certain
middle nature, substance, or being, betwixt the Godhead and mankind, that is
as far, yea and much farther transcendent in Glory above the common nature of
man, as the nature of man is above the nature of the beasts; yea it is even
above the nature of the Angels.

This will be thought the more strange of by many, because they have been
commonly taught and have commonly received it, that there is no middle
substance betwixt the Godhead and us, at least as to the inward; for they have
supposed, that the spirit or mind of a man or an Angel, is next unto the
Godhead, which I deny, for the Heavenly or Divine Substance or Essence, of
which the Divine Birth was both conceived in Mary, and is inwardly conceived in
the Saints, is of a middle nature.

Now this middle Nature I call a Divine Substance or Essence, not as if it were
the Godhead it self, or a particle or portion of it, but because of its
excellency above all other things next unto the Godhead, as on such an account
men do call other things Divine (which are very excellent) yea some call Holy
men Divine, and some call these, who teach the things of God, Divines, as John,
who wrote the Revelation, is called John the Divine.

Also, this excellent and intermediate being may be called the Divine Being, on
such an account, as because the Godhead is most immediately manifest therein,
and dwells in it, as in the most Holy place, or Holy of Holies. For thus,
even according unto the manner of men, we commonly say, such a place, in the
outward, is such a man's being, because of his dwelling or abiding there. And
so it may be called the Divine Essence or Being, for that God does dwell in it,
though he dwells in himself also, and so did from everlasting. And truly I
cannot but in Charity construe this to have been intended by some in some other
places, who affirmed, that Christ as man, was born of the Divine Essence or
Substance, for so say I, according to the foresaid explanation, that he was not
only born of it, but of the essence or substance of man also, through Mary.

And thus he was both the Son of God and the Son of Man, according to his very
birth in Mary: and therefore even according to that birth, he has a Divine
perfection and virtue, and that substantial, above all other men that ever
were, are, or shall be, who is the Heavenly Man, by virtue of which Divine
Perfection he was united with God in an immediate manner, and replenished with
such a fullness of the Godhead, as no other man, or men are capable of: yea by
virtue thereof the fullness dwelt in him bodily, as the Scriptures declare.

And this Divine and Super-eminent perfection of this birth above the common
nature of man, yea of Angels, is that wonderful nexus, tie, or bond betwixt God
and him, through which he has immediate union with him; yea it is, and may be
called the union, viz. that by which God and man is made one, and such and
union as no other Creature has, or ever shall have, for that the union of God
with all other creatures is but mediate, whereas this is immediate. Wherefore
he, and he alone ought to be called Jesus Christ, both God and Man, and no
other. And by this Divine Perfection he carries the Image of God, in his very
outward birth: as also he carried in the same the true nature and image of Man,
through his partaking of Marys substance.

And thus he has our whole, and perfect true nature, as man, being like us in
all things without sin, in Soul and Body, so he has also somewhat, even as to
his Soul and Body, much more excellent, than all other men, and that
substanstially: so that his body has not only the perfections of our body, but
also much more, because of its being generate, not only of the Seed of Mary,
but of a Divine Seed, and his Soul has all the perfections and properties,
which the Soul of man in innocence has: but it has also much more excellent
properties and perfections, and that substantially. And therefore his body tho
it could suffer death, yet it could not suffer corruption, and his Soul could
not sin, nor be corrupted with Iniquity, but did ever suffer under it, and by
it, which Soul of Christ is the Quickening Spirit, as Paul has declared, 1
Cor. 15.

Now because of the wonderful and Divine excellencies and perfections of this
birth, therefore it is ordained and appointed of God to be that Universal
Balsam or Medicine, to cure and restore, not only all these of Mankind in Soul
and Body (who shall receive him inwardly by Faith and Love) but also to cure
and restore the whole outward Creation, from its Distempers and Corruptions,
that are come upon it, through sin. Yea this is the little leaven, that shall
leaven the whole lump of this visible Creation, by its Pure, Heavenly, and
Divine Virtue, into most wonderful Sweetness, Purity, Virtue, Beauty, and
Glory, whereby all things shall be made new, and that which is but natural,
shall be, as it were, spiritual. Yea this is indeed that Stone of the Wisemen,
which by its touch shall in due time change, not only the Bodies of the Saints,
but the Body of the whole Creation, and purge it from all its weakness and
impurity. And truly another Philosophers Stone, even in the outward (at least
to that Latitude, as it is commonly defined) shall men never find, but this,
even this Holy and Divine Body and Birth, which now 1669 years ago was brought
forth, through the Power of the Holy Ghost, in and by the Virgin Mary. For what
can perfectly cure and restore the sick and diseased Body of Nature, either in
man, or other things, but his incorruptible body, through the Power of the
Spirit that dwells in it, who said, Behold I make all things new, and for
whose coming to renew them all, the Creation is invited to rejoice, because of
their being to be delivered through the same, from their Bondage and Vanity?
Yet I shall not deny, but that it may be possible for men, through the Wisdom
of God, to find out such a substance, as may do great cures on the Body of
Nature, but I say it can never perfectly cure it: otherwise the Body should
become immortal, which never shall be through the Virtue of any other Body, but
that of Jesus Christ, as is said. And, though such a Substance have been found,
or may be (as supposing it, which could turn the other Metals into Gold) yet
this were not the universal Bal^om or Stone, for even the purest Gold on Earth
has its Corruptions and Distempers, from which when it is refined, it will
more excel, what it is now, than it at present does excel the basest Metal,
Stone, or Sand, or Turf.

And to the end that this excellent Body or Birth of Jesus Christ might be the
more prepared forsuch an effect, viz. To cure and restore all things, therefore
it pleased the Father to give him up, both in Soul and Body, to suffer such
deep inward afflictions, sufferings and trials, for by these that hidden Divine
Virtue and Perfection, which was in the center both of his Soul and Body, was
raised up and brought forth (as into the circumference) even unto its fullness
and perfection. According to which it is said in the Scripture, that he (the
Captain of our Salvation) was made perfect through sufferings, for so it is indeed
as to all other things, which have any perfection or virtue further in them,
than is manifest, as it were, hid in the center, which perfection is raised up
and brought into view or manifestation, through its sufferings, as by
mortification, calcination, melting it in the fire, heating it, pounding and
pressing it, bruising and squeezing, boiling, and many such kind of things,
well known to Chemists and Physicians. And thus was our Blessed Lord used, both
in his Soul and Body: his deep sufrings in both were like a Wine Press, which
served to squeeze and press out the hidden Wine, that was in his Grapes, even
that pure and precious Water and Blood, which came out at his Side on the
Cross, and when in the Garden he sweat, that drops of Blood fell to the ground,
these very drops of Water and Blood had a most excellent virtue in them, beyond
what man's heart is able to conceive of, whereby they entered into the very
kernel and quintescence of the whole Creation, to its very heart, for its
deliverance and restoration. And this was as a Seed, that was then sown in the
very heart of the outward Nature, by which it is blessed of God in some
measure, and through which it shall in due time be perfectly delivered and
cured of its vanity, corruption, and bondage.

Therefore it was, that at the sufferings of Christ, the whole outward Creation
fell into a wonderful passion and suffering, in so much that there was a great
darkness over all, and the very Earth was, as it were, rent, for that secret
and excellent virtue, which went forth from him at his Sufferings, even in the
Water and the Blood pierced into the heart of the body of the World, and
wrought in it, like Physic that works strongly, against the corrupt humors
in man's body, that does greatly affect the body with sufferings. And thus it
was even fit, that the Creation should, after its manner, suffer with him,
which was to partake of such glorious effects, through his sufferings. And
though the outward Creation be not yet cured, through the secret Virtue of that
Water and Blood, no, nor yet the Bodies of the Saints, yet in due time they
shall, even through and by the Virtue of these Sufferings.

But as I have said above, so do I again repeat it, that it may have the more
weight, viz. that we are not too nicely to make a difference betwixt the
Influence and Effects of his outward and inward Sufferings, but to understand
them in a perfect conjunction, and that the end of his Suffering in both was
this, viz.

1. Both to quench and allay the wrath of God, which was kindled both in Men's
Souls and Bodies, and also in the whole Body of the Creation. And

2. To purify and cure both Men, and also the outward Creation, from
Corruption, Vanity, and Bondage. And so, in relation to Men, this I say, that
the Sufferings of Christ, and his Obedience, Life and Righteousness, both
inwardly and outwardly, has a very blessed influence upon Men, both to remove
the Wrath, and also to remove Sin the cause of it, and to bring in everlasting
Righteousness, to cover the Soul with, by a real participation of it, over and
beyond all imaginary reckonings and imputation of man, (though the imputation
of God unto man, ^we own.) And this I say further, that the Wrath is no further
removed from Men, by Virtue of Christ's Obedience and Sufferings, than Sin, that
is the cause of it, is removed: and thus Justification and Mortification, and
Sanctification, go on equally. And by what is said, way is also made for
clearing of that concerning Christ, his bearing the Wrath and Anger of God for
us; to which I say, he did so bear it indeed, that he bore it up from falling
upon us, in its full weight, which if it had done, it would have sunk us into
an eternal state of misery, and he stood in the way and bore it off, that it
did not drown and consume us with everlasting Death and Destruction; but that
he did bear the Wrath of God, either in that manner or measure, which the
damned in Hell do, or we should have done, had not the Lord recovered us, I
altogether deny, for he could, and did satisfy the Father well and acceptably,
without bearing it in that way.

But if it be queried, If he suffered by that wrath, when he stood betwixt us
and it.

I answer, He suffered a trial and chastisement by it, and so it is called a
Chastisement, but it could never be said, that the Father was offended or
displeased with him, even while he suffered for us, for the Father was
satisfied and well pleased in him in his greatest sufferings, which he did
bear, in most perfect resignation, love, and willingness, both to please his
Father, and also to save and reconcile men unto God. And tho the Lord did not
withdraw that sensible comfort from him, when he suffered on the Cross, it was
not for any displeasure toward him, but for a trial, and as is said, to raise
up and draw forth that excellent virtue and perfection, that was in him, the
more. So it pleased the Father to bruise him, and press him with sufferings, as
in a Winepress, to the end that sweet Wine might come forth, that has the
virtue in it to cure men of their wounds, both in relation to wrath and sin.
And so when he cried forth with a loud voice upon the Cross, My God, etc. even
therein and there through Virtue went from him, in that holy Breath or Spirit
which had, and has, a most effectual Influence upon both men and the creation,
for their deliverance, as aforesaid, for nothing, that he ever did or suffered,
was in vain, or without virtue and influence unto men's Salvation.

And thus having declared the great influence, which the very outward coming,
Birth, Life, Sufferings, and Death, etc. of Christ, has upon men, both for
their Justification and Sanctification; let us now see how and in what manner
we should improve the same effectually, in order thereunto: For indeed we shall
find how the Apostles did greatly improve and make use of it, in order unto
Mortification, or dying unto sin, and living unto holiness, and making progress
therein, unto perfection. As to instance in some few examples.

Romans 6.2. How shall we, that are dead to sin, live any longer therein? Know ye
not that as many of us as were baptized into Jesus Christ, were Baptized into
his death, etc. See throughout the whole Chapter.

2 Cor. 5.14. For the love of Christ constrains us: Because we thus judge,
that if one dyed for all, then were all dead, and that he died for all, that
they which live, should not henceforth live unto themselves, bu^ unto him, who
died for them, and rose again.

1 Pet. 2.24. Who his own self bore our sins in his own body on the tree, but
we being dead to sin should live to righteousness, by whose stripes ye were
healed, Verse. 21. Because Christ also suffered for us, leaving us an example,
that we should follow his steps.

1 Pet. 4.1. Forasmuch then as Christ has suffered for us in the flesh, arm
your selves likewise with the same mind. For he, that has suffered in the
flesh, has ceased from sin, that he no longer should live the rest of his time
in the flesh, to the lusts of men, but to the will of God.

By all which places, and many other, which could be mentioned, we may observe
that the Saints made the chifest use and improvements of the Sufferings, Death,
and Resurrection of Christ, for the Mortification of Sin, and living unto God,
in holiness and righteousness, and that unto perfection; and did not sooth or
please themselves to live in much sin and unholiness, and speaking peace to
themselves therein, because of what Christ had done and suffered for them.

And now I shall sum up in a few words the particular uses and benefits, which
the Saints receive, in order to a growing and proceeding in holiness, through
the improving the Coming, Sufferings, Death, and Resurrection of the Lord in
the outward, through the Power and Light of his own holy Spirit and Life, in
and by which only they can improve them aright.

I. As his Coming, Birth, Sufferings, Death, Resurrection, etc. are presented
and set before us, in the evidence and virtue of his own Light and Spirit in
our hearts, so it is made a great occasion to strengthen both our faith in God,
and our love toward him, forasmuch as our Lord God the Father of our Lord
Jesus Christ has given, by his outward coming, etc. as aforesaid, a very great
and large testimony of his love and good will toward all men, for their
Salvation, and of his patience and long-suffering, in permitting men so to use
his own dear Son, which was, as if it had been unto himself. Yea, herein he
gave a most convincing Testimony how he had born and suffered, with wonderful
long-suffering the iniquities of men, which struck against his inward Life and
Spirit of his Son in all ages and generations, before the wounding and
crucifying it in them, as now they did against him in the outward. By which men
might be greatly convinced, that the will of the Lord was their Salvation, in
so bearing and suffering them, for had he not intended love to them herein, he
might have eased himself of his adversaries in a Moment, and altogether
delivered that tender Life and Spirit of his Son from its sufferings in them,
and brought intolerable sufferings upon the transgressors themselves. Also
herein the Lord gave a great testimony of his Power to save, in as much as tho
he delivered up his Son to suffer most deep affliction in and under sinners,
yet in due time he raised him up again, even from death, and did manifestly set
him over all his adversaries, according to the working of which mighty power he
is able to save unto the uttermost all, that come unto God by him. And so these
things being inwardly presented and set before the Soul in the Spirit and Light
of Jesus Christ, are indeed very forcible and prevailing to work faith in it,
both upon the mercy and power of the Lord, and so to rest and stay its faith
upon him, for its full and perfect Salvation, as also to work and beget love
unto him, in the inward sense and feeling of the wonderful love of God, as
manifesting it self even so in the outward.

II. And yet more particularly the coming, sufferings, and death of Christ, as
presented by his Spirit in the Soul, as aforesaid, have a very special
influence to kindle most ardent love in it toward him, in the sense of that
love of his so wonderfully manifested in the outward, whereby, for the Souls
saving from sin and wrath, he so humbled himself by so many steps and degrees,
and bore such indignities and sufferings as never any one did; and all in love
to the Soul, and for it, and for its deliverance, as aforesaid, and that he
should be manifest in the outward body, and suffer so deeply therein, even for
the delivering our outward bodies also from sin and wrath; these things, I say,
as presented and set before the Soul in his own Spirit, as it were, himself
telling it in a particular way how he had humbled himself, and what he had done
and suffered for it, are strong and prevailing occasions to work most ardent
and dear love in the Soul toward him and his Spirit, and toward the Father
also, whose free Gift of Love he is.

III. And they have indeed a great influence, when presented in his Spirit, as
aforesaid, to work in our hearts true and real repentance from all our sins,
yea and a perfect and universal hatred against them, as having a sense that our
sins were the occasion of his sufferings, yea his deepest and heaviest
sufferings, even in his Soul in the outward, was through the burden of our
iniquities, which he then did bear, so that the wounds, he got in his blessed
Body, with the Nails, and the Spear, and the Thorns, and the violent Hands of
Men, were nothing comparable to these wounds he had in his righteous Soul and
Life, through the burden and weight of men's iniquities.

But how Christ did suffer under the iniquities of men and the spirit and power
thereof, can never be understood in any true measure, but by these alone; who
are come to be acquainted with a measure of his righteous Life in their own
particulars, and to know a measure of redemption from sin thereby; such will
feel how that righteous Life of Christ Jesus suffers by sin, and the spirit and
power thereof, so that many times we have felt the Life of him in us to be
deeply smitten and wounded, and deeply to suffer, through and by iniquity and
the spirit of it, even in others, and in a whole country and nation, yea in
some measure through the whole world. The reason of which is, because of that
deep and near Sympathy, that his Life in the Saints has with the Seed of that
Life, that is oppressed in others, till it be raised. So that many, in whom
this righteous Life is raised to reign in perfect dominion over all, its
contrary in their own particulars, yet witness many times its deep sufferings,
through its Sympathy with that Seed of its own nature oppressed and murdered in
others. So that indeed upon the matter this Righteous Life in none of the
Saints will be wholly delivered from its Sufferings, till that of its own
nature over all the World be raised up in all hearts, to reign with it in
dominion, either in full love, or wrath.

And truly these deep Sufferings of Christ under the burden of men's Iniquities
really felt and witnessed by him, as in the Garden, and on the Cross, etc. I
find the Professors know little or nothing of, for they conceive not that
Christ suffered any other way by the burden of sin laid on him, then in that he
suffered the Wrath of God, that was due to men for sin, and so they understand
his bearing our sins to be only in respect of the Wrath of God he did bear,
which was not so, for he suffered much more deeply by the sins of the World and
the Spirit thereof, because of that great and implacable contrariety and
enmity, which sin and the Spirit thereof has against his tender Life; which at
that time had mustered up all its forces against him, the Lord permitting it so
to be, that by his patient and meek sufferings, he might overcome it, as indeed
he did; and even upon the Cross Triumphed over it, and gave the Spirit of
Transgression the greatest blow and wound that ever it got, which shall in due
time by the Virtue and Power of his Sufferings be utterly slain, and
extinguished in the Earth, and it filled with his Holy and Righteous Spirit.
And this Spirit of Iniquity wrought what it could so to Eclipse and Vail the
presence of God from his Righteous Soul, as to take away that comfort and joy
from him, which at other times he had, yet his Faith pierced through this
Cloud, that it did not overcome him, but he overcame it, and signified his
Faith in God, saying, My GOD, my GOD, Why have thou forsaken me? which
respected that sensible joy and comfort: yet in the midst of this deep trial
the Father was with him, in love, and in the Power and Virtue of that Love the
Wrath became mitigated and qualified toward men. And to speak properly, the
Wrath was indeed against men, but never on any account directly against Christ,
who did indeed intervene, and intermediate betwixt it and us, to bear it off,
and qualify it, as is abovesaid; yet he could never suffer it, as the damned
do, for he qualified it both in the Father's Love, and in his own; but the
Wrath which the damned suffer, has no such qualification. And truly we cannot
judge that the Father was (to speak properly) offended or displeased with him,
nay not on our account, nor do the Scriptures speak any thing so, only it
pleased the Father thus to try him, and make him perfect thus by sufferings, to
the end he might overcome Sin and the Spirit thereof, in the more Glory, and
might be the more fitted to help them, that are under Trials, as being touched
with the feeling of our Infirmities.

IIII. Being presented in his Spirit, as aforesaid, they have also great
influence, to raise in our Souls most fervent Breathings and Supplications unto
the Lord, not only for his pardoning and forgiving Grace, (for and because of
his Son's Bloodshed, his Sufferings, and Death, etc. by which he procured or
purchased it) but also for his Sanctifying and Mortifying Grace, even for an
abundant measure of the Life and Spirit of Grace, whereby we may be enabled to
die perfectly unto sin, and live unto God, in perfection of Holiness; so that
the Soul may strongly plead with the Lord upon the account of Christ, that he
may pour forth abundantly of his Grace, Life, Light and Spirit, because that
the Lord Jesus has purchased it abundantly, and has opened the Fountain of
the Father's Love abundantly, by his Obedience and Righteousness, to the end
that all Souls may come and draw out of that fullness of his, which he has
purchased, and is in him, even Grace for Grace, Joh. 1.16. both to justify and
sanctify, and as much the one as the other.

V. Also these things presented in the Spirit, as aforesaid, and in and thereby
applied to the Soul, become very strong and forcible motives unto it to war
against sin universally, and the Spirit thereof, to the utter killing and
destroying of it, seeing it is the greatest enemy of that tender Life of
Christ, which suffered so much on this account, even to the mortifying of the
Soul unto sin, and saving it therefrom, so that if the Soul do not diligently
apply it self unto a total mortification of sin, it does nothing answer unto
that love and good will of Christ, in his sufferings, nor to the end thereof.
They are also of the same force to move the Soul to follow after Holiness, till
it attain unto it, so as to be pure and holy, as Christ its Beloved and Spouse,
who gave himself for her, that she might be holy, and to present her unto God,
without spot or wrinkle, or any such thing, Ephesians. 5.27. Also how can the Soul
but be moved to press after Holiness, seeing it inwardly feels, that the
Righteous Life of Christ is as much eased and refreshed, and delighted in its
becoming Holy, as ever it was formerly Grieved and Burdened with its
Iniquities?

VI. Our Blessed Lord in his outward coming, Life, and Way of Conversation,
Doctrine, Sufferings, and Death, etc. is a most noble and perfect example unto
us, even the best that ever outwardly was, is, or shall be, that we might
imitate his Virtues, and follow his Steps, in all Godliness, Temperance, and
Righteousness, who taught us most excellent Documents and Instructions of a
Holy Life, both in Doctrine and Example, and sealed the same with his most Holy
and Blessed Sufferings, who knew no sin, yet so willingly suffered Death for
Sin, gave us a most convincing Example, that we should Die unto it, and suffer
it no more to live in us.

Now it is to be observed and remembered, that in all these Steps, the
Sufferings and Death of Christ, etc. have these Influences upon us, not as they
are presented unto us barely in our own Spirit, or as we do bring them to our
remembrance thereby, and so make a working upon our selves, in our own thoughts
and motions, for in so doing we shall never profit our own Souls, either in
Dying unto Sin, or Living in Holiness unto God. Indeed we may thereby raise
sparks of our own kindling, in the affectionate part, and work some effect in
our hearts, which may be a shadow or likeness of these things, but can never be
the things themselves, but as they are inwardly presented to the Soul in the
Light, Life, and Spirit of Christ Jesus, and applied thereby, and that
instantly and continually. For it is his Light, Life, and Spirit alone, which
both gives the true Understanding of the Use and End of these things, and also
gives unto the Soul the living sense and feeling of them, and in a living and
effectual way does only, and can apply them unto the Soul, and whole Powers
thereof, for the Working such suitable Effects and Impressions, as are proper
thereunto.

But some may say, Seeing the outward Coming, Sufferings and Death, etc. of the
Lord Jesus Christ, as it is known and improved by the Soul is so effectual to
work Faith and Love in it toward God, and for its Mortification unto Sin and
living in Holiness unto God, would it not therefore seem that the knowledge of
the outward Coming, Sufferings and Death of Christ, as aforesaid, is of
absolute necessity unto every one, for the attainment of these things? For how
can a Soul believe that God will be Gracious unto it, or is reconcilable with
it, but as it looks upon that Testimony of his Mercy and Love, in sending his
Beloved Son outwardly into the World, to Suffer and Die for our Sins, in order
unto our Reconciliation and Peace with God? Also how can it love God with that
Purity and Fervency of Love, which is according to the Gospel, but as it
regards and considers that Testimony of his Love, in the Coming, Sufferings and
Death of Christ in the outward?

ANSW. Indeed the knowledge of this outward Coming, Sufferings and Death, is of
very blessed use and advantage, and all who have it, should be very thankful
unto God, who has given us this Testimony of his Love, Good Will,
Long-suffering and Power, in the outward coming of Jesus Christ, for the more
abundant helping and enabling us to believe in him and love him. Yet this I
say, though express knowledge of his outward Coming, Sufferings and Death, is
very profitable to beget Faith and Love in men toward God, as aforesaid, and
ought to be highly valued in its place; nevertheless this express knowledge is
not of absolute necessity unto Faith and Love, forasmuch as the outward Coming,
Sufferings and Death of Christ may have, and has a real and true Influence
upon them, who know it not expressly. For, seeing he has tasted death for every
man, and given his Life a Ransom for all, it cannot be but that it should have
an Influence upon all. Yea the Apostle expressly mentions what it is, Romans 5.18,
19. how that by the Righteousness and Obedience of Christ the Free Gift is come
upon all, to Justification of Life. Look then, as many of Adam's Posterity
suffer disadvantage by his disobedience, who never knew it expressly, so why may
not many receive an advantage by Christ the Second Adam's obedience, even in
the outward, who never knew it expressly? Yea, certainly they have, for how many
Thousands have been Saved before Christ's coming in the outward; who knew it
not expressly? And many, who knew something of it, it was but very darkly and
under Vails and Figures: yea, the very Disciples did not for a good time know
of his Death, so that when he told them of it, they were astonished, and yet
they had both Faith and Love in some measure: seeing then that some had Faith
and Love to God, and were saved, without the express knowledge thereof, before
he came outwardly, why not also after his coming, where his coming outwardly
has not been preached nor revealed? Yea has not God a way of saving Infants,
and the Dumb and Deaf, who have not that express knowledge?

For now Christ is inwardly come in a Seed of Life* and Light in all, which is
the Word of Reconciliation, by which men may be Reconciled with God, as they
join and apply their minds thereunto: and in this the Lord God does give a
sufficient testimony of his love, mercy, good will Long suffering, and Power
unto every man, for his Salvation, whereby it is possible for him to attain
unto the true Faith in God, and the true Love toward him, even according to
the Gospel. And in this Holy Seed the Sufferings of Christ, and how he bore the
Iniquities of the Soul, and makes Intercession or Atonement unto God, may be
learned in some measure, with many other things concerning Christ, in relation
to him and his doings and sufferings in the outward, which was an outward and
visible Testimony of his inward doings and sufferings in all ages in men and
women in the Holy Seed.

And indeed we find, that this is only the true and effectual way of knowing
the use and work of his Coming, and Sufferings, and Death in the outward, by
turning, and having our minds turned inwards unto himself near and in our
hearts in the Holy Seed, to know by an inward feeling and good experience his
doings and sufferings in us, by being made conformable thereunto. In which Holy
Seed as it arises in us, such a clear Light shines forth in our hearts, as
gives unto us the true knowledge of the Use of his inward Doings and
Sufferings, hence also such a precious, sweet, and powerful Life springs up
from and in the same Holy Seed, which does with much sweetness and comfort,
enable us to follow his example in the outward, in Faith, in Obedience, in
Love, in Purity, in Patience, in Godliness, in Righteousness and Temperance,
and all other things, wherein we are required to imitate him.

And this is the great loss we find people at generally, who seek to know the
Virtue and Use of his Coming, Doings, and Sufferings in the outward, by what
they can outwardly hear or read of him, while as they remain estranged from his
Light, Life, and Spirit, in the Holy Seed in their hearts; and yet they can
never know the same but in this. And, Oh! at what great pains have many poor
Souls been to imitate Christ in his Heavenly Virtues, by setting him as their
Example before him, but merely as the Letter or History declares of him? By
which way yet they can never attain unto the true imitation or following of
him, for there is required an inward Spring and Power of the same Life of
Christ, by which he did these things, to enable them to follow his Example, and
all imitation, without the Soul attain to be endued with this Life (which it
attaineth unto, through the arising of the Holy Seed in it) is, as if a man
would, by much pains, set himself to mount up toward Heaven, and fly through
the midst of it, like an Eagle, or Bird of the Air, which were impossible for
him to do, even so as impossible is it for him to follow Christ in his Heavenly
Virtues, Doings and Sufferings, but by being endued with a measure of his
Heavenly Life and the Powers thereof, which are as Wings, whereby the Soul may
indeed mount up as an Eagle, and follow Christ, flying with him through the
midst of Heaven, yea, walking with him, and that without wearying, and running
without fainting.

And therefore this is the true method and order, which we have found greatly
blessed of God, which the Lord has taught us to hold forth unto people,
whereby they attain unto Holiness, to a being made conformable unto the Holy
Life of Jesus Christ, and come to know the true and great End and Use of his
outward Coming, viz. In the first place, to point and turn their minds unto the
Light of Jesus Christ, who has enlightened them, and Every One, and has sown
a Seed of his Light, Life and Spirit in every one, unto which Seed they should
give the most inward of their Hearts, as a Ground for it to grow and spring up
in, abondoning and forsaking all those things, which hinder its arising: whence
then in due time such a measure of Light and Life arises therein, as gives
them both truly to know Christ and to follow him.

GEORGE KEITH.

How to discern the CONVICTIONS, that proceed from the LIGHT of Faith, or
Divine Principle in us, from those, that proceed from the Light of Nature, or
mere Natural and Humane Reason, assisted by Arguments drawn from Scripture.
THis question I find weighty on my heart to answer, for the sake of some,
whose minds, through the subtle workings of the Enemy, may be perplexed with
the same, as my mind was, for a considerable time, after I was in great measure
convinced of the Truth. The Enemy of my Soul did exceedingly work in me, to
cause me to believe, that I was still, but where formerly I had been, to wit,
that, although I had changed my judgment concerning many things, yet the
principle, that swayed my judgment, was still but the natural principle, helped
with Scripture Arguments, and so my Faith, touching these things, was but
merely Humane and Natural, not Divine and Supernatural, and consequently was
nothing but opinion still, and that I was still but a natural man, and no true
believer, and that, though I should join with the People of God, who have the
true Divine Faith, and should do the things that they do, I could not be
accepted of God, my Obedience not proceeding from the true Divine Faith, which
is the effect of the true Divine Light, nor having received the true Divine
Call.

This Objection did so trouble, perplex, and disquiet me, through the working
of Satan, as it were, under ground, and hiding himself and his design from me,
that none, but the Lord alone, did, or could, know the great anguish of my
Soul; and, had not the Lord, in his wonderful Mercy, broken this snare, I had
been held in it, unto this very day, and perhaps had died in that sad and
lamentable condition. And I do certainly know, the Enemy does assault many in
this day, and does prevail over them by the same tentation, who are truly
convinced of Truth by the Divine Light, and Principle of God in their Hearts,
which Divine Conviction is a sufficient Divine Call, being always accompanied
with a secret Divine drawing, to give Obedience unto God, in all things,
whereof they are convinced. The sense now of such Souls condition being brought
upon me, my Bowels are moved in great tenderness toward them, and my Heart is
opened by the Lord, to say somewhat unto them, that may be of service, to whose
hands it may be ordered to come. And the breathing of my Soul, in the Spirit of
Lif^^ ^s, that God Almighty may bless it (...), and make it effectual.

The (...) between these two Principles, and their respective operations in the
Soul, does not proceed from this, that they are not in their own nature, widely
distinct or discernable to be so, by them, who have the true eye of discerning
opened in them, and are come to a clear inward sense and feeling, through a
living growth in the Truth, for indeed no things in the whole Universe do more
clearly appear to be of a differing nature, unto those, who have the Spiritual
Senses raised and opened in them, than the two aforesaid Principles, or Lights,
which differ as widely, as Heaven and Earth: for the one is of the Earth,
Earthly; the other is of Heaven, Heavenly; the one is of the first Adam, the
other is of the second Adam; Jesus Christ: yea, the one is merely Humane and
Natural, the other is purely Divine and Supernatural.

The cause then of the great difficulty to discern betwixt these two
Principles, and their respective Operations, is that Darkness and Confusion,
that is over the Hearts and Understandings of those, who are but first
convinced of the Truth, and not as yet really so converted unto it, as to be
leavened by the Power of it, and transformed into its nature. Yea, after some
beginnings of true Conversion, wrought in the Soul, the difficulty does, in
some measure, still remain, but not so great, as formerly.

The greatest difficulty therefore belongs unto those only, who are but
beginners, and beginning to travel out of Egypt and Babylon, and Sodom, into
the Holy Land, the Land of the Living, and the Holy Hill of Zion, with their
faces thitherwards. To whom also it is a great difficulty how to distinguish
not only betwixt the Natural^ Understanding, and the Divine Light of Faith in
them, but to distinguish betwixt the true Divine Light, and Satan transforming
himself into the similitude of an Angel of Light, in all which notwithstanding
the difficulty is not so great, as the Enemy of the Soul does represent it to
be.

Now to help any distressed or perplexed Soul, that may be in doubt concerning
this thing. To such I say, Since thou art really convinced that God has given
a measure of the true Divine Light, of his Son Christ Jesus, unto every Man and
Woman, and consequently unto thee (for to such only at present do I write, who
are convinced of this Truth, but do question the nature of their Convincement)
why should thou question that thy Convincement does only proceed from the
Natural Light and mere Natural Understanding of thy Soul, as influenced by
Scripture Arguments, and other outward helps, and not also from the Divine
Principle of the Light, Life and Spirit of Christ Jesus? For certainly this
Divine Principle, which is in thee, is not altogether idle, or without
Operation, it is of a most active or operative Nature, even as Fire and Light
in the outward. Can the outward Sun shine, and inlighten the Earth, and have no
operation, nor influence upon it? or, can the Fire burn and have no operation,
or influence upon what is next unto it? Nay surely. And therefore no more can
this Divine Principle and Light be in any Soul, but it must certainly and
infallibly have some Influence and Operation upon that Soul, in whom it is, and
that in order to Salvation, whose day of Visitation is not expired. And the
most proper operation of it in the first place is to convince the Soul of
Truth, I mean of somewhat of the Truth, of somewhat of God, and of his mind and
will, of what he does accept, and is well pleased with, and what he does reject
and abhor.

The Word of God (said the Apostle, Heb. 4.12.) is Living and Powerful, or
operative, and sharper than any two edged Sword, piercing even to the dividing
asunder of Soul and Spirit, and of the Joints and Marrow, and is a Discerner
(Judge, or Reprover) of the Thoughts and Intents of the Heart. And this Word is
in all, even in the mouth and in the heart of every man, and is that Word of
Faith, as Paul did expound it, Romans 10.8. Now, if it be the Word of Faith, it
is also the Light of Faith, for in that Word is Life, and the Life is the Light
of men, and this is the true Light that does lighten every man, that comes
into the World, as John declared, 1.9. Now mark the word [ lighten] which does
import its active and operative Influence and Virtue in all men, in some
measure or degree, really to convince them. And, although there be great
darkness over the Hearts and Souls of all Unconverted Men and Women, that they
are said to be darkness, yet as John has declared, the Light shines in
Darkness, although the Darkness comprehends it not, 1.5. so the Light not only
is in the darkness, but it shines in the darkness, and works against the
darkness to reveal it, and remove it, even as the darkness does work in the
Soul, to hide and obscure the Light, and as it were, to extinguish and quench
it in the Soul. And it is a most absurd thing to acknowledge that the natural
Principle has its operation in the Soul, and is not without its influence and
force to move and act the Soul, as also that the principle of darkness, to wit,
the Diabolical or Hellish Principle, even the very Spirit of Satan has its
operation and influence in all men, in whom it is, and yet to deny that this
Divine Principle, that is in Nature more powerful, and more operative, than
either of the other two, has any influence or operation in them at all. And
this I would have thee also to consider, that it pleases God in his great
condescension many times, together with his Divine Light and Spirit in thy
Soul, to make use of the Scriptures, and arguments drawn therefrom, making them
of Service in the Hand of the Divine Light and Spirit, as also to make use of
thy own natural understanding, and the natural principle or light by shining
upon it, and raising up in it pure and holy convictions and openings of Truth,
together with pure and holy desires in the Soul, which as they are entertained,
become a true beginning of Conversion in that Soul. But the way of the Lord is
not one and the same always to the Soul in this State, for sometimes as is
said, he makes use of the natural principle it self, to wit, the natural
understanding, and reason of man (by shining upon it) in a more active way and
manner, so as it may seem to be nothing else, but the natural principle it
self, helped with Scripture Arguments and Reasons, or some outward helps, that
does convince the Soul of those things, which it is forced to acknowledge to be
true, while yet it is Divine Light working in the Soul more secretly and
hiddenly, that has the main stroke and hand in the business. At other times
the Divine Light appears more immediately in the Soul, and more openly, and
scarcely at all makes use of the natural principle or understanding; further
than in a passive way, as when the Eye looks toward an object, or as the Ear
hears a voice or sound, wherein the Soul is rather passive than active. And
sometimes all the natural powers of the Soul are drawn into a deep silence, by
the mighty, and yet secret working of the Power of the Divine Principle and
Light, so that the Soul by none of its natural or humane powers or faculties
does apprehend what is inwardly revealed in it by the Divine Light, but they
all being silenced, bound, locked up, and as it were, made asleep (both
imagination and Reason, or whatever else can be called a natural or humane
faculty of the Soul being wholly suspended and laid by, as of no present use)
and the Soul, as it were, wholly dead for that present time unto them all, as
so many dead Members, the Divine Light and Spirit does raise up, and awaken, in
that Soul, a new Sense and power of discerning, of which it formerly had no
experience, or at lest made no reflection upon the same, which is the Spiritual
sensation of God and Divine things, as inwardly revealed by the Divine Light.
But this kind of experience is more rare to new beginners, and to whom it is
given, is a most singular and choice mercy and favor of God, which yet is most
ordinary to all those, who in any considerable measure, are truly converted
unto the Truth, and leavened into the nature of it. And if it shall please God
at any time to give thee such an experience, who art not yet so considerably
converted unto the Truth, thou art to receive it, as a singular favor and Grace
of God, but, if it be denied at present unto thee, God not judging thee worthy
of so high a favor, thou ough^st to be content with that other way. And such a
convincement is a true Divine and Spiritual convincement, proceeding originally
and principally from the true Divine Light and Spirit of Faith, and there is
virtue sufficient in that, which does thus convince thee, to enable thee to
believe and join unto it, and to obey its requirings, according to the present
measure, and that is a true sufficient Divine call for the present, which if
thou do slight or neglect, in expectation of a greater, or more clear, thou
do tempt the Lord, and provoke his Holy Spirit.

Moreover, I would have thee to know, that thou oughtst not to expect that
measure or degree of clearness, or clear and distinct discerning, as perhaps
thy own mind does judge to be requisite. God is wiser than thou, and does
better know, what is fittest for thee, than thou do. And indeed this is no
small engine of the Enemy, to keep thee in a state of Unbelief and
Disobedience, under a pretense that thou art not so fully and sufficiently
clear as is requisite: and, if the Enemy can prevail with thee here, he will
continually keep thee in it from day to day, yea from one Week, Month, and
Year, to another, until thou lose the precious opportunity and day of thy
visitation, to end thy miserable life in this sad estate of Unbelief and
Disobedience: and so, in place of getting more clearness and more distinct and
clear discerning of the true Divine Light, and Divine Voice and Call, thou will
come to have less, until what thou once had be altogether taken from thee,
and thou left in great darkness, and deadness, and hardness of Heart. Therefore
thou oughtst to improve that small clearness, which thou have, and not to
despise the day of small things, Zach. 4.10. nor overlook and contemn the
little small grain of the Kingdom of God in thee, which is as a Mustard Seed,
the least of all Seeds. The least measure of the true Light, that shines in
the darkness in thee, is a most precious treasure, even when it is but as the
light of a Star, that shines in a dark night. Some people travel with the help
of Star light, till the Moon arise, and after the Moon is risen, they travel
on, until the day dawn, and the clear day appear, and the Sun rise up, and then
they have great comfort, and see much more clearly than before, and many things
are clearly discovered unto them, far and near, which they saw nothing of
formerly, or but very dimly and obscurely. But he is certainly a very unwise
Traveller, who, having a great Journey before him, which he must accomplish in
one day, or else suffer an unexpressible and irrecoverable loss, resolves in
himself to lie still in Bed till the Sun be up, and that he has not time
enough to accomplish his Journey: on the contrary the discreet and diligent
Traveller gets up betimes, and even while it is yet night, sets forth on his
Journey, and contenting him with the morning or Star light, goes on,
inexpectation of the approaching day, when the Sun will arise upon him, and
then his Travel will be the more comfortable, easy, and pleasant to him. As it
is then in the outward, so ought it also to be in the inward, or rather much
more; for thou have a great and long Journey before thee, ere thou arriv'st at
everlasting Salvation, and thy time is but short, thou have but one day, or
rather, piece of a day, to travel it in. For all men spend a great part of
their day in other Travels, yea in Traveling the contrary way, which must be
all Traveled back again, and therefore when thou, whoever thou art, beginst to
see and turn thy face to thy Journeys end, thou had need gird up thy Loins,
and Travel with all thy might, with all circumspection, making use of every
help, thy Guide affords thee, for, if thou do not accomplish it within this
one day, or the remaining part thereof, I mean the day of thy Visitation, thou
art undone for ever. Herein only lies the difference 'twixt these two
Travelers, in the outward, and in the inward. That in the outward, when one
has misspent, slept, trifled, or rioted away his time, how deeply soever he
become affected with his mistake, he is past all remedy of getting to his
Journeys end in that small pittance of time left him. But in the inward it is
quite otherwise, when the Lord, by his pure Judgments manifested in the Soul,
awakens her, showing her that she is even at the brink of the pit of misery,
ready, as it were, to drop in, and yet would, did not his Mercy prevent: I say,
if the Soul in a deep sense of her error turn to the Lord, flee unto him,
lamenting her by past strayings and present miserable state, void of all
capacity of helping her self, expecting from him his Power and Assistance, to
carry her through to ^her Journeys end. Behold! she will find Jesus, that
Mighty Savior ( who is able to save unto the uttermost all, that come unto
him, Heb. 7.25.) at her right hand to uphold and carry her through. And as the
Soul comes diligently to wait upon him, in the Light, in the true self-denial,
forsaking every evil way, and taking up his daily Cross, in all things, his
Light, Life, Power and Virtue will break forth in the Soul, and cut short the
work in righteousness, and so the Soul, in and by, and with his Power, and
strength, will redeem the Time lost. For which cause it was that Christ said,
Work while ye have to day, the night comes, wherein no man can work, Joh. 9.4.
and 12.35. But if any man will neglect the small measure of Light, that Jesus
has imparted to him, in the night state, and refuses to follow and obey it,
but says, in himself, I will stay until the Sun arise, he provokes the Lord
against him, instead of giving him more Light, to take that from him which he
has already received: for the promises of more Light and Grace are only to
those, who improve what is already given, in how little measure so ever.

And now, in what I am further to say unto thee, take heed unto it, and observe
it, for it is from the Lord, and by the opening and moving of his Spirit,
Light, and Life in my heart, I declare it unto thee, which is this. The Divine
Light of God, and of his Son Jesus Christ, which is in thee, has a true and
innate clearness in it, and a self-evidencing power and virtue, whereby it can
and does sufficiently discover it self to be what indeed it is, namely to be a
Divine Light given of God to guide and lead the Soul in the way of Life and
Salvation. And it does at times and seasons sufficiently appear in every Soul
of man and woman, upon the face of the Earth, with a sufficient clearness and
self-evidence in some measure more or less, according to the good pleasure of
God, whereby to convince every Soul, that it proceeds from God and leads unto
God: by the innate clearness and self-evidencing Power of which Light and
Grace, Seed or Principle, all men (Fools or Idiots, and Infants excepted, in
whom yet this Divine Principle is, tho they do not actually understand it, with
whom therefore how the Lord deals, in order to the Salvation of their Souls,
he alone best knows, nor is it for us curiously to enquire) by this Divine
Principle, I say, all men shall be left without excuse, who have not believed
therein, nor obeyed it. Nor shall their pretense of wanting clearness and
evidence sufficient avail them in the day, when God shall call them to an
account, for he will then bring to their remembrance the particular times and
places, when and where he caused his Divine Light to shine in their hearts, in
such manner and measure as was sufficient to enable them to know, whence it
was, what was its tendency, and wherefore it was given them.

If then thou be but diligent in thy mind to observe, and give attendance to
the inward Operations, Motions, and Shinings of the Divine Light in thee, and
Breathings of the Divine Life, in the silence and quietness of thy Soul, out of
the many wanderings, vain thoughts, and imaginations of thy mind, thou will
certainly come to a true measure of clear discerning of the true Divine
Principle, Life, and Light, and of the operations thereof, so as to distinguish
it from all that, which is but Natural and Carnal, as also from all that is of
Satan in his cunning transformings. And although in the beginning it will be
very hard to thee to attain to that perfect, and absolute inward silence of
mind, from all thy own thoughts and imaginations (which will afterward become
easy and familiar unto thee, as thou do experience any considerable growth
in the Truth) yet, as thou pressest after it, thou will find they self helped
by the Lord, to come into some measure of true silence. And although thou can
not say, that all vain foolish thoughts, and idle imaginations, are put out of
thy mind, yet, if a considerable part of them be gone, and evanished, so that
thy mind is somewhat more cool, and quiet and still, and empty of such things,
than it is wont to be, here thou will find thy self at some advantage, and in
some capacity to discern the Divine Light, and working thereof, even, as it
were, in this imperfect state of Silence, or half Silence, as we may call it.

To help thee then a little further in this inquiry and search, that thou may
come to know, discern, and be acquainted with the true Divine Light, and
working thereof in thee, which is indeed a very necessary knowledge, and without
which thou art liable to sit down in a false rest, and build upon a false
foundation, as many do at this day, taking the Natural Light and Principle for
the Divine and Supernatural. And so what the Socinians and Pelagians, are in
profession (who profess no higher Principle, in them necessary, than the
Natural) these Men* are (whatever they profess of the necessity of having and
being illuminated and led by the Spirit) really in practice. Therefore that
thou may avoid this snare, and come to the true knowledge of the Divine Light
and Principle of God in thee. I shall briefly point at some distinguishing
marks and characters, whereby the Divine and Supernatural Principle, is truly
distinguishable from that, which is but Humane and Natural. As

1. The light, influence, and operation of the Humane and Natural Principle is
cold, saint, and dead; but that of the Divine and Supernatural warm, living,
and powerful, and the warmth, power, and life thereof, reaches not only the
Brain or Head, or the animal part, and affections (which the natural can do,
and often does) but it reaches also the heart, and most inward parts, even the
most inward affections of the Soul, and is of a Heavenly and Divine Nature, as
the Principle is, of which it proceeds. It is said of Christ, when he
preached outwardly, he spoke with Authority or Power, and not as the Scribes,
Matthew. 7.29. and he said himself, The words that I speak unto you, are Spirit
and Life: It is the Spirit that quickens, the Flesh profits nothing, Joh.
6.63. And thus it is in the inward: what Christ speaks in the Soul or Heart
of any Man, or Woman, is with Power, even with a Heavenly Power and Authority,
that raises an awe and reverence in the Heart, by which the Soul is convinced,
that it is indeed the Voice or Word of God, and not of Man, by reason of that
innate Majesty and Glory, that is in it, as it is said in Psalm 29.4. The Voice
of the Lord is Glorious, the Voice of the Lord is full of Majesty, etc. And,
although many Souls be so dark, blind, deaf, and stupid, that many times they
have no sense of any Divine Power, or Principle, yet, when it pleases God to
speak in the most deaf and stupid Soul, he causes it to hear, and raises up
some small sense of the same in it, at that present time, although, soon after,
darkness and death does prevail over them again, and they forget any such
experience, as if they had never had it. How did God speak unto Cain, and
expostulate with him? We read not that it was by an outward Voice, nor is there
any need to suppose, that, when God reproved him for his anger against his
Brother, it was by an outward Voice, and not rather by the Spirit of God
inwardly in his Heart and Conscience, as he does reprove men at this day, and
as he did strive in man, before the deluge, and did judge and reprove him for
sin, Genesis 6.3. My Spirit shall not always strive (or contend) in Man, for so
the words should be translated; and Christ promised that he would send the
Comforter unto his Disciples, to wit, the Holy Spirit, and he should reprove
the World of sin, Joh. 16.8.

Now, although a man by his own reasonings may reprove himself for sin, yet
there is a great difference betwixt man's reproving himself, and God's
reproving him by his Spirit and Divine Principle, in his Heart, that of Man
being saint, cold, and dead, as is said, but the inward reproof of the Spirit
of Truth, powerful, hot, and living, which goes to a man's heart, and pricketh
him to the quick, wounds him deeply; and of this no man but has some
experience, at times, especially before sin be come to such an height, and
has power in the Soul, that it is become past feeling. Now that some are so
become, does plainly imply, that once they had a feeling.

Again, when a man reproves himself, he does it too partially, although he will
be ready to judge himself, in the general, a great sinner, yet there are many
times many particular sins, whereof he is guilty, that he will not reprove
himself for, by any reasonings whatsoever, or Arguments drawn from Scripture,
but will rather justify and defend himself: for the natural light and natural
understanding is exceedingly corrupted by the fall, and therefore it cannot
impartially witness against sin, but is most ready to call many sins, virtues,
and to call many virtues, sins, and so to put light for darkness, and darkness
for light, and call good, evil, and evil good, Isa. 5.20. Yea, the Natural
Light or Understanding is so dim and dark, that it is no where in all Scripture
called Light; but I find that unconverted men are ealled darkness, in
Scripture, and that by reason of the darkness of their understandings. It is
said in Scripture, the carnal mind is enmity against God, and the wisdom from
below is carnal, earthly, and devilish. All the natural powers of man's Soul
are so corrupted by sin, that he is but dark, foolish, blind, and deceived in
his most sublime and refined reasonings in Spiritual matters.

But the inward Conviction, Judgment, and reproof of the Spirit of Truth, and
Divine Principle, is wholly impartial, and is a most Faithful Witness, in man's
Heart and Conscience, against all manner of Sin, reproving and condemning those
Sins in man, which man himself by his corrupt reasonings does excuse and
justify.

2. The operation of the Natural Principle in man, as concerning God and Divine
things, consists only in bare Speculation and Notion, and mostly, if not
wholly, in tedious and laborious Reasonings by drawing Conclusions from
Premises, which weary the Soul, even as a long and tedious Travel does weary
the Body. Hence Ratiocination is not unfitly called Discourse, whereby the Soul
runs through many things from one to another, before it can come to any
certain determination, or conclusion. Hence they that go about to prove that
there is a God, by the light of Nature, or a Natural Principle, how many
tedious Syllogisms and Argumentations are they forced to make use of,
especially against an Atheist, if he be of a cunning and subtle Wit? And when a
man is inwardly pursued with Atheistical Thoughts, and tempted in his heart, to
think that there is no God, if he go to reason the matter, and essay to
overcome that tentation by his mere natural reasonings, he will find the Devil
a stroug Adversary and Disputant against him, he will suggest unto him ^any
subtle and crafty answers, to the most cunning reasonings, he can invent. Not
that I judge that it cannot be truly and convincingly demonstrated by reason,
that there is a GOD, but I say, such a conviction and knowledge of God by mere
reason, and the hammering and working of the mere natural Principle is still
but a bare and naked Theory or Notion, it has no life in it, it gives the
Soul no true sense or feeling of God, no intuitive knowledge of him, but only
that which is abstractive and notional, even as the knowledge is, which a blind
man has of Colors, or which a deaf man has of Music and pleasant Sounds.

Whereas the operation of the Divine Principle, the Divine Spirit and Light in
man's heart exciteth and begeteth in him a true living sense and feeling of
God, and of his Goodness, Love, Mercy, Power, Holiness, Purity and Justice: and
this is more effectual, than all demonstration of Reason, or of the Natural
Principle, for I cannot doubt of the being of that, which I have a real sense
of, which I see, taste, and feel; nor do I need any exercise of my Reason, to
persuade me of its true real existence. And although unconverted Souls feel
little, or have little sense or taste of the Lord's Love, Goodness, and Mercy,
by reason of their great sins, that do so distemper and corrupt the true
capacity or faculty in them, which can have a true sense and feeling of the
same, even as a Fever does corrupt the natural taste of the Mouth, that it
cannot tr^^ly relish the sweetness of Wine, or Honey, but it seems
unpleasant. Yet, in the Unconverted and Corrupt State, men are truly sensible
of the inward work and operation and appearance of God in the Divine Principle
of his Light, Life and Spirit, in Judgment, and Wrath, and Terror, so that they
can feel the Word of Life in them, as it pricketh and wounds them in their
hearts, and is as a Hammer, an Ax, a two-edged Sword, and Fire, in their most
inward parts, against not only all manner of actual Transgression, but against
the very habits and habitual Inclinations of Sin, laying the Ax to the Root of
the Tree, and striking at the very nature and being of sin in the heart.

Blessed is the Soul, that, being truly sensible of this inward work of
judgment, has a true love unto the same, and does patiently lie under the
judgment, the pricking, the hammering, the wounding and bruising, and breaking
in pieces, vea, the killing and burning, and, as it were, utterly consuming,
and destroying the Soul, until the life and nature of sin be slain therein, and
the Soul be thoroughly cleansed and redeemed thereby?

Now whatever Soul has the least experience of this kind, it may certainly
conclude, it is the true and infallible effect of the Divine Light and
Principle, and not of the Natural and Humane, for even as the light of the Moon
has no heat, nor can burn any thing, though never so combustible, but is
sensibly cold, even so the Natural Principle in its utmost extent, has no true
heat, to tender or melt the Soul, can kindle no true Fire in it, to purify or
refine it from sin, or consume truly the least sin hence.

3. The Operation of the Divine Principle, in its very first appearance, by an
innate purity and perfect contrariety to sin, does work in the Soul against all
sin, and the nature of it, and has a wonderful antipathy against it, even as
good Physic does work in the Body against a Disease, and this contrariety is
most sensibly felt in the Soul, and, as it is entertained, causes powerful and
unusual motions to seize upon the Soul, and sometimes on the Body also, until
Sin be utterly vanquished and overcome.

But the Natural Principle has no such perfect contrariety to Sin, as being it
self exceedingly corrupted and defiled therewith.

4. The Divine Principle works most powerfully and sensibly, when the mind is
silent, and does rest from its own mere natural workings, and especially from
its soaring imaginations and lofty reasonings. And, although in the unconverted
state it seldom, or never, is perfectly silent, yet, at sometimes, it is more
silent, quiet and calm, than at other times (for even the Sea does not always
rage, although it always have some motion.)

5. The Divine Principle never works at, or in, the will of man, but only in
the will of God. Whereas the corrupt and depraved will of man can set the
Natural Principle on work, when and how it pleases.

6. There is somewhat, that is unexpressible, and cannot be named in words, but
can be inwardly felt, both in the Divine Principle, and all its Operations,
whereby, through an innate self-evidencing Power and Authority, it does really
distinguish it self, and may be really discerned, as distinct from the natural
and humane principle, and all its workings, as also from the more subtle and
cunning transformings of the Enemy, if the Soul be but diligent and watchful to
observe the same, and have a true desire to understand the difference, and
clearly to distinguish the one from the other.

And indeed, this innate self-evidencing Power of the Divine Principle, is that
principally, whereby it can be discerned from the Humane and Natural; for,
although it is truly distinguishable also by its effects, as Christ said, Ye
shall know the Tree by its Fruits, yet the question at present relates to the
state of those who are but newly convinced, and so have but little experience
of its effects in them. Also seeing there are counterfeit effects, as a
counterfeit Holiness, Purity, Humility, etc. The true effects cannot be
infallibly discerned from the counterfeit, which proceed only from the mere
Natural Principle, or together with the same from Satan's transformings, but as
there is a regard unto the Principle, from whence the effects do proceed, for
the true Divine Principle, as the mind is duly applied thereunto, does
infallibly discover its own effects, and also the counterfeit workings and
effects of the Enemy.

And therefore all outward rules do fail, and come short, to give an infallible
discerning betwixt these two Principles, where the inward living discerning,
which the true Divine Principle begeteth, is not attained. But where this
inward living discerning is attained and kept unto, in any measure, outward
rules may be useful in their place, but they only, who have this discerning,
that proceeds from the Principle it self, can sufficiently make a due
application of any outward rules, or other outward helps, that can be given in
the case.

GEORGE KEITH.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
IN the Preface, Page 6. line 20. after made dele any; p. 8. l. 18. r. into
some; l. 28. r. I do; l. 29. r. kinds; p. 12 l. 20. f. or r. and.

In the Book, p. 26. l. 18. f. an r. and; p. 30. l. 27. f. souls r. soul; f. it
r. its; p. 32. l. 26. f. of r. often; p. 39. l. 15. after perform r. them; p. 44.
l. 6. f. excesses r. exercises; p. 45. l. 22. after here r. also; p. 48. l. 22
f. beginning r. begins; p. 50. l. 18. f. says r. said; l. 31. f. p. r. cap;
p. 66. l. 25. f. or r. for; p. 69. l. 7. f. with r. of; l. 30. f. begets r.
beget; p. 70. l. 20. f. though r. through; l. 22. after weaken r. it; p. 75. l.
12. f. object r. objective; p. 85. l. 7. f. unto r. in; p. 90. f. the r. thy;
p. 103. l. 8. after all dele and; l. 14. f. live r. alive; p. 105. l. 4. f.
works r. words; p. 108. l. 29. r. the other; p. 109. l. 7. f. or. r. and; l 16.
f. powers r. power; p. 112. l. 9. f. things r. thing; p. 113. l. 5. r.
diligently; p. 116. l. 4. f. bring r. brings; p 121. l. 17. r. and how and;
p. 134. l. 26. f. and uinon r. an union; p. 142. l. 21. f. but r. that.

The CONTENTS.
CHAP. I. CErtain Doctrinal Principles of the Truth, whereof a man being
convinced by the Spirit of God, it contributes much to his making a right
entrance into the way of Holiness, Page 1 CHAP. II. That the Soul converting it
self unto GOD in the Divine Seed within its self, through the Influence of the
Divine Power upon it, for that effect, is the very first thing, that is
requisite unto it, in order to its entering into the way of Holiness, 10 CHAP.
III. How the Soul ought to persist and continue in its conversion toward God
and Christ: and of the effects, which follow at first thereupon: as also of the
Inward trials and troubles it usually meets with therein, 19 CHAP. IV. How
the Soul, after its converting unto GOD and Jesus Christ, in the Divine Seed,
must, in its persisting and continuance therein, stand in great passiveness,
stilness and quietness, bearing and forbearing, before it enter upon its
operative exercises, 36 CHAP. V. How the Soul after its Conversion unto GOD,
and continuance therein, in passiveness and forbearance, for some small time,
becomes a partaker of the Holy and Divine Life, and the Powers thereof in some
measure, through some beginnings of a Spiritual Death and Regeneration, by
which it attaineth unto some measure of union with God and Christ, and thereby
is put in some capacity for operative exercises of Holiness, unto which it
ought to apply; and that any other way of entering upon these exercises is but
feigned and hypocritical. 47 CHAP. VI. Wherein diverse things, needful to be
known by them, who do, or would, enter into the way of Holiness, in relation to
the nature of Conversion, Regeneration, of the Life and Power of Holiness, and
of Union with God, are opened, and the gross mistake of most Professors,
touching these things, discovered and cleared, 60 CHAP. VII. How the Soul is to
reflect upon it self, and enter into a trial and examination of it self,
whether it has truly passed through the aforesaid steps of Conversion, and
continuance therein, in passiveness and forbearance: and whether it has
attained unto any beginnings of the Divine and Holy Life, and the Powers
thereof, before it enter upon other operative Exercises, and how, or by what
rule or touchstone it may infallibly know the same 71 CHAP. VIII. Wherein
diverse Advertisements and Cautions are given unto the Soul, in relation unto
its applying it self unto Works, or operative Exercises, inward or outward,
through the Holy Life and the Powers thereof, 85 CHAP. IX. How that, though
Works can have no influence upon the very first beginnings of a Holy Life, that
being only received through a receptive Faith, yet they do greatly conduce unto
the growth and continuance thereof; also unto the killing and mortification of
the sinful and unholy Life with its Powers, more and more, till it be utterly
slain: where also the distinction of a two fold property of Faith, viz.
Receptive and Operative, is somewhat opened. 114 CHAP. X. Of the great
influence, that the Coming of our Lord Jesus Christ in the outward, in his
birth, life, doctrine, works, sufferings, death, resurrection, ascension,
glorification, etc. has upon our mortification to sin, and regeneration unto
holiness, even unto perfection: and how, and after what manner we should
improve the same effectually, in order thereunto. 121 How to discern the
CONVICTIONS, that proceed from the Light of Faith, or Divine Principle in us,
from those, that proceed from the Light of Nature, or mere Natural and Humane
Reason, assisted by Arguments drawn from Scripture, 158
BOOKS Printed and Sold by the Assigns of J. Soul, at the Bible in George
Yard, in o Linbard-Street.
A Brief Account of the Rise and Progress of the People called Quakers, in
which their Fundamental Principle, Doctrines, Worship, Ministry and Discipline,
are plainly declared, to prevent the Mistakes and Perversions that Ignorance
and Prejudice may make to Abuse the Credulous. With a Summary Relation of the
former Dispensations of God in the World, by way of Introduction. By W. Penn.
Price Bound 1 s.

The Christian-Quaker, and his divine Testimony, stated and vindicated, from
Scripture, Reason and Authority. By W. Penn. Price Bound 2 s.

Primitive Christianity Revived, in the Faith and Practice of the People called
Quakers. Written in Testimony to the present Dispensation of God, through them
to the World; that Prejudices may be removed, the Simple informed, the
Well-inclined encouraged, and the Truth and its innocent Friends rightly
represented. By W. Penn. Price Bound 1 s.

A Defense of a Paper entitled, Gospel Truths, against the Exceptions of the
Bishop of Cork's Testimony (against the Quakers.) By W. Penn. Price Bound 1 s.

An Account of W. Penn's Travels in Holland and Germany, for the Service of the
Gospel of Christ; by way of Journal. Containing also diverse Letters and
Epistles, writ to several Great and Eminent Persons whilst there. The Third
Impression. Corrected by the Author's own Copy; with some Answers not before
Printed. Price Bound 2 s.

Tender Counsel and Advice, by way of Epistle to all those who are Sensible of
their Day of Visitation, and who have received the Call of the Lord, by the
Light and Spirit of his SON in their Hearts, to partake of the Great Salvation,
wherever scattered throughout the World; Faith, Hope and Charity, which
overcome the World, be multiplied among you. By W. Penn. The Third Edition.
Price 3 d

Scripture-Instruction; degested into several, Sections by way of Question and
Answer. In Order to promote Piety and Virtue, and discourage Vice and
Immorality. with a Preface relating to Education. by I. Freame price 1 s.

W. Penn's Key in English Price 4 d. -- French 4 d.

A Collection of sundry Books, Epistles and Papers written by James Nailor,
some of which were never before printed. with an Impartial Relation of the most
remarkable Transactions of his Life. price 6 s.

Persecution Exposed in some Memoirs of the Sufferings of John Whiting, and
many ancient, eminent Friends. price 3 s.

More Fruits of Solitude; being the second part of Reflections and Maxims,
relating to the Conduct of Humane Life. By the Author of the former. Price 9 d.

The Harmony of Divine and Heavenly Doctrines, demonstrated in sundry
Declarations, on Variety of Subjects* Preached at the Quakers Meetings in
London, by Mr. W. Penn, Mr. G. Whitehead, Mr. S. Waldenfield, Mr. B. Cole,
taken in Shorthand, as it was delivered by them; and now Faithfully
transcribed and published for the Information of those, who by reason of
Ignorance, may have received a prejudice against them. By a Lover of that
people. price Bound 1 s. 6 d.

Truth prevalent; and the Quakers discharged from the Norfolk-Rectors furious
Charge: In a sober Answer to their Book, falsely styled, The Principles of the
Quakers further shown to be Blasphemous and Seditious; By these thus remarked
Authors, viz. Edward Beckham, D. D. Rector of Gayton-Thorp, Henry Meriton, M.
A. Rector of Oxborough, Lancaster Topcliffe, L. L. B -- Rector of H^^kwold;
Norfolk. Upon due Examination Answered, by G. Whitehead, a Servant of Christ.
price 2 s.

A Catechism and Confession of Faith, by R. Barclay. price Bound 9 d.

Fruits of Retirement; or Miscellaneous Poems, Moral and Divine: Being some
Letters, Contemplations, etc. written on Variety of Subjects: by M. Mollineux,
late of Leverpool, deceased. price 1 s. 6 d.

Piety Promoted, in a Collection of the Dying Sayings of many of the People
called Quakers. With a Brief Account of some of their Labors in the Gospel,
and Sufferings for the same In Three Parts, By John Tomkins. Price Bound 1 s.
each part.

No Cross, No Crown. A Discourse showing the Nature and Discipline of the Holy
Cross of Christ; and that the Den^al of Self, and daily Bearing of Christ's
Cross, is the alone way to the Rest and Kingdom of God. To which is added, The
Living and Dying Testimonies of diverse Persons of Fame and Learning, in Favor
of the Virtue and Temperance recommended in this Treatise. By William Penn. The
sixth Edition. Price Bound 3 s.

The Harmony of the Old and New Testament. And the Fulfilling of the Prophets,
concerning our Lord and Savior Jes^s Christ, and his Kingdom and Glory in the
latter Days. With a brief Concordance of the Names and Attributes, etc. given
unto Christ: And some Texts of Scripture collected, concerning Christ's
Humiliation and Sufferings; also of his Excellent Dignity and Glorification.
Published for the Benefit of Christians and Jews, by John Tomkins. With an
Appendix to the Jews, by W. Penn. The 3d Edit with Additions. Price Bound 1 s.

A Collection of many Select and Christian Epistles, Letters and Testimonies,
written on sundry occasions, by that Ancient, Eminent, Faithful Friend and
Minister of Christ Jesus, George Fox. The Second Volume. pr. 10 s.

The Works of the Long-Mournful and Sorely-Distressed Isaac Pennington, whom
the Lord in his tender Mercy at length visited and relieved, by the Ministry of
that Despised People, called Quakers; and in the Springings of that Light, Life
and Holy Power in him, which they had truly and faithfully Testified of, and
directed his Mind to, were these things written, and are now published as a
thankful Testimony of the Goodness of the Lord to him, and for the benefit of
others. In Two Parts. pr. 12 s.

The Works of that memorable and ancient Servant of Christ, Stephen Crisp;
containing also a Journal of his Life, giving an Account of his Convincement,
Travels, Labors and Sufferings in and for the Truth. Pricebound 5 s.

The Works of Samuel Fisher, in Folio. pr. 8 s.

Truth's Innocence and Simplicity shining, through the Conversion,
Gospel Ministry, Labors, Epistles of Love, Testimonies and Warnings, to
Professors and Profane (with the Long and Patient Sufferings) of that Ancient
and Fath^ul Minister and Servant of Jesus Christ, Thomas Tailor. Price bound 5
s.

The Memory of the Righteous Revived, being a brief Collection of the Books and
written Epistles of John Camm and John Audland; together with several
Testimonies relating to those two faithful Laborers. Price Bound 2 s.

The Design of Christianity testified, in the Books, Epistles, and Manuscripts,
of that Ancient and Faithful Servant of Christ Jesus John Crook, who departed
this Life the 26th Day of the 2d Month, 1699. in the Eighty-second Year of his
Age. Price 3 s. 6 d.

A Light shining out of Darkness: Or, Occasional Queries, submitted to the
Judgment of such as would enquire into the true State of Things in our Times.
The whole Work revised by the Author, the Proofs Englished and augmented, with
sundry Material Discourses concerning the Ministry, Separation, Inspiration,
Scriptures, Humane Learning, Oaths, Tithes, ^c. With a brief Apology for the
Quakers, that they are not Inconsistent with Magistracy. The Third Edition.
Price Bound 1 s. 6 d.

God's Protecting Providence, Man's surest Help and Defense, in times of the
greatest Difficulty, and most eminent Danger. Evidenced in the Remarkable
Deliverance of Robert Barrow, with diverse other Persons, from the Devouring
Waves of the Sea, among which they suffered Shipwreck: And also, from the cruel
Devouring Jaws of the Inhumane Canibals of Florida. Faithfully related by one
of the Persons concerned therein, Jonathan Dickenson. price stitched 8 d.

A Scripture-Catichism for Children. By Ambrose Rigge. price Bound 6 d,

Truth's Vindication or a gentle Stroke to wipe off the foul Aspersions, false
Accusations and Misrepresentations, cast upon the People of God, called
Quakers, both with respect to their Principle, and their way of Proselyting
people over to them. price Bound 1 s.

A brief Testimony to the great Duty of Prayer; showing the Nature and Benefit
thereof; to which is added, many Eminent and Select Instances of God's Answer
to Prayer: Collected out of the Record of Holy Scriptures. By I. T. one of the
People called Quakers. With a Postscript by I. F. The Second Edition, with
Additions. price 6 d.

The Poor Mechaink's Plea against the Rich Clergy's Oppression: showing Tithes
are no Gospel Ministers Maintenance: In a brief and plain method how that
Tithes, (as now paid) are both Inconsistent with the Dispensation of the Law,
and Dispensation of the Gospel. Also, how they were brought into the Church
many Hundred Years after Christ, and testified against by several Ancient
Christians and Martyrs. With several sober Reasons against the payment of them.
By I. Bocket. Price 3 d.

Vindiciae Veritatis: Or an Occasional Defense of the Principles and Practices
of the People called Quakers: In answer to a Treatise of John Stillingfleet's,
miscalled, Seasonable Advice concerning Quakerism, etc. By Daniel Phillips, M.
D. Price 1 s. 6 d.

New England Judged. In Two Parts. First, Containing a Brief Relation of the
Sufferings of the People called Quakers in New-Engla^d, from the Time of their
First Arrival there, in the Year 1656, to the Year 1660. Wherein their
Merciless Whippings, Chainings, Finings, Imprisonings, Starvings, Burning in
the Hand, Cutting off Ears, and putting to Death, with diverse other Cruelties,
infl^cted upon the Bodies of Innocent Men and Women, only for Conscience sake,
are briefly described. In Answer to the Declaration of their Persecutors
Apologyzing for the same, printed anno 1659. Second Part, Being a farther
Relation of the cruel and Bloody Sufferings of the People called Quakers in
New England, continued from anno 1660, to anno 1665. Beginning with the
Sufferings of William Leddra, whom they put to Death. Published by George
Bishop, in anno 1661, and 1667. and now somewhat abreviated. With an Appendix,
containing the Writings of several of the Sufferers; with some Notes, showing
the Accomplishment of their Prophecies, and a Postcript of the Judgments of
God, that have befallen diverse of their Persecutors. Also, An Answer to Cotton
Mather's Abuses of the said People, in his late History of New England, printed
anno 1702. The whole being at this time published in the said Peoples
Vindication, as a Reply (...) all his slanderous Calumnies. pr. 5 s.

Angui^ Flagellatus; or, a Switch for the Snake. Being an Answer to the Third
and Last Edition of the Snake in the Grass. Wherein the Author's Injustice and
Falsehood, both in Quotation and Story, are discovered and obviated and the
Truth Doctrinally delivered by us, stated and maintained, in Opposition to his
Misrepresentation and Perversion. By Joseph Wyeth. To which is added, A
Supplement by G. Whitehead. pr. 3 s. 6 d.

Lux Evangellica Attestata. Or, a further Testimony to the sufficiency of the
Light within. Being a Reply to George Keith's Censure, in his Book, entitled,
An Account of the Quakers Politics, upon certain passages in my Book,
entitled, Mercy covering the Iudgment-Seat, etc. For the clearing of Truth
from G. K's Misrepresentations, and satisfying of sober Enquirers into the true
state of the Controversy between us. By Richard Claridge. pr. stiched 1 s.

A Dissertation of the Smallpox, by Daniel Phillips, at his Comme^cing Doctor
o^ Physic in the University of Leyden in Holland, in the Year 1696. Translated
by T. E. price 9 d.

Academia Caelestis: The Heavenly University; or, the Highest School, where
alone is that Highest Teaching, the Teaching of the Heart. By Francis R^use,
sometime Provost of Eaton-C^lledge. A Treatise written above Threescore Years
since. The Third Edition, Revised and Compared with the Latin. pr. 1 s.

Two Treatises of Thomas Lawson's Deceased. The First A Mite into the Treasury,
being a Word to Artists, espec^ally Heptatechnists, the professors of the seven
Liberal Arts: Showing what is therein owned by the People called Quakers, and
what is denied by them: With several other things touching the Divinity of the
Heathen, and School-Titles, Habits, Degrees, etc. The Second, A Treatise
relating to the Call, Work and Wages of the Ministers of Christ and Antichrist.
price 1 s. 6 d.

The Vail of the Covering ^^read over all Nations. what it is; and how removed.
with a Discovery of that Mountain of Fat things full of Marrow, and Wines on
the Lees well Refined. by I. VVebster. price 3 d.

The Secret Soothsayer, or, H^dden Sorcerer, Discovered by I. VVebster. Author
of the Saints Guide, the Cloud taken off the Tabernacle, etc. price 4 d.

An Essay toward the Improvement of Physic. with an Essay for Employing the
able Poor. by J. Bellers. price 9 d.

Musa Paraenetica; or, a Tr^ctate of Christian Epistles, on sundry Occasions,
in Verse by W. M^ssey. price 6 d.

A Vindication of Women's Preaching as well from Holy Scripture and an^ient
Writings, as from the Paraphrase and Notes of the judicious I. Lock, on 1 Cor.
xi. by Josiah Martin. price 1 s*

The Clergy-Man's pretense of Divine Right to Tithes, Examined and Refuted.
Being a full Answer to W. W's Fourth Letter, in his Book, entitled, The
Clergy's Legal Right to Tithes asserted. To which he has also annexed, A
Justification of the Divine Right, Erroniously so called. By I. Gratton. priee
6 d.

The Saints Travel to Spiritual Canaan; wherein are discovered several false
Rests, short of the true Spiritual coming of Christ in his People. With a brief
Discovery of what the coming of Christ in Spirit is, who is the alone true Rest
and Center of Spirits. By R. Wilkenson price 1 s.

A Treatise concerning Baptism and the Lord's Supper; Showing that the true
Disciples of Chist are sent to Baptize Men into the Name of the Father, Son,
and Holy Ghost for the carrying on of which, Christ is with them, and will be,
to the End of the World. Also, a few words concerning the Lrrd's Supper;
showing, that those that Sup with him, are in his Kingdom. by John Graton.
price 9 d.

A Brief Concordance of the Names and Attributes* with Sundry Texts, Relating
unto our Blessed Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. collected out of the
Scriptures. by John Tomkins. price 4 d.

A brief Apology in behalf of the People called Quakers. Written for the
Information of our sober and well-inclin'd Neighbors in and obout the Town of
Warminster in the County of Wilts. by W. Chandler. A. Pyott, I. Hodges, and
some others. pr^ce 6 d.

A Testimony to the Truth of God, as held by the People called Quakers: Being a
short Vindication of them, from Abuses, and Misrepresentations often put upon
them by Envions Apostates, and Mercenary Adversaries price 3 d.

The Possibility and Necessity of the Immediate Revelation of the Spirit of
God, toward the Foundation and Ground of true Faith proved, In a Letter writ
in Latin to the Here Paets; and now put into English by R. Barclay. price 3 d.

A brief History of the Voyage of Katharine Evans and Sarah Cheevers, to the
Island of Malta, where the Apostle Paul suffered Shipwreck. To which is added a
short Relation from George Robinson, of the Sufferings which befell him in his
Journey to Jerusalem. pr. bound 1 s.

Buds and Blossoms of Piety, with some Fruit of the Spirit of Love, and
Directions to the divine Wisdom. by B. A. price bound 1 s.

A Collection of the Christian Writings, Labors, Travels and Sufferings, of
that Faithful and Approved Minister of Jesus Christ, Roger Hadock to which is
added, an account of his Death and Burial. price 2 s.

A Journal of the Life, Travels and Sufferings of William Edmundson. price
bound 3 s.

Daivdeis. The Li^e of David King of Israel: a sacred Po^em. In Five Books. by
T. Ellwood. price bound 3 s. 6 d.

Cerinthus and Ebion: Or the Heresy of Tithing under the Gospel Detected; in
some Observations unpon a Book entitled, An Essay concerning the Divine Right
of Tithes: By the Author of the Snake in the Grass; together with an Essay
concerning the First Rise of Tithes; and and an Essay against their Divine
Right. by B. Lindley. price 8 d.

A Treatise of Election and Reprobation; In Vindication of the Universal Grace
and Love of God to Mankind. by B. L. price 6 d.

Divine Love exalted: being Select Meditations, Ejaculations, and Divine
Soliloquies concerning the Love of God. by an eminent Lady in Germany. price 6
d.

Posthuma Christiana; or, a Collection of some Papers of William Crouch. price
bound 1 s. 6 d.

The Arraignment of Popery, Being a Collection taken out of the Chronicles, and
other Books of the State of the Church in the Primitive Time. I. the State of
the Papists, how long it was before the Universal POPE and MASS was s^t up; and
the bringing in of Rudiments, Traditions, Beads, Images, Purgatory, Tithes and
Inquisitions. II. a Relation of the Cruelties they acted after the Pope got up,
being worse than Turk and Heathen; New R^om proving like Old. III. What the
People of England worshipped before they were Christians. IV. to which is
added, the Blood of the Martyrs is the Seed of the Church. With several other
things, very Profitable for all that Fear God, to read, try, and give judgment
by the Spirit of Truth, against the Worship of the Beast and Whore* p. bound 1
s. 6 d.

The Peoples Ancient and Just Liberties asserted in the Trial of W. Penn and
William Mead, at the Sessions held at the Old Baily in London, the First,
Third, Fourth and Fifth of Sept. MDCLXX. against the most arbitrary procedure
of that Court. price 4 d.

An Apology for the True Christian Divinity, as the same is Held Forth and
Preached by the people, called in Scorn Quakers; Being a full Explanation and
Vindication of their Principle and Doctrines, by many Arguments, deduced from
Scripture and right Reason, and the Testimonies of Famous Authors, both Anceint
and Modern, With a full Answer to the strongest Objections usually made against
them. By Robert Barclay. The Fifth Edition in English. price Bound 4 s.

Robert Barclay's Apology Translated into French, for the Information of
Strangers.

Truth and Innocence Vindicated, and the People called Quakers Defended, in
Principle and Practice, against Invidious Attempts and Calumnies. Being a just
Examination of two Books against the said People, Entitled, I. A Brief
Discovery, etc. by three Norfolk Priests II. Some few of the Quakers many
horrid Blasphemies, etc. being a Scandalous Libel; Examined by George
Whitehead, a Servant of Christ; Containing also many of the repeated Abuses in
John Meriton's Antidote, and Francis Bugg's Pilgrim's Progress. price Stich'd 6
d.

The Rector Examined, about his Book Scandalously styled, An Antidote against
the Venom of Quakerism, by John Meriton. who calls himself A. M. Rector of
Boughton in Norfolk, And his Observations Remarked, and the Christianity of the
people commonly called Quak^rs Re-asserted and Vindicated, from his Perversions
and assertions. by G. Whitehead price Stitched 6 d.

The History of the Life of Thomas Edwood, Or, an Account of his Birth,
Education, etc. with diverse Observation^ on his Life and Manners when a Youth:
and how he came to be convinced of the Truth; with his many Sufferings and
Services for the same. written by his own Hand. price 3 s. 6.

A Rational Catechism; or an Instructive Conference between a Father and a Son.
price bound 1 s.

Saints Perfect Freedom. by John Webster. price 6 d.

Piety promoted, in a Collection of Dying-Sayings of many of the People called
Quakers. with some Memorials of their Virtuous Lives. the Fourth and Fifth
Part. by I. F. price bound 1 s. each Part.

The Trial of Spirits both in Teachers and Hearers, Wherein is held forth, the
clear Discovery and certain Downfall of the Carnal and Antichristian Clergy of
these Nations. Testified from the Word of God, to the University Congregations
in Cambridge. Whereunto is added, a Plain and Necessary Confutation of diverse
gross Errors delivered by Mr. Sydrach Sympson, in a Sermon Preached to the same
Congregation at the Commencement, Anno MDCLIII. by W. Dell, Minister of the
Gospel, and Master of Gonvil and Caius College in Cambridge. price bound 1 s.
6 d.

A New Discourse of Trade, wherein is Recommended, several weighty Points
relating to the Companies of Merchants. The act of Navigation, Naturalization
of Strangers, And our Woollen Manufactures. The balance of Trade, etc. by Sr.
Josiah Child. price bound 2 s.

A few Queries relating to the Practice of Physic, with Remarks upon some of
them. by H. Chamberlen. price bound 1 s.

The Way to Health, Long Life and Happiness: Or, a Discourse of Temperance, and
the particular Nature of all Things requisite for the Life of Man, etc by
Thomas Tryon, Student in Physic. price bound 4 s. 6 d.

A Diurnal Speculum; containing, I. A plain and easy Method to find out those
things that are most useful to be known Yearly; And may serve as an Almanac
for Thirty Years; and many other things sutible to the Matter, etc. II. And
Explanation of Weights, Money and Measures, both Scriptural and Usual, with
sundry Tables depending thereon, etc. III. Some Remarks on England; or a brief
Account of every County, with the Names, and Days of the Markets, and the chief
Commodities therein, etc. The whole consisting of great Variety, explained by
diverse Examples, the like in all particulars not extant; as by the Contents
does more at large appear. Collected by I. B. price bound 1 s. 6 d.

Instructions for Right Spelling, and plain Directions for Reading and Writing
true English. With several delightful things, very Useful and Necessary, both
for Young and Old to read and learn. price bound 6 d.

A New book for Children to learn in. With many wholesome Meditations for them
to consider. With Directions for true Spelling. And the Ground of true Reading
and Writing of true English price 3 d.

The good House-wife made a Doctor, Or Healths Choice and Sure Friend, Being a
plain way of Natures own Prescribing, to Prevent and Cure most Diseases
incident to Men, Women and Children, by Diet and Kitchin-physick only. With
some Remarks on the Practice of Physic and Chemistry by Thomas Tryon Student
in Physic. The Second Edition. To which is added some Observations on the
Tedious Methods of Unskilful Chirurgions; with Cheap and Easy Remedies. by the
same Author. price bound 1 s. 6d.

(...) Or, a Treatise concerning Baptisms. Whereunto is added, a discourse
concerning the Supper, Bread and Wine, called also Communion by Thomas Lawson.

Dagon's fall before the Ark, Written Primarily, As a Testimony for the Lord,
his Wisdom, Creation, Products of his Power, Useful and Necessary Knowledge,
Capacitating people for the concerns of this Life. Secondarily, As a Testimony
against the Old Serpent, his Foolishness with God, his Arts, Inventions,
Comedies, or Interludes, Tragedies; Lascivious Poems, Frivolous Fables,
Spoiling Philosophy, taught in Christians Schools. Wherein, as in a Glass,
Teachers in Schools and Colleges may see their concern, neither Christian ^or
Warrantable by Thomas Lawson.

A short Work, but of greatest Concern. by William Tomlinson. price 3 d.

A Collection of the Writings and Epistles, of our Ancient Deceased Friend John
Whitehead. price. 3 s

A Collection of the several Books and Epistles of our Ancient Deceased Friend
Charles Marshal. price 3 s.

The Spiritual Guide, which dis-intangles the Soul; and brings it by the Inward
Way to the getting of perfect Contemplation* and the Rich Treasure of Internal
Peace. Written by Dr. Michael de Molinos. Translated from the It^lian Copy. 9 d.

Christ's Spirit A Christians strength: Or, a plain Discovery of the Mighty and
Invincible power that all Believers receive through the Gift of the Spirit
First held forth in two Sermons, on Acts 1.8. and after Published for the
Instruction and use of those that are Spiritual, anno 1645. by William Dell,
Minister of the Gospel of Jesus Christ. 6 d.

Christ All in All. Opened in a Sermon by Mr. Stephen Crisp, late of Colchester
in Essex. Exactly taken in Shorthand, as it was delivered by him, in the
Meeting-Hou^e of the People called Quakers, at Devonshire-house, without
Bishops-gate, London. And now Faithfully Published, together with his Prayer
after Sermon. 2 d.

Tender Counsel and Advice to the Flock of God every where. By a Lover of Truth
and Righteousness, William Bingley. 4 d.

An Abridgment of Eusebius Pamphilius's Ecclesiastical History, in two Parts*
Part I. A Compendious Commemoration of the Remarkablest Chr^n^ligies which are
Contained in that Famous History. Part II. A Summary or brief hint of the
Twelve Persecutions sustaind by the Ancient Christians with a Compendious
Paraphrase upon the same. Whereunto is added a Catalogue of the Synods and
Counsels, which were after the days of the Apostles; together with a hint of
what was decreed in the same. by William Caton. 1 s.

The Saints guide; or, Christ the rule. Manifested by way of Positions,
Conse^^a^ie and Queries. Wherein is contained the Efficacy of acquired
Knowledge. The Mission and Maintenance of Ministers. And the Power of
Magistrates in Spiritual things. by John Webster. the third Edition. 6 d.

A Brief History of Trade in England Containing, the manner of its Birth,
Growth, and declen^^on; and the several Occasions thereof: With some proper
Remedies to recover it from its present Languishing condition, to its former
Flourishing Estate. by Thomas Tryon. Merchant. 1 s. 6 d.

Instructions for Children and others: By way of Question and Answer.
Demonstrating to them, How they may come to know God and Jesus Christ, whom to
know is Life Eternal. by S. Hunt* price 3 d.

Where may be had also Bibles Testaments, Concordances Spelling-Books, Primers,
Horn-books; with Writing-Paper, Paper-Books, etc. and Marriage Certificates on
Parchment, Stamped.


