George Keith's FOURTH NARRATIVE, OF HIS PROCEEDINGS AT TURNERS-HALL, 1699.

WE, whose Names are under written, having (at Mr. Keith's Request, and by the
Allowance of the Right Reverend the Lord Bishop of London) carefully examined
the Quotations of this Narrative, do testify the Faithfulness of them, and
that they exactly agree with the Books out of which they are taken. And as we
commend his Integrity, in retracting publicly his Errors, and his Christian
Zeal for the reducing of his Brethren who are yet entangled with them; so we
hope, they will follow his Example, and discern the Perniciousness of their
Ways, and be led, by the Grace of God, to the Acknowledgment of the Truth, and
to the Communion of the Church.

Z. Isham, D. D. Rector of St. Botolph Bishops-gate. W. Bedford, D. D. Rector
of St. George Botolph-Lane. R. Altham, B. D. Rector of St. Andrew Undershaft.
Will. Whitfield, Rector of St. Martins at Ludgate. J. Adams, Rector of St.
Alban, Woodstreet.
George Keith's FOURTH NARRATIVE, OF HIS PROCEEDINGS AT TURNERS-HALL.

Divided into Three Parts:

Detecting the Quakers Gross Errors, Vile Heresies, and Antichristian
Principles, oppugning the Fundamentals of Christianity, by clear and evident
Proofs ( in above Two Hundred and Fifty Quotations) faithfully taken out of
their Books, and read at three several Meetings, the 11th, the 18th, and 23d of
Jan. 1699. before a great Auditory of Judicious Persons, Ministers, and others:
More particularly discovering the Fallacious and Sophistical Defenses of George
Whitehead, Joseph Wyeth, and seven Quakers of Colchester, in their late Books
on all the several Heads contained in the printed Advertisement.

To which is prefixed, The Attestation of five Ministers of the Church of
England, to the Truth of the said Quotations; And a POSTCRIPT.

By GEORGE KEITH.

LONDON: Printed for Brabazon Aylmer, at the Three Pigeons against the Royal
Exchange in Cornhill, 1700.

Advertisement.
THIS is to signify, that it is my purpose (Godwilling, and by his Assistance)
to be present at Turners-Hall in Philpot-Lane by Fanchurch-Street in London,
being our ordinary Meeting Place, Licensed by Authority, on the Eleventh Day of
the Eleventh Month called January, in the Forenoon; there to detect and
discover Gross Errors and Antichristian Principles, plainly repugnant to the
Fundamentals of Christianity, in the Books of the approved Authors and Writers
of the People called Quakers, by ocular Inspection presenting them, in fair and
full Quotations, to as many as are willing to be present and make Inspection
into them. And also to lay open the great Fallacy and Sophistry of George
Whitehead and Joseph Wyeth, and some of their Brethren at Colchester, which
they have used in their late printed Defenses of their Own, and their Brethrens
most Erroneous Passages contained in their Books, in order to Cloak and Hide
their Antichristian Principles and vile Errors, not only to the great Scandal
of all true Protestants in this Nation, of whom they pretend to be the more
refined Part, but of all true Christians any where.

And I do hereby desire, George Whitehead and Joseph Wyeth, and their Brethren
of the Second Days Meeting at London, who have approved their late Books, to be
present at the said Meeting (for which I have Permission by Civil Authority) or
any others who think themselves concerned, at the Time and Place
abovementioned, to hear and see out of their own Books, their Errors and
Fallacies detected, who if they have any thing to offer in their own, or
Brethrens Defense, shall be fairly heard.

The particular Errors that I intend (God-willing) to discover them guilty of,
out of their Books and Authors, are,

Concerning their Pretenses to Infallibility and sinless Perfection. Concerning
the Scriptures. Concerning the Holy Trinity. Concerning Christ, his
Incarnation, his Soul and Body and Blood, his coming to Judgment at the Last
Day. Concerning Justification. Concerning the Soul. Concerning the Light
within. Concerning the Resurrection. Concerning the outward Baptism, and the
Supper. Concerning doing servile Work on the First Day. George Keith.
London, 18th 10th Month, 1699-1700.
A few Words of PREFACE TO THE IMPARTIAL READERS.
IMpartial Readers, I have these few things to acquaint you with, and recommend
to your Consideration. First, that I found just and necessary Cause to recite
diverse former Quotations given in my former Narratives, and in other Books
formerly published against the Quakers Errors, to detect the fallacious and
sophistical Defenses that they have made in their late Books, in Vindication of
those Quotations, to cover their vile Errors.

Secondly, Beside the former Quotations above mentioned, I have brought many
new Quotations, which are neither in my former Narratives, nor in any other
Books that hitherto have been published against them, which obviates the
cavelling of the Quakers, who would be ready to say, There is nothing to be
expected of new Matter, but what is contained in other Books, and which has
been already answered by them: The contrary whereof will sufficiently appear to
any that shall compare this fourth Narrative, with any other Books, before
this, published against them.

Thirdly, Whereas the common Objection of the Quakers, is, That their Books are
neither fully nor fairly quoted: To remove the Ground of any such Objection, I
have got the Attestation of Persons of known Integrity and Judgment, to the
Truth of them (as I got the like Attestation from some, the former Year, to
attest to my third Narrative.) I have given the Quotations as fully and fairly
as is requisite to satisfy any reasonable Persons. But the Men I have to deal
with, for all this, will (I expect) renew their unjust Complaint, and will tell
their Readers, This and the other Passage, going before, or following, should
have been inserted in the Quotations; whereas the not inserting of them, makes
not their Cause one whit the worse, nor the inserting them, makes their Cause
one whit the better, as could be showed in many Instances, and is showed in
their late Books, for when so much is quoted out of any Book, that gives the
full Sense of the Writer; whatever is more, is superfluous.

Note, for a Proof on the last Head, That the Quakers deny the Moral Law or Ten
Commandments, to be a Rule to the Christian's Life, and thereupon do not blame,
but justify doing servile Work on the first Day, yea, and in the Face of a
Congregation, while the Minister was preaching. See p. 28. of this Narrative.

G. K.

George Keith's Fourth Narrative, OF HIS Proceedings at Turners-Hall, 1699. For
the Detecting the QUAKERS ERRORS.
The first Part giving an Account of his Proofs on the first four Heads,
contained in his printed Advertisement, viz. Concerning, I. Their
Infallibility, II. Their sinless Perfection, III. The Scriptures, IV. The Holy
Trinity.

Proofs out of the Quakers Books, on the first Head, concerning their
Infallibility.
1. GEORGE Fox, Great Mystery, page 105. For who witness these Conditions that
they were in, that gave forth the Scriptures? They witness Infallibility, an
infallible Spirit, which is now possessed and witnessed among those called
Quakers. Glory to the Highest for ever

Again, a little after, So Isay, the Devil, false Prophets, Antichrists,
Deceivers, Beast, Mother of Harlots; none of these can witness an infallible
Spirit. But being out of the Spirit, that Christ, the Prophets and Apostles was
in, that gave forth Scriptures, they are not infallible as they were, but with
that they are all judged out.

II. Great Mystery, page 98. And thou and you all that speak and write, and not
from God immediately and infallibly, as the Apostles did, and Prophets, and
Christ; but only have gotten the Words; you are all under the Curse in another
Spirit ravenned from the Spirit that was in the Apostles. Saul 's Errand to
Damascus, page 7. They are Conjurers and Diviners, and their Teaching is from
Conjuration, which is not spoken from the Mouth of the Lord, and the Lord is
against all such, and who are of God are against all such.

Truth defended, by G. F. and Rich. Hubb, p. 104. Our giving forth Papers or
printed Books, it is from the immediate eternal Spirit of God, to the showing
forth the filthy Practices of the World's Teachers, etc.

George Whitehead, Voice of Wisdom, page 33. his Opponent, Th. Danson, having
said, As for our Want of Infallibility, it is no valid Plea against our
Ministry. G.W. answers, His Falsehood here appears plainly, for they that want
Infallibility, and have not the Spirit of Christ, they are out of the Truth,
and are fallible, and their ministry is not of the Spirit, seeing they speak
not from the Spirit, but from their own Hearts, which are deceitful, where they
want Infallibility, so out of the Abundance of the Heart, the Mouth speaks.

Note, Jos. Wyeth, in his Switch for the Snake, p. 87. states the Question
concerning their Infallibility, fallaciously in three several Particulars.

1. That the holy Spirit of God is infallible, etc. This is no Part of the
Controversy.

2. That the holy Spirit leads all such who obey him, infallibly into all Truth
necessary to Salvation: This is wrongly stated, the true State of the Question
being, Whether the Holy Spirit leads us into all Truth necessary to Salvation,
without the external Doctrine, externally delivered in the holy Scriptures, by
preaching and reading, and without all external means? This they affirm, as
shall hereafter be proved; but this all sound Christians deny, who yet grant,
that all the Faithful are infallibly led into all Truth necessary to Salvation,
by the infallible Spirit, in the Use of the holy Scriptures, which contain the
infallible Truths of the Gospel.

3. That the Ministers who are sent forth in the Work of the Ministry, have, or
may have (if they diligently attend to the Voice of the infallible Spirit
speaking in them) a certain infallible Knowledge and Assurance of the Truth of
what they so deliver. This also is wrongly stated, the true State is not what
they have or may have, but what they really have in all they preach and write,
as is clear from the above given Quotations of G. F. and G. W. their great
Leaders. To say, they may have, implies that they may not have, and in that
case they are fallible, and so by their own Verdict, are under the Curse,
Conjurers, Deceivers.

Note, that their great Teachers and Leaders, G. F. and G. W. have taught, that
the infallible teaching of the Spirit, is not by the medium or external Means
of the Scriptures, and that Faith is not given by the external Word, does
appear from their Books.

1. G.F. Gr. Mist. page 350. Ye tell People of an outward ordinary means by
which Christ communicates the Benefit of Redemption. The means of Salvation is
not ordinary nor outward, but Christ is the Salvation, who is eternal.

2. Gr. M. p. 133. His Opponent, T. Moor, having said, The Scripture is the
absolute Rule and Medium of our Faith. In page 134. he answers, The
Scriptures is not the Author, nor the Means of it, nor the Rule, but Christ who
gives it, and he increases it.

3. Gr. Mist. page 243. And the things of the Gospel, and of the Spirit are not
attained by an external means.

4. Gr. Mist. page 320. His Opponents having said, God works Faith in us
inwardly by his Spirit, and outwardly by his Word. He answers, Here thou go
about to make the Spirit and the Word not one; is not the Word Spiritual, and
Christ called the Word?

Gr. Mist. p. 168. Them that never heard the Scripture outwardly, the Light
that every Man has that comes into the World, being turned to it, with that
they will see Christ, with that they will know Scripture, with that they will
be led out of all Delusion, come into Covenant with God, with which they will
come to worship God in the Spirit, and serve him.

Note, the Quakers that say, they are turned to the Light, yet are not led out
of all Delusion, but many of them are under great Delusions and Error,
concerning the great Truths of the Gospel, as does evidently appear by these
and the following Quotations.

A Quotation being brought out of Gr. Mist. in the Snake of the Grass; G. Mist.
p. 213. Switch. page 79.
Thou cast not know the Scriptures, but by the same Degree of the Spirit that
the Prophets and Apostles had. Jos. Wyeth says, in his Switch, By the Error of
the Press, the Word ALL is left out: For which he quotes Gr. Mist. page 212.

In answer to this, hear what G. F. says in Gr. M. page 120. And he that has
found the true Record, the Spirit of God; with that he shall know ALL the
Scriptures, and is come within the Book where all things are written, and which
writes all things forth, the Spirit.

Note, G. F. no doubt, and G. W. did think they had found the true Record, the
Spirit, etc. and therefore they knew ALL Scripture, and had the same Degree
that the Prophets and Apostles had. G. F. G. M. p. 222. The Light, etc. is the
Substance of all Scriptures, opens all Scriptures, and that all Scriptures ends
in: Lets see all Scripture.

But that the Quotation of the Switch, G. M. p. 212. is lamely made, the
following Words prove, that some of the Quakers at least did understand (as
they thought) ALL Scripture. The Passage is this; But they cannot know all
Scriptures, but as they vttain to the full Measure of the Spirit of the
Prophets and Apostles, and to the Measure and Stature, and Fullness of Christ:
And if they do not attain to all this, they are not able to know all the
Scriptures, and the Work of the Ministers of God, was to bring People to this,
to the Measure, and Stature, and Fullness of Christ.

Note, that they thought their Ministry had brought some of the Quakers to
this; we shall see hereafter, and no doubt they judged they were come to it,
viz. G. F. and G. W, Gr. M. p. 47. The Light which every one has that comes
into the World, is sufficient to Salvation without the Help of any other Means
or Discovery.

But which is much more than that of Degrees! G. F. tells of them that were
come to that, which is above Degrees.

Gr. Mist. page 281. And the Blood of the Seed it cleanses from Sin, the Power
and Stain of it; and then the Guilt is gone of it, and where this is known, the
Seed that destroys Death; and him that has the Power of it, which is the
Devil; the Fullness is known, which is above Degrees, that which Degrees ends
in.

Again, G. Mist. page 318. For who comes to the Spirit, and to Christ, comes to
that which is perfect, who comes to the Kingdom of Heaven in them, comes to be
perfect, yea, to a perfect Man, and that is above any Degree.

Note, by this it appears, G. F. thought himself, and some others of the
Quakers, come above any Degree, and that is beyond and above the Apostles
themselves, who were but in the Degrees, but they were come to the Fullness it
self, that is, to be equal with Christ himself.

But let us next hear G. Whitehead 's Excuse of G, F's Saying, None can
understand Scripture, but by the same Degree of the Spirit the Prophets and
Apostles had.

In his late Book, called Truth and Innocence, page 19. But if any true
Knowledge of the Scripture be received, that must be by a Degree of the same
Spirit, as I suppose, the Words before-cited should be so transposed, and so
intended.

Note, If this Liberty be allowed, to transpose Words in a Sentence, the
falsest Assertions may be made true, and the truest made false, as Acts 12.
It Is said, Herod killed James, by transposing James killed Herod. Is not this a
rare Evidence of G. W's Truth and Innocence, or rather of his shameful
Sophistry: But whereas he says, the Words were so intended, the above
Quotations prove that G. F's Intention was, that some of the Quakers, and to be
sure HE for one, were come to the same Degree; yea, which is more, to the
Fullness, and that is above any Degree.

But it is no wonder G. F. thought he was come to such Height of Perfection,
when he said in his Battle-door, All Languages are to me no more than Dust, who
was before Languages were: This Passage Jos. Wyeth quotes lamely, Switch, page
149. leaving out the Words, which were chiefly offensive, who was before
Languages were. What says Jos. Wyeth to this? Snake, page 85.
And why did he not fully quote it, as it was objected in the Snake? It seems
he found Difficulty to give a plain Answer to it, therefore made a lame
Quotation. The like, or rather more blasphemous Assertion is in a Book of J.
Parnel, called, The Watcher, p. 37. But to the end of all Disputes and
Arguments, I am come; for before they was, I am, and in the Light do them
comprehend, and judge to be out of the Light in Babylon, etc.

But here again let us note, that the Author of the Switch acts the dull
Sophister very manifestly, Switch. p. 453, 465.
when on the one hand he seems to be highly pleased with the Doctrine of the
Church of England, in the Point of Inspiration, and says, He is glad that so
essential a Truth, as is the Inspiration of the holy Spirit, is owned by her:
And on the other hand, for blaming the Author of the Snake, for his
contradicting himself, by his approving the Inspirations owned by the Church of
England, and yet faulting the Quakers Pretenses to, Inspirations. The Author of
the Snake had sufficiently cleared this, in his Book called the Snake, etc.
page 322. what sort of Inspiration the Church of England owned, which is that
of sanctifying and saving Graces; but for the extraordinary and miraculous
Inspirations of Prophecy and Tongues, she does not pretend to, nor teach, that
they are commonly given, or that they are to be sought, there being no need of
them.

The manner of prophetical Inspirations, which the Prophets and Apostles had,
was such as they had given them by the Spirit, without all outward teaching of
Men or Books; and beside this, they had the ordinary Inspirations of the Spirit
(given in the use of the external means in God's ordinary way) to wit, the
sanctifying and saving Graces of the Spirit inspired into them. Here is a plain
Difference betwixt the Inspirations which the Quakers pretend to, given them
without the external means of hearing, reading, etc. and the Inspirations given
in the use of the ordinary means of the written Word, both preached and read,
that the Church of England lays claim unto, which makes the Sophistry of the
Author of the Switch very manifest, and also his great Injustice to the Author
of the Snake, so to charge him without ground.

But let us hear what great matters the Author of the Switch pretends, that the
Inspirations of the Light within, Switch, page 38.
will teach them who attend upon it: It will ( says he) fully teach them their
Duty to God, and enable them to perform it: It will discover to them a System
of Principles truly Orthodox, with more Certainty than Counsel or Synod can,
not taught by it; for be is indeed a wonderful Counselor. It will first, fully
and truly (beyond any Casuist) show unto Man what is his Sin, and if Man
despile not this Discovery, but close with it, it will beget in him a Loathing
of his Sin, and then proceed to work in him a Repentance from dead Works, which
if unfeigned, you see he is very cautious [but why If unfeigned? Can the Light
within work any other Repentance but that which is unfeigned?] It will go on to
sanctify him; and when Man, by this Light, Spirit, or Grace, is sanctified; it
will then witness to his Spirit that he is justified; so will Man come truly to
be redeemed. This ( he says) in short, is the Substance of what has been by
us declared, concerning this Divine Light, Christ in Man, and which is not more
than is witnessed of it in the Holy Scriptures.

Note, By this plain Confession, we see what sort of System of Divinity the
Inspiration the Quakers plead for, does, or will give them who attend upon it;
to wit, a-Scheme of Deism, or refined Paganism. In all this Substance of his
whole System, not one word of Faith in Christ, as he outwardly dyed for our
Sins; his being the great Sacrifice for the Remission of our Sins, by Faith in
his Blood outwardly, shed. But the Inspirations of the holy Prophets and
Apostles taught them this Faith, and the necessity of it, as well as of
Repentance for the Remission of Sins: And seeing the Quakers Inspiration
teaches them nothing of such a Faith, and the necessity of it, it is a plain
case tho the Quakers pretend to the same Inspirations that the Prophets and
Apostles had; yet they have them not, nay, nor the ordinary Inspirations that
common true Believers have, in and by the means of the external Doctrine
contained in the holy Scriptures, that lead them to regard Christ outwardly, as
he was crucified and raised again, and is at the Right Hand of God, in our
Nature, as the great Object of their Faith: But this the Inspirations of the
chief Teachers of the Quakers have led them not to regard.

In the whole System of his Orthodox Principles, the Substance whereof he tells
us he has given; there is not one entire Article of the Creed, commonly called
the Apostles Creed, mentioned; nay, nor so much as employed. And indeed, he
cannot (nor any of his Brethren) by any real Evidence, convince any Man. that
their Inspirations have taught them so much as one entire Article of that
Creed, in the true Sense, generally received by true Christians; and according
to their Principles, they must not say, that the Spirit has given or wrought
the Faith of the Articles of the Creed in them, by the medium or means of the
outward Word; for that is contrary to G. Fox's Doctrine above delivered, and as
expressly contrary to the Doctrine of G. Whitehead, in his Brief Discovery of
the dangerous Principles of John Horn, G. W's. brief Discovery, p. 18.
page 18. who blames J. Horn and T. Moor for having affirmed, that the
Scriptures are the medium of Faith, [i. e. the means by which Faith is wrought
in Believers.] There is no such Scripture (says G.W.) as says, the Scriptures
are the Medium of Faith.

Note, seeing the Quakers have not the Faith of Christ, as he was outwardly
crucified, and died for our Sins, and rose again; neither by the Light within
them, nor by the medium of the Scriptures, as the Instrument of the holy
Spirit, as other true Christians have it; it is a plain case, they have no
Faith of it at all, other than a mere historical Faith, as they have of any
common History; and indeed many of them have not that.

G. Whitehead, in his Quakers Plainness, p. 70. brings a quibbling Distinction
betwixt a means and the means, he grants, The Bible may be a means
instrumentally, as God bestows a Blessing upon, or accompanies the serious
reading thereof, as it directs to Christ Jesus, or to his Light and Spirit,
which opens the Understanding in the holy Scriptures. And a little before he
says, Mark the Difference betwixt a means and the means, as between the Bible
and Christ; that may be a means which is not the means, Christ being the
absolute way and means, by way of Eminency for Man to come to know God.

But to show the Fallacy of this Quibble: By the means are generally understood
the instrumental and subordinate Causes, to the principal Agent and Efficient,
which ought not to be confounded. Christ is the Author, and principal Efficient
of our Knowledge of God; and the Bible, i.e. the divine Oracles and Testimonies
contained therein, are the means, and to say the means, or a means, is
equivalent among all that know true English; as when we say, Food and Raiment
are the means to preserve our natural Life, or a means, the Sense is the same.

But it is proved already out of G. F's Gr. Mist. p. 243. that G. F. denied
that the things of the Gospel, and of the Spirit, are attained by an external
means; will G. W's Distinction here serve him? Will he again distinguish
betwixt a means and an external means?

But let us apply this subtle Distinction of G.W. to the Words of G. F. in
Readiness Errand, p. 6. who being charged that he said, He was the eternal Judge
of the World, he confesses it, and brings several Proofs, as he thinks, to
prove it, as that the spiritual Man judges all things, and the Saints shall
judge the World: Now, seeing G. W. will needs have a Distinction betwixt a
means and the means, why not also betwixt a Judge of the World, and the Judge,
yea, the eternal Judge of the World, as he professes himself to be? It was not
enough that G. F. should be a Judge of the World, but the Judge, yea, the
eternal Judge of the World; and by G. W's Logic, G. F. was not a Judge, but
the Judge, by way of Eminency; yea, the eternal Judge of the World, But G. F.
after his manner of frequently corrupting the Words of Scripture, as well as
his Opponents Words, does corruptly and falsely argue from that Scripture, 1
Cor. 6. 2. Do ye not know that the Saints shall judge the World: Note, the
Words, shall judge, in the future, which G. F. corruptly applies to himself,
in the present, or preterit. Tense, that he was or is the Judge, yea, the
eternal Judge of the World.

Lastly, To come yet more closely to G. W. himself, I will show you how he
denies the Scriptures to be a means for the Conversion of Jews and Heathens to
the true Faith; in Truth defending the Quakers, by G. W. qu. 35. page 51. And
what is that the Gospel must be preached to, in the Heathens that will receive
it? And whether they that preach to Turks and Heathens, ought to preach out of
a Text, and prove their Doctrine by Scripture to them, as the Priests do in
England, yea or nay?

Note, By this Query, he not only excludes the Scripture from being the means,
but a means for converting Turks and Heathens; nor will his common Excuse of
saying it was but a Query, help him: This sort of querying being the strongest
way of denying or affirming, both in Scripture and all other Writings.

Next let us hear W. Penn 's Confession concerning means, in his Key, printed,
1699. p. 12. pervers. 8. The Quakers assert the Spirit of God to be the
immediate Teacher, and that there is no other means now to be used, as
Ministry, Ordinances, etc. He answers, They never spoke such Language...for
they never denied the use of means, but to this Day, from the Beginning, they
have been in the use of them; but then they are such means as are used in the
Life and Power of God.

Note with what presumptuous Confidence, W. P. dares to say, they never spoke
such Language, when G. F. their great Apostle, had plainly said, as
above-quoted, that the things of the Gospel are not attained by AN external
means: That they have been all along in the use of some means, as preaching,
writing, and reading, is but to say, their Practice contradicts their
Principles, which is very common to them: But to cover their Error, their way
is to mistate the Question, as W. P. does here, which is not whether outward
means can truly profit, without the inward Aid and Assistance of the Spirit;
for this is generally granted that they cannot, which is equivalent to his
Phrase, that the means then only profit when used in the Life and Power of God:
And in very deed, their holding the Light within every Man sufficient to
Salvation, without any thing else, as they do commonly teach, destroys all
necessary use of outward means; as who should say, a Man has that within him,
that is sufficient to carry him to America without any thing else, as Boat or
Ship, should be understood to say, he can walk on the Sea, or fly in the Air
to that remote Place.

The next thing in reference to their Infallibility, is their Pretense to the
infallible discerning of Men's Hearts, without respect to their Works, good or
bad. This is differently stated by them, and wherein we shall find a real
Contradiction among them.

G. F. in his Gr. Mist, page 89. had said, Here thou have showed, that the
Quakers have a Spirit given to them, beyond all the Forefathers (which we do
witness) since the Days of the Apostles in the Apostasy; and they can discern
who are Saints, who are Devils, and who are Apostates, without speaking ever a
Word, they that be in the Power and the Life of Truth.

This discerning of Men's Hearts, G. Whitehead had formerly placed upon outward
Signs in the Countenances of wicked Men or Women, which he still justifies in
his Antitode. page 69. -- Proud and haughty Looks, wanton and scornful Eyes,
envious and fallen Countenances are rendered in Scripture, as outward Signs or
Marks of such wicked Hearts, which also the Gift of discerning perceives, and
gives to see many times through such outward mediums.

Note, G. VV. here lays a great Stress upon outward Signs in the Countenance,
which he owneth to be outward mediums, through which the Spirit of discerning
perceives, and gives to see Men's Hearts, but yet he will not allow the
Scriptures to be the medium of Faith, so prefers outward Signs in the
Countenance to the Scriptures, but then he much throws down this sort of
discerning by Men's Countenances, by saying many times, for this leaves their
discerning to be many times fallible; and though the Scripture, and common
Experience proves, that the Countenances of some, openly vicious, and
extremely wicked, are Signs of their wicked Hearts, yet the Scripture gives no
universal Rule in the Case, but gives us the Command of Christ, Isaiah 11. 3.
John 7. 24. Judge not according to Appearance, but judge righteous Judgment;
and it was said of Christ, He shall not judge after the Sight of his Eyes, nor
reprove after the hearing of his Ears. But G. VV. will not take Christ in the
case for his Example; but he pleads further, That the Gift of discerning of
Spirits is given to some Members especially (and still is continued) in the
true Church, and from which discerning, Satan cannot be hid, however he
transforms himself. Here is another minching of their Infallibility of
discerning, that it is given to some Members especially, but he does not allow
it to all Members; however he seems to plead for all the Ministers having it,
Truth and Inn. p. 12.
for he makes it an Evidence of great Darkness in his Opponents, to hold, that
a Minister that is fallible is in the Spirit, a Minister of Christ, and yet
cannot discern another Man's State or Condition, so as to give an infallible
Character of him: And he contends so earnestly for this infallible discerning
in the Church, that he says, If there must be no discerning of Spirits. no
infallible or certain Character to be given of other Men's States or
Conditions, by an inward Sense or discerning of Spirits; then Christ's Sheep
may follow Strangers, Wolves, Dogs, etc. and so be devoured, contrary to his
own Doctrine, and below the Sense and Instinct of the very Sheep, which leads
them to shun Dogs and Wolves, when they make at them, whether they bark or
howl, or be mute.

Note, By this manner of G.VV's arguing, not only the Teachers, but all and
every one of the People, if they be Sheep, must have this infallible
discerning, whereas he pleads for the Ministers having it, or some Members; so
it seems the People must rely on the Ministers discerning by an implicit Faith,
or if not, be in danger of perishing: But in plain Contradiction to this
Doctrine of G.VV. who pleads for the infallible discerning of Men's Hearts, to
every Minister; let us hear Jos. VVyeth, who says, Switch, p. 95. But though
this holy Spirit can discover unto one, the Heart and Thoughts of another, as
of Ananias to Peter, Acts 5. yet as that is not usual, so neither is it
necessary, nor is it that which we pretend to; nor has G.F. in the fore-quoted
Places, pretended to it, referring to the above-quoted Passage, where he makes
this Observation, Switch, p. 90. -- Which does very plainly show, that G. F.
did not attribute this Knowledge or Discerning to the Quakers or any Man, but
to the Power and Life of Truth, where it is manifested. This Gloss, as it is
directly contradictory to G. Fox's Words, which say, They, i.e. the Quakers
that be in the Power and Life of Truth can discern; so to the Words of G. W.
who does affirm, That some of the Members especially have it.

But both G. F. and G. VV. has carried this discerning farther than by the
outward medium of Men's Looks and Glances, so that they can know the inward
States of their Hearers, without looking to their Faces, yea, though their
Backs be toward them; and not only what they are at present, but what they have
been, and shall be from Eternity to Eternity. For Proof of this,

G. F. Gr. M. quotes his Opponents, G. M. p. 229.
saying, Will a discerning of the Gospel Mysteries prove a Power to discern
the State and Condition of Souls, what it shall be to all Eternity. And after
some Words he answers; And so who are come into the Bishop Christ, they are one
Soul, they know the Hand of God, which the Soul lives in, which is the Power,
and so knows it from Eternity to Eternity: And so ye Priests which do not
discern the Soul and its State, to Eternity and from Eternity; ye are not in
the Mystery of the Gospel, which gives Liberty to it, neither have ye it -- And
you five Priests have shamed your selves that do not know the Soul from
Eternity to Eternity; and on this horrid Presumption, that they knew the State
of Men's Souls from Eternity to Eternity. Rich. Hubberth passes this severe
Sentence on his Opponent, Truth's def. page 92. Thou art ordained of old for
Condemnation, and for Perdition among the ungodly ones, and art a Reprobate.
And p. 93. So here thou art cursed, and cast out eternally. Note, this was only
for his asking What is original Sin? And here he speaks of the several States
of the Soul, as when the Soul is in Death, and when it lives, and God has
Pleasure in it: By which Soul, he must needs understand the Soul of Man, for of
the Souls of Men his Opponents did speak.

Next G. VV. in his Truth defending the Quakers, has gone as far as G. F. with
respect to his Infallibility in knowing Men's Hearts.

The Question being put to him in Truth def. p. 24. qu. 54. Do not you, G. W.
blasphemously take to your self an Attribute of God, while you pretend
ordinarily to know the Hearts of Men. And tell Mr. Townsend of Norwich, in the
second Page of your Ishmael, That the Light of God is departed from his
Conscience. He answers, I take no Attribute of God to my self, but what God
has given me, by whose Gift I witness that Promise fulfilled in me: ye shall
discern between the righteous and the wicked, between him that serves God, and
him that serves him not, Mal. 3. 18.

This arrogant assuming of one of God's Attributes, of knowing Men's Hearts,
being objected against him lately, in a printed Sheet, called, An Account from
Colchester, etc. In another late printed Paper, signed by seven Quakers at
Colchester, called, Some Account from Colchester, they expostulate the Case
with them who made the Objection: Is it such an Error to believe or witness the
fulfilling of this plain Promise, Mal. 3. 18. How do you then believe in
Christ, in whom all the Promises of God are yea and amen? Is the contrary good
Doctrine for you (our Acculers) to hold, that ye or Christians shall not
return, nor discern between the righteous and the wicked? etc. Do you not
thereby prove your selves blind, and in Unbelief?

Note, This in Mal. 3. 18. or any other Place of Scripture proves not that any
Men shall have one of God 's Attributes given them to know Men's Hearts; which
is no where promised, but Christ has taught us to know Men by their Works and
Fruits, and not by his giving them one of God's Attributes whereby to know
Men's Hearts; for if they had that, they should be as God himself, to know
without regard to the Fruits: But that Place, Mal. 3. 18. seems to have a plain
Reference to the Day of Judgment, wherein the Works of all Men, however secret,
shall be made manifest, and yet not by Men's having one of God's Attributes
given them even then. And as to G.VV's Argument for the necessity of this
infallible discerning given to Ministers, otherwise Christ's Sheep may follow
Strangers and be destroyed: This Consequence does not follow; for while they
follow the Voice of Christ, that is, his Doctrine outwardly deLivered in the
holy Scriptures, and inwardly set home and applied to their Hearts by the holy
Spirit, they are safe; and when they follow not that, but Men of false
Pretenses, who bring a contrary Doctrine, and yet say, they have the infallible
Spirit, as the Followers of G.VV. and his Brethren do; they are in great Danger
of perishing, and though the true Sheep of Christ shall not finally be
deceived, nor finally perish, yet they at times may be deceived, and have been
deceived by false Teachers, and by none more than such false Teachers, who
falsely pretend to the Spirit of Christ, and yet preach contrary to his Doctrine.

But that the Quakers did not only pretend to extraordinary Inspirations of the
Spirit, but to miraculous Operations I shall show you out of G. F's G. M. p.
254. Some of them having asked the Question, Whether your Baptizers cast out
Devils, and drink any deadly thing, and it not hurt you? And whether the House
where you meet was ever shaken? And where he did give the Holy Ghost to you?
The Opponent calls this an unlearned Question, to which G. F. replies, This is
to show that you are not Believers, nor in the Power that the Apostles was in.

Note, By this it appears they lay claim to the same Power of working Miracles
that the Apostles had, as to drink any deadly thing, and it not to hurt them,
and that the House where they meet was shaken: I have both heard and seen, that
some of the Quakers Bodies were shaken in their Meetings, but I never heard nor
saw that the House where they met was shaken.

Note, while I was giving my Proofs out of G. F. and G. W. their Books,
concerning their high Pretenses to an infallible discerning Men's Hearts; a
Quaker, called Samuel Miller, as I am informed, a Bricklayer, stood upon a
Bench, and for a further Confirmation, said with a loud Voice, George, I had a
Vision concerning thee twenty Years ago, that though thou did preach the
Gospel to others, thou thy self should be a Castaway. This he gave to
corroborate G. F's Pretense of his knowing the State of Men's Souls from
Eternity to Eternity: But if his and their bare Affirmation must be received
for Truth, without all external Evidence, that I am an Apostate, a Castaway,
what Man, howsoever innocent, can escape their uncharitable Censure? Another
Quaker, called Thomas Kent, stood up, and would have preached, telling the
Auditory, He felt a Fire or Flame burn in his Breast, he had a Conscientious
Concern upon him; but the People forbidding him to preach, he cried out, The
Quotations were false, but gave not the least Proof: I told them he has been
disowned by the Quakers, and recorded out of the Unity these many Years, for
his Drunkenness, and opposing G. Fox's Orders; so after a short time he was
silent.

Proofs out of the Quakers Books on the second Head, concerning their Sinless
Perfection.
IT being objected against G. F. that he had said, He was as upright as Christ*
He answers, Readiness Errand, p. 11.
Th^se Words were not so spoken by me, but that as he is, so are we in this
present World, that the Saints are made the Righteousness of God, that the
Saints are one in the Father and the Son, that we shall be like him, 1 John 3.
2. And that all teaching which is given forth by Christ, is to bring the Saints
to Perfection, even to the measure of the Stature of the Fullness of Christ;
this the Scripture does witness, and this I witness; where Christ dwells, must
he not speak in his Temple?

It having been said by one of G. F 's Opponents, G. Mist. p. 282
They (i.e. the Saints) cannot be perfect here or hereafter in Equality, but
only in Quality. G. F. answers, Christ makes no Distinction in his Words, but
says, Be ye perfect, even as your Heavenly Father is, and be ye merciful as he
is, and as he is so are we, and that which is perfect and merciful, as he is
perfect and merciful, is in Equality with the same thing, which is of God and
from him.

G. Whitehead, in Defense of this Passage, in Truth and In. p. 14. says, Now
where is the Blasphemy pray? Was it not Christ's own Doctrine? Be ye perfect
even as your Father which is in Heaven is perfect; and Luke 16. 36. Be ye
therefore merciful as your Father is merciful. Now what Distinction does Christ
make in these Words and Precepts, as in point of Purity, and where is the
Perfection in Quality granted then, and wherein must this Perfection consist?

Note, It was not Christ's Doctrine to be perfect in Equality with God's
Perfection, for that were to command them to be God himself, and though Christ
expresses no Distinction, yet it is implied; and whereas G. W. pleads for the
Saint's Equality with God in point of Purity, he is still blasphemous; the
Saint's Perfection in Quality is not an essential Perfection, for what Holiness
and Purity they now have, they formerly had not, but God's Perfection is
essential to him, and so is his Purity, his Purity and Perfection is himself,
and so is not the Saint's Perfection or Purity, therefore there is an infinite
Distance betwixt God's Perfection, and all Creatures Perfection whatsoever.

Again, G. M. p. 197. His Opponent having said, He sums up all in this, Be ye
therefore perfect as your Heavenly Father is perfect, that is, in Quality not
in Quantity. G. F. answers, He that is perfect is perfect, as his Heavenly
Father is perfect, is perfect as he is perfect: If thou or any have an Ear to
hear, let him hear, and lay away thy Qualities and Quantities, and take the
Words as they are, and all that are come into Christ, are come into Life from
the Dust and Ashes, and are spiritual Men.

Note, This he spoke in Opposition to his Opponent his calling Man poor Dust
and Ashes; here he magnifies himself above Abraham, who called himself Dust and
Ashes, and yet was come into Christ, and into his Life. The like arrogant
Expression he has in G. M. p. 299. Such as be Saints through the immortal
Seed, are not Dust and Ashes, for the immortal Seed lives and abides and
endures for ever.

A Tittle of the Law is seen not to be broken, G. M. p. 310.
and this ( says he) is known in us.

Who comes to the Kingdom of Heaven in them, G. M. p. 281, 318.
(...) to be perfect, yea, to a perfect Man, and that is above any Degree.

Again, Are you not worse than Lawyers and Physicians, taking the Peoples
Money, and yet cannot make them perfect Men? G. M. p. 268.

Note, By this reckoning, all the deceased Quakers were perfect with a sinless
Perfection before their Decease, yea, and all they not deceased, by G. F's
Doctrine above-quoted, for in all these Plates G. F. means a sinless Perfection.

He blames his Opponent for saying, One that is in the Kingdom of Grace
groaning for Adoption. ^ And p. 218. G. M. He will not allow any that is
translated into the Kingdom, to have any Members to be mortified.

He judges his Opponents for saying, That Pollution was in the Church, and
says, That the Church is without Spot, or VVrinkle, or Blemish, on any such
thing, meaning surely the Quakers Church.

But that the Quakers Church or Ministry, are not all such, who are without
Spot, or Wrinkle, or Blemish, or any such thing. G. VV 's General Epistle (
which he calls, A Christian Epistle to Friends, etc.) sufficiently shows, in
p. 4. He charge it upon too many Professors of Truth (viz. among the Quakers)
their Negligence and Unfaithfulness to Truth in themselves, which has caused a
Decay of Love, and want of Charity toward others, and then instead of humbly
waiting and depending upon the Lord, some have exaled themselves in a self-will
self-conceit and affection to Pre-eminence in Judgment over others, until
thereby Divisions and false Separations have been caused, and stirred up by
them, to the great Grief of the Spirits of the upright: Such were never
thoroughly subjected into true Humility, Mortification, true Self-denial, or
dying with Christ, etc.

In that called G. Fox's Canons, or Orders ( so did all that Party of the
Quakers call them that joined with John Story and John Wilkinson, two eminent
Preachers of the Quakers, in opposing them) published by G. F. about the Year
1669, and signed or subscribed only by G. F. [Pope-like indeed] having this
Title, Friend's Fellowship must be in the Spirit, and all Friends must know one
another in the Spirit and Power of God. At the Number 9 we have the following
Words; And also all Men that hunt after Women, from Woman to Woman; and also
Women, whose Affections run sometimes after one Man, and soon after another,
and so hold one another in Affection, and so draw out the Affection of one
another; and after a while leave one another, and go one from another, do the
same thing; these doings make more like Sodom than Saints, and is not of God's
moving or joining. And in Number 10. And Notice be taken of all evil Speakers,
Backbiters, and Slanderers, and foolish Talkers, and idle Jesters; for all
these corrupt good Manners. And in Number 11. All such as are Tale-carriers and
Railers, whose Work is to sow Dissension, are to be reproved and admonished.
And in Number 12. And all such as go up and down to cheat by borrowing, and
getting of Money of Friends in By-places, and have cheated several; all such
are to be stopped and judged; as there is a Woman, tall in her Person,
freckled in her Face; and also one John Harding, who are for Judgment and to be
condemned. And in the Conclusion he sharply reproves them of the Quaker's
Society, who sit nodding in a Meeting, for their Sleeping, and Sottishness, and
Dullness; and he says, Therefore be careful and watchful, and let it be
amended. And last of all he adds, Let this be read in all your Meetings.

On this I noted, that these and other Faults he charge upon many of his
Brethren, owned to be Quakers, evidently prove their visible Church and Society
are not such a Church of Christ, which he says, is without Spot or VVrinkle,
as above-quoted; and that, as a People, they are far from that sinless
Perfection they commonly boast of, on which account they are not known, as a
People to pray in their public Meetings for Pardon of Sin; and yet, where such
Faults are, were they sincere, they would both confess and ask Pardon of God
for their Sins. I noted also, that according to this Injunction, these Orders
on Canons of G. F. are duly read in their quarterly Meetings, both here in
Europe, and also in America, whereof I have been an Eye and Ear Witness. But as
he has not in all his Canons enjoined the reading the holy Scriptures, nor any
Part of them in their Meetings; so I said, I never heard any Part of Scripture
read in any of their public Meetings, either for Worship or Discipline; and
they cast great Blame on me, for my reading some Texts of Scripture in our
Meetings at Turners-Hall. But let it be further noted, that seeing G. F. and G.
VV. have so strongly affirmed, That the Quakers can give an infallible
Character of Men, to know who are Saints or Devils, without ever speaking a
Word; what need had G. F. in his Canons, to give such a Description of some, by
Name and Face, whereby to know them to be Cheats? Surely if they had such an
infallible discerning as they pretend, they need not to have such outward
Characters of Deceivers.

Note, Were not some of these abovementioned, Members of the Quaker's Church?
and are not such Evils as he has mentioned, that were among them, Spots, and
Blemishes, and Sins? Yea, G. VV. does own, in his Voice of Wisdom, p. 17.
before that State of Freedom [from Sin] be witnessed, There is a Time of Pain
in Travel, and of suffering in Temptations and Trials. Note, do none of these
belong to the Church, who yet have not arrived to a sinless Perfection, but are
in that Time of Travel? But what if they die in that Time of Travel, before a
sinless Perfection be attained? G. VV. has passed a nibst severe and
uncharitable Censure on them. Voice of Wisdom, p. 42, 43. This sinless
Perfection (for that is the true State of the Question) all must come to witness
who ever come to be saved, for there is no unclean thing must enter into
Christ's Kingdom, therefore People must either expect Freedom from Sin in this
Life, or never.

Note, Thus he has passed a most uncharitable and cruel Sentence, nor only upon
many who were in a sincere Travel toward Perfection, and yet have not attained
to a sinless Perfection before their Decease, but also upon his deceased
Brethren, many of whom deceased (as I judge he must confess) while they were in
the Travel toward it, for Quakers commonly are not longer lived than other
Men, they die at all Ages, young as well as old, and many die that are but
Novices in their Way: And certainly G. Fox, and E. Burr. Fr. Hougel, Rich.
Hubb. and some of their greatest Saints lived in great Ignorance, Error, and
Unbelief, in diverse great Fundamentals of the Christian Faith, and in great
Uncharitableness toward such as differed from them, and remained in these Sins
to their dying Day; shall we therefore be so uncharitable to them, as G. Ws
Doctrine is, to conclude they are all damned, and parished eternally? God
forbid, we will be more charitable to them than his Doctrine allows.

But then again, in Contradiction, not only to G. F. but, himself, he pleads in
his Voice of Wisdom, That the Believers Works are perfect, and God has wrought
all their Works in them, citing Isa. 26. 12. So these Works of God, which
true Believers witness, are perfect, and the Believers have ceased from their
own Works, which were imperfect, and are come into God's Works which are
perfect. But then what says he concerning them who are in the Travel toward
Perfection? Are not they Believers; Have they no Faith? Thus their Confusion is
evident.

They do not consider, that though the Work of Faith, Labor of Love, and
Patience of Hope in Believers are the Works of God, yet they are also the Works
of those Men, in whom they are wrought; it is they who believe, who love and
hope by God's Operation or working in them, and therefore they being imperfect,
though God is a perfect Being and Agent, their Faith, Love and Hope are
imperfect, it being the Property of all Effects to be according to the weaker
and more imperfect Causes, according to that true Maxim, Bonum ex integra
causa, malum ex quolibet defectu, a perfect Effect must have all its Causes
perfect.

But whatever Charity we may suppose they may have for their deceased Brethren,
they have little or none for any such who do not believe to the Hight of their
Doctrine of a sinless Perfection before Death; their Doctrine obliges them to
judge, that none of other Societies are saved, because they do not believe the
Quakers Doctrine of Perfection before they die, the contrary of which, they
call the Doctrine of Devils, the which, if any die, and do not renounce before
their Decease, by the Quakers Principle, they cannot be saved.

But some of them now begin to go into the same Road with others of other
Professions, and after a large Circumference, wherein they have far departed
from them who say, That the Souls of Believers are at the instant of Death made
perfect in Holiness; yet return and say the same thing concerning their
imperfect Brethren who are deceased, and yet before their Decease, arrived not
to a sinless Perfection; which, if it may be allowed to imperfect Quakers, may
be as well allowed to others, sineere Travelers toward Perfection, many of
whom, no doubt, have arrived to greater Perfection before their Decease, than
any among the Quakers Worthies, of whose Perfection they so much boast, who
lived in great Error and Unbelief in the great Fundamentals of Christianity,
and Uncharitableness toward others, and of whose Repentance for the same we
never heard any Account.

Again, G. F. in his G. M. p. 251. in Defense of his and his Brethrens sinless
Perfection, thus answers to that in Eccles. 7. 20. There is not a just Man upon
the Earth which does good and sins not. This just, this wise Man upon the
Earth, which does good and sins not, that was the Estate of the Law, which
Christ is the End of, who is a greater than Solomon, who is the just, and
Righteousness it self, and makes Men free from Sin.

Note, that G. F. in Contradiction to his own Gloss, in the same Page, to prove
a sinless Perfection, brings the Examples of Job and David, both which were
long before Christ came; and to prove David's sinless Perfection, he brings
David's Words; and David said, He had seen the End of all Perfection. Is not
this a rare Proof for a sinless Perfection? But if G. F. did not mean Christ
without, but Christ within, to be the End of the Law: As this is a false Gloss
on Paul's Words, so that imports, that Solomon was not come to the Light within
him, which G. F. calls Christ within; but how then could Solomon pen such Books
of the Scripture, which the Quakers confess to have been writ by Divine
Inspiration, if Solomon had not come to the Light within him?

But let us hear another as nonsensical Gloss of G. VV. on the same Place,
Voice of Wisd. p. 18. Eccles. 7. 20. Ans. The Conversation of the Saints is in
Heaven, Ephesians. 2. 6. Philip. 3. 20. And they are redeemed from the Earth and from
the Vanity, where Solomon saw all things in the Days of his Vanity, in which
all were Sinners.

Note, Is this any Proof, that the Saints, such as Paul, who writ these Words,
were not real Men upon Earth? And is not G. W. a Man upon Earth so long as he
eats, drinks, sleeps, etc? Thus we see how they pervert the Scriptures to prove
their sinless Perfection; for if G. W. will own he is one of these just Men on
Earth, that Solomon writes of, he must confess himself to be a Sinner, if he
will not own himself to be a just Man upon the Earth, yet he must allow his
Body to be upon Earth, unless he will say, our Sight deceives us when we see
him in the Streets, and then either his Body is no Part of him, or if it be, it
has Sin, and consequently, he also has Sin, if he will own his Body to be a
Part of him.

But let us yet again hear another nonsensical Gloss of G. F. to maintain his
and his Brethrens sinless Perfection on the Words of James, In many things we
offend all, G. M. p 309. Mark, says G. F. In the many things we offend all,
but we are come to the one thing, Christ Jesus, the End of the many things, and
in him there is no Sin, and who is in him sins not, who put an End to the many
things that must end and change. Thus we see his and his Brethrens Presumption,
who plainly declare they were got beyond James, and all the Faithful to whom he
wrote those Words; and he charge both James and all the Faithful, to whom he
wrote all these Words, with a horrid Falsehood, that they were not come to the
one thing, to wit, to Jesus Christ: And if none are come to Christ or in
Christ, but who are perfect with a sinless Perfection, as G. W. does here
argue, then young Believers and Converts, who are traveling toward
Perfection, are not in Christ, nor come to Christ, because they have not that
sinless Perfection, which is both a most false and most comfortless Doctrine,
and injurious to all young Christian Converts at least, and may be thought, by
young Quaker Converts, injurious to them also.

Note, while the Proofs were reading out of the Quakers Books for their sinless
Perfection, a Quaker (supposed to be John Whiting) said, George, if Men are not
perfect before Death, when are they made perfect? It must be either before
Death or after Death. I answered, In the instant of Death, and that is neither
before Death nor after Death; as if one should ask, when did Peter and other
deceased Saints put off the earthly Tabernacle, whether before Death or after
Death? The Answer is, neither before nor after, but at the Instant of Death.

But let us hear yet somewhat more of G. F's great Conceit of his and his
Brethrens Perfection, even in Equality with God himself.

Abrief Discovery of the Threefold State of Antichrist, G. W's. brief
Discovery, p. 15.
printed 1653. he being charged with saying, That he was as upright as Christ;
he answers, these Words were not spoken by me, but that, as he is, so are we in
this World, that the Saints are made the Righteousness of God, that the Saints
are one in the Father and the Son, that we shall be like him, and that all
teaching which is given forth by Jesus Christ, is to bring up the Hearers to
Perfection, even to the Measure, Stature, and Fullness of Christ, this the
Scripture witnesses, and I witness fulfilled in me.

Note, this is more than what is in Readiness Errand above-quoted, for there the
Words of Scripture are kept to, that mention the Measure of the Stature of the
Fullness, but here it is far beyond what is written in Scripture, that he was
come, not only to the Measure, but to the Stature and Fullness of Christ, and
what is this but to be equal with Christ and God? Readiness Errand, p. 13. G. F.
He that is perfectly holy, is perfectly just; where this is revealed, there
needs no Addition, for the Man of God is perfect.

This will yet more fully appear by the following Quotations.

In Truth def. by G. Fox and R. Hubb. page 65. a Query being proposed by the
Opponent, Who is like to be the Man thou speak of, he that says he is equal
with God and Christ. or he that preaches Christ the Head? The Answer is, Here
in this Question thou openly shew^d by self, (...) the Mind the Apostles had,
for (says he) I would the some Mind were in you, that was also in Christ
Jesus, who thought it no Robbery to be equal with God, and yet made himself of
no Reputation, Philip. 2. 5. And here thou have showed thy self, that thou have
neither the Mind of Christ nor his Apostles, but art an Antichrist, and an
Enemy against them that witness these things, which the Apostle, said, I would
that ye were of the same Mind. And again the Apostle says, Our Fellowship is
with the Father and the Son, 1 John 1. 3.

Again, in his G. Mystery, p. 248. he quotes, (but very lamely and corruptly).
C. Wade, in his Book Quakery Slain, He denies the Son of God to be revealed in
Man* only by Adoption, and cries against Equality with the Father.

Here before I give you G. F's Answer, I shall give you C. Wade's Words, as
they stand in his Book, to which he answers.

C. Wade's Words in his Quakery slain, are these, p. 23. G. Fox, in the 8. page
of Readiness Errand, affirms, That he that has the same Spirit that raised up
Jesus Christ, is equal with God, and the Saints have the same Spirit in
Measure, for God's Spirit is but one. And G. Fox says, in page 11. That he is
a Saint. Thus he would again prove, That he, a poor wicked Creature, is equal
with God the Creator, and if so, then G. Fox is the Creator of G. Fox, and the
whole World; and he intimately claims Christ's Equality with God, by his
perverted citing of Philip. 2. 6, 7. Now in Opposition to G. F's affirming, He
was equal with God, C. Wade, in his page 24. says. The Scripture says, that
even the Saints themselves are not God's Sons otherwise but by Adoption only by
Christ (note that you Quakers) not as being Christ, as you foolishly fancy but
by Christ, for it is written, Having predestined us unto the Adoption of
Children by Jesus Christ, Ephesians. 1. 5. See this confirmed, Gal. 4. 5. Romans 8. 23.
and Creature adopted Sons cannot be equal with their Heavenly uncreated Father,
who vouchsafes by free Grace, by and in his Son Christ, to adopt them to be
his Sons in Acceptance only: Neither can any Creature adopted Sons, be equal
with God's only begotten Son, the Creator of all adopted Sons, and all other
things, both in Heaven and in Earth also. This is the true and full Quotation
out of C. Wade his Quakery slain.

In Opposition to which sound Doctrine of C. Wade, G. Fox thus answers. G. M.
p. 248.


Ans. And that is contrary to the Apostle, who had the Son of God revealed in
him, and the Assembly of Divines gave forth a Catechism, which, Children, old
and young, was to learn, and said. The Holy Ghost and Son was equal in
Substance and Power and Glory with the Father: What? Then all that have the Son
and the Holy Ghost, has that which is equal in Power and Glory with the
Father. In this thou have not only judged thy self, but all the Assembly of
Divines at Westminster, 1649.

Note, G. Fox here does not quote the Page of C. Wade's Book, as frequently he
does not throughout his G. Mist, give his Opponents Pages of their Books, which
it seems was in Design, that his unfair Quotations might not be so easily found
out. Now observe, whereas G. F. brings C. Wade, crying against Equality with
the Father, we see by the Quotation given, what Equality with the Father C.
VVade cries against, to wit, not the Equality of Christ, the only begotten of
God, with the Father, for that he expressly affirms by saying, That Christ,
God's only begotten Son, is the Creator of all things; but the Equality that C.
Wade cried against, was the Equality of G. Fox, and Creature adopted Sons with
the Father, and for his so saying, G. Fox makes him to have contradicted the
Apostle, and also the Assembly of Divines at Westminster, and judged both
himself and them.

This I think so evident a Proof, that G. F. thought himself equal with the
Father, that neither G. W. nor Jos. Wyeth, nor any of their Brethren, with all
their little Craft and Sophistry, can clear this Passage from that downright
Blasphemy, That G. F. was equal with God, for neither the Assembly of Divines
at Westminster, nor C. W. deny the Equality of the Son and of the Holy Ghost,
for G. Fox grants they owned it; but the Equality which C. Wade cried against,
was the Equality of G. F. or any of the Saints with the Father. But here we
find the Strength of G. Fox's Logic, The Son and Holy Ghost are equal with the
Father, therefore G. F. is equal with the Father, the Proof of which
Consequence must be one of these two following Assertions; the one is, That G.
Fox thought himself to be the Son of God, or such a Son as was equal with the
Father; the other is, That because the Son of God was revealed in G. Fox (as he
thought) that therefore G. Fox was equal with the Father. As to the first of
these Assertions, as it is utterly false, that G. Fox was the Son of God, to
wit, the only begotten Son of God, the Word made Flesh, so the other is utterly
a false Consequence, that because the Son of God was revealed in him, that
therefore he was equal with the Father; but surely, if the Son of God had been
revealed in him, that Revelation would have taught him not to utter such horrid
Blasphemy.

But that C. Wade did not deny, but own as much as the Scripture warranteth,
That God the Father, as also Christ the Son, were manifested or revealed in the
Saints: I shall quote a Passage in his Book, being originally the Words of one
T. Moor, that wrote against the Quakers, whom J. Nailer had charged, That he
would exclude God and Christ out of the World, and that he should no more dwell
in his People till Doomsday: In Opposition to which C. Wade quotes the
following saying of T. Moor, which he approves, page 23. of Quakery slain, That
the Majesty of God, whose Throne is in Heaven, is in his Inspections,
Influences, and Operation every where; and in his gracious and spiritual
Presence, and manifested Nighness in and through his Son, dwelling in Sion,
even in the Hearts and Societies of his People.

Now let us hear what Jos. Wyeth and G. Whitehead say in Defense of that
blasphemous Passage abovementioned, quoted from Readiness Errand to Damascus, p.
8. He that has the same Spirit that raised up Jesus from the dead, is equal
with God. Jos. Wyeth does plainly justify it by the like false Consequence as
G. Fox made; Switch, page 59.
he says, For when Men are guided by the Holy Spirit, they are certainly
guided by God, for the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, are one God, and therefore
equal, and that which is equal, as G. Fox (he says) often expresses it. But
does it therefore follow, that because the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost
are equal, that therefore he that has either the Son or the Holy Ghost, is
equal, either with the Son, or Holy Ghost, or with the Father? yet this is Jos.
Wyeth's blasphemous Consequence, to justify G. F's Blasphemy.

But G. W. has found two other Ways to defend the abovesaid Blasphemy of G.
F. in the Supplement to the Switch, he says, p. 528. And if any among us have
writ of them who are perfect in Christ Jesus, being led by his Spirrt, as in
that Sense equal. I understand equal only as like unto God, or in Union with
him, being united unto him by his Spirit, as he that is joined to the Lord is
one Spirit.

Note first, The Word Equal, no where that I know, either in Scripture, or
other Books, or common Speech in any Language, signifies only as like,
therefore this is a mere Force put upon the Word, and a strained Sense: But
Secondly, That could not be the Sense intended by G. Fox, because, as I have
above showed in a former Quotation, he proves that he is equal with God the
Father, because the Son and Holy Ghost are equal with the Father. Now will G.
W. say, That the Equality betwixt the Son and the Holy Ghost and the Father, is
only an Equality of Likeness, as to say, the Son and the Holy Ghost are only
like the Father, but are not really equal with the Father: This was the Arian
Heresy, that the Son was like the Father, but not equal or of the same
Substance with the Father; they said he was Homoiusios, but not Homouisios.

But he has yet another String to his Bow, in his Truth and Innocence, page
10. Therefore the Words [He that hath] in the said Instance, should be left
out, being contrary to G. F 's and our Principle, and to his own very Words and
Confession a little before in the same Book, quoting Readiness Errand, p. 5, 6.
where G. F. says, It was not so spoken, as G. Fox was equal with God, but the
Father and the Son is one. But the Fallacy lies here, he did not say, George
Fox, to wit, the Name George Fox, or the outward visible Body that bears that
Carnal Name, as he somewhere calls it, but the new Name that he has, that is
the He that is equal with God, because that He is the Son, and as to what G. W.
says of Union with God, that G. F. did not mean Union by Faith and Love, but a
personal Union, appears from G. M. p. 100. He brings in his Opponent saying,
God dwells not in the Saints as a Personal Union. In Opposition to which he
answers, How comes the Saints then to eat of his Flesh, and to be of his Flesh
and Bone: Note, it should be by a personal Union? And God dwelling in them, and
have Unity with the Son and the Father, and to be of his Body which is the
Church, and Christ the Head: Yea, he blames his Opponent, G. M. p. 258. for
saying, To say that God is substantially in Man, as essentially one with him,
can be no other but the Man of Sin.

But whereas G. W. says, He that has should be left out; pray who put them
in? That they were G. Fox's Words, the Book called Readiness Errand, affirms, if
this Liberty be allowed to transpose, leave out, and add Words in a Sentence,
nothing so vile and blasphemous or atheistical, but may be justified by G. W.
who has used all these three Methods to defend his and his Brethrens vile
Errors.

But let us hear one Passage more of G. F. out of G. Mist. p. 299. to let us
know what Conceit he had of himself as being more than a Creature; he tells,
That one had raised a grievous Lie against G. F. and said, he said he was
Christ, p. 298. to the End. This Man having so charged him, and having told him
he had Witness to prove it, G. F. told him, He was a Judas, and he went away,
and after a while hanged himself, and Christ in the Male and in the Female, if
he speak he was Christ the Seed, and the Seed was Christ, but he did not speak
it as a Creature.

Note, he grants he spoke the Words, That he was Christ, but he did not speak
it as a Creature, therefore he thought he was something more than a Creature,
the Seed in him spoke it, which was Christ, and that was not a Creature, but
what Seed was in him, or in other Quakers, that was not a Creature; I cannot
find out any other in his Writings, but his Soul or invisible Part that he
makes to be Christ and a Part of God, as will afterward appear on a distinct
Head.

But he has yet another Defense to save the like blasphemous Saying of F.
Howgel, They that have the Spirit of God are equal with God in Nature, but not
in Stature.

It having been objected against the Quakers, that some of them have said, They
that have the Spirit of God are equal with God: To this F. Howgel answers,
after some foregoing Words, F. Howgel's Col. p. 232.
He that is born from above is the Son of God, and he said, I and my Father are
one; and where the Son is revealed and speaks, the Father speaks in him; and
dwells in him, and he in thy Father; there is Equality in Nature though not in
Stature. Here it is a plain Case that F. H. places this Equality in Nature but
not in Stature, betwixt him that has the Spirit of God, who is born from above,
and God himself; for to place it betwixt Christ, as he was the Son of God
before all Ages, and God the Father, were to say, That the Son is equal with
the Father in Nature but not in Stature, which has a twofold Error in it;
first, To make a Distinction betwixt God's Nature and Stature. Secondly,
Suppose that Distinction, That the Son is equal to the Father in Nature but not
in Stature, both which are most gross and blasphemous, and no less gross and
blasphemous it is to affirm, That the Saints are equal with God in Nature but
not in Stature.

Now let us hear G. VVhitehead's Defense, Truth and Inn. p. 10. The Equality in
Nature (objected) relates to the Divine Nature which the Child of God partakes
of in Measure, though not in Stature, relates to the Child, that Divine Nature
is one and unchangeable, but our participating of it, and Growth in it is
gradual, until all ( i. e. Christ's whole Church and Body) come into the
Measure of the Stature of the Fullness of Christ. But does all this Saying of
G. VV. prove that the Children of God are equal with God, either in Nature or
Stature? The Saints are said in Scripture to be Partakers of the Holy Ghost,
are they therefore equal to the Holy Ghost? Which yet is the Way of G. VV's
reasoning; the Equality in Nature he says, relates to the Divine Nature, but
who is it that is equal to God in the Divine Nature, but not in Stature? was it
the Son or Holy Chost that is equal to God in the Divine Nature but not in
Stature? Nay, therefore it must be the Saints or Believers; here a Proposition
is framed, They that have the Spirit of God are equal with God; and then this
Distinction is given; They are equal in Nature, but not in Stature: This
Proposition has for its Subject They, i. e. the Saints or Children of God. In
all Propositions, all the Parts of the Predicate belong to one and the same
Subject, the which Parts are equal in Nature but not in Stature: But it is an
unaccountable Liberty that G. VV. takes in his Way of defending these
Blasphemies, not only to change the Signification of Words from all common Use,
but the unalterable Rules of right Reason, as in the present Case; like as if
one should say, G. Whitehead is equal to A. B. in Nature but not in Stature;
Nature relates to G. W. but not in Stature relates to another; but who is this
other who can tell? Or as if one should say G. W. is a Man, but not honest, Man
relates to G. Whitehead, but not honest relates to another. It is a real Shame
that such pitiful Sophistry should be used by G. W. to defend his and his
Brethrens vile Errors and Blasphemies, whereby he makes himself guilty of them,
and all to save his and their pretended Infallibility: It were much more Manly,
as well as Christian, fairly to acknowledge and retract those most erroneous
Passages, and own their Fallibility and Error, and be contented to be lifted
among fallible Men, for humanum est errare, labi, decipi; and not only so, but
to be greatly humbled for the Presumption, that being Men, they should equal
themselves to God.

But the general Conceit of their sinless Perfection, as they are a Body of
People, is such, that both G. W. and Jos. Wyeth does justify W. P's objecting
to the Church of England, their praying from seven to seventy, Lord be merciful
to us miserable Sinners.

G. VV. says, in Truth and In. p. 15. Alas poor Sinners! Is not a Sign of
Laughter at them, but rather of Lamentation and Pity over their miserable
Estate, who are always (...) but not forsaking their Sins. The like Answer does
J. VVyeth give in the Note, Is not this a plain Evidence of the great Pride
that is among the Quakers concerning their sinless Perfection; As a Body of
People, and their great Uncharitableness toward, not only the Church of
England, but all others called Christians throughout the whole World; yea, all
Christians in all Ages, and the universal Church of God, both under the old and
new Testament, who always used Confession of Sin, and prayed for Forgiveness of
Sin? find as Christ taught his Disciples to pray daily for their daily Bread;
so to pray daily for Forgiveness of Sins: So under the old Testament there were
daily Offerings for Sin, and the High Priest, however so holy, yet offered both
for his own Sins, and the Sins of the People: Does it therefore follow that
their Confessions and Offerings were hypocritical?

But does not G. VV. know, that as there is a gradual going unto Perfection, so
there is a gradual forsaking of Sin, and a putting off the old Man with his
Deeds? Must not they who feel themselves wounded with Sin, seek for a Cure? And
should not the diseased come daily to the Phisician till they be cured? And as
to the Quakers Uncharitableness, and G. VV's especially, toward all in the
Church of England, whom he charge without Exception, that they are still
confessing but not forsaking their Sins. How can he more prove this Charge
against them than his own Society or himself? Many, both in the Church of
England, and other Protestants, can compare with the best of the Quakers for
Holiness of Life, and exceed them in many Virtues, especially in Humility. But
do no not they better who confess their Sins, and yet through humane Frailty,
find that they relapse into some Sins, than such proud Pharisees among the
Quakers, who neither confess nor forsake their Sins? such as their sinful
Ignorance and Errors in the great Fundamentals of the Christian Faith, their
too high Esteem of themselves, and Uncharitableness toward others, calling all
others but themselves, The World and Idolaters, and their Worship Idolatry: And
if any, formerly among them, come to a more sober Mind, and to a more sound
Understanding and Faith in Christian Doctrine, and are more charitable toward
others: They call them Apostates, as they do call me and others, whom God in
his great Mercy has of late recovered from the Errors and Uncharitableness that
were and are among them; so that for owning the Protestant Churches, and that
we can join in the Worship of God with them, we are rendered Apostates by G. VV*
and his Brethren in their printed Pamphlets against us: But if we be Apostates
for this, then by G. VV's and his Brethrens Sentence, all the Protestant
Churches are Infidels and Idolaters.

But if the Church of the Quakers be a sinless Church, that need not to confess
their Sins, nor pray for Forgiveness of their Sins, how does this agree with
the large. Acknowledgments that G. VV. has made in his Christian Epistle to the
People called Quakers, of so many things amiss among them, as above quoted?
Either such faulty Persons are owned Members of their Church, or they are not;
if they are not, why do not they disown them, and excommunicate them, or
declare them to be none of them.

If they own them to be of their Church, then their Church is not without Sp^t,
Wrinkle, or Blemish; and consequently, not the Church of Christ by G. F's
Doctrine? If it be said. The Tares cannot be discerned often times from the Wheat
then where is their Spirit of discerning, whereby they can know who are Saints
or Devils without speaking ever a Word? Surely if they have such a Spirit of
discerning, their Sin is great to suffer such a Mixture among them as G. W.
complains of in his Christian Epistle especially now that they reckon E^oth's
Prophecy is fullfilled in them: Truth and Inn. p. 13
They, i. e. the Quakers, are the ten thousand of his Saints in whom the Lord
is come to execute Judgment upon all. Why do they not begin at home, and first
cleanse their own House, and purge out the old Leaven from among them? How is
it that diverse unclean Persons, even of their Ministry, have been owned to
preach among them while living in secret Uncleanness, diverse of whose Names
they know I can produce? Why did they not discern them, seeing they have (as
they pretend) an infallible discerning of Men's Hearts? Or if they did discern
them, why did they not discover them, and get them cast out of the Camp?

As to the Instance above given of the daily Sacrifices for Sin, which were
offered under the Law: If it be replied, That they grant the Law made nothing
perfect, but now a sinless Perfection is brought in by the Gospel. I ask them
what became of them all of that ancient Church (who daily confessed their Sins,
and prayed for Forgiveness) when they died? Did they die in their Sins! Or
where were they cleansed from their Sins after Death? Or did they all perish,
according to G. W's manner of reasoning against his Opponents in his Voice of
Wisdom above quoted.

As to that Place in Scripture, The Law made nothing perfect; and other the
like Places; they are to be understood, first, Comparatively, the Gospel State
under the New Testament, as to the general, is a State of more Purity and
greater Perfection than the State of the People under the Law. Secondly, The
ceremonial Part of the Law, as Circumcision and the Sacrifices, did neither in
whole, nor in part, give them the Remission of their Sins, but were Types of
Christ, that alone Sacrifice, by which Remission of Sin and Sanctification both
then was and now is obtained.

It is on the Conceit that the Quakers have of their sinless Perfection,
especially their Ministers, that they are not known to pray for the Forgiveness
of their Sins, in their public Meetings, which gave occasion to that Question
in Truth defending the Quak. by G. VV. p. 8. Q. 11. Do not you think it
needless to pray for the Pardon of your Sins? To this G. Whitehead replies, We
have prayed for the Pardon of our Sins, and the Lord, who heard our Prayers,
has pardoned and remitted our Sins, by the Power of the World to come, which
we have tasted, and do taste of, as many witness. But of late some of them have
got a way to pray in the third Person plural in their Meetings, as I have
observed; as thus, If any here have sinned against thee, give them Repentance
and Forgiveness: Or thus, Pardon them that have sinned against thee: Thus I
have heard John Field pray, but I never heard him, or any here in England, to
the best of my. Remembrance, pray in the first Person plural, Forgive us our
Sins; though Daniel, and the best of the holy Men recorded in Scripture,
prayed, Forgive us our Sins. A Quaker said, George, do not thou know, that it
is the manner of Friends, if any have done amiss, to deal with them, and get
them to confess and ask Forgiveness: I said, that was but as to particular
Persons, and private Offenses; but that was no Proof as to their general
Confession and praying for Pardon of Sin. Another Quaker stood on a Bench, and
began to read a Passage out of a Book of mine, called, The Way cast up, printed
in the Year 1677, containing some Words of Prayer, which I said I had heard, or
Words to that effect, used in our Meetings, both to God the Father, in the Name
of Jesus Christ, and also to Jesus Christ, naming him by the Name Son of David.
This Passage that Quaker brought (his Name, as I am informed, is John Whiting)
to prove, that the Quakers prayed for Forgiveness of Sin, for I was then a
Quaker, but what he read out of my Book not being well heard, he was desired to
hand the Book to the Minister that stood by me, and read the Quotations; which
was done, and the whole Passage, containing a Prayer, was read, which is this;
Way cast up, p, 121. Son of David have mercy on us. O thou blessed Lord Jesus,
that were crucified and died for our Sins, and shed thy precious Blood for us;
be gracious unto us. Thou that in the Days of thy Flesh, were tempted of Satan,
afflicted, bore our Sins on the Cross, felt our Infirmities, and were touched
with them. O thou our merciful High Priest, whose tender Bowls of Compassion,
are not more straightened, since thy Ascension, but rather more enlarged, and
whose Love and Kindness is the same toward thy Servants in our Days, as it was
of old, help us and strengthen us, and by the Power of thy divine Life and
Spirit; raise us up over all Tentations, and indue us with a Measure of the
same Patience and Resignation that dwelt so fully in thee, and which thou did
so abundantly manifest in all thy Sufferings in the Days of thy Flesh. Thou art
the same that thou were, thy Heart is the same toward thy Servants, as when
thou were outwardly present with them in the Flesh. Thou art our Advocate and
Mediator in Heaven with the Father* Our merciful High Priest, who is not
untouched with the feeling of our Infirmities. Thou, even thou, blessed Jesus,
thou know our most secret Desires and Breathings, which we offer up unto
thee, in the Enablings of the blessed Life and Spirit, that thou may present
them unto thy Father and our Father, that in thee we may be accepted, and our
Services also; and for thy sake our Defects and short Comings, our Sins and
Transgressions that we have committed, may be forgiven us.

The Prayer being read, diverse Ministers and others said it was a good Prayer,
but they never heard that any such Prayer was used in any of the Quakers
Meetings: A Quaker, called Daniel Philips, standing by near where I stood, said
that Book was approved by the second Days Meeting at London, which was a great
Untruth: I told how I wrote that Book in Scotland, and from Scotland sent it to
a Correspondent in Holland, who printed it there; and when it came over to
London, in the Year 1678. it met with great Opposition from diverse of the
Preachers of the Quakers at London [as Stephen Crisp, William Shown, William
Mede, and, Samuel Newton] and one of the chief things they blamed in my Book,
was this very Prayer, and especially that Part of it, Jesus Son of David have
mercy on us: Some of them said it was half Popery; for though G. K. would not
pray to Mary the Mother of Jesus, as the Papists do, yet he was for praying to
the Son of Mary: Others said it was Common Prayer: A larger Account of things
relating to the Opposition I met with from the Quakers for that Prayer, and
some other things in that Book, ye will find in the late Book called A Defense
of the Snake, in that called A Collection, from p. 16. to 38. I further showed,
that what I had delivered in that Book, and others of my Books in former times
when I was reckoned in Unity with the Quakers, did plainly evidence that I held
the Faith of the Fundamentals of Christianity with all true Christians, though
in some lesser Matters I was biassed and misled by them into diverse Errors,
particularly in rejecting the Sacraments of Baptism and the Supper; which I
have since retracted; and for my holding the fundamental Doctrines of the
Christian Faith, as appears by that Book, and other Books of mine. All the Time
of my Quakerism, a Quaker in Ponsylvania, who was a Justice of Peace [his Name
was Arthur Cook] said unto me, George, thou never was a right Quaker all thy
Days? but an old rotten Presbyterian.

The reading of that Passage in my Book, containing the Prayer aforesaid, which
the Quaker brought to make against me, had a far contrary Effect to what he
intended; for many (some Ministers; and others) present said, This makes for G.
K. not against him; let the Quakers bring any such Passage out of their Books,
to prove they were of that Faith with him. Some of the Quakers that objected
against that Prayer in my Book, asked me, in one of the Meetings that were
appointed to hear the Objections against my Book, and my Answers, Where did I
ever hear any English Friend of the Ministry pray after that manner? Possibly,
said they, some Scots Friends, who were thy Proselytes, thou have heard to pray
so: I confess they guessed right, they were some Scots Friends whom I had heard
to pray so, and so I had prayed; and being at a stand to instance any English
Friend that I had heard so pray, W. Penn told them, he had so prayed, and that
not long ago, but he said, It was in private: G. W. said, Let the Scripture
decide it; whereupon he calls for the Bible, and reads in 1 Cor. 1. 2. What say
ye to this Friends, said G. W? Ye see that Paul did approve the Corinthians
that called upon the Name of the Lord Jesus Christ: Their Answer was, Paul was
dark and ignorant in that thing, as G. K. is, for our Parts we know better.
Here note the Fallacy both of G. W. and W. P. who for all this seemingly owning
Faith in the Man Christ Jesus, by confessing they were to pray to him, yet in
their printed Books have opposed that Faith without any Retractation.

Proofs on the third Head.
First, That the Scriptures, according to the Dictates of their greatest
Teachers, are not the Word of God.
THat the Scripture is not the written Word, see G. Mist. p. 68, 75. The Word
not contained in Scripture, p. 232. The Scriptures not the Word of
Reconciliation, but Christ, p. 186. The Scriptures not infallible nor divine,
but humane, p. 302. He charge C. Wade with Blasphemy, for affirming the
Scriptures are the Word of God, G. M. p. 246, 247. Thus the Church of England,
and all Protestants are guilty of Blasphemy by his Assertion.

Note, This Controversy betwixt all true Protestants and the Quakers, whether
the Scriptures are the Word of God (which the Quakers have formerly most
earnestly denied, and fiercely disputed against, though some now begin to
acknowledge it, and yet they are still the same infallible Men) is not a mere
Strife of Words, but a most material and important Controversy, for when many
Places of Scripture are brought to prove that God's Spirit does inwardly teach
us, by means of the Word, and that Faith comes by the Word of God outwardly
heard or read, that we are born of the Word, and sanctified by it, and all
spiritual Effects that are attributed in Scripture to God, Christ, and the
Spirit, as the principal Agent, and to the Word as instrumental, they will not
allow of any instrumental external Word, but makes the Word to be the Spirit,
to be Christ and God, which is in effect to render them of no use to us at all
seeing by denying them to be the Word they deny them also to be the external
Means or Medium, whereby the Spirit teaceth us by his inward Operation in our
Hearts, and works any saving Knowledge and Faith in us, and this also they have
denied, viz. that the Scriptures are the Means or Medium.

But that the Scriptures are the Word of God, and the Word most frequently so
called in Scripture, is clear from abundant Places; to wit, the external
Doctrine contained in the Scriptures. Our Gospel came unto you, said Paul to
the Thessalonians, 1 Thessalonians. 1. 5. not in Word only; by Word here is meant
Doctrine, Isaiah 28. 13. The Word of the Lord was unto them Precept upon
Precept, Line upon Line: Here the Precepts and written Lines of the Prophets
are called the Word of the Lord; and Joh. 15. 25. there we find the Word
written, (...), i. e. the written Word, which was a short Sentence written in
one of the Psalms; but G. F. denies them to be the written Word, G. M. p. 68,
319.

When Paul bid Timothy preach the Word, it cannot be justly thought that he
would have him only preach the inward Word, or the essential Word or Light
within; but by the Word he meant the whole Doctrine of the Gospel. The Quakers
but trifle when they argue the Scriptures are Words, and it is a Lie to call
Words the Word, which is not a Lie, but a common Speech used by themselves, who
call an Epistle a Letter, that yet contains many Letters: And they do no less
trifle when they argue, to say the Scripture is the Word, is to say the
Scripture is Christ, as if the Name Word did only belong to Christ, whereas the
Name Word, as well as the Name Light, is given both to Christ and other things:
Christ said to the Disciples, Ye are the Light of the World; and so said Christ
of himself, does it therefore follow that they were Christ? They say they call
the Scriptures what they call themselves, A Treatise, but not the Word, quoting
Acts 1. the former Treatise, but in the Greek it is Word; the same in Joh. 1.
1. (...), etc. the former Word, where it is plain he calls all the Words
written in the Gospel according to St. Luke, the Word, as each Oration in
Isocrates or Demosthenes is called (...), i. e. the Word.

Proofs that the Scriptures are not the Rule, but the Spirit or Light within,
as is common to all Mankind.
G. F. G. M. p. 39, 120. and in his G. M. p. 302. he says, The Spirit is the
Rule that leads into all Truth, so says Christ. Note, Here he belyes and
wrongs Christ's Words; Christ did not say, the Spirit is the Rule, the Spirit
is the Leader who leads us into all Truth, by the Line or Rule of the holy
Scriptures, we not having those extraordinary Leading that the Apostles had.

Nor is this a mere Strife of Words, but a most necessary Controversy, which
is the Foundation of their Deism, and their overthrowing Christiany, and yet
this very Year they have reprinted W. P's Discourse concerning the general Rule
of Faith and Practice, who brings fourteen Arguments to prove that the
Scriptures are not the general Rule of Faith and Practice, to which I have
answered in my late Book in Print, called The Deism of W. P. etc. Three of
which Arguments of his are, 1. From their Imperfection. Switch, page 46.
2. Their Uncertainty. 3. Their Obscurity, Yea, Jos. Wyeth in his Switch,
charge the Scriptures with Uncertainty. This is a most dangerous Heresy; for
by this Principle they are not obliged to believe one entire Doctrine in the
Apostles Creed, as indeed I could easily prove; by their Principles they do not
believe one entire Article in that called The Apostles Creed.

G. F. G. M. says, The Apostle does not tell us of a Creed, but the Pope's
Canon Book, p. 355. yet the Quakers now say they believe that called The
Apostles Creed: For seeing by denying the Scriptures to be either the Medium or
Rule of their Faith, what account can they give for their Faith, to believe one
peculiar Article of Christianity?

If they say they have a peculiar Inspiration from the Light within, to believe
these peculiar Doctrines; this in the first place throws down the common
Illumination from being the universal Rule, for common and peculiar are
differing things. But next, It is a mere Fiction, if they should say they have
such a peculiar Inspiration without Scripture, viz. to believe that Christ was
born of a Virgin, died for our Sins, rose again the third Day: W. P. grants the
Light within does not reveal these things to them, nor is it needful; and he
grants the Scriptures are an historical Rule, but he will not allow that the
Belief of the History of Christ's Birth, Death, etc. is necessary to our
Salvation: It is none of the absolute Necessaries he says.

But they have not only denied the Scriptures to be the Word, the Rule, the
external Medium of Faith, but have given them Names of Contempt, particularly
G. F. who has called them earthly and carnal, Death, Ink and Paper, Dust, and
Serpents Meat, G. F's Truth's Defense, p. 14, 102. See several Papers given
forth, etc. p. 45, 46. So Dust is the Serpents Meat, their Original is but
Dust, which is but the Letter, which is Death; so these Serpents feed upon
Dust, which feed upon all these carnal things, and their Gospel is Dust,
Matthew, Mark, Luke, and John, which is the Letter: The cursed Serpent is in
the Letter, R. Hub's Words, Truth's Def. p. 102. Is not this to fright People
from reading the Letter, to tell them the cursed Serpent, i. e. the Devil is in
it? Their common Defense is, that G. F. meant all this of the Ink and Paper,
but none of all (whom he calls Serpents) that is the Protestant Churches did
ever say, that the Ink and Paper was the Gospel, they meant the Doctrines and
Truths declared by what is writ or printed with Ink on Paper: As for the
Switch, Quotations out of G. M. to prove that some of his Opponents had said,
The Scripture is God, yea, the Letter of the Scripture is God, Switch, p. 15.
and for Proof of this he quotes G. Fox, G. M. p. 261. who affirmed that one
Roger Atkinson affirmed, That the Scripture is God; but had this been so, will
that justify G. F. ^his giving them such opprobrious Names, if one or two
Particulars did run into one Extreme? Will this justify G. F. his running into
the other Extreme? The bending a crooked Plant the contrary way will not serve
his turn in this case: But that G. Fox his Evidence is not to be trusted, in
his quoting his Opponents: I shall clearly prove, G. F. in his Great Mystery,
p. 247. quotes C. Wade for the same Trespass that he quotes Roger Atkinson for,
namely, that Christopher Wade should affirm, That the Scripture Letter was God
and Christ; for this he quotes his Book called Quakery Slain, but no such
Passage is to be found in all that Book; and C. Wade, in another Book of his,
entitled, To all those called Quakers, he charges G. F. with a Hellish Lie and
Slander, for affirming that he called the Letter God and Christ; see this last
Book of C. Wade, p. 7. and compare it with his Quakery slain, p. 16. and his
Words in that p. 16. being, That the Letter of the New Testament or Gospel,
contains in it the mediate inspired teaching written Word of Christ, the
Word that was and is God, which, says C. VVade, is flat contrary to thy Lie.
And in his last cited Book, the said C. VVade mentions no less than twelve
particular Lies wherewith G. F. had belyed him in matter of fact as to his
Quotations, all which I have considered, and so may others if they have the
Books, and will find them indeed to be abusive Perversions and Lies of G. F.
upon this C. VVade, but I shall give only two Instances more, that out of the
Mouth of two or three Witnesses, that is plain matter of fact G. F. is guilty
of false Quotations, and belying the Innocent (and yet these impudent Men will
defend his Infallibility) one of them is, that G. F. in his G. M. p. 246.
charge C. VVade to say, O Luciferian Pride to save Souls; to this C. VVade
fully and effectually answers, and plainly detects the Lie and Perversion in
his second Book, where he shows out of the seventh and eighth Page of his
Quakery slain, that his Words were, His crying out against James Milner' s
Luciferian Pride to save Souls as Christ did, C. Wade's second Book, p. 4.
because he pretended himself to be Christ, and audaciously took upon him to
save Souls, as Christ did by his suffering Death; and hereupon James Milner did
in a juggling manner die, and in a juggling enchanting manner, with a Knife and
a Basin, he pretended his Blood was shed to save the Souls of two Women, this
manner of saving Souls only, C. Wade blames, which G. F. either justifies, or
renders himself a Liar by blaming C. Wade. See the Places themselves.

The other Lie and Slander which G. F. is guilty of against C. Wade, is that in
his G. M. p. 247. he makes C. Wade to say, God limits the Supreme Holy One, by
the inspired Writings of the Apostles; but C. Wade's Words were, That the Devil
limits the Supreme Holy One; see C. Wade's second Book, p. 5. compared with p.
13. of Quakery slain.

Note, If either the Switch, or G. Whitehead could prove the like Perversions
and Lies against the Author of the Snake, as C. Wade has here proved against
G. F. how would they have sentenced him, as indeed they have, for things of
small moment, in comparison of what is here justly proved against their
infallible Apostle (as they pretend he was) G. F? But I do not know one
Quotation of the Author of the Snake, out of their Books, wherein he has in a
substantial matter wronged him, as G. F. here has wronged C. Wade, not only in
these three, but many more.

There yet remains two Quotations out of G. W's own Book, called Truth
defending the Quakers, which he most fallaciously and sophistically endeavors
to justify. The Question being put, Whether the Quakers did esteem their
Speakings to be of as great Authority as any Chapter in the Bible? Truth and
Inn. p. 16.
It Is answered, That which is spoken from the Spirit of Truth in any, is of as
great Authority as the Scriptures and Chapters are, and greater. This same
Quotation is objected in a late printed Sheet, called An Account from
Colchester, where the following Words are set down, that G. W. blames the
Norfolk Priests for leaving out, which he calls the annexed explanatory Words,
and they are these; As Christ's Words were of greater Authority when he spoke,
than the Pharisees reading the Letter, and they in whom that Spirit speaks not,
are out of the Authority of the Scriptures, and their speaking we deny.

But first, These Words are not explanatory, but a sophistical Argument to
prove the former Assertion; for G. VV. argues, That because Christ's preaching
was of greater Authority than the Pharisees reading the Scriptures, that
therefore what the Spirit speaks in the Quakers, and by them, is of greater
Authority than the Scriptures, which is both a false and foolish Consequence,
for it supposes that the Spirit of God speaks in the Quakers when they preach
or speak in Meetings, as it did in Christ and in the Apostles, viz. by the same
divine Inspiration in kind and manner, immediately and infallibly, which cannot
be granted* and the Falsehood of it appears by the many false things that they
speak and write contrary to the Scriptures: And though he mentions not Quakers,
yet that he does understand them, and none else, is clear from his own Words:
He says, They in whom that Spirit speaks not, their speaking we deny: This
supposes he grants that the Spirit spoke in some, which they did not deny, and
who were these, but the Ministers among the Quakers, seeing they deny the
Ministry of all others in our Days.

Next he has an impertinent Question, as to the Division of Chapters and
Verses, Can these Men say that was done by Divine Authority? But this is wholly
from the purpose.

Another Evasion is, That the Spirit of Truth immediately ministering in Man, or
by any spiritual Minister, is of greater Authority, Power, or Efficacy, than
the Chapters are, simply considered as without the Spirit. But, simply
considered as without the Spirit, is wholly remote from the Question, and is no
ways to be allowed for any true Vindication, because the Spirit does as truly
and frequently accompany the Scriptures when read as when preached; or whatever
is preached by the Spirit's Assistance, if the Hearers in reading be as sincere
as the Hearers in preaching: But if the Hearers be careless, suppose Men preach
by the Spirit, it does not follow that carnal and careless Hearers hear by the
Spirit, more than that they read or hear what is read by the Spirit: But if he
will needs have the Words simply and abstractly considered without the Spirit
be added to reading, let them, by the like reason, be added to preaching; what
he adds of Christ and the Apostles living and powerful preaching, being of
greater Efficacy, Power, and Authority, than the outward Writing or Scripture
it self, simply or abstractly considered as distinct from the Spirit: As it was
no Part of the Question, nor Answer given by him in Truth's Defense, so it is
altogether impertinent. But he equivocates upon the Word Authority, taking it
for the effect it has on the Hearers; but that was not the Sense of the Word
Authority in the Question asked; but its Sense (as it is generally among all
that treat of Scripture Authority above other Writings, so taken) the
Obligation or Right that does oblige or induce us to believe the Truth of them,
and that they are of divine Inspiration: This is quite another thing than the
Effect or Impression that Men feel in reading or hearing them read, as well as
when preached upon by way of expounding; for whether the Effect or Influence
and Impression be great or little, as it is sometimes great, and sometimes
little, and sometimes perhaps none, upon hardened Hearts, yet their Authority is
still the same, neither greater nor less at one time than another.

The other Quotation is taken out of his Truth defending, and is objected
against in that called An Account from Colchester, to which a pretended Answer
is given in that called Some Account from Colchester, signed by seven Quakers;
the Passage is this, Is the Moral Law or ten Commandments a Rule to the
Christian's Life, Some Account from Colchester, p. 9. to the End.
or is it not? Ans. Thou might as well ask if the moral Law, as thou call
it, be a Rule to Christ? For the Christian's Life and Rule is Christ, who is
the End of the Law for Righteousness, who came not to destroy but to fulfill it.

Note, In their Answer they groslly equivocate, in taking the Word Christian's
Life in another Sense than was meant in the Query, and is meant in common
Speech: By a Christian's Life, is meant in the Query and common Speech, a
Christian's Practice and manner of Life, with respect to his Thoughts, Words,
and Actions. Now, though Christ is called in Scripture the Christian's Life by
the Figure of a Metonimy, being the Author of their Life, yet he is not their
Practice or Manner of Life, their thinking, speaking, and acting; and whereas
they make it absurd to suppose that the moral Law was a Rule to Christ: Here
they show their Ignorance and Error, for the Man Christ had the moral Law for
his Law and Rule, and it did oblige him to Obedience, and he fulfilled it in
his own Person, for he was made under the Law, and though the Law is not a Rule
to the Spirit of Christ in Believers, yet it is a Rule of the Spirit, whereby
he rules them. Next they say, The said Answer appears not to be intended to
make void the moral Law or ten Commandments, but the contrary, in asserting
Christ to be the End of the Law for Righteousness, and that he came not to
destroy the Law, but to fulfill it, therefore the Righteousness thereof remains,
and is binding by the holy Spirit in every true Believer, though not under the
Law, but under Grace, which effectually teaches, both to deny Ungodliness and
worldly Lusts, and to live righteously, soberly, and godly in this present
World, Tit. 2. 11, 12. which answers the Substance and End of the Law.

Note, whereas they say, The Righteousness of it remains, and is binding by the
holy Spirit in every true Believer, how is it binding by the Spirit, if it be
not a Rule to every true Believer? Does the Spirit bind Believers to that which
is no Rule or Law? Again, By their Limitation and Restriction of binding by the
Spirit, they make the moral Law, as it is outwardly delivered in the holy
Scriptures, to have no Obligation upon Believers at all, but only as it is
inwardly revealed and given by the Spirit; and thus Christ's Prophetical and
Kingly Office, as he outwardly delivered that Law to us, is of no Force by
their Answer; whereas that Law, and all the other Laws of Christ, have their
binding Authority over Believers from Christ the great Prophet, and King, and
Head of his Church, as without them delivered by him to them, and sealed by his
Spirit in their Hearts; and though the Spirit of Christ in Christ himself, and
in the Prophets and Apostles, was a Lawgiver to Men, yet the Spirit is not a
Lawgiver as in us, because his Law is sufficiently given already by Christ, and
by his Spirit in Christ, and in his Prophets and Apostles: But the Work and
Office of the Spirit in us, and all Believers, is to persuade us of the Truth
and Authority of the Laws of Christ already given, to enlighten our Minds to
understand them, and inwardly to strengthen us by his Grace, and gracious
Influences and Operations to obey them. But to hold that the holy Spirit is any
Lawgiver to Believers since the Days of Christ and the Apostles, is of no less
dangerous Consequence, than to overthrow Christianity, and introduce Deism and
Mahumetism: For indeed, upon that Pretense, the Laws of the Turks Alcoran are
set up and by the same Pretense G. F. did throw down Christ's Institutions of
Baptism and the Supper, and Church Government by Pastors and Elders, and set up
Laws and Rules that he pretended to have given him by the Spirit; and this was
the Pretense of the ancient Montanists: Yea, W. Penn, on this very Pretense,
rejects Baptism and the Supper, affirming, That the same Spirit that led the
Apostles to reject Circumcision, has led the Quakers to reject the outward
Baptism and Supper.

Lastly, whereas they say, A Believer is not under the Law, but under Grace;
this does not justify their vile Heresy, That the moral Law is not a Rule of
Life to Christians; for though they are not under the Curse and Condemnation of
it, nor as it is a Law of Works, so as thereby to be justified, yet they are
under it, even as outwardly given by Christ and his Prophets and Apostles, as a
Rule of Life: And thus, as they disannul and make void the moral Law of the Ten
Commandments, so all the other positive Laws and Commands of the Gospel, making
the Gospel nothing but the Light within all Mankind, and Gospel Commands
nothing but what that dictates, though they are not agreed about the Commands
of the Light within, either their Number or Duration, or whether there are any
new Commands given in this Age, as G. F. pretends was given to him, and by him
to the Quakers.

But again, How does it appear, that their Answer does not make void the moral
Law or Ten Commandments, when they reject the Morality of the fourth
Commandment, and do not allow, that one Day of seven is to be observed, and to
be sanctified, by abstaining from servile Labor, and giving that Day to
religious Exercise, as appears from another Quotation in that called An Account
from Colchester, taken out of G. W's Truth defending? To which they pretend to
give answer, in that called Some Account from Colchester, p. 11. Did that
Quaker sin therein or not, who brought lately, on the Lord's Day, an old
Doublet into Dr. Gell' s Church in London, and sat upon the Communion Table
mending it, while the Dr. was preaching; the Parishoners forbidding him? In
their Answer they expostulate with him, as if it were Popery (...) it a Crime
Sin to work upon the Communion Table, as if it were a more holy Place than
another. But though it have no inherent Holiness, yet it being dedicated to
that Use, every sober Christian will say, it was a great Sin by diverse
aggravating Circumstances, as done in Contempt of the Institution of our Lord
himself, who appointed the Practice of breaking of Bread; and that there should
be a Table* is evident from Scripture, that mentions the Table of the Lord.
Secondly* The doing of it while the Dr. was preaching. Thirdly, The wilful
Offense designedly given to the People present, upon Pretense of bearing
witness against their Idolatry and idolatrous Practice, as the Quakers were
wont to censure it. Fourthly, The doing of it on the first Day of the Week, set
apart from servile Labor, to the Worship of God. Fifthly, The Breach of that
golden Law of Equity, Not doing as they would be done by; for would not the
Quakers account it a great Sin and Trespass, if any of the Church of England,
or Dissenter, should sit in one of their Galleries where they stand to preach,
and kneel at Prayer, and mend an old Doublet, while they are preaching in their
Meeting Places? Surely they would greatly aggravate it, and call it rude and
unmannerly and profane. Again, whereas they query, Where do thou read in the
Scripture, that Men must do no Work on the first Day of the Week? And this
Query is made to justify the Quaker's sitting on the Communion Table to mend
an old Doublet on the first Day, in time of Divine Service. Is not this a great
Shame, to print and reprint such avowed Profanation of the Lord's Day, and
Worship also, in the Face of a Protestant Nation, that zealously profess to be
against the Profanation of it, and where are standing Laws against the
Profanation of it?

Note here, that whereas the Quakers affirm that what they speak and write, is
immediately and infallibly from God; their professed Principle obliges them to
hold, that what they speak and write, is of greater Certainty, and consequently
of greater Authority than the Scriptures, because they are certain of what they
speak and write from the Spirit in themselves, but they are not certain of the
Writings of the Scriptures, as W. P. argues in his Discourse concerning the
General Rule: They have not the Autographa, the Copies differ, and so do the
Translations, but they have their own Autographa, and their Books and Writings
are from the Original immediately. Thus when G. W. sent me his Curse, Thus
says the Lord, etc. and signed G. W. This had more Authority with him than the
Scripture, by his own Doctrine, and if he please, let him add, simply
considered as without the Spirit.

Proofs on the fourth Head. Concerning the Holy Trinity.
GEorge Whitehead, G. W's. Truth and Inn. p. 50.
in his Truth and Inn. and Jos. Wyeth, in his Switch, pretends, That it is not
the Doctrine or thing intended that they deny, i. e. the Father, the Word, and
Holy Spirit, which three are one.

And says Jos. Switch, p. 184.
Wyeth, We own their Distinction in all the Instances of it recorded in Holy
Writ. The only thing they pretend to scruple at or deny, is the calling them
three Persons, which they say are not Scripture Terms, and they are wholly for
keeping to Scripture Terms in Matters of Doctrine.

But to this I say' first, How many unscripture Terms do they freequently use?
Where do they find in Scripture, the Term immediate Revelation, immediate
teaching of the Spirit, immediate Word, which they so commonly use? Again,
where do they find in Scripture, That, see G. M. p. 324. the Seed, to which the
Promise of Salvation is, is Christ within? Several Papers, etc. p. 47.
And that Expression, where do they find it in Scripture, That the same Spirit
takes upon it the same Seed, which is Christ, now as ever, etc. That God the
Father took upon him Humane Nature, That the Spirit is the Rule; and many more,
not only unscripture Terms, but contrary to Scripture? But why do they call
them Three Witnesses, as G. W. has so expressly called them? Where do they find
them in Scripture so called? That Place in John's first Epistle does not call
them Three Witnesses, but Three bearing Record, or witnessing.

But it is not only the Words. Three Persons, wherewith they are offended (the
unjustly, for personal Acts and Properties are given to them, and therefore,
according to plain Consequence from Scripture, they may be called Persons) but
the Doctrine or thing intended they deny, for they allow not that they are
distinct* otherwise than in Manifestation; see G. W's Divinity of Christ, p.
94. he says, The Three that bear Record in Heaven, the Father, the Word, and
the Spirit (or the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost) are one and inseparable, no
where in Scripture called three separate Persons, nor finite in Personalities,
though Three [in Manifestation] and so testified of (as Three Witnesses) for
the Confirmation of the Gospel.

Note, Seeing G. W. does not own them to be Three, otherwise but in
Manifestation, this is not only to deny the Names or Words, Three Persons, but
to deny that they were Three from all Eternity, or before all Ages, for there
was no Manifestation, either of One, or Two, or Three from Eternity: His
calling them Three in Manifestation, is to call them three Manifestations; and
seeing all Manifestation has a Beginning with Time, by his Doctrine there were
not Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, three any wise distinct from Eternity: There
was no God the Father from Eternity that did beger, nor no Son from Eternity
that was begotten, nor Holy Ghost that from Eternity did proceed from the
Father and the Son, by G. VVhitehead's Doctrine.

And F. Hougil, in his Collection, p. 308. delivers the same erroneous
Doctrine: He says, That the Holy Ghost is called another (than Christ:)
Another is not understood of another Life, of another Substance; but is
understood of another Manifestation, or Operation of the same God, who subsists
in the same Power in which the Father, the Son, and the Spirit subsist, as I
said unto thee before: Another, as to distinguish of the Operation and Work of
the Spirit and of the Son, we do not refuse. By this Doctrine of F. Hougil,
they are but distinct Manifestations, Operations, and Works.

Now if G. VV. or the Author of the Switch will say, that there were three
Manifestations, Operations, or Works in the Godhead from all Eternity: It is
absurd to suppose such Manifestations, beside that they are unscripture Terms,
the same Arguments that they use against, three Persons, will as much, and
indeed much more, be of Force against three Manifestations; for if the Father
be a Manifestation from Eternity, of what is he a Manifestation? Can he be a
Manifestation of himself? Or is he a Manifestation of the Son, who (as they
say) is a Manifestation? Thus one Manifestation would be the Manifestation of
another Manifestation; but then what would the Holy Spirit be a Manifestation
of?

And seeing in God there are no Accidents, these three Manifestations are not
three Accidents, nor three Subsistences, nor three Substances, nor three
Persons; and consequently (according to these Men) they are nothing at all but
their own Inventions.

But VV. Penn, in his Sandy Foundation, has not only argued against three
Persons, but against the Holy Three, for he brings five Arguments against
their being a Holy Three, Page 12, 13, 14. one of which is this in express
Words: Since the Father is God, the Son is God, and the Spirit is God (which
their Opinion necessitates them to confess) then unless the Father, Son, and
Spirit are three distinct nothings, they must be three distinct Substances, and
consequently, three distinct Gods. Now let his Argument be applied to the
unscripture Terms, three Manifestations, and it will have the same Force, or
rather greater; but indeed it has none at all against three distinct Persons,
for there is a plain Distinction of a Medium in created Beings, betwixt
Substance and Nothing, the three Dimensions of a Body, Length, Breadth, and
Depth, are neither three Nothings, nor three Substances; the Understanding,
Will, and Locomotive Power of Man's Soul, are neither three Nothings, nor three
Substances, and yet they are but one Soul, though all Creaturely Similitudes
are improper to express this Mystery.

Beside, how could a Manifestation become Flesh, or take Man's Nature, as the
Son did? And how could one Manifestation send another, or beget another, or a
third Manifestation proceed from two other Manifestations?

But whereas Jos. VVyeth says in his Switch, p. 184. We own their Distinction
in all the Instances of it recorded in Holy Writ: In contradiction to this,
hear F. Hougil, in his Collection, p. 251. he calls it damnable Doctrine to
say, That Christ must be distinct from the Father and the Holy Ghost: Before in
God, and now from God; their Quibble about separate does not help them, for
some that have so called them, have declared they meant nothing by separate but
distinct; and now if Jos. VVyeth and G. VV. will have distinct to signify
separate, seeing they pretend to own the Distinction of the Father and the Son,
they must own the Separation.

And whereas, the Teachers among the Quakers profess they are not changed in
any thing of Doctrine or Practice, from what they were from the Beginning, for
Truth is one (say they) and changes not, and as God is one, and Truth is one
and changes not, so his People are one: Now let us compare the Doctrine of G.
Whitehead, what it was in the Year 1659. when he writ his Truth defending the
Quakers (which he said was written from the Spirit of Truth) concerning the
Doctrine of the Holy Trinity, and what it was in the Year 1697, when he wrote
his Antidote against the Venom of the Snake.

In his Truth defending, etc. printed 1659. in p. 2. he says, What the
Scripture says of the Godhead, the Father, the Word, and the Spirit, which
are one, 1 John 5. 7. we own, but deny the Popish Term of three distinct
Persons, which you call God the Father, God the Son, and God the Holy Ghost,
which tends to the dividing God, and to the making three Gods: [Note, here he
not only denies the three Persons, but the Orthodox and Scriptural Explanation
of them, of God the Father, God the Son, and God the Holy Ghost.] And thou who
have vindicated such a Dream; could never prove it by the Scripture, when thou
wast put upon it: And do not you Priests, in your Divinity, as you call it,
affirm, that a Person is a single rational complete Substance, and differing
from another by an incommunicable Property? And art thou so blind, as to think
that there is such a Difference in the Godhead? Seeing Christ is equal with his
Father who is a Spirit, then what incommunicable Property can he differ in from
the Father, that is not communicable to the one as well as the other? Here we
see, he not only opposes the Terms, Three Persons, but the Distinction of the
Three their incommunicable Properties, which are these, That the Father begot
the Son from everlasting, the Son was begot of the Father from everlasting, and
the Holy Ghost did proceed, both from the Father and the Son from everlasting;
and surely the Father's Property is incommunicable to the Son, and so is the
Son's to the Father, and the Holy Ghost's Property to both, for it cannot be
said, that the Son begot the Father, or that the Son is the Father, etc. or
that the Holy Ghost is either the Father or the Son.

But now let us hear his late Doctrine in his printed Antidote, 1697. p. 139.
Though it is true (says he) in one Sense, the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost are
not essentially distinct, as to their divine Being, which is but one, they are
but one God; but in respect to their Properties of Relation, as Father, Son,
and Holy Ghost, as such they are distinct, but not divided nor separate, either
in themselves, or Work of the old or new Creation. First, G. VV. should tell
us, where does he find in Scripture, in express Terms, that they are distinct
in respect to their Properties of Relation. Secondly, Whether these Properties
of Relation are communicable or incommunicable Properties: Surely he must say,
incommunicable, and that he did in his Book, Truth defending, expressly deny:
For if he should say, these Properties are communicable, such as God's absolute
Properties are, as holy, wise, good, etc. then the Son might beget, and the
Father might be begotten. And lastly, Seeing he now owns a Distinction of
Properties of Relation, though in unscripture Terms, he must, by good
consequence, own three Persons to be the Subjects of those Properties, for no
Properties, or Predicates, or Attributes, can be without their proper Subjects;
for though it is the Father's Property to have begot the Son from everlasting,
yet the Father is not a Property, but the Person or Subject that has that
Property. Thus we see, how Proteus-like G. VV. has changed his Shapes in the
Years 1659. and 1697. and yet there is no Shadow of Change in him for all this,
if we will believe him. But further, by some of his late Books, we shall find
him, not only owning the Distinction of the three, in respect to their
Properties of Relation, but advanced much nearer, so far as to disown his
former Opposition to the Terms Three Persons, which in his Book called Ishmael,
that was his jointly with others, he had charged his Opponent to have conjured
out of one, and told him, that both they and he are shut up in perpetual
Darkness for the Lake; and this he does in two several Books, one printed in
the Year 1690. called The Christianity of the People commonly called Quakers,
where he sets down the Words quoted out of his Ishmael more largely; the other
called Truth and Innocence, printed this very Year, 1699. where he leaves out
the most offensive Words, and puts an etc. in their room, as being (I supose)
ashamed of them, and well he might; but he is not ashamed to affirm, he is not
changed in his Faith. But let us hear how he excuses what he writ in his
Ishmael, that was printed in the Year 1655. Truth and Inn. p. 51.
Though his Name is at the Book, yet he positively disowns the Words, and
affirms, They are none of his, and that he writ not that Part of the Answer to
Townsend: And in his Book, called The Christianity, etc. above mentioned, he
says He looks on the Words as wrong writ, or wrong printed, and that he raced
them out, or corrected them long since, where he has met with that Answer.

But is not this a Piece of dull Sophistry to save the Credit of his
Infallibility? Had he not better, more like a Man and a Christian, acknowledged
his Error, than to lay the Fault upon [as wrong writ, or wrong printed?] And if
he corrected them long since, how comes it that he never published his
Correction in any of the Books he has published since, betwixt the Year 1655.
and 1690. containing the space of 36. Years?

But for evidence against him, that he has not sincerely said, That he writ
not that Part of the Book, it is enough that he owned it, and this I can prove,
that without Exception, he owned it to be his jointly with these others who
signed it with him, as appears from his Truth defending the Quakers, p. 1.
printed four Years after the Ishmael: And he belches out the like antichristian
and profane Expressions against the three Persons in the Godhead, in Terms
equivalent to those in the Ishmael. He says, in his first Page, in Answer to
the first Question, Do not you repent for your endeavoring vainly to defend,
August 29. 1659. in so great a Congregation, these Positions printed in a Book
writ by George Whitehead? He answers for himself and his Brethren thus: The
Positions we defended, are according to the Scriptures of Truth, and them we
need not repent of. These were they contained in that very Book called Ishmael,
as does appear out of the Book Ishmael it self; [here the Book was produced]
one of which Positions were, in asserting the Scriptures or Writing not to be
the Word: Another was, That there is no such Word in the Scriptures, as Three
Persons in the Trinity, but it is a Popish Doctrine, as the Mass or
Common Prayer Book mentions it. Fourthly, And thou that affirms three distinct
Persons in the Godhead, art a Dreamer, and he that dreams, and tells Lies,
contrary to the Scriptures of Truth which we own, he with his Imaginations and
Dreams, is for the Lake. Here it is plain, that by his Imaginations and Dreams,
G.W. meant the Ministers Doctrines of calling the Scriptures the Word, and
affirming that there are three Persons in the Godhead; so whereas he said in
his Ishmael, Townsend and the three Persons are shut up in perpetual Doctrines:
Here in Truth defending, etc. he says, He with his Imaginations and Dreams
[that is the three Persons] is for the Lake: Now this is not one whit more
sober than his Words in the Ishmael, how then is it that G. Whitehead has not
found some shift to put this part of his Truth defending upon another? Again,
in his Truth defending, etc. p. 25. he plainly owns that Book called Ishmael to
be his, four Years after it was printed; and now, though in his Truth
defending, etc. he says, That he and his Brethren need not repent of the
Positions laid down in that called Ishmael; yet now in the Year 1690. in his
Christianity, he says, He was sorry his Name was to that Paper; and yet, as
before is mentioned, in Truth defending, p. 1. he says, They need not repent
of it. Is not this a plain Change in G. W. He need not repent of what was writ,
and yet was sorry that it was writ: Formerly he owned that Book in the Year
1659, and in the Year 1690, He writ not that Part, and was sorry it was writ;
and all this without any Change in his Mind: But when People are sorry for what
they do, we commonly reckon they repent of it.

This offensive Passage, objected against G. Whitehead, out of his Ishmael, was
objected against him by Christopher Wade, in his Quakery slain, p. 9. printed
in 1657. And though G. W. printed against C. Wade, in his Truth defending,
1659. yet he then took no notice of that Passage, to disown it to be his.

But how is it that G. W. disowns what was written in the Book called Ishmael,
against the three Persons? Does he now own the three Persons not to be Popish,
as he formerly charged them, Truth def. p. 2? Though he has not in the least
retracted his abusive and reviling Speeches against this glorious Truth, both
in the Ishmael, and in his Truth defending, etc. [for that would reflect upon
his Infallibility) yet he would seem now to own the Doctrine of the three
Persons, since the Act for Toleration came forth, for that Act of Toleration
does except those who deny, in their preaching or writing, the Doctrine of the
blessed Trinity, as it is declared in the Articles of Religion, viz. the 39
Articles. But that G. W. may have the Benefit of the Act (which at present he
has not by Law, whatever he has by Indulgence) he ought also to disown some
other abusive Expressions of his, and sophistical Arguings he has used in his
other Books, as particularly, not only in his Truth defending, etc. above
mentioned; but in his Divinity of Christ, signed by the two Letters, G. W. see
p. 18. he has these Words, As to T.D' s telling of the Son of God's
Incarnation, the Creation of his Body and Soul, the Parts of that Nature be
subsisted in, etc. To this I say (says G. W.) if the Body and Soul of the Son
of God were both created, does not this render him a fourth Person? And as
nonsensical and abusive is the reasoning of G. Fox their great Apostle, in the
Epistle prefixed to the Divinity, signed by him and John Stubbs, where, in the
9th Page of that Epistle, they thus argue; -- And he speaks again, in his 14th
Page, of three distinct Persons are one with the Godhead: Now Reader, is not
here four, to wit, three Persons and the Godhead? And thus G. F. and G. W. make
no less, by their wild and nonsensical Reasonings, than five Persons in the
Godhead, an Absurdity they would fix on the Doctrine of three Persons; for by
their Arguments, the Godhead is the fourth Person, and Christ's created Soul
and Body is the fifth: Do not these Passages require a Retractation, and will
they say they are Protestants, and one with the Church of England in Matter of
Doctrine, and in the common Principles of Christianity, and yet boldly stand in
the Defense of those abusive Passages?

But whereas they argue ( ad hominem) that there must be five Persons, if
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost be said to be three Persons, seeing G. W. calls
them three Witnesses, by their nonsensical Argument, there must be five
Witnesses that bear Record in Heaven, viz. the Father, the Son, and the Holy
Ghost, and the Godhead; these are four, and the created Soul and Body of
Christ, that is the fifth: But G.W. has a way to evade this last, by denying
that Christ has any created Soul or Body, as in the Words in p. 18. above
mentioned does appear, for which I shall have some use hereafter.

Jos. Wyeth, in his Switch, p. 184. would make his Readers believe, It Is only
the Word Person they object against, as too gross: We cannot ( says he) but
think the Word Person too gross to express them.

But to detect this Fallacy, pray let us take notice, that G. F. whom he calls
an Apostle, has expressly owned the Person of the Father, G. M. p. 247. But thou
says, Christ does not dwell in them personally, does not Christ dwell in his
Saints, as he is in the Person of the Father, the Substance? And are not they
of his Flesh, and of his Bone?

Again, G. Fox, G.M. p. 248. owns expressly Christ's Person; for first, having
cited his Opponent's Words; It is a false thing to say Christ's Person is in
Man; in his Answer (without finding the least fault with the Term Person) he
makes Opposition thus, Which is as much as to say, none are of his Flesh, or
of his Bone, nor eat it, nor had not his Substance.

By this it appears, that G. F. did not find fault, either with the Word
Person, as belonging to the Father, or with Christ's Person, but he will not
allow them to be two Persons, but one Person. But if any will say, he allowed
them to be two Persons, then by the Arguments, both of G. F. and G. VV. they
must be two Gods; for if three Persons infer by Argument, three Gods, by the
same Argument, two Persons will infer two Gods.

The above mentioned Words of G. F. in G. M. Does not Christ dwell in his
Saints, as he is in the Person of the Father, the Substance? Jos. VVyeth, in
his Switch, recites as quoted out of the Snak^: Here the Switch finds no fault
with G. Fox's owning the Person of the Father, which were G. F's own Words, but
labors to prove, that by that spiritual Oneness betwixt Christ and his
Followers, G.F. did not mean to make the Soul of the same Person and Substance
with God, which how ineffectual his Labor is in that may be shown afterward.

Note, that the Switch does justify G. F. his Saying, That God the Father did
take upon him Humane Nature, p. 190. and in Truth's defense, by G. F. p. 85.
The Son's Body is called the Father's; they are one, not two, viz. the Son and
the Father.

But here, once more on this Head, let us take notice of G. VV 's Fallibility
and self Contradiction in most evident manner. In his Light and Life, p. 47. he
blames his Opponent, VV. B. for these Words following, concerning Christ; Now,
as he was God, he was Co-creator with the Father, and so was before Abraham,
and had Glory with God before the World was, and in this Sense came down from
Heaven. To this G.VV. replies, What Nonsense and unscripture Language is this,
to tell of God being Co-creator with the Father, or that God had Glory with
God? Does not this imply two Gods, and that God had a Father, let the Reader
judge? Note how he calls it Nonsense and unscripture Language, to say, That
Christ, as God, had Glory with God, and that he had a Father; which is a plain
Evidence that G. VV. denied the eternal divine Generation of the Son, contrary
both to the Nicene and Athanasian Creed, and Scripture also. But let us see how
he excuses himself in his Antidote, p. 188. But the Phrase, God Co-creator with
God, I think still implies two Creators, and consequently two Gods. It Is not
the Particle Co, with, in this case, will excuse the matter, for Co or Con is
simul, together, as Co-workers, Copartners, which are more distinct Agents
than one, but the Creator is but one God, one Word, one Spirit, and so one
Creator.

Note, Here we see the Force of G. VV's Argument against Christ the Word, being
God, Co-creator with the Father, is, that it would infer the Father and the Son
to be Co-workers, and consequently two Gods. This Antidote he writ in the Year
1697. but in the Year 1674. wherein he published his Quakers Plainness, in p.
24. he allows the Father and the Son to be Co-workers in the following Words;
That the Distinction of the Father and the Son, is not only nominal (as this
Opposer implies against us) but real, in the divine Relation of Father and Son;
the Son as being the only begotten of the Father, and also known as Co-workers;
in the Order and Degrees of Manifestation and Discovery, where it is plain, by
his late manner of arguing, in his Antidote, against the Father and the Son
being Co-workers, that it does infer two Gods; that in his Saying, in his
Quakers Plainness, as above quoted, That the Father and the Son are known as
Co-workers; he has rendered himself guilty, by his own Argument, of holding the
Father and the Son to be two Gods: This is not only a Contradiction to himself,
but a severe Censure on himself, that in the Year 1674. he was guilty of
Idolatry, in holding, That the Father and the Son are two Gods.

Note Reader, that the Quakers use to object two things against my charging
Contradictions upon G. W. and other their principal Authors: First, That I have
contradicted my self in my former and later Writings: To this I have answered,
What in my later Writings I have retracted of my former Errors, is no
Contradiction; for that is a Contradiction, when a Man holds contradictory
Propositions to be both true [ simul and semel] without retracting his Errors.
But what a Man retracts, he is no more chargeable with; let G. W. and his
Brethren retract their Errors, and I shall cease to charge them with them, or
with Contradictions. Secondly, they object, That I may find as many
Contradictions in the Scriptures, as in their Books: Thus we see how they
undervalue the Scriptures, to be as contradictory as their Authors; but I deny
there are any real Contradictions in the Scriptures, but there are many in the
Quakers Authors.

Again further, hear a Quotation out of the Primmer of G. F. junior, and S.
Crisp, p. 24. And they that come to see and know the Son, they come to see and
know the Father also, for the Father is in the Son, and the Son is in the
Father, as says the Scriptures, and they are called by one Name, which is, The
Word, or The Light, For the Word is God, and Christ is the Word, and God is
Light, and Christ is the Light of the World, and the Spirit of Life proceeds
from God and Christ, who are Light.

Note, Seeing they hold that the Father and the Son are called by one Name,
which is, The Word, and that the Father is the Word, and the Son is the Word,
it is evident they make no Distinction betwixt the Father and Son? and
therefore, according to their false Doctrine, seeing the Word was made Flesh,
and the Father is the Word, the Father was made Flesh, the Father was born of a
Virgin, the Father suffered Death on the Cross, yea, the Father is the Son, and
the Son is the Father, which is a plain overturning the great Fundamentals of
Christianity; yet this Primmer is so highly magnified among the Quakers, that
almost every Family of them have it to teach it their Children, and they call
it in the Preface, A Fruit of the Plant of Righteousness, given forth for the
removing the Use of such Books and Catechisins, as are sprung forth of the
corrupt Tree, which now is to be burned, and its Fruit rejected: Now these are
all the Books and Catechisms published by any others but themselves.

Again, in p. 23. they say, And though some have known him ( viz. Christ after
the Flesh) yet henceforth know they him so no more, as say the Scriptures of
Truth.

Note, Here they pervert the true Sense of Paul's Words, as they commonly do in
their Books and Preachings, giving Paul's Words for a Reason why they do not
preach Faith in Christ, as he came in the Flesh, died, and rose again, etc, as
necessary to Salvation, because, say they, We are no more to know Christ after
the Flesh; whereas it was the great Subject, both of Paul's Preaching, and of
all the Apostles, to wit, Jesus Christ, as he came in the Flesh, died for our
Sins, and rose again, and ascended, etc. insomuch, that they did, with one
Accord, declare, That the Gift of the Holy Ghost, with all the saving and
sanctifying Graces of the Spirit, do come to Men, by Christ, through Faith in
him, as he came in the Flesh, died, rose, and ascended; and that this Faith was
wrought in Men by hearing the Word outwardly preached.

Again, in p. 23. they say, Now Children, the Scriptures of Truth do declare of
God and Christ, and the Spirit of Truth, which are one; but the Scriptures
cannot bring you to know God, and Christ, and the Spirit of Truth: And yet they
say, concerning this Primmer, and the Contents of it, p. 2. That they are very
useful for Children and others to Learn, that they may be turned unto the
Light, which is the Gift of God: Here they seem to prefer their Primmer to the
Scriptures; for they say, of the Contents of their Primmer, That they are very
useful for Children and others to Learn: To learn what? Surely some Knowledge
of God and Christ they will say, and yet they will not allow so much to the
Scripture; and on a diligent Search, I find not, in all this Primmer, one
simple Direction, to Children and others, to read the Scriptures, and what they
have quoted of Scripture in it, is but little, and much, even of that, grossly
perverted and misapplied, as in p. 44, 45. they say, They that hear the Light
[that is in all Men, and common to all Men] they hear God, for God is Light,
and they that hear God, they hear Christ also, for God and Christ are one (as
says the Scripture) and they that hear Christ, hear the Author of the true
Faith, and so hear the Savior of their Souls, and the Light is that Prophet,
which all that hear not him, are to be cut off.

Here we see how grossly they pervert that Place of Scripture, Deuteronomy. 18. 15.
Acts 3. 22. 7. 37. which is not to be understood of the common Illumination
given to all Mankind, but of the Man Christ, as he outwardly came in the Flesh,
and did execute his prophetical Office on Earth, by preaching and teaching; and
as he does now still execute his prophetical Office in his Church, by his Word
outwardly preached, and his Spirit inwardly accompanying it to make it
effectual.

Again, p. 82. they run into the same wild Notion, that others, Familists and
mad Enthusiasts run into, of the Blood of Christ within them: For, say they,
and all wait together in the Light [ viz. as it is common to all Mankind,
Infidels, Jews, Mahumetans, Heathens; for so they understand it] and believe in
it, that ye may be the Children of the Light, and therein watch unto Prayer,
and one over another, and this will beget ye into unfeigned Love, and walk in
the Light, ye will have true Unity and Fellowship one with another, and the
Blood, which is the Life of Jesus Christ, ye will feel cleansing you from all
Sin, and so ye will come into Unity with God.

Note, By this it is evident, as will more fully appear on a particular Head
following, that by the Blood, which they call the Life of Jesus Christ, they
meant not his Blood outwardly shed, or his Life that he outwardly laid down,
viz. the Life of his Manhood without us, for the Remission of our Sins, and
cleansing therefrom: But according to their usual Cant and Phrase, The Blood,
that is the Life, and the Life is the Light within: So that they make the
Blood, the Life, and the Light within them, to be one and the same thing; but
neither in this Primmer, nor in any other of their Books, do I find the least
Direction to Faith in the Blood of Christ, as it was outwardly shed on the
Cross, therefore in this Primmer, and in their other Books, they give Poison to
poor Children, to suck or receive, instead of wholesome Food.

George Keith's Fourth Narrative, OF HIS Proceedings at Turners-Hall, 1699. For
the Detecting the QUAKERS ERRORS.
PART II.
Containing the Proofs out of the Quakers Books on the fifth Head, concerning
Christ, his Incarnation, his Soul, Body, and Blood. And on the sixth Head,
concerning the Souls of Men.

Read at the second Meeting at Turners-Hall, January 19. 1699.

W. P. in Serious Apology, p. 146. says, That the outward Person which
suffered, was properly the Son of God, we utterly deny.

This is expressly contrary to many Texts of Scripture, and to a great
Fundamental Article of our Christian Creed; yea, in a manner, it overthrows the
whole Christian Creed: See the following Scriptures, Mat. 16. 13, 16. Luke 1.
32. Mat. 14. 33. Mark 1. 1. John 1. 14, 34. John 9. 35. 10. 36. Acts 8. 37.
Romans 1. 4. Mat. 27. 54.

G.W. in his Truth and Inn. p. 52. excuses W.P' s Words thus, Here I take him
to mean the Son of God, in respect to his Divine Being, as he is of one
Substance with the Father, which his Body that suffered Death was not, though
he was truly the Son of God, as he took upon him that Body, and as made of a
Woman: Gal. 4. 4. Being conceived by the Holy Ghost, and born of the Virgin
Mary.

The Fallacy of this is easily detected, the Question in Debate betwixt W. P.
and his Opponents, who were Presbyterian Ministers in Ireland, was not whether
the Body was the Son of God, abstractly considered from the Soul of Christ and
his Godhead, for no Presbyterian ever held that, neither will any Socinian that
denies the Godhead of Christ say, that that mere Body, without his created
Soul, was the Christ or Son of God. But the true State of the Question was and
is, whether he that outwardly suffered Death without the Gates of Jerusalem,
(whom W. P. calls that outward Person. in Distinction from the Light within,
which the Quakers will have to be the whole Christ, according to G. Fox's
Doctrine) was and is not properly the Son of God, which all sound Christians
say, according to Scripture, he was and is, being both God and Man, and yet one
Person, one Christ, one Son of God, having his Godhead-Nature, and his
Manhood-Nature, so united as to constitute one Christ, which is by a miraculous
and extraordinary Union, that no other Creatures, neither Angels or Men, are
dignified with? and though Christ, as Man, was the Son of God, miraculously
conceived and born in Time, and also, as God, was, by a Generation from
Eternity, before all Worlds and Times, yet he is but one Son of God, and
because of the personal Union of the Word with his Manhood, both as God and Man
he is properly the Son of God.

But there is yet another Fallacy in G. W's Words, which is, that neither the
visible Body, nor Manhood, that was born of the Virgin, was any Part of the
true Christ, or Son of God; and first, As to that visible Body of Flesh and
Bones, he denies that Christ consisted of it. I distinguish (said he) between
consisting and having, Christ had [visible] Flesh and Bones, but he did not
consist of them, Christian Quaker, p. 139, 140. This shows us the very Heart of
their Heresy. In like manner, W.P's Rejoinder, p. 299, to 307.
W. P. argues, for 16. Pages in his Rejoinder against Faldo, That Christ never
died, for they will not have any thing properly to be the Christ, but his
Godhead, which they make to be all one, identically and essentially with his
Heavenly Mandhood, consisting of Heavenly Flesh and Blood, that he had from all
Eternity.

Here a Quaker, called John Whiting, opposed, in Defense of W. Penn, and said,
W. Penn did not deny, that that outward Person was the Son of God: I asked him,
whose Son was he properly? He said, The Son of Mary: I replied; Mary was his
Mother, but who was his Father properly? He said, He was conceived by the Holy
Ghost: I again replied, But that is no Answer to my Question, who was his
Father? Every Son must have a Father, and seeing Christ had no immediate Father
but God, then surely he was properly the Son of God, as the Scripture plainly
testifies.

To this he made no Reply, but opposed in Defense of G. W. I having said, that
G. W. denied that visible Body, that hung on the Cross, to be any Part of the
true Christ; I replied, I have proved it already, by the late Quotation here
read, wherein he says, He denies that Christ consisted of Flesh and Bones; I
distinguish, said he, between consisting and having, Christ had Flesh and
Bones, but did not consist of them, as a Man has a Coat or Garment, but does
not consist of it, and that outward Person that suffered at Jerusalem, was
Christ by a Metonimy (says VV. P.) of the thing containing, having the Name of
the thing contained: And at this rate, VV. P. himself may be called Christ,
because he has Christ in him. The Excuse, That Christ did not Merely consist
of Flesh and Bones, signifies nothing, for that was no Part of the Question
betwixt G.VV. and his Opponent: None ever said, That Christ did merely consist
of Flesh, Blood, and Bones; no Socinian will so affirm, for that were to say,
Christ was merely a Body of Flesh and Bones, without a rational Soul; whatever
has Parts, does consist of those Parts, incompleatly of one or more Parts,
completely of them all: The Foundation of the Quakers great Error on this Head,
lies here, That because Christ was before the Body was; therefore that Body is
no Part of him, which is easily answered thus, Christ was before that Body was,
but he was not completely, and in all Respects, fitted to be the anointed
Savior of the World, until the Word was made Flesh, i. e. until the Word did
take our Flesh and whole Nature into a personal Union with himself, the which
was necessary to the complete Performance of his Mediatory Offices, of King,
Priest, and Prophet, and especially of his Priestly Office.

And not only G. VV. has denied Christ to have any created Body, whereof he
consists, but he has denied that he has any created Soul, in his Answer to T.
Danson' s Synopsis, p. 18. As to T. Danson's telling of the Son of God's
Incarnation, the Creation of his Body and Soul, the Parts of that Nature he
subsisted in, etc. To this I say, if the Body and Soul of the Son of God were
both created, does not this render him a fourth Person? For Creation was in
Time, which contradicts their Doctrine of three distinct, increated, coeternal,
coessential Persons in the Deity, seeing that which was created, was not so:
But herein, whether does not his, and their Ignorance of the only begotten of
the Father, and their Denial of Christ's Divinity, plainly appear, yea or nay?
Where does the Scripture say, that his Soul was created? For was not he the
Brightness of his Father's Glory, and the express Image of his Divine
Substance? But supposing the Soul of Christ, was, with the Body, created in
time; I ask, if from Eternity he was a Person distinct from God and his holy
Spirit, without either Soul or Body, and where does the Scripture speak of any
Person without either Soul or Body? T. Elwood, to cover this gross Error of
G.VV. in his pretended Answer to my first Narrative, says, That G. W. only
denied that Christ had a created Soul, as God: But this was not the State of
the Question, for neither T. D. nor any other Man, were ever so gross as to
affirm, that Christ as God, had a created Soul: And the like Evasion does G.
VV. use himself, in his Antidote, p. 191. This Question ( says he) is no
Determination, that it was, or was not Christ; as God, his Soul was increated;
as Man, his Soul or Spirit was not the Deity, but formed and assumed by the
Word: But it is Evident, that his accusing T. D. and others of Ignorance, for
saying, it was created, determines it sufficiently.

But as is above said, G. W. and his Brethren will have only the Godhead to be
the Christ, which they call, The Heavenly Man, having Soul and Body, Flesh,
Blood, and Bones, uncreated, and existing from all Eternity, which they call,
The Seed within them, the Seed of the Woman that bruiseth the Serpent's Head,
which G. F. (as is above quoted) denies to be a Creature: What the Seed spoke
in him, he said, he spoke it not as a Creature; therefore, that Heavenly Man,
or Seed, consisting of Heavenly Flesh and Blood, which they say is in them, not
being a Creature, must needs, in their Sense, be from all Eternity, and not
from the Beginning of the World only. This appears yet more fully from R.
Hubberthorn.

When was that Christ created, R. Hub. Coll. p. 49, 50.
which you say, must, as a Creature, judge the World? And if in Mary's Time,
who was Judge of the World till then? Was not the Person of Christ Jesus before
the World was? [ Note, here he owns Christ to be a Person; and by G. W's
Argument above mentioned, he must, being a Person, have both Soul and Body
before the World was.] And when had the Man, Christ Jesus, his Beginning? If
you can declare it, how is Christ the only begoten Son of God, if he be a
Creature? Or how can God beget a Creature? And if the whole Person of Christ
was not before the Barthly Adam, how was the Creation made by him, or how can
he be of the Nature of fallen Adam, and not Earthly and defiled, and is the
Flesh of Christ Heavenly or Earthly, or is he Christ without his Flesh?

Agreeable to this, He Goar^ Horn, p. 11, 12.
is the Doctrine of both G. W. and E. B. G. Whitehead does severely blame John
Horn and T. Moor, for saying, That Christ took upon him their Nature; And
though they did well distinguish betwixt our Nature, as in us it is corrupt by
Sin [since the Fall] and as in Christ not corrupt and filthy; yet by no means
will he allow this Distinction, nor will he allow, That it is one and the same
Nature in the Gentiles, by which they did the things contained in the Law, and
by which they broke the Law; and he makes the sinful Nature and the pure
Nature, to be two Natures; this agrees with G. F's Doctrine afterward quoted,
That the Nature in us that does the Will of God, is Christ the Seed, but the
Nature in us that sins, is the Devil, the Serpent, the Lust; so that there
is nothing in Men's Bodies, but Christ, or God, and the Devil, the Serpent, Sin,
and Lust; there is no reasonable created Soul in Men, that at one time sins,
and afterward is cleansed from Sin, and obeys the Will of God, yet still
remaining one and the same Nature, in Essence and Substance.

Next let us hear E. Bur. in his Collection, p. 301. Thou say, in that
Answer, that Christ ascended to the Right Hand of the Father in your Nature.
Mark now thy Nature and your Nature, who are one with thee, is sinful and
wicked, and of the Devil, for so are all Liers, and it is Blasphemy to say,
sinful, wicked, devilish Nature, such as John Bunnion's is, and his Fellows,
is at the Right Hand of God in Heaven. Oh Horrible!

Again, he says, p. 306. That Christ ascended into Heaven in our Nature, viz.
in his Nature, and they that are one with him, and he and they are proved to be
in corrupt Nature, as they will confess it: O what Wickedness is it to hold
forth, That Christ is at the Right Hand of God in sinful Nature, as his Words
hold forth from his own Mouth.

Note, His Opponent did not say, sinful Nature, but our Nature: But seeing E.
B. makes them both one, that it cannot be our Nature that Christ has in
Heaven, except it be sinful Nature: This is to make Sin to be essential to our
Nature, which is a most vile and gross Heresy, and agrees with that above
mentioned, of G.F. and G. W. That there are but two Natures in Man's Body, the
one that is divine, and of God's Essence, that neither does nor can sin; the
other of the Devil, that sins and can do no good: So there is no Soul left
in Man, that is neither God nor the Devil, nor any Part of either by these Men's
Doctrine.

But what does G. W. and his Brethren then say to W. Penn, in his Primitive
Christianity, where he says, p. 85. That we do, we bless God, religiously
believe and confess, to the Glory of God the Father, and the Honor of his dear
and beloved Son, that Jesus Christ took our Nature upon him, and was like unto
us in all things, Sin excepted? And p. 87. We say, that he then overcame our
common Enemy, foiled him in the open Field [ viz. at his Death] and in our
Nature triumphed over him that had overcome and triumphed over it, in our
Forefather Adam, and his Posterity; and that as truly as Christ overcame him in
our Nature in his own Person, etc.

But possibly, some will say, W. P. by our Nature, did mean the Quakers Nature,
which is not sinful; but not the Priests Nature, which is sinful. But first,
was not the Quakers Nature once sinful, as really as the Nature of other Men?
And does no Sin cleave to the Nature of any Quaker at this Day? But secondly,
W. P. tells us, Our Nature, which Christ took, was that, over which our common
Enemy had triumphed in our Forefather Adam, and his Posterity. Now, except the
Quakers will say, They are none of Adam' s Posterity, they must grant, that,
according to W. P. Christ did take, not only the Nature of the Quakers, but the
Nature of other Men, which has been defiled by Sin, both in them and us. What
shall we now say of the great Unity that the Teachers of the Quakers boast of,
in Doctrine as well as in Spirit? Whereas we see, that what W. P. owns, as a
Part of his and his Brethrens Faith, and for which, he says, They bless God:
E. Borough, who was owned as a Prophet among them and was in greater Repute
and more deserving then, than ever W. P. was, or now is: E. B. has past
Sentence on it, That it is horrible Blasphemy: For if Christ took our Nature,
and triumphed over the common Enemy in our Nature, surely he rose from the dead
in our Nature, and ascended into Heaven in our Nature, which E. B. has judged
to be Blasphemy and Wickedness.

Here I asked John Whiting, of which of these two Faiths he was, whether that
of G. W. and E. B. who said, Christ was not in Heaven in our Nature; or that of
W. P. who said, Christ took our Nature, and triumphed in our Nature? He
replied, He was of the Faith of both: By which Answer he made himself very
ridiculous, and obnoxious to the general Censure of the Auditory, who cried out
against him, as at several other times, many cried out at his and his Brethrens
Impertinencies and absurd Answers.

After the same manner does W. Penn labor to excuse and cloak his and his
Brethrens vile Heresy, That he who died at Jerusalem, was not properly the Son
of God, as is set down at the End of Truth and Innocence, recommended by G. W.
And W. P. thinks he has fairly defended himself, Truth and Ion. p. 72.
by what he formerly said, viz. That he that laid down his Life, and suffered
his Body to be crucified by the Jews, without the Gates of Jerusalem, is
Christ, the only Son of the most High God. But to assert, the Body which
suffered and died, was properly the entire Son of God; this brings him more
under the Charge of making him but a mere Man, than us, who acknowledge him to
be one with the Father, and of a Nature eternal and immortal. But here are two
Fallacies; one is, He that laid down his Life, and suffered his Body to be
crucified, is Christ, the only Son of the most High God: But, by this HE, he
means only the Godhead, or the Word: This is the entire Christ by his Doctrine,
and this HE suffered his Body to be crucified; but how was it his Body? Not as
any Part of the entire Christ, but only as a Vail or Garment; that is a Man's
Garment, but is no Part of him. The other Fallacy is, that he would cast it
upon his Opponents, that they held, The Body that suffered, was properly the
entire Son of God, which were to make him but a mere Man. But none of his
Opponents said, That that Body, without the Soul of the Manhood, and without
the Godhead of the Word, was the entire Christ; nor could it be so much as mere
Man, without a Soul, even a created Soul belonging to it.

Whether Christ's coming in the Flesh was a Figure.
THE next thing I charge to be a vile Error in the Quakers Books, especially G.
F. and G. W. That Christ's coming in the Flesh, and his Sufferings without us,
in the Flesh, and his outward Flesh and Blood was a Figure, and But a Figure of
Christ, and what he suffers in us, and of his Blood shed in us.

This being charged in Readiness Errand, That R. Hubberthorn, writ, That Christ's
coming in the Flesh was but a Figure.

It is answered, in Readiness Errand, in two several Places; first, in p. 8. thus;
Christ, in his People, is the Substance of all Figures, Types and Shadows,
fulfilling them in them, and setting them free from them; but as he is held
forth in the Scripture Letter without them, and in the Flesh without them, he
is their Example or Figure, which is both one, that the same things must be
fulfilled in them, that was in Christ Jesus, for which he quotes 1 Pet. 2. 21.
1 Pet. 4. 1. 1 Pet. 1. 15. Joh. 13. 15. Again, in Readiness Err. p. 14. Q. Whether
Christ in the Flesh be a Figure or not, and if a Figure, how, and in what? Ans.
Christ is the Substance of all Figures, and his Flesh is a Figure, for every
one passes through the same way as he did, who comes to know Christ in the
Flesh; there must be a suffering with him, before there be a rejoicing with
him: Christ is an Example for all to walk after, and if thou knew what an
Example is, thou would know what a Figure is, To come up to the same Fullness.

Note, Had R. Hubb. and G.F. taught, That Christ is our Example, and if by
Example, they only meant to be our Example, to follow him in the Virtues of
Love, Humility, Self-denial, Patience, Resignation, etc. none would have blamed
them, but what they talk of his being such an Example, is but mainly to hide
their vile Heresy: For first, says G.F. Christ is an Example for all to walk
after, to come up to the same Fullness: No sound Christian ever taught so, for
the Apostles never taught, That they, or any other were, by following Christ's
Example, to come up to the same Fullness; but still spoke of the Measure, as
with respect to all others. To come up to the same Fullness, is to come to be as
much Christ as he was; and according to VV. Penn, see his Preface to R.B's
Collection, the Passage quoted in my third Narrative, p. 10. attested, etc. The
Work of Regeneration is a greater Mystery, than God manifest in the Flesh
without us: And says G.F. Christ, in his People, is the Substance of all
Figures, Types, and Shadows, fulfilling them in them; and his Flesh is a
Figure. Now, that by Figure or Example, they meant, not only or indeed so much,
that he is our Example in holy living and walking, which none ever found fault
with, of any called Christians; but that, as he was outwardly born, was
crucified, had his Blood shed, was buried, rose and ascended; so he is inwardly
born, and has been crucified in the Quakers, and all other Saints, buried,
risen, and ascended, and is King, Priest, and Prophet in them; and G.VV's Light
and Life, p. 44. Christ in them offers up himself in the Nature of a mediating
Sacrifice, to appease the Wrath of God; That not the outward Blood, that was
outwardly shed, is the Blood of God, by which he purchased his Church, but God
being a Spirit, his Blood, his inward and spiritual, as G.VV. has expressly
affirmed in his Light and Life, p. 44. And VV. P. in his Rejoinder to I. Faldo,
p. 336, 337. comparing Christ his dying as a Malefactor, by his Death to
reconcile us to God, to what was to be accomplished in Man, says, It Is strange
that should be reputed most misterious, which was the Introduction to the
Mystery, and those Transactions counted most difficult, that were, by the
divine Wisdom of God, ordained, as so many facile Representations of what was
to be accomplished in Man, etc. And a little before, comparing the outward with
the inward, in Relation to Christ, he says, The History is made the greatest
Mystery, which he blames in I. Faldo, for making Christ without us, a greater
Mystery than Christ within us; so that whether by Figure or Example, the
Quakers mean the same thing, it is horribly offensive, that Christ without us,
and what he did and suffered without us, is such an Example, as is to be
wrought and accomplished in us by a greater Missery, so that the Work, or the
thing wrought and effected, is greater and more excellent, t;han the Example
according to which it is wrought; as the building some great Fabric, the
Example, Type, or Figure, according to which it is built, is made perhaps of
Wood or Past-board, in a small Model; whereas the Fabric is great, and
consisting of rich and very precious Materials: Thus they magnify the Flesh
and Blood of Christ within them, above his Death and Sacrifice without them,
and well they may, if Christ's Flesh and Blood with in them be unerected and
from all Eternity, and that Christ's material Blood on the Cross, was the Type
of Christ's inward ward and spiritual Blood he had from all Eternity; for the
Word, Example, in this case, is fully as offensive as Figure, and can signify
no other than Figure; for if there be any such inward and spiritual Blood of
Christ, and Flesh that he had from all Eternity, and if the material Blood be
the Example of it, and Christ's material Flesh the Example of that Heavenly
increated Flesh: It must needs be granted, that the thing exemplified, is
greater than the Example of it, in the case, and the shedding of that Heavenly
Blood which Christ had from all Eternity, and which was shed in Adam when he
sinned, is more excellent than the shedding of that material Blood which is but
its Figure, according to them.

But now let us hear how G.VV. first defends himself, and next VV. P. in his
Truth and Inn. p. 53. He gives a lame Quotation, objected against him, out of
his Truth defending the Quakers: Christ's coming in the Flesh was but a Figure,
i. e. a Figure or Type of the inward Christ, or Light within: Here is a lame
Quotation, which at full is thus, Truth defend. p. 21.

Did R. Hubberth. well in writing, That Christ's coming in the Flesh was but a
Figure?

Ans. Could Christ have been said to have been transfigured, if his coming in
the Flesh had not been a Figure or Example, till his Glory was revealed? And
have thou not read, That he was the express Figure of his Father's Substance,
instead of which, it is translated, he is the express Image, etc.

Note, This Quotation was objected in a late printed Sheer, called An Account
from Colchester: And a pretended Answer was given to it in another printed
Paper, signed by seven Quakers of Colchester: And the like Answer is given by
G.VV. in his Truth and Innocence, p. 53. They abuse me still in this (says he)
it was none of my Assertion, That Christ's coming in the Flesh, was but a
Figure: I positively disown these Words, as a downright Forgery put upon me.
Ans. How can he in Conscience disown these Words, and charge them to be a
downright Forgery put upon him, when in his Answer to that Charge against R.
Hubb. he finds no Fault with the Phrase, But a Figure, but brings two Places of
Scripture to justify it, which are most ignorantly and impertinently brought
to prove it? Why did he not then except against the Word, But a Figure? But
instead of excepting against it, he brings two Scriptures to prove the
Assertion alleged against R. Hubb. the one is, That Christ was said to have
been transfigured; which, because it sounded in English like his being made a
Figure, therefore, in his great Ignorance of the Word Transfigured, as well as
of the Sense intended, he thought it was a good Proof, that Christ, as he came
in the Flesh, was but a Figure; but transfigured there signifies nothing other
but transformed; the Greek Word has no Relation, either to Figure or Example,
for it is (...), i.e. Metamorphosed, a Word some use in English; and what that
Transfiguration was, Matthew tells us, Mat. 17. 2. that His Face did shine as
the Sun, and his Raiment was white as the Light: Now what Relation has this,
either to Figure or Example, in that Sense for which G.W. brought it to prove
R. Hubb's Saying, Christ's coming in the Flesh, was but a Figure? Of what was
Christ's Transfiguration a Figure? Or how was it our Example to follow? But
that G.W. meant not an Example of Imitation, but a Type or Figure that was to
vanish or be laid aside, is evident from his own Words; Could Christ have been
said to have been transfigured, if his coming in the Flesh had not been a
Figure or Example, till his Glory was revealed? Thus we see how long G.W.
thought that Christ's coming in the Flesh was to continue a Figure, viz. until
his Glory should be revealed; to wir, by his inward coming into the Hearts of
the Disciples, which was the Substance of that Figure; for thus G.W. and his
Brethren argue for the Disuse of outward Baptism and the Supper; they were but
Figures of the inward Substance, and were to continue but until that was
revealed; so here Christ's coming in the Flesh, was but a Figure till his Glory
was revealed: So whether G.W. makes it Figure or Example, he tells us how long
it was to be our Figure or Example, till his Glory was revealed. But taking
Example, for an Example that we ought to follow, in all holy living and
walking, we shall find the Scriptures set him forth for our Example after his
Glory was revealed, 1 Pet. 2. 21. Because Christ also suffered for us, leaving
us an Example, that ye should follow his Steps: this was after his Glory was
revealed in and among the Believers.

And as the Quakers Reason why they cast off outward Baptism and the Supper is,
because the Substance is revealed in them, whereof they were Figures; so for
the same reason, they think Christ's Death at Jerusalem is not to be minded nor
preached, because it was a Figure, Christ in his People is the Substance of all
Figures: And his Flesh is a Figure: Here Figure in both Places has the same
Signification: He does not say, Christ without his People, but Christ in his
People is the Substance of all Figures. And as a Proof of this, a Quotation was
brought against the Quakers out of one of their ancient Books, called, The
Doctrine of Perfection vindicated; So when you come to know this [to wit, the
Operation of Christ, or the Light within] you will cease remembering his Death
at Jerusalem, and will come to see how he has been crucified in you, and what
it is that has crucified him. Thus we see, how, according to him, Christ's
Death at Jerusalem being but a Figure of Christ crucified within the Substance;
the Use and Remembrance of it cease. Is not this horrid Blasphemy? Why have
they not all this time retracted this?

To this G.W. answers, Truth and Inn. p. 55. I do (...) believe this to be
justly or impartially quoted, let them produce it at large, and whose (...) it
is. But the Book being produced, it did appear to be justly and impartially
^^ored, and the Book to be a Quakers Book, and printed for R. Wilson, the
Quakers Bookseller at that time; the Author's Name is John VVhitehouse, who
shows how, and by whom he was brought over to Quakerism.

But let us see, how that other Place of Scripture, brought by G.W. to prove
R.H. his Assertion, That Christ's coming in the Flesh is but a Figure, will
clear him, or rather indeed render him guilty of the same Error with R.H. the
Place is most impertinently quoted by G.W. to prove, That Christ's coming in
the Flesh, was either a Figure or Example for us to follow, as he would have us
to understand him; That by Christ's coming in the Flesh, his being a Figure,
that is, an Example of our lmitation, Truth and Inn. p. 24, 25. Heb. 1. 3.
Christ is there called, The Brigthness of his (viz. God' s) Glory, and the
Express Image of his Person; and this G.W. brought to confirm R.H's Assertion,
telling us, from his pretended great Learning, that he is the express Figure;
instead of which, he says, it is translated, express Image. And he is at great
Pains to show, that Type or Figure sometimes points at a thing to come,
sometimes it denotes a present Example, and that either of Imitation, or of
Warning and Caution: But how can he make it appear, That by the Description
given of Christ, Heb. 1. 3. his being the express Image of his ( viz. the
Father's) Person, that Christ is there set forth to be our Example, either for
Imitation or Caution, for he is not there said to be our Example or Image, but
the (...), (as it is in the Greek) of the Father's Person or Hypostasis: But
the Word Character, can no wise justly here be understood to be an Example of
our Imitation; and C.VV. was but idle, to render it Figure, to quadrate with R.
H's Assertion, and to make the ignorant think he could mend the Translation,
but his now turning it to Example, makes it Blasphemy, as to say, The Son is an
Example of Imitation or Caution for the Father to follow; it had been more
agreeable to have said, The Father is an Example of the Son, for the Son to
follow, than to say, The Son is an Example for the Father to follow, seeing
Christ said, I can do nothing of my self, for what I see the Father do, that do
I. But to give an Instance what an Ambidexter G.W. is, in twisting and twining
and bending the Scripture. In his Antidote, p. 191. he says, That He spoke for
Christ's Divinity, as he was the Brightness of the Father's Glory, and the
express Image of his divine Substance, in Answer to T. Danson. Here he
forsakes his former Translation, which was Figure, and takes the Translation
in our English Bible, which is Image. But how will this prove the Divinity of
Christ, so as to be one Substance with the Father, if the express Image
signify our Example of Imitation, as G.W. does argue in his Truth and
Innocence? His being an Example of our Imitation, is no sufficient Argument to
prove his being one Substance with the Father; for the Socinians will grant him
to be a very excellent Example of our Imitation, yet this is no sufficient
Argument to convince them, That he is one Substance with the Father, from his
being an Example of Imitation. Is it not plain, from all this shuffling and
shifting, that G.W. rather than he will confess his former Errors, will wrong
his own Conscience, and bring the most nonsensical Excuses that ever were heard
of, to defend his Infallibility, than give Glory to God by a plain and free
Confession of his Errors?

Next let us hear G.W's Defense of that Saying of W.P's; One outward thing
cannot be the proper Figure or Representation of another; the outward Lamb
shows forth the inward Lamb. He labors to vindicate W.P's Saying, by thus
arguing, How will these Men (says he) prove that the outward Paschal Lamb was
the proper Figure or Representation of Christ's outward Person? Pray what
proper Resemblance had they? Was not rather the Lamb, in respect of its
Innocence, a proper Figure of Christ's Innocence, as the Lamb of God once
offered for Sin? I answer, And was not the Lamb's Innocence an outward thing,
i.e. without Men, and also Christ's Innocence, as he lived and walked among
Men, and was not his outward Person innocent? But had not G.W. been extremely
blind and ignorant, he had never argued nor asked so foolishly, what proper
Resemblance had they, viz. the Paschal Lamb, and Christ's outward Person; for
the Generality of Christians know, that as by God's Appointment, the Paschal
Lamb and Sacrifices, were proper Types and Figures of Christ's outward Person,
as he was to be slain for the Sins of the World; so the Resemblance was not
only in Innocence, but in many other Respects; the Lamb was to be killed, so
was Christ; the Lamb was to be without Blemish, so was Christ; the Lamb was to
be of the Flock, so was Christ to be of his Brethren; the Blood of the Lamb,
sprinkled on the Door-posts and Lintels of the Israelites, saved them from the
Wrath of the destroying Angel, so the Blood of Christ, that was outwardly shed,
applied by Faith, saves true Believers from Wrath; the Lamb was to be eaten
wholly, so we are to receive Christ wholly, in all his Offices: These and many
other Resemblances there are betwixt the Paschal Lamb and Christ, known in
general to Christians, yea, to many Children, which yet G.W. here declares
himself to seem wholly ignorant of. Godwin, in his Book called Moses and Aaron,
numbers at least twelve Particulars of Resemblance, betwixt the Paschal Lamb
and Christ without us, and yet this G.W. more like a Heathen than a Christian,
queries, Pray what proper Resemblance had they? But to return his Question,
Pray what proper Resemblance had the Paschal Lamb to the inward Blood Christ,
which, G.W. says, is the Life and Light and Spirit of God within, and the Holy
Ghost? Was ever the Holy Ghost, or the Godhead slain in Men? Or is there an
inward spiritual Blood of Christ slain in Men, that is not the Godhead? But we
shall come anon to treat more fully of this: And how is that fulfilled in
Christ within, A Bone of him shall not be broken?

Whether Christ without us, as he died and rose again, is the Object of Faith,
etc.
G.VV. Truth and Inn. p. 54. defends a most Antichristian Saying of his in his
Light and Life, and to cloak it the more, he gives the Quotation lame. The
Quakers at Colchester, in their late printed Paper, called, Some Account, gives
it more fully: But in the Book, Light and Life, p. 38. it is thus; Bapt. Now
the Quakers would be so far from directing Men to go to the material Temple,
that they make it but a vain thing to look to Jerusalem, to the Antitype of
that Temple, viz. to Jesus, as he was there crucified, or to that Blood that
was there shed for Justification.

His Answer is, The Quakers see no need of directing Men to the Type for the
Antitype; viz. neither to the outward Temple, nor yet to Jerusalem, either to
Jesus Christ or his Blood, knowing that neither the Righteousness of Faith, nor
the Word of it, does so direct, Rom 10. And is it the Baptists Doctrine to
direct Men to the material Temple and Jerusalem, the Type for the Antitype?
What Nonsense and Darkness is this? And where do the Scriptures say, That the
Blood was there shed for Justification, and that Men must be directed to
Jerusalem, whereas that Blood shed, is not in being? p. 40. But the true
Apostles directed them to the Light, which was so much opposed by the Baptists,
to walk in the Light, for the Blood of Christ to cleanse them from all Sin.

Now let us hear his Defense, Truth and Inn. p. 54. I ask these Men (says he)
where the Scripture does so direct Men to go to the outward Temple at Jerusalem
for Jesus Christ? Nay, does it not contrariwise direct them? See plain
Scripture, Deuteronomy. 30. 12, 13, 14. Romans 10. 6, 7, 8. The same Answer in effect,
but in more Words, quoting at full length, Deuteronomy. 30. 12, 13, 14. and Romans 10.
6, 7, 8. we find in that called, Some Account from Colchester, signed by seven
Quakers there (but likely enough to have been drawn up by G.W. himself, though
whether it was or not, is not material to the case) and on the Margin they say,
Must they then go on Pilgrimage?

Note, This is a most shameful Evasion to cloak their vile Heresy, of which,
yet to this very Day, G. W. has not plainly cleared himself, nor ever can,
till he retract this and his many other Errors. Can it be supposed, that W.
Burnet, who was the Baptist that thus objected against the Quakers, was for
having the Quakers or any others, go on Pilgrimage, or on Feet to Jerusalem for
Jesus Christ or his Blood? G.W. knows, in his Conscience, the contrary; yea,
in the Lines immediately going before the Quotation, W. Burnet clears the
matter, That he was not for having People go on Pilgrimage to Jerusalem, either
for Christ or to Christ. W. Burnet, in his Capital Principles, p. 24. Israel of
old (he says) were commanded to go up to the literal Temple at Jerusalem to
worship, but now God's Worshippers may worship him, each one in his Respective
Place. Yea, G.W. in his Light and Life, takes that to be W. Burnet's Sense,
That Christ was to be sought and found at such a Distance by Faith, and yet he
still objects against Christ sought at a Distance without us, even by Faith, as
in Heaven above the Clouds, or as he suffered at Jerusalem: I ask (says he) if
the Object or Foundation of the Faith he divided from the Faith? From which
reasoning, it is evident he is against Christ, as without us, as at a distance,
either as he suffered at Jerusalem, or as he is now in Heaven, to be the Object
of our Faith.

And whereas, in that called Some Account from Colchester, they quote Romans 10.
6, 7, 8. and set down the Words at full Length, why do they not quote and set
down the Words in p. 9, 10. That if thou shall confess with thy Mouth, the Lord
Jesus, and believe in thine Heart, that God has raised him from the dead, thou
shall be saved. By all the things that have been objected against G.W. to move
him to give some confession of his Faith in the Man Christ, as he suffered and
rose again without us, and is now in Heaven without us, in that very created
Nature of the Soul and Body of Man he had on Earth, as in Union with the
eternal Word, and that as such, he is the great Object of our Faith, for
Remission of Sin, yet he cannot be drawn to it, which still shows he remains in
his vile Antichristian Doctrine. As to his seeming Confession to Christ
without, in his Supplement to the Switch, we shall see ere long in its Place.

In his Truth and Inn. p. 54. he seeks to excuse W.P's Saying, in his Quakerism
a new Nickname, p. 6. Faith in Christ's outward Manifestation, has been a
deadly Poison these later Ages has been infected with. G.W's Defense is, It Is
making Faith in the History thereof, that is in Opposition to his Power and
Work in the Soul, and to Godly living, as is evident in the Place quoted. But
did I. Faldo, W.P's Opponent, make Faith in Christ's outward Manifestation, in
Opposition to his Power and Work in the Soul? Nay surely; nor did any other of
their Opponents teach such Doctrine.

But this is the common way of G.W. and his Brethren, to cloak their own vile
Errors, they will misrepresent their Opponents Principles: It Is sufficiently
evident, from G.W's Doctrine, that he has all along opposed Faith in Christ's
outward Manifestation, as necessary to Salvation, and it will yet further
appear.

Again, he excuses W.P's Saying, Truth and Inn. p. 55. And since they believe
that outward Appearance [i.e. of Jesus at Jerusalem] they need not preach what
is to be main; by telling us, he means, They need not always preach it where it
is believed; and comesseth all true Quakers own that visible Appearance of
Christ.

Note, this is an evidenly apparent Strain, W.P's Reason why the Quakers need
not preach Christ's outward Appearance, as he suffered Death was, that it was
not to be again, which makes it unnecessary to be preached. But this Liberty of
G.W. and I. Weyeth, and others, of adding and taking away material Words, is so
intolerable, where the plain Sense will bear no such Addition, nor taking away,
that at this rate nothing so false, but shall be made to seem true.

But why need they not always to preach it? Suppose the Quakers believe it, do
not they preach always the Light within, and do not the Quakers generally
believe it, and diverse other Principles they prosess? How shall their Children
have the Faith of it without preaching? Does the Light within so reach it, that
they have it without preaching? But how do they believe it? Only histostically:
It is no necessary Article of their Faith to be preached or believed to
Salvation, the Light within is sufficient to Salvation without any thing else.

The like Fallacy and Sophistry he uses to excuse W. Shewen's Saying, Not to
Jesus, the Son of Abraham, David, and Mary, but to God the Father, all Worship,
Honor and Glory is to be given. But to hide his Fallacy, he gives a lame
Quotation. The Words being, Not to Jesus, the Son of Abraham, David, and Mary,
nor to Saint nor Angel, but to God the Father. he says, he knows his Intent
was, Not to Jesus only, as the Son of Abraham: But then if the Word Only must
be added, as explanatory to one Part of the Sentence, it must be added to the
other Part of the same Sentence and so it will run thus, Not to Jesus the Son
of Abraham, David, Mary, nor to Saint and Angel only, but to God the Father all
Worship, etc. Is not this a fair Excuse, by which, to cover their vile Heresy,
they will run into Popish Idolatry, they are not to give Worship to Saints and
Angels only, but to God.

Note, G.W. writes this contrary to what he knows in his Conscience to be
true, for he was present at that Meeting in London, 1678. where W.S. and others
blamed me for praying to Jesus Christ, in the Passage above quoted in my Book,
called The Way cast up, etc. Beside, it was no Part of the Controversy betwixt
the Quakers and the Church of England or Dissenters, That Christ was to be
prayed to only as the Son of Abraham.

But is G.W. now in good earnest, in thus excusing W.S.? Is he for giving
divine Worship to Jesus the Son of Abraham, David, and Mary, in any respect,
seeing he has denied that the true Jesus did consist of a Body of Flesh and
Bone, or that he has a created Soul and Body, as above quoted.

But let us once more hear how he excuses that Passage of W. Penn, his Address
to Protestants, p. 119. Let us but soberly consider what Christ is, and we
shall the better know whether moral Men are to be reckoned Christians; what is
Christ but Meekness, Justice, Mercy, Patience, Charity, and Virtue in
Perfection? G.W. says, W.P. did not design thereby to lessen the Power or
Dignity of Christ, who is the Author of these Virtues, no more than the
Apostles did in saying, He (Christ) is made of God unto us, Wisdom,
Righteousness, Sanctification, and Redemption (spoken in the Abstract) and the
Prophet saying, God is my Light and my Salvation, though God and Christ also be
the Author of Redemption and Salvation.

This is also a sophistical Evasion; when Paul said, Christ was made of God
unto us, Wisdom, Righteousness, Sanctification, and Redemption; he meant not
the Light within, as it is in mere moral Heathens, but so W.P. meant (...) but
Paul did really mean Jesus of Nazareth, who is both God and Man, the Word made
Flesh, as is clear from the foregoing Words, even Christ crucified, as being
the Author of those Graces, Blessings, and Virtues, unto all sincere Believers
in him, by bestowing on them his holy Spirit, to indue them with Wisdom and
Sanctification, and freely imputing his Righteousness that he wrought in his
own Person without them, for their Justification and Redemption: Also David, in
calling the Lord his Light and Salvation, had a Respect to God in Christ, even
the Man Christ, who was to come out of his Loins, as the Object of his Faith
for Redemption and Salvation. But the whole Tendency of W.P's Discourse in that
Passage, and in other Passages, going before and following, is to persuade that
Men are Christians, if they have these moral Virtues, without Faith in Christ,
as he was outwardly crucified; for, in the Enumeration of these Virtues, he has
not the least Word of Faith in Christ crucified, as necessary to Christianity,
but pleads for a false Notion of the Christian Faith, p. 118. At he that
believes in Christ, believes in God, so he that believes in God, believes in
Christ: Thus, making Faith in Christ to be nothing else but a Belief in God, as
a Creator, without any Respect to Christ crucified And p. 119. a little after
that scandalous Passage above quoted, he says, Christians ought to be
distinguished by their Likeness to Christ, and not their Notions of Christ;
which is likewise scandalous, as imply^ That Men may be like Christ, without
true Notions of him and Faith in him (...), Christ Jesus of Nazareth, that died
and rose again; yea, he pleads, p. 118. That a mere just Man ought not to be
excluded the Communion of Christians, and that to exclude him, is partial and
cruel. And at this rate, professed Infidel Jews and Mahumetans, if they be but
mere just Men, are to be received into Christian Society as good Christians,
indeed good enough to be Members of the Quakers Church.

But now let us see how the following scandalous Passages, quoted out of G.VV's
own Books, are defended by the Colchester Quakers, in that they call Some
Account from Colchester.

Some Account from Colchester, p. 11. When you tell us you have Faith in
Christ, do you mean Christ, whose Person is now ascended into Heaven above the
Clouds, or do you mean only a Christ within you? Ans. (says G.VV.) Here thou
would make two Christ's, a Christ whose Person is above the Clouds, and a Christ
within; but how provest thou two such Christ's? We have Faith in that Christ
that descended from the Father, who is the same that ascended far above all
Heavens; and this Christ we witness in us, who is not divided.

Note, in their Vindication of this Passage they say, This Answer appears
pertinent to detect and reprehend an impertinent and foolish Question, which,
whether it does not imply two Christ's, let the serious judge, from the natural
Import and Sense of the Question in the disjunctive Part of it; or do you only
mean a Christ within you? Here their pretended Grammatical Skill of the Term
disjunctive, fails them.

To ask the Question disjunctively, implies no more two Christ's, than it
implies two George VVhiteheads, to ask, Is George Whitehead a Londoner born,
or a North Country Man, born in the North of England; this does not imply two
G. Whiteheads: But if one should say, George Whitehead was born, in the North
of England some 64 Years ago, and since that, was born in London; this would
import two G. Whiteheads very plainly: And no less indeed do the Quakers wild
Notions that many of them have printed, even the Men of great Note among them,
import not only two Christ's, but many Christ's, even thousands; and they have no
way to extricate themselves of this Difficulty, but sophistical Evasions; for
if ye ask them, Was that the true Christ who was born at Bethlehem, of a Virgin
called Mary, above 1600 Years ago, and do they believe in that Christ? They
will tell you yea; but they have this sophistical Sense, that he was the Light
within, that Person that was outwardly born, who is by a Metonimy called
Christ, the thing containing, for the thing contained: See W. Penn's Rejoinder,
p. 304, 305. But that that outward Person was properly the Son of God, we
utterly deny, said W.P. as above quoted: But the most true and proper Christ,
is the Christ born in them, and growing up in them from a holy thing or Seed,
to a Child born, and then to the Mighty God; which three Steps are orderly set
down by W.B. in his printed Collection, p. 291. See third narrative, p. 37.

And he tells who is the Virgin in whom this Child is born; not the Virgin
Mary, but every Quaker, who is converted to the Light within: And because this
Child is not born in them all at once, but at different times, as they witness
the Work of Regeneration, and as many as come to witness Regeneration, as many
regenerated Persons there are in the World, as many times Christ is born; and
though they say, Christ is one in all, and would defend their so saying by
Scripture, yet they mean not as the Scripture means; for Christ, as he is God,
is the same in all and as he dwells in all the faithful by his Spirit and by
Faith, yet not so as that Christ is really and truly begotten and born in
regenerate Persons without any Alle^^^y as they hold; for they make Christ, as
both without the Figure and All^^^^^ and Christ as born within. etc. the
Substance; and on Supposition, that the^ (...) so many real Births of Christ,
it is impossible they could be one Christ, otherwise than specifically one,
though consisting of many Individuals, as many Individuals of Men are called
Man, but they are not one numerical Man, no more can Christ be one numerical
Christ, but many, if he were really begotten and born in many as they say he
is: It Is true, the Scripture speaks of Christ being formed in Believers, but
this is a metaphorical Expression, and allegory, even as the Image of Caesar on
Gold or Silver, is called Caesar; so the true lively Image of Christ, is called
Christ, in true Believers, and that is the meaning of Christ formed in
Believers, so that if they would be content with the allegorical Sense of the
Word, Christ formed within, begotten and born within, as sound and sober
Christians understand it, none would blame them; and that they laid no more
Stress upon it than they should, but the contrary they do, so as to make the
Christ thus born within, the greater Reality and Mystery, than Christ born
without, and to make that inward Birth, to have no Dependence on Christ as born
without us, and as he died for our Sins, and rose and ascended into Heaven, in
the true entire Nature of Man, consisting of a created Soul and Body, and so as
to witness the inward Work of Regeneration, to be without Faith in Christ, as
without; and without all special Illumination and Operation of the Holy Ghost,
as given only to Believers in Christ crucified: And to assert, That mere just
Men, and moral Heathens, who have no Faith in Christ as outwardly crucified, to
be as truly regenerate as the most sincere Believers; all this is really
Antichristian.

And whether G.W's following Discourse, in his He-goats Horn, p. 8, 9. compared
with the like Passages in G.F's G.M. and elsewhere, I leave to intelligent
Christians to consider, does not really import many Christ's really distinct, as
really as the Persons are, in whom they say Christ is born, raised up, etc.

Whether the Seed of God, in Believers, be Christ, and the Seed of the Woman,
and the Seed promised to Abraham and David.
G.W. He-goats Horn, p. 8. As to our saying, That the Seed of God, which is
Christ, wherever he is known in such a low Measure as a Seed that suffers,
and is burdened in Man by Corruption, there he desires to be free from the
Burden of Sin, and always to do his Father's Will, and this Seed the Power
reaches to, where it is begotten, and in the Power it arises in them that
believe in the Light for their Redemption. They have showed themselves ignorant
of the Seed of God, which the Promise is to, and that they never knew the Work
of that Power which reaches the Seed, as also they are ignorant of the
Scriptures, for it is written, Worthy is the Lamb that was slain to receive
Power, and Riches, and Wisdom, and Strength, and Honor, and Glory, and
Blessing, [Note, this he understands of the Seed within, to be the Lamb slain,
who has redeemed Men by his Blood, to wit, the Blood of the Seed within, is
G.F. calls it.] Rev. 5. 12. So that they might as well hate scoft at the Angels
of God was spoke these Words, as at us, [But the Angels spoke it not of a Seed
within that needed Salvation or Redemption, but of the Man Christ without, as
he was outwardly slain and rose again] and have said, that the Power that
reaches to the Seed is Christ, and then Christ is worthy to receive Christ; as
also they have done in their Scorn, in p. 63. wherein they have showed their
gross Ignorance of the several Manifestations of Christ the Seed in his People,
who are of the Seed of Abraham, which Christ took upon him to redeem his own,
and to bring to his own Power and Promise which he receives of the Father.

See again in another Book of G.W. etc. called, A brief Discovery of the
dangerous Principles of John Horn, etc. p. 21. A Quotation being taken out of
J. Nailer's Love to the Lost, That the Seed to which the Promise was made, and
which few know, is a certain Seed or Principle in Man, desiring to follow after
God, and to be free from Sin. Reply, Here you are seen to be ignorant of the
Seed of God, and Enemies to it in his People, which Seed is Christ, and
wherever he is known in such a low Measure as a Seed that suffers, and is
burdened in Man by Corruption, there he desires to be free from the Burden of
Sin, and always to do his Father's Will; and this Seed the Power reaches to
where it is begotten, and in the Power it arises in them that believe in the
Light for their Redemption, and the Apostle traveled again for the Galatians,
until Christ was formed in them, who first is known as one without Form or
Comeliness, and so the Seed of God suffers in some, and in others it reigns,
and is known to be Prince of Peace: And this is no Mystery of Deceit (as you
say) but a Mystery that has discovered your Deceit, who know not the Seed of
the Kingdom, nor the Power wherein it rises: And have you never known what
Christ is without the Camp? But before you, who are Neglecters of Christ, and
Abusers of his Truth, can know the Seed of God, and what it is in you, you must
come to the Light which condemns you for your Deceits and Lies, with which you
have abused the Truth, and then learn to know what and where the Grave is which
Christ has made with the wicked. Comformable to this R. Hub. said in He-goats
Horn broken, p. 62. Christ the Seed made his Grave in the wicked, and in the
rich in his Death, and out of that Grave, with his Body, rises into
everlasting Life; and if thou can receive it, thou may be satisfied.

Again, in He-goats Horn, p. 50. G.W. quotes I. Horn thus. J. Horn says, The
Prophet Isaiah does not witness, That in them a Child was born, and in them a
Son was given.

G.W. answers, Christ was the firstborn in many Brethren, Romans 8. 29. (...),
and was not Isaiah one of these Brethren, who also had been as with Child, Isa.
26. 17. Jer. 30. 6.

Note, Thus by G.W. and R.H. we have an Account of Christ a Seed, buried in the
wicked, suffering without the Camp, desiring to be freed from Sin, and to do
the Will of the Father, suffering in some, but reigning in others, begotten and
born in them, raised in them, the which Seed is reached to by the Power which
takes hold of it, even the Seed of Abraham; and thus the chief Prophecies in
the old Testament, concerning Christ's Birth of the Virgin, his Death, Burial,
Resurrection; G.W. has applied to the Birth of the Seed within, and which he
says, suffers in some, and reigns in others, and so is neither begotten nor
born in some, but is begotten and born in others: But how this can be
understood all of one and the same numerical Seed or Christ, is fully as hard,
as to understand how all Men in the World, both good and bad, are one numerical
and individual Man: Nay, it is much harder; for G. F. says, The Seed that
spoke in him, and said he was Christ, was not a Creature; he spoke it not as a
Creature, but out of and beyond all Creatures. Now, that any thing can be
begotten and born in time, yea, daily and hourly, as this Seed is daily
begetting in some, and begotten and born in others, and yet not be a Creature,
is not intelligible to Men's Understanding by the highest Illumination they are
capable of.

Whether was Christ incarnate more than once, or is he daily incarnate, etc.
NOTE. I produced a Quotation out of E. Borough, To prove that Christ is daily
incarnate, and incarnating in Men, as often as Men are regenerated or
regenerating; the which (though it was read in the Beginning of the third
Meeting) because of its Affinity with what goes before on this Head, I shall
here insert.

In E. B's Works, p. 29. a Question being proposed to the Quakers by Philip
Bennet, Whether was the Word made Flesh, or the Son of God made of a Woman,
more or oftener than once? After some Railing going before, he thus answers;
Thou do not know, nor can not witness the Word to be made Flesh once, but
art one of the Antichrists and Deceivers which John speaks of, that are entered
into the World, which cannot confess Jesus Christ come in the Flesh, and
therefore thou queriest whether the Word was made Flesh any more or oftener than
once? Which Query comes from thy dark polluted Mind, who is out of the Light.
And p. 30. And when thou can witness the Word to be made Flesh once, then
thou will know whether the Son of God was made of a Woman, any more or oftener
than once: But thou art the Dragon that would devour the Man-child which the
Woman has brought forth, who shall rule all Nations with a Rod of Iron.

Note, some Expositors on the Book of the Revelation, have, by the Woman,
understood the Church, and by the Man-child, the Life of Christ, or Christ
formed in true Belidvers, by way of Allegory and Metaphor only, as is above
noted; but they never understood, that Christ, strictly speaking, without-all
Allegory or Metaphor, was ever begotten or born in time but once, or was ever
made of a Woman but once, viz. when he was conceived by the Holy Ghost in the
Womb of the Virgin, and born of her: But the chief Teachers among the Quakers,
such as G. F. G. W. and W. P. and E. B. has made Christ's Birth of the Virgin
Mary, and his Death, and Sufferings, and Blood shed without them, the Type, and
Allegory, and Christ born within, crucified within them, risen and ascended
within them, the Reallity and greatest Mystery, as is above proved.

Like to this is another Passage in G. Whiteheads Jacob found in a desert Land,
p. 6, 7. And in Simplicity I was made to wait upon God, and to endure the Cross
of Christ, though for a Time and Times, the Enmity of the wicked one was strong
against me within and without, seeking to devour that Seed, which, through the
Word of the Lord, was begotten in me. And the Mysteries of God and his Kingdom
was revealed in me, who brought me out of Darkness through the Wilderness where
the Man-child was preserved, for a Time and Times, and half a Time, from the
Wrath of the Dragon who would have slain the Man-child: But now is he arisen in
his Power and Zeal, and the Prince of the World is cast out, and he is born
which is the everlasting Counselor, the Prince of Peace [quoting in the Margin
Isa. 9. 6.] who has sent War, and the Fire, and the Sword into the Earth.

Note, This I find was generally their manner of preaching and writing, both at
their first Appearance and long after, to tell People that Christ was begotten
in them, born in them, crucified, dead and buried, risen and ascended into
Heaven within them; and that every one, in order to eternal Salvation, must
know Christ thus begotten and born in them, crucified, dead, buried, risen and
ascended; and this inward Conception and Birth of Christ, etc. they made the
greatest Mystery and Reallity, whereof Christ, as born without in the Flesh,
was the Figure, and a facile Representation (to use W. P's Phrase in the case)
of what is to be transacted in us, thus they did represent the inward Work of
Regeneration to be a greater Mystery than God manifest in the Flesh, viz. in
that Body of Flesh that was born at Bethlehem, as W. P. has expressly affirmed,
as is above quoted: And by this high sublime Doctrine, which they gave forth to
be given them by immediate Revelation from Heaven (though it was no other but
what G. F. had from some old Ranters and Familists; who had it long before
him.) They did mightily magnify themselves above all others, and cried out
against all others, as dark ignorant Sots, Deceivers and Antichrists, who
denied Christ come in the Flesh, because they did not receive this wild Notion
they had got from Ranters and Familists, That Christ was born, crucified, dead,
buried, risen and ascended in them; and though while I was with them, I was not
altogether ignorant that they had such Phrases and Methods of Speech as I had
read in some of their Books, yet I thought they understood it only by way of
Allegory and Metaphor, as Origin, Augustine, etc. Some others of the Fathers,
both Greek and Latin, used the like allegorical Phrases, and which I my self
have partly used in some of my former Books, only by way of Allegory and
Metaphor: But I appeal to all, who shall but impartially consider what I have
above quoted out of their Books, whether they will not judge and say, that
these Teachers of the Quakers, whose Words I have quoted, plainly import quite
another thing than an allegorical Birth, Crucifixion and Resurrection of Christ
in them, even that which is real, without an Allegory, Metaphor, or Figure; for
as G. F. said, in Readiness Errand, Christ's Flesh is a Figure, and Christ in his
People is the Substance of all Figures; and consequently of that Figure also.
Besides, if they meant it only by way of Allegory and Metaphor, why did they
cry out against all others as Antichrists, Deceivers, blind and dark Sots, who
did not receive this their Notion, but opposed it as antichristian? But if they
had plainly told, that they meant it not otherwise but by way of Allegory and
Metaphor, I know none that would have opposed them in that case. But as in some
other things, after the Quakers have made a great Compass, and yet return to
say the same with others, from whom they differed so in this very thing, after
all that G.W. as much as any, had formerly contended for Christ begotten and
both within, suffering within, his Blood shed within, being a Sacrifice within
Men, to appease the Wrath of God, and giving much more to Christ thus born
within, suffering within, his Blood shed within, than to Christ born without,
this Blood shed without, being a Type of his Blood shed within: Yet in his
Judgment fixed, printed 1682. which was 26. Years after his Jacob found in a
desert Land, printed 1656. above quoted, he turns all that he had formerly writ
and contended for, (Christ born within, suffering within, desiring to be freed
from Sin) into an Elegancy of Speech, the Property and Effect being put for the
Cause [which is no more, nor other than what all Christian Teachers and
Expositors affirm:] For this hear what he says in answer to his Opponent,
Jeffery Bullock, who charged the Quakers with false Doctrine, in saying, That
God's Appearance is to his Son Jesus Christ's* and for the begetting and
bringing him forth in the Sons and Daughters of Men, the which Doctrine, said
J. B. I do deny. To this, G.W. after some foregoing Words, answers, in his
Judgment fixed, p. 330. This innocent Birth, which God by his Spirit brings
forth in the Sons and Daughters of Men, who truly believe, relate to them and
their Souls, as begotten and born of the immortal Seed by the living Word, so
that, this Birth is not Christ Jesus [What say the Quaker Zealots to this flat
Denial of his own and his Brethrens former Doctrine, and yet this without any
Change in him, he is the same infallible G. W. still] for he is that
incorruptible Seed and Word of Life, which begets Forms, and brings forth the
Soul of Man into his own Nature and Image, and so he renews his own Image in
Man that believes in his Power, and so Christ may be said to be formed in us,
as in a misterious and elegant way of speaking, the Property and Effect being
put for the Cause; for Christ, in himself, has all Power in Heaven an Earth
given to him, and it has pleased the Father, that all Fullness should dwell in
him.

Again, in Judgment fixed, p. 322. We deny the Doctrine that the Word, GOD, is
in Bondage or Captivity in the Sons and Daughters of Men but only that there is
a Seed of God and of Christ that is opressed, and suffers in many by reason of
Transgression. A Seed of God is commonly our Phrase and Terms in this case. And
p. 124. These are certain Allusions and Elegancies.

Note, this is expressly contradictory to what he has frequently printed in his
other Books, particularly to what is at great length quoted above out of his
He-goat^ Horn, p. 8. and his Brief Discovery, p. 21. where he calls the Seed
that suffers within People, and that desires to be freed from Sin, Christ; and
the Lamb that was slain, that is worthy to receive Power, and Wisdom, and
Riches, and Strength, and Honor, and Glory and Blessing: Now if by Christ, the
Lamb that was slain within, the Seed that suffers within, and desires to be
freed from Sin, etc. G. W. does not mean Christ, really and strictly speaking,
but will have it to be a misterious and elegant way of speaking, the Property
and Effect being put for the Cause, so that by the Seed, Christ in Men,
according to his Explication, in Judgment fixed, just now given, he means
only the created Souls of Men, as begotten and born of the immortal Seed; then
how will this agree with his making the created Soul as begotten and born of
the immortal Seed, to be the Lamb that was slain, who is worthy to receive
Power, and Riches, and Wisdom, and Strength, and Honor, and Glory, and
Blessing? Rev. 5. 12. which is a Doxology of divine Praise, and an Act of
divine Worship given to that Lamb, by Angels and Saints; and seeing, according
to G. W's Explication here given in his Judgment fixed, the Seed that is born
in them, suffers in them, slain in them, is neither God nor Christ, and yet had
divine Worship and Honor given thereto by Angels and Saints: It follows, that
according to G. W. divine Adoration is due to regenerated Souls of Men, or at
least, to something in the Souls of regenerated Men that is neither God nor
Christ, but a mere Creature, which is abominable Idolatry, and yet justified
here by G. W. in his Judgment fixed, compared with his He goats Horn. I cannot
understand how G. W. can clear himself here, unless he should tell us of
another elegant way of speaking; that is, to give to this Allegorical Christ
Jesus born within them, the Lamb that was slain within them, an allegorical
divine Adoration and Worship, and that it was only this allegorical divine
Adoration that the Saints and Angels gave to this Lamb slain within Men, Rev.
5. 12. But how nonsensical and idle any such Gloss would be, I need not show,
and yet I suppose it is the best he can find.

But again, that not only a Seed of God suffers in Men by their Sins, but that
God, and Christ as God, suffers in Men by their Sins [in plain Contradiction to
what he has delivered in his Judgment fixed] is evident from his Divinity of
Christ, p. 55. 5^ where he has these following Words [in Opposition to T.
Vincent, who had affirmed, That Christ, as God, did not suffer, but only as
Man.] Whereas (says he) T. V. had affirmed, That Christ, as God, could not
suffer: As to his saying, That God cannot suffer, is in one Sense, not true,
though he intended as to Death, yet the Spirit of God has suffered, and has
been grieved by Man's Transgressions: And for this he cites Isa. 63. 10. Amos
2. 13. Hos. 11. 8, 9. Psalm. 95. Genesis 6. 6. Psalm. 78. 40. Isa. 1. 7, 13. and
Isa. 43. 24, 25.

Note, Here the State of the Controversy betwixt G. VV. and T. V. was not
about a metaphorical suffering of God, but a real, which is here affirmed by G.
VV. in Contradiction to what he has said in his Judgment fixed, as above
quoted. And because G. VV. in his Judgment fixed, p. 322. blames Jeffery
Bullock for his dealing unfairly and fallaciously, with charging it on the
Quakers for preaching and printing, That the Seed, Spirit, Word, or God, is
both in Prison, Bondage, and Captivity, and to be quickened, raised, etc. withal
adding, That the said J. B. has not produced any Book of ours or our Friends,
wherein this Doctrine is printed: Surely G. VV. had a very treacherous Memory,
or writ this against his own Conscience, seeing he had writ so expressly himself
in his former Books, as is above quoted out of his He-goats Horn, his Brief
Discovery, and his Divinity of Christ, all which were in print before J. B.
gave this Charge against them. And as to his Distinction betwixt God or Christ,
and a Seed of God or Christ that is oppressed, and suffers in Men by their
Sins, as if it were not either God or Christ that thus suffers in Men by their
Sins; this is contradictory to G. W's own former Doctrine, who brought Amos 2.
13. to prove that God suffers in Men by their Sins ( viz. not metaphorically,
by that Figure commonly called Anthropopathia, but really, which was the only
State of the Controversy.) Behold, I am pressed under you, as a Cart that is
full of Sheaves. Now, seeing this must be understood literally and strictly,
according to G. W. it must be a very great Suffering, that he thinks God
suffers in Men by their Sins, that may be said to amount to an Oppression,
which yet he denies is applicable to God, in his Judgment fixed. And seeing the
Seed within, that is slain, he would have it, in his He-goats Horn, to be the
Lamb that was slain, Rev. 5. 12. to whom the Angels gave divine Worship; he
must needs own that Seed to be Christ, and that Christ to be God; and
consequently, not only that God suffers in Men by their Sins, but is slain in
them, or else confess Idolatry to be lawful. But that the Seed that is within
Men, that W. Penn will have to be the promised Seed of the Woman that bruiseth
the Head of the Serpent, is Christ, and God over all, blessed for ev^er more:
Take his express Words in his Christian Quaker, p. 97, 98. The Seed of the
Promise is an holy and spiritual Principle of Light, Life, and Power, that
being received into the Heart, bruiseth the Serpent's Head; and because the
Seed, which cannot be that Body (viz. that was outwardly born of the Virgin) is
Christ, as testify the Scriptures, the Seed is one, and that Seed Christ, and
Christ, God over all, blessed for ever.

But when is it, that the Seed in Men is the Mighty God? Is it at its first
being received into the Heart, according to W. P' s Notions? Hear himself
unriddle the Mystery, in his Christian Quaker, p. 98. And though particular
Persons might arrive at great Seize, even to a beholding the Day of the
Seeds complete Redemption and Conquest over all its Oppressors. [ Mark this, G.
Whitehead, That the Seed, which is Christ, and God over all, is for a time
oppressed, and suffers under its Oppressors, which yet thou have the Impudence
to deny, that any of thy Friends use any such Phrase,] (when what was but in
Condition of a Seed or newborn Child, should become the only Son, the
wonderful Counselor, the Mighty God, the everlasting Father, and Prince of
Peace, of the Increase of whose Government, there should be no End, as speaks
the Prophet;) yet it is granted, through that good Understanding the Lord has
given us in these weighty things, that the Generality were but weak, dark, and
in Bondage, as says the Apostle, under carnal and beggarly Elements, not
clearly seeing through those outward Services; which, if I may so speak. God
held them in Hand with, condescending to their Weakness, that he might both
keep them from gadding after the pompous Invention, and idolatrous Worship of
other Nations, and point out unto them, under their great Carnality, that more
hidden Glory and spiritual Dispensation* which should afterward be revealed,
to wit, the complete Redemption of the Soul, and Reign of the Holy Seed, from
the Child born, and the Son given, to the wonderful Counselor, the mighty God,
the everlasting Father, and Prince of Peace; of the Increase of whose
Government there should be no End.

Note, Thus we see, he wholly applies that most excellent Prophecy of Isaiah,
9. 6. concerning the holy Seed and Child Jesus born of the Virgin, whose Name
is, The Wonderful Counselor, The Mighty God, etc. to a Seed or Principle
within, which grows up from a Seed to a Child, and from a Child, to become
the Only Son, and so to become the Mighty God; which exactly agrees with that
blasphemous Notion of W. Baily, in the Collection of his Works, p. 292, 293. Be
thou but the Virgin, the Power of the most High shall overshadow thee, and that
holy thing, which shall be born of thee, shall be called the Son of God, this
was Christ's Name in the Womb (read, within) and then had other Names, as
Jesus and Emanuel. But the Virgin is subject to the Power of the Most High,
where Christ is known to be first a Holy Thing, then a Child given, and a Son
born, which is Emanuel, God with us, a Savior, the wonderful Counselor, the
mighty God, the Prince of Peace. Thus we see, according to these Men's
Doctrine, God sows a Seed in Men, the which Seed, as Men attend to, and obey
it, they are the Virgin in whom this Seed comes to be a Child born, and that
Child becomes the only Son, the wonderful Counselor, the mighty God: And a
Preacher in Pensilvania, of the Quakers, did illustrate this great Quaker
Mystery, to another Quaker in Pensilvania, who told it me after this manner, by
this following Similitude; A Hen lays an Egg, sits, and hatches, and brings
forth a Chick, and that Chick becomes a Hen, equal to the Mother Hen; which I
confess is a very plain and intelligible Explication of the blasphemous Notion
of G. VV. VV. P. and VV. B. above mentioned: Thus God, in every regenerate Man,
begers God, and the God begotten is equal, in Power and Might, to the God that
did beget. The Quakers Name that gave this Similitude, is Jacob Talner, a
Dutchman, who began to speak at the Beginning of the first Meeting at
Turners-Hall, but saying nothing pertinent to the purpose, and confessing he
had no Deputation from any of the Persons properly concerned, was desired by
the Auditory, as well as by me, to be silent, that the Service of that Meeting
might not be hindered. I proffered to give him a Meeting at that Place any other
Day, if he had a mind to dispute, but he did not agree to my Proposition. This
very Person is a frequent Preacher in the Quakers Meetings here in London.

Note, I find in VV P 's Christian Quaker, p. 100. that he acknowledges that
Christ is called Light, by a Metaphor; And whereas, he says, the Light in Men
has been resisted, grieved, and as it were, slain: The Word, Slain, is also
metaphorical, yet be contends, it suffers in Men, and has been deeply wounded
in wicked Men; yea, he makes the Sufferings of Christ's Godhead, to have been
the greatest, p. 102. Nor was his Manhood insensible of it, he says; and a
little after he says, As outwardly he gave his outward Life for the World, so
he might inwardly shed abroad in their Souls, the Blood of God, that is, the
holy purifying Life and Virtue, which is in him, as the Word, God, and as
which, he is the Life of the World. Thus we see the mistick Notion of the
Blood of God.

For a Close on this Head, I shall produce a large Quotation out of Truth's
Defense, p. 48. 49, 50. giving a plain Contradiction to G. VV. his denying the
Word, God, to be imprisoned, or in Bondage, etc. It having been queried by his
Opponent, Whether there be a Possibility to hide Christ, the Son of
Righteousness, quite under a Cloud where be really is. G. F. thus answers, Thou
Enemy of God, thou do hide the Talent in thee, under the Clod of the Earth in
thee: If thou have an Ear, thou ma^st hear, 1 Pet. 3. 19. The Ministers of God,
they speak to the Spirits in Prison, and the Prisoners shall come out of
Prison. The Son of Perdition is above all that is called God in thee, 2 Thessalonians.
2. 2. Thou blind Hypocrite, was not be in Egypt while Herod was King, and out
of Egypt have I called my Son, says the Lord? Who have thou preached all this
while? Thou art one that keeps the Light in Prison in thee. And in Answer to
another Question, Whether the Devil is stronger than Christ, the Flesh than
the Spirit, or where do thou find he was ever a Prisoner in Satan's Chains?
Ans. We witness he was in Satan's Chains, and is in thee, else how could they
crucify him a fresh? This, with much more after the same Strain, is found in
the Pages quoted, and which was read at the second Meeting.

Is not this a great Perversion, as well as nonsensical Exposition of G. F. on
this Place of Peter, to prove that wicked Men imprison Christ in them? The
Spirits in Prison (whereof Peter writes in that Place) were sometimes
disobedient in the Days of Noah, as the following Words expressly declare. But
how could Christ in them be disobedient; not only Spirits, but disobedient
Spirits? This is that Apostle of the Quakers, of whom VV. P. says, in his
Preface to G. F's Journal, He had an extraordinary Gift in opening the
Scripture, he would go to the Marrow of things, says VV. P. Is not this a rare
Instance of it?

Upon the reading these Places, Samuel Jobson, one of the Quakers Elders said,
George, does not the Scriptures say, that some crucify Christ a-fresh? I
answered, It is said in Scripture, they crucify him to themselves, but it is
not said; they crucify him to himself, or in himself; by crucifying him there,
is understood their rendering themselves guilty of his Death, and depriving
themselves, by their unworthy Life and Practices, of the Salvation purchased by
him. I asked him, did he believe, that wicked Men, by their Sins, do really
wound Christ in them, and kill him, and let out his Blood in them, and that
that Blood is the Blood of Atonement. He said, The Scripture says, If we walk
in the Light, etc. the Blood of Jesus Christ cleanses us from all Sin. I asked
him, Whether that Blood was the Blood of Christ without us, that was shed on
the Cross? He said, The Blood was the Life: But I asked again, Was it the Blood
without us, or the Blood within us? He said, It was spiritual Blood: But being
much pressed, not only by me, but some Ministers present, to answer, whether it
was Blood without him, or Blood within him? He waved any direct Answer; and I
showing the Auditory, that the Notion of G. F. and other Teachers of the
Quakers who had learned it of him was, That the Blood, by which we are cleansed
from Sin, is the Blood within, which he calls, The Blood of the Seed; as is
more fully afterward to be proved; and this Seed is Christ, and is not a
Creature. Another Quaker said, Is not the Seed Christ, and is not Christ
within, the Seed of the Woman that bruiseth the Head of the Serpent? [At this,
some of the Hearers said, Here is Proof enough of their Error, The Seed of the
Woman, it the Seed within them.] I answered, Christ is called the Seed of the
Woman, and the Seed of Abraham, as he came in the Flesh without us, and was
made of a Woman, and was the Son of Abraham: And though I own Christ within, by
his Godhead Presence, and by his common Illumination in all Men, and by his
special Presence, and special Illuminations in the faithful; yet I deny, that
the Seed of God in Men, is either Christ or God; I own that there is a Seed of
God in the faithful, but I deny G. F. his Notion of it, That it is not a
Creature. I asked Daniel Philips, what he said to my former Question; Did Men,
by their Sins, really wound God in them, as some of their Teachers have
affirmed? After some Demur, he said he would not give a positive Answer, but
take it into further Consideration, whereupon some of the Auditory did commend
him: I said, it was better so to do, than to assert such a vile Error; however,
by this it appeared how uncertain they were, and how little agreed about some
of their chief Principles.

Having thus given an Account of G. W's wild Notions, concerning Christ the
Seed within, that the Power takes hold of and raises up: I will proceed to show
the like by some new Quotations out of G. F. referring to other Quotations
given in my third Narrative, especially on the same Subject. See my third
Narrative, p. 25.

G. F. in his G. M. p. 324. quotes his Opponent saying, That the Seed to whom
the Promise of Salvation is made, is or has been Sinners. Ans. The Promise of
God is to the Seed which has been laden, as a Cart with Shaves by the Sinner,
which Seed is the Hope Christ that purifies, even as God is pure; and here is
the Creature come to know its Liberty, among the Sons of God, and the Seed
Christ never sinned, in the Male nor in the Female, in the Jew nor in the
Gentiles: And of this Mystery was the great High Professors ignorant of, that
stood at a Distance from the Gentiles, that Christ had no room among them,
though they talked of him, but in the Stable, in the Manger, and in their
Mouths to talk of him with their Lips, and such Christ calls Graves and
Sepulchers, and whited Walls, and the Wall is not the Seed, but the Seed is
Christ, and not the Sepulcher nor the Grave; so this Promise is not unto Seeds
as many, but to one, the Seed which is Christ. Note these gross Perversions of
Scripture.

Again, p. 171. G. M. Now they feel not the Comfort, nor the Benefit, but by
the Faith of Christ Jesus, the one Offering in which God is pleased with all,
which is acceptable, which is Christ's Offering, his Sacrifice, his Flesh, his
Blood, his Life, his Word must be manifest and received within, before they
come to Justification, Sanctification, and Redemption.

P. 173. And where Jesus Christ is within, the Word is there, and God is there,
and this is the great Mystery of Godliness.

Again, G. M. p. 158. Of this Body (which is that by which Christ reconciles
unto God) are all the Professors, Protestants and Papists, ignorant of this
Seed that breaks the Enmity.

P. 159. And by Faith is every one justified in the Blood of the Seed, the
Flesh of Christ, the Lord from Heaven shed for the Sins of the whole World. The
Blood of the Seed which is the Life that cleanses; and this Blood is felt
within, for it purges the Conscience from dead Works, to serve the living
God; and here is the great Mystery of God, and the Wisdom of God.

Note, This Flesh and Blood that he says is the great Mystery, which neither
Papists nor Protestants know, is that Flesh which was crucified in Adam, when
Adam sinned, and the Blood that was then shed, in which is the Belief that
takes away the Sin, as I have showed in a large Quotation out of another Book
of his in my third Narrative, p. 25.

For a Close upon this Head, I shall quote a Passage of G. F. in that called
Several Papers given forth, etc. by G. F. who is there called Minister of the
eternal Word of God. p. 47. Now to all dear ones and dear Hearts, I speak, the
same Seed which it Christ, the same Spirit takes upon it now as ever; yea, the
same Temptations, the same Devil, and the same Worship of the World is
winding into another Form and Color; but Jesus Christ is the Way, the Truth,
and the Life: And the same Seed passing into the Wilderness, and there is
tempted to lust after the Creature; you that are in the Wilderness, witness
this with me, and the same Tentations even to Despair, and make themselves away.

Note* here all along, from the Passages above quoted out of G. F. and G. W.
and many more which might be quoted out of them and others, it evidently
appears, that the greatest things that are written of Christ, either by
Prophecy in the Old Testament, or fulfilled in the New Testament; his outward
Birth, his Incarnation, his taking hold, not of Angels, but the Seed of
Abraham, his Sacrifice and Offering, his Blood, Death, Burial, Resurrection,
Ascension; yea, his being tempted by Satan in the World; is all applied to the
Seed Christ within, as the great Mystery of Godliness; yea, as greater than God
manifest in Flesh without, as is quoted out of W. Penn, and as concerning
Christ's Flesh without, that is a Figure, but Christ within is the Substance.
Now to apply all this in way of Allegory to Christ incarnate within, the Seed
that the Spirit takes hold of, to use G. F's Words, that looks like an
Incarnation of the Holy Ghost in G. F. and his Brethren, is too rash, and goes
beyond the Bounds of Sobriety: But to turn it all to the greatest Reallity, and
all that is said of Christ without, to be the Allegory and Figure of the
Substance within, as is effectually proved, is a plain overthrowing the
Christian Faith.

But it is very hard to conceive how this Seed Christ within, as G. F. holds it
forth, was or could be tempted of the Devil, to lust after the Creature;
seeing, as he will have it, it is no Creature it self, can it be supposed that
the Devil would or could tempt the Godhead to lust after the Creature; and what
this Seed can be, which G. F. calls Christ that is buried in the wicked; and
elsewhere, the Spirit and Spirits in Prison, yea, the Prisoners in Hell, that
the Quakers have preached to, that is no Creature, nor God, nor any Part of the
divine Essence, for that cannot be divided into Parts, is unaccountable?

There yet remains three or four Passages which were objected in a printed
Sheet, called An Account from Colchester, against G. W. and E. B. to which
these seven Quakers in Colchester have given their Reply by way of Vindication,
but all grossly fallacious, in that they call, Some Account from Calchester, as
we shall see in what follows.

It was objected against G. W. out of his Truth defending the Quakers, page 65.
Christopher Wade affirms, That our blessed Savior does instruct Men to lay
fast hold of, and to abide in such a Faith which confideth in himself, being
without Men. To this G. W. answers, That Is contrary to the Apostles Doctrine,
who preached the Word of Faith that was in their Hearts, and the Saints Faith
stood in the Power of God, which was in them.

Their Defense is, That George White head's Intent in this Answer, was not
against C. Wade's excluding Christ's spiritual Appearance and Work of
Righteousness out of his Saints, by affirming, That our blessed Savior does
totally condomn all such Faith which does trust, that Men are righteous in
their own Bodies by what Spirit soever, either from Heaven or elsewhere, that
Righteousness is wrought in Men's Bodies; p. ibid. Whereby ^e opposed Christ's
Work of Regeneration in true Believers, as also his affirming that the true
Christ does prove himself not to be a Spirit.

To this I say, suppose C. Wade had erred on the one hand, this does not
justify this most scandalous Assertion of George Whitehead. That it is
contrary to Romans 10. to confide in Christ without Men, whereas Romans 10. 8, 9,
10. teaches us, That to to believe in Christ without us, and so to confess
him, is necessary to our Salvation. It Is observable how both they and G. W.
himself waves giving a plain and positive Answer to this great Objection. They
say indeed, in page 21. As there is one Lord Jesus Christ, and one true Faith
in him, this Faith respects Christ, both as without us in the Heavens, and as
he is in the Hearts of his Saints. But they do not tell what they mean by
Christ as without us in the Heavens; not one Word of their Faith in Christ, as
he is both God and Man, and who as Man, consisting of a created Soul and Body,
the same in Nature with the Nature of other Men (but without Sin) is in the
Heavens in our glorified Nature: This being the thing that is mainly objected
on this Head, and which they will not, nor dare not give a plain Answer unto,
nor G. W. either, for it will detect his and their gross Error; or if they or
he give a sound Answer, it will prove they are changed, and that will reflect
on G. W's Infallibility.

But they grossly abuse C. Wade for his sound Doctrine, which G. W. has not
fairly nor duly represented; for C. Wade, in that very Page, does clear
himself, both against a lying Charge, first, in G. F. who charged him, That he
did totally exclude Works without any Distinction, G. M. p. 298. And the like
false Charge does G. W. load him with, That he opposed Christ's Work of
Regeneration in true Believers, which is an extremely false Charge against him,
as he shows at length; but he did only exclude them from being the
meritorious Cause of our Justification, and the Foundation of our Faith; so
that though Sanctification and good Works are necessary, and none can be either
justified or saved without them, yet we must not trust in them, nor make a
Savior of them. But it is no Wonder that G. W. blames this Doctrine, who in his
Voice of Wisdom, pleads for the Meritoriousness of good Works in Men, as grossly
as the grossest Papists, yea, and much more grossly, as we may see in its proper
Place. But this is G. W. and his Brethrens common Work, to misrepresent their
Opponents, to hide their own vile Heresies. And as for C. Wade's saying, Christ
proved himself not to be a Spirit, to wit, a mere Spirit, as he explains
himself; he quoted for it, Christ's own Words, Handle me and feel me, for a
Spirit has not Flesh and Bones as ye see me have; and was not that a sufficient
Proof that the Man Christ was not a mere Spirit.

Proofs on the sixth Head, Concerning the Soul.
Whether the Soul of Man is a Part of God.
G. Whitehead is at great Pains. in his Truth and Innocence, page 7. and 9. to
prove, that when George Fox said, The Soul was a Part of God, and of God's
Being; he did not mean the rational Soul of Man, and which he calls the
reasonable Soul or Spirit formed in Man, but that divine Inspiration or Breath
of Life, whereby Man became a living Soul, as the great and universal Soul of
Mankind, even the Soul, or Life of the Soul, as some phrase it.

And Joseph VVyeth, in his Switch, page 53. pleads, That he meant not That the
created Soul was a Part of God; and will have it, that George Fox held, That
the Soul of Man was created. But none of them give the least effectual Proof
out of his Books, where George Fox mentions any created Soul to be in Man, that
is not a Part of God: Their Inferences are weak, as That Christ is the Bishop
of the Soul: The Soul is in Transgression in Death: The Soul redeemed rejoices
in God: All this does not prove; that George Fox did hold, that the Soul of
Man, in all these Considerations, was not a Part of God: For, according to him,
the Soul being a Part of God, this part rejoices in God the Fullness; and God
or Christ considered as the Fullness, is the Bishop of the Soul that is a Part
of him, the Soul being like a Drop of Water returning into the Ocean, so taught
the Ranters; and that all Creatures were Parts of God, who was the Substance of
all things; and so says George Fox expressly, Great Mystery, page 99. and
Edward Borough, see the Collection of his Works, page 827, 828. And George Fox
denies, That either Christ or Men have a Humane Soul, or that Christ has
either a Humane Soul or Body, Great Mystery, page 99, 100. His Objection is
idle against Humane, as signifying Earthly, from Humus, the Ground, which is
but a Cloak to cover his gross Eerror.

None of his Opponents said, the Soul was from the Earth: He might as much
object against the Language of Scripture, that calls Christ the second Adam,
the Word Adam signifying Red Earth. That the Soul is in Transgression in Death,
proves not that George Fox did not hold it to be a Part of God, for he and
other Teachers among the Quakers teach, That what they call the Seed Christ, is
crucified in the wicked, and is held in Satan's Chains, and what are these
Chains but Sins, as is above proved out of Truth's Def. p. 49.

But for a full and clear Evidence, that George Fox did hold the Soul of Man to
be a Part of God, in answer to Magnus Byne his Book, called, The scornful
Quakers answered. Great Mystery, p. 90. Is not the Soul without Beginning
coming from God, returning into God again, who has it in his Hand? And in
Answer to Jonathan Clapham his Book, called A Discovery of the Quakers
Doctrine, Great Mystery, page 100. Is not this that comes out from God, which
is in God's Hand, part of God, of God and from God, and to God again, which
Soul Christ is the Bishop of?

It is to be noted and well observed, that this Opposition that George Fox made
to those Men and his other Opponents, as Richard Baxter, and the five Ministers
of New Castle, about the Soul which they denied to be a Part of God, or without
Beginning, and he affirmed it was. [By Opposition to them] was not about any
divine Soul in the Soul that was the Life or Soul of it, as George Whitehead
would have it; by which he means, God or the Holy Ghost, for in all Disputes,
the Subject of the Dispute is one betwixt the Opponent and the Respondent; and
though sometimes, where the Matter is intricate and nice, the Subject is hard
to find out, and the Opponent may mean one thing, and the Respondent another;
yet in a Case that is clear, and easy to be understood, as this Case is, there
can be no Difficulty about the Subject of the Dispute, as indeed here there is
none; which Subject of Dispute betwixt George Fox and his Opponents above
mentioned, was purely and simply the Soul of Man, and not any divine Principle
in the Soul. As to instance from Magnus Byne, the Beginning of this
Controversy betwixt Magnus Byne and George Fox, about the Soul, was by a
Question that Magnus Byne put to Thomas Lawson a Quaker, which was this [see in
Magnus Byne, The scornful Quaker answered, page 103.] What is the Soul of Man,
and the Preciousness of it, seeing Christ says, It is more worth than all the
World?

To this Thomas Lawson the Quaker answers, The Ministers of Jesus, who come by
the Will of God, such know the Soul, and watch for the Soul, Heb. 13. 17. But
thy watching is for the Fliece, and art querying what the Soul is which lies in
Death, and State, and Condemnation so long as it lives, and the false Accuser
lives, and it the Firstborn knows not, nor the Preciousness of it, who prefers
the World, and obeys it before the Light of Christ, and so sells the Soul for
the World, as thou do who professest him in thy Lip-talk, but denies him in
Practice, Ways, and Conversation, though Christ says, The Soul is more worth
than all the World.

To which, Magnus Byne, his Opponent thus replieth; In all this Answer, there
is not a Tittle unto-the Question; here it appears thy perfect knowledge fails
thee. Here thou guessest, that the Soul is Christ, for he is the Firstborn the
Scripture mentions; and so according to thy Blasphemy, Christ it seems may be
damned and cast into Hell, for so it is said of the Soul, Fear him who is able
to cast Body and Soul into Hell. See how dark thou art in making no Difference
between the Soul and Christ; the Soul is indeed a precious thing, there is a
kind of Infiniteness in it, which all the World cannot satisfy; and therefore
the Man was a Fool that said, Soul, take thine Ease because thy Barns are full;
and yet notwithstanding this kind of Infiniteness in the Soul as being
restless, till it return to God; yet it cannot be Infiniteness it self, it
cannot be the Firstborn, for of whole Man it is said, whereof the Soul is the
more noble Part, What is Man that thou art mindful of him? Heb. 2. 6, 7. Man
you see is inferior unto the Angels, much more inferior to the Son of God. And
farther (says he) though the Soul be the Seat of Christ, and Christ be hid
there as a Treasure in a Field, even in the innermost Room of the Soul, yet the
Soul cannot comprehend the infinite Majesty; so Christ in his diviner Essence
or Being, much less, can it be Christ who is God over all blessed for evermore?
And though there be indeed a blessed Union and Fellowship between Christ and an
holy Soul, yet still there is a vast Difference between the Essence or being of
the Soul and Christ, the one being still a Creature, and the other the Creator
of it.

Next he comes to give his own Definition of it; The Soul (says Magnus Byne)
is a most noble Power, a living Being, an Essence that quickens the Body, and
yet dies not, sleeps not when the Body dies and sleeps, but returns unto God
who gave it: This Soul is a little Map of the great World, and makes Man a
little World; for in his Soul is comprehended the Life of Plants, the Sense of
Beasts, the Reason of Men and Angels: This Soul quickens and makes Man a living
Creature, a sensitive Creature, a rational Creature. After he has described the
Soul of Man (which he expressly calls a Creature, as above quoted) in its
several Powers and Faculties of the Mind, Reason, Judgment, Will, Memory,
Fancy, Appetite and Affections; to wit, the created Soul of Man: He says, God
is the Life of our Life, and Soul of our Soul; he proceeds very regularly to
tell, That in this Soul of Man, or in the Spirit or Mind of it, as the highest
Power, when it is regenerated and resigned, lives the great King manifested;
here he dwells as in Mount Sion, here he delights to be as in his Temple. And
in this Soul of Man, unenlightened and unrenewed, Christ lies hid and is as one
dead [note, he does not say dead, as the Quakers say, but is as one dead] and
unsavory unto the Soul, and so the Soul is in Darkness, Weakness, Sinfulness,
Sorrow, Fear, Bondage.

Thus we see Magnus Byne does so clearly state the Subject of the Controversy
betwixt him and the Quakers his Opponents, which was the Soul of Man, the
created reasonable Soul, that is neither God nor Christ, though he owneth that
God and Christ are in the Souls of Men, both regenerate and unregenerate, but
after different Manners, that he leaves no room for any of the least Capacity
of Understanding to mistake the true Subject of the Controversy; and therefore
George Fox, whom Joseph Wyeth magnifieth as the APOSTLE in this Age, could not
be such a Sot as not to understand the true Subject of the Dispute, which was
the Soul of Man, the reasonable Soul, that which thinks, wills, loves, which
dies not when the Body dies, and which again and again he calls a Creature,
and the created Soul, distinguishes it from Christ in the Soul, which he
says, is the Life of our Life, and Soul of our Soul. [The same Expression used
by George Whitehead, in his Truth and Innocence.] Yet notwithstanding all this
clear stating the Subject of the Dispute, which was the Soul of Man [and not
that divine Principle in the Soul.] George Fox does make a great Difference
with him, and sets himself in great Opposition to him, and will needs have it,
That the Soul [to wit, the Soul of Man, which was the only Subject of the
Dispute] is without Beginning, coming from God, returning to God again. Also he
opposes Magnus Byne's Saying, There is a kind of Infiniteness in the Soul [
viz. with Respect to the Largeness of its Desires, which the whole World cannot
satisfy, as he explained himself;] but it is not Infiniteness it self, which
George Fox wrongly quotes by adding the Word IN, making him say, It is not
Infiniteness IN it self, which mars the Sense: But George Fox, in Opposition to
M. B. will have the Soul of Man [which was the Subject of the Dispute] to be
Infiniteness it self without Beginning.

Note, Here a Quaker, Daniel Philips objected, That Disputants might differ
about the Subject of the Dispute, so as the Opponent might mean one thing, and
the Respondent another: But I answered, They might so, when the Matter is
intricate and obscure by Ambiguities of Words; but it could not be so here, the
Subject of the Dispute being so clearly proposed, that none but a Sot or Cheat
could or would mistake the Subject, which the Quakers will not allow G. F. to
be, having so great an Esteem of his Wisdom, as the Apostle in this Age.

And the like is to be said of all the Disputes betwixt George Fox and his
other Opponents about the Soul, which were only about the Soul of Man, and not
at all about God or Christ in the Soul, for they all did contend there was a
real Distinction betwixt the Soul and God or Christ who was in it: But George
Fox would allow none, but still contended, That the Soul, concerning which they
and he disputed, was a Part of God without Beginning, etc. And in his Great
Mystery, page 91. he blames Magnus Byne for calling the Soul a Creature, and
says, he is in Babylon and Confusion. And in his Dispute with the five
Ministers of New Castle, Great Mystery, page 227, 228. he says, The Soul,
whereof Christ is the Bishop, is divine and immortal; also he most grossly
wrongs the five Ministers of New Castle, and charges them with holding it to be
their own Principle; Great Mystery, page 227. That the Soul is a Part of the
divine Essence.

And in his Great Mystery, page 29. he says to them, And so you five have
judged your selves to be Blasphemers, who said, The Soul was Part of the divine
Essence, and yet it is Blasphemy to say so. This he most unjustly charge in
them, quoting their Book, called, A Discovery of that Generation of Men called
Quakers; but in that very Book, which was produced and the Words quoted, as
they are in that Book, page 5. the five Ministers deliver it, not as any
Position of theirs, but as one of the Quakers Positions [having this Title on
the Top, Quakers Positions] being the third in Number, and in all being
seventeen] That the Soul is a Part of the divine Essence. What Excuse can
George Whitehead, or any of his Brethren find for this palpable Injustice in
George Fox? Could he be so sottish as not to distinguish betwixt the five
Ministers Positions, and what they call the Quakers Positions, and which they
expressly blame and disown, and give their Arguments against? And if he was not
so ignoratly sottish in the Case, what can it be construed but a wilful Lie
thus for him to charge them?

And for a further Confirmation that George Fox did hold, That that very Soul
of Man [which George Whitehead calls the reasonable and rational Soul, Truth
and Innocence, page 7, 8, 9. and which George Whitehead confesses has
sinned] does not sin, and is not at any time a sinful Soul; consequently is,
according to him, a Part of God; I bring a Quotation out of his Great Mystery,
page 337. George Fox quotes his Opponent saying, The Soul of Man is a
reasonable sinful Substance: To this George Fox answers, How can that which is
sinful be reasonable? And if that which is unsinful be reasonable, and sinful
be reasonable both, then they are one in Unity. The Lord will take the Soul for
an Offering for Sin, Isa. 5. 3. See how thou and the Prophet agrees here. But
what is that Soul that the wicked is not able to kill? Is it not that which God
has in his Hand? And this is a Lie to say, That which is reasonable is sinful.

Note how grossly he perverts that Place in Isa. 53. 10. When thou shall make
his Soul an Offering for Sin: This is understood of the Soul of the Man Christ
who suffered without us, and not of any Soul within us, which yet is George
Fox's Notion; and this very Soul in Men, this reasonable Soul, George Fox will
have it to be the Odering for Sin: And because it is so, therefore he concludes
it is not sinful, not capable of sinning; yet George Whitehead says, The
reasonable Soul is capable of sinning, and has sinned in Men (though it never
sinned in Christ.) See how these two Apostles do now contradict one anoother,
and yet none of them fallible! Note, again, how George Fox thought he put a
very puzzling Query to his Opponent to convince him, that the reasonable Soul
in Men did not sin; What is that Soul that the wicked cannot kill? Surely by
this Query George Fox meant the Soul that the wicked cannot kill, was not the
Soul that could sin, wherein he shows his great Ignorance; for though the
wicked cannot kill the sinful Souls of Men, yet as Christ said in the following
Words, He is to be feared, to wit, God, that can cast both Soul and Body into
Hell Fire: Now what Soul can be cast into Hell Fire, but the Soul that sins?
But lastly, By George Fox's Argument, That if the sinful Soul be reasonable,
and the unsinful Soul be reasonable also, then they are one in Unity, which he
would have to be a great Absurdity; thus he has plainly disclosed the Mystery
of his profound Doctrine, that is a Branch of Ranterism, viz. that there are
but two Principles, one good in Man, that never sins or does evil, the other
bad, that sins, and never does good; the one is God, or a Part of God, the
other the Devil, or a Part of the Devil: And his denying that one and the same
Soul does sin at one Time, and does well at another Time, clearly proves, that
according to him, there is not any Soul of Man, but what is either a Part of
God, or of the Devil: And he discovers his great Ignorance, in denying that
the reasonable Soul is sinful, the contrary whereof is true, that no Soul but a
reasonable Soul, is or can be sinful: for what is it that makes the Beasts
incapable of sinning, but that they are not reasonable?

And whereas his Opponent had very well argued, that the evil Spirits are both
sinful and reasonable; George Fox answers, This is a Lie, for reasonable is
not sinful, unreasonable is sinful; quoting 2 Thessalonians. 3. 2. And that we may be
delivered from unreasonable and wicked Men, for all Men have not Faith. But
this does nothing favor his Manichean Notion; he was so ignorant as not to
distinguish betwixt the Faculty of Reason, and the Act of Reason, when Men that
are reasonable, and have reasonable Souls, act contrary to Reason; they are
said to be unreasonable, to wit, in Act; but still, the Soul that sins is
reasonable, with respect to the rational Faculty, nor could evil Spirits sin,
if they were not reasonable, i. e. endued with rational Faculties? Besides, the
Greek Word, in 2 Thessalonians. 3. 2. is not (...) but (...) and is not so properly
translated Unreasonable, but (as it is on the Margin) Absurd, i. e. such, who,
though they have Reason, yet will not give place to Reason, but act contrary to
it; and George Fox, had he had the right Use of his Reason, might have seen,
that it is no more an Argument against the Soul of Man being reasonable, that
it acts unreasonably, than it is an Argument that the Soul is not enlightened
by the Light within, because it often acts contrary to the Dictates of it.

Again, for a further Confirmation of George Fox's Doctrine, That the Soul that
sins, is not the Soul that is to be saved; and that therefore, the Soul that
is saved, or is to be saved, is only Christ, the Seed within Men: Hear what
George Fox says, Great Mystery, page 324. he quotes his Opponent saying, That
the Seed, to whom the Promise of Salvation is made, is or has been Sinners.
This he opposes saying, The Promise of God is to the Seed, which has been
laden as a Cart with Shaves by the Sinner, which Seed is the Hope Christ, that
purifies even as God is pure: So this Promise is not to Seeds, as many, but to
one, the Seed which is Christ.

Note In the same Paragraph he says, So here is the Creature come to know its
Liberty amongst the Sons of God, and the Seed Christ, never sinned in the Male
nor in the Female.

Note what he means by the Creature that comes to know its Liberty, which has
not sinned, and has the Promise of Salvation, seems not intelligible, for he
denies that the Seed is a Creature, and yet it is that to which the Promise of
Salvation is, to wit, the Seed Christ in the Male and in the Female that never
sinned; but he grossly perverts that Place in Gal. 3. 16. for by the Seed
Christ, is there meant Christ as he came outwardly according to the Flesh out
of Abraham's Loins, to whom the Promise was, that in him all Nations of the
Earth should be blessed, but this was not to a Seed within that needed
Salvation.

Like to this is what he says in Great Mystery, p. 15. having quoted his
Opponent saying, There is nothing in Man to be spoken to but Man: To this he
thus opposes, How then Ministered the Apostle to the Spirit, and Christ spoke
to the Spirits in Prison, and Timothy was to stir up the Gift that was in him,
and the Spirit of the Father speaks within them, and the Light it shines in the
Heart? Here the Scriptures are for Correction of thee, and Reproof of thee, who
said, there is nothing to speak to in Man but Man.

Again, In Great Mystery, p. 187, he quotes his Opponent saying, It would be
good News, if the Quakers should go and preach to the Spirits in Hell. To this
he answers, The Quakers have been among the Prisoners that be in Hell, and
ministered to that, and the CORRUPTIONS shall go into the Fire that has no End,
and they that do wickedly and forget God, shall go into Hell, and Death and
Hell shall go into the Lake of Fire; and there is more in these Words yet than
thou can receive, for God is the Salvation of all Men, but specially them
that believe.

Note, thus we see he is very charitable, and the Quakers Ministers are very
charitable, that they have been among the Prisoners in Hell, and preached to
that. But how is this great Charity consistent with his saying, That that which
sins is not saved, unless he mean that Sin is not saved, though the Creature
is?

The very same Doctrine, concerning the Soul, I find asserted by Edward
Borough in his Works, Coll. page 27. Thou say, one of us told thee, That
that which sinned could not be saved. I answer (says Edward Borough) It is
out of the Reach of the Wisdom, and thy vulturous Eye shall never see it, I
say, as the Scripture says, The Soul that sins must die, and every Man must
die for his own Iniquity: If thou have an Ear, thou may hear.

Thus we see the Agreement of these two great Teachers of the Quakers, about
the Souls that sin, that they shall not be saved, nor can be saved. But how
grossly does Edward Borough pervert those Scriptures to prove his most corrupt
Doctrine, that is plain Ranterism? Because the Scripture says, The Soul that
sins must die; does it therefore follow, That it cannot afterward be saved,
both from Death, and Sin, that is the Cause of it? Indeed Sin has brought a
Spiritual Death upon the Souls of Men: But what then? Must they therefore none
of them that have sinned be saved? Had not the Ephesians been great Sinners,
yea, and they were dead in their Sins and Trespasses, yet these very same Men
having the same Souls, were quickened and made alive by Christ, Ephesians. 2. 3.
And you has he quickened who were dead in Trespasses and Sins?

And George Whitehead himself is guilty of the same absurd Doctrine with G. F.
and Edward Borough, who in his He-goats Horn, page 11, 12. denies that Christ
has our Nature in Heaven, and that it is one and the same Nature in Men, by
which the Gentiles sinned, and by which they did the things contained in the
Law: And in his Voice of Wisdom, page 20. he holds, That Christ is both the
Efficient and Subject of the good Works that are wrought in Men, which is in
effect to say, it is not Men, or the Souls of Men that repent, believe, obey
God, but Christ in them, or else he must say, The Soul that believes, repents,
obeys, is Christ; and though in his later Books he seems to deny this, yet will
retract nothing, for that would reflect on his Infallibility: But his common
Salve for this Sore is, That he may see cause otherwise to word the Matter, and
yet mean the same thing, as he has of late expressed in some of his Books.

Note, Whereas in the Close of the third Meeting, a Letter of John Audland (a
Preacher among the Quakers) to George Fox, was read, wherein is contained gross
Idolatry, which confirms, in matter of Fact, what George Fox said of himself,
That he was equal to God, and that he was Christ; and upon this Notion John
Audland addressed himself to George Fox, as to God and Christ, in his said
Letter, the which, for its Affinity with the Doctrine of George Fox, discovered
in the first and second Part of this Narrative, I think fit here to insert.

John Audland's Blasphemous Letter to George Fox, Spelt and Pointed according
to the Original.
Dear and presious one in whom my life is bound up and my strenth in thee
stands, by thy breathings I am nurished and refreshed: and by thee my strenth
is renewed: blessed art thou for Ever more: and blessed are all they that Enjoy
thee: life and strenth comes from thee holy one: and thou art the blessed of
the lord for Ever more, dear dear reach unto me, that I may be strenthened, to
stand in the mighty power and dread of the lord, for the sarvisse is very
great, my travel and burden was never, so as now since I saw thee: but daily
do I find thy Presence with me, which does exceedingly Preserve me; for I
cannot reane but in thy presence and power: pray for me that I may stand in thy
dread for Ever more: dear my dear brother John Came has been Exceeding sick
and he is very weak I can say little of his Recovery as yet his wife is with
him she is dear and preciously keept; their dear love is to thee, chreach
through all in thy mighty power to him this bearer can declare to thee of the
work this way: Jo: Willkinson and Jo: Storey is hear, their love is dearly to
thee: dear heart there is one thing that lies upon me: I shall lay it before
thee: as tuching my coming into Wiltshire: I was there at Justice Stoks house:
and his famaley is all pretty loveing and convinced: and he is a sober wise man
and there is honesty in him which will stand: and there is a pretey people that
way: it has laid exceeddingly upon me these 3 days of thy being at that
place: I know not such another place in all the Counterey: for thee: dear: I
was much wounded to know that thou was in such a rude place and suffers so
amongst them: and this was I moved to lay before thee: and great is my disere
that it may be so: the Place is about 20 miles from brestol in wiltshire one
mile from chipenam a markete town Justice: stoks house, Jo: Came told me that
the Justice he was with was a very Loving and pretty, man: this bearer was there
he can declare to thee more: but oh that thou wear but at that place I
mention: it is free and suitable for friends coming to thee: it lies much upon
me: and if thou find movings strike over thither I shall say no more of it:
the work is great hear away pray for us all that in thy Power we may abide
for Evermore: I am thine begoten and nurished by thee and in thy Power am I
preserved glory unto thee holy one for Ever:

John Audland.


The Letter being read, the Auditory was struck with Admiration, and generally
signified their great Abhorrency of the Blasphemy and Idolatry contained in it
to G. Fox: I told them, the Quakers had two Excuses as to this Letter, one was,
that it was feigned; because, as it was once printed, it had a wrong Date, viz.
1665. which was some Years after John Audland was dead. But that was the Fault
or Mistake of the Publisher of that Letter; that proves not the Letter to be
feigned, for the original Manuscript was read in the Meeting, that had no date,
and was handed about to several Ministers and others, together with another
Letter of the same John Audland, in Manuscript, to another Person, who did
unanimously judge it was the same hand that writ both the Letters. Their next
Excuse is, That these Words in John Audland's Letter, were not intended to G.
Fox, but to Christ, or the Life in G. Fox: And the like Excuse G. F. made in a
Letter writ with his own Hand [which was produced and read in the Meeting, and
is ready to be produced before any that shall call for it] for a Woman Quaker,
that in a Quakers Meeting, said to George Fox, Thou art the King of Israel:
That she spoke her Words to Christ, viz. in G. Fox: But I told, This did not
hinder it to be Idolatry, nor was any just Excuse in the Case, for it was the
same Excuse that the Heathens gave for their worshipping Idols, because it was
not the Idol, but the divine Power that was in it, which they worshipped. The
like Excuse gave those Quakers that sung Hosanna to James Nailer, at his
Procession into Bristol, and the same Excuse he made for them.

PART. III.
Containing the Proofs on the 7th Head, concerning Justification, and on the
other following Heads, contained in the Printed Advertisement, Read at
Turner's-Hall the 23d of January, 1699.

Concerning Justification by the Blood, Merits, and Righteousness of Christ.
I Produced a Printed Paper in the Meeting, called, A few Positions of the
sincere Belief and Christian Doctrine of the People called Quakers, Signed by
G. Whitehead; to which is adjoined another printed Paper, Signed by Thirty two
Quakers, which, they say, was given to the Members of Parliament in the Year
1693: In which Paper, I noted diverse gross Fallacies, and gross Equivocations;
such as follow.

In the 4th Article of that Paper signed by G. W. I quoted these words. The
Divinity and Humanity, i. e. Manhood, of Christ Jesus, that as he is true God,
and he is most glorious Man, our Mediator and Advocate, we livingly believe,
and have often sincerely confessed in our Public Testimonies and Writings. On
this I noted, That whatever seeming Confessions they have given in their
public Testimonies to this and other Doctrines, yet seeing they have
contradicted them most evidently in their printed Books, and will not allow
that they are changed in any one of their Principles, they do Fallaciously, and
put a Cheat upon the Members of Parliament, and the whole Nation. A Quaker
replied, Do thou think that the Members of Parliament are not more Wise than
to suffer themselves to be cheated by the Quakers? I answered, It is one thing
for the Quakers to put a Cheat upon them; it is another thing for them to be
cheated by them; a Cheat may be put on Men, and yet they not receive it. I hope
they are so wise, as not to be deceived by them. Some of the Quakers objecting,
That this tended to Persecution, so to represent them; I answered, it tended to
no Persecution, being to rescue such from those Errors, who were corrupted by
them, and prevent their further spreading, and would they take my advice, I
would show them a way to secure the Toleration unto them; and that is, by a
free and plain Retractation of their gross Errors. And for an evidence of their
fallacious way of Speaking and Writing, besides what was quoted and proved at
the former Meeting, to prove them grossly Erroneous, concerning Christ, his
Humanity, and Incarnation, his Soul, Body, Flesh and Blood; I brought a
Quotation out of that, called, A Testimony for the true Christ, printed 1668,
and given forth (as in the Title Page) from some of them called Quakers. In
page 4. As he speaks of Humane, with relation to Nature and Body, it has
relation to the Earth, or Humus, the Ground, of which Man was made, which the
first Man is of, not the second (though he was really Man too,) but Humane or
Humanity in the other sense, with relation to Gentleness, Mercifulness, and the
like, this we know, was, and is, in the Image of God, in which Man was made;
and his Gentleness, Kindness, Mercifulness, etc. is manifested in Christ, who
is the Image of the invisible God, and Firstborn of every Creature; which
Image is not earthly, for that must be put off, but heavenly, and so to be put
on by all that come to know the Glory of the terrestrial in its place, and the
true and real Humanity, as opposed to that Cruelty, Envy and Inhumanity, which
is got up in Man since the Fall; so that Humanity and the Unreasonableness of
Beasts are two things.

Note, Thus we see how they own Christ's Humanity, not in the sense of
Scripture, and of all sound Christians, viz. That the Word did take the real
Nature of Man, consisting of Soul and Body, into a Personal Union with himself,
his Divinity and Humanity being two Natures distinguished in him, but not
divided; and that he took a Body of Flesh and Blood, the same in Nature with
ours, even our earthly Nature, like to us in all things, but without Sin; but
this they plainly deny, That Christ had Humanity, as it signifies Earthly; but
they tell in what sense they mean his Humanity, viz. as it signifies
Gentleness, Mercifulness, as opposed to Cruelty, Envy, and the unreasonableness
of Beasts; in which sense they may affirm all this of Christ's Divinity and
Godhead, That his Godhead is Humane, i. e. Gentle, Merciful, Kind, and yet
believe not one tittle of Christ's Humanity as the Scripture holds it forth;
that is, that he was really made of a Woman, and had his Flesh of her
Substance; but this they not only here deny, but G. F. expressly denies, That
Christ's Body was Earthly or of the Earth, G. M. p. 322.

He quotes his Opponent saying, That Christ had and has a Carnal Body, -- A
Carnal and Humane Body united to his Divinity. In opposition to which he says,
And Carnal Humane is from the Ground, Humane Earthly, the first Adam's Body,
and Christ was not from the Ground, let all People read what thou say; but
he was from Heaven, his Flesh came down from above, his Flesh which was the
Meat, his Flesh came down from Heaven.

Again, He quotes his Opponent saying, That the Flesh of Christ is not in them;
he answers, The Saints eat his Flesh, and they that eat his Flesh, has it
within them.

Again, He quotes his Opponent, That there is as much difference between a Body
and a Spirit, as there is between Light and Darkness; he Answers, Christ's Body
is Spiritual, and that which is Spiritual does not differ from the Spirit; and
so there is a spiritual Body, and there is a natural Body; and there is a
spiritual Man, and there is a natural Man, and each has their Body.

Note, He plainly here denies a difference or distinction between Christ's Body
of Flesh and his Spirit, for he says, The Saints eat his Flesh, and they that
eat his Flesh, has it in them. Now what Flesh can they have of Christ in them,
but what is merely Spirit? whereas his Opponent (and all Christians, when they
speak of Christ's Flesh, they) meant a real Body, as real as the Body of any
other Man. And whereas G. F. says Christ's Flesh was not from the Ground or
Earth, the Scripture says no such thing, but the contrary, that he did partake
of the same Flesh and Blood with the Children, wherefore he is not ashamed to
call them Brethren Heb. 2. 11, 14.
G. F. does both Ignorantly and Fallaciously play and quible about the Word
Carnal, against his Opponent, who said Christ had a Carnal Body; he Answers,
Carnal, indeed, is Death, says the Scripture; but here he belyes the
Scripture; it says not, the Carnal Body is Death, but to be Carnally-minded is
Death. Could G. F. be so sottish, as not to distinguish between a Carnal Body,
and a Carnal Mind? His Opponents who said, Christ had a Carnal Body united to
the Divinity, they meant not Carnal, as it signifies Vicious or Corrupted, but
as it signifies Material, i. e. a real Body, as real a Bodily Substance, as any
other Man has; and though Christ's Body now in Heaven is a Spiritual Body, yet
it is a Body still, and the same Body in Substance it was on Earth. And when it
was on Earth, it was both a Material Body, and yet, in a sense, a Spiritual, i.
e. a pure, immaculate Body, without all stain of Sin, a most holy Body; and, in
the like sense, it might be said, even when on Earth, it was a heavenly Body,
to wit, as opposed to sinful, corrupt, and tainted with Sin; and not only so,
but in respect of its miraculous Conception, by the Holy Ghost, and the holy
and heavenly Virtues it was endued with above the Body of Adam, in Innocence:
And thus the comparison is made betwixt the First Adam, and the Second; the
first Man, even as he was in Innocence, is of the Earth, Earthly; his Body was
Created or Made by God Almighty, but was neither so wonderfully framed, nor
endued with such excellent Virtues as our Lord's Body was: Though the Substance
of both was the same in Specie or Kind, yet the difference was great, both in
the manner of Production, and the Virtues and Properties wherewith Christ's
Body was endued above Adam's Body, and chiefly in respect of the Hypostatical
and Personal Union, betwixt Christ's Body or Flesh, and the Eternal Word,
Eternally Begotten of the Father. It was an old Heresy of the Manicheans, That
Christ's Body that was Born of the Virgin, had no part of her Body, but did
penetrate her Body, as the Beams of the Sun penetrate Crystal, and did
entirely come from Heaven; which Heresy was revived by Meno, a Dutchman, but
is effectually and solidly refuted by Calvin, in his Institutions, lib. 2. c.
13. And as to the Quakers arguing from 1 Cor. 15, 47. The first man of the
earth, earthly, the second Man, the Lord, from heaven, that therefore his Body
had not an earthly Substance, which is the same Argument Manicheus used of old;
Calvin answers solidly thus, Manicheus aereum fabricatur Corpus, quia vocetur
Christus secundus Adam de Coelo Coelestis; at neque illic essentiam corporis
Coelestem inducit Apostolus sed vim spiritualem quaed Christo diffusa nos
vivificat, Sect. 2. i.e. Manicheus makes him ( viz. Christ) to have a Body of
Air, because he is called the Second Adam, from heaven, heavenly: But neither
does the Apostle there infer, that the Essence of his Body is heavenly, but
that there is a spiritual Virtue, which, being diffused from Christ, does
quicken us.

Again, Whereas G. W. says, Art. 7. of that Paper, Our really Believing and
Confessing the Lord Jesus Christ his Passion, Sufferings, Death, Atonement, and
Reconciliation made for us, and his Resurrection, Ascension, and Glorification
(as without us) according to Scripture cannot be to allegorize these away, as
if only transacted within us, as we have been unduly accused, for they were
really done, and transacted without us, by our Blessed Lord Jesus Christ, though
our true knowledge of the Power and Effect of his Resurrection, and Fellowship
of his Sufferings, and our being conformable to his Death, must be experienced
within us, if ever we live and reign with him. And in their Paper annexed, Art.
2. they say, we sincerely Believe and Confess, that Jesus of Nazareth, who was
Born of the Virgin Mary, is the true Messiah, the very Christ, the Son of the
Living God, to whom all his Prophets gave Witness. And we do highly value his
Death, Sufferings, Works, Offices, and Merits, for the Redemption and Salvation
of Mankind, together with his Laws, Doctrine and Ministry.

Note, That all this seemingly fair Confession, cannot but be judged extremely
Fallacious, seeing they will not Retract any of their former assertions
expressly contradictory to the same, as is in great part already proved, out of
the above-given Quotations. How do they sincerely Confess, that Jesus of
Nazareth, who was Born of the Virgin Mary, was the very Christ, the Son of the
Living God, seeing they profess to be of one Faith with W. P. who says, That
that Outward Person that Suffered [at Jerusalem] was properly the Son of God,
we utterly deny, as above-quoted? And to be of E. B.'s Faith, who denies that
Christ is in Heaven in our Nature? And of G. F.'s Faith, who denies, That
Christ's Body was from the Earth? But yet more fully to detect their Fallacies.

Whereas G. W. says, Their really Believing and Confessing Christ's Passion,
Sufferings, Death, Atonement, and Reconciliation, made for us, etc. cannot be
to allegorize these away, as if only tranfacted within us, as we have been
unduly accused. To detect his Fallacy here, Note, I know none that accuse them,
for holding that Christ's Birth and Death was only transacted within them; they
grant that a Man called Jesus of Nazareth, was outwardly Born and Suffered
Death; but some of the chief of them have said, That that Man was not properly
the Christ, nor Son of God, but was by the metonymy of the thing Containing for
the thing Contained so called; so W. P. as above-quoted. Next they make his
being outwardly Slain, and his Blood outwardly Shed, and what was outwardly
transacted by him, both Actively and Passively, a Figure of what he was to do
and suffer in Men, of his inward Crucifying, his Blood inwardly Shed, his
Burial, Resurrection, and Ascension within them. These outward transactions,
says W. P. are so many facile representations of what was to be accomplished
in Men, as above-quoted, and G. W. beside the Proofs already given out of his
Books to that Effect, he has lately affirmed in his Antidote p. 39.
Antidote against the Venom of the Snake, Printed in the Year 1697, That that
Blood of his [viz. Christ's outward Blood] as well as the Water that came out
of his Side with it, had an ALLEGORICAL and MYSTERIOUS SIGNIFICATION, as well
as an Outward and Literal, even of the Spiritual Blood and Water of Life, which
Christ, our High Priest, Sprinkleth, and really Washes our Hearts and
Consciences withal, which, we hope, no sensible Soul will say, is an Outward or
Literal Sprinkling or Washing, but an Inward and Spiritual.

Note, When we charge G. W. and his Brethren with Allegorizing away Christ's
Birth, Passion, Death, Burial, Resurrection, Blood, Atonement, and
Reconciliation made for us, etc. the sense is obvious, which is this, That though
they grant, that a Man called Christ was outwardly Born, Dyed, had his Blood
shed, etc. yet all this was an Allegory, and had an Allegorical Signification
of Christ truly and really (without an Allegory) Born within them, Crucified
and Dead within them, his Blood shed within them, Buried, Risen, Ascended
within them; Atonement, Reconciliation made within them. Now, that this is so,
we have G. W.'s plain Confession, in the Words just now quoted. So that,
according to him, Christ's Sufferings without, his Blood shed without, is the
Allegory, or Allegorical Signification of Christ's Sufferings within, of his
Blood shed within, the Atonement made within, as Hagar and Sarah, who were real
Women, yet as Paul has declared, they are an Allegory of the Two Covenants,
and Types or Figures of them, and as far short of the things signified by them,
as the Type is short of the Substance, or thing signified; for that is the true
definition of an Allegory, Where one thing is expressed, and another thing is
understood. Now if Christ's Birth, Sufferings, Blood, etc. without Men, be an
Allegory, or Allegorical Signification of Christ's Birth, Sufferings, Blood
shed and sprinkled within Men; that Within must be the Reality, or Excellent
thing signified, or typified by the outward; but both cannot be the Allegory,
as to say, that as Christ's Blood without us is the Allegory of his Blood
within, so his Blood within is the Allegory of Christ's Blood without; this is
as great Nonsense, as who would say, as Hagar and Sarah were an Allegory of the
Two Covenants, so the Two Covenants are an Allegory of Hagar and Sarah. And
thus G. W. and his Brethren stand justly charged with Allegorizing away
Christ's outward Birth, Sufferings, Blood, Atonement, by making them the
Allegory of his Birth, Sufferings, Blood, Atonement, made within Men, though they
deny not Christ's Birth, Death, Blood without, simply as Historically related;
yet seeing they deny the Merit and Efficacy of his Death and Blood without, and
of what he did and suffered without us, they are justly charged to Allegorize
it away, that is, to make no other account of it, than of the History of Hagar
and Sarah, and other Types, Symbols and Allegories of the Old Testament.

Besides, If Men will be wilful denyers of the Historical Truth of Christ's
outward Birth, Death, Burial, Resurrection, Ascension, according to G. W.'s and
his Brethren's way and method of expounding Scripture, we have no way to
convince them of their Error.

If we bring Isaiah 9. 6. to prove that Isaiah Prophesied of Christ's Birth,
and that the Child that should be Born, should be both God and Man, and his
Mother should be a Virgin, according to Isaiah 7. 14. And if we bring Isaiah
53. to prove that Christ should be wounded for our Sins, be killed, be buried,
and make his grave with the wicked; or, That Christ should suffer without the
Camp; they may Answer, All these, and the like places, are to be meant not of
any Birth, Death or Burial of a Christ without us, but of Christ Born, Slain,
and Buried in Men; and, for their Proof, vouch G. W.'s Authority and his
Brethren's to confirm it, who, as above-quoted, have expounded these places of
Christ Born, Slain, Buried, within Men. But if G. W. will say, these and other
the like places have two meanings, one Outward and Literal, and the other
Inward and Spiritual; to this I say, First, G. W. in his Voice of Wisdom, page
21. has severely blamed his Opponent T. D. for giving two meanings to one
place. I agree to the most Judicious and Orthodox Expositors of Scripture, that
the Scriptures have but one sense or meaning, properly and strictly speaking,
viz. That the thing principally and properly intended, is but one, and what
other senses or meanings may be put upon some places of Scripture, besides
that, is rather an Allusion or Allegory, than the real meaning, which, so far
as we have Scripture warrant, is allowed, as Paul's calling Hagar and Sarah an
Allegory, but otherwise is dangerous, and in the present case is most
Heretical, as in G. W.'s and his Brethrens making Christ's Birth, Sufferings,
Death, Burial without Men the Allegory, and his Birth, Sufferings, Death,
Burial, within, the Reality and Substance, or thing principally intended in
these places of Scripture.

That the Spirit of God, with his sanctifying Gifts and Graces, is called Water
of Life, and Living Waters, whereby God does really Purify and Cleanse the
Hearts and Consciences of the Faithful; and that this Work of Sanctification is
Inward and Spiritual in them, is no part of the Dispute or Controversy; for
this is not only granted, but earnestly taught and pleaded for against
Pelagians and others who deny it, or at least the necessity of such an inward
and spiritual Operation. Therefore G. W. in this, as in most of his late
Defenses, does purposely mistake the true Case, to hide his vile Heresy, as if
the debate betwixt him and his Opponents, were only about the inward Operations
of the Spirit of God, for the cleansing and sanctifying the Hearts of the
Faithful; but this is his ordinary Fallacy. The true state of the Question then
is this, Whether there is any Inward Blood or Water that Christ Crucified in
Men lets out, or is pressed out of him, crucified within them, that is the
Blood of Atonement, is the Price and Ransom, and Meritorious Cause of the
Remission of our Sins; is the satisfactory and propitiatory Offering for Sin,
either in whole or in part? Also, whether any such supposed Blood or Water or
Spirit, thus flowing from Christ, as Crucified and Wounded within Men, is the
meritorious and procuring Cause either of Men's Justification before God, or of
the saving and sanctifying Graces of the Holy Spirit; and whether the Gift of
the Holy Spirit, given to Believers, with the sanctifying Graces thereof,
proceeds from Christ Crucified within, having made the Atonement and
Satisfaction by his Blood shed within, Risen and Ascended within, Sitting at
the Right Hand of God within Men, making Intercession for them; or from Christ,
as he was crucified without us, having made the Atonement and Satisfaction
without us, by his Blood shed without us, Risen and Ascended and sat down at
the Right Hand of God without us, and there Interceding for us. This is the
true state of the Controversy; all true Christians say, that all this is from
Christ without us; as outwardly Born, Crucified, Risen, Ascended, from him thus
only considered as without us; all Believers have the free gift of the
Remission of Sins, free Justification freely by God's Grace [being the real
effect of Christ's Purchase, and of the Merit of his Precious Blood] and also
the Holy Spirit, with the sanctifying Gifts and Graces thereof, inwardly to
renew and sanctify them. So that the Work of Christ or of the Spirit in
Believers, is not at all, either in whole or in part, to suffer for our Sins,
or to procure by way of Merit, the pardon of our Sins, and our Peace and
Reconcliation with God, for that is wholly and only done by Christ without us;
but to work the sincere Faith of all that he has done and suffered for us
without us, and give us the Spiritual Knowledge and Comfort of it, in our
Hearts and Souls.

The Plaster and healing Medicine of Christ's Body and Blood was prepared for
us, when he gave his Precious Body to be broken for us, and his Blood to be
shed for us; this was once done, and is no more to be dove again; Christ having
once dyed, dies no more; by the one Offering of himself once only offered
without us [his Soul, Body, and Blood] he has entirely and completely prepared
the wholesome Medicine and Food of Life for us: But now the work of Christ, and
his Spirit in us, is to apply it effectually to us [that is] to enable us
effectually to apply it to our selves for our Eternal Health and Salvation; to
give us a Spiritual discovery and sight of that living Food, a Hunger and
Appetite after it, and to teach us spiritually by Faith to receive it, and feed
upon it, to eat his Flesh, and drink his Blood, not by the bodily Mouth, but by
the Mouth of the Soul, which is Faith, a true and living Faith wrought in us by
the powerful Operation of Christ in us, or his Spirit. And though the Blood of
Christ that both justifies and sanctifies is without us, yet the application
by Faith is within, both for our Justification and Sanctification.

Note. again, That as G. W. does fallaciously state the Question, concerning
Men's being Cleansed, i. e. Justified and Sanctified by the Blood of Christ, as
is above-shewed, so he argues most fallaciously for his false Notion of a
Blood of Christ within Men, to be the Atonement, by the merit whereof they are
Cleansed from Sin; as because the Operation of the Spirit of God is within Men,
whereby he applies to them the Merit, Virtue and Efficacy of Christ's Blood,
(which application, by a Metaphorical Speech is called in Scripture, A
sprinkling the Conscience,) that therefore the Blood of Christ is Inward; which
is the like Sophistical and Nonsensical Argument with that of G. F. The Saints
eat the Flesh of Christ, therefore they have it in them. Thus they both argue
from a Metaphorical Eating and Sprinkling or Cleansing to a Literal or
Material; as because what Men eat of Material Food, they receive it into them;
so because they eat Christ's Flesh, they have it in them; and because the Blood
of Christ Sprinkles the Hearts and Consciences of the Faithful, therefore that
Blood is in them, not considering the application here, both with respect to
Eating and Sprinkling, is not Material but Spiritual, by Faith, as Christ has
plainly explained it, that to eat Christ is to believe in him; to eat his Flesh
and drink his Blood, is sincerely to believe with the Heart, that Christ gave
his Body of Flesh to be broken for us, and his Blood to be shed for us, for the
Remission of our Sins, and both for our Justification and Sanctification, and
eternal Salvation. Joh. 6. 35. He that comes to me shall never hunger, he that
believes in me shall never thirst; and verse 40. This is the will of him that
sent me, that every one which sees the Son, and believes on him, may have
everlasting life, and I will raise him up at the last day.

Again, Whereas they say in that Printed Paper above-quoted, signed by G. W.
and Thirty more, We do highly value his Death, Sufferings, Works, Offices and
Merits for the Redemption and Salvation of Mankind. That all this is extremely
Fallacious does largely appear from what is abovequoted: Do they highly value
his Death and Sufferings, when some among them have Printed, as above-quoted,
That when they come to the Operation of the Spirit or Light Within them, they
will cease remembering Christ's Death at Jerusalem. Do they value Christ's
Sufferings and Death, etc. who deny it to be the Gospel that Christ empowered
the Apostles to Preach; for which hear what they say in their Book
above-quoted, called, A Testimony for the true Christ, etc. p. 16. Their
Opponent they quote saying, [p. 16.] Christ empowered the Apostles to go forth
to Preach the Gospel to the ends of the Earth; which Gospel was his Sufferings,
Death and Resurrection, Baptizing in the Name of the Father, Son, and Holy
Ghost, etc. To this they Answer, The Gospel which they Preached was
Everlasting, it was the Power of God to Salvation, to as many as Believed both
of Jews and Gentiles; But were his Sufferings, Death, etc. Everlasting? Is this
good Doctrine, say they. So that according to them, it is not good Doctrine,
but bad, to Preach Christ's Sufferings, Death, etc. to be the Gospel either in
whole or in part; for their reason is of equal force against that Doctrine
either in whole or in part, The Gospel is Everlasting, but Christ's Death and
Sufferings, etc. [Note the etc. which both the Opponent and they add] is not
Everlasting, for that they say was Temporal, therefore Christ's Death and
Sufferings is not the Gospel; and by this their profound Logic, or rather
beggarly Sophistry, nothing is the Gospel, but that which is Everlasting, i. e.
was from Eternity to Eternity; and thus, according to them, nothing is the
Gospel, but the Light Within, because that is Everlasting; the Power, the
Spirit, the Light is Everlasting, and therefore that only is the Gospel. But
though the Spirit, and Power, and Light, was and is Everlasting, yet it was not
within them from Everlasting, because they were not from Everlasting; and
therefore by their Logic, as the Light or Spirit is in them, and as t^^ Gift
of God to them, it is no more the Gospel, than Christ's Death and Sufferings,
etc. because they had it not within them from Everlasting, if they will
acknowledge themselves to be Creatures, Created and Made by the Great Creator
in Time. But they quibble Sophistically upon the word Everlasting; for though
Christ's Suffering and Death were not Everlasting, yet both the Merit, Virtue
and Efficacy of them, both for procuring Remission of Sin, and the Holy Spirit
with the sanctifying Gifts and Graces thereof, was from the beginning of the
World, and will continue to the end of the World; yea, and to all Eternity; and
the Doctrine of it in some measure was Preached from the beginning, as God
revealed it first to our first Parents, and then successively to others of his
Holy Prophets, and was held forth, both by Prophecy, Promise and Sacrifices to
the Faithful.

Again, They are grossly Fallacious, when they say in that Printed Paper, We do
highly value and esteem his Sufferings, Death, Precious Blood, and whole
Sacrifice for Sinners -- Works, Offices, and Merits for the Redemption and
Salvation of Mankind. But, what do they mean by Christ's Merits? Do they mean
the Merits of what Christ has done for them, without them, suffered without
them, his Righteonsness without them, his Blood shed without them, so as
thereby to be justified? Nay, The following Quotations will sufficiently
evidence the contrary; viz. That not the Righteousness or Merits, or Blood of
Christ shed without us, but the Merits of Christ within them, his Righteousness
wrought in them, his Blood shed within them, the Blood of his Divinity or
Godhead, but not of his Humanity or Humane Blood, by which they are justified;
for further proof of which hear what G. W. says in his Voice of Wisdom, p. 48.
where he blames T. Danson, and charge it on him to be false Doctrine held by
him, That there were two Righteousnesses of Christ, the one without the Saints
to justify them, and the other within the Saints that did sanctify them. And
in p. 26. he charge T. Danson with Ignorance, for his asserting two
Righteousnesses of Christ, [the one without us for Justification, the other
within us for Sanctification.] And in p. 35. He argues against Justification
by a Righteousness of Christ without us, thus, If it be the same Christ that
justifies and Janctifies, then it is but one and the same Righteousness, which
effects both these in and for the Saints.

And in p. 19. he expressly defends that Popish Argument used by S. Fisher, [the
very same Argument is used by Bellarmin, De Justif.] That because evil Works
are meritorious of Condemnation, therefore good Works [wrought by us in the
Spirit] are a meritorious cause of our Justification: But T. Danson does
effectually Answer the Argument, by denying the Consequence; and that it can
have no force unless the good Works we work, even by the help of the Spirit,
Voice of Wisdom, p. 36.
were, in all respects, Perfect and Sinless, and that we had always perfectly
fulfilled the Law from first to last, which no Man ever did but Christ. And he
gives another good reason, why he denies the Consequence, Because the
Righteousness which God works in us is but Finite, as well as other effects;
his sense is obvious, No Righteousness can Merit our Justification before God,
but that which is of an Infinite value; and therefore the Righteousness of a
mere Man, had it been Perfect and Sinless from the first moment of his Life to
his Death, could not be of Merit for the Justification of others; and, indeed,
strictly speaking, not of Merit for his own Justification; he could only have
been justified by his own good Works (assisted to do them by the Spirit) by
fulfilling the terms of the Law or Covenant of Works; but because Christ was
not mere Man, but both God and Man, therefore his Righteousness and Obedience
is of that Infinite Value and Merit, that is sufficient for all that lay hold
on it for Justification by a true and lively Faith. Now to both these good and
solid Reasons G. W. Answers most Ignorantly; First in asserting, That the good
Works which we work by the Spirit, or which the Spirit works in us are Perfect,
and are the fulfilling of the Law, and therefore deserving Justification; but
to this I have answered above, and discovered his Ignorance, [see the First
Part, p. 13.] To his 2d Reason G. W. Answers, The Righteousness which God
effects in us is not Finite, but Infinite, [Voice of Wisdom, p. 36.] for Christ
is God's Righteousness, and Christ is formed in us, Gal. 4. 19. and so that
Righteousness which God works in us by his Spirit, is of the same Kind and
Nature with that which works it, for the Saints are made partakers of the
Divine Nature.

Thus we see, how he magnifies the Righteousness wrought by the Spirit in Men;
not only to be Perfect with a Sinless Perfection, but DEIPIES it, so as to make
it equal to God himself, arguing that the Righteousness which God works in us,
is of the same Nature with that which works it; surely whatever is of the
same Nature with God, is equal to God, yea, is God; for, because Christ, as he
is the Eternal Word, is of the same Nature with God, therefore he is equal with
God, and is God.

But, observe a prodigious Fallacy in G. W. to defend his Blasphemy. In his
Truth and Innoc. p. 60. in defense of that passage above-quoted out of his
Voice of Wisdom, he says, My meaning simply of the word [Infinite] was that
God's Righteousness, which he effects in us, is Everlasting, and without end,
Psalm. 119. 142. And Christ is said to be of God made unto us Wisdom and
Righteousness, and Sanctification and Redemption, 1 Cor. 1. 30. I hope (says
he) none will deny him to be Infinite, or his work of Righteousness, and the
effect thereof to be quietness and assurance for ever. And thus he would heal
himself by giving us his sense of the word Infinite, that he meant simply, that
it was Everlasting and without end. But to detect this prodigiously dull
Sophistry, [I call it not prodigious for the Wit of it, but the Dullness of it,]
the nature of G. W.'s Argument did not only carry the sense of the word
Infinite to be endless, but to be every way Infinite, his Argument being
grounded on this, That that Righteousness which God works in us is of the
same Kind and Nature with that which works it: Now the Nature of God is not
only endless, but Infinite every way; his Righteousness and Holiness not only
extends beyond all Times and Ages, but beyond all Degrees and Measures of
Created Perfection.

But whatever sense the word Infinite may be allowed in other cases to have; as
to say a Nation is Infinitely Rich, as Nahum 3. 9. yet in this case of the
Controversy betwixt T. Danson and G. W. the word Infinite can have no such
limited or strained sense; neither did T. Danson understand it in that sense,
as only to signify Endless. And G. W. did he know the true Law of Disputants,
should know, That when he answers to his Opponent's Argument, he should take
the word of his Opponent in the sense of his Opponent, because the force of the
Argument lies upon that sense. For T. Danson's Argument had not this sense,
That because the Righteousness that God works in Men, is not Endless, therefore
it is not Meritorious of Justification; for granting it to be Endless [that is,
Infinite in G. W.'s sense] as the Apostle Paul says of Charity, it never
fails, every degree of it is Endless; but it will not therefore follow, that
it is meritorious of Justification, because it has no end of duration, for so
the Soul it self should be meritorious of Justification, because it is Endless;
yea, the Souls of bad Men and Devils are Endless and Infinite in G. W.'s sense;
do they therefore merit Justification? But the force of T. Danson's Argument
lies in this, That Righteousness alone can be meritorious of our Justification
before God, that is Infinite in Value and Worth (that is) equivalent, and
infinitely more than equivalent, to the Righteousness, not only of all the most
holy Angels that never sinned, but of all the Men, that ever lived or shall
live, had they (by Supposition) lived as holily and righteously as the holy Law
of God required them to live from first to last; yet such a Righteousness as
this, of all such holy Angels and Men, being but a Finite Righteousness with
respect to its intrinsic worth and value, could not be sufficiently
meritorious for the Justification of one Man that has sinned, though suppose but
once all his Life time.

But because the Righteousness of Christ, to wit, his most holy and perfect
Obedience, which he performed without us, was not the Righteousness of a mere
Man, but of him, who was both God and Man, therefore it is an Infinite
Righteousness, i. e. of Infinite value before God, by way of merit to obtain
the Justification of true Penitents and Believers; and when sound
Christian-Teachers say, The Righteousness of Christ, which he performed without
us, for our Justification, is an Infinite Righteousness, they mean not that it
was Physically Infinite, but Morally, i. e. of Infinite value before God, by
reason of the Hypostatical Union of the Humane Nature of Christ with the
Essential and Eternal Word.

But G. W. thought to excuse S. F. and himself from the imputation of Popery,
on the Point of Justification, and that very handsomely, why? because the
Quakers say, It Is only the works that they work by the Spirit's help, that are
meritorious of Justification. But this will not excuse them from Popery; for
even Bellarmine, a great Popish Author, and the other Popish Authors, plead
only for the merit of such good Works, (which merit by Condignity,) as wrought
by the help of the Holy Spirit assisting them.

And his Sophistry is as dull, in his drawing an Argument from 1 Cor. 1, 30.
That Christ is made unto us of God, Wisdom and Righteousness, and
Sanctification and Redemption, therefore that Believers are justified by an
Infinite Righteousness wrought in them, and that Christ is formed in them, Gal.
4. 19.

And thus he will have Christ, as held forth in that Text, 1 Cor. 1. 30. not to
be Christ God-Man without us, from and by whom we receive Justification and
Redemption, and also divine Wisdom and Sanctification, by his holy Spirit that
he sends into our Hearts, and by his holy Doctrine outwardly taught us, but
Christ formed in us; he will have to be all this unto us, Judgment Fixed, p.
330.
and Christ formed in us is the Seed, and the Seed is God over all blessed for
ever, as above-quoted, both out of G. W. and W. P. But what then is become of
his Exposition that he gave in his Judgment Fixed abovequoted, That this Birth,
viz. Christ formed in true Believers, is not Christ Jesus; for he is that
incorruptible Seed and Word of Life, which begets, forms and brings forth the
Soul of Man into his own Nature and Image; and so Christ may be said to be
formed in us in a Mysterious and Elegant way of speaking, the Property and
Effect being put for the Cause.

Thus we see how he wavers to and fro, betwixt So and No, and No and So,
sometimes This, and sometimes That: and sometimes neither This nor That; a
Phrase that S. F. used to some of his Opponents, but very justly applied to G.
W. But differing senses and meanings are more tolerable for a Man to put on his
Words, than plain contradictions, and especially in Matters Fundamental, as
these are.

Next, let us hear what W. P. has said on the Doctrine of Justification, and
how J. Wyeth in his Switch defends him.

W. Penn in his Serious Apology p. 148, gives the charge of his Opponent thus,
That we deny Justification by the Righteousness which Christ has fulfilled in
his own Person for us ( wholly without us) and therefore deny the Lord that
bought us; W. P. Answers; And indeed this we deny and boldly affirm it in the
Name of the Lord, to be the Doctrine of Devils, and an Arm of the Sea of
Corruption, which does now deluge the whole World.

What says Jos. Wyeth, that hardy Champion, to this, Switch p. 238. Yes it is
still true, and that we do deny, and boldly affirm to be the Doctrine of
Devils; and for our so denying and affirming, we have the warrant of Holy Writ,
wherein is abundantly testified of the Spirit of Christ in Man, to which he
must be obedient in order to his Justification; for which he quotes Romans 3. 24,
28. Romans 5. 1. Titus 3. 7. and concludes then not wholly without us.

Note, Here J. Wyeth acts the dull Sophister as much as his Elder Brother G. W.
by perverting the true state of the Question, as is their frequent manner. The
Question is not, What is necessary, by way of Instrument or Instrumental
Application, or Preparatory Condition, in order to Justification; such as Faith
and Repentance; for such are granted to be necessary in order to Justification,
as the stretching out the Hand is necessary to receive an Alms, or free Gift,
and the opening the Mouth is necessary to receive Food; but the true state of
the Question is, What is the procuring and purchasing Cause of our
Justification before God, by way of Merit, or the Meritorious Cause of our
Justification; whether the Righteousness of Christ that he wrought without us,
by his Active and Passive Obedience, above Sixteen Hundred Years ago, Yea, or
Nay; If Yea, surely that is wholly without us; but this says W. P. and J. W. is
a Doctrine of Devils; and G. W. charge T. D. with ignorance and false
Doctrine for affirming it, as above-quoted; and yet it is the very plain
Doctrine of the Holy Scriptures, Isa. 53. 4, 5, 11, 12. Romans 3. 21, 22, 23, 24,
25, 28. Romans 4. 4, 11. Romans 5. 18. Gal. 3. 22. 2 Cor. 5. 21.

There are other Arguments which W. P. uses in his Serious Apology, some of
which I shall mention, not to refute them, for the least Child in Christianity
may do that, but to show his Error; one of which is, Death came by actual Sin,
not imputative, therefore Justification unto Life comes by actual
Righteousness, and not imputative. Another is, This speaks Peace to the Wicked.
Another is, Men are Dead and Alive at the same time by this Doctrine. Note, He
perverts the state of the Question; his Opponents do not say, That Wicked and
Unsanctified Persons are justified; but if none be justified, but who are
Perfect with a Sinless Perfection, and have not the least impurity, then
neither W. P. nor any Quaker, ever was, or is justified; for whatever they
boast of their Sinless Perfection, their vile Errors, Pride and
Uncharitableness, as well as other their Imperfections, demonstrate the
contrary. Another of his Arguments is against our Justification by Christ's
Righteousness without us, Our rejoicing must be in our selves and not in
another; thus perverting Paul's Words, Gal. 6. 4. But let every Man prove his
own work, and then shall he have rejoicing in himself, and not in another. But
does this exclude our rejoicing in Christ Jesus our Head. who to be sure is
another? O sad! How contrary to this is Philip 3. 3. For we are the
Circumcision, which worship God in the Spirit, and rejoice in Christ Jesus, and
have no confidence in the Flesh; by this Argument of W. P. he for himself and
his Brethren (whose Faith he pretends to deliver) renounces all Rejoicing, as
well as Faith and Righteousness, in Christ without us; yea, and in Christ
within them also; for Christ within them, if he be within them, is Another.
Dare W. P. or G. W. say, Christ in W. P. or G. W. is W. P. or G. W.

But whereas G. W. in his Printed Paper above-quoted, called, A Few Positions,
etc. says, We highly do value and esteem his (Christ's) Sufferings, Death,
Precious Blood, and whole Sacrifice for Sinners: For a Proof of his Insincerity
and Sophistry in this, I shall produce some following Quotations, what G. W.
means by his Precious Blood, and whether he put the due value upon Christ's
Blood that was outwardly shed, or upon another sort of inward Blood, I cannot
say of his and his Brethrens inventing, but what they received from Familists
and Ranters, though they pretend to have it by immediate Inspiration, to wit, an
inward Blood, that is the Atonement and Sacrifice for Sin, which Blood G. W.
will not allow to be the Blood of Christ's Humanity, but of his Godhead.

G. W. in his Truth Defended, p. 66. quotes C. Wade saying, The Lord has
Bought us and Redeemed us, with the Precious Blood of his Humanity, and says
your imagined Christ [ viz. their Notion of a Christ, whose Blood is shed
within them] never had any Humane Blood to Redeem you with; and to prove it, he
brings 1 Pet. 1. 19. G. W. Answers, That Scripture, 1 Pet. 1. have thou
perverted, as thou have done other Scriptures, to thy own Destruction; for
there he witnesses to the Blood of the Lamb, which Redeemed them from their
vain Conversation, but does not tell them of Humane Blood to Redeem them with;
for that which is Humane is Earthly, but Christ whose Blood is Spiritual is
Lord from Heaven, and he is not an imagined Spirit, but a true Spirit. And what
say thou to this? Was that Humane Blood, which Christ says, Except a Man
drink he has no Life in him, and which cleansed the Saints from all Sin, who
were Flesh of Christ's Flesh, and Bone of his Bone.

Note, Thus we see what Blood G. W. esteems the Precious Blood of Christ, not
his Humane Blood, or Blood of his Humanity, and that not only he denies that
we are Redeemed or Cleansed by any Blood of his Humanity, but denies that
Christ had any Humane Blood, or Blood of Humanity, and gives his Reason
against it, That Humane is Earthly, but Christ, whose Blood is Spiritual, is
Lord from Heaven.

But again, For a further evidence of his undervaluing the outward Blood of
Christ, and denying it to be that Blood by which Christ purchased his Church,
in his Light and Life, p. 56. It is confessed ( says he) that God by his own
Blood purchased to himself a Church, Acts 20. 28. Now the Blood of God, or that
Blood that relates to God, must needs be Spiritual, he being a Spirit, and the
Covenant of God is Inward and Spiritual.

Note, This Quotation was lately published in the Printed Sheet, called, An
Account from Colchester, abovementioned; to which Seven Quakers at Colchester
have given a pretended Answer, called, Some Account from Colchester, etc. In
their Answer to this Quotation, they quibble Sophistically upon the Word
Spiritual. We would ask these Men (say they) if God's own Blood be not
Spiritual, whether it be Carnal, and the Blood of his Covenant such also? But
was not the Blood that was outwardly shed on the Cross, which John said he saw,
and bare Record, real material Blood, as really as that of other Men: And
granting it to be Spiritual, as Spiritual signifies Holy, as a Holy Man is a
Spiritual Man, and yet is a Carnal Man with respect to his Body of Flesh, yet
it was Material and Corporal. But G. W. by Spiritual meant inward Blood, in Men
and Women; and so expressed it; The Covenant (says he) is Inward and
Spiritual, and so is the Blood of it; so that Spiritual and Inward are with him
Synonymous. But, for a further Answer, they quote a passage in G. W.'s
Antidote, p. 233, 234. where he grants, contrary to his former Doctrine, That
God purchased his Church, by Christ's Natural or Outward Blood, but not only by
that, but principally by the Spiritual Blood or Life of Christ Jesus; and this
Spiritual Blood he holds to be Inward in Men, The Blood is the Life, and the
Life is the Light of Men, as W. Bailie phrased it, perverting and confounding
two sundry Texts of Scripture. But the tenor and tendency of G. W.'s former
Arguments were altogether against Redemption or Justification, by any natural
or outward Blood whatsoever; for Humane is Natural; but Humane Blood G. W.
would by no means admit to be the Blood of Christ, by which Men are Redeemed:
So now he will have God's own Blood to be no less than his own dear Son, and
the Blood to be both Natural and Outward, and Spiritual and Inward, by which we
are Redeemed; meaning by Inward Blood, his Life, Power and Spirit, in Men and
Women; and yet, in contradiction to himself, he says, God's sparing not his
own Son, but delivering him up for us all, includes the whole Sacrifice of
Christ in Soul and Body, which were offered.

Note, If Christ's Soul and Body without us, were the whole Sacrifice, the
outward Blood being a part of his Body, then his Spirit, Life and Light in us,
is no part of the Sacrifice; and yet in contradiction to this in his Light and
Life, p. 44. He brings several Arguments and Scriptures, but all grossly
perverted to prove That Christ in us, offers up himself a living Sacrifice,
refering to W. Burnets Book, cap. prim. p. 31. Where the words are more largely
quoted thus, out of W. Smiths Primmer. We believe that Christ in us, does offer
up himself a living Sacrifice unto God for us, by which the Wrath and Justice
of God is appeased toward us. This lays the whole stress upon Christ within
Men, being the offering; but now G. W. would seem to give one part to Christ
without, and another part to Christ within Men to be the offering, and to the
Blood shed without, that was Natural and Outward, and to the Blood shed within
Men, that is Spiritual and Inward. But then surely he gives very little to the
Blood shed without, that was but once, and was Natural Blood, the Blood of the
Humanity; but he gives very much to the Inward Blood shed within Men, which is
a more excellent Blood; it is the Blood not of the Humanity, but of the
Divinity, and is shed many Thousands, yea, Millions of times, for it is shed in
all Men, who have lived in several Ages of the World: And thus Christ has
offered up himself Inwardly Millions of times, and had his Blood inwardly shed
to appease the Wrath and Justice of God; but this is directly contrary to the
Scripture, that says, That Christ by one Offering has for ever perfected them
that are Sanctified; and by one Offering, Heb. 9. 28. 10. 14.
once offered, not often offered, he has appeared to put away sin; and, as was
Prophesied of him, a Body thou have prepared me, not two Bodies, or many
Bodies: And as Christ had not two Bodies to be offered for our Sins, Heb. 8.
so nor had he two Bloods, the Scripture never mentions any Blood of Christ
but one; we no where read in Scripture of the Bloods of Christ, plural, but of
Blood, singular. And according to G. W. the Blood of Christ, in his former
Books, is but one, and that is the Inward Blood, the Blood of his Divinity, but
not of his Humanity; yea, he has denied the Body of Christ to be any part of
him, whereof he consists, as above-quoted, and consequently, nor was the
outward Blood, shed on the Cross, any part of him.

But suppose it were allowed to call the Spirit of Christ in Believers, or the
sanctifying and refreshing Influences thereof, his Blood, by way of metaphor,
as Wine is called in Scripture, the Blood of the Grape, and Christ calls
himself the Vine, and Believers in him the Branches, yet by no means can the
Spirit, or influence thereof in Men, be called the Blood shed for remission of
Sin, the Blood of Atonement, that by way of Merit and Satisfaction to Divine
Justice, removes the guilt of Sin, and makes Peace betwixt God and Men; for
whatever Sacrifice makes Atonement for Sin, must be Slain, and the Blood of the
Sacrifice shed or poured forth, as the Beasts that were offered for Sin under
the Law, behoved to be Slain, and their Blood to be shed, which were Types of
Christ, who was outwardly to be slain, and his Blood outwardly shed, for
without shedding of Blood there is no remission, as the Scripture testifies;
the which sheding of Blood must be by the Death of that, whose Body was to be
Slain: Now the pouring and shedding of the Spirit of Christ, and his Graces and
Gracious influences into the Hearts of the Faithful, is the effect of Christ's
Death without us, as he was outwardly Slain and offered up for us, by way of
Merit and Purchase as it is also the effect of his Mediation and Intercession
for us now in Heaven by way of impetration and actual dispensation, having
received power to give those gifts to Men, as he is now at Gods Right Hand in
Heaven, in his glorified Humanity, which he procured and purchased for them,
when he was upon Earth, in his state of Humiliation, by the proper Merit of his
Obedience, both Active and Passive, who humbled himself and became obedient
unto Death, even the Death of the Cross; wherefore God has exalted him, to be
a Prince and a Savior.

And therefore it is, Coloss. 1. 20.
that the Blood of Christ by which he made peace for us, is called the Blood of
the Cross, because it was shed, and poured forth on the Cross, and he is said
to have reconciled us in his Body of Flesh, through Death; all which bespeaks
that our Redemption, and Reconciliation by way of Purchase and Merit, was
wholly done and transacted by Christ without us, and could not be done within
us, by way of Sacrifice and Atonement, for that required the Sacrifice to be
Slain, and the Blood thereof to be shed and poured forth. But the Authors of
this abominable Heresy, which teaches that Christ in Man by his Blood shed in
them, is the offering for Sin, and the Blood thus shed in them, is the Blood of
Atonement, yea, the Blood of the Cross within them, to make things seemingly
consist and hang together, they have invented an Inward Crucifixion and Killing
of Christ in Men, as well as an inward shedding of his Blood in them, to
answer, by way of Analogy, to the outward Killing of the Sacrifices under the
old Testament. But when this Crucifying or Killing of Christ in Men, was,
beside many other questions about the manner of it, they are put hard to it to
resolve, and indeed the resolution of it is impossible, for it implys not only
manifest contradictions to Scripture, but to all true and right Reason, as much
as the Popish Transubstantiation does. For as nothing can be properly said, to
have been Killed, but what was formerly alive; If Christ has been Killed,
suppose in every Quaker, he behoved to be first alive in them; and as Christ in
the Figure or Type, (as some of them call him) was Born long before he was
outwardly crucified; for though when he was a Child, Herod sought his Life, yet
by his being taken by his Mother into Egypt, he was preserved; and this very
passage, of Christ's being persecuted by Herod, soon after he was Born, the
Quakers have made an Allegory, not that the inward is the Allegory of the
outward [which were somewhat tolerable, as some of the Ancients have so
Allegorized, though some went too far even so] but the outward is the Allegory
of the inward, and as then there passed some considerable space of time betwixt
Christ's typical Birth in the outward, and his typical Crucifixion; so that
being about Twelve Years of Age, he disputed with the Doctors, and about Thirty
he began his Ministry, wherein he continued for about three Years and a half,
and then was Crucified; after he was Betrayed by Judas, denied by Peter, and
Sentenced to Death by Pontius Pilate, falsely Accused, and cruelly Mocked by the
Jews; all which, according to W. P. are so many Facile representations of what
is to be accomplished in Men. And I have heard, since the difference betwixt
the Quakers and me began, about Preaching Christ without, some of their
Preachers in their Public Meetings, Preach a great deal of the History of
Christ's Birth, Persecution by Herod and the Jews, Betrayed by Judas, denied by
Peter, Sentenced to Death by Pilate, and made it all an Allegory of what was to
be witnessed within, with an Exhortation to Friends to wait to have it all
fulfilled and witnessed within them: And particularly I heard Jacob Talner, the
Dutchman abovementioned, Preach at a Public Meeting in Philadelphia [about
the time our differences began there about Christ] That Christ must be first
Born in us, and after that must be Crucified in us, etc. On which I asked some
of their Preachers, Were it not better, after Christ is Born in Men (using
their Phrase) that Men would not Crucify him in them, but rather that he might
live in them? For who can Crucify Christ in Men, but they themselves (on
supposition that he can be Crucified?) For the Devil cannot do it by himself
without Men's consent and concurrence, and being the main Actors: But G. F.
whom J. Wyeth calls the Apostle in this Age, has resolved this Question; but
whether effectually so as either consistent with Scripture or true and right
Reason, to which no true Revelation can contradict, I leave to the intelligent
Christian to judge, in a Treatise of his, called, Several Papers given forth
for the spreading of Truth, one of them bearing this Title, Concerning Christ's
Flesh which was Offered, p. 54. Christ the Lamb slain from the Foundation of
the World, when it began its Foundation, then the Lamb was slain, then the
World was set up in Man's Heart, that he did not see the beginning nor the
ending of the Works of God; -- Then came their Understandings to be darkened,
and Christ ACCORDING TO THE FLESH CRUCIFIED, the Lamb Slain, that FLESH of his,
which is a Mystery; and when the Jews did transgress the Law of God, the
Prophets told them, they OPPRESSED the Seed, as a Cart with Sheaves. [ Note,
the word Oppressed, though G. W. is so impudent in his Judgment Fixed, p. 322. as
to deny that the Seed is Christ and God that is Oppressed] -- That they may
come to a thing that is lower and under, and higher and over all, and before all
that is the Righteousness it self; so in this lies the Belief, so then in the
Life and in the SUBSTANCE, and in the end of all Types, so through this Flesh
he does reconcile, and by the offering up his Body, his Flesh, that which has
been Slain from the Foundation of the World, and yet never corrupted: -- And
this Flesh is a Mystery; and in this Flesh is the Belief that takes away the
Sin, that never corrupted, that is the Offering for Sin, and the Blood of this
Flesh clear seth from Sin; so through this Offering is the Reconciliation,
through the Offering of his Flesh that never corrupted, but takes away
Corruptions, and his Blood Cleanses from Corrup^ions, THE LIFE READ. See the
Quotation more at large in my Third Narrative, p. 24, 25. And it is observable
that he says with respect to Christ being thus inwardly Crucified, for as he
was God he did not die, but whether he did suffer as he was God, he does not
here determine, though G. W. has determined it, as above-quoted, That Christ as
God does suffer in Men by their Sins.

Note, Whereas many of the Quakers, particularly G. W. does argue against
Christ without us being the object of Faith; Can (says he) the object of Faith
he divided from the Faith? Which Argument has no more force, than if he should
argue, Light and Life, p. 45.
The Sun cannot be the object or Foundation of his Sight, because it is without
him, and at a great distance from him, but his Sight is within him. And he has
of late been heard, several times to preach in the Quakers Meetings, that
Christ without us cannot be the object of our Faith; does not G. F. here
propose an object of our Faith without us? and such an object, as is very
difficult, if not impossible, to apprehend, to wit, the Flesh of Christ, which
was Crucified when Adam sinned, and that Blood of his that was then shed or
offered together with the Flesh, -- And in this Flesh is the Belief (says he)
that takes away the Sin. But possibly G. W. or some other will say, the Flesh
of Christ that was Crucified in Adam, when he sinned, is conveyed or
transmitted from him into us. If any of them will adventure to say so, it will
occasion such Intricacies and Niceties, that the Quakers pretended plainness
does not suit with; for G. W. in his Book, called, The Divine Light of Christ
in Man, p. 13. gives this description of the People called Quakers, That they
are not only esteemed an illiterate People, but are a plain, simple, innocent
People, who most affect plain Scripture Language, without any School-glosses or
nice distinctions, to deck, adorn, or illustrate their Christian Profession of
Christ, or his Divine Light in Men. And many thousands may not understand the
terms, Vehiculum Dei, Intermediate Being, nor is Jesus Christ, preached among
us under those terms, but in Scripture terms. [The terms Vehiculum Dei had been
used by R. Barclay, in his Apology, p. 83. and Intermediate Being by me, in
some of my former Writings concerning the Seed of God, or principle of God's
Grace in Men; but which we carried not to that height, nor had that sense of
it, to be the Flesh and Blood of Christ that is the Offering for Sin, and makes
the Atonement by way of Expiation to take away the guilt of Sin.] But is not G.
W.'s Fallacy very plain in this Case? Did not G. F. Preach Christ as he Writ
and Printed concerning him; and what though G. F. and none of the Quakers ever
used the word VEHICULUM DEI, or INTERMEDIATE BEING before R. B. and G. K. used
them, which they chiefly used to help the Quakers out of the Mire, and render
(if possible) the Quakers Notions about the Seed within, intelligible, but they
carrying it far beyond, whatever R. B. or I ever thought of, particularly G. F.
and G. W. as I have found by my late more exact search into their Books, than
ever formerly I made; I find it not only difficult but impossible to reconcile
them, either with Scripture or right and true Reason, and therefore I disown
them, and whatever I have formerly Writ, that seemed in the least to justify
such Notions as I have found in the Quakers Writings, particularly in the
Writings of G. F. and G. W. let them be as void and null, as if they had never
been Writ. [See my late Book of Retractations.] Although, as I have already said,
I carried them not so far, so much as in my thoughts, and I think no more did
R. B. as they have done.

Now since G. W. professes that the Quakers are such a plain simple People,
who most affect plain Scripture Language, how is it that both G. W. himself,
and G. F. the chief Leaders and Teachers among them have gone so far from
Scripture Language about Christ within, that they have run into most wild and
extravagant Notions, that they sucked in from Familists and Ranters about
Christ within? Where do they find such Scripture Language, That Christ,
according to the Flesh, was crucified when Adam sinned, and his Blood then
shed, and that that Flesh, then crucified, was the Offering for Sin, and the
Blood of that Flesh cleanses away Sin, and that the Belief or Faith is in that
Offering, the Flesh that was then Crucified: And where does G. W. find his wild
Notion of a Blood of Christ within Men, that cleanses from Sin, by way of
Sacrifice and Atonement; or of any other Blood of Christ, than the Blood of his
Humanity; for though that place of Scripture, Acts 20. 28. calls the Blood of
Christ, wherewith he purchased his Church, the Blood of God, yet it does not
say, it was a Blood within Men, or the Blood of the Godhead, and not of
Christ's Humanity; it is called the Blood of God, because Christ, whose Blood
it was, was not a mere Man, but both God and Man, the Man Christ Jesus was God,
though his Godhead was not his Manhood.

But as to this Conveyance of Christ's Flesh, conveyed or transmitted from Adam
into his Posterity, since his Fall, what Scripture Language is this? If any of
them will dare so to affirm, give us Chapter and Verse for any such Doctrine or
Terms? But yet further to discover the grossness of this wild Notion: Is this
Flesh of Christ conveyed or transmitted into his Posterity, Crucified or Alive?
If they say Crucified, it is scarcely intelligible, how dead or crucified
Flesh, however so Spiritual, can be conveyed or transmitted from Adam into us;
or how any crucified Seed or Principle can be so conveyed; and seeing that as
we are all descended of Noah, and he was descended of Seth, and Seth was
descended of Adam, by humane Generation, long after Adam's Fall, and the Seed
of the Woman was promised to him, it is most probable, That if there was any
crucified Flesh, or Body of Christ in Adam when he Fell, that crucified Body,
Seed or Principle, was quickened and raised in him, some time before he begot
Seth, and it will-therefore follow rather, that such a Body, Seed or Principle,
if conveyed or transmitted from Adam into his Posterity, is conveyed alive and
not dead. Beside, how can it be conveyed by natural Generation? Indeed, many of
the Quakers deny any conveyance of Original Sin, by natural Generation, as the
Pelagians denied of old, because they cannot comprehend with their Reason, how
such a conveyance can be; to be sure it is altogether remote from all rational
Comprehension, as well as from Scripture, that such a Noble Principle, as the
Seed of God, should come by natural Generation, and so come to all Men, even
the Children of Heathens, as well as the Children of Believers, as the Quakers
commonly Teach; yea, G. F. says, G. M. p. 209. Every Man AT HIS COMING INTO
THE WORLD has a Light from Christ, him by whom the World was made, which is
more than Conscience. But if every Man has that Light at his coming into the
World, then Heathen Infants have it; and seeing they have it from Christ,
whether they have it Immediately conveyed, or Mediately, by natural Generation,
through their Parents, as they have their natural Flesh? If Immediately from
Christ, it is more rational to suppose it is not crucified nor killed at its
first reception: Beside, how can it be a slain or dead Thing in them, when it
convinces them of the sins of Lying, Thieft, and the like, and speaks to
them in their Hearts and Consciences, and teaches them their whole duty to God
and Man, if they will obey it; yea, an entire Systeme of Orthodox Divinity; If
J. Wyeth can be believed, how can it do all this, and be a dead or crucified
thing in them?

These are but some of the inexplicable and unintelligible Difficulties, beside
many more that might be mentioned, which the wild Notions and Phrases of G. F.
and G. W. especially, as far from Scripture Language, as Darkness is from
Light, have led them into, and many others whom they have bewildred with them,
notwithstanding G. W.'s fallacious pretenses of his Brethren and Himself, being
an innocent, plain, simple People, that most affect Scripture Language, when,
indeed, no Society called Christians (nay not the Church of Rome) have so much
deviated from Scripture Language, as well as Scripture Doctrine and Sense, as
they have done.

But let none from this infer, that I do not own the Doctrine and Faith of
Christ within, and of his Divine Teachings, Inspirations and Illuminations, for
that I do withal my Heart, as truly as ever I did, and, I hope, rather better;
only I deny the Quakers wild, extravagant and blasphemous Notions of Christ
within, and particularly of G. F. and G. W. abovementioned, who affirm that
Christ is Crucified in all unregenerate Persons, and that the Flesh of this
crucified Christ in them is the Offering for Sin, and the Belief is to be in
this Flesh, and the Blood of this Flesh cleanses from all Sin: Which Flesh was
crucified in Adam, when he Fell; but how from Adam it came into them, either
crucified or alive, is not intelligible, and therefore no proper object of
Faith; but if they say it is alive in all Men, at its first reception, or at
their first coming into the World, then all Men are Born Sanctified and
spiritually Regenerated, Heathens as well as Christians; for the great
difference that the Quakers give betwixt Regenerated and Unregenerated Persons,
lies in this, That the Seed Christ is alive in the Regenerated, but crucified
and dead in the Unregenerated.

But yet again, to show how much G. W. acts the Sophister in his late pretenses
to own, the Merit of the Blood of Christ that was outwardly shed, which yet he
has so plainly denied in his Light and Life, and mightily, opposed it, That
the shedding of that Blood upon the Cross was the meritorious cause of Man's
Justification, in p. 8. Of Light and Life he blames W. B. For laying a twofold
stress upon that Blood, 1. Merit to Salvation, 2. Work to Sanctification, and
infers against W. B's twofold assertion, That in his so doing, he has set it
(viz that Blood) up above God, for God could not save he says, and yet is not
in being, gross absurdity says G. W. Here the force of G. W.'s Sophistical
Argument against the Merit of Christ's Blood, is very apparent, To say that
Blood is the Meritorious cause of our Salvation is to set it up above God,
which is a most absurd consequence, and his proof of his consequence he grounds
upon an absolute forgery whereby he manifestly wrongs his Opponent W. B. in his
alleging on him, that he said, God could not save, whereas, W. B. did not say,
God could not save, But that Christ as he was God, without being Man, he could
not save Man. See W. B.'s Capital Principles, p. 35, 36. which is almost
Orthodox Doctrine, rightly understood, viz. Seeing God has appointed to save
Man after that manner. G. VV.'s further opposition to the Blood of Christ as
outwardly shed, being the Meritorious cause of Man's Justification, is evident
from his words Light and Life, p. 61. But mark how one while W. B. makes that
Blood, and the shedding of it, his Justifier and Redeemer, etc. Which he has
confessed is not in being. Another while People must seek their Savior above
the Clouds and Firmament contrary to the righteousness of Faith, Romans 10. 6.
Another while they must look to Jerusalem for Justification, and to the Blood
that was there shed, contrary to Deuteronomy. 30. 13, 14. And Romans 10. And if Men
should look to Jerusalem for that Blood, it is not there to be found, for it is
not in being, says W. B.

The Seven Colchester Quakers, in their Printed Paper, called, Some Account,
above mentioned, p. 16. pretended to answer this passage, by producing some
words of G. VV. in his Light and Life, which they think will justify him, but
all in vain, unless to detect his and their dull Sophistry. VV. B. having said,
The shedding of the Blood upon the Cross, that was let out by Virtue of the
Spear, being thrust into his side, to be Meritorious, or the Meritorious cause
of Man's Justification. To this G. W. Answers, The shedding of that Blood,
let out by the Spear, was an act of a wicked Man; and the Spear, an Instrument
of cruelty, which to lay the Meritorious cause or stress of Justication upon,
is false Doctrine, for there is a great difference between Christ's offering up
himself by the eternal Spirit, a Lamb without Spot to God, and the acts of
wicked Men inflicted upon him, as it is said, by wicked Hands they put him to
Death. And they conclude saying, But the making the very act of shedding his
Blood by the Spear, to be the Meritorious cause of Man's Justification, we
therefore ask them, if they really believe the same. Here, Note, Both G. W.'s
and the Seven Colchester Quakers fallacy, thereby to cover G. W.'s vile
Heresy. He most unjustly charge it upon W. B. his Opponent, that he laid the
Meritorious cause or stress of Justification, upon the Act of the wicked Man,
that thrust the Spear into our Savior's Side, but this is a piece of gross
forgery in G. W. so to charge W. B. and mistate the Controversy, between W. B.
and him; nothing but deceit it self could invent such a forgery in G. W. as
this, to charge it on W. B. as if he had either said or thought that the
Meritorious cause of Man's Justification, was laid by him, upon the Act of the
Soldier, that thrust the Spear into our Savior's Side; for neither did he say
it, nor can it be gathered from his Words, by the least shadow of any just
Consequence, his Words being thus, as G. W. cites them, The shedding of the
Blood upon the Cross that was let out, by the Virtue of the Spear being thrust
into his Side, was the Meritorious cause of Man's Justification. See Light and
Life, p. 64. The shedding of the Blood, etc. is the true English of the Latin
Words Effasio Sanguinis, which being A Noun Verbal, has a Passive as well as
Active signification, and that W. B. meant it, in the Passive signification
[and not in the Active as with respect to the Soldiers Act] is evident, from
the Words both of Jer. Ives, and also of W. B. quoted by G. W. Light and Life,
p. 64. he quotes Jer. Ives, saying, My Brother Burnet meant Christ's Passion,
and not the Act of wicked Men. And again, G. W. quotes W. B. saying, Yes
Brother, it is proper to say, It was Christ's Act to shed his Blood. His
meaning is obvious, to any impartial Reader, that it was Christ's Act, freely
to give his Blood to be shed for the remission of our Sins, as he said himself,
no Man takes my Life from me, I lay down my Life, and I take it up again.
Without all doubt, though Christ was not Active to Kill himself, by any Bodily
Act of violence, that he did to himself, yet his giving up his Blood to be
shed, and his Life to be taken away, was a most noble act of his Soul and Will;
who by a most noble act of Obedience and Resignation to the Will of God, for
the Salvation of Men, gave up his Blood to be shed; for that the shedding of
Christ's Blood was necessary for remission of Men's Sins, and their
Justification before God, is clear from his own words, This Cup is the New
Testament in my Blood shed for the remission of the Sins of many; and as the
Scripture says, Without shedding of Blood is no remission; so that, had not
Christ's Blood been shed, Men's Sins could not be forgiven; and yet what but
deceit it self can infer from this, That the merit or stress of remission of
Sin or Justification, is laid upon the act of the wicked Soldier, that thrust
his Spear into our Savior's Side.

Note again, Seeing G. W. has imposed such a Forgery upon W. B. without any
just ground, as if he had placed, the Merit of Men's Justification, upon the
act of the wicked Man that thrust the Spear into our Savior's Side: By the
like forgery, he may charge the Church of England, with the same absurdity,
(though most unjustly) for in the Prayer immediately before Baptism, [in the
Office of Baptism for those of Riper Years] she thus Prays, Almighty everliving
God, whose most dearly beloved Son, Jesus Christ for the forgiveness of our
Sins, DID SHED OUT of his most precious Side, both Water and Blood, and gave
Commandment, etc. Here we see it is said, that Christ SHED OUT of his most
precious Side, both Water and Blood. Can therefore G. W. from thence infer,
that the Church of England believes, that she lays the Merit of remission of
Sin, and Justification upon the act of the Soldier, or that Christ by any act
of Violence killed himself, or commanded others to do it; and if no just
consequence, as this, can be gathered out of the Church of England's Words, nor
can they from the Words of W. B. that are of the same importance.

But it is no wonder that G. W. will have the shedding of that Blood which came
out of Christ's Side, when it was pierced, to be only the Soldiers act, when T.
Elwood in his Truth Defended, p. 99. denies the Blood that came out of
Christ's Side, and its shedding after he was Dead, to have been to complete the
Offering, for this he says, and again repeats the same Words and justifies
them in his pretended Answer to my first Narrative, p, 220, 221. This offering
up himself, (and giving himself a ransom for all) included all his sufferings
both inward and outward, and made it a complete and perfect Sacrifice, in which
his Blood was comprehended and concerned as well as his Flesh, before his Side
was pierced by the Spear, for he had pronounced that great Word, Consummatum
est, it is finished, had bowed his Head, and given up the Ghost before his Side
was pierced with the Spear. This is not only contrary to the Doctrine of the
Church of England, as above quoted in the Office of Baptism, but of all
Orthodox Christians throughout the World, who teach according to Scripture,
That the Water and Blood that came out of our Lord's Side, after his Death, was
a special part of the Offering as well as his Death; and the wounds in his
Hands and Feet and the Blood that came out of them, before his Death; which
gross Error of T. Elwood, is the Error of the Second Days meeting at London,
who approved his Book, and of G. W. who professes the same Faith with them, is
deservedly censured and refuted, in Satan disrobed, p. 47. His Body pierced and
his Blood shed after his Death, were truly and properly a part of the
Sacrifice, as much as what he suffered before he expired. As the legal
Sacrifice was not completed by the Death of the Beast, but by the Burning of
it, and offering the Blood afterward, that was shed; and those who reject that
Blood do mutilate his Sacrifice, and render it ineffectual to themselves.

Note, again, How neither G. W. nor the Colchester Quakers, in their Some
Account, etc. give any answer, to what was objected against him, out of his
Light and Life, p. 61. Though quoted by them, p. 15. Where he positively
asserts, That to seek our Savior above the Clouds and Firmanent [i. e. to pray
to him as he is in Heaven, without us, above the Clouds and Firmament] is
contrary to the Righteousness of Faith, Romans 10. 6. And to look to the Blood
that was shed at Jerusalem, for Justification, is contrary to Deuteronomy. 30. 13, 14.
and Romans 10. which seeking or looking to Christ, and his Blood, as is
abovequoted and proved, was not by any outward or bodily act, but by Faith, and
yet even such seeking or looking is denied, and opposed by G. W. and his
Colchester Quaker Brethren.

But whereas G. W. does argue so much and so frequently against that Blood that
was outwardly shed by the Spear, its being the meritorious Cause of
Justification, because that Blood is not to be found at Jerusalem, for it is not
in being says W. B. as G. W. quotes him. Suppose W. B. had positively said [as
if they had been his words originally] That Blood is not in being; yet he was
far from inferring thence, that we are not justified by that Blood; this was G.
W.'s consequence, and not W. B.'s for W. B. did strongly assert, that Men are
justified by the Blood that was then shed, though it was not now in being, but
(said he) the Efficacy of it is still in being; but G. W. did draw a quite
contradictory Conclusion, to that of W. B. as thus, That Blood that was shed by
the Spear, is not in being, says W. B. therefore G. W. concludes, Men are not
justified by it; which Argument of G. W.'s has equal force against Christ's
Death, and Bodily pains, as well as his Souls Dolours and Griefs, they are not
now in being, therefore Men are not justified by them. And his Argument has the
like force against Men's being justified, or having their Sins pardoned, by the
Merit of Christ's Blood, before Christ came in the Flesh; for example, David
had not the remission of his Sins by the Merit of Christ's Blood, because G.
W.'s Logic, in David's time, the Blood was not in being: But as I showed in
the Meeting the Words [that Blood is not in being] were not originally W B's,
but some Quakers Words, or some other that held the like false notions with
them, which W. B. calls a Cavillation. Capital Principles p. 40. Of late, says
he, I have frequently met with a Query by way of Cavillation, Which is, whether
that Blood spilt upon the Cross run not on the ground, etc. If so, how then can
Man be justified by that which is not in being? Thus we see, W. B. censures the
consequence of that Argument to be invalid, but G. W. again, and again, I know
not how frequently, makes use of it, and thinks the Conclusion to be good; and
I said, in the Meeting, had G. W. been present, I would have asked him, what
was his Answer to that Question, Is the Blood that was shed on the Cross now in
being? [If he happen to reply to this 4th Narative, I desire him to give a
positive answer to it, seeing he makes it the Foundation of his Conclusion,
that Men are not justified by the Merit of that Blood, because that Blood is
not in being] but seeing I had not G. W. there, I asked Dan. Philip [who was
present, and sat near where I stood, and is one of the Quakers in the Unity]
whither that Blood was in being, He replied he knew not whither I meant the
Blood, that was without Christ's Body, or within it; I told him, the Blood that
went out of his Body, whether that Blood was in being? but he gave no reply. I
asked him again, whether he believed that the Blood that was outwardly shed,
was Meritorious to Justification, and that true Believers were justified by it,
he said, he knew not what I meant by the Word Merit, or Meritorious; I told
him, it was a shame for him, to pretend to be so Ignorant of the signification
of the Word, that an ordinary School Boy did know, seeing he was a Scholar, and
did not long ago, commence Dr. of Physic at Leiden, and had there a Latin
Oration. However, I gave him the signification of it, that Merit signified that
it was of that Worth and Value by way of Atonement and Expiation to make
satisfaction to God, for the guilt of our Sins. He also pretended he knew not
what I meant by the Word Atonement, I told him, it signified reconciling and
bringing Men into savor with God. I asked, again, were Believers justified by
the Merit of the Blood, that was outwardly shed, he answered it was a part of
the Offering, but I asked were Believers justified by it, He said, that Blood
will justify none, that are not Sanctified; I replied, that was not the
question, nor is it any part of the Controversy; I further asked him, what did
he mean by the Offering whether Christ only as without us, or as within us, or
both without and within, and both by Christ's Blood without us, as outwardly
shed, and by the Blood of his Godhead as inwardly shed in Men, as G. W. will
have it now at last; but to this he gave no positive answer; and though in all
his answers he gave, on this or other heads, he greatly foiled himself: He is
(as I am informed) so confident, that he tells in private, how he foiled me.
But seeing neither he, nor any of the Quakers there present, offered any answer
to that question; Is that Blood of Christ that was outwardly shed in being? I
told them, I believed the substance of it was still in being, for not the least
atome of any Bodily substance was ever annihilated; but to enquire, where that
Blood now was, or whether Christ did take it back again into his Body, [which
no doubt he was able to do, having all power, was a curious and unnecessary
question, to be resolved,] And here I brought a saying of B. Burnet (whose Name
I mentioned with due respect) to the same effect in his Exposition on the xxxix
Articles of the Church of England, and also, sometime afterward at the same
Meeting, I quoted him, in the same Book, to show my Agreement with him [as I do
with all sound Christian Teachers] that our Lord has the same Body, in
substance, he had on Earth, and that his Body is not changed in substance, but
in the different Contexture of parts.

And on this Head also I queried Dan. Philips, Whither Christ's Body was the
same in Substance, now in Heaven, that it was on Earth; and whether it was,
when on Earth, a terrestrial Body; he said, He did not know what I meant by
Substance. I told him, the same that others meant, who had any true skill in
Natural Philosophy, and it was a shame to a Dr. of Physic, to profess his
being ignorant to define a Substance; however I told him, that a Substance
(understanding a created Substance) was a Being or Thing that did only depend
on God Almighty, the first Cause, and was the subject of certain Accidents that
did depend on it, and could not be without it. He asked whether a Substance
could be without Accidents? I answered him, it could be without Accidents of
this or that kind, and could be wonderfully changed in Accidents, and yet
remain the same Substance. I asked him again, Was our Lord's Body earthly, when
it was on earth? He answered, it was like ours in all things, Sin excepted. I
again asked, but was it earthly, when on earth? Here he demurred, and would not
give a positive Answer; a Minister that stood by, said, by his confessing it
was like ours, he has confessed it was an earthly Body; I said, to them that
are sound in the Faith it is so, but not to the Quakers; for they will not
allow, that an earthly Body, and an heavenly Body, can be the same Body in
Substance, or that a natural Body, and a spiritual Body, are the same in
Substance; for which I quoted G. W.'s Light and Life, p. 69. Who calls him a
very blind and ignorant Man that will affirm, That Bodies Celestial and
Terrestrial, differ not in Substance; whereby he has proved himself to be both
blind and ignorant, by his ignorant Assertion. And I told the Auditory, how the
Quakers ignorance and false Notions of Philosophy, destroyed their Faith, and
hindered them to believe that necessary and fundamental Article of the Christian
Faith, That Christ's Body that he had on Earth, is the same in Substance it was
in Heaven; and though when on Earth, it was earthly, and is heavenly now, yet the
change was not in Substance but in Accidents; for if it be not the same in
Substance, it is in no respect the same; for, take away the Substance and no
Accidents can remain of any thing. And by the like false Philosophy, both G. W.
and W. P. have argued against the Resurrection-Bodies of the Saints, that they
shall not be the same in Substance with the Natural Bodies they had on Earth.
And I further showed, that Muggleton said, Christ's Body was like ours, and yet
would not own it was the same Substance with ours; for, he held that Christ's
Body that hung on the Cross, and was laid in the Sepulcher, was the Godhead;
yea, was God the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost.

Nor is G. W. and his seven Colchester Brethren, less fallacious, in his and
their Defense of Solomon Eccles's Blasphemous saying, That the Blood of Christ
that was forced out of him, by the Soldier after he was dead, was no more than
the Blood of another Saint. In their Some Account, they quote G. W.'s Antidote,
for his defense, p. 223, 224, 225. 1. He says, he showed a dislike of S. E.'s
Expressions before-cited, but how? in that he did not allow them as an Article
of their Faith. But nor did he censure them as contrary to their Faith, which
he ought to have done, and would have done, had he been in the true Faith. And
that his dislike did not proceed from any detestation of the Error, is very
apparent, that he said in his defense of S. E. That S. E. did highly speak in
esteem of the Blood of Christ, and New Covenant, as more excellent and living,
and holy and precious, than is able to be uttered, etc. which (G. W. faith)
might have satisfied any spiritual or unbiased Mind; therefore it seems it
satisfied G. W. But the deceit of G. W. lies in this, That the Blood which S.
E. did so highly esteem, was not that Blood, that was let out of his Side,
after Christ was dead, as S. E. plainly confessed in his Letter to R. Porter,
but another kind of Blood, that is, the Blood not of the Humanity, but of the
Godhead; the Blood of the New Covenant, which is Inward and Spiritual, says G.
W. 2. He says, he showed in part his estimation of the Blood and whole
Sacrifice or Offering of Christ, both in respect to the blessed Testimony,
Value and Efficacy thereof, more than that of any other Saint or Saints. But I
find no such Testimony in all that Book, to any Value or Efficacy of it, by way
of Merit, as it was shed for the remission of Sins: For it is a great part of
his work throughout his whole Book, Light and Life, to contend against the
Merit and Value or Efficacy of it, for Men's Justification and Salvation, as is
largely above-proved out of many Quotations in that very Book, and can be
further proved. Yea, he would not so much as allow it to be concerned in any
part or respect, as the meritorious Cause of Men's Justification, Light and
Life, p. 56. For We are not (says he) to suppose two kinds of Saviors and
Sanctifiers, that is both a Natural which is not in being, as is said of the
Blood that was shed) and the Spirit which still lives. Thus he wholly excludes
the outward Blood, which he calls Natural, and places all upon the Spirit,
arguing most weakly and impertinently, That to say, we are saved by the Blood
of Christ that was outwardly shed [as the meritorious Cause of our
Justification, and Sanctification, and Salvation] and by the Spirit of Christ,
[as the internal Agent and Efficient, that applies to us the Merit and
Efficacy of that Blood that was outwardly shed] is to inser two kinds of
Saviors and Sanctifiers; he might by as good an Argument infer, That a
Medicine, and he that applies the Medicine to the Patient, are two Doctors of
Physic, as to argue that Justification or Sanctification by the Blood of
Christ, and by the Spirit of Christ, is to suppose two Saviors. But how will
G. W. answer his own Argument, who of late, but without any Retractation of his
former Error, does own, Redemption, both by the natural Blood outwardly, and by
the Spirit inwardly, Antidote p. 232, 233, 234. And it still remains as a vile
Error justly charged on G. W. which he has never to this day fairly answered,
nor any for him, that in Light and Life, p. 59. he blames W. B. for saying,
That Blood that Christ shed in order to the effecting the Salvation of Man,
must needs he visible and material Blood; in opposition to which, he plainly
denies, That the material Blood of the Sacrifices was a Type of the material
Blood of Christ; for that were to say (says he) that material Blood was a Type
of that which was material, this to give the Substance no Pre-eminence above
the Type; which clearly proves, that G. W. held that the material Blood of
Christ was not the Substance signified by the Blood of the Sacrifices that were
offered under the Law, but a Type or Figure of some inward thing, to wit, their
spiritual Blood within, which they call the Life and the Light. 3. But after
all, though G. W. would seem, at last, to be full and plain, in his passing
censure on S. E.'s words, he remains still Fallacious and Sophistical, as much
as formerly; I disown (says he) his said Comparison, of the Blood of Christ
with that of another Saint, and believe he was not in the Counsel or Wisdom of
God therein.

Here he nothing blames the matter of his Words, but says, he was not in the
Counsel or Wisdom of God therein; that is to say, He was not wise nor well
advised, to disclose that great Secret or Mystery among the Quakers, so as to
let the World know it, that the Quakers held as a Principle among them, That
that Blood was no more [by way of Merit] than that of an ordinary Saint; for in
effect G. W. himself, as to all the real worth of it, above that of other
Saints, by way of real Merit for Men's Justification, or real necessity to
Salvation, has plainly excluded it, not only by his many impertinent and
nonsensical Arguings and Quibblings against it, as above-quoted, but by his
plainly asserting in his Antidote, p. 28. That the Quakers are offended with G.
K. for saying, the Light within is not sufficient to Salvation, or not
sufficient without something else; the which Proposition, seeing he blames as
false, he must hold the contradictory to be true, That the Light within is
sufficient to Salvation without any thing else; yea, G. W. has granted in his
Antidote, p. 28. That Christ, as outwardly considered, is that something else,
which G. K. meant. This is an evident proof, beside many others above-given,
That it is G. W.'s and his Brethren's Principle, That the Blood of Christ that
was outwardly shed on the Cross, is not a meritorious Cause of our Salvation;
nay, not so much as in part; and that Faith in that Blood is not necessary for
our Justification, expressly contrary to Scripture, Romans 3. 25.

Hence it is, that neither in their Books, nor Preachings, is any thing
generally of this Doctrine Preached, That Christ, God-Man, as without us, as he
Died for us, etc. is the object and foundation of our Faith, for remission of
Sin, and for our Justification, and eternal Salvation; but there is much to be
both read in their Books, and heard in their daily Preachings, against the
necessity of any such Faith. The farthest that they go at this day, is to
Preach a little of him Historically, and as an Example, but to Preach him as
without us, in the true nature of Man, to be the great Object of our Faith,
Love and Adoration, they think is hurtful, as aboveproved; yea, W. Smith in his
Primmer gives it as a mark of distinction, whereby to know, true Ministers from
false, They that are false, Preach Christ without, and bid People believe in
him, as he is in Heaven above,

Jos. Wyeth's excuse of this, in his Switch, p. 220. is extremely fallacious;
he thinks he may supply the defect in W. Smith's Words by an Ellipsis, telling
us, The Church has given abundant encouragement to supply Elliptick defects by
her example and practice in the holy Scriptures, and what is so familiarly done
with holy Writ, surely me may do with our Friends Books. But to detect this
fallacy, what Elliptical defects the Church has supplied in some places of the
holy Scripture, she had ground so to do from other places of Scripture more
full, that taught her to make that supply; but the case is far otherwise here,
it being so far from being the Quakers way generally to preach Faith in Christ
without Men, for Salvation that they oppose it, and call them Reprobates, who
profess any such Faith; and this their great Apostle G. F. has taught them by
his Example so to do, in his G. M. p. 248. he says to C. Wade, The Devil was
in thee, and thou says thou art saved by Christ without thee, and so has
recorded thy self to be a Reprobate, and ignorant of the Mystery of Christ
within thee, for without that, thou do not know Salvation. And yet this same
C. Wade, has fully owned the Mystery of Christ within, Switch, p. 205.
as above-quoted. Jos. Wyeth's excuse for G. F.'s saying to C. VVade, The Devil
was in him. He says, Was for his stuffing his Book with Lies, but of this he
gives not one Proof, though I have given several evident Proofs, That G. F. did
grossly belly him: To the other part of G. F.'s charge, Thou art saved by Christ
without thee. Jos. VVyeth Answers, It does plainly contradict the Doctrine of
the Apostle. Thus we see, what value he and all his Brethren have, (in whose
Name he writes) for Christ without us, that he says; it plainly contradicts
the Doctrine of the Apostle, but by his so saying, he palpably bewrays his and
his Brethrens Infidelity and Heathenism, and has prepared a Rod for his own
Back instead of a Switch for the Author of the Snake. To suppose that C. VVade
meant that he was saved by Christ without him, without the inward Operation of
Christ, by the holy Spirit, to Sanctify him, is great injustice done to him,
for he has sufficiently cleared himself of that charge, as I have above-quoted
him. But that Faith in Christ without us, as he Died for our Sins, etc. is no
part of the Quakers Faith, or Systeme of Doctrine, is evident from Jos. VV^^h's
plain confession, as above-noted, it is none of the Systeme of Principles truly
Orthodox, or Substance of the Doctrine, which the Light within has taught them,
for he wholly passes it by, p. 38. and yet tells us, he has given us the
Substance, of what the Light within has taught them: Besides, who will consider
W. Smith's Primer, out of which the above given Quotation is taken, will find
that his Words wanted no Ellipsis to explain his sense, for he gives it very
fully, to be his sense, that the Light within, is the only Foundation, and that
there is not another, see this more largely quoted in my Third Narrative, p. 11.

Proofs out of the Quakers Books, on the following Heads, viz. Christ's Coming
to Judgment: The Resurrection of the Body: The Light Within: Baptism and the
Lord's Supper.
Eighthly, Concerning Christ's last Coming to Judgment.
G. F. in his G. M. p. 9. quotes J. Bunyan saying, That the Place where Christ
shall come to Judgment, is at the Mount of Olives, at the Eastside of
Jerusalem; to this he Answers, Thou have put him far enough off from thee, and
have not yet judged thy self (and Christ is come to Judgment) and so art one of
the false Prophets, who bids People look for him beyond the Sea, lo here, lo
there; but who are come to Christ, the Light, the Life, they need not go forth;
who abide here, are sealed by the Spirit, puts not off the good and evil Day.

Note, Waving that Question, over what place on Earth Christ shall appear at
his last Coming, we see here, That G. F. opposes not only to the place of his
Coming, but to any outward and personal Coming yet to be, and charge J. B. to
be one of the false Prophets for asserting it; and says, Christ is come to
Judgment, as if there were no other, for that is the true state of the
Controversy, betwixt J. B. and him; J. B. did not deny that Christ was
inwardly Come, to reprove and judge for Sin, but he asserted his Coming
personally to Judgment without us also.

G. W. in his Light and Life, p. 40. 41. Disputing with W. B. about Christ's
outward Coming in his Glorified Body, to Judge the Quick and the Dead,
answers to the several Scriptures that W. B. brought for Christ's outward
Coming at the end of the World, and carries them all to his inward Coming
already fulfilled, such as, 1 Thessalonians. 4. 15, 17. and Acts 1. 9, 10, 11. Acts 2,
32, 33, 34. Matthew. 24. 30. and Verse 26. 14. and opposes W. B. in his
understanding them of his outward Coming in Glory at the end of the World. --
And as to that, 1 Thessalonians. 4. 17. (says G. W.) which W. B. brings to prove that
Christ shall come in the latter end of the World, from Heaven, above the
Clouds. Now in Ver. 15. it is said, That we which are alive, and remain unto the
Coming of the Lord. Now I ask (says he) if they did live and remain to a
personal Coming of Christ in the Clouds, yea, or nay? Or can it be reasonably
thought to be a Coming that is not yet, that they lived and remained unto?

Note, How G. W. here most weakly (but very plainly to discover his Infidelity)
argues against Christ's Coming at the latter end of the World; and whereas in
my First Narrative I did show, That when Paul said, We which are alive, and
remain to the Coming of the Lord, he spoke by an Enallage Personae, We for
They, we which remain, i.e. such of our Brethren, who shall be found alive at
Christ's last Coming, etc. To this T. E. Answers, in his pretended Answer to my
First Narrative, p. 162. Why might not the Apostle speak in the first Person
[We] as supposing that great and extraordinary Appearance and Coming of Christ
(the certain time of which no Man knew, Matthew. 24. 36.) was so near at hand,
that it might probably fall out in his Lifetime; and for this sense he quotes,
Heb. 1. 2, 9, 26. 1 Pet. 1. 20. 1 John 2. 18. 1 Cor. 10. 11. 1 Pet. 4. 7. as
because the times after Christ came in the Flesh, are called the last times,
that therefore the Apostles thought, the end of the World was not far off, i.
e. in his sense, That Paul and the other Apostles, thought that Christ would
come to Judge the Quick and the Dead before they dyed.

This gross and absurd sense, as it is contrary to G. W.'s words, so it renders
Paul to have spoke an untruth, even by Divine Inspiration; for said Paul, This
we say unto you by the word of the Lord. J. Wyeth in his Switch, p. 297, 298.
and his Brethren; their common excuse, here and elsewhere, that these were but
Queries, signify nothing to defend them; the very import of these Queries,
implying a positive denial. See this Fallacy of T. E. more fully detected in
Satan Disrobed, being a Reply to his pretended Answer to my First Narrative.

Again, G. W. in Light and Life, p. 41. says, -- But Three Comings of Christ;
not only that in the Flesh, at Jerusalem, and that in the Spirit, but also
another Coming in the Flesh, yet to be expected, we do not read of, but of a
Second Coming, without Sin unto Salvation, which in the Apostles days was
looked for: And these words of Paul, The dead in Christ shall rise first, he
expounds of an inward Death.

To this G. W. Answers very fallaciously, in his Truth and Innoc. p. 61. But is
this to deny or oppose Christ's coming to Judge the Quick and the Dead? 'Twas
never so intended. And questioning some Men's carnal Expectations of a fleshly
coming of Christ, to be seen with their carnal Eyes; was this to deny his
coming in the Glory of his Father, with his Angels, to reward every Man
according to his works, [ quoting, Matthew, 16. 27. Luke 9. 6.] no sure, for
that is confessed and undeniable.

Note, His and his Brethren's common evasion to hide their Infidelity, is to
quibble about the Word FLESH; as if their meaning were only to deny, That
Christ is to Come, in a fleshly Body, subject to the like Passions it had in
his state of Humiliation, when upon Earth, as Hunger, Thirst, Pain, Death, etc.
But this is no part of the Controversy, betwixt the Quakers and their
Opponents. But, why may not Glorified Flesh be taken to signify Spiritual
Flesh, as distinct from Mortal Flesh, as well as Glorified Body signifies
Spiritual Body, without any change of Substance?

But it is evident that G. W. not only denied, that Christ would Come to Judge
the World, in a Body of natural and passible Flesh, but that he would not Come,
in the same Substance of that Body he had on Earth, which was a mortal and
passible Body, of the same Nature with ours; for he makes it most absurd, That
an earthly Body and an heavenly Body can be the same Substance, as above-quoted.

Now, That he denies that Christ was in Heaven in a bodily Existence, or would
come to Judgment, as the Son of Mary, in a bodily Existence, [to wit, having
any thing of that Body which he had on Earth,] is evident from his Nature of
Christianity, p. 29. D^st thou look for Christ, as the Son of Mary, to appear
outwardly in a bodily Existence to save thee, according to thy words, p. 30. If
thou do, thou may look until thy Eyes drop out, before thou will see such
an Appearance of him.

Note, To excuse his great Infidelity, he uses a gross Fallacy in his Truth
and Innoc. p. 61. and giving a lame Quotation of his own words, This is true in
Fact (says he) for those very Eyes decay and perish. But this was no part of
the Controversy betwixt G. W. and his Opponent, who did not presume to say or
think, That Christ's coming to Judge the World in that bodily Existence would
be before his Death; but the thing earnestly asserted, was, That Christ as he
was now really in Heaven in a bodily Existence, at God's Right Hand, so he
would come in that very bodily Existence to Judge the World; for which G. W.
does evidently oppose him as above-quoted. The Phrase, Thy Eyes will drop out
before thou will see such an Appearance, is equivalent to this, Thou will never
see such an Appearance, nor any other Man sor thee, as that common Phrase, at
the Greek Calends. And whereas he adds: And Christ's last Coming in Power and
great Glory in his Glorious Body, accompanied with his mighty Angels, at the
Resurrection, must be seen with stronger, clearer, and more celestial Eyes,
than perishing Eyes. Here he still hides his vile Error. What are these more
celestial Eyes, seeing he will not have Christ's Coming to be without Men in a
bodily Existence? For in his Light and Life, he quotes Matthew. 16. 27, 28. and
Luke 9. 26, 27. in plain opposition to Christ's outward Coming, saying, -- When
was that Coming to be? Is it now to be looked for outwardly; and seeing he is
not to Come outwardly but inwardly, these celestial Eyes, in his sense, must be
inward Eyes. But then, how shall the Wicked see him? for the Scripture says,
Every Eye shall see him, even they who have pierced him; must they have
celestial Eyes wherewith to see him? And though the Wicked shall not see him in
the same manner that the Godly shall see him, yet certainly, according to
Scripture, and the Faith of all true Christians, all that ever lived, as well
as they that shall be found alive in the Body at his Coming, both good and bad,
shall see him, as an object without them; yea, Christ told the Chief Priest and
the Jews, Mat. 26. 64. Hereafter shall ye see the Son of Man sitting on the
right hand of power, and coming in the clouds of heaven. At which saying, the
High Priest rent his Clothes, and said, he had spoke Blasphemy. It seems if G.
W. had been present, he would have given the same judgment. Does G. W. think
that the High Priest and those Jews shall see Christ with celestial Eyes,
seeing, according to his Philosophy, no other Eyes but celestial Eyes can see
him at his Coming?

But again, Note, G. W.'s palpable contradiction both to himself and to T. E.
in his Truth and Innoc. above-quoted, p. 61. he seems to own Christ's Coming,
as a thing yet to be at the end of the World, though in Light and Life, p. 41.
from that very place, which he now quotes for it, Matthew. 16. 27, 28. he did
argue against it; and thus in express words does T. Elwood in his pretended
Answer to my First Narrative argue, p. 160. That Coming (says he) there spoken
of by Christ, Matthew. 16. 27. could not be meant of his Coming at the end of the
World, because it was to begin in that very Age. And yet G. W. in his Truth and
Innoc. contrary to his former gloss, and T. Elwood also, would seem now to
understand it of Christ's coming, as a thing yet to be at the end of the World,
and if he do not so understand it, he most grossly deceives his Reader, and if
he do so understand it, he palpably contradicts himself, as well as his Brother
T. E. and yet he is the insallible G. W. still, without any change. And for all
G. W. his seeming now at last, to be drawn, to a plain confession of his Faith,
concerning Christ without us, in his, Appendix to the Switch, p. 544. yet he is
still fallacious, and lurks like a Snake in the Grass. He professes to own his
belief, concerning Christ without us, in Eight several steps, from his
Conception and Birth without us, to his Resurrection, and Ascension without us,
Being seen (says he) to ascend without us, and a Cloud received him out of
their sight, who beheld him ascend; unto whom it was said by the Two Angels
present, This same Jesus which is taken up from you into Heaven, shall so come
in like manner, as ye have seen him go into Heaven, Acts 1. 3, 9, 10, 11. And
doubtless when he so comes, and all his mighty Angels with him, it will be in
great Glory and open Triumph, and he will in that Day be greatly glorified in
his Saints, and admired in all them that believe, 2 Thessalonians. 1. 7, 8, 9, 10.

Note, How he gooth no further in his confession to Christ without us, but to
his Ascension, and the Cloud receiving him out of their sight. But in the other
two following steps of the Christians Faith, fully as necessary as the former
Eight, and without which the other Eight are of little or no signification, to
demonstrate a true Christian, viz. Christ's being sat down without us, at the
Right Hand of God, in the true Nature of Man, consisting of a Created glorified
Soul and Body, the same he had on Earth, the same in Substance, but wonderfully
changed in manner and condition, and in that very glorified Nature of Man that
he will come without us, to Judge the Quick and the Dead; he is altogether
silent, and his Words seem rather to imply a denial of them, than any
affirmation, as with respect either to Christ's being now in Heaven, without
us, in that Body which rose from the Grave, or his coming without us from
Heaven in that Body to Judgment.

Again, take notice of another fallacy of G. W. in his answer to the question
proposed, whether they ( i.e. the Quakers) believe in Christ as without them,
as without all other Men, he varieth the terms of the question, from a
believing in Christ without them, to a Historical Faith of their believing that
Christ was Conceived without them, Born without them, Crucified without them;
all which he and his Brethren may believe Historically, as they believe the
Historical Relation of Moses's Birth, Death, etc. and yet have no Faith in
Christ without them, as the great Savior of Men, for remission of Sin,
Justification and Eternal Life and Salvation, Light and Life, p. 64.
as the great Object of saving Faith, for this he has fiercely opposed in his
Light and Life, arguing against W. B. who asserted Christ without us in Heaven,
to be the Object of our Faith, for Justification. (Says G. W.) Is the Object
and Foundation of Faith divided from the Faith?

But what the Cloud is that received Christ out of the sight of Men, and with
what Body Christ did ascend, and whether as a Person without us, Christ is to
be Prayed unto, and whether he is to return as a Person without us to Judge the
World; hear what W. Bailie, a great Author among the Quakers, says. In his
Printed Collection, p. 300. -- But methinks I hear some say (in their
Reasonings and Imaginations) What Body has he, and where is it, seeing it is
said, he is at the Right Hand of God? This I shall Answer (says he) with his
own words, which he spoke here on Earth, viz. No Man ascended up to heaven, but
he that came down from heaven, the Son of Man which is in heaven; he that has
an Ear to hear let him hear and take notice, what Body that was which came down
from Heaven, when Mary said unto the Angel, How can this be, seeing I know not
a Man? Thus we see he falsifies our Savior's words, and will have no Body that
ascended to Heaven, but what came from Heaven; whereas our Savior, in the
place quoted, mentions not the Word BODY.

Again, In his Treatise Deep calls unto Deep, p. 30. he says, -- And so he
taught them to Pray, Our Father, etc. not to look at his Person, and Pray to
him as a Person without them, but bad them Pray to their Father which sees in
secret, etc. Again, in his p. 26. But, indeed, it is but a Cloud that has
received him out of the sight of the Gazers; but says the Lord to his
Children, I have blotted out your Iniquities like a thick Cloud. -- And,
indeed, this [viz. the Cloud of their Sins] has hid both his Body and Face
from you, for the Kingdom of Heaven, and the Lord from Heaven, comes not with
outward observation, but the Kingdom is within. And in his p. 29. I never read
in all the Scriptures ( says he) as I can remember, of a Third Coming of
Christ, personally in his own single Person, or of a personal Reign, besides,
what shall be in his Saints. And G. W. in his Christ Ascended above the Clouds,
not only denies any personal Coming of Christ, yet to be at the end of the
World, but denies him to have a personal Existence in Heaven, without the
Saints, and charge it to be Anthropomorphitism and Muggletonism. And, indeed,
I know not one place of Scripture, of the many that are justly brought by sound
Christians to prove Christ's Coming without us, in his Glorified Body to Judge
the World, at the great Day of Judgment, but they have turned altogether to his
inward Coming, which, they say, they witness already fulfilled in them, and
they look for no other Coming.

Ninthly, Concerning the Resurrection of the Body that Dies.
G. W. instead of answering to the Quotations brought out of his and his
Brethren's Books against the Resurrection of the Body that Dies, has not so
much as produced them; or any part of them, they are so broadfac'd Proofs, to
evidence his and his Brethren's Infidelity in that great Article of Faith, that
he seems ashamed so much as to mention them. And whereas he says, their
Arguments not being answered by their Opposers, he shall need say the less to
them; and concludes, That he would have them so Charitable, that they would not
condemn them as Blasphemers, for believing that their Resurection-Bodies shall
be Spiritual and Glorious, far excelling these natural, carnal and earthly
Bodies; for else, how should the Saints Bodies be like unto Christ's Glorious
Body.

Note here again, He seeks to cloak his and his Brethren's Infidelity, by
perverting the true state of the Question, which is not, That the
Resurrection-Bodies of the Saints shall not be wonderfully changed, and far
excelling these natural, carnal and earthly Bodies, and made Spiritual and
Glorious, like to Christ's Glorious Body, for that is acknowledged; But the
true Question is, Whether the Saints Bodies, at the Resurrection, shall be so
changed, that they shall not be the same in Substance, or Essence of Bodies,
and consequently in no respect the same; for if the Substance be not the same,
to be sure, the Accidents are not; and consequently, nothing of that Body that
dies, either in Matter or Manner, in Substance or Modification, rises again;
for our Lord's Body, though it was wonderfully changed in Manner and Qualities,
at his Glorification, yet it remained the same in Substance or Essence of a
Body. And yet more fully to detect their Fallacy, the following Quotations will
prove, That they look for no Resurrection of the Body out of the Grave, at the
end of the World; but all the Resurrection they look for, is, The New Birth, or
what they expect, as some of them say, immediately after Death, which, to be
sure, is no part of the Body that is laid in the Grave. But whereas he says,
that W. P.'s and T. Elwood's Arguments about the Resurrection have not been
answered by their Opposers, is false; they have been sufficiently Answered
again and again, as The Snake in the Grass, Satan Disrobed, and in my First,
Second, and Third Narratives.

G. Whitehead in Christian Quaker, p. 353. brings T. Danson saying, The
happiness of the Soul is not perfect without the Body, its dear and beloved
Companion; the Soul having a strong desire and inclination to a reunion to the
Body, as the Schools not without ground determine, etc.

To this G. W. Answers; Both Calvin, T. Danson, the Schools, and diverse
Anabaptists, are mistaken in this very matter, and see not with the Eye of true
Faith, either that the happiness of the Soul is not perfect without the Body,
or that the Soul has a strong desire to a reunion to the Body, while they
intend the terrestrial elementary Bodies; for this implies the Soul to be in a
kind of Purgatory, or disquietness, till the supposed Resumption of the Body.

To the same effect does W. P. argue against T. Hicks, Reason against Railing,
p. 137. He quotes T. Hicks arguing for the Resurrection of the Body; the Joy's
of Heaven imperfect else. To this W. Penn opposes. I Answer, Is the Joy of the
Ancients, now in Glory, imperfect? Or are they in Heaven but by halves? If it
be so unequitable, that the Body which has suffered should not partake of the
Joys Celestial, is it not in measure unequal, that the Soul should be rewarded
so long before the Body? This Principle brings to the Mortality of the Soul
(held by many Baptists) or I am mistaken. But why must the Felicity of the
Soul, depend upon that of the Body? Is it not to make the Soul a kind of
Widow,, and so in a state of Mourning and Disconsolateness, which state is but
a better sort of Purgatory.

Note, We see from both their Reasonings, they would infer diverse absurdities,
that would follow upon that Doctrine, that the Souls of the deceased Saints now
in Glory, do look for a reunion to their Bodies, which they put off at the
Bodily Death. So that by their manner of Reasoning, as well as their express
Words, they declare themselves in their own behalf, and in the Name of the
Quakers, whose Faith they pretend to give an account of, to be positive
Unbelievers as concerning any Resurrection of the Body that Dies, or any
reunion of that Body, to the Soul to which it was formerly united before the
Bodily Death. But still G. W. as his manner is, perverts the true state of the
question by his saying, While they intend the terrestrial elementary Bodies:
For if he mean that the Bodies after they are raised shall have the same
terrestrial elementary Qualities, Passions and Accidents, that they had before
Death, he wrongs his Opponents, for none of them have so affirmed: But if he
mean the same Substance or Essence of Bodies, under more excellent Qualities
and Endowments, as far excelling the former, as Spiritual excells Natural, or
Animal and Carnal, Immortal and Incorruptible excells Mortal and Corruptible,
and Heavenly excells Earthly, they are the same: For in all changes that Bodies
are capable of, as well as Souls or Spirits, from worse to better; the subject
of these changes must remain the same, and that is what is justly called the
Substance, as when the Soul or Mind of Man is converted and changed from
Earthly affections to Heavenly, the Subject or Substance which is the Soul or
Mind is the same, and by as good Reason, when a Body is changed from Earthly
qualities to Heavenly, the Body is still the same Substance or Subject, though
changed in Qualities and Conditions: For further proofs out of both G. W. and
W. P. I refer to my Third Narrative, p. 26, 27, 28.

Again, Rich. Hubbertborne, a great Author among the Quakers in his Coll. p.
121. proceeds at the same rate against the deceased Saints, looking for the
Resurrection of their Bodies. -- And these are they (says he) that plead for a
Life in Sin, while they are here, and that say, that the Saints glorified in
Heaven, do yet hope, For the Resurrection of their Bodies, and so not come to
the end of their hope, though in Heaven, when as the Saints upon Earth, witnessed
the end of their hope the Salvation of their Souls. Now these may well deny
perfection on Earth, who deny it in Heaven, which the Saints, we and the
Scriptures do witness it in, both and against all such, who are not fit to
speak of the things of God. See further in my Third Narrative, p. 29.

Note, Here again, G. W.'s gross Fallacy and Sophistry, Truth and Innoc. p. 59.
as if Rich. Hubberthorne had only opposed the Doctrine of the glorified Saints
in Heaven, not being perfect, which is a most deceitful Evasion, by mistating
the Controversy, R. Hub. here is not disputing against the Papists who
maintain a Purgatory, but against a Protestant Author, who did hold, That all
the deceased Saints, are perfect with a sinless perfection, but it does not
therefore follow, that they do not in that sinless state, hope for the
Resurrection of their Bodies, which yet is R. Hubb.'s inference, by which he
does plainly discover his, and his Brethrens infidelity in that great Article
of the Christian Faith, viz. the Resurrection of the Body.

Again, in Coll. p. 275. he gives us his sense of the Resurrection. The Seeds
(he says) are but two in the whole World [ viz. the Seed of the Woman, and the
Seed of the Serpent] having each Seed its own Body, and in every one, until the
one be cast out, and every one of these two Seeds in every Man shall arise in
its own order, the one shall rise unto everlasting Life, the other unto
Condemnation, -- Christ the Seed made his Grave, IN the Wicked, and IN the Rich
in his Death, and out of that Grave shall rise with his Body unto everlasting
Life, if thou can receive it, thou may be satisfied. Are not these Words
horrid Perversions of Scripture, and containing abominable Blasphemy!

Again, G. F. in his Distinction betwixt the Two Suppers, p. 20. says, -- And
the Apostle said, that there shall be a Resurrection of the Dead, both of the
Just and Unjust, and for Preaching the Resurrection of the Dead (namely, Christ
Jesus) he was called in question, Acts 24. 15, 21. And in p. 21. quoting 2 Timothy
2. 17, 18. he says, But Hymenaeus and Philetus concerning the Truth erred, who
said that the Resurrection was past already; such overthrew People from the
Faith, that stands in Christ, who is the Resurrection and the Life, through
which Faith, they attained to the Resurrection, and had their vile Bodies
changed, and made like unto his Glorious Body.

Note, How he perverts the Scripture both in words and sense; the Scripture
words, Who shall change our vile or low Bodies, respecting the time to come, at
the Resurrection of the Dead; but he says, they attained the Resurrection, and
had their vile Bodies changed, as a thing already fulfilled. Also he makes the
Resurrection that Paul Preached in the Acts 17. 18, 22. and 23. 6. to be Christ
himself, perverting our Savior's words, who called himself the Resurrection
and the Life, to a literal sense, which (as is obvious to all intelligent
Persons) contain a figurative sense, to wit, the metony my of the Cause getting
the Name of the Effect, as is frequent in Scripture, and in all Authors; as
when God is called in Scripture the Saints Hope, and Confidence, and Salvation,
i. e. the Author and Cause of their Hope, Confidence and Salvation.

Tenthly, Concerning the Quakers Notion of the Light Within.
THE true Doctrine and Sense of the Light Within, as a Divine and Supernatural
Gift of God, given to all faithful Christians, of whom it is truly said (as
David said, concerning himself) The Lord is their Light and their Salvation;
and also that Christ the Eternal and Essential Word, who was in the beginning
with God, and was and is God, is that true Light, that does enlighten every Man
that comes into the World, even Heathens and all Individuals of Mankind, with
a common and universal Illumination, Discovery and Knowledge, of certain moral
Principles, of Justice and Temperance; and also of some general knowledge of
God, as the great Creator and Ruler of the World, and of some general moral
Duties toward him as such, [whether by certain innate impressions preventing
the exercise and actings of the rational Faculty, or by exciting and awakening
the rational Faculty of the Soul, as it is enlightened and assisted by God
Almighty, as the primary Cause, and by the works of Creation and of general
Providence, as secondary Causes; whether one or both of these ways is not so
necessary at present to determine,] is a Doctrine well warranted by Scripture,
and consented unto by the generality of Professors of Christianity, and which I
not only consent unto, but highly value as an excellent Principle, laboring
daily, by the Grace of God, practically to improve whatever true Light within I
have, both Common and Special, and, I hope, ever I shall so do, and so I pray
that God may enable all and me to do the same: But the Quakers Notion of the
Light within, held in general by them, and authentickly received from their
Principal Teachers, particularly G. F. G. W. E. Bur. and others, is extremely
contrary to the Holy Scriptures, and also to the best dictates of our rational
Faculties, to which no divine Light, either within Men or without Men, can
contradict.

To show which has been a principal part of my business in all the the three
Meetings, abovementioned, and is the same in all the three Parts of this
Narrative, the which contrariety I intend to show in a short Scheme of their
absurd, unscriptural, as well as irrational Notions of what they call the Light
within; which, upon due examination, will be found to be Darkness, and not
Light, within.

1. It Is natural to Man to have a Supernatural Light, W. P.'s Prin. Christ. p.
15.

2. There is no natural Light in Men, Prin. Christ. p. 30. There are not two
Lights in Men, p. 31. Thus he allows no distinction betwixt natural Reason,
which is a good and true Light, and Gift of God to Men, and the Light of Faith,
given to all true Christians, and the Light of prophetical Inspirations given
to the holy Prophets and Apostles, but confounds them, by making them all to be
one and the same thing, whereas they, are all very distinct, though all coming
from one Fountain and Author, God, the Father of Lights.

3. Man at his coming into the World has a Light from Christ, which is more
than Conscience, G. F.'s G. M. p. 209.

4. And seeing the Light is but dim in Heathens and Christians, and Prophets
and Apostles, by Prin. Christ. as above-quoted, no Man has, or ever had, any
other Light, but what he had at his coming into the World.

5. The Light within, not only true Christians, but within all Men, Heathens,
Turks, Jews, is sufficient to Salvation without any thing else, G.W.'s Antid.
p. 28. Thus the Man Christ without us (who is both God and Man) and his Death
and Sufferings, and Blood outwardly shed, and Mediation for us in Heaven, are
all excluded from being so much as concurring Causes of our Salvation.

6. The Light within every Man (literally understood without any Metonymy) is
God, Christ, the Holy Ghost, the Unction or Anointing, is blinded in some by
the God of this World ( G. F. News out of the North, p. 19.) is Crucified,
Imprisoned, Slain, in wicked Men, and its Blood is shed in them, and that is
the Blood that they trod under feet (see the places above-quoted) and is the
Blood of Atonement.

7. This Light is first a Seed, then a new born Child, and lastly, the Mighty
God; see W. P.'s and W. B.'s words above-quoted.

8. This Light within being God, etc. teaches the Quakers immediately and
infallibly, as it did the Prophets and Apostles, and they Speak and Write from
the same Prophetical Illumination and Inspiration that the Prophets and
Apostles had; yea, from the same degree, at least some of them; and G. F. was
come to the same Fullness that was in Christ, and the Works of their Ministry is
to bring People to the same Fullness, that was in Christ, that it may be in
them, i. e. to make them all equal to Christ and God, as above-quoted.

9. The Light within, teaches them, what they Preach and Write without the
Scriptures, being the means, or a means to help or assist them in so Preaching
and Writing: hence it is that E. B. upbraids all Protestant Ministers, Coll. p.
126. saying -- Their Prophecy and Preaching would soon be ended, if they had
not the Scripture, which is other Men's Words, and that which was spoken to
others, to speak their imaginations from.

10. That this Light within every Man, is the Gospel, the Power of God, unto
Salvation, to every one that believes in it, and is the alone Object of Faith,
[as above-quoted] and that Prophet whom God promised to raise up.

11. That the Light within every Man, is the Rule of Faith, and Life to all
Men, as above-quoted, yea, a full Rule to lead to Salvation, where it is
obeyed. The Glory of Christ's Light within, by G. W. and others p. 32. and p.
28. from the Light of Christ within, they [ i. e. all Men] have so much of the
Instructions or Precepts therein [in Scripture] contained as are necessary to
Salvation. Note, This is to teach People to be saved, by a mere Covenant of
Works, Do and live, which none ever yet fulfilled, but Christ, for all have
sinned, Romans 3.

12. This Light within them is whole Christ, God and Man, Flesh and Spirit, G.
F. G. M. p. 246. 249. and G. E. is so much for the Flesh, Body, Blood and Bones
of Christ within, that he denies that Christ has any Body that is absent from
his People, and is now in the presence of his Father, G. M. p. 211.

13. It is the Flesh and Bone of Christ, a measure in one, and a measure in
another. Note, This is to make the whole to be the part and the part or ( G. M.
246.) measure to be the whole.

14. The Saints eat his Flesh, and they that eat this Flesh, has it within
them. G. M. p. 322. Thus arguing most grossly from a Metaphorical eating to a
Literal.

15. The Light within is the Urim and Thummim, as G. W. says Truth and Inno. p.
16. which not only the Quakers have, but all Men, Heathens and Infidels as
really as they.

16. Christ within is the Doctrine of Salvation, which IS ONLY necessary to be
Preached, and he is a deceiver, that exhorts People for Salvation to any other
thing than the Light of Christ, as he has enlightened them within.

Note, This evidently appears from those passages in E. B.'s The true Faith of
the Gospel of Peace, p. 29. 30. quoted in that called, Some account from
Colchester, signed by Seven Quakers above mentioned, [the whole of which
account is in the several heads of this Narrative fully replied unto] which
these Seven Quakers are so far from Censuring, that they have justified them,
p. 16. 17. But to hide their deceit in their reply they transpose the Words of
E. B. in his Q. 12. which were the Light of Christ to Christ who is that true
Light, whereas it is manifest, that by Christ that true Light, they meant the
same which E. B. viz. ONLY the Light within.

Again, in their p. 17, 18. they justify G. W. 's saying, They that want
infallibility, and have not the Spirit of Christ, they are out of the truth,
and are fallible, and their Ministry is not of the Spirit.

Note, Here they not only disown such Ministers who have not the Spirit, but
who are fallible in any case; for that is the true state of the Controverse, as
stated betwixt G. W. and T. D. Voice of Wisdom, p. 33. Want of infallibility is
a valid Plea against the Ministry; let the intelligent therefore judge whether
G. W.'s fallibility sufficiently proved in this Narrative, as well as that of
his Brethren by his Argument, has not manifestly discovered him and them to be
no Ministers of Christ.]

Note, Their faulting so much, some small Errors of the Press no wise materal,
as by the Original manuscript yet extant, and ready to be produced, if
required, is to be seen, shows their quibling Humor, straining at a Gnat, and
swallowing down a Camel; as also their querying if this or that of the
Quotations brought against them be against the Foundation of the Christian
Religion, as was said in the Title Page of the Sheet, to which they have made a
pretended reply; but are they so ignorant as not to know that every Error is
against the Foundation, in some degrees though every Error is not Fundamental,
so as to destroy the Foundation, 2. That Errors as well as other ill things
receive their denomination from the greater and worse part; as indeed, the far
greatest part of all therein contained is destructive to the very Foundation of
Christian Religion, as is on the several Heads plainly shown.

And as to the Printed Testimony of John Gledhill, Nonconformist Minister,
which they have prefixed to their Some Account, it avails them nothing, for he
grants that he did witness to the truth of the Quotations, and no more was
desired from him. The Printing of his Name without his knowledge and consent,
reflects no blame on the Person who desired him to set his hand to it, even
though he told him, that that Paper was not designed for the Press, for that
Person did not put it to the Press, but it was Printed without his leave or
consent; and the Person who put it to the Press, was under no tie to hinder him
from so doing, but judged it would be of Service to the Truth to make it
public, as he still so judges; and it is no dishonor to J. Gledhill, nor his
Brethren, but commendable to have their Names in Print, to attest to the great
Truths of the Gospel, in opposition to the Quakers great Errors, that do so
manifestly contradict them. And it would be yet more commendable in him and
them, to bear a more full and zealous Testimony against them, to stop the
gangrene of the Quakers vile Errors, that have so much prevailed in Colchester,
as in many other places of the Nation.

Note, By this and all the foregoing Quotations it is sufficiently evident,
that the Light within, not as taught by the Scriptures, but as taught by the
Quakers, has led them into manifold Blasphemies, and vile Errors, as the
Norfolk Ministers have most justly charged them, concerning God, Christ and the
holy Scriptures.

11thly, and 12thly, Concerning Baptism and the Lord's Supper.
IN a Book, called, Some Principles of the Elect People of God, in Scorn called
Quakers, p. 75. The Baptism we own, which is the Baptism of Christ, with the
Holy Ghost and with Fire, but we deny all other; for there is but one Lord, one
Faith, one Baptism, one God and Father of all; add they who would have one
Baptism outward and another inward, would have two Baptisms, when the Scripture
says the Baptism is but one; and whosoever has the Baptism outward, are the
same they were before, but the Baptism of Christ makes a new Creature. -- And
now I see the other to be formal Imitation, and the invention of Man; and so a
mere Delusion; and all are Heathens, and no Christians, who cannot witness this
Baptism, Matthew, 15. 4. who can witness this DENIES ALL OTHER; for the Scripture
says, the Baptism is but one. And in p. 76. -- And are without, feeding upon
the Husk and Shadow, which is carnal; for the Bread which the World breaks, is
Carnal and Natural, and only feeds the outward carnal Body, and goes into the
Belly, and so passes out into the Dunghill; and so likewise the Cup which they
drink, and so the Communion and Fellewship of the World passes away; but this
is no nourishment to the Soul, but still the Soul lies in Death, and here is no
Commnnion, but natural, outward and carnal, of several Minds and Hearts, full
of Filthiness and Uncleanness, which IS THE TABLE OF DEVILS, Eating and
Drinking their own Damnation, not discerning the Lord's Body, which is
Spiritual, which the natural Man discerns not.

W. P. in his Reason against Railing, p. 108. -- I affirm, by that one
Scripture [ Heb. 9. 10.] Circumcision is as much in force, as Water Baptism,
and the Paschal Lamb, as Bread and Wine, they were both Shadows, and both
elementary and perishable.

And we can testify FROM THE SAME SPIRIT, by which Paul renounced
Circumcision, that they are to be rejected, as not now required; neither have
they, since the false Church espoused and exalted them, ever been taken up
afresh by God's Command, or in the leading of his Eternal Spirit; and the Lord
will appear to gather his People out of them, but never to establish or keep
People in them.

Note, Notwithstanding the severe Censure that the Quakers have passed on the
outward Administration of Baptism and the Lord's Supper, in the former
Quotation, and W. Penn in this latter Quotation; in the one they say, Baptism
with Water, and the Lord's Supper, with Bread and Wine, are to BE DENIED, WE
DENY (say they) ALL OTHER; and in the other W. P. says, they are to be
REJECTED, and this (he says) they can testify from the same Spirit by which
Paul renounced Circumcision; yet W. Penn, in his Key, Printed at London, 1699.
says, -- Hence it is that the People called Quakers, cannot be said to deny
them [ viz. the outward Administration of Baptism and the Supper] that is
(says he) too hard a Word, -- But they leave them off, as fulfilled in Christ,
who is in them, their hope of Glory. Is there not here a palpable contradiction
betwixt W. Penn and his Brethren? He says in his Key, p. 28. The People called
Quakers cannot be said to deny them, that is too hard; and yet in the former
Quotation, they have used that very same Word, -- WE DENY ALL OTHER, say they;
and call it the Invention of Man, and so a mere Delusion.

But it is fearful Delusion in them, to call these so solemn Institutions of
our Blessed Savior, expressly enjoined to the end of the World, and his coming
to Judgment, by such Names; yea, and the like contradiction is found betwixt W.
P. in his Reason against Railing, in the Year 1673. and the same W. P. in his
Key, Printed 1699. In the former he says, We can testify from the same Spirit
by which Paul rejected Circumcision, that they are to be rejected; In the
latter he says, The People called Quakers cannot be said to deny them, that is
too hard a Word; yet we see they have denied them, both by Practice and verbal
Confession; yea, and rejected them, and with no less pretended Authority, than
the same Spirit by which Paul rejected Circumcision.

Where is now the Unity they boast of? seeing in this, as well as in diverse
other things of great weight, they are so contradictory and unconstant to
themselves, and yet without all change, if we will believe them.

And notwithstanding the severe Censure that the Quakers in general, and G. W.
in particular, have passed on Baptism and the Lord's Supper, outwardly
Administered, calling them, the Invention of Man, a mere Delusion, and Idolatry,
and the Lord's Supper, The Table of Devils, and the Cup of Devils: yet G. W. in
his Antidote, p. 114. Printed 1697, pretends a great deal of Moderation and
Charity to some who practice them, but without any change in him -- And though
too many now are very Formal and Superstitious in those outward Observations
and Shadows, laying so much stress for Salvation upon them, that they neglect
the Substance, yet others being more conscientiously tender in the observation
thereof, we are the more tender to these, so as not to censure or condemn them
merely for practicing that which they believe is their Duty, either in breaking
of Bread, or Water Baptism, yet desire they may see further.

Note, What can this smooth Language of W. P. and G. W. concerning Baptism and
the Supper now of late Years import or signify to all impartial Persons, but
that thereby they seek to deceive the weak and simple, seeing they will not
acknowledge, that they are changed in any respect from what they were in the
beginning, either in point of Persuasion, or Charity? They mean the same now,
as when they called them, universally and without exception, beggarly Elements,
worldly Rudiments, Idolatry, Invention of Man, and mere Delusion?

But seeing they are not changed in their Faith and Persuasion, concerning
Water Baptism and the Supper, they cannot with any good Conscience be changed
in their being more charitable now then formerly, so that G. W.'s saying, they
do not censure or condemn them, who are more conscentiously tender in the
observation thereof, merely for practicing that which they believe is their
duty, is a mere fallacy. Do they not condemn all visible Christian Societies
but their own, and call them Apostates, the World, Idolaters, Worshippers of
Baal, and the Preachers belonging to those Societies Priests of Baal, etc. Do
they not censure them, who practice Idolatry, and Man's Invention, and mere
Delusion? as they have past Judgment on those outward practices, to be such.
And if People's practicing what they believe is their Duty, being misled by an
erring Conscience, and Ignorance of Mind (as the Quakers think all are so
misled who practice the outward Baptism and Supper) can excuse them from
censure, according to G. W.'s way of Argument, they may extend as much Charity,
not only to Judaising Christians, that would practice outward Circumcision, but
to Insidels, Jews and Mahometans; yea, and the most Superstitious and
Idolatrous Papists, for no doubt many of them practice what they believe is
their Duty, when they pray to the Virgin Mary, and other Saints, and adore the
Bread in the Mass, being misled by an erring Conscience, to believe it is the
real Body of Christ.

But they falsely infer, that because unworthy Persons do partake of the
outward Supper, that therefore it is the Table of Devils, and the Cup of
Devils, Paul did not say, he that Eats and Drinks unworthily, Eats at the Table
of Devils; But he that eats this Bread, and drinks this Cup of the Lord
unworthily, shall be guilty of the Body and Blood of the Lord, 1 Cor. 11. 27.
Thus we see that according to Scripture, that Cup which the unworthy drink is
the Cup of the Lord, and not the Cup of Devils, and that Bread which they eat
is the Bread of the Lord, as Augustine said, the unworthy they eat Panem
Domini, but not Panem Dominum the Bread of the Lord, but not the Bread which is
the Lord?

Some of the Quakers said, George, seeing thou art for the outward Baptism and
the Supper, why do thou not practice them.

To this I gave the following account, which many declared was satisfactory
unto them, that not having an outward Call, I ought not to administer them to
others upon the pretense of an inward extraordinary Call, which too many
pretend to have. And for my Speaking at Turners-Hall, and elsewhere as I had
occasion, I do not pretend to any extraordinary Call in so doing, but what I
did, was what a private Christian, who has a Spiritual Gift and Ability given
him of God (especially to oppose Heresy) may and ought to do, to teach his
Neighbors Catechistically (not to set up any Sect, or make any Schism) as
Origin taught in Christian Assemblies, when a Layman, before he received
Ordination; and so did others, as Eusebius shows in his Church History: And
as to Baptism, I was satisfied with what I had received in Infancy, being Born
of Christian Parents; for I believe, That Baptism, being a Seal of God's
Covenant of Grace, does as really belong to Infant Chirdren of Believers under
the New Testament, as Circumcision did to Infant Children of Believers under
the Old Testament. Next as concerning the Lord's Supper, after it pleased God
to convince me that it is an Institution of Christ, and let me see my Error and
Sin, in rejecting it, for which I have been humbled before God, and asked his
Forgiveness, and which, I hope, God for Christ's sake, has given me; I had some
considerable time of hesitation, about the lawful and due Administrator, and
after I had clearness in that, I delayed for some time, for the sake of some
others, lest my forwardness should be an hindrance and offense to them; but,
through Mercy, that being much removed, I became uneasy to delay it longer, so
that I declared I did intend, God willing, with the first opportunity, to
receive it. And whereas my Adversaries among the Quakers did object against me,
that I am a Member of no visible Society, and on that pretense refuse to have
any public Dispute or Conference with me. To this I answered, first, Supposing
it were so, why should that be made a Crime in me, which W. P. in his Preface
to G. Fox's Journal, esteemed so great a Virtue in G. Fox, viz. That he was of
no particular Society; but, secondly, I told them I was a Member of the
Catholic Church of Christ, and I did own the Church of England to be a part of
the Catholic Church, and other Protestant Churches to be other parts of the
same.

In the close of the Meeting I told the Auditory, I was ready, by God's
Assistance, to prove against my Adversaries, the Chief Leaders and Teachers of
the Quakers, particularly George Whitehead, Jos. Wyeth, and them of the
Second-Days-Meeting at London, who have approved the Quakers Books, That they
do not believe One Article of that called the Apostles Creed, in the true sense
of Scripture, and of all true and Orthodox Christians throughout the World; and
I desired the Quakers present, to acquaint their Brethren with my said
Proposal: I also told the Auditory, that the false pretenses of the Quakers
Teachers to extraordinary prophetical Inspirations gave them the just Character
of false Prophets, and all such who had the like false pretenses with them; and
that none could justly be so called, however otherwise unsound or mistaken,
that had not those high pretenses. That it was some of the most crying Sins
committed in this Land, that so many false Prophets should abound in it,
speaking Lies in the Name of the Lord, and saying, Thus says the Lord,
pretending the fame Immediate Message and Authority that the true Prophets had,
whenas they can give no proof of it, but many undeniable proofs can be given to
the contrary, as particularly their vile Antichristian Errors published in
their Books, and that lewd Swearing and open Profanation of the Name of God,
are not greater Sins, nor so great nor dangerous, in many respects, as their
speaking Lies in the Name of the Lord, and entituling their vile Errors and
Blasphemies to the Spirit of God, as they commonly do.

POSTSCRIPT.
FOR an Evidence of my owning the Church of England, to be a part of the true
Catholic Church of Christ, I did with great inward Peace and Satisfaction, I
bless God, receive the Lord's Supper, by D. Bedford, in his Church in
Buttolph-lane, with others of that Congregation, the first Lord's Day of the
Month of February, 1699, and since again in the same place, by the same Person,
the first Lord's Day of this Instant Month of March, 1699. On which same day
Robert Bridgeman, and Margaret Everard, and some other of my Friends (formerly
under the profession of Quakers, and in great repute among that People, whom
God, in his great Mercy, has of late times enlightened, to see their former
Error, and to renounce it) did receive the Lord's Supper in Huntington, and
have declared that they received it with great inward Peace and Satisfaction;
the account whereof I have from the said Robert Bridgeman, by his Letter to me,
bearing Date the 5th of this Instant; in which Letter he also informs me, and
in another of a former Date, of about Ten of my Friends in Huntington and
Godmanchester, and there-about, who formerly were Quakers all of good repute,
who now go to Church there; and that Margaret Everard has had her youngest Son,
and three Daughters lately Baptized: Also, by Letters from Bedford, I have an
account, that some both in the Town and County of Bedford are come off from the
Quakers and gone to Church, particularly W. Mather and his Wife; also at
Reading, diverse who were formerly Quakers and were so Educated, have gone to
Church and have been Baptized, and some there have brought their Children to be
Baptized, and here at London, diverse of both Sexes who were educated under the
profession of Quakers have been lately Baptized and go to Church, one of whom
is my Youngest Daughter, my Elder Daughter having been Baptized above a Year
ago, so that to my certain knowledge above forty Persons within a few Months
past are come off from Quakerism, and brought to the Church, which gives a good
ground of hope, that many others will follow, which God in his great Mercy
grant, and prosper my sincere, though mean Endeavors and Labors, and other his
Servants, whom he has made instrumental in this Work, and for the success he
has been pleased to give us therein, all Glory, and Honor and Praise be given
to his most worthy Name, through Jesus Christ, Amen. And whereas my adversaries
G. W. and other of the Preachers of the Second Days meeting at London, had
given it as a reason why they would not meet me at Turners-Hall, to dispute
with me, at the former Meetings for the Years 1696, 97, 98, according to my
published Advertisements, that they knew none who had been in Unity with them,
since I came into England, who did own me, or were in danger by me to be
brought off from them, that Objection, to their Knowledge and full Conviction,
is now quite removed, for both R. Bridgeman and M. Everard, (besides diverse
others that might be mentioned) were not only in Unity with them, since my
arrival into England, but in great repute among them. R. Bridgeman, having been
but lately a Member of their Men's Meetings at London, and one of the Twelve,
who were entrusted with the receiving and distributing the Money collected for
their poor in the City of London; and Margaret Everard having for many Years,
till of very late, been received and well owned as a Speaker among them, both
in City and Country. And it is most certain, that the Quakers refusing to meet
with me, at Turners-Hall, to answer to the Quotations I produced out of their
Books, has been a great means to let many of those formerly in Unity with them,
see their sandy Foundation, and the badness of their Cause, and will yet be a
further means to give many others the like discovery, who are dissatisfied with
their not appearing either to vindicate their Books and Authors, or to
acknowledge the great Errors contained in them, and publicly to retract them.
They are indeed brought to a very pinching dilemma, if they will not appear in
public view, to answer to the charges of the vile Errors and Heresies, yea,
and Blasphemes brought against them, by plain Quotations out of their Books
presented to the People present by ocular inspection, they now see by
experience of what is past, what the consequence will be, even that many of
themselves will see they have a bad Cause, which because they are not able to
defend, they find out and devise frivolous excuses, why they will not appear.
And if they will appear, there is the like and equal danger, that their Errors,
Heresies and Blasphemies will be detected to their own People, as indeed the
last Meetings, where some of them, (though none principally concerned,) did
appear, have had a good service in some owned by them, to give them a discovery
of them.

There remains but two shadows of Reason why they will not appear, one is, that
it is offensive to civil Authority, but this is a mere pretense, for whatever
offense it may be to some particular Persons that may too much favor their
errors, yet it can be no just offense to Civil Authority, there being no Law
against it, and where no Law is, there is no transgression, nor can it be
supposed, that it can offend the civil Authority, that such an innocent and
probable way to reduce the Quakers from their vile Heresy, which God has in
measure manifestly blessed with some Success, and to bring them to the Church,
is used to that effect: For, must not some means be used to reclaim them, and
what means so probable as this? The Act of Tolleration, to be sure, does not
forbid any, by fair Reason and Argument, to deal with them, for their
Convincement; and for an Instance, that this manner of proceeding is not
offensive to Authority, I had the leave of the Lord Mayor of London, for each
of the Meetings I have yet had.

Their other shadow of Reason, is, That they think it better to Answer in Print
to what is objected against them, out of their Books, than by Word of Mouth. I
confess, indeed, it is the most ready and expedient way for them to hide and
cloak their vile Errors, and boldly to deny them, whenever so justly charged
with them, by their Sophistical Quibling and Evasions; and particularly, by
their boldly asserting the Quotations to be falsely, or lamely given, when they
are ever so truly and fully given, which not one of many thousands, simply by
Reading their pretended Answers and Defenses in Print, can be able to judge,
whether the Quotations be true or false, perfect or lame; because they have
not, nor can they easily find out the Books, out of which the Quotations are
taken, whereby to compare them; and suppose the Books could be found, yet few
will bestow so much, either time or labor, to compare them; whereas the
presenting the Books and the Quotations contained in them, by Ocular
inspection, to Persons present, saves all that labor, and is the surest and
readiest way, to find out the truth of Matters, in point of Truth or Error, and
whether or not the Quakers are justly charged with those Errors. Beside, if
they think their Answering to the Charges against them, by Print, be profitable
to them, had they Truth on their side, they would be ready to defend their
Principles and Profession both ways, that is, both by Word of Mouth, and also
by their Pens, for still two ways are better than one; if both be proper to the
same true end, which is the Discovery of Truth and Error.

But notwithstanding of their brags, and telling that they have Answered me
from time to time in Print, yet this is but an empty flourish; diverse of my
chiefest Books against them, for the detection of their Errors, they have not
given the least Reply unto; as my Second and Third Narratives; my Book, called,
The Quakers Arguments against Baptism and the Supper, etc. Examined and
Refuted; my Larger and Shorter Catechisms; my Book, called, The Deism of W.
Penn, and that called, The Fallacies of W. P. and his Brethren, etc. And though
T. Elwood Printed a pretended Reply to my First Narrative, yet the Answer given
to it, called, Satan Disrobed, which has effectually discovered the falseness
and folly of it, has not received an Answer from them to this Day. And their
usual way of answering Books writ against them, is to Quible and Evade in some
few particulars, and wholly to pass by the most material things urged against
them: And yet to boast and brag, that they have given a sufficient Answer.

And whereas Jos. Wy^th, in his Printed Paper, in Answer to my late Printed
Advertisement, says, They (i. e. the Quakers) in common with all Protestant
Dissenters, are Entitled to the peaceable Profession of their Christian
Principles, and may be deemed imprudent to call it in Question, etc. To this I
say, it is a mere begging the Question, That either their Principles are
Christian, or that they are Intitul'd to the peaceable Profession of what they
call so, In Common with Protestant Dissenters. The Act of Toleration has no
more declared their Principles to be Christian, than the Toleration that
Holland and other Commonwealths, have given to Jews and Papists, does declare
their Principle to be Christian. Besides, though the Quakers think it imprudent
in them, to call their Principles or Profession in question, yet it is no
breach of the Act of Tolleration, nor imprudence in me, or any, who have
sufficient evidence to give of their Unchristian, yea, Antichristian
Principles, to call them in question, and that publicly in the Face of the
Nation.

And cannot the Quakers defend their Principles in Sober Disputes, in a
Christian Assembly, without breach of Peace, or invading their peaceable
Profession? How frequently did they provoke, but some Years ago, to public
Disputes, Ministers of the Church of England, whose Religion (was more than
Tolerated) was Established by Law? By the Quakers Argument, this was a breach
of the Peace, and an Invasion of the peaceable Profession of the Religion
Established by Law in the Nation.

But, to deal plainly with them, I do not think that either the Profession of
G. Whitehead, or Jos. Wyeth's Principles is so much as Tolerated by the Act of
Tolleration; and if they will call me to an Account for this my plain dealing
with them, before any Judicatory, I shall, by God's Assistance, be ready to
Answer.

I neither envy, nor grudge the connivance they have, but seeing they are
become so insolent with their false and unjust pretenses, to what they have
not, as if the Act of Tolleration did not only give them a permission, but did
entitle them to a peaceable profession of their most Antichristian Principles,
which they most falsely call Christian, that their Principles may not be called
in question, and fairly examined, and the falsehood of them detected in that
public manner that I have hitherto used, it is high time to tell them of their
mistake, that the Act of Tolleration does neither of them, and that therefore
the best and only safest and readiest way to be included in the Act of
Tolleration, is for them to reject, retract and renounce their vile errors,
especially those against the holy and ever blessed Trinity, whereof I have
sufficiently proved them guilty if this foregoing Narrative. Jos. Wyeth indeed,
hints at the most politic Reason they have for refusing to meet with me, to
hear themselves proved guilty of vile Heresies, that it would be a too public
exposing themselves to the danger of losing their pretense, to their being
entitled to the peacable profession of their Principles, which in other words
he expresses thus, To trifle away that for which they account themselves so
thankfully engaged to their Superiors, the intent of which he says, [viz. The
Act of Tolleration] In it is Preamble, is declared to be, to Unite the King's
Protestant Subjects in interest and affection. Surely by this way of his
Arguing he must needs think that to come to a public, fair, and free Trial,
were to endanger their liberty of Profession, or trifle it away: But how can
this trifle away their liberty, if their principles be Christian, and that they
are sure, they are by virtue of their Christian principles included in that
Act? To suppose their may be a danger to trifle away their liberty, or peacable
profession of what they call their Christian principles, by public Trial, is
to suppose, that upon due examination, their principles may be found not to be
Christian, which if once discovered would trifle away that liberty, and
therefore it is their best policy to hide and cover their principles, all that
they can, and still lie hid as the Snake in the Grass, for the evil doer hates
the Light, and is not willing to be brought to the Light. But how little do the
Quakers regard the intent of the Act of Tolleration, declared in its Preamble
to Unite the King's Protestant Subjects in interest and affection, when they
continue generally to this very Day, in their horrid uncharitableness toward
all visible Christian Societies, both Church of England and all Protestant
Churches, That they are no part of the Church of Christ, that their Religion,
and Worship is false and idolatrous, the people belonging to those Societies
are Worshippers of Baal, and their Ministers Priests of Baal, Deceivers,
Antichrists, denyers of Christ come in the Flesh, the bane of Soul and Body of
Mankind, etc. And have never to this Day, retracted this Language; is this to
Unite the King's Protestant Subjects in interest and affection, to rail against
that Religion, and Church, whereof the King himself, and the best of his
Subjects are members, and to call me and my Friends for owning that Church, and
coming into Communion with her, and relinquishing the errors condemned by that
Church, Apostates, and Runagadoes, as they have done, and still continue to do.
For his insinuation of my envy, which (he says) increasing, has led me into a
disturbance of Mind, which in its course resembles the returns of a delirious
affliction. I think it not worth noticing further than to give it as an
instance of his and their Scornful, Proud and Haughty, as well as Uncharitable
and Unchristian Temper and Spirit. They reckon me their Enemy, because I tell
them the truth, and labor to rescue them from out of the Snares of Satan, and
seeing my sincere labors God has been pleased to bless with success both in
America and here away, none of their malicious Insinuations or Accusations
against me, are nor I hope, shall be of force to stop me from my Christian
Duty, to contend earnestly for the Faith of Christ, which they seek to destroy.

Note, Since the last Meeting at Turners-Hall, there is come to my hands, a
pretended Answer to a Printed half Sheet of mine, called, A Synopsis W. P.' s
Deism, by Benj^ Cool, called, Sophistry Detected, of which shortly I purpose
(God willing) to give an answer and therein to detect his dull Sophistry, false
Quotation, and gross Perversion.

FINIS.
The Correction of Errata, most of which are not material, yet to prevent
Critical Objections, are Corrected as follows.
PAge 1. Line 16. for truth defended read truths defense. p. 2. 1. 19. f. the
r. this. 1. 30. after redemption should be a break -- p. 3. 1. 23. after p. 47.
r. say it is contrary to Christ to say, it is an error that. l. 41. for that r.
the p. 4. l. 14. on the Margin for p. 413. r. 463. l. 38. for counsel r.
council. l. 39. after counceller should be a break -- l. 42. before you should
be [p. 5. l. 41. before know r. and. p. 6. l. 7. for he confesses it and r.
does not disown it but. l. 8. dole the Spiritual Man judges all things. l. 9.
after World r. I am the Way, the Truth and the Life. p. 7. l. 14. for haughty
r. lofty. l. 16. after gift r. and Spirit. p. 8. l. 20. after come up. l. 36.
for 54. r. 45. l. 45. after Colchester r. p. 12. 13. p. 10. l. 20. after
perfect should be a break -- l. 35. before as dele is perfect. l. last. after
broken should be a break. -- p. 11. on the Margin add compare. l. 9. after
adoption r. p. 217. l. 11. after Church r. G. M. p. 301. l. 12. after thing r.
G. M. p. 27. meaning surely the Quakers Church put within [ ]. l. 21. for false
r. self. l. 22. after upright should be a break -- l. 37. after these r.
things. p. 12. l. 44. after Wisdom r. p. 18. p. 13. l. 45. after which r.
state. p. 14. l. 31. on the Margin for G. W. r. G. F. l. 37. after witness r.
the Scripture. l. 46. for truth r. truths. p. 15. l. 1. after thou add have. p.
15. l. 22. after Sons r. any p. 16. l. 25. for p. 23. r. p. 4. p. 17. l. 84,
after was dele a. l. 35. before the female dele in. l. last. for where r. when.
p. 18. l. 11. the Quotation out of Truth and Inno. p. 10. beginning at the and
ending at Christ, should be in Italick. p. 19. dele no. p. 23. l. 20. for (...)
r. (...). l. 32. r. Christianity. p. 24. l. 27. for p. 15. r. 155. p. 25. l.
26. after Quakers r. 7. l. 29. before Chapters for and r. or. p. 26. l. 30.
after defending r. p. 18. Q 29. p. 27. l. 32. for affirming r. saying to this
purpose, Reason against Railing. p. 109. p. 28. l. 36. after Rule r. Append. to
Chr. Quaker. p. 141. p. 29. l. 11. after Nature r. G. M. 246. l. 35. for
erroneous r. erroneous. p. 30. l. last. for single r. singular. p. 31. l. 36.
after lake r. p. 10. p. 32. l. 28. for Doctrins r. Darkness. p. 34. l. 6. after
Switch r. p. 50.* p. 37. l. 11. for 19. r. 18. p. 38. l. 36. as a Man has a
Coat or Garment but does not consist of it, should have been of Roman Letter
and within [] to distinguish them from the Quotation. p. 41. l. 43. for must r.
might. p. 42. l. 25. after 44. r. to this effect. l. 29. for 44. r. 56. p. 43.
l. 14. for 21. r. 20. l. 25. after Figure r. -- and it is a manifest forgery
upon me, that Christ's coming in the Flesh was but a Figure or Type of the
inward Christ or Light within. p. 45. l. 24. after defense r. Truth and Inno.
p. 54. p. 46. l. 3. after Blood r. of. l. 23. after Jerusalem r. to it. l. 24.
for was r. is. l. 31. after Colchester r. p. 14. p. 47. l. 5. after Faith r.
Light and Life. p. 45. l. 10. for P. r. V. l. 24. as is evident in the place
quoted, should be in Italick. p. 47. l. 32. r. is not. l. 34. should be in
Italick. p. 48. l. 1. after uses r. Truth and Inno. p. 55. l. 26. after says
add Truth and Inno. p. 57. p. 49. l. 16. before here r. Truth defended, p. 23.
24. l. 24. after it r. viz. l. 37. after within dele, p. 50. l. 40. before they
r. that. p. 51. l. 26. after which r. will. l. 30. r. shall rise. after Life r.
and. -- p. 52. the two last lines should be put in Italick. p. 54. l. 12. for
an r. and. l. 17. for terms r. term. p. 56. l. 20. after 293. r the answer is
as it was. l. 22. after Womb r. a holy thing. l. last, from the word yet, to l.
r. in p. 57. after greatest should be put betwixt [ ]. and in Roman Letter. p.
57. l. 12. after of dele the. l. 14. after Person make a break -- l. 17. before
Though should be a break -- p. 58. l. 35. for Word r. Mind. l. 40. for for this
r. his. l. 44. after Word should be a break -- p. 59. l. 11. after Life should
be a break -- l. 41. after Colchester r. p. 12. p. 60. l. r. dele not p. 62. l.
18. for state and r. state of. p. 64. l. last. before the r. Truth and Inn. p.
9. p. 68. l. 25. for Israel r. Saints. p. 71. l. penult. for Manicheus r.
Manicheans. p. 72. l. 16. for and reign r. or reign. p. 81. l. 7. after is r.
ibid. l. 43. after Christ r. being a mere Spirit. l. 36. for above r. alone. p.
82. l. 24. after Spiritual r. p. 14. p. 85. l. 30. after God r. p. 55. l. 33.
before And should be a break -- p. 56. l 40. for in r. is. after Types should
be a break -- p. 57. ibid. for this r. his. l. 45. before so should be a Break
-- p. 86. l. 8. for can be r. is. p. 88. l. 12. after believed r. Switch. p.
38. p. 94. l. 13. after S. E. r. Light and Life. p. 58. p. 95. l. 16. after
therein r. Antidote p. 224. 225. p. 96. l. 16. for p. 248. r. p. 250. p. 98. l.
29. for 6. r. 26. p. 101. l. 44. after G. W. r. in Truth and Inno. p. 105. l.
32. dele the. p. 106. l. 3. for dim r. one. l. 18. after this Light r. in
Believers and regenerate Persons. l. 25. for works r. work. l. 40. r.
defending. p. 107. l. 40. for materal r. material. p. 108. l. 38. for add r.
and.

A Catalogue of the Authors and Books of Quakers, quoted in this Narrative, and
some Books of their Opponents.
GReat Mystery by G. Fox Printed 1659. Fol. Saul 's Errand to Damascus. By G.
F. etc. 1653. In 4to. Truths Defense. By G. F. and Richard Hubberthorne about
1654. In 4to. Voice of Wisdom. By G. W. 1659. In 8vo. The Watcher. By J.
Parnel. In 4to. A Brief Discovery of the Dangerous Principles of Jo. Horn, by
G. Whithead 1659. in 4to. Truth Defending the Quakers, by G. Whithead, etc.
1659. in 8vo. A Brief Discovery of the Threefold State of Antichrist, by G. F.
etc. 1653. in 4to. Doctrine of Perfection Vindicated, by Jo. Whitehouse, 1663.
in 4to. Fr. Howgil' s Works. 1676. Fol. Several Papers given forth, by G. F.
1671. in 4to. W. Penn' s Reason against Railing, 1673. 8vo. W. Penn' s
Christian Quaker, 1674. Fol. Appendix to Christian Quaker. 1674. Fol. W. Penn'
s Sandy Foundation. 1668. 4to. Ishmael and his Mother, by G. W. etc. 1655. 4to.
G. Whitehead' s Divinity of Christ. 1669. 4to. Light and Life, by G. Whithead
1668. 4to. Quakers Plainness, by G. Whithead 1674 8vo Primer, by G. F. Jun. and
Stephen Crisp. 1682 240 Serious Apology, by W. Penn 1671 4to W.P' s Rejoinder
to Jo. Faldo 1673 8vo Rich. Hubberthorne' s Collection 1663 4to He Goat' s Horn
Broken, by G. Whithead 1660 4to. Edw. Borrough' s Collection 1672 Fol. W. Penn'
s Address to Protestants 1679 4to Jacob found in a Desert Land 1656 4to William
Bailie' s Collection 1676 4to Tho. Elwood' s Answer to my First Narrative 8vo
Truth Defended, by T. Elwood 8vo Nature of Christanity, by G. Whithead 1671 4to
Christ Ascending above the Clouds 1669 4to G. Foxe' s Distinction betwixt the
two Suppers 1685 4to News out of the North, by G. Fox 1655 4to Glory of Christ
within by G. Whithead, etc. 4to True Faith of the Gospel of Peace, by Ed. Burr.
1656 4to Some Principles of the Elect People of God, by G. F. 1671 4to W. Penn'
s Key, last Edition 1699. a little 8vo. Antidote against the Snake, by G. W.
1697 8vo Switch for the Snake, by Jos. Wyeth 1699 8vo Truth and Innocence, by
Geo. Whithead 1699 4to Judgment Fixed, by Geo. Whithead 8vo Some Account from
Colchester, by Seven Quakers 1699 4to G. Whithead's Christian Epistle to
Friends 1691 4to G. Fox' s Canons or Orders 1669 8vo A Few Positions of the
sincere Belief, etc. by G. W. etc. School A Testimony for the true Christ, by the
Quakers 1668 4to
BOOKS against the Quakers Quoted.
Quakery Slain, by Christopher Wade 1657 4to His Second Book to the People
called Quakers 4to The Scornful Quaker Answered, by Magnus Byne 4to A further
Discovery of that Generation of Men called Quakers, by Five Ministers of
New Castle, 1654 4to The Way cast up, by Geo. Keith, 1677 8vo
This Book was Published by him, when under the profession of a Quaker; though
many things in it are contrary to the Quakers, particularly, the Prayer quoted
in this Narrative, p. 21.


