An (...) from the Twenty Eight JUDGES TO THE Spirit of Truth and true Judgment
In all Faithful Friends, called Quakers, that meet at this Yearly Meeting at
Burlington, the 7 Month, 1692.
WHereas twenty eight Persons, called Friends of the Ministry, have published a
Paper of false Judgment against George Keith, and the rest of his Friends and
Brethren, without any Hearing or Trial, We, in behalf of the rest, do make this
our Serious and Solemn Appeal to the Spirit of Truth and true Judgment in you
all, that by the help and guidance of the same, ye may enquire and search into
the matter, requesting and beseeching you to do Justice in these things, for
the Vindication of the Truth, the honor of Christ, the Peace of your
Consciences, and the Credit and Repute of our holy Profession, and making up
the Breach that is among us, if possible, and ans^ering the expectation of our
faithful Brethren in England, and other places of the World, who will be
greatly concerned with us, that Justice and true Judgment may take place
impartially, and without respect of Persons.

And Friends, Think it not strang^, that we Appeal to you universally, that by
the Spirit of Truth ye may give true Judgment in these matters concerning Us
and these Twenty Eight Persons, and others of the Ministry who are joined with
them therein; for though upon a pretense of their being Ministers, they claim a
Superiority over you the Lords Heritage and People, as if ye were not capable
nor qualified to judge them, but that they have Authority to judge you, and on
this pretended Authority (too like the Roman-Hierarchy) they have sent their
Paper of Judgment against us to you, though they were Yearly Meeting ^or any true
Representative of the Body (...) these three Provinces, but a Party or Faction
of (...) against the Truth (and us the defamed Witnesses of it) many of whom we
can prove guilty of great Ignorance and Error in Doctrine, as well as some of
them are guilty of evil and scandalous Practice, repugnant to our holy
Profession; and some that have been too busy to comply with their usurped
Authority over you, have re^d the said Judgment in diverse Monthly. Quarterly
and other Meetings, without the consent of the said Meetings, or so much as
asking it: All which we Appeal to you, Whether it be not a manifest Usurpation
over you, and seeking to bring you into Bondage? And when we have at several
Meetings, requested the Friends of the said Meetings, to enquire and examine
the matter of Difference between these twenty eight men and us, some of the
said 28 have still refused to suffer the thing to come to any further
Examination or Judgment, pretending, None have Power to judge in th^se Matters
but Friends of the Ministry, whereof these 28 are the far greatest part in
these 3 Provinces, and most of the rest of the Preachers are joined with them,
to uphold and defend them in their Tyrannical Usurpation over your Consciences,
as if ye were only to see with their Eyes, and hear with their Ears, and not
with your own, and that ye were to take all things without all due Examination
and Trial, by an implicit Faith, Papist-like, from them. But if there remain
that Nobility in you, and sense of your Christian-Liberty and Freedom,
where-withall Christ has made you Free, as we hope there does, ye will not
suffer your selves to be so imposed upon, nor to be thus Ass-rid by them, as to
take things by a ba^e implicit Faith from them, but every one of you to see
with your own spiritual Eyes, and hear with your Spiritual Ear^ of Gods
opening, and to bring these weighty things of Difference to the true
Touchstone, the Spirit of Truth and true Judgment in your selves, which ye
have; as well as they, and which many of you are better taught by and
acquainted with than they; even as formerly it was, that many of the (...) say
beyond the Priests and Teachers, in the days of the ^^^hets and of Christ in
the Flesh, and the Apo^les; all of late, many Thousands of the People have seen
beyond the Priest and Teachers, and have been made able by the Spirit of Truth
to judge them for their great Ignorance and Error. And that ye may have the
better Opportunity to examine these matters, and impartially and thoroughly to
search into them, and judge of them, we have procured to be printed their three
Papers of Judgment, viz. the first given forth by their Monthly Meeting at
Philadelphia, the 26 of 3d Month 1692. wherein they clear Tho. Fitzwater, and
condemn G. K. for saying, The Light is not sufficient without something else,
which something else, Thomas Lloyd, as the Mouth of the said Monthly Meeting,
acknowledged, They knew G. K. held to be the Man Christ Jesus, and what he did
and suffered for us on Earth, and what he now does for us in Heaven: The 2d
Judgment is given forth by them called Friends of the Ministry, concerning W.
Stockdale, signed by Sam. Jenings, as Clark of the said Meeting, the 4 of 4
Month, 1692. The 3d signed by 28 of them of the Ministry, against G. K. and his
Friends, etc. Which said Judgments we desire you to compare with our Printed
Answer, called, The Plea of the Innocent, etc and another Paper called. An
Expostulation with Thomas Lloyd, Samuel Jenings, etc. and another by way of
Epistle, in answer to their three false Judgments.

And we earnestly request and desire of you, to procure of these 28 men, that
we may have a public Hearing with these men before you all, at a place and
time mutually appointed by them and us, before the People he gone from the
Yearly Meeting; and that an orderly Method be agreed upon betwixt them and us,
to prevent all Confusion, and especially that none but one speak at once, and
that every one that speaks, who is concerned, may have full Liberty, without
Interruption, in order to which we are most willing that one or two Impartial
and Judicious men may be c^^sesby both them and us, to preside, and (...) Power
to command and enjoin Silence to any of them (...) they shall see occasion; and
whoever of them or us yields not obedience to the said Command, shall ^ and
declared unworthy and incapable of further speaking at ^ said public
Conference. And also, we demand that Justice of these 28 men, that they will
give us the said Public Hearing and Trial before you.

And let these particular things be discoursed of, and come to a public
Hearing and Trial at the said Meeting, and what other things they and we shall
agree to, viz.

1. Whether George Keith has been proved guilty by these 28 men (his Accusers)
of Reviling, Ungodly Speeches and false Accusations? Or whether he has given
Names to any of them (as alleged in their Paper) that they did not deserve,
and did not belong to them? And whether it be not false that they say, This
Meeting having Tenderly and Orderly dealt with him?

2. Whether they who have signed that Paper against him, are not guilty of
giving him Names that did not belong to him, but may be justly accounted Names
of Reviling, Ungodly Speeches and false Accusations? And whether Samuel
Jenings particularly is not greatly to be blamed for calling G. K. Worse than
Profane, and Apostate, seeing we know not wherein G. K. is in any one
particular gone from Friends Doctrine or Practice, or what thing or things he
is guilty of, so as to be worthy of having his Ministry denied?

3. Whether it cannot be proved, that that Faction (which have sufficiently
shown their Opposition and Prejudice against G. K. and have signed to that
Paper against him) are guilty of Cloaking more Damnable Heresies and Errors,
than any Protestant Society in Christendom, while it can be proved against
them, that they have not only cloaked W. Stockdale for above 18 Months, in
saying, To preach Faith in Christ within, and in Christ without, it to preach
Two Christ's; and Tho. Witzwater, in saying, The Light in sufficient without any
thing else, and That he owned no man Christ Jesus as Mediator is Heaven, but
the Grate of God within him, and saying in his Prayer, O God that dy^d in us,
and laid down thy Life in us, etc. and saying, That he had not learned that
Lesson, whether the God head was crucified on the Tree of the Cross or
somewhat that he took of the Virgin, etc. but they have cloaked diverse other
Persons in their vile and gross Errors, as can be sufficiently proved, and
particularly Sam. Jenings, in saying, To do our own business, as men, we needed
not a supernatural Power; and Tho. Lloyd in arguing some hours, That we might
be Christians good enough without the Faith of Christ as he dyed for our sins,
and rose again without us; and Arthur Cook and John Simcock in their charging
G. K. for imposing Novelties upon them, when he affirmed, Christ was in Heaven
in the same Body for being, in which he suffered; and J. Simcock denied that
Christ rose in the same Body in which he suffered; and Robert Young in saying,
That he read not in all the Scriptures of Christ without, and Christ within,
and that Christ was separated from his Body in the Cloud; and Rob. Owen and
William Southbe, in denying any general Day of Judgment, and the Resurrection
of the Dead, but only what every one witnessed within here: Whether these, with
many more that can be proved, were not cause enough for G. K. to say, More
Damnable Heresies and Errors were cloaked among the Quakers here, than in any
Protestant Society in Christendom?

4. Seeing their Paper, signed by the 28 mentions a main matter of
Controversy betwixt G. K. and them, which (they say) they proffered to refer
to one of his own Books, or to the Yearly Meeting here, or to the Yearly
Meeting at London; Let them show what that main Matter of Controversy is, and
wherein his present Doctrine does contradict any of his former Books, which he
says they can never prove.

5. Whether the Act of the Monthly Meeting at Philad^lphia* the 26 of 3d Month,
1692. is according to Christian Doctrine, That the Light is sufficient without
any thing else, thereby excluding the Man Christ Jesus without u^, and his
Death and Sufferings, Resurrection, Ascension, Mediation and Intercession for
us in Heaven, from having any part or share in our Salvation; and thereby
making him only a Titular, but no real Savior, as one zealous for that side,
lately called the Difference betwixt them and us concerning Christ. An empty
Barrel, and another great Zealot said, He did not believe to be saved by that
which dyed at Jerusalem?

6. Whether it be necessary to our salvation, to believe, That Christ dyed for
our sins without us, and rest again, and is gone into Heaven without us and
there does make Intercession for us? And whether it does not belong to sound
Christian Doctrine to believe, That Christ will come without us in his
glorified Body to judge the quick and the dead and that there shall be a
general Day of Judgment, and that there is a Resurrection of the Dead to be,
that the deceased Saints have not yet attained generally, but wait for it until
Christ's Coming? And whether there is not to be a Resurrection of the Body, that
is not the Resurrection or quickening of the Soul only, as some falsely imagine:
Let them clear themselves in these things, they haviug given us just cause to
suspect them Unbelievers therein.

7. Whether every true Christian is not taught and led to believe in the Power
and Spirit of Christ, and his Eight and Life inwardly revealed, and by the help
of the said measure to believe in him who has the Fullness, even the Man
Christ Jesus without us, glorified in Heaven? And whether by True Faith in the
Man Christ Jesus without us, as it is wrought by the measure of the Spirit and
Light of Christ in us, we receive not a daily supply and increase of more
Grace, Light and Life, and a further measure of the Spirit from the Man Christ
Jesus? And whether they who have not this Faith in the Man Christ Jesus without
them, are worthy to bear the honorable Name of Christians?

8. Whether it is not a great and necessary part of Christian Doctrine,
necessary to be preached, in order to bring People to an inward knowledge and
enjoyment of God and Christ, and the holy Spirit, to preach Faith in Christ
without us even the Man Christ Jesus, as he dyed for our sins, and rose again,
and is ascended into Heaven, and there makes Intercession for us, as well as
Faith in Christ in us. as he does inwardly enlighten us? And whether it can be
said that the Man Christ Jesus is in us, otherwise than by a figurative Speech,
of giving the Name of the whole to the measure or part, as when the Sun is said
to be in such a House, the fullness of the Sun's light is only in the Body of
the Sun, and but a stream of, Light comes from the Sun into the House?

9. Whether the said 28 Persons had not done much better to have passed
Judgment against some of their Brethren at Philadelphia (some of themselves
being guilty) for countenancing and allowing some called Quakers, and owning
them in so doing, to hire men to fight (and giving them a Commission so to do,
signed by 3 Justices of the Peace, one whereof being a Preacher among them) as
accordingly they did, and recovered a Sloop, and took some Privateers by Force
of Arms?

10. Whether hiring men thus to fight, and also to provide the Indans with
Powder and Lead to fight against other Indians, be not a manifest Transgression
of our Principle against all use of the carnal Sword, and other carnal Weapons?
And whether these called Quakers, in their so doing, have not greatly weakened
the Testimony of Friends in England, Barbados, etc. who have suffered much for
the is refusing to contribute to uphold the Militia, or any Military force? And
whether is not their Practice here an evil President, if any change of
Government happen in this place, to bring Sufferings on faithful Friends, that
for Conscience sake refuse to contribute to the Militia? And how can they
justly refuse to do that under another's Government, which they have done, or
allowed to be done under their own. But in these and other things we stand up
Witnesses against them, with all faithful Friends every where.

11. Whether it be according to the Gospel, that Ministers should pass Sentence
of Death on Malefactors, as some pretended Ministers here have done, preaching
one day, Not to take an Eye for an Eye Mat. 5. 38 and another day to contradict
it, by taking Life for Life?

12. Whether there is any Example or President for it Scripture, or in all
Christendom that Ministers should engross the Worldly Government, as they do
here? which has proved of a very evil Tendency.

Signed by us, in Behalf of many Friends, who are one with us herein. George
Keith, Thomas Budd, Richard Dungworth, George Hutcheson, John Heart, Abraham
Opdegraves.


POSTSCRIPT.
BY a Warrant signed by Sam. Richardson and Rob. Ewer, Justices, the Sheriff
and Constable entered the Shop of Wiliam Bradford, and took away all the above
written Papers, they could find, called, An Appeal, etc. and carried the said
W. Bradford before the said justices, and also sent for (...) M'Comb, who (as
they were informed) had disposed of two of said papers, and they not giving an
account where they had them, were both committed to Prison: also, they sent
Robert Ewer, and the said Officer, to search the said W. Bradford's House again
for more Papers, etc. but found none, yet took away a parcel of Letters, being
his Utensels, which were worth about ten Pound. Now the said Papers being
seized, and a great Rumor spread abroad of Sedition, Disturban^^, o^ the Peace
and, Subversion of the Government, etc. we have, though with some difficulty,
procured the said Appeal to be Reprinted, that every one that defined might
have the Opportunity to read and judge of the matter contained in the said
Appeal, and also to signify, that we did not nor do not intend any thing
against the present Government, or Magistracy, but own them in Commission to be
Magistrates, and account it our Duty to obey them, (...) actively or passively,
but knowing that it is contrary to the Quaker Principles to use the carnal
Sword, and finding by experience, that it is impossible to uphold Magistracy
without it, therefore we proposed it to be duly considered and discoursed of
among all Friends at this Yearly Meeting at Burlington.

A Copy of the Mittimus.
Whereas William Bradford Printer, and John M' Comb Tailor being brought
before us, upon Information of Publishing, Uttering and Spreading a Malicious
and Seditious Paper, entitled, An Appeal from the Twenty Eight Judges, to the
Spirit of Truth, etc. Tending to the Disturbance of the Peace, and Subversion
of the present Government; and the said Persons being required to give Security
to answer it at the next Court, but they refusing so to do, These are therefore
by the King and Queen's Authority, and in our Proprietary's Name to require you
to take into your Custody the Bodies of William Bradford and John M' Comb, and
them safely keep till they shall be dsicharg'd by due Course of Law; whereof
fail not, at your Peril, and for your so doing, this shall be your sufficient
Warrant. Given under our Hands and Seals this 24th of August* 1602.

These to John White, Sheriff, of Philadelphia, or his Deputy. Arthur Cook,
Samuel Jenings, Samuel Richardson, Humphery Murrey, Robert Ewer.


THE END.

