An Exhortation and Caution TO FRIENDS Concerning buying or keeping of Negroes.
Seeing our Lord Jesus Christ has tasted Death for every Man, and given himself
a Ransom for all, to be testified in due time, and that his Gospel of Peace,
Liberty and Redemption from Sin, Bondage and all Oppression, is freely to be
preached unto all, without Exception, and that Negroes, Blacks and Taunies are
a real part of Mankind, for whom Christ has shed his precious Blood, and are
capable of Salvation, as well as White Men; and Christ the Light of the World
has (in measure) enlightened them, and every Man that comes into the World;
and that all such who are sincere Christians and true Believers in Christ
Jesus, and Followers of him, bear his Image, and are made conformable unto him
in Love, Mercy, Goodness and Compassion, who came not to destroy men's Lives,
but to save them, nor to bring any part of Mankind into outward Bondage,
Slavery or Misery, nor yet to detain them, or hold them therein, but to ease
and deliver the Oppressed and Distressed, and bring into Liberty both inward
and outward.

Therefore we judge it necessary that all faithful Friends should discover
themselves to be true Christians by having the Fruits of the Spirit of Christ,
which are Love, Mercy, Goodness, and Compassion toward all in Misery, and that
suffer Oppression and severe Usage, so far as in them is possible to ease and
relieve them, and set them free of their hard Bondage, whereby it may be hoped,
that many of them will be gained by their beholding these good Works of sincere
Christians, and prepared thereby, through the Preaching the Gospel of Christ,
to embrace the true Faith of Christ. And for this cause it is, as we judge,
that in some places in Europe Negroes cannot be bought and sold for Money, or
detained to be Slaves, because it suits not with the Mercy, Love and Clemency
that is essential to Christianity, nor to the Doctrine of Christ, nor to the
Liberty the Gospel calls all men unto, to whom it is preached. And to buy
Souls and Bodies of men for Money, to enslave them and their Posterity to the
end of the World, we judge is a great hinderance to the spreading of the
Gospel, and is occasion of much War, Violence, Cruelty and Oppression, and
Theft and Robery of the highest Nature; for commonly the Negroes that are sold
to white Men, are either stolen away or robbed from their Kindred, and to buy
such is the way to continue these evil Practices of Man-stealing, and
transgresses that Golden Rule and Law, To do to others what we would have
others do to us.

Therefore, in true Christian Love, we earnestly recommend it to all our
Friends and Brethren, Not to buy any Negroes, unless it were on purpose to set
them free, and that such who have bought any, and have them at present, after
some reasonable time of moderate Service they have had of them, or may have of
them, that may reasonably answer to the Charge of what they have laid out,
especially in keeping Negroes Children born in their House, or taken into their
House* when under Age, that after a reasonable time of service to answer that
Charge, they may set them at Liberty, and during the time they have them, to
teach them to read, and give them a Christian Education.

Some Reasons and Causes of our being against keeping of Negroes for Term of
Life.
First, Because it is contrary to the Principles and Practice of the Christian
Quakers to buy Prize or stolen Goods, which we bore a faithful Testimony
against in our Native Country; and therefore it is our Duty to come forth in a
Testimony against stolen Slaves, it being accounted a far greater Crime under
Moses's Law than the stealing of Goods* for such were only to restore four
fold, but he that steals a Man and sell^th him, if he be found in his hand,
he shall surely be put to Death, Exodus 21. 16. Therefore as we are not to buy
stolen Goods* (but if at unawares it should happen through Ignorance, we are
to restore them to the Owners, and seek our Remedy of the Thief) no more are we
to buy stolen Slaves; neither should such as have them keep them and their
Posterity in perpetual Bondage and Slavery, as is usually done, to the great
scandal of the Christian Profession.

Secondly, Because Christ commanded, saying, All things whatsoever ye would
that men should do unto you, do ye even so to them. Therefore as we and our
Children would not be kept in perpetual Bondage and Slavery against our
Consent, neither should we keep them in perpetual Bondage and Slavery against
their Consent, it being such intolerable Punishment to their Bodies and Minds,
that none but notorious Criminal Offenders deserve the same. But these have
done us no harm; therefore how inhumane is it in us so grievously to oppress
them and their Children from one Generation to another.

Thirdly, Because the Lord has commanded, saying, Thou shall not deliver unto
his Master the Servant that is escaped from his Master unto thee, he shall
dwell with thee, even amongst you in that place which he shall choose in one of
thy Gates, where it likes him best; thou shall not oppress him, Deuteronomy. 23. 15,
16. By which it appears, that those which are at Liberty and freed from their
Bondage, should not by us be delivered into Bondage again, neither by us should
they be oppressed, but being escaped from his Master, should have the liberty
to dwell amongst us, where it likes him best. Therefore, if God extend such
Mercy under the legal Ministration and Dispensation to poor Servants, he does
and will extend much more of his Grace and Mercy to them under the clear Gospel
Ministration; so that instead of punishing them and their Posterity with cruel
Bondage and perpetual Slavery, he will cause the Everlasting Gospel to be
preached effectually to all Nations, to them as well as others; And the Lord
will extend Peace to his People like a River, and the Glory of the Gentiles
like a fl^wing Stream; And it shall come to pass, says the Lord, that I will
gather all Nations and Tongues, and they shall come and see my Glory, and I
will set a sign among them, and I will send those that escape of them unto the
Nations, to Tarshish, Pull and Lud that draw the Bo^ to Tub^ll and J^van, to
the Isles afar off that have not heard my Fame, neither have seen my Glory, and
they shall declare my Glory among the Gentiles, Isa. 66. 12. 18.

Fourthly, Because the Lord has commanded, saying, Thou shall not oppress an
hired Servant that is poor and needy, whether he be of thy Brethren, or of the
Strangers that are in thy Land within thy Gates, least he cry against thee unto
the Lord, and it be sin unto thee; Thou shall neither vex a stranger nor
oppress him, for ye were strangers in the Land of Egypt, Deuteronomy. 24. 14, 15.
Exodus 12. 21. But what greater Oppression can there be inflicted upon our
Fellow Creatures, than is inflicted on the poor Negroes! they being brought
from their own Country against their Wills, some of them being stolen, others
taken for payment of Debt owing by their Parents, and others taken Captive in
War, and sold to Merchants, who bring them to the American Plantations, and
sell them for Bondslaves to them that will give most for them; the Husband
from the Wife, and the Children from the Parents; and many that buy them do
exceedingly afflict them and oppress them, not only by continual hard Labor,
but by cruel Whippings; and other cruel Punishments, and by short allowance of
Food, some Planters in Barbados and Jamaica, it is said, keeping one hundred of
them, and some more, and some less, and giving them hardly any thing more than
they raise on a little piece of Ground appointed them, on which they work for
themselves the seventh days of the Week in the afternoon, and on the first
days, to raise their own Provisions, to wit, Corn and Potatoes* and other
Roots, etc* the remainder of their time being spent in their Masters service;
which doubtless is far worse usage than is practiced by the Turks and Moors
upon their Slaves. Which tends to the great Reproach of the Christian
Profession; therefore it would be better for all such as fall short of the
Practice of those Infidels, to refuse the Name of a Christian, that those
Heathen and Infidels may not be provoked to blaspheme against the blessed Name
of Christ, by reason of the unparalled Cruelty of these cruel and hard
hearted pretended Christians* Surely the Lord does behold their Oppressions and
Afflictions, and will further visit for the same by his righteous and just
Judgments, except they break off their sins by Repentance, and their Iniquity
by showing Mercy to these poor afflicted, tormented miserable Slaves!

Fifthly, Because Slaves and Souls of Men are some of the Merchandise of
Babylon by which the Merchants of the Earth are made Rich; but those Riches
which they have heaped together, through the cruel Oppression of these
miserable Creatures, will be a means to draw Gods Judgments upon them;
therefore, Brethren, let us hearken to the Voice of the Lord, who says, Come
out of Babylon, my People, that ye be not partakers of her Sins, and that ye
receive not her Plaegues; for her Sins have reached unto Heaven, and God has
remembered her Iniquities; for he that leads into Captivity shall go into
Captivity, Rev. 18. 4, 5. and 13. 10.

Given forth by our Monthly Meeting in Philadelphia, the 13th day of the 8th
Month, 1693. and recommended to all our Friends and Brethren, who are one with
us in our Testimony for the Lord Jesus Christ, and to all others professing
Christianity.
THE END.

