TRUTHS DEFENSE: Or, the Pretended EXAMINATION BY John Alexander of Leith, Of
the Principles of those (called QUAKERS) Falsely termed by him
Jesuitico-Quakerism, Re-Examined AND Confuted, Together with Some
Animadversions on the Dedication of his Book to Sir Robert Clayton, then Major
of London. By G. K.

LONDON, Printed for Benjamin Clark in George-Yard in Lombard Street,
Bookseller, 1682.

The pretended Examination of the Principles of those called Quakers (Falsely
called Jesuitico-Quakerism) by John Alexander in Leith, Re-examined and
Confuted, by G. K.
CHAP. I.
IN my Answer to this pretended Examination of I. A. I intend to observe on his
Answer to every Question wherein he misrepresents, or perverts the state of the
Question; and wherein he has missed to Answer ^it: Also to Answer briefly, but
I hope sufficiently and distinctly what is necessary to the Vindication of
Truth, (not to every Word or Sentence, nor to every frivolous and weak or
impertinent Argument, where the solution thereof lies obvious to any ordinary
understanding, but) to any thing alleged by him that seems Material, or to
require an Answer, referring the Enquiring and Truth-loving Reader to diverse
Treatises already published (not to mention our Friends books in England) by
some here in Scotland, to wit, R. B. his Apology* also to his Answer in
Vindication thereof to I. B. al^o his book called, Truth cleared of Calumnies,
in Answer to W. M. in Aberden. And the Answer given by the said R. B. and me to
the Students of Aberden; as also to diverse Treatises published by me, such as
my book of Immediate Revelation, my book of Universal Grace, my book called,
The Way cast up, my book called, The Rector Corrected, in Answer to T. W. who
calls himself Rector of Arrow, and lastly to my book called, Quakerism no
Popery. And though to this last book I. A. has replied in some few
particulars, which I purpose, so far as may seem requisite, to Answer; yet he
has quite passed by the most material passages, and especially all the
Authorities and Testimonies of Ancient Writers; and also of the Protestants
brought by me, as concurring with the Scriptures Testimony, to clear us of that
imputation of Popery falsely charged upon us by I. M. To none of which weighty
Testimonies has the said I. A. replied one word. Now because there is little
or nothing that seems Material of I. A. his Objections that is not already
fully answered in these Books and Treatises above mentioned, therefore I Judge
it not needful to Write a large or particular Answer to every thing; yet lest
he should seem too wise in his own Eyes, or lest he and others that favor him,
should think he is stronger, than really he is; and especially to prevent the
stumbling of the weak, into whose hands his book may come. I purpose, through
the Lords Assistance, to reply some things, which may suffice on every Head or
Section.

What has induced I. A. to Dedicate his book against us, to the Mayor of
London, may seem no impertinent Query. Had he none in all his Native Country
whom he had confidence in to Patronize his undertakings? Or being Conscious of
his small esteem at home, did he despair to find any Liberal Mecenas in
Scotland, and therefore he must go so far as London to find out one, and that
no less then the Mayor himself, to whom it may be supposed I. A. his greatest
commendation was his being a stranger: And that he says in his Epistle to the
said Eminent person; His Treatise presums not to add any luster to his Name,
whereof it is incapable: That may well be believed, that his Book is indeed
incapable of adding any luster thereunto. But why was he not afraid that it
would detract from his luster? It were good, that those Eminent persons in the
World, who suffer men to Superscribe their Names as Patrons to their Books, did
first examine them diligently, if they did deserve any such Patronage, lest
Error masking it self under the name of Truth, seek the Protection, as is too
common now in the World. And for my part, I have no small conjecture, that if
the said Eminent person, to whom this disingenuous and impertinent piece by I.
A. is Dedicated, had but taken the leisure or pains, to review but one sixth
part of it, he had never suffered his Name to be superscribed to it. And I am
very hopeful that the Mayor of London, who has diverse thousands of that
people, within his Precinct in that Famous City; many of whom I judge are
better known to him, than I. A. ever was, has more charity toward the people
called in scorn Quakers, than to believe I. A. his description of them in his
said Epistle; were he expressly alleges on them, That they renounce all true
Principles of Religion, and stifle their very faculties of Reason; charging
them also with Absurdity: And in his Preface to the Reader he calls them,
Uncircumcised Philistines and reproachful Adversaries; having in their Queries
and other Papers, disgorged as many Lies against God and his Truth, and as many
Slanders against the Church of God in Britain, as if they had exchanged both
Persons and Offices with^the Father of Lies and Accuser of the Brethren. But if
that Eminent person, whose Name and Favor this I. A. has abused, shall please
to look into this small Treatise, in Answer to that of I. A. I hope he shall
find, that they are falsely charged with those Crimes. It seems no new or
strange thing to us to be so falsely accused, knowing that not only our Fellow
Servants and Brethren in former Generations, have been so used, but also the
Head himself, and Captain of our Salvation, the Lord Jesus Christ, was not only
numbered among transgressors, but called a Blasphemer, and said to have a Devil:
And the Lord forewarned his Disciples and Followers that they should be so lied
upon, and all manner of evil things said against them falsely for his Name sake.
But rejoice, said he, and be glad, for great is your reward in Heaven.

Now whereas I. A. calls his Book, A Vindication of the Church of God in
Britain, he ought to have told what Church he meant, seeing there are diverse
sorts of people in Britain, who call themselves the Church of God, and yet in
diverse things Dissent from I. A. And upon review of his Book, I find the said
I. A. his Principles to be almost wholly Calvinistical, and particularly, 1.
That he denies the Universal Grace of God, or that Christ has died for all
men. 2. That he denies that God has any regard to the new Creature, or work
of Conversion, or Repentance to be so much as a condition requisite in order to
our Justification. 3. That he denies that any can be free from actual sining
in this Life by any Grace of God given them, or to be given. These and other
principles alleged by him, which are wholly Calvinistical, are as much
disliked by many and some of those, the most considerable, of the Episcopal
Church in Britain, as by us. And I judge that I. A. should hold himself a
Member of th^s Episcopal Church, seeing he himself Officiates as Reader and
Presentor at at Leith, under John Hamilton an Episcopal Preacher, who has also
recommended his Book. And therefore seeing I. A. has undertaken the
Vindication of the Church of God in Britain, as he alleges against the
Quakers; he must either acknowledge, that the Episcopal Church in Britain is
not the Church of God, whereof he is a professed Member, or else have proved
out of the the Episcopal Church now in Britain, that she avoweth and owneth
such principles, all and every one, as he asserteth; and that those Eminent and
Noted persons, both in England and Scotland, who dissent from him, and agree
with us, in those principles already mentioned, are Heretics, and renouncers
of true principles of Religion, stifling the faculties of reason; such as among
others in England, R. Cudworth, and H. More, accounted great Doctors, also
William Sharlock, and I. A. his Reverend and much admired Rich* Baxter, whom he
particularly opposes in the matter of Justification: And in Scotland, Bishop
William Forbes in his Treatise called, Considerationes modestae and pacificae
Controvers. As also diverse other persons of Note yet living, whose Names I need
not to mention; all which I suppose, and thousands more in the Episcopal Church
in Britain, of all Qualities and Ranks, will be loath to acknowledge I. A. for
a Patron or Defender of their Faith; but rather find ^ault with him in those
things, as an Enemy of their Faith, and in other things a bewrayer and betrayer
of it, rather then a Defender. In his Preface to the Reader, he excuses
himself that he has not Cited any humane Testimonies (meaning Authorities of
Ancient and Modern Writers) against us Seeing these (says he) they do not
value, except when they think they make for them, especially ad hominem. And
with this slender pretext, I suppose he thinks to evade the many Testimonies
I brought to confirm the Truth of our principles, in my Book called Quakerism
no Popery, even out of Writters both Ancient and late, of great esteem among
them; none of which he has once so much as touched. But to Answer to his
Charge, I say, we value the Testimonies of all Writers, whether Ancient or
late, which are true, and agree with the Scriptures, as much as any Protestants
do, or more than he does. And seeing he imputes it as a fault to us, that we
will not own the Testimonies of others, against us; I ask him, if he would own
or value any Testimonies of Authors that make against him, or his Judgment? If
he say nay, then his excuse is removed, and he has naught to say for this
omission. But the matter seems to be in effect, that those Testimonies
adduced by me in the foresaid Treatise he knew not how to Answer, unless by
saying that those persons erred in those principles, as much as we, which he
was loath to acknowledge, lest he should seem to weaken the Charge of his Title
against us, and acknowledge his own party, and those that are more worth of
Credit than himself, equally guilty of Iesuitism with the people called
Quakers, wherewith he does falsely accuse them.

And here I shall give a List or Catalogue of diverse gross Perversions and
Calumnies, whereby he seeks to abuse his Reader, in the very Preface of his
book against us: As 1. That we reject all manner of External Ordinances; Which
is notoriously false, as all who have the least knowledge of us can witness;
that we are for Meeting together, and that frequently; and when we meet, to
Preach, Exhort, Pray, and give Thanks to God in Audible words, as the Spirit of
the Lord does help us: And can I. A. say that none of these are External
Ordinances or Appointments; and we challenge him to instance any one External
Ordinance or Appointment of God that is truly so, which we are against: For it
is but only humane Institutions, (and Abolished shadows) set up as Divine
Ordinances which we oppose, as in the Sequel of this Treatise does appear. 2.
He says, We do directly strike at the Foundation of all with one blow,
overturning (so far as we can) the whole rule of Faith and Duty, setting a new
one of our own Invention in the room thereof. But why does he charge us so
highly in this matter? because we cannot own the Letter or External Testimony
of the Scriptures, as the primary Rule or Foundation of Faith; but only Christ
Jesus, the first and last; concerning whom Paul has writ, That another
foundation no man can lay, then that which is laid already, which is Christ
Jesus. And said the Lord, behold I lay in Zion an Elect precious Corner stone,
a sure foundation: Which to be sure, is not the Letter, but Christ and his
Spirit, Light and Life revealed in the heart. And I Query this Accuser I. A.
whether, if to acknowledge Christ in his immediate Teachings by his Spirit in
men's hearts, is to set up a false Foundation or overturn the true one; the
Apostles are guilty of this Charge, as to their own particulars; seeing I. A.
will not deny, but that the Apostles had Christ immediately to Teach them, and
speak in them: And was it not the Apostle Paul his labor to build the Churches
upon Christ, that their Faith might not stand in men, (though sent and moved of
God) but in the power of God. And though I. A. blame us for setting up the
Light within for the Rule, yet Christ taught people to believe in the Light,
and that this Light was not the Scripture, which he bid them believe in is
clear; that he said, While ye have the Light, believe in the Light, that ye may
be the Children of it: This clearly Imports, that this Light should not long
remain with them, if they did not believe in it, as he said in the foregoing
Verse, Yet a little while is the Light with you; walk while ye have the Light,
lest darkness come upon you, see John 12. 35, 36. And indeed the gracious
Visitation of Light did not long after remain with them who did reject it,
although the Scriptures did remain with them: And therefore the Light which he
bid them believe in, was not the Letter of the Scripture, but Christ himself,
who said, I am the Light of the World. 3. He says, This Heresy (so he calls
our Faith) is a very Sink or an Universal System of almost all the gross
Errors, which hitherto have annoyed the Church of God: And herein he does
imitate I. Brown, and the Author of the Postcript to S. R. his Epistles, who
have so charged us; but how unjustly, we hope our Answers do sufficiently
evince: And surely this I. A. in the Art of Slandering and false Accusing, may
pass muster for a Lieutenant to those aforesaid Champions, who have led the way
before him in this enterprise. It is not unknown, how the Papists loaded the
Protestants, at their appearing, and do still at this day load them with such
kind of Charges; and to none is it more familiar to blame others for Heresy,
than those who are greatest Heretics themselves. 4. He says, In Doctrine, we
trample generally upon the whole Moral Law, but more especially upon the first
Table: And here very falsely he Charges our Doctrine to be contrary to the
first, second, fourth, fifth, sixth and ninth Commandments: but let us see how
he makes good his Charge in each of them. He alleges our Doctrine
transgresses the first Commandment, because we say, All Prayer and Worship
that is performed without the Spirit of God, is Will Worship and Superstition,
and consequently no wicked or unregenerate persons are bound to Worship God, or
indeed in any respect to obey God: And from thence he concludes, They are not
under any Law of God; and therefore lastly, let them do what they will, they
cannot sin against God, such men (in the Quakers Principles, as he says) may
deny, disown, reject, hate and contemn God, worship the Devil, and debauch at
their pleasure; they may lawfully dishonor and defame all men, Murder, commit
Adultery, Steal, bear false Witness, and yet they cannot sin, because they are
under no Law. Hence also he infers, That Reprobates are most unjustly condemned
for their sinning against God, seeing they (not having received the Spirit) are
not under Law to God, and so cannot be guilty of sinning against him.

Now what Sober, Impartial and indifferent person that is not biased with deep
prejudice against us, sees not, that these absurd consequences have not the
least shadow of any Rational inference. For although we say indeed* that there
is no true Worship, but that which is in Spirit, according to the express words
of Christ; and that none are true Worshippers of God, but such as Worship him n
the Spirit; and that God requires no Lifeless or Spiritless Worship; yet we
still affirm that all mankind ought to Worship God, and Call upon him, even all
the wicked and unrenewed persons, as well as the renewed; so that in the thing
of Worship it self, we have no Controversy, whether it be due unto God by all
mankind; but the state of the Question lies here betwixt us, and those that
dissent from us, what the Worship of God is, and what kind or sort of Worship
it is that God requires of all men: And in Answer thereunto, we say, the true
Worship of God is a Spiritual Worship, requiring the sincerity of the heart not
as a circumstance, or accidental thing, but as the essential part thereof,
which cannot be done without the Spirit of God: How much therefore more True
and Rational consequence is it to argue thus. God commands all men to Worship
him, therefore he has given some measure more or less of the help of his
Spirit, unto all men, whereby they may so do, which does continue with them so
long as it pleases God, who takes away this help from none, but such as
mightily provoke him, and sin out the day of their Visitation. And even those
whom the Lord in his Justice has withdrawn that help or grace of his Spirit,
are still bound by the Law of God, to Worship him, as much as ever; even when
they neither do, or can Worship him truly, because they have brought this
unpotency or inability upon themselves, by their own unfaithfulness: Even as a
Servant or Steward that has received a sum of Money to pay his Master, and the
said Servant spends the Money upon his Lusts, and has not one Penny,
wherewith to pay the debt; yet he is still liable for the whole sum. Hence what
I. A. says in page 11. of his Preface, is true, that the inability of
unrenewed men, to perform acceptable Worship, neither does nor can take away
their Obligation to perform it. But we differ from I. A. in the cause or
reason, why those who want that ability are still under the said Obligation;
which reason he will have only and alone men's losing it in Adam, in whom they
all once had it; and the losing of it is their fault, citing Romans 5. 12, 19.

But to this I Answer, First, Whatever loss or inability is come upon Adam's
posterity by the primitive disobedience; yet now by virtue of the second Adam
his obedience, a new ability is conferred upon all men; So that as broad as the
Sore did spread by the first sin, even as broad is the Plaster that God has
provided to the Lame and Diseased Souls of all mankind. And this is most clear
and plain from Romans 5. 18. as also from Ioh. 3. 19. And this is the
condemnation (said Christ) that Light is come into the world, and men loved
darkness rather than Light, because their deeds were evil: So we see, that
Christ lays not the ground of wicked men's condemnation upon Adams sin, but
upon their hating the Light that did come unto them as a new and fresh
discovery and visitation of Gods love. But secondly, Whether this Inability is
come upon the wicked by reason of Adam's sin, or by their own actual
disobedience since that time; yet we affirm no less than I. A. that the most
wicked and ungodly are still under the obligation to the whole Law of God; and
their inability can be no ground of excuse unto them. But the true state of the
Queston is this, Whether wicked men, not simply as men, or creatures, but as
wicked, and remaining still in their wickedness, should, or are required to
offer up unto God hypocritical and lifeless performances of that which men
commonly call Prayer and Worship; but is no more so in the sight of God, than a
dead Picture of Stone or Clay is a true living man; and so whether God did ever
require any to draw near to him with their Mouths, and remove their Hearts far
away, as the manner of all wicked persons, while so remaining, always is: Now
we say, God never required such sort of Prayers, but refused and forbad them,
to be offered unto him, even under the Law, see Isaiah 1. 13. Bring no more
vain Oblations; and v. 12. When ye come to appear before me, who has required
this at your hand to tread my Courts? Again Psalm. 50. 16, 17. But unto the
wicked, God says, what have thou to do to declare my Statutes, or that thou
should take my Covenant in thy mouth, seeing thou hate instruction, etc.
And whereas I. A. cites some words of our Friends, That wicked men should not
Pray; let the Impartial and Indifferent Reader understand these words, in the
Sense of those Scriptures just now mentioned, which are as positive and full,
as any that can be cited out of our Friends Books, and all occasion of mistake
shall be removed. For neither the Sense of the Scripture, nor of our Friends
is, That wicked men are b^und in no respect to Wor^ip God; for the contrary is
manifest from the words cited by I. A. out of the Book called, The Principles
of Truth^, where he alleges their words, saying, All men ought first to wait,
until they receive the Spirit in Truth, then in the same Truth to Worship God
in Spirit who is a Spirit. So we see by I. A. his own Confession, the Quakers
teach that all men ought to Worship God in the Spirit, and that they may indeed
Worship him, they would have all men follow the Lords order, which is to wait,
or watch unto Prayer; and they would have men in the first place cease or
depart from their wickedness; and then by the help of the Spirit (which is
never wanting in the proper season of it) to come and Pray unto God. And that
this is no new or invented way of the Quakers so called; Read Isaiah 1. 16, 17,
18. where the Lord by the Prophet bids first, That they wash and be clean, and
put away the evil of their doings, etc. And then said he, Come now let us
reason together: Also Peter commanded Simon Magus to join Repentance with
Prayer; Repent (said he) and Pray, that the Thoughts of thy heart may be
forgiven thee. And for the more clear understanding of this whole matter, we
are to consider, that Prayer is either simply Mental, and with the heart only,
or both Mental and Vocal; to wit, both with heart and Mouth. Now as for Mental
Prayer, at least in respect of the bent or frame and inclination of the Heart,
God requires it always of all men; and it is possible for all men, if they but
receive that help of his Spirit, which he gives or offers unto men always to
perform it. But as for Vocal Prayer, he neither does require it at all times,
nor does he give the help at all times, nor the utterance whereby to perform
it. And it is observable, that under the Gospel, no particular set or limited
time is appointed for Vocal Prayer: But every one is to wait to know the times
of the Spirits call and moving thereunto, which will be seasonably and
frequently afforded to such as wait singly therefore, especially when the
people of God Assemble together; for then it is that Vocal Prayer is of
greatest use and service, though it has also its use and service in private,
or when one is apart.

But whereas I. A. alleges further, That if wicked men are not to Pray, (viz.
their Hypocritical Prayers) because they sin when they Pray; No man on earth
should offer to Pray or Worship God, seeing as he says, There is somewhat of
sin ^leaving to the best Actions of the Saints here away. To this I answer;
That there is somewhat of sin cleaving to the best Actions of the Saints here
away is denied, seeing it is asserted by him without proof, for the Scriptures
cited by him, viz. Prove. 20. 9. Gal. 5. 17. say no such thing, and by
consequence he has not evinced it; and for a proof to the contrary, see Job
16. 17. Malach. 1. 11. But secondly, nor does it follow, that men, who are not
yet come to a perfect state, but labor sincerely under the burden of their
sins, to be delivered from them, may not Pray unto God, because their Prayer,
as they put it up unto God by the help of his Spirit is pure and without all
sin, proceeding from the pure or renewed part of their hearts; for it is only
the pure or renewed part of the heart, from which indeed the true Prayer does
proceed; even as on the contrary, the evil desires and affections arise and
spring only from the impure and unrenewed part. Therefore he that has this
unrenewed part in him, ought to watch against it, while he prays, that he
give it no liberty to move or stir, as indeed he ought to watch against it at
all other times. And though he that prays sincerely, being not attained to a
sinless state, pray not with that degree or measure of fervency, wherewith
another more perfect does or can pray; yet God regarding that man's sincerity,
he accepts his Prayer, in Christ, and for Christ's sake pardons him, when at
any time he commits a weakness in his Prayer, in not keeping purely to the
Spirit.

Again, Lastly, Whereas I. A. objecteth, That the Plowing, Eating, Sleeping,
etc. of the wicked is sin: Shall the wicked then do nothing at all, because
whatever they do, they go about it in a sinful manner. I answer, This
consequence does no wise follow, because there is a great difference betwixt a
wicked man's Plowing, Eating, Drinking, etc. and his Praying, as remaining
wicked and alienated from the Spirit of God; for his Plowing, Eating, Drinking,
or any other Corporal or Natural actions, are really these actions, and they
are profitable and necessary in the Creation; and when he performs these
actions he fails not in the substance or matter of the action required, but
only in the manner; for the substance or matter of a wicked man's Plowing,
Eating, Traveling, is not sin, but the manner of it, viz. That it is not in
Faith, but a wicked man's Prayer, as he is a wicked man, is no true Prayer at
all, it has nothing of the true substance of true and real Prayer, it is a
mere picture, or dead resemblance of Prayer; and is rather a mocking God, than
praying unto him; for it wants the life of true Prayer, which alone the Spirit
of God does give; and thus a plain difference is demonstrated betwixt the two
cases: and the Unvalidity of I. A. his consequences in this whole matter is
evinced. And if the Reader desire further satisfaction, in this particular, let
him Read our Answer to the Students, and R. B. his Apology, where these
Objections of I. A. are largely Answered, for he has brought no new matter
against us; and it had been better he had both spared his own pains, and not
troubled the world with his repeating other men's Arguments, long since
answered. As for his instance of our opposing the second Commandment, by our
rejecting, wresting and abusing the Word of God, and avowing of Error and
Blasphemy; seeing it is but a bare alleging, without any shadow of proof; it
is enough as simply to deny it, as he does simply affirm it. But another
instance he gives of our opposing the second Commandment, By swallowing down
our Meat and Drink (as so many Beasts) without any Prayer and Thansgiving;
without which (if they will believe the Apostle, 1 Timothy 4. 3, 4, 5.) they are
not sanctied. But how unjustly he charge this upon us, I can freely leave to
the Judgment of all sober and true Christians. For how does he prove that we
Eat, or Drink, or receive any Creatures of God without Prayer and
Thanksgivings? Because we do not always use Vocal and External Prayer, when we
Eat and Drink although at other times we use it, as God is pleased to give
utterance, and are most glad either to do it, or join with these, who do it by
the help of Gods Spirit: But is I. A. so ignorant and unreasonable to think
that theirs is no Prayer, or Thanksgiving, nor any use of the Word of God, but
that which is Vocal and External: Do we not Read of the Prayer of the Heart in
Scripture, and also of Singing and making Melody in the heart unto the Lord, as
well as with the Mouth? Or does I. A. think that brutes can do this, as well as
we, that he compares our Eating and Drinking altogether to that of Brutes.
However for the satisfaction of those that are sober. I futher declare, that we
hold it our duty, and I hope, we can say, it is our aim, and endeavor in all
our Eating and Drinking, and in the receiving all the Mercies of God, both
Spiritual and Temporal, to reeeive them with Prayer and Thanksgiving, either
both Mental and Vocal; or at least Mental, which we know is aceepted of God, if
in sincerity when the Vocal is not used. And they who Pray, or seem to Pray
with their Lips and Voices, when their Hearts are far away, as it is too much
the general manner and custom of people; their Eating and Drinking is worse
than that of Brutes, which sin not when they Eat, as all wicked persons do. But
I ask I. A. does he use Vocal and External Prayer and Thanksgiving, always when
he receives any of the Creatures of God; as in the use of Tobacco* or Tasting a
little Wine, or Ale, occasionally in a Tavern; or when walking in an Orchard,
is his Conscience so scrupulous, that he cannot Taste an Aple, but he must use
Vocal Prayer: I suppose he is not so scrupulous. And does not I. A. know, that
there is not one moment of our Life, but we are still receiving the Creatures
of God, seeing every breathing or receiving in of the Air, is a renewed Mercy
and Ble^ing of God, with many others continually added unto us: And yet the
Lord does not continually require Vocal Prayer, in the continual use of t^ose
Mercies. And here I shall propose a few plain Questions for I. A. to Answer,
upon this whole matter. 1. Whether one that sincerely uses Prayer and
Thanksgiving in his ^^art before he Eats and Drinks, and in his Eating and
Drinking; and at a^^ other times labors to have his heart exercised in the
^ear of God, although at times he use not Vocal Prayer, before and after Meat,
is not more unlike to a Brute, and more indeed a true Christian; than he, who
knows not what it is to fear God, or Pray to God sincerely in his heart, at
any time, yet always at Mealtimes uses a form of dead and lifeless words
before and after Meat. 2. Whether to Pray without the Spirit and without
sincerity of heart, be not a transgressing of the first, second and third
Commandments. 3. Whether that Doctrine which teaches men to Pray spiritless
and hypocritical Prayers, does not oppose these three Commandments. Further I.
A. does allege, that we do openly impugn the fourth Commandment, in one of
the following Queries, unto which place, he refers the Controversy. To (...)
I Answer, and so he might all the rest, without prepossessing his Reader with
prejudice against us, until he had heard the whole matter more amply discussed.

Our opposing the fifth Commandment he instanceth; in not taking off our Hats,
and bowing the body in Salutations: But seeing the fifth Commandment mentions
no such form of Honor, nor does he deduce it by any just consequence
therefrom, It is as easily denied by us, as affirmed by him. Nor does it
follow, as he alleges, that because we are to obey ehe fifth Commandment,
with our Bodies, as well as with our Souls; that therefore we are to take off
our Hats, in giving that honor to Parents; for the Jews to whom that command
was particularly given, used no such form of honor or respect. And as for
bowing the Body, although it was practiced under the Law, yet we find it
forbidden under the Gospel, as in the case of Cornelius bowing to Peter: And in
the New Testament we read of no bowing that is lawful, but that which is at the
Name of Jesus, and of God Almighty. Again, whereas he alleges, that from the
words of Christ, John 5. 44. We Impugn the very letter of the fifth
Commandment, and declare that no manner of Civil Reverence or regard is to be
given to any man. I Answer, this is a false Charge like unto the rest; for we
deny not, that there is a civil regard and honor that is due unto all men, in
their respective degrees, which is also to be signified and practiced with a
suitable outward behavior of the body, and may very well be, without either
uncovering the Head, or bowing the Knee, such as to rise up before the
Hoary-Head, or those that are our Superiors; also to stand before them, to
speak humbly, or be silent, unless when required, or liberty is given; also to
havean humble Aspect, or regard of the Eye and Face toward them, to give the
Hand, if required; to be ready at a beck to Answer their Call, and to walk and
run to serve them, in what is requisite; these and many such instances of
External Honor and respect, may Children lawfully practice to their Parents,
and Inferiors to their Superiors, without either bowing the Knee, or taking off
the Hat. But certainly these words of Christ, Ioh. 5. 44. Condemn all false
honor which the spirit of the World has invented: And such we have good cause
to hold the uncovering of the Head to men, until I. A. can produce a better
Original for it.

Lastly, His instances of our opposing the sixth and ninth Commandments; seeing
they are but Allegations, I pass them.

And thus I have gone through all that I saw requisite in his Preface to
answer, which may occasion me to be the more brief in the things that follow,
where most of the same things do again occurr.

CHAP. II.
ANd here I give the Reader to know, that this pretended Examination of I. A.
is in Answer to 17 Queries, which he says came to him subscribed by I. S. But
I believe I. S. never did Subscribe those Queries, nor was he Author of them,
but some of our Friends in England; however it is possible that through a
mistake, some had put the said Letters unto them. And though I. A. seems not
a little offended that these Queries should be directed for one or all of the
Ministers in Scotland to Answer, as if such a direction did argue both the
Arrogance and weakness of the Authors; yet I do not believe that they all can
Answer them sufficiently, holding to Scripture, without renouncing their former
Principles in great part. Far less is this pretended Examination of I. A. any
sufficient Answer unto them, as the sequel I hope shall make appear. In his
Survey or Examination of the first Query, he alleges, That the Questionist
does pervert the whole state of the Question, For, says he, who ever heard
that the Church of Scotland, or any other Church, made humane Arts and Sciences
an Infallible Rule to make a Minister of Christ? then they should never have
required more of any man in order to his admission to that Office, but his
alone sufficient skill in Grammar and Logic, which the Adversaries themselves
know to be most false.

To this I Answer, That not the Questionist but I. A. does pervert the state of
the Question, for the Question was not, Whether Grammar and Logic, and the
many Tongues, etc. was the only infallible Rule to make a Minister of Christ:
but whether it was an infallible Rule, etc. Now that may be conceived to be an
Infallible Ru^e, which is not the Infallible Rule. Nor does I. A. his
consequence follow, that then they should never have required more of any man
in order to his admission to that Office, but his alone sufficient skill in
Grammar and Logic, an example in other cases will show the weakness of this
Consequence. It is reported that Plato made it an Infallible Rule to receive
none into his School, but he who had some skill in Geometry, does it therefore
follow, that he required no more of any man, in order to his admission, to be
his Scholar, but that he had some skill in that Science. Another Instance may
be this, in diverse Incorporations and Cities it is an Infallible Rule, That
none may be admitted to be a Magistrate in the said City or Incorporation, but
he that is a Freeman therein, does it therefore follow, that nothing is more
required of any man in order to his being a Magistrate, but that he be a
Freeman in that City? Now suppose the Church of Scotland make it not the one
only Rule to make a Minister of Christ, that he has Grammar, Logic, and the
Languages, yet it may be very fairly Queried I hope, whether she makes it not
an Infallible Rule? Seeing for many years bygone she has made no Ministers,
but some as at least pretend to have Grammar and Logic, and Languages, and are
called Masters of those Arts, (howbeit many of them have but a very small
scantling of them for all the stress that seems to be laid on them.) And I
Query whether it be not one of the Canons of the Church, that none be admitted
into the Office of the Ministry but who have those aforesaid Arts? And if there
be no infallible or absolute Rule or Canon in the case, then why do they not
frequently allow men, wanting those Arts, who possibly may have all the other
Qualifications required, to enter into the Ministry. And it is further Queried,
Whether I. A. or the Church that he does own, does establish and avow that
Doctrine of James Durhame, positively asserted in his Commentary on the
Revelation, that Grammar Logic, or the like acquired Arts, are necessary to
the esse or being of a Minister of Christ, and consequently much more necessary
than true Piety and Godliness, which he makes only but necessary to his been
esse or better being, and only accidental to his being a Minister of Christ.
And this Question, which is indeed the main design of the first Question, as is
obvious to any ordinary understanding, I. A. for all his glorious pretense has
not in the least Answered, which is therefore returned upon him to be further
considered.

And whereas I. A. says, That Grammar and Logic are ordinary means of
Knowledge, exceedingly requisite in a Minister. If by Grammar and Logic he
mean not those innate gift^ (which may be well called natural as common to all
men having the ordinary use of understanding, and which I acknowledge to be in
some degree necessary unto all) but the Systems of those Arts, as they are
artificially composed of a great many Rules and Precepts, and commonly taught
in the Schools. I ask I. A. Why are they more requisite in a Minister, than in
the rest of the Church? Ought not all the Church to have the knowledge of God,
and of the Principles of Christian Religion as well as the Minister. And may
not some of the people come to have as much true knowledge of God, as their
Teachers; yea, may they not become wiser than their Teachers, as David said
concerning himself? and whereby did David become wiser than his Teachers, was
it by the humane Arts of Grammar and Logic? I trow not, but by the Law of God,
wherein he did meditate both day and night. May not therefore people come to
have as much knowledge of God at this day, without those aforesaid Arts, only
by meditating in the said Law or Word, and praying to the Lord, as also waiting
upon the Lord to have their understandings more and more opened, to understand
the Scriptures, as I. A. has, with all the help of his Arts? And if I. A.
think that those Arts are necessary to attain Divine Knowledge, so as he who
wants them, may not know as much of Divine things, as he who has them, I am not
of his mind, nor ^ hope are many others in his Church, who believe they may
both know the Lord, and daily grow in the knowledge of Him till they have as
much, and perhaps more of true Divine Knowledge than I. A. ever had, without
all I. A. his Arts, which he does so highly magnify.

But I. A. says, The Infallible rule to make a Minister of Christ, is set down
in 1 Timothy 3. and Tit. 1.

Answ. It is very well. But I cannot find in these places, or any where else in
all the Scripture; that Artificial Grammar and Logic, are made any one part of
that Infallible Rule, or that God has any where appointed them, as ordinary
means of attaining Divine knowledge. And if they be the ordinary means of
Divine knowledge; then it must needs follow, that all who have the least
measure of true Divine knowledge, have also humane Arts, or else they are
extraordinarily taught; none of which I judge I. A. will readily grant. Now the
Infallible rule set down by the Apostle, in these places already cited,
requires, That Bishops and Deacons (and consequently Ministers) should be
blameless, sober, just, holy, temperate: And I Query I: A. if this one only
qualification, viz. To be Holy, be as much made an Infallible rule, to make a
Minister of Christ in the Church he owneth, as to have Grammar, and Logic, and
Tongues: And how is this consistent with the foresaid Doctrine, that real
Holiness is not necessary to the esse or being of a Minister of Christ? For is
not that which is the infallible rule, to make a Minister of Christ necessary
to his very esse or being.

In the following part of his Examination of this first Query, I. A. does
further wrong the people called Quakers, As if they did hold that Grammar,
Logic, and Languages, were unlawful among Christians: And upon this idle and
false Supposition, he disputes for the lawfulness of those Arts, which none of
these people, so far as I know, deny: And for a proof to the contrary, that
people have Schools wherein Grammar, and the Languages, viz. Hebrew, Greek and
Latin are Taught, and some other Arts. Nor is it the use of these things, but
the abuse of them, and laying too great a stress upon them, that we oppose. Nor
do we deny, but Grammar, Logic, and especially the knowledge of the Hebrew and
Greek Languages, may be of good use and service to him that is a Minister of
Christ in a subordinate and subservient way, when he has to do with men,
especially that g^ory in these Arts, and in the abuse of them, contend against
the Truth; such adversaries may be lawfully redargued from their own
principles, and the points of their own weapons turned against them, as the
Lord gives fr^^dom fo to do; although the simple naked Truth, out of the mou^h
of a man, having none of those Arts, has more prevailed against a
Letter-learned Adversary many times, than many Learned men have done, whereof a
famous instance is recorded to have befallen at the Council of Nice, where a
simple Layman convinced again-saying Philosopher so called, when the Learned
Bishops and Doctors could nothing prevail upon him; the which passage is at
length recorded in Lucas Osiander, his Epitome of the Church History, Centur. 4.

But the said I. A. seems to dispute, not only for the lawfulness of Grammar
and Logic, as they are Taught in Schools, but for the absolute necessity of
them, to a Minister of Christ. For he says, Would they then have a Minister,
not knowing how to Speak and Write Sense. To which I Answer, And thinks he
that none in all the Church of Scotland knows how to Speak and Write Sense,
but they who have Learned the Art of Grammar. I suppose there are many
thousands in that Church, who never Learned any Art of Grammar, that have as
good Sense, and can both Speak and Write to as good Sense; at least in their
Mother Tongue, as I. A. and perhaps to better too, if that Proverb hold good,
That an Ounce of Mother-wit, is worth a Pound of Clergy. And do we not commonly
Learn to Speak and Write our Mother Tongue, without any Rules of Grammar; and
these who so Learn to Speak and Write, only by Reading and Hearing, without
Rules of Grammar, speak well enough to be understood. And what great or
intolerable defect is it, if a Minister of Christ, having sufficient knowledge
and Piety requisite to that Office, should Speak or Write a little Incongruous
Grammar; does or should that Unminister him? Is not a blemish or error in Life
and Conversation, much more intolerable; although such is the Vice of the
Times, whereof some good men have formerly complained, that he who breaks a
Rule of Grammar, is more noticed, than he who breaks the Rule of Piety.

Nor does the Translation of the Scriptures out of Hebrew and Greek, argue the
absolute nec^ssity of those Languages, unto the Ministers of Christ; seeing men
who are not Ministers, might have done that: And now since the Scriptures are
Translated, (which we acknowledge is a great Blessing of God) the Knowledge of
these Languages seems less necessary on a general account; seeing whatever
errors or weaknesses may be found in the present Iransstions, they contain the
form of found words, in respect of the more necessary things: And therefore the
Scriptures thus Translated to him, who is endued with that Spirit that gave
them forth, may well enough suffice, though he has neither Hebrew nor Greek:
Which for all this pretended necessity, the far greatest part of those called
Ministers in these three Nations have not so much skill of, but that they are
as much obliged to the Translation as many others that make no such Vaunt. And
it is a great question; for all this pretended necessity of Hebrew and Greek,
whether many called Ministers in these three Nations, ever once in all their
life Read an entire Chapter of the Bible in Hebrew, or indeed can so do: And I
see no cause why there is any more absolute necessity for a Preacher to have
Hebrew and Greek than any ordinary true Christian; for if true Faith, Knowledge
and Piety, can be attained as well without Hebrew and Greek, as with it, then
why is it made abs^^lutely necessary in the one, rather than in the other. Nor
do we plead against the lawfulness or good use that may be made of Tongues*
because they began at Babel, as I. A. does allege; but seeing they began at
Babel, or Babylon, we may lawfully infer, they are not absolutely necessary to
give the true knowledge of God, nor to make true Preachers, seeing there were
men that did both truly know the Lord, and also Preached him in Truth, before
the many Languages came in. Nor is I. A. his Argument for the necessity of
School-Logick less impertinent. He that knows nothing (says he) how to define,
divide, judge and Argument aright (if any such were) is in no better capacity,
than the Ass speaking to his Master: Take there (says he) the Quakers
Minister, very fit for Balaam' s Sadle, if he had but four Legs. Ignorance I
see is the Mother of the Quakers Devotion. By this Argument I. A. (as it
seems) concludes, that all men who want School-Logick, are no more men, and
have no more the use of their Rational Faculties, to define, divide, judge and
Argument aright, than Balaam's Ass; and thus he puts many thousands, and ten
thousands of his Fellow-Church-Members in the same List with Balaam's Ass, and
makes them as unskilsul to define, divide, judge and Argument aright, as
Balaam's Ass, only because they want School-Logick. And is this a Vindication
of the Church of Britain, so to defame the greatest part of all her Members,
by comparing them to Balaam's Ass, only for want of School-Logick, which I
suppose scarce the hundredth person has any knowledge of? Indeed I confess, it
has been but too familiar for such men, to repute the people as Asses* for
want of those School-Arts; and they have but too much used them in times past
as Asses, and also Rid upon them. But whether is not I. A. short of Balaam's
Ass, which saw the Angel of God, and had its mouth immediately opened by the
Lord to reprove the Prophet; to none of which I. A. has any pretense. and why
does I. A. conclude, That Ignorance is the Mother of the Quakers Devotion?
Because they have not commonly School-Logick, and judge it not absolutely
necessary to any Christian, or Minister of Christ. Then by I. A. his Irronical
and Sarcasme, none have true Devotion, but these who have School-Logick; the
which reflection strikes as much against his own Church Members as us. And I
suppose there are many thousands in the so called Church of Scotland, that may
think I. A. deserves a sharp reproof, for such an idle Satyr, as to conclude,
because we establish not School-Logick as necessary^ to Devotion, That
therefore Ignorance (according to us) is the Mother of Devotion. When the
Protestants blame the Papists for holding Ignorance to be the Mother of
Devotion, I understand they mean the ignorance of the Scriptures, and
principles of Religion, and not of School-Logick, which men may either have or
want, and yet be truly Devout: And for all this scorn of I. A. I shall mind him
of what Augustine observed above 12 hundred years ago, Surgunt indocti, and
indoctae, and rapiunt coelum a nobis doctis: The unlearned men and women arise
and take the Kingdom from us who are the Learned: Which may well at least be
applied against them, who glory in their Artificial Learning, and set it up
higher than it does deserve. And said Paul, to the Corinthians, as well to the
Preachers among them as others; For ye see your Calling Brethren, how that not
many wise men after the flesh, etc. are called. And what is a man with all his
School-Logick and other Natural Sciences and Arts, but a wise man after the
flesh: And yet according to Paul's Doctrine, God had not chosen many such
either to be Christians or Ministers. Moreover, whereas I. A. pleads for the
great commendation of Humane Arts and Sciences of Grammar, Logic, etc. from
Isaiah 50. 4. and 2 Pet. 3. 16. It remains for him to prove, that these
places are to be understood of such kind of Learning, which I deny; and on the
contrary affirm, it is Divine and Supernatural Learning, which is there to be
understood. As to Isaiah 29. v. 12. 14. I grant that it is meant of humanly
Learned; but it makes clearly against him, seeing the Vision was a Sealed
Book, as well to the Learned, as to the Unlear^ed: And therefore none of I. A.
his Arts of Grammar and Logic could open the Seals here of.

Again, whereas he says, The Quakers have often Objected to him against the
lawfulness of Logic among Christians, because it was first used among
Heathens; and then he scoffingly does inquire, But what shall we do with the
Isle of Britain, which was first used by Heathens. I Anwer, that I suppose it
is I. A. his mistake, or failure of memory, that the Quakers have ever Objected
against the lawfulness of true Logic, which I know none to be against; only I
judge it may be well argued, that seeing it was a thing used among the
Heathens, and yet did not bring them to the true knowledge of God; nor can it
bring any Christians thereunto now. And it seems unreasonable, that any Art
found or used among the Heathens should be made an Infallible Rule to make a
Minister of Christ. Or perhaps, if any of those called Quakers have Disputed
against Logic, it has been only against that falsely so called, viz. a
Sophistical way of contending about any thing, for or against, which is too
much used in Schools at this day, and wherein too many glory, and are puffed
up. But I. A. his comparison betwixt the Isle of Britain and School Logic is
very unequal, else let him prove that his School-Logick is as necessary, and
profitable to the life of man, as the Land of Britain is.

Again, whereas in Answer to the Instances of Elisha, Amos, Peter and John, who
were not bred up in Grammar and Logic, and yet were true Min^sters, he
alleges, It is no good consequence to argue from an extraordinary fact to an
ordinary fixed Rule; I Answer, he has not as yet proved that it is any
ordinary fixed Rule by the Lord, that all must have those Arts of School-Logick
and Grammar who are Ministers of Christ. He but here beggeth the Question, as
it is ordinary for him to do in other cases. And as for us, we judge it no
tempting of God, nor looking for extraordinaries to believe that we may receive
true knowledge, and grow up in the same, so far as is requisite for a true
Preacher to have, by our diligent reading and meditating on the Scriptures, by
the help of God's Spirit assisting us to understand them, and withal using
fervent Prayer unto God, to obtain the said help of His Spirit, although we
neither use the Art of Grammar or Logic; and we find not that Paul recommended
Timothy to give attendance to those Arts, but only to Reading, viz. the
Scriptures, and not to neglect the gift that was in him, which I suppose I. A.
will not be so ra^h as to say, was either Grammar or Logic. And now after
diverse abuses and perversions of I. A. in his examination of this first
Question, he concludes with another great calumny and false charge, in saying,
The Quakers allege that Peter and John had no Grammar and Languages, whereas
the Question does only allege, That Peter and John were not bred up in Grammar
and Languages, which does not hinder it to be true, that God afterward did
immediately inspire them with the gift of Tongues. And yet even before they
were inspired with these Tongues, they were Ministers.

In his Survey or Examination of the second Query, he continues to play his
old Game of perverting the state of the Question, which is not (as the Reader
may see) whether Grammar, Logic, and Philosophy, etc. were extant in the World
before Christ his coming in the Flesh, for that we readily acknowledge; but the
Question is, How long it was, after Christ, that those Arts were set up to make
Ministers of Christ; To this he gives no Reply, but only goes on to prove the
lawfulness of Philosophy, and to tell what it teaches. Now, as for true and
genuine Philosophy the Quakers deny it not to be lawful, even that commonly
called Natural Philosophy, which is a knowledge of natural things, and the
operations thereof, with their effects; but that which they oppose is to make
such a natural knowledge, so ^ar as it is only an Art taught in the Schools
absolutely necessary to make a Minister of Christ. Again, Secondly, We Question
much, Whether that which is commonly taught in Schools, among those called
Christians, under the name of Philosophy, be indeed the true and genuine
Natural Philosophy, seeing the far greatest part of it is exploded and rejected
by not a few of the more knowing among your selves, and if any of us have
called Philosophy, Foolosophy and Witchcraft, as I. A. alleges they did not
mean it of any true Natural Knowledge, but in the Apostlessence, when he says,
Beware lest any spoil you through Philosophy, and vain deceit; which I. A.
confesses is Sophisticate and corrupt Philosophy. And dare he say there is
none of that sophisticate and corrupt Philosophy taught in the Schools and
Universities in Britain. And may not sophisticate and corrupt Philosophy be
called Witchcraft in that sense used by Paul, Gal. 3. O foolish Galatians, who
has bewitched you. And I Query what Philosophy does I. A. mean by the true and
genuine Philosophy, which he makes so necessary to every Minister of Christ,
whether Aristotle's Philosophy, or the Cartesian, or any other, seeing there
are many kinds of that called Philosophy in the World, whose principles and
rules directly contradict one another. And the Schools in Christend^m to this
day have not agreed in the common principles and Rules of that called
Philosophy, but remain at great uncertainty in the very foundations of it, as
is acknowledged, by the most ingenuous Professors thereof. Now to make a thing
so uncertain (as their Philosophy is in many or most things, to wit, a fallible
thing) an infallible Rule to make a Minister of the Infallible Truth, is a very
absurd and unreasonable matter. But I. A. gives us a number of Thirteen or
Fourteen Positions, which his School-Philosophy does teach, the truth whereof
is evident as that there is a God, who is Infinite, Eternal, Omnisci^nt,
Omnipotent, Unchangeable; that every man is a Rational Creature; that the Soul
of man is Immortal; that no Brute is a Man; that no Action can be without some
Subject, nor without some effect; nor any Union without some extremes. But I
suppose there are few men, if any that have but the right use of their
understanding as men, that do not, or may not know all this without
School-Philosophy, as well as I. A. does with it. And then what advantage
gives his Philosophy unto him? But toere are other great matters which his
Philosophy teaches; and as he particularly describes them? they are these
following, That every thing either is, or is not; that nothing can ^oth be, and
not be at once; that of every contradiction the one part is true, and the other
false; that every whole is more than (...) part, that every Cause is prior in
nature to its effect, that nothing can work before it exist. But I must tell I.
A. that these last mentioned Positions, are not taught by Philosophy, and are
not any part of Philosophy, as is generally acknowledged by the Professors of
it; because they are first Principles which Philosophy does not undertake to
teach, but presupposes them as already known and understood, by the common
dictates of understanding, that is in all men; and are called by them (...)
common Sentiments or Principles; and therefore we still desiderate, what
peculiar Mysteries I. A. his Philosophy does teach, that men of ordinary
understanding does not already know, or at least may know very easily by a
simple reflection, without his Philosophy or School-Craft. Not that I deny, but
that there are diverse things which the true genuine Philosophy may teach, that
are not obvious to common understanding; but I find nothing asserted by I. A.
in all these positions, which he gives as instances of what Philosophy
teaches, but every ordinary Tradesman knows as well to be true, as I. A. And
therefore he might have spared his Pains in that idle and unnecessary work.

CHAP. III.
J. A. in his Survey or Examination of the third Query, does earnestly contend,
That the Words of the Scripture are, and ought to be called the Word of God:
For which he uses diverse Arguments and Citations of Scripture; but the true
state of the Question here, is, not whether the Scriptures figuratively, as by
a Synecdoche, or Metonymie, may not be called the Word, for which I shall not
contend, finding that the Greek Word Logo^, Translated into English [the Word]
is used sometimes in Scripture to signify either Words or Writings, as Acts 1.
1. the Treatise Writ by Luke, he calls it, (...) which is to say in English,
the first Word or Speech: Also where Paul says, Our Gospel came unto you, not
in Word only, but in Power, etc. 1 Thessalonians: 1. 5. And some other places may be
found both in the Old and New Testament to that effect, which yet does in
nothing give to I. A. nor to any of our Adversaries, the least advantage
against us. For the Question is, what is properly the Word God, or the (...).
That which is most properly and eminently that Word of God, so much mentioned
in the Scripture, with its wonderful effects; and that the Letter is not
properly the Word of God, is as evidently apparent, as that the Writing or
Written Letter of a man's Speech, is not properly the words of a man's Mouth; for
we commonly distinguish betwixt a man's Word and his Write. How much more ought
we to distinguish betwixt the outward Letter and Writing, and the Word of God
in the proper sense, seeing God is an invisible Spirit, and so is his Word: And
what he has spoke by his Prophets or Apostles, he spoke it first in their
Hearts and Mouths, before there was any Declaration of it in Writ; and
consequently it was the Word of God, before the Writing: And therefore the
Writing is not the Word properly, but only figuratively, as when a part is put
for the whole, by a Synecdoche, or when the sign is put for the thing
signified, as a Map of England and Scotland, is commonly called England and
Scotland? and yet none will say, that that Map is really England or Scotland;
or when we hear that England and Scotland produces such and such Fruits, who
is so ignorant as to think, that the Map or Card, produces these Fruits, and
not the Land it self. Let I. A. know therefore, that in all the places where
the Word is mentioned, he must prove that the Letter of the Scripture is meant,
or he does nothing against us; the which I am sure he shall never be able to
perform, seeing he grants himself, That sometimes at least, by the Word is
meant Christ, and not the Letter. Moreover, I ask I. A. when he says, The
Scripture is the Word of God, what he means by the term Scripture Does he
mean the only bare Writing, or Characters consisting of Ink and Paper; and will
he say that is properly the Word of God? Or does he mean the Doctrine expressed
and signified by the said Writing and Characters, and the true sense and
meaning of the Spirit of God held forth in the same, which Metonymically may be
called the Scripture, putting the thing signified for the sign (and thus the
Doctrine may be called the Scripture, and the Scripture the Doctrine, to wit,
by a twofold Metonymie, one where the thing signified is put for the sign, the
other where the sign is put for the thing ^igni^ied.)

Now we do most willingly grant that the Doctrine and true sense or mind of the
Spirit declared of or expressed in the Scripture, is, and may properly be
called the Word of God. But then we further affirm, that the said Doctrine or
true sense of the mind or Spirit, cannot be reached or attained unto by the
mere Reading or Hearing the Letter, o the bare meditating in the Letter; and
there^fore not every one that has the Letter, Preaches the Letter, and
Hears the Letter, has also the true Doctrine and mind of the Spirit, and
consequently nor has he the Word of God. But he only that receives the Spirit
of Christ, or Christ the Lord who is that Spirit, receives the true Doctrine
when he Reads or Hears the Scriptures, or meditateth in them, and
consequently he only receives the Word of God: And thus also none can Preach
the true Doctrine and Word of God, but he who speaks it by the Spirit of God;
and none Hears the Word of God, but he who Hears it, and into the Heart and
inward Ears of his inward man receives it by the Spirit of God. To these only,
I say, the Doctrine is known, and by these it is only received, as it is indeed
the Word of God; and in this respect it was, that Paul commended such as
received the Truth, by the same Spirit by which it was Preached unto them
through him; That they received it not as the word of Man, but as the Word of
God, etc. Now this comm^ndation can be given to no unbeliever, that what he
receives in the Ministry of the true Servants of God, he receives it as the
Word of God; for only the true Believers do so receive it, according to Paul's
Testimony, as it is indeed the Word of God. Moreover, I would have the Reader
to know, that when we say, by the Word, is understood Christ; we mean not
Christ abstractly, or seperately considered from the Divine Doctrine and
Testimony of Life, whether in the heart or Mouth, that immediately proceeds
from him, nor yet as divided or separated from any Divine operation of his
Spirit, Power and Life in any of his Servants; but we take both these conjoined
together, to be the Word of God, even as the Soul and Body is one Man, and
sometimes the Soul is called the man, and sometimes the Body, and both properly
enough, when the Soul is in the Body and united therewith, but the Body alone
without the Soul, is not properly called the man; and thus much I hope shall
suffice, to satisfy the sober Reader, as concerning the Word of God, how we
understand it. Now whereas I. A. cites diverse places of Scripture to prove,
That by the Word of God is not understood Christ, but the outward Testimony or
Writing of the Scriptures. It is very evident, and may plainly appear so to be
unto any having the least measure of Spiritual understanding, that by the Word
of God in these Scriptures, is not understood the Letter, but Christ, together
with the Divine operation and Testimony of his Life in the Hearts and Mouths
of his Servants. And among these places by him alleged, I shall cite these
following (for it is needless to cite them all) viz. Heb. 4. 12. Ephesians. 6. 17.
Rev. 1. 16. Rev. 2. 12, 16. Rev. 19. 15. And also he cites diverse Scriptures
which mention the Word of Christ, and the Word which he has spoken. And seeing
that cannot be Christ himself, it must needs acaccording to him be the Letter.
Now as to that Scripture Heb. 4. 12. For the Word of God is quick and powerful,
etc. There are diverse Protestants that expound it of Christ, and not of the
Letter; and indeed the words themselves do plainly enough evince it, seeing it
is said in the next verse, concerning the same Word, That all things are bare
and manifest to his sight; and therefore that Word has an Omni^cience, which I
suppose I. A. when he considers, will not affirm of the Letter of the
Scripture. As for Ephesians. 6. 17. his reason is weak, that by it cannot be
understood Christ, seeing it is called, The Sword of the Spirit; as to say, an
Instrument in the hand of the Spirit. But this is only I. A. his gloss, and not
Paul's words; For the Sword of the Spirit, may very well be understood to be
the Spirit it self, As the shield of Faith, is Faith that shield, The Helmet of
Hope, is Hope that Helmet, so the City of Rome, is Rome that City; and why not
also the Sword of the Spirit, that Spirit it self: And this is further
confirmed out of the Greek Article, Englished by [which] that is in the Neuter
Gender, and therefore rendering this Sense, The Sword of the Spirit, which
Spirit is the Word of God, so that the Article [which] being in the Neuter
Gender, is Relative to Spirit, which in the Greek Language is in the same
gender. Again, as to those three places in the Revelation, which mention the
Word of God; its being the Sword of his Mouth, and proceeding out of the Mouth
of Christ: Does I. A. think, that this only is the Letter of the Scripture?
Does nothing but the Letter come out of his Mouth? Does not Spirit and Life,
and living virtue come out of his Mouth? And did not Christ say, The Words that
I speak unto you, they are Spirit and Life, John 6. And is not this somewhat
more than the Letter? But lastly, The Word of Christ, and the Word that Christ
speaks, has of the Life and Spirit of Christ in it; and therefore it is still
somewhat beside the External Writing or Letter, and is not divided or separated
from Christ. And I have told I. A. already, that not only Christ abstractly
considered, but the immediate Testimony and influence of his Life (which can
never be separated from him, no more than the Sun Beams can be separated from
the Son) is also acknowledged by us to be the Word of God, and to be Light and
Life.

B^t, says I. A. The whole Doctrine of the Prophets, is the Word of the Lord;
To which I Answer, I have granted, and do still grant it so to be, but as is
already said, that Doctrine is not the bare Letter; nor has every one that
doctrine who has the Letter; for to have the true doctrine and sense of the
Spir^t, is not only to have the Letter, but to have the Spirit, by which only
the true doctrine can be conveyed unto us, although the true service and use of
the Letter, in subordination to the Spirit is not denied.

And whereas I. A. accuses the Quakers, That they call the Scriptures a dead
Letter, I no where remember that ever I read or heard any of them simply
calling it so. But only in so far as it is eventually such unto them, who are
spiritually dead themselves, and are not turned to the quickening Spirit, but
alienated therefrom, to such only the Scripture is a dead and killing Letter,
and this much diverse Protestants have acknowledged as well as we, and
particularly John Owen, in his Treatise on the Scriptures, That it is so to the
Jews, and other Unbelievers. But unto all those who are spiritually alive, the
Scripture is no dead nor killing Letter, but a living Testimony; as also unto
all such whom it pleased God to quicken by his Spirit in the reading, or
hearing or meditating in the Scriptures. Again that he says, A part of the
Scripture, to wit, the Law considered, as strictly legal is in respect of
guilty sinners called a killing Letter, but never the whole Scripture; I
Answer, That not only the Old Testament, but even the Writings or Letter of the
New Testament, may be called a killing Letter to those that remain alienated
from the Spirit that quickens. Lven as Origin has formerly taught in his
Commentary on Leviticus, Not only (says he) in the Old Testament is found the
killing Letter; there is also in the New Testament the Letter which kills
him, who does not spiritually attend unto the things which are spoken. And why
was the Law called a killing Letter? only because it did curse and condemn
guilty sinners. Nay, that is not the only or main reason, but rather that its
Ministration could not give life, whereas the Ministration of the Gospel, being
accompanied with the Spirit, does quicken and give life; and in that respect
Paul said, The Law was weak and could no make perfect, and therefore calls it,
The Law of a carnal Commandment. Now if any go from the Spirit, that only makes
the true Gospel Administration, and set up the Letter or Writings of the
Apostles, in the room of the same. These Writings of the Apostles do eventually
become a killing Letter, no less than that of the Law, and can no more give
life, or make perfect, than the outward Law could.

And here upon this Head, I do readily take notice what I. A. acknowledges
concerning the Scriptures in page 16. of his Book, toward the middle part,
viz, That the Scriptures as to the external Form and Mode, which they have from
the Writers Pen, they are not the Word of God, but that as to their ennutiate
doctrine and sentence they are the Word of God.

And why then does I. A. make all this loud clamor and noise against the
Quakers, seeing upon the matter he confesses what they say, viz. That the
letter or external form of the Writing is not properly the Word of God. And I
suppose I may add with I. A his allowance, that the external Form and Mode of
the Preachers mouth, when he forms a sound in speaking Scripture Words, is
not properly the Word of God any more than the bare writing, ^seeing there is
no more in the one than in the other, simply as such. Let not I. A. therefore
blame us for that hereafter, which he confesses himself; and we do as readily
acknowledge, as he either does or can do, That the ennutiate and expressed
Doctrine and sense of the Spirit is indeed truly and properly the Word of God.
But then is there no difference betwixt him and us? I Answer, as to the naming
the Scriptures, the Word, it seems there is none. But yet another great
Controversy arises, which I doubt will not be so soon ended betwixt us, viz.
Whether any man can reach unto that Ennuti^te Doctrine and sense of the
Scriptures without the Spiritual Illumination and Assistance of that Spirit
that gave them forth? we say Not; and if he say Yea, we still differ; but not
as it seems to me by his Confession, in naming the Scriptures, The Word of
God.

But there is yet another great Charge wherewith he loadeth us in this his
Survey of the Third Query, Some Quakers, says he, are upon this Head so grossly
Atheistical, as to say, That the Scriptures are but the Saints Words and
Testimony from their own particular experiences. And again he alleges, That
according to the Quakers, they are but the mere bare Word of a Creature. Hence
he infers, That the Penmen of the Scripturs, of all men in the World, must
have been the greatest Cheats and archest Impostors, etc.

But seeing he produces no express Testimonies out of the Writings of that
People, for such Assertions he is not to be believed. Nor does it follow, that
because the Scriptures are the Saints Words, that therefore they are not also
the Words of God, even unto all who hear or read them; at least mediately and
remotely; although none but such as believe, do receive them as such, which yet
is only and alone the ^ault of those unbelieving persons, because they reject
the Spirit of God that does certify or assure unto us, That the Scriptures are
proceeded from God by Divine Inspiration. And what if some have said, That the
Scriptures are Testimonies of the Saints, from their experience. May not this
receive a fair and charitable construction, and not presently be judged to be
gross Atheism; for although the Scriptures give a narration of diverse
Histories, as also of Precepts, Prohibitions, and mysteries of Faith, As Christ
His coming in the Flesh; His being born of a Virgin; His being Crucified, and
Buried; His Resurrection, and Ascension; the which Histories, and things
aforementioned, albeit they cannot properly be called the Saints Experiences,
yet the Divine Inspiration and Revelation, which the Prophets and Apostles had
immediately of those things, was truly their Experience; and let us see if I.
A. will deny it; or if he do, may it not be more justly retorted upon him, That
he, and not the Quakers, deny that the Scriptures are from Divine Inspiration;
or can he say, that although the Prophets and Apostles had Divine Inspiration
and Immediate Revelation, yet they had no Experience of the same. And that we
call the Scriptures, sometimes, the Saints Words (yet not denying them in a
true sense to be the Words of God) I. A. can no more justly blame us than Paul
and John who called their own Preaching and Writing, and that of their
Brethren, the Witness and Teaching of men; so that Paul and the Apostles Words
were both the words of men, and yet also the Words of God, to wit, mediately
declared unto them by the Apostles. Now they whose Faith stood in the Power of
God, received them, as the Words of God, but who came not to that power to
believe in it, they were but unto such as the words of men, which, as is
al^eady said, was only and alone the fault of such unbelieving Persons.

There yet remains two parts or branches of the third Query, to which I. A. for
all his pretended Survey, has given no more satisfaction, than to any of the
former. The first is, Whether all that is written in the Scriptures, from
Genesis to Revelation, be a Rule of Faith and Manners. To this he only
answers in general, That we are bound to believe all S^ripture Enunciation,
from the beginning to the e^d (which we do readily grant, and that therefore it
may well be called an Historical Rule of Faith) and that the Moral Law, with
whatsoever is of common equity, or whatever enjoining any piece of Religious
Worship under the New Testament does belong to Christians of our Calling and
Condition; but that the obligation of the Ceremonial and Judicial Law is
totally abrogated: And (says he) the Quakers must be content with these
generals. To which I Answer, When the Nature of the Question requires a
particular Answer, to Answer in general, neither can nor ought to satisfy; for
notwithstanding of all he has said, the great Question yet remains unanswered.
What parts of the Scripture belong to the Moral Law, and what ^o the Ceremonial
and Judicial so called. Also seeing there are diverse things that were commanded
and practiced by the Apostles and Primitive Christians under the New Testament;
whether all these do oblige us now, yea or nay; as for example, the Washing one
anothe^s Feet, and Anointing the Sick with Oil; and whether these actions were
commanded by any part of the Ceremonial or Judicial Law, or whether they belong
to any piece of Religious Worship under the New Testament. The other branch of
the Question is, Whether every Title from (...) to the Revelation be the Word,
or Words of God. To this he Answers affirmatively, and seems, to be so
offended with the Question, as if it did conclude, That the Quakers judge, that
the Scriptures are interpolated and corrupted with the additions of men. But in
Answer, I. A. ought to know, that to Query a thing, will not conclude that the
Questionist does positively affim or deny what is Queried. Again, I hope it may
without offense, not only be Queried, but also concluded, that the Translations
of the Scripture (the which Translations are commonly cal^ed Scripture) have
diverse additions, which men have added, without any pretense to Divine
Inspiration: The which Additions are commonly Printed in our English Bibles, in
another Character than the other words. Now is it any Crime to ask if these
Addititions be the words of God, or only the words of man; and if such
Additions be any part of the Rule of Faith and Manners? And yet those very
Additions are of such consequence, that they may occasion the Reader to take up
another sense of the Sentences, then otherwise he would, or perhaps the Spirit
of God did really intend. Nor are there wanting diverse, both Judicious and
Learned men so accounted, and of good repute, even among Protestants, who do
acknowledge, that some particular words have dropped in, into the Greek and
Hebrew Texts, since their first Writing, and what are these various Lections of
many places of Scripture, especially when they contradict in one and the same
place? Are not some of them at least only the words of men? All which being
granted, yet do not hinder, but that the purity of the Scriptures is
sufficiently pre^erved ( viz. in respect of the main and necessary things) for
which we have cause to bless God, and acknowledge his great care and
Providence, as in many other things. And thus I. A. may see how much of the
weightiest part of his task, in giving a sufficient Answer to those Queries, he
has still left undone, for all his windy Braggings against the people called
Quakers.

CHAP. IV.
IN his pretended Survey of the fourth Query, he divides it into three
Sections: In the first, he labors by many Arguments to prove a thing, which
we do not deny, to wit, That the Scriptures are a Rule of Faith and Manners:
And so he might have spared himself and others, all that pains, for the state
of the Question is not, whether the Scriptures are not, and may not be called a
secondary Rule; nor whether they may not in respect of all the Historical part,
be called an Historical Rule: But the true Question is, whether the words of
the Scripture, as they are only written and spoken outwardly, be the Principal,
or only Rule of Faith and Manners.

Now seeing I. A. has been at such needless pains, to prove a thing against
us, which we do not deny, I need not give a particular Answer to any of his
Arguments. But because there are diverse of his Arguments, which have some false
premises, although the conclusion be granted; therefore I shall a little take
notice of one or two of them.

In his seventh Argument, he makes it one of the Premises, That the more sure
word of Prophecy, mentioned 2 Pet. 1. 19, 20. is the Scripture. But this is
denied by us, for we believe it to be that Word of God in the heart, by which
all the true Prophets did Prophecy, and without which we cannot understand
their Prophecies, nor any other part of the Scripture. Now the reasons of his
Assertion are, 1. Because of the coherence of 19 and 20 Verses. But this is no
sufficient reason, for the coherence is as good and better, to understand it of
the word in the heart, as to understand Peter saying thus, Take heed to the
Word of God in your hearts, by which the Prophets gave forth the Scriptures,
for it is that same word, which makes us sure, that the Scriptures are
Divinely Inspired, and also does give unto us the true Interpretation of them:
This is a good coherence and much better then that imagined by I. A. as if
Peter had said, Take heed unto the Scripture, as the more sure Word, for no
Scripture is of any private interpretation: The which violent and strained
coherence, I for my part cannot understand, seeing Peter aims at something
that is not the Scripture, as being necessary to give us its Interpretation:
And what can that be, But that Word of ^od, which spoke in the Prophets. His
second reason is, That he cannot understand how the Dictate or Light within is
more sure, than Gods immediate voice from Heaven, as that was at the
Transfiguration. To which I Answer, that the inward Voice or Word of God
immediately in the heart, can very well be understood to be more sure as to us,
than any outward Voice of God from Heaven. 1. Because that which is immediate
in the Heart, is more near and immediate, than that which is outward in the
Air, which comes to the Heart and Soul, but mediately through the outward
Hearing; however immediate may be understood otherwise. 2. It was by the
immediate Word of God in the Heart, by which the Prophets, when at any time
they heard an outward Voice or Word from God, did assuredly know that it came
from God, and that it was no delusion of Satan. And they believed the Word of
God in their Hearts, simply from its own self Evidence, and not from any
borrowed Evidence of an outward Voice: For they often believed, and received the
Word of God in their Hearts immediately, when they heard no outward voice at
all, as is generally acknowledged. And this inward or intellectual kind of
speaking by the Lord unto the Prophets, is acknowledged by Thomas Aquinas and
Suarez, and other Schoolmen, to be the most noble kind of Divine Revelation,
and consequently the most sure, at least unto us. His 3. Reason, Is the
Testimony of other Scriptures produced, and to be produced. But he has neither
produced, nor can produce any Scripture that proves, that Word of Prophecy, or
Prophetical Word, to be only the Letter of the Scripture, and not the Word or
Light of God, and of Christ in the Heart.

Again in his eighth Argument, he alleges, That it cannot be the Dictate or
Light within, by which Spirits are to be tried; because the Dictate or Light
within is ^allible: And this he undertakes to prove, from some words of mine in
Quakerism no Popery, where I acknowledge, That it is possible for us to mistake
and err in Speaking and Writing (and consequently in Examining and Judging) if
we be not duly watchful. But how unreasonable this consequence is, I leave
unto sober men to judge; as to conclude, because men are infallible, that
therefore the Dictate and Light of Gods Spirit in men is fallible also. Was not
Peter fallible in some Cases; Yea, did he not fail sorely, when he denied his
Master: Does it therefore follow, that the Dictate or Light of Gods Spirit in
him was fallible? Indeed if I had said, that when we follow the Dictate and
Light of God within, we are fallible, he might have inferred such a
consequence; but I never said, nor thought any such thing, but on the contrary,
that the Dictates and Leadings of Gods Spirit in us are infallible, and have a
direct tendency to lead, guide and move us infallibly, as they are purely kept
unto, the which is possible for us to do. Another Argument he brings against
the Dictate (...); I^s being the rule to try Spirits, because then it would be
both Superior and Inferior, which is Repugnant, Superior, when it tryes and
examines; and Inferior, when it is tried and examined. To which I Answer, 1. It
is no Repugnancy, that one and the same thing be Superior and Inferior in
different respects, and as it respects different Subjects. But 2. There is no
necessity to understand the Dictate and Light of Gods Spirit in diverse men to
be Superior and Inferior, when it examines, and is examined, for one equal may
be a measure or rule to another; yea one thing may be said to be a rule unto it
self, according unto that common Maxim or principle, Line^ recta est norma sui
and obliqui, i. e. A right line is the rule of it self, and also of that which
is crooked. Otherwise let I. A. Answer me, How did Adam know the voice of God
in his Heart and the Prophets, before the Scriptures were writ, how did they
know it?

And in the close of his first Section, he concludes with a manifest Untruth,
That the Quakers are for a new Dispensation, not only in manner, but matter,
contrary to the Doctrine formerly Dictated by the Holy Ghost. This I say is
false, which he neither does, nor can prove, and the Dispensation we plead for
is the same, both for matter and manner, which belonged to all true and good
Christians in all Ages. And as to what he says, Of our extreme Infatuation and
Brain-sickness, and retaining the proportion and features of humane bodies,
having quite enervated our Rational Essence. These and the like scoffing and
disdainful expressions are no more to be regarded by us, nor have any more
weight, than when some Epicureans at Athens, called Paul a Babbler We know, it
has been the Lot of Gods people in former Generations, to be reputed by
Adversaries, both Fools and Madmen. However, we hope, the sober Readers of our
Books and Treatises, and these also who have any Converse with us, will find
that we have neither abandoned, nor lost the use of our Rational Faculties,
which we acknowledge to be good Gifts of God, and for which he is to be
praised; nor does our principle and belief of Divine Inspiration, as being a
more noble and excellent Gift of God, than the highest Natural Faculty of
Reason, either weaken or render useless to us our Reason, but both indeed both
strengthen it and make it the more useful and comfortable, whereof to Gods
praise, we are bold to say, we have true experience, notwithstanding of what I.
A. or any of his insulting humor do, or can say to the contrary.

There yet remains two other things in this first Section of I. A. which I
think fit to notice. One is, That he alleges some of us understand by the
more sure word of Prophecy, the Scripture, which is only to be taken heed unto,
until the day dawn, and the day Star arise in the heart; that is, until the
Holy Ghost be given, and that consequently, the Scriptures serve for nothing to
belivers, who are born with the Spirit and sealed therewith. But seeing he has
produced no Names of any among us understanding that more sure word of Prophecy
to be the Scripture, we are not concerned to Answer him. It is possible that
some in Discourse, has only so argued with him, ad hominem, as they use to say,
and not as being their own judgment. And as for the Scriptures, we judge that
they are profitable, and ought to be Read by true Believers and renewed
persons, as well as others. But when does I. A. think that the day dawneth, and
the day Star arises in the hearts of believers? Whether in this mortal State,
Yea or Nay, and then whether the shining of Gods day, and the day Star thereof,
be not a true immediate Revelation in the hearts of those who have it, and
whether it does not more assure them who have it, than the Letter of Scripture
can do? And seeing the Light of God in them, when it shines in the heart but as
in a dark place, is a more sure Word, than an audible voice from Heaven, or
than the Letter of the Scripture, as to us; what shall be said of that Light,
when it becomes not only as the day Star, but as the day itself, for clearness
in the Soul? Or can there be any greater, or more principal rule than this? The
other thing I notice is, That he infers the Scriptures to be a rule, because
Christ said to the Sadduces, Ye err not knowing the Scriptures. Now if this
Argument hold good, seeing Christ said also, Ye err not knowing the
Scriptures, nor the Power of God; It will as well follow, That the Power of
God, is the Rule, and that the rather, because it was their being ignorant of
the Power of God, (which quickens both Soul and Body) that made them ignorant
of the Scriptures; for none know truly the Scriptures, but they who know the
Power of God; and therefore that Power, which is Life, Light and Spirit, is the
more principal and original rule. But I. A. in citing these words of Christ,
omitted the following words, which are exceeding weighty, viz. [no the Power of
God,] whether this was purposely done of him, to ensuare his unwary Reader, or
not, I shall not determine, but leave to his consideration.

CHAP. V.
J. A. in the beginning of his second Section, concerning the Rule, is pleased
to call me an Arch-Quaker, (the which Title I no wise acknowledge) and a man
too Learned, as I employ it. To which I Answer, That as to my Learning, that is
but very ordinary, and a thing I neither can nor ought to glory in. However in
this I rejoice, that the Testimony of my Conscience bears me Witness in the
Holy Spirit, that any small measure I have of that called Learning, it has
been my sincere aim and endeavor to employ it to Gods Honor, and serve the
Truth therewith, and not in the least to use it against the Truth, so far as it
was, or is made manifest unto me. Next, he blames me that I affirm, The
Scriptures are only but a secondory Rule of Faith and Manners; but that the
Spirit, or his Dictate within is the Principal Rule, and like Proteus, turning
my self into all shapes; sometimes I design Christ himself, oftener the Spirit
himself, but oftnest the Dictate of the Spirit within to be that Rule. But he
might at that ra^e have no less blamed the Apostle Paul that he turned himself
into all shapes, while he affirms sometimes, That Christ spoke in him; and
sometimes that the Spirit spoke in him; and certainly what Christ or the Spirit
spoke in him, was by a certain Word or dictate. But to Answer directly, when I
say Christ is the Rule: And again, when I say the Spirit is the Rule, there is
no absurdness therein; for if we mean by the Spirit, the Holy Ghost, Christ and
the Holy Ghost are never separated or divided in what they Speak or Witness in
the souls of men, but their speech and Testimony is one and the same always;
and also Christ himself in Scripture is called the second Adam; the quickening
Spirit, and the Lord that Spirit; and said Christ, I am the way, the Truth, and
the Life; and certainly that Life is Spirit; and also the Words or dictate of
it is Spirit and Life, as Christ said, The words that I speak unto you are
Spirit and Life. So the Reader may see that my words are sound and according to
Scripture, and therefore whether I say, Christ or the Spirit, or the internal
dictate and Word of the Spirit is the Rule, it is to the same purpose. And to
say the dictate of the Spirit is the Rule, is no other than to say, the Spirit
dictating or speaking is that Rule; and do not some of your selves use a
variety of Speech, when ye speak of the Rule, one time saying, The Scripture is
the Rule; another time, The Word of God contained in the Scriptures of the Old
and New Testament is the only Rule, etc. as the Westminster Confession of Faith
expressly has it. Another time, The Spirit of God speaking in the Scriptures,
etc. Now according to I. A. I may blame him and his Brethren in this case, that
Proteus like, he and his Brethren turn themselves into all shapes when they
speak of the Rule. And whether these phrases used by them be not more
unscriptural, I leave unto sober men for to judge.

In the next place he argues, That Christ cannot be the Rule, nor the Spirit,
because the Rule of Faith must be some complex Proposition, Direction, or
Precept, and the like. To this I Answer, First, That the Rule of Faith must be
a complex Proposition, Direction, or Precept, formally understood in words
formally conceived, I altogether deny, and I. A. has not offered to prove it.
And although the Spirit of Christ may, and often does speak express words in
the souls of his people, yet he does not always so do, when yet he clearly
enough signifies his mind and will unto them; for if among men, a King may
signify his mind to his Subjects, or a Master to his servants, without any
formal Proposition, or direction of words, but only by some motion of his hand
or face: How much more may the Lord God, who is the King of Kings, signify his
mind unto his servants by the motion of his Spirit, without any formal or
express words? Again I ask I. A. if he has not learned in the Schools, that
the reasonable nature of God is the first rule of Manners? And certainly the
reasonable Nature of God is not a complex Proposition consisting of many words.
And has he not read in Boethius that excellent saying? Quis legem det
amantibus? major lex amor est ipse sibi, which the Author of a late Book
called, The Life of God in the soul of man, does use, to prove that somewhat
more than words is a Law or Rule to Christians, and Englisheth thus: For who
shall give a Law to them that Love?
Love's a more powerful Law that does such persons move.
And I further Query I. A. seeing the Scripture says, God is Love; he that
knows God to be Love, and has the Love of God shed abroad in his Heart by
the holy Spirit, which in Scripture is called, The Spirit of Love; shall not
this man be tied to love God, and his Brethren; yea, and all mankind, even his
very enemies. Suppose it be not said to him in formal express words, do so and
so. Again, whether he that only reads or hears these outwardly, Thou shall
love the Lord thy God with all thy Heart, etc. and thy Neighbor as thy self;
but his Heart is utterly void of the love of God; or he that has the love of
God in his heart, and feelleth the powerful constraint of it, is under the most
powerful Law? Whether the words without, or the Spirit and Nature of Divine
Love within, is the most powerful Law and Rule? There may therefore be a Law or
Rule, which is not a complex Proposition of words, either inward or outward, to
wit, the Divine Love it self, which has a Voice and Language to the souls of
men, in the silence of all words, many times, and can be understood as well
without words as with them. And therefore when I say the dictate of the Spirit
is the Rule, I mean not, that there is always a dictate of express words; but
that which is either such a formal express dictate, or equivalent thereunto,
which those who are acquainted with the experiences of the Saints do well
understand, although it may seem to I. A. a strange Riddle or Paradox. And thus
by what I have said in this particular, the intelligent Reader, I hope, shall
perceive, that in saying, The Spirit is the Rule, I am not beside my self, as
I. A. does allege, but speak the words of Truth, and soberness. And I further
ask, Whether I. A. thinks that Ignatius the Martyr was beside himself, when he
writ in one of his Epistles to the People, (...), i. e. Using the Holy Ghost
for a Rule? or, Whether Paul was beside himself when he said, The Law of the
Spirit of Life in Christ Jesus had made him free from the law of Sin and Death.
And whether that Law was not the Spirit of Life, even as the Law of sin, was
sin; and the Law of death, was death. And whether the Law of the Mind,
mentioned by Paul, was not a Divine Principle of Grace in his mind, even as the
Law of his Members was a principle of sin and corruption, that sometime had
place in him, and not any complex Proposition of words? And whether the Law
that God writes in the hearts of his people in the new Covenant, be simply a
form of words, consisting of so many letters, syllables and sentences; or,
rather to speak properly is not that Law, a new and Divine Nature or
substantial Life of Holiness and Righteousness and Wisdom, by which the
Children of God are led and taught under the new Covenant (naturally as it
were) to love God, and all men; even as the Law that God has put in all living
Creatures, or Animals to love and cherish their Offspring (which is a shadow
or figure of that more Divine Law in God's people) is not any complex
Proposition of words, but an innate principle of love and affection, which he
has planted in them?

Moreover, the said I. A. digresseth here from his matter to seek an occasion
against us, and to load us with downright Blasphemy, because we do not say,
that there are three Persons in the Godhead. But to this Charge I have
answered already to one of I. A. his Champions, in my book called, The Way Cast
Up; the which has given content to divers-sober people, and I hope may give
content to all who reads it in that particular, where I show, that it is only
the unscriptural terms of a Trinity of Persons, or of three Persons in the
Godhead, that we deny, and not the mystery or thing it self, of Father, Son,
and Holy Ghost, being three that bear Record in Heaven, which according to the
Scripture, we both believe and confess. And indeed Augustine in his Fifth and
Seventh Books of the Trinity, not only says the words, three Persons are
improper, but disputes against them; and I suppose I. A. for all his
School-Logick and Philosophy, shall hardly be able to Answer his Argument, the
substance of which, to my best remembrance, is this, The word Person, either it
signifies somewhat absolute and simple, or somewhat relative; to say the first
is absurd, otherwise there should be three (...) Beings, or Essences in God,
which is absurd, if somewhat relative (which is the second) then seeing every
relative is referred, or is relative to another, as Father is relative to Son
(and therefore Father is the Father of another, and no man is his own Father)
in this sense, to say the Father is a Person, is to say, the Father is the
Person of some other, and so of the rest, which is absurd. The which Argument,
not as mine, but really Augustines, I leave I. A. to Answer; and Jerome,
another ancient Doctor and Father so called, does find fault with the words,
Three Hypostasis, saying expressly in the words, Three Hyposta^is, Latet aliquid
veneni, There lies hid some poison. And La^rentius Valla, a man well esteemed
among the learned, finds fault with the words, Three Persons, why then should
we be so uncharitably charged by I. A. or such hotheaded men, with Blasphemy,
only for keeping close to Scripture words in so great a Mystery, while the
thing it self, so far as the Scripture declares it, is owned by us. And
whereas he urges us to tell what Three are they to be called, if neither Three
Gods, nor Three Persons, I Answer, It suffices us to call them, what the
Spirit of God in Christ and the Apostles has called them; and to enquire no
further, nor to be curiously wise, above what they have d^^lared. Has not I.
A. heard, That there is a Docta Ignorantia, or Learned Ignorance, which is more
safe, and to be preferred, to an uncertain Knowledge or Science falsely so
called. And if I. A. his definition of Person be received, viz. That it is an
intelligent Being, subsisting incommunicably or distinctly one from another. I
see not, for my part, but that Three Persons, at this rate, shall infer three
intelligent Beings subsisting incommunicably, and consequently Three Gods.

Lastly, That he says, Some Quakers have called them three Manifes^ations,
viz. of Moses, of Christ, and of the Spirit; he ought to have produced their
names, or then we are not bound to believe him, that any have said so; for, at
this rate, Moses should be the Father of Christ, which I do not believe any,
called a Quaker, ever thought; perhaps some have said, there have been three
Dispensations or Manifestations of God, one through Moses, and one through
Christ in the Flesh, and one through the Spirit, or Christ in Spirit; and that
these may after some sort have such a reference, as that the first may be
called relative to the Father, yet not excluding the Son; and the second may be
relative to the Son, not excluding the Father, etc. which yet does not argue,
that we understand the Dispensation, or Administration of the Father, to be the
Father himself; far less, Moses to be the Father, as I. A. I believe very
rashly and unwarrantably does allege, Now that there are or have been
diversity of Administrations, the Scripture is plain, and Protestants as well
as Papists do acknowledge it. Yea, what says I. A. to the common Catechism
that says, The Father has Created us, the Son has Redeemed us, and the Holy
Ghost has Sanctified us; which is to be understood not exclusively, nor yet
without some order in the manner of working. But who will be so foollish or
ignorant, for all this to say, That the Father is our Creation, the Son our
Redemption (strictly or literally, and without a Figure so understood) and the
Holy Ghost our Sanctification. Nor does it follow, that because Christ brings
in his Father and himself as two Witnesses, to prove that he was the true
Messiah; that therefore there are either two or three Persons in the Godhead;
for Christ speaks these words, not simply as God, but as man: Now as Man, we
acknowledge that Christ is a distinct Nature or Being from God, although not
divided or separated therefrom. And lastly, that he argues, That Christ is
called the express Image of the Fathers Hypostasis, and that Hypostasis should
be and is truly Translated Person, and not Substance, and otherwise it would
infer Arianism. I Answer, That Hypostasis should be Translated Person, he does
merely affirm without any proof from approved Authors, and sure I am the
Etymology of the word, has no affinity to person, but properly signifies
Substance, being compounded of the Preposition, and Substantive Verb, which as
near as possible, is in Latin substantia, and in English substance, and is so
Translated, Heb. 11. 1. Now that to Translate it substance, would infer
Arrianism, I. A. does but merely say it without any proof, and so is not to be
believed, And beside, Christ in Scripture is called, The Image of the Invisible
God; and certainly God is a substance, and yet this, I hope, will not infer
Arrianism, and may we not well understand how Christ as man is the Character or
Image of God's substance, without Arrianism, seeing Christ said, viz. in
respect of his Manhood, My Father is greater than I; and it is clear that the
aforesaid place, Heb. 1. 2, 3. is to be understood of Christ, not simply as
God, but as man, who certainly as man is the most bright and glorious Image of
God, and above all Angels or Men, or whatever can be named besides the Godhead
it self.

CHAP. VI.
HAving thus traced I. A. in his unnecessary and impertinent digression. I
shall now reply unto his Arguments, whereby he labors to prove, that the
Scriptures are the principal rule of Faith and manners.

And to the first, that in Isaiah 8. 10. they were sent unto the Law and
Testimony, supposing that were the Scripture; it follows not, that therefore
it is the principal rule, especially in Gospel times, when God writes his Law
in the heart, and the Testimony of Jesus is the Spirit of Prophecy; and he that
believes has the Testimony or Witness in himself. But that people are not
sent to any dictate, Word or Light within, as I. A. does allege is false, and
contrary to 2 Pet. 1. 19. Deuteronomy. 30. 14. Romans 10. 8. Ioh. 3. 20, 21. Ioh. 12.
36. And does not God and Christ, and the Holy Ghost dwell in the Hearts of
believers; and must not they go to God and Christ, where they are, and does not
God and Christ speak in his people? Are they not his Temple, and as God spoke
immediately in the outward Temple, under the Old Covenant; the which Temple was
a Figure of Christ and the Church, shall he not speak now immediately in his
true Temple, as well as he did in former times: Or are we wholly to neglect God
and Christ in us, and their Inward Teaching; and only to mind the Letter of the
Scripture without us, according to I. A. And when Paul said to Timothy, Neglect
not the Gift that is in thee, Has this command no regard unto us. And when
Christ says, Behold I stand at the door and knock, if any man will hear my
voice; Is this door only an outward door, or is not rather the door of the
Heart, which is inward; and therefore is not that voice inward? And whence is
it, that seeing Christ is so near to his people as to be in them, that he does
not speak one word to them by himself, as a man does to his Friend, that he is
present with: Is it want of power or unkindness, that he does so refrain. Does
not I. A. and those of his Principle, make God over all Blessed for ever more;
like unto the dumb Idols mentioned in the Scripture, Who have a Mouth but speak
not, being always dumb or silent. Oh! what an Indignity is this to the Lord of
Glory; and let I. A. take heed, lest he who is so ready to charge us with
Blasphemy, be not found among the Blasphemers himself, who would limit the Lord
from speaking and revealing himself, in his Living Temples.

To his second Argument I Answer; Though the Scriptures are Infallible, and
cannot deceive us; yet they cannot sufficiently demonstrate unto us, their
Infallibility, nor yet their true Sense, without the evidence of the Spirit, as
is clear by Paul's Testimony, 1 Cor. 2. 4. where he tells, That his Speech
and Preaching was in Demonstration of the Spirit and Power; And therefore
without that demonstration of the Spirit, his words could not prevail, nor
persuade them, that they were of God: And certainly if Paul's Preaching needed
the demonstration of the Spirit, his Writing does as much need it at this day.

To the third, I say, It is no derogating from the Scripture, that they derive
their Authority from the Spirit of God, which gave them their being, even as it
is no derogation from the words of a King, long ago spoken by him, That he
confirms them a new, by a new immediate Testimony.

To the fourth, Although we may not receive any Dictate within, that agrees not
with the Scripture; it does not follow, that therefore the Scripture is above
the Spirit of God, or his Dictate; for as the Spirit can never contradict the
Scripture, so nor can the Scripture ever contradict the Spirit of God; and
neither can the Spirit or Scripture, ever contradict pure and sound Reason; yet
it does not follow, that Reason is either greater, or equal to the Spirit, or
to Scripture. And because that Dictate which is contrary to Scripture is to be
rejected, as being none of Gods Spirit, it does only well follow, that the
Scripture is a Rule, that is to be set over all false Dictates, to judge and
condemn them, which we most willingly grant.

Now I. A. perceiving that I could retort one of his Arguments, labors to
guard against it, As seeing the Word of God is the principal Rule, and the
Dictate or Speech of Gods Spirit within men, is the word of God; therefore that
Dictate is the principal Rule: And this Argument I did use in my Book called,
Quakerism no Pepery. To which he Answers by denying, That there is any such
Dictate of God, or the spirit in any men whomsoever, whether believers or
unbelievers. But to this I Answer, 1. He will not deny, but that the Apostles
had such an inward or immediate Dictate, and also the Prophets; and therefore
he must allow, that the Scripture, as to the Prophets and Apostles, was but a
secondary Rule, or at least no greater Rule, than that Dictate within, which
they had. And yet by I. A. his Logic, the Apostles did vilify and despise the
Scriptures, and it was a needless or unuseful thing unto them, seeing they had
an inward Dictate, which was greater, or at least equa unto the Scripture: Or
let I. A. show, how their having the Inward Dictate for their Rule, did not
make them undervalue the Scriptures; whereas our having such a Dictate as he
alleges, or pretending to such a Dictate makes us so to undervalue them. But
secondly, he only supposes it, without any proof, that such an Inward Dictate,
which was once in the Church of God, (as is confessed,) is discontinued, or
ceased. And this indeed is the general manner of our opposers, who lay it down
as a Principle, as needing no proof, that Immediate Revelation, and Teaching of
Gods Spirit is ceased. But let I. A. know, that we can receive no such Doctrine
as a Principle from hims but return it as a mere idle and false supposition,
which yet is the foundation of a great many of his consequences against us.
Thirdly, that he says, I should first prove, that there is such a D^ctate in
every man. I Answer, that I have done already, in my Book called, Immediate
Revelation, published many years ago, by many Arguments; and he should first
have Answered to these, before he had sought any more. Also in my Book called,
Qua^erism no Popery, to which he has given no sufficient reply, and some of the
most weighty, he has not so much as once Named. And whereas he objecteth the
Americans, and others that cannot tell how many Gods there are: I ask him, by
what shall the Americans be judged at the last day; shall it not be by the Law
of God, writ in their Hearts. And do not these Americans sin against God, and
those also who are most ignorant, and yet want the Scripture; now where no Law
is, there is no transgression. This I hope is enough to prove, that even the
Americans, and consequently all men, have a Divine Law in their Hearts; for if
it were not Divine, and as really the Law of God, as any that we have, to
transgress it, were not a sin against God. Hence I thus argue, a Divine Law in
all men, is an Inward immediate Dictate; but there is a Divine Law in all men,
and therefore, etc. And in this respect it is, that the substance of the Moral
Law is generally acknowledged to be Imprinted in the Hearts of all men, even
those who want the Scriptures. And I well remember, that Bishop Sanderson says
in one of his Sermons, That the said Law, in the Hearts of all men, is as
really the Word of God, as that Printed in our Bibles: And thus I hope I have
sufficiently evinced, that there is a Dictate in all men, that is a Divine Law
and Rule, at least in many or most things, belonging both to Piety, Justice,
and Sobriety. Although I do not plead, that there is a Law or Rule in them, who
have not had the History of the Gospel revealed unto them to believe the same.
Nor do I say, that the History of the Gospel is revealed to us immediately
without the Scripture; but that, having Heard or Read the said History, and all
other Historical parts of the Scripture, the Spirit of God, by some Inward
Dictate formal or virtual, or that which is equivalent, does move and incline
us to believe the same. And that I. A. does plead, That Believers only have the
Spirit. I Answer, They have it only so as to possess and enjoy the indwelling
of it, and union with it; but that Unbelievers have it so far, at least as to
reprove them, and call them to repentance, is clear from many Scriptures,
especially John 16. 8. Prove. 1. 23, 24.

In Answer to one Argument of mine, he says, A Believer needs not any
immediate Dictate, to assure him that he is a Child of God, seeing by the
a^^istance of the Spirit effectively, he may draw a conclusion from Scripture
Premises, in applying the Scripture marks. But to this I Answer, that the
Scripture only tells him one of the Premises, of that they call the
practical Syllogism; but no Scripture in all the Bible tells I. A. or me,
that he, or I have these marks; and seeing a true Believer may attain to a
Faith of assurance, as I. A. does not deny; and Faith must have the Word of God
for its object, seeing there is not a word in all the Scripture that says, he
or I have those marks, we must seek that word somewhere else then in the
Scripture; and where shall we seek it else but in our Hearts, where the Spirit
himself witnesses with our Spirits, that we are the Children of God, (if so
be, that we have that witness) even as it did witness in Paul. And if the
illumination of the Spirit discover the Graces of God in our Souls, certainly
that is an Immediate Revelation; for Scripture does not discover in us those
Graces, but the Spirit; and he that discovers the Graces, discovers also
himself to be the true Spirit of God, and does not hide himself from us; or
else we might doubt whether the discovery were true or not, not knowing
infallibly the Author thereof.

Lastly, That he says, I spurn at the distinction of objective and subjective
Illumination, as Antichristian and deceitful. I Answer, I do not blame the
distinction simply as in it self, but as it is illused and applied: Whereas
they say, The influence and illumination of the Spirit in Believers, is merely
effective or subjective, and not at all objective: But I say it is both
effective and objective; effective to help us to See or Hear; and objective, or
by way of ^bject, for the Sight and Hearing, or any other perception of our
Souls to stay and rest upon; but this object, can no more be the Letter of
Scripture alone, than a report of Meat and Drink, can be the object to satisfy
a man's Taste, or Appetite, when he is Hungry or Thirsty: And thus I do not
confound the distinct considerations of objective and effective; only I affirm,
that the same thing may be both, and so indeed is; as when the Sun enlightens
us, its Ray or Beam helps us to see, and also it is the object of our sight:
And the Heat of the Fire is both the object of our Feeling, and also when it is
moderate helps us to feel, and effectively does strengthen our Feeling: But
when the Fire heateth a stone, it works in it only effectively, and not
objectively, or as an object; but Believers receive not the Heavenly Light and
warmth of the Spirit as dead and insensible stones, but as living Souls that
have a real sense and perception of that which does influence them; and
therefore that influence is the proper immediate object of their perception.
And if there be no inward Spiritual object, that the Spirit presents to Gods
Children, then there is no inward Spiritual Eye nor Ear, nor inward Spiritual
Taste or Savor, nor inward Spiritual Feeling, all which is most contrary, both
to Scripture, (which mentions all these Spiritual Senses, as I have proved at
large in my Book of Immediate Revelation) and also to the Saints experiences.
And does not God promise, that his Children shall see him under the New
Covenant; and certainly all sight that is proper is immediate. And to say, that
the Saints only see God by the Scriptures, is but as much as to say, that we
only see our Father, by a report of him, or that we only see the outward Sun by
ones telling us that it shines, who has indeed seen it; or that we only see
our Native Country in which we live and dwell, by looking at the Map of it: But
certainly such a remote and improper seeing do^s no wise answer to the Glory of
the New Covenant, but rather falls short of the Old: And if that be all to
see God in the Scriptures, then all those that lived under the Old Covenant saw
God, as clearly as Believers under the New Covenant, seeing they had the
Scriptures in great part. But I remember a good saying of S. R. in one of his
Epistles, that I hope may have some weight with I. A. That is little (says he)
to see Christ in a Book, (which yet the Scripture is) and certainly if I. A.
has seen no more of God, or Christ, but what he has had a report of, from the
Letter of the Scripture; I must needs say, he is a great stranger to the New
Covenant Dispensation, and is still like so to remain, while he disputes in
unbelief against so great a Blessing, that if he did believe, he might attain
unto: But I wish the Lord may open his Eyes, and then he will no more contend
against such a thing.

I. A. proceeds further to dispute against the Dictate, or Witness of the
Spirit within, although he says, He has sufficiently affronted it, yet
because it is worthy of a thousand deaths, for its proud usurpation, as he
says, he will reach it some few blows more. To this I Answer, that these
exceeding bold and daring words, against the Blessed Dictates or Words of Gods
Holy Spirit in the Hearts of his people, has not a little moved me with
Commiseration and pity, praying heartily that the Lord may forgive him.

But now let us see further, what he says against the inward Dictate. First,
he says, It is not essentially right and infallible, because all men have not
the Spirit: But to this is Answered already. And whether all men have the
Spirit in some sense, Yea or Nay; it is agreed upon by all sober Writers, that
there is an infallible and incorruptible Law planted by God in all men, even
those who have not the Scriptures, which the Lawyers call Synderesis, that is,
the foundation of all just and good Laws; and if that were destroyed or
corrupted, all Justice should utterly perish among that part of mankind, in
whom it should be destroyed or corrupted. But this I. A. like a blind man he
strikes so rashly with his supposed Blows, that he not only fights against
our Religion, and Principle, but even against all the Lawyers and Justiciaries,
and all other sober Writers, on these matters, who do all unanimously plead,
that there is such an incorruptible Law implanted or imprinted by the Creator
in all men: And certainly if that Law could be corrupted and changed from its
essential rectitude and purity, to transgress it, were no sin; for a corrupt
and impure Law, can be no Law of God. And does not Paul speak of the Law that
was in the Hearts of the Gentiles, which he did not say, they did or could
corrupt, But that they held the Truth in unrighteousness, Romans 2. 15 compared
1. 18. Again he argues, That as for Believers, they need no Inward Dictate or
Teaching of the Spirit, seeing the whole Doctrine of Salvation is abundantly
made known in the Scriptures. But I Answer, That the whole Doctrine of
Salvation is abundantly made known in the Scriptures, that the Inward Teaching
and Revelation of God by his Spirit is needless, is a thing he barely does
allege, without proof, as his ordinary custom is: And indeed his manner of
Argument is, as if one should say, the Card or Map of the Earth, does
abundantly make the Earth known unto us, with the things therein; and therefore
we need no other knowledge of the Earth, nor of any thing in it; we need not
see the Earth it self, nor Taste any of the Fruits of it; and when we Hunger or
Thirst, we need neither Bread nor Drink, the report of these things can
satisfy our Appetite well enough: Or if one should say to a Woman that
entirely loves her Husband, thou have many of thy Husbands Letters, and Books;
also thou have his Picture very perfectly drawn, to look upon, and it cannot be
better drawn than it is done already, and therefore what needs thou to hear or
see thy Husband himself. The application is easy, for certainly as the report
of Meat and Drink, cannot satisfy one that is Hungry and Thirsty, though it be
never so full, and as to hear or read of our most dear and beloved Friends, is
not enough to satisfy our desire after them; but over and above all that
others can tell us of them, we desire to hear and see them, and converse with
them immediately; so a report of God and Christ, cannot satisfy the Souls of
Gods people, but they desire a nearer knowledge of him, whom their Souls love,
and which he does also give unto them, according to his promise, Ioh. 14. 21.
He that loves me, (said Christ) shall be loved of my Father, and I will
manifest my self unto him. And why did Christ promise, that he would send his
Spirit to Teach them all things, if the Teaching of his Spirit was a needless
thing? Might they not have answered according to I. A. thou need not send
thy Spirit to Teach us, we have the Scriptures that abundantly Teach us all
things needful to be known; and what is not expressly contained in the
Scriptures, we can gather it by consequence from the Scripture, and therefore
there is no need of sending the Spirit to Teach us, it is but a superfluous
labor. But however this Language savours to such whole persons as I. A. that
need not the Physician; yet those that are truly Sick, Poor and Indigent, do
need the Lord and his Spirit to Teach them, and also to speak unto them;
without which they cannot be healed, refreshed and comforted, by all that they
can read or hear from the Letter of the Scriptures, or what man can Preach unto
them, until the Lord by his Spirit syeak unto them himself.

And in the close of his Argument against the necessity of the Inward Teaching,
or Dictate of the Spirit of God, he pleads, That it is inconsistent, to hold
an infallible Dictate of the Spirit to be in any man, and yet that man in any
respect, to Think, Speak, Write, or act fallibly: And (...) when Peter denied
Christ, as also when Christ reproved him, for saying, be it far from thee
Master: Peter according to I. A. had no infallible Dictate in him: And seeing
I. A. does plead that the Apostles did sin in Thought, Word and Deed, so long
as they lived upon Earth, and to sin is to act fallibly, it must needs follow
by his doctrine, that none of the Apostles had any infallible Dictate. But why
may they not err who have an infallible Dictate within, as they may err who
have the Scripture without, that is infallible? May not a man have an
infallible guide and way before him, and yet through unwatchfulness, not follow
that infallible guide and way. Again, whereas he pleads, That there is no
middle betwixt fallible and infallible. I Answer, to be universally fallible,
and partly infallible, I grant is a contradiction, and admits no midst, but
yet to be partly infallible, viz. so far as a man does follow the infallible
Teaching and leading of Gods Spirit; and partly fallible, viz. so far as at
another instant or moment, or hour, and in another thing he waits not for his
guide, but runs before, or turns aside from him: I say, these two are no
contradiction. And I ask I. A. has he no infallibility nor infallible
knowledge in any thing? Does he not believe and know infallibly that there is a
God, and diverse other weighty Truths? This I judge he will not deny? Well then.
According to his Logic, if he be infallible, when he Thinks, Says, or Writs
that there is a God, he must be infal^ible in all other things that he either
Thinks, Writes, or speaks, because according to his Doctrine, there is no middle
betwixt fallible and infallible. I. A. should have better remembered his
School-Logick, which Teaches, that contradictory propositions are not betwixt
two universals, nor two particulars; but the one universal, and the other
particular.

His 3d Argument against the Dictate of the Spirit of God within, is the same
with his 4th Argument that is formerly Answered above* concerning the
Scripture. And surely this repeating of Arguments, as if they were new ones,
when they are nothing but old ones formerly used, argues great barrenness of
matter in I. A. else he would not run into such needless and idle Tautologies.
But he thinks I have yielded the cause to him, because I grant, all Doctrines,
that agree not with the Scriptures, are to be rejected; therefore the Scripture
is a superior rule to all such false Doctrines I grant. Therefore the Scripture
is Superior to the Spirit of God and his Dictate in our Hearts, I deny it. And
though we are to examine the inward Dictates of Gods Spirit by the Scriptures,
yet that proves not that the Scriptures are superior; no more, than that it
proves that the words of the Prophets were superior to the words of Christ and
the Apostles, because the people examined the latter by the former.

His fourth Argument is built upon a Supposition, that the Scriptures are the
principal rule, and consequently not the Spirit inwardly Dictating in our
hearts. But he has not proved that the Scripture is a more principal rule,
then the Spirit. Although in respect of all outward rules that can be named, or
conceived, the Scripture is the most principal rule. Nor is it any repugnancy
to say, the Scripture is the principal external rule, by which all Doctrines
and Principles of Religion are to be examined, and what is contrary to
Scripture is to be rejected; and yet to say also that the Spirit himself,
persuading or assuring us, of the Truth of the Scripture, is the principal
inward rule, seeing these two principles are in differing kinds, the one
external, or without us, the other internal, and within us, which are very well
consistent, and mutually bear witness one of another, even as John bare witness
to Christ, and Christ bare witness to John: Although Christ needed not the
Testimony of John, as for himself.

His fourth Argument concludes only against a thing, which we do no wise deny,
viz. That every Dictate within is not the Rule: And I. A. might have spared his
pains to dispute against that, which no man holds. For who is so absurd to
think that every Dictate, suppose it be of a man's own vain and foolish mind, or
of the Devil, is to be received as his rule. The Question is not concerning
every Dictate, nor indeed concerning any other, then that alone Dictate of the
Spirit of God and of Christ in men, which has a self evidence unto him, who
has it, as I. A. must needs acknowledge it had to the Prophets and Apostles.
But he objects, That the Devil may present an Imposture unto a man, with so
much seeming evidence, as with the concurrence of a deceitful heart, will make
it be received for a Divine Truth, especially by that man that for the present
time has no Divine Dictate. To this I Answer, That the person supposed by I. A.
is either one that the Lord has in his just judgment for some great
unfaithfulness, and abuse of Light formerly given, delivered up to Satan's
delusions, such as these mentioned 2 Thessalonians. 2. 11. And as for him, and the like
sort, the Scripture cannot help him: For certainly he that is given up by the
Lord, to the delusion of Satan, as a punishment of his sinning against the
Light he once had, will misunderstand the Scripture, and cannot otherwise do,
even as the Jews and Sadducees did of old. But as for others that are not so
given up by the Lord, it ought not to be supposed, that they can altogether
want some Divine Dictate, or witness of Gods Spirit, to testify against the
strongest delusion of Satan. And therefore he to whom Satan presents such a
delusion, if he has a sincere love to the Truth, by comparing the delusion
with the true Dictate or Light of Christ that witnesses against it, may
readily discover it, to be a delusion; and if the said delusion be contrary to
any Doctrine expressly declared in the Scripture, the Scripture will also be a
secondary confirmation to him, that what is so presented to him, is but a
delusion. But many times Satan presents delusions to men to do, or act things,
that are not simply in themselves unlawful, or contrary to Scripture. And then
I Query by what rule, shall these delusions be discovered? But I confess I. A.
has a very short way, but yet very false and unsound to resolve this question,
viz. Positively to conclude, that all inward Dictates and suggestions
whatsoever that any man finds in himself, are utterl^ to be rejected, as being
any Command of God, or any Divine Testimony, seeing* there are none such in the
hearts of men. They are all according to him, either a man's own thoughts or
suggestions of Satan: And therefore nothing that a man has in him is to be
relied upon. But it is strange Doctrine, that Satan shall be so near always to
Dictate evil, even unto the Children of God, immediately; but God and Christ
shall be at such a distance, as not once in a man's whole life time, to Dictate
in him immediately that which is good. The which Doctrine of I. A. is so
favorable to the Devil, and so advantageous to advance and uphold his Kingdom
among men, that this one consideration is enough to render it suspected that it
is not of God, but of the adversary.

CHAP. VII.
IN the Third Section of his Survey upon the Fourth Query, I. A. pretends to
Answer our Objections or Reasons, That there is a Word or Dictate of God in our
Hearts, or Christ himself that does Dictate or Teach in us; and who is the
principal Rule of Faith and Life. All which Objections he brings them not,
either in matter or form as used by us, but miserably perverts the most of them
to a contrary sense and intent, as if we did use those Reasons to oppose an
outward Ministry, or the use of outward Preaching, Hearing, Reading, Praying;
none of which we oppose; but on the contrary, we own all these things, as both
needful to be done, seeing they are commanded of God, and as profitable to men;
yea, to the most advanced and experienced Saints, when duly practiced. And it
is an exceeding great mistake in our Adversaries generally to suppose, That our
Principle of Immediate Revelation, or the Immediate Teachings of the Spirit
does destroy, or make null and void the use of the Scriptures, or any other
means: For by Immediate, we mean not Immediate in opposition to those things,
that are means truly appointed of God, as Reading the Scriptures, Preaching,
Praying, Meditating, Singing, Waiting. But on the contrary we say, It is only
by the help of the Spirits immediate Teachings and Leadings, that those and the
like means are made effectual, and profitable to the People of God. For if the
Prophets and Apostles their having Immediate Revelation, did not make void the
use of the Scriptures unto them, nor the use of Preaching, Praying, Reading,
Meditating, Waiting and Watching, no more does our having it. Again, our
Adversaries grant, that God does operate or work immediately, by an immediate
effective illumination of his Spirit, in the hearts of all his People, and that
this immediateness does not hinder, or make void the use of means, but make
them the more profitable and useful; even so nor the i^mediate objective
illumination, does in the least made void the means, as is already said in the
case of the Prophets and Apostles; and Paul said, the Scriptutes were writ for
his and his Brethrens Learning, even his fellow Apostles, as well as other
Christians. And to say or think the contrary, is as absurd and unreasonable, as
who would say, a Scholar that is taught of his Master immediately is not to
read upon any Book, nor to hearken to any of his fellow Scholars, that may be
as well or better learned than himself; and on the other hand, to set up the
means in opposition to the Lords immediate Teachings, is equally unreasonable
as to conclude, such a man has Books whereon to learn, and therefore it can
profit him nothing to be taught immediately, or viva voce, and by word of mouth
by a l^ving Teacher. Now both these extremes, our Principle, and the Scripture,
and also our good experience have taught us to shun. And the immediateness of
the Spirits illuminations, both effectively and objectively to work and operate
in us, in the use of all the means appointed of God, (sometimes in the use of
one means, and sometimes in the use of another; as now in Reading, then in
Hearing; now in Preaching, then in Praying; now in Meditating, then in Singing
or Praising God; now in giving Alms, then in visiting the Sick, or thos^ that
are in Prison; and sometimes, as the mind is retired in pure silence to wait
upon the Lord, which may be as well and as truly called a mean, as any of the
former. I say the immediateness of the Spirits Communications and
Illuminations, in the use of those and the like means aforesaid) do as well
consist with the means, and the means with them, as the immediate Sunshine and
influence of the heat, and comfortable warmth of the Sun, which works both
effectively and objectively upon us, consist with the means; when we walk or
travel on the Road at noon day, or labor in the Field, Plough, Digg, Sow,
Reap, and use any other manual operation, the which means are so far from
hindering, or making void the necessity of the Suns immediate influence and
concurrence, that none of these things can be well or comfortably performed
without it. And in this large and general sense of the word means, which also
is true, it may be warrantably enough said, without any prejudice to our
principle of Immediate Revelation, that we have no ground to expect any
Immediate Manifestation or Revelation of God, but in the use of some one means
or another, that God requires us to be found in. For there is not one hour, or
moment of our Life, but there is something of Duty or Obedience that we ought
to be found in, either inwardly or outwardly (if we have the use of our
understandings as men) and every act of Obedience may and ought truly to be
called a means of our receiving somewhat immediately of God, to wit, our Faith,
our Love* our Hope, our Holy Fear, our Care, our Watchfulness, our Praying,
Meditating, and silent Waiting; and in one word, our whole Obedience, all these
are as truly and properly means, as Prea^^ing, or reading in the Scriptures.
And thus every one that is most diligently exercised in the true means, has
greatest access unto God, and does most abundantly partake of the immediate
Revelations and Communications of God's Holy Spirit, Light, Life, Love, Virtue,
Power, and Wisdom. And if it be said, Why are they called then Immediate; I
Answer, Because we feel or perceive them most near unto us even as near, or
rather more near unto us, as the things or actions wherein we are exercised,
giving Spiritual Vigor, Life, and luster unto them, without which they are but
as dead or lifeless. And thus even as when the soul lives in the Body, it is
said to be immediately united with it, and act immediately therein or
therewith, although it uses the Body as its Instrument: Even so the Spirit of
God and of Christ, livingly indwelling in the Saints, and united with them, and
they with him, is said to act immediately in them, and with them, although the
Lord uses them as means or instruments to work with him. And as for the word
Immediate Revelation, seeing it is not any express Scripture phrase, no not in
the case of the Prophets and Apostles, so far as I can remember, if the thing
it self were granted, to wit, That God does inwardly reveal and speak his mind,
or show his Glory, and glorious ^ower and Presence in his Children, as he did
in and to his Saints of Old; so that the Saints do Hear, See and perceive, also
Taste and Savor, and feel after God Himself, as he reveals himself in his Son,
by the Holy Spirit, the Controversy about the Name or Phrase should soon be at
an end; for it did satisfy the Prophets and Apostles, who had it in great
measure to call it simply Revelation, and Vision, or the like, without adding
the word Immediate: for in those days, it seems that deceitful distinction
of Mediate and Immediate Revelation was not found out in the World; I call it
deceitful and false, because, to speak properly, all Revelation is Immediate,
even as all Vision is Immediate; and so is all Hearing, for I can neither see
nor hear a man, unless I see and hear him immediately. And as for the
Scripture, when it is called a Revelation, it should be figuratively
understood, as when it is called a Vision; for none will say that Isaiah his
Book is really the Vision it self which he s^w, but only a declaration of it.
And as (...) could not write the intellectual Vision that he saw, to speak
properly, so nor could he write the intellectual Voice, Word or Words, that he
did only intellectually hear, but only a Report or Declaration of them, the
which does far come short of what he saw, or heard; and in this respect, Paul
says, that he heard verba ineffabilia, unspeakable words, that could not be
uttered or expressed, and so did all the Prophets and Apostles; for indeed the
words of the mouth, as they can be spoken and writ, fall short many times to
express the depth of what we inwardly think or receive in natural things, and
how much more to express what God does inwardly speak or reveal, which yet is
no derogation from the words of Scripture, for it is acknowledged by us to be a
blessed instrument, in the hand of the Spirit for our Instruction. And though
we cannot be so bold as to say, That the true God is not Worshipped, nor known
savingly, where the Scripture is wanting, as I. A. does allege more daringly,
I suppose, than many of his Brethren that that are more sober will allow, yet
we do believe and freely acknowledge that the Scriptures are ordinary means,
(but yet not without the inward Direction, Revelation and Teaching of God's own
Spirit) of Peoples Instruction, in all Nations, according to Romans 16. 26. and
those Nations that want the Scriptures, are, no doubt, for most part, in great
darkness; But why some Nations want the blessing of the Scriptures belongs to
the secret Judgments of God; and as for us, who have them, let us be thankful
to God, and earnestly seek the holy Spirit that gave them forth, without which
they will be a Sealed Book unto us, whether learned or unlearned, as it is at
this day unto the unbelieving Jews, and also unto many thousands of unfaithful
Professors of Christ, who in works deny him. And thus, by what is said, how and
in what manner we own the Word of God in our Hearts, immediately Speaking and
Teaching, as our principal Rule, I. A. his Cavils, and false Charges are
sufficiently Answered, which may serve to all his Third Section. Yet to Answer
to some things more particularly, whereas I. A. alleges, That the Word
mentioned, Deuteronomy. 30. 14. is not Christ, but the Books or Writings of Moses. To
this I Answer, But whether shall we rather believe I. A. or the Apostle Paul,
who, Romans 10. does plainly expound it of Christ; see Verse 4. compared with
Verse 5, 6, 7, 8. when he distinguishes betwixt the Law and Christ, as
preferring Christ to the Law; and he says, Christ is the end of the Law, which
he proves out of Moses's words, Deuteronomy. 30. 14. and therefore these words of
Moses are to be understood of Christ, and so did Clements Alexandrinus, and
others of the Fathers understand them. But says I. A. Moses ties them straightly
to the external written Word of the Scriptures. But what then, does he so tie
them, as that they were not to regard God, or Christ, or the Holy Spirit in
their Hearts? How wild and unreasonable is this consequence? Could the people
understand the true Spiritual intent and signification of the Law, without
Christ and his Spirit, and inward Teaching? Was it not the fault of the people,
that they stuck so close to the bare outward performances of the Law, and
neglected Christ and his Spirit, which could alone give the understanding of
it: And therefore when he came in the flesh, they rejected him.

Secondly, as to Jeremiah 31. v. 31, 32. we do not bring this place to
overthrow the external Rule of the Scripture, or true outward Teaching, as I.
A. falsely does allege, but only to prove, that God himself does Teach his
people under the New Covenant; so that they hear God himself, and learn of him;
which yet does not hinder, yet they both also may and ought to hear all those,
whom God sends. And certainly that Scripture expression to be Taught of God;
is more, or a further thing then to be Taught by the Letter of the Scripture,
or by Moses and the Prophets Writings; otherwise it might be said, that the
people simply by the Old Covenant, was as much Taught of God, as under the New.

Thirdly, Nor do we bring Luke 17. 20, 21. where Christ says, The Kingdom of
God is within you, to exclude all External helps and means, as I. A. does again
no less falsely allege. But only to prove that there is an inward Principle
of Christ's Light, Life and Grace in men, whereby he rules in those that are
obedient unto the same; and even in them, who are disobedient, it has its Rule
and Kingdom so far as to judge and condemn them; which yet it could not do,
without some inward Dictate or witness.

Fourthly, As to John 16. 13. where Christ Promises to send his Spirit to guide
us into all Truth: Nor do we bring this to oppose all outward Teaching,
Reading, Learning, etc. But still we say, seeing it was a promise made to the
Apostles, as well as unto us, it implies a real inward Teaching of God, and
the Spirit; that is somewhat further, then the outward Teaching whatsomever,
which if it may and ought to be called immediate in the Apostles, may and ought
also to be called immediate in Gods people now, and always to the end of the
World, seeing the promise is the same to both; and therefore has the same
performance at least in kind, if not in degree.

Fifthly, The same false and absurd charge he is guilty of, as to 1 Ioh. 2. 20,
27. which mentions, The Anointing which taught them all things, so that they
needed not any man to Teach them. For we bring not this place to oppose all
outward Preaching or Teaching of men, of God truly sent and called by him; But
only the bare dead and dry Teaching of men, who run, and God has not sent
them. And also the words may be understood in respect of an absolute necessity;
so as they who are come to that inward Anointing, and that it abide in them,
they have not an absolute necessity of outward true Teachers, so as they must
need perish, for want of them, if so be at any time, they could not be had, as
does at times come to pass. And thus also that of Jeremiah 31. 31, 32, 33, 34.
is to be understood, importing likewise that all True Believers, should have
that experimental knowledge of God and acquaintance with him, by the inward
Teachings of his Spirit, so as none should be wholly ignorant of God, but all
should know him in measure; and therefore it should not be needful to say unto
any of them, know the Lord; as if they were utterly ignorant of him, in respect
of Spiritual and experimental knowledge, as indeed many or most of the people
under the Law were: Which yet hinders not, but that still there will be both
need and great use of True Teachers in the Church to the Worlds end, though not
to say, know the Lord, (as if they did not in any measure know him) yet to
promote and advance them who know him already, in more knowledge of him; and of
the great and deep Mysteries of his Kingdom.

Sixthly, He says, That engrafted word mentioned Jam. 1. 21. which we are bid
receive, is the Scripture, and not Christ, or his Light. For he says, We
cannot in proper Speech be said to receive or hear a Dictate within, which we
have already, and is not audible properly. But how weak is this Argument? Could
not the Prophets and Apostles both hear and receive Christ, whom they had
already? were they not still more and more to receive him. And have we not the
Scripture already, and consequently according to I. A. we cannot receive it.
And that he says, A Dictate within is not audible properly. But why not as
properly, as a Dictate without? Seeing the Spiritual Hearing and Seeing are as
proper in their kind, as the Natural are in their kind. And according to this
reasoning of I. A. none of the Prophets nor Apostles were to hear God, or the
Spirit in them, seeing nothing within, is audible properly. And as for the word
(...) that is Englished, Engrafted, it does most properly signify innate, and
is commonly understood of that which originally is Grafted or Implanted in us;
and in this sense is used generally both by Christian and Heathen Writers, as
it is contradistinguished* from that which is outwardly received. Hence the
natural love or affection that is in mankind, is said to be (...) the which is
not a thing outwardly received, and consequently the (...), cannot be the
Letter of the Scripture, but a Divine principle immediately grafted into our
Souls, when God Created them? and in respect of which, men are said to be made
in the Image of God.

Seventhly, He alleges, that we bring Heb. 6. 1, 2. To oppose and reject all
External Ordinances out of the Church citing Principles of Truth, page 63, 68,
77, 80. And here he insulteth not a little, as if by the same Argument, The
Quakers were obliged to reject the very Principles of the Doctrine of Christ,
and the foundation of Repentance and Faith, as well as Water Baptism. But to
this I Answer, having examined these pages cited by him, I do not find, that
they mention or intend any thing of rejecting the Principles of the Doctrine of
Christ, or External Ordinances. And let but the Reader examine the words, and
he shall find, that nothing further is intended, than this, that people should
not sit down, or build their Faith upon a form of words, though never so sound,
but should come further than all words; so that leaving them behind, as in
respect of a foundation, they were to come unto Christ the true foundation, and
grow up in him unto perfection. And as for Water Baptism, that place of the
Heb. 6. 1, 2. does not mention it, among the principles of the Doctrine of
Christ, but only the Doctrine of Baptisms, which is another thing than
Water Baptism. For although we have not Water Baptism among us, yet we have the
Doctrine of Baptisms, that is set down, with other principles of our Faith, as
in diverse other of our Book, so in that mentioned by him, called, The
Principles of Truth. Now to leave a form of Words, or Articles and Propositions
concerning Faith, which commonly are called Principles, so as not to set them
up for the principal and only foundation of our Faith, which people are but too
ready to do. This is not to reject them, no more than when a man leaves his
Affairs he has been conversant in, and goes to his Bed to rest him with
moderate sleep, is to reject his Affairs, for he returns unto them again.

Eighthly, He says, We object that Enoch, Noah, Abraham, etc. Had not the
Scripture to be their Rule, and therefore nor are we to have it to be our Rule:
And this he makes as ridiculous a consequence, as to say, the Scriptures were
not written in the primitive World, therefore neither afterward. But I Answer,
that to argue from thence, that the Scripture is not to be our only and
principal Rule, is both safe and pertinent. For it Enoch, Noah, Abraham had the
Spirit to be a Rule unto them, it is no less a rule unto all now, who have the
same Faith which they had; seeing the same Spirit is given to Believers now,
which they had, which Spirit is one, as Paul has declared; and it is most
Rational, that as the Faith is one, in all Ages of the World, and the Spirit
one, so the Principal rule of Faith should be one also.

Ninthly, He says, I object, (Quaker^sm no Popery, page 9. 13.) That the
Test^mony of the Spirit within, is greater than the External Testimony of the
Scripture; and therefore the said Testimony of the Spirit is the Principal
Rule. To which he roundly Answers, by denying that there is any such
Testimony of the Spirit within Believers; and because I say there is, he
alleges I drive the Plough before the Oxen. But I Answer, that I have proved
it sufficiently already; and now also I have Answered I hope sufficiently, all
his objections against it. And here I desire the Reader to take notice, how
that notwithstanding I. A. says elsewhere, as Page 44. That he and his
Brethren never denied the Spirits Teaching, Yet how inconsistent that is, with
denying any Testimony of the Spirit, or Dictate thereof, in men's hearts. Is the
Teaching of the Spirit, only an outward thing? Is it nothing else, but to Hear
or Read the Letter of the Scripture? And are they all Taught of the Spirit, who
are but only and merely Taught by the Letter? But if it be granted, that there
is an inward Teaching of the Spirit, distinct from the outward Teaching of the
Scripture, although not separated therefrom, or without the outward, as I know
some of the more sober does acknowledge; then I say, is not that inward
Teaching a Testimony of the Spirit? For to affirm it to be a Teaching, and no
Testimony, seems to me to be a great contradiction. And as for us, although we
cannot say that the inward Teaching or Testimony of the Spirit is never in any
case, without the outward; yet we grant it is often accompanied with the outward,
and in that case, it is no less truly immediate, than if it were without it, as
I have already showed. And supposing, but not at all granting, that the inward
Teaching of the Spirit were never without the outward of the Letter; yet seeing
the outward Teaching of the Letter, is often without the inward, (for many are
Taught by the Letter, who are not Spiritually Taught, all that the Letter has
outwardly Taught them) it follows evidently that the inward Teaching of the
Spirit, and outward Teaching of the Letter are distinct things, as is manifest
from that sure maxim, that when two things can be separate, so as the one to
be without the other, they are really distinct. This Argument I used in my Book
called Quakerism no Popery; but I. A. has made no reply to it. And still I
say, if the inward Teaching of the Spirit be denied, it does follow, that in
respect of any inward Speaking, or Teaching, God does no more intelligibly or
perceptibly speak to the Saints, than he speaks to the Earth to bring forth
Grass; the which consequence I. A. seems to allow, but how absurdly, I leave
to sober men to judge.

And whereas I. A. says, That God does not always make use of the greater
Witnesses for testifying his will to us. I Answer, In respect of men and
Angels, it is true: But notwithstanding God has given himself, and his own
Holy Spirit, which is one with him, to be unto us a witness of his will; and
this is the greatest witness that can be given: See Romans 8. 16. 1 Ioh. 5. 8, 9.

CHAP. VIII.
IN his pretended Survey of the Fifth Query, he begins with two false Charges
against us, the First, That we deny all Scripture Interpretation; the Second,
That we deny all Scripture Consequences; And to refute these idle Suppositions,
which are none of our Assertions, he spends many Pages of his Book to no
purpose, and wherein we are nothing concerned to Answer: For we own both
Scripture interpretation, and just and necessary consequences of Scripture; but
then we say, that these interpretations and consequences ought to be by the
help and direction of the same Spirit that gave forth the Scriptures,
immediately teaching them to interpret, and to draw such consequences
therefrom; to which I. A. does not pretend, nor any of his Brethren. For all
the Interpretations and consequences which Christ or the Apostles used, were by
the same Spirit that was in the Prophets; and Peter says expressly that no
Prophecy of Scripture is of private Interpretation; and it is said of Christ,
that he opened the understandings of the Disciples that they might understand
the Scriptures, which opening was by his Spirit that he gave unto them, and
seeing the Scripture cannot be understood without the opening of the Spirit
that gave it forth, it cannot be interpreted without the same; nor can
consequences be lawfully deduced from Scriptures without it; for how can a man
interpret what he does not understand? or how can he deduce a consequence from
that whereof he is ignorant?

And there is yet another fault that we find in I. A. and his Brethrens
interpretations of Scripture and consequences therefrom, that they keep not
closely to Scripture it self, when they interpret, or draw consequences, but
for most part, mingle with the Scripture words many of their false principles
and Axioms of that they call their Philosophy. For as I have already said; the
most part of that they call their Philosophy, is utterly false or uncertain;
nor are the Teachers of it agreed among themselves, in their Principles and
Axioms. And yet their Consequences are commonly from one or other of these
false or uncertain Maxims or Principles which they join with the Scripture, in
which case the consequences are not purely Scriptural. For seeing in
Argumentation, the Conclusion or Consequence is drawn from two Propositions or
Premises, one of which may be true, the other false. Again, the one may be
true and certain, the other although true, yet may be to us uncertain and
doubtful; in which cases, the consequence or conclusion is always of the nature
of the weaker premise, hence if but one of the premises be false, the
conclusion is false, although the other Premise be true: And if one of the
Premises be unclear or uncertain, the conclusion is also uncertain. And again,
if one of the Premises be Scripture, and the other be but some principle or
maxim of Natural Philosophy so called, the conclusion in that case is not
Scriptural, but Natural: And thus much is generally acknowledged by all the
Schoolmen so called. And hence it is that the School Divinity, as it is so
termed is rejected by many, as a dubious and uncertain thing, because the
conclusions thereof, for most part, depend not on Scripture Propositions, but
uncertain and doubtful principles and maxims of that called Natural Philosophy.
But again, suppose one should draw a consequence from Premises that are both
Scriptural; yet seeing the terms in those Premises may have different
significations, as the words, Flesh, Spirit, Life, Light, Man, and many others,
that have one signification in one place of Scripture, and quite another in
another part of Scripture; the conclusion in that case does not follow, for not
only the Art of Logic, but Common Reason it self Teaches us, that in all
Arguments, the word or term that is used in both Premises, must have the same
sense and signification in both. Now he who has not the direction of the same
Spirit that did Dictate the Scripture, has not this discerning so as to know
the true sense or signification of Scripture words, as they signify Spiritual
Mysteries and things; For the Natural man understands not the Things of God, as
says the Scripture, and therefore he is utterly unfit to reason about them. By
which natural man I understand, any man considered as never so well furnished
with all Natural helps of his Parts and Arts, but wanting the Spirit of God, or
at least not making use of the help of it, but putting another thing in its
room. And thus much shall suffice at present to the Intelligent Reader, how and
after what manner we own both Scripture Interpretations and Consequences; and
yet may very well deny I. A. his Interpretations and Consequences, and all such
as he is, who declare themselves Enemies to that Spirit that gave forth the
Scriptures, as necessary to help them in interpreting and drawing Consequences
from Scripture. And albeit I. A. use many Arguments to prove, that
Interpretations of Scripture are lawful, and Consequences therefrom; as that
Christ and the Apostles did interpr^^ the Scriptures, and draw Consequences
therefrom; yet all this proves not, that I. A. his Interpretations and
Consequences, without the same Spirit, which they had, are as good, which is
all one as to say, Christ and the Apostles did Interpret the Scriptures, and
argue from them by the Spirit: And therefore I. A. and his Brethren may as well
do it, without the Spirit; but who having common Sense, does not see the
unreasonableness of this Consequence. Again, as for the Levites their
Expounding the Scripture, which is another Argument of I. A. it remains for
him to prove, that these Levites who did rightly Interpret the Scripture, did
it without the Spirit of God, and merely by their own Natural Understanding.
And what if these Levites were not in all respects Infallible? it does not
therefore follow, that they had no Infallible direction of Gods Spirit, when
they did rightly Interpret the Scripture. And indeed this is a third false
Charge of I. A. against us, as if we did hold, that none is to Intepret the
Scripture, but he who is simply and absolutely, or in all respects Infallible,
which we affirm not. Nor is that the true state of the Question, but this,
Whether any should give an Interpretation of Scripture, without he be
Infallibly persuaded by the Spirit of God, that he has received it from the
Lo^d. We say, Nay, otherwise he Preaches not the Word of God to the people,
but his own Fallible conjecture. Now it is one thing to be simply or
universally Infallible, and another thing to be Infallibly directed in some
particular cases of Interpreting some particular places of Scripture, as God
gives to a man the help of his Spirit so to do. And thus I. A. his two first
Sections, wherein he spends 18 Pages are sufficiently Answered. In the
beginning of his third Section, concerning Baptism with Water, he alleges
falsely upon us, That wherever Bapt^sm is mentioned in the New Testament, and
the word Water is not expressly added; that we always deny Baptism with Water,
there to be meant. This is false, for we grant, that though Water be not
expressed, yet in some places, Baptism with Water is understood; as where Paul
said, Christ sent me not to Baptize; here we affirm, that to Baptize signifies
to Baptize with Water. But we say further, That the words Baptism and Baptize,
when Water is not mentioned, do sometimes signify Water Baptism, and at other
times not, but some other thing, as the Baptism of the Spirit, or the Baptism
of Sufferings; as where Christ said to two of his Disciples, Can ye be Baptized
with my Baptism; this was not Water Baptism, but the Baptism of his Sufferings
whereof they were to be partakers.

And here in my Answer to I. A. his Arguments for Water Baptism, its being a
Gospel Ordinance, it shall suffice to take notice, what is the principal defect
of every one of them, and wherein he comes short in his proof as being merely
asserted, which therefore are to be returned unto him to be proved. In his
first Argument he alleges, That John the Baptist was the first Minister of
the New Testament way of Dispensation, for which he cites, Mat. 11, 12, 13.
Luke 16. But these places prove no such thing, for they do not call him the
first; and the words, viz. The Law and the Prophets was unto John; here John is
the term inclusive in respect of the Law and Prophets, as if I should say
England reaches from I ands end in Cornwall to Berwick upon I weed; here
Berwick is the term inclusive, and therefore it does not follow, that it is any
part of Scotland; again to say Scotland reaches from Berwick to Orknay; here
again Berwick is exclusive, in respect of Scotland; and therefore when it is
said, From John, the Gospel of the Kingdom is P^eached. It does not infer,
that the Gospel began at John inclusively, but exclusively, even as Scotland
begins at Berwick exclusively; for John was but a forerunner of Christ, who
himself began the Gospel Dis^ensation, in a peculiar way, and yet Christ also
was subject to the Law, for he was Circumcised, and did Eat the Passover, both
which were but Legal Administrations.

And here again, in the Prosecution of the first Argument I. A. abuses us,
saying, That we agree with Papists in affirming that Christ's Baptism was
substantially differing from the Baptism of John. But his fallacy lies in
this, that he does not express what the Papists mean by Christ's Baptism; for
they mean WaterBaptism, even as I. A. does; but we say, the Baptism of Christ
is not with Water, but with the Holy Ghost: Now we do not say as the Papi^ts,
That there were two Baptisms with Water, one of John another of Christ; but
only that John's Baptism with Water, and Christ's Baptism with the Holy Ghost
were distinct, even as John and Christ have expressly distinguished them. And
therefore the seeond Objection he instanceth page 69. does not concern us.

As to his second Argument, he takes great pains to prove a thing which we no
wise deny, viz. That the Disciples did Baptize diverse with Water, after Christ
his Ascension, and his giving the Holy Ghost; But it is the consequence that is
den^ed by us, viz. That therefore Water Baptism, is a Gospel precept, for the
Disciples practiced diverse things after Christ his Ascension, which were not
Gospel Precepts, for Paul Circumcised Timothy long after Christ his Ascension,
also he purified himself after the manner of the Law, none of which were Gospel
Precepts. And the Disciples did not only abstain from Blood and things
Strangled, but enjoined it unto others, the which Abstinance continued in the
Church, even in Tertullian's days, as is clear from his words; and I. A. does
not hold that to be a Gospel Precept, nor yet the Anointing with Oil the Sick,
nor the Washing one another Feet, both which were commanded and practiced in
the Primitive times. And this does also sufficiently Answer his third Argument,
from Peter his saying, Repent and be Baptized, if it were granted him, that
Baptism with Water is there to be understood, for Peter might see it convenient
at that time, for a help to their weakness, who were much used with outward
Signs, to require it of them; which yet proves not, that it is a Gospel
Precept: For all Gospel Precepts reach further than unto Figures and Signs,
which are but the shadows of Gospel Mysteries. And his fourth Argument has the
same defect with the former, that because Peter commanded Cornelius and others
with him to be Baptized, that therefore it was a Gospel Precept; which does no
more follow, than that abstaining from Blood was commanded by the Apostles,
that therefore it is a Gospel Precept; or because Anointing the Sick with Oil
was commanded by James, that therefore it is a Gospel Precept.

And to his Fifth Argument, from Ephesians. 4. 5. that the one Baptism must be
Water Baptism, because that is the only proper Baptism, according to the
signification of the word, whereas there is not one but many improper or
Metaphorical Baptisms. But according to this reason of I. A. when in the same
place Paul says, There is one Body; Body does not signify the Church: for, to
call the Church Body, is but improper and metaphorical; and there are many such
metaphorical Bodies. Also when Paul says, There is one Spirit, I. A. I
suppose, does know that Spirit, or as it is in the Greek (...), does not
improperly and metaphorically signify God, as much as Baptize signifies
inward Baptism, for the Grammatical signification of the word (...) ^, is Wind,
and therefore if I. A. his consequence hold good, when the Apostle says, There
is one Spirit, that Spirit must be, in the Grammatical sense, Wind, that is a
material thing, and not the Spirit of God, even as the Baptism must be a
material or outward Baptism. And thus we may see, whether I. A. his blind way
of drawing consequences does lead him, even to the greatest impertinencies
imaginable.

His sixth Argument from Mark 16. 16. has this defect, that seeing the word
Baptized cannot be meant of Conversion, or any other metaphorical Baptism, it
must therefore be meant of Water Baptism. And it cannot be meant of Conversion,
because of the order of the words, which requires Faith to go before Baptism,
whereas Faith cannot go before Conversion, because Faith is Conversion it self.
I say his Argument has this defect, that it confounds the part with the whole,
for granting that Faith is Conversion in part, or in some degree; it does not
follow, that therefore it is the whole, or furthest degree of Conversion; for
the work of Conversion, or Sanctification has its several degrees, and that
high or eminent degree of the Souls purification, which may be called its
Bap^ism, or through plunging, is really posterior to the Souls first believing,
and is the effect or consequence of it. Hence we read of purifying the heart by
Faith, so as the purification is the effect and consequent of Faith. Again,
whereas he labors to prove that the Baptism that saves, which is mentioned,
1. Pet. 3. 21. must be Water Baptism, because it is called the Antitype, or
thing signified, in respect of Noah's temporal saving by Water, and there must
be some near resemblance betwixt a Type and its Antitype, but he alleges
there is little or no resemblance betwixt Noah's temporal saving by Water, and
the saving by the inward or Spiritual Baptism. But who is so blind or weak,
that does not see the falsehood of this his Assertion? Is there not the
greatest and most near and infallible resemblance betwixt that temporal
Salvation of Noah by Water, and the spiritual and eternal Salvation by the
spiritual Baptism, which does universally and infallibly save all Souls that
are partakers of the said spiritual Baptism, whereas many thousands get the
Water Baptism, who are not saved thereby? and therefore it does much more
naturally follow that not Water Baptism, but the Baptism of the Spirit that
does infallibly purify the Soul is here meant, even as the inward Circumcision
of the Spirit, is the Antitype, or thing signified by outward Circumcision.

Lastly, As to his seventh Argument; whereas he labors to prove, That
Water Baptism is meant, Matthew. 28. 19, 20. whereof he is so confident, that he
entreats his Reader, Not to believe him henceforth, if he do not prove it so to
be* I shall briefly take his proof into consideration.

(...) He says, The Greek Word which is Translated Teach, signifies to make
Disciples, and therefore they were to be made Disciples before they were to be
Baptized; but they could not be made Disciples before Conversion, nor does
Conversion pre-require Discipleship, or else no man might endeavor the
Conversion of an Heathen, or of any man who is not before Hand a Disciple. To
which I Answer, That granting the Greek word may signify to make Disciples,
yet all this reasoning of I. A. does not infer, that by Baptizing here, cannot
be meant the Spiritual Baptizing, by the effusion of the Spiritual Water upon
them, which, as is already said, signifies not barely the first or lowest
degree of Conversion, but an high or eminent degree thereof, even as the
outward Plunging or Dipping into Water, i^ more than a small Sprinkling. Now as
true Faith is before this eminent degree of Conversion, or Purification, so is
also true Discipleship: Nor does it follow, that else no man might endeavor
the Conversion of an Heathen; for they were to endeavor the full and perfect
Conversion of Heathens, in the highest degree that was possible; but so as to
do it in Gods way and order, to wit, first by Teaching and Discipling them into
the true Faith, and then their full and perfect Conversion, or Purification and
Spiritual Cleansing, was to follow one degree after another.

His other reason is, That the Baptism of Conversion, or the Spiritual
cleansing of the Soul is but only improper and Metaphorical; and we must (...)
throw about the words of any Text of Scripture, from a proper to an improper
meaning, without some necessity constrain us so to do. To this I Answer, First,
That we ought not to go from the proper signification of any word, to an
improper, without some urgent necessity, I already acknowledge. But then why
does I. A. and his Brethren frequently transgress this Rule in expounding other
places of Scripture; as to instance when the Scripture says, Christ died for
all men, I. A. expounds this all, not of all individuals of mankind but only
some, and these the far less number; and yet he must needs acknowledge, that
the proper signification of the word all, is all individual. Again, when the
Scripture says, The Kingdom of God is within you, I. A. turns it, to among
you, contrary to the proper sig^ification, and also to the common Transl^tion.
Also when the Scripture speaks frequently of Christ and the Holy Spirit being
in the Saints, they commonly say, This is not to be meant properly, but
figuratively understanding by Christ and the Spirit, the effects and operations
or Graces of the Spirit, and not Christ or the Spirit himself; And many
instances of that nature can be given, to show how I. A. and his Brethren go
from the proper signification of Scripture words, to an improper, without any
necessity, unless that of their own devising.

But Secondly, I. A. does but barely take it for granted, without any shadow of
proof, that it is an improper meaning, to mean by the Baptism of Christ, the
spiritual Baptism. For the proper meaning of any place or sentence of
Scripture, is certainly that meaning which the Spirit of God does intend,
whether there be a Metaphor used in that place or not. Nor does the
Metaphorical use of the word, hinder the meaning of it to be properwhen it is
so intended. And seeing the Scripture does almost every whereabound with
Metaphors and metaphorical expressions, we are not so much to consider, what is
the bare Grammatical sense of any word in common Speech, as what is the most
common and usual sense of it in Scripture; for what is the most, common sense
of it in Scripture I judge is the most proper meaning of it, whether the word
be otherwise metaphorical or not; for who will deny, but according to Scripture
sense, by the word Christ is properly understood the true Christ of God, to
wit, His only begotten Son; and yet Grammatically, it is but metaphorical; at
least, as much as the word Baptize, for Christ signifies Anointed, even as
Baptized signifies Was^ed or Dipped; and if I. A. or any will contend, That
Christ is properly called Christ or Anointed, because the spiritual Anointing
is as real and proper in its kind, as the outward and natural is in its kind; I
shall not contend against them, but rather go along with them therein; but then
I say also, that the spiritual Baptism is as real and proper in its kind, as
the spiritual Anointing is in its kind; and thus also when Christ is called
Bread in Scripture, in the Scripture sense, he is truly and properly called so;
yea, why does he call himself, The true Bread; and why said he that the Manna
which Moses gave to the People in the Wilderness, was not the true Bread from
Heaven. Does not this signify, that whatever virtue or excellency outward,
Bread has to feed the Body Christ, who is the inward and spiritual Bread has
it much more to feed the Soul, yea, and the Body also, when he pleases so to
do; and in this respect it is that some do affirm, That those names of Bread,
Water, Light, Oil, and the lik^, are more properly applied to the spiritual
than to the natural: so that the Water, Oil, Light and Bread, that is but
outward and natural is rather metaphorically so called, and the inward and
spiritual, more truly and properly dese^ving those names. And thus the
spiritual Baptism shall be the most proper in that sense also. But now let the
Scripture be searched, and we shall find, that the word to Baptize, does no
less commonly signify the spiritual Baptism, than the outward and Elementary*
and therefore whoever would persuade us to believe that the spiritual Baptism
is not meant here in Matthew. 28. 19, 20. must show some invinsible necessity,
why it ought not, the which I. A. has not as yet done; and on the contrary we
have good ground to believe, that the spiritual only is meant, because it is
the spiritual Baptism only, which is called the Baptism of Christ in Scripture,
and is expressly distinguished from the Baptism of John with Water; and
certainly the Baptism which Christ commanded, was his own Baptism, whereof he
gave the Apostles charge to administer it as servants and instruments under
him, who made them Ministers of the Spirit and Power that was in him, by whose
Ministry, others were partakers of the same. But if I. A. his Argument hold
good, the spiritual Baptism is altogether excluded, and the Apostles received
no Authority to Administer the Baptism of the Spirit, but only of Water, and
consequently they were no Minister of the Spirit, for how could they Minister
of the Spirit or the spiritual Baptism, unless they received Authority so to
do; and where received they this Authority or Command; if not, when Christ said
these words unto them. Again, if Christ had sent the Apostles to Baptize with
Water, then certainly he had sent Paul a Chief Apostle, but Paul said, Christ
sent him not to Baptize, to wit, with Water. But whereas I. A. does allege,
that Paul means, That Christ sent him not principally to Baptize; I ask him,
Why does he transgress his own Rule, to go from the proper to the improper, and
unusual signification of the word, not which is absolutely Negative, and not
Comparative, and that without any urge^t necessity, but that of his own mere
devising; and that he says, Doubtless the Apostles did not Baptize without a
Commission; I Answer, this is barely asserted without proof, why might not Paul
and others Baptize without a Commission, to wit, by a permission, as well as he
did Circumcise, and did other things of the Law, and that without any
impu^^tion of Will Worship.

Having thus Answered I. A. his Arguments, I shall not need to answer his
Objections, or pretended refutation of our Arguments, and that especially
because some ^ of them which he brings as our Arguments, are not really ours;
and none of them he brings does he fairly propose; and therefore I shall
refer the Reader to our other Treatises, wherein our Arguments are more duly
and fairly proposed, without rep^ating them here, because of Brevity. Only
whereas he alleges, we argue that Water Baptism is not meant, Matthew. 28. 19,
20. because not expressed, I say, that Baptism with Water is not expressed, nor
by any true and just consequence is proved to be meant in Matthew. 28. 19. and
therefore we are not bound to believe that Water Baptism is there understood.
And I hope the intelligent and impartial Reader may see, that I. A. has not
proved it to be so meant, by all his endeavors, and therefore not of his own
mouth, henceforth he is not to be believed.

As concerning I. A. his Fourth Section, which is altogether concerning
Infant Baptism, I might wave it, because it proceeds upon a bare Supposition
that is not proved, viz. That Water Baptism is a Gospel Precept. And seeing the
Controversy is most proper betwixt him, and these called Anabaptists, wherein
we are little concerned, I shall not insist to Answer every thing, only I
cannot but take notice of some of his most gross and impertinent Assertions and
Proofs.

He alleges Baptism under the New Testament is succeeded in the room of
Circumcision; to this I may reply in his own language elsewhere, He puts the
Plough ^before the Oxen, because he supposes still a thing without proof, that
Water Baptism is any New Testament Precept. Again he alleges, That Boptism
with Water is come ^n the room of Circumcision, because Paul says, Col. 2. 11,
12. Our burial with Christ in Baptism is our Circumcision. But he has not
proved that the Baptism, there mentioned, is Water Baptism; where is his
consequence for this? And why does he expound the Circumcision to be spiritual
in that place; and the Baptism outward and visible? Is it not more proper to
take them both spiritually, and then his Argument does wholly vanish? And I
find, ask him, Are all buried with Christ, who are B^ptized with Water; if he
say Not, as he ought, then surely the Water Baptism, is not the Baptism there
understood. Another Argument of his, is, That because the Infants of Believers
are probably partakers of Regeneration, which is the thing sealed or signified;
that therefore they ought to be baptized with Water. But this Argument proves
as much, that Infants should also have that called the Supper, because Christ
who was signified thereby, does as probably belong to Infants as Regeneration,
seeing none can have Regeneration without Christ, and I would know what I. A.
does say to this; or let him show a reason why his Argument prove the one
rather than the other. And it seems, that for that, or the like reason,
Augustine and others of those called the Fathers, were for giving that called
the Supper to Infants, as well as Water Baptism; and in that respect was long
ago really administered to them.

But seeing I. A. has spent so much Paper on Water Baptism, why says he
nothing to sprinkling of Infants? why does he not so much as attempt to prove
that sprinkling with Water, is, or ever was the true form of Baptism with
Water, although the Question does expressly mention it. Thus we see how all
along hitherto, I. A. has left the substance of the Queries unanswered.

CHAP. IX.
BEfore my Answer to I. A. his pretended Survey of the Sixth Query, which is
concerning that called the Sacrament of the Supper, I shall premise these few
particulars: 1. That we do not deny but own and believe that all true
Christians and Believers do eat of Christ's body, and drink of his blood, and
that beyond, or what is more than a figure or figurative Commemoration thereof,
to wit, really and substantially, yet so as spiritually, and by Faith, and not
outwardly and with the outward or bodily mouth. 2. Nor do we deny, but that in
all our Eatings and Drinkings, we are to remember the Lords Death, and so Eat
with Holy Fear and Reverence, and Thankfulness. 3. And we deny not, but that
the night wherein he was betrayed, he took Bread and brake it, after Supper,
and having given Thanks, he gave it unto his Apostles, saying, Take Eat this is
my Body, and likewise the Cup, saying, Drink ye all of it, for as often as ye
Eat this Bread, and Drink this Cup, ye show forth the Lords Death until he
come: So we grant, he gave them a Commandment to do the like for sometime to
come: But that which is Queried is this, Where is it called a Gospel Ordinance,
or standing Command of Christ unto the Worlds end, to Eat Bread and Drink Wine
after Supper in a peculiar and solemn way of Commemoration, over and besides
that which may and ought to be done every day? And whereas Christ said, Do this
in remembrance of his Death, till he come again. It is Queried, Was this coming
to the end of the World, or was it his coming to dwell in them? Now says I. A.
to all this, first he alleges, It was a mere Circumstance, the doing of it at
night, and after Supper, and so is no Essential part of the Action. But he
gives no proof of this: And if men take a liberty to change one Circumstance,
why may they not change all the rest as well as that one. As for Example, why
may they not say, that Bread of Wheat, and the Wine, are but Circumstances
also, seeing Eating and Drinking may be without either Wheat or Wine, as well
as it may be any other time, then at Night. Again, why may it not be said, that
the whole Action is but a Circumstance in respect of the thing principally
intended, which was to signify our Spiritual Eating and Drinking of Christ his
Body and Blood; which may be very well without the outward Eating and Drinking,
as all Protestants do generally acknowledge; and thus the outward Eating and
Drinking is but a Circumstance, as well as the time: And surely the time does
seem no less to have signification, than the Eating and Drinking it self had,
to wit, that it was at Night; for that time when Christ suffered was the
Evening, or last part of the Covenant Dispensation, wherein he gave them a Sign
or Figure suitable to that present Dispensation, and was not to continue as a
binding thing, after the Gospel day or Dispensation should clearly break up, or
be dispersed. And it does plainly enough appear, that in the primitive times,
they who used that Solemnity, they laid weight upon the circumstance of the
time, doing it at Night, and after Supper; which came in process of time to be
changed, to the doing of (...) the (...), or before Dinner: And if Christ (...)
intended some weighty signification (...) ^ircumstance of time, to wit, at
(...) the Passover, I see not, (...) of time is so carefully (...) ^angelists.
Hence from the (...) of time, I bring an (...) Christ did at that time, and
(...) do, until he came, is no Gospel (...), because it was done in the Night
or Evening of the Old Covenant Dispensation, and consequently was to come to an
end with it. Although for the weakness of some, it was continued for a time in
the Primitive Church after the Night of the Old Covenant was expired, and the
day of the Gospel Dispensation was clearly broke up: And another Argument we
have, that the outward Bread and Wine is but a Figure of Christ's Flesh and
Blood, and not his real Body, as all Protestants acknowledge, and consequently
is no Gospel Ordinance, which consists not in the Figures, Types and Shaddows,
that were proper to the Law, but in the things signified by them. Again,
whereas I. A. does allege, That Christ commanded it to be done, It is granted,
he commanded it for that time, and for some time to come, until the darkness of
the legal Dispensation should clearly ^anish, and be dispelled from the Eyes of
the Disciples, which was not ^udde^ly done, but required a time: And many (...)
believe in Christ, were but (...) and could not easily be weaned from (...)
observation of outward Figures and (...) and therefore Christ gave them thus
(...) to condescend to their weakness, to bring them off from the Law, and the
Figures, Types and Shaddows thereof by degrees, as they were able to bear. But
it does not follow, that because Christ commanded it unto them, for that time,
or sometime following, that therefore it is a Gospel Ordinance, seeing he
commanded them as expressly diverse other things, which I. A. and his Brethren
acknowledge are no Gospel Ordinances, As the washing one another Feet; also,
That they should go and tarry at Jerusalem for certain days, and wait for the
Promise of the Father. And he bid them, Provide neither Bag, nor Shoes, nor
Money, when they went forth to Preach: But I suppose none of all these will I.
A. or his Brethren plead to be Gospel Ordinances. And even as his commanding
them to tarry at Jerusalem until they received the Promise of the Father; which
was the Spirit, (to wit, in greater measure than formerly it was given unto
them) did not oblige them to stay longer: So his commanding them to use that
solemn and peculiar commemoration of his Death until he should come, did not
oblige them longer, than until that his coming. But now the Question is, What
coming did Christ mean, whether his last coming at the end of the World, or his
Spiritual coming to dwell in them, and feed with his real Flesh and Blood
Spiritually received, which is more than the Figure? We say it is his Spiritual
coming in his Saints; but I. A. and his Brethren say, It is his outward coming,
which yet he has not proved, for all his wrangling. And instead of proving
what he says, he not only abuses us with bad words, as calling us, Possessed
with a blind and deaf Spirit; but most falsely alleges on us, that we hold,
Christ did not dwell in his Apostles, before that time, when Christ took the
Bread: For we say no such thing, nor is any thing of that sort insinuated in
the Queries: Only, That Christ did promise unto them, that he would come and
dwell in them, to wit, in a more abun^ant measure, and clearer way of
manifestation, suitable to the Gospel Dispensation, than formerly they
witnessed under the Law. Nor will this argue that either the Apostles were
wholly unconverted, or unregenerated at that time; all this is but the bare
imagination of I. A. his Brain, and no just or true consequence from our words.
And whereas I. A. Querieth, Did not Christ dwell in these Corinthians whom Paul
writes to. I Answer, he did in some measure; but yet in diverse of them, he did
not dwell in that measure or manner of clear manifestation, as was promised;
for Paul said unto them, He could not write unto them as spiritual, but as
carnal, and he fed them with milk, and not with meat; which plainly imports
that many of them was short of that measure and degree of Spirituality, which
the pure Gospel state required. And as for 1 Cor. 11. 23, 24. Which I. A.
brings to prove, That the outward Eating is a Gospel Institution; I Answer,
that place, 1 Cor. 11. 23, 24. contains no Institution of it at all, but only
an Historical relation of what Christ did and said that night to his Disciples.
Nor did Paul say, that he received a Command from the Lord, or delivered a
command unto them, concerning Bread and Wine; but that which he received and
delivered unto them from the Lord was, the knowledge of what the Lord did and
said at that time. And though this practice was continued in the Church of
Corinth for that time, and perhaps in other Chruches, this proves it not be a
Gospel Ordinance more than Water Baptism, or Circumcision, both which were
practiced by many that did believe in those times.

And here again I. A. falls into his old trade of fal^ly accusing us, as being
against all external Ordinances, because the Query insinuates, That such who
are come into Death with Christ, need not Bread and Wine to put them into
remembrance of his Death; from whence he most unjustly infers his
consequence, that we reject all outward helps and means whatsoever. But does
not I. A. know that his own brethren acknowledge there is no absolute necessity
of using that called the Supper, so as none can be saved but such as pa^take of
it; and the like may be said of any outward helps, when people cannot have
them. But yet we say still, whatever outward thing God has Commanded us to
use, be it never so small or mean, is in that respect both necessary and
profitable unto us, for there is none of God's Commands, but they bring along
with them a real advantage to men's Souls; but I. A. has not as yet proved it,
that using Bread and Wine, as aforesaid, is any Gospel Command. Another abuse
of his is, that he alleges, We reject the said practice of taking the Bread
and Wine, from a conceited perfection; which is false, for as we do not boast
of our perfections, so we do not reject that custom^ because of any perfection,
that some of us may become unto beyond others, but because we cannot find it to
be any Gospel Precept; and therefore we cannot acknowledge it either to be
necessary or profitable to the weakest.

Another thing he quarrelleth in the Query is, That it makes to dye with
Christ, and to come to the Death with him all one. And here he insults not a
little in his knowledge of Philosophy above the Quakers, for a mere
Grammaticism of saying to for into, which perhaps was only a fault in the
Transcriber; and yet we find commonly that to and into are indifferently used
to signify one thing: as to come to Town, is all one as to come into it; and
to come to Christ, is all one as to come into him; and when Christ said, Come
unto me, he did certainly mean that they were to come into him. Hence we read
of the Saints being in Christ. And if this be I. A. his Philosophy so to
quarrel at words proper enough, and according to Scripture, let the judicious
and sober Reader judge, whether some of our Friends that called his Philosophy,
Foolosophy, had not ground so to do. And whether he has not discovered more
folly than true Philosophy, from first to last, in his Book against us.

In his Answer to the reason hinted in the Query from Paul's words, to seek the
things that are above, and the things that are seen are temporal, he still
beggeth the Question, That the outward observation of Bread and Wine, is a mean
which God has appointed, for the attaining the things above. And in Opposition
to his Assertion, let him read what Paul says, Col. 2. 17. where he puts
mea^ and drink in together with the new Moons, and other legal Observations,
which he calls, A shadow of things to come; but the body is of Christ. And
seeing I. A. acknowledges that the Bread and Wine are but external signs, and
not the real body of Christ; I ask him, wherein then differ they from Shadows.
And if they be Shadows, they are no part of the Gospel Dispensation, according
to Paul's Doctrine.

In the close of his pretended Survey to this Sixth Query, he charge us most
rashly and uncharitably, as being related to the accuser of the Brethren, as if
the writer of the Queries had positively charged all the Ministers of Scotland,
that they never intended their Hearers should come any nearer to Christ's Death,
than a bare Historical remembrance thereof. But does not I. A. know, that to
Query a thing is one, and positively to conclude it, far another. And the
Enquirer had ground so to Query, because he understands, that if it were the
care of Preachers to bring people into the Death with Christ, so as to be
Crucified with him, they would not plead so much for upholding a Figure or
Shadow of Christ's Death, to put them in remembrance of it; when to suffer and
die with Christ is much more effectual to remember them. Nor Secondly, would
they plead so much for carrying a body of sin about with them, while they live,
and that all must be under a necessity of sinning daily in Thought, Word, and
Deed; yea, in whatever they think, speak, or do, for such a state is not
consistent with a being Dead and Crucified with Christ. And Thirdly, If it were
their work to bring people to dye with Christ, they would turn them to the
Light of Christ in their Hearts, and Preach it to be unto them of a saving
Nature, and an effectual mean to obtain the said Death with Christ, which yet
they do not, but on the contrary deny it as merely natural insufficient. And is
it not too apparent that the far greatest number of your Church Members, know
nothing more of Christ's Death than the History of it? And whether the fault of
this lie not in a very great part upon the Preachers, is no small nor
impertinent Question.

And seeing I. A. pretends so much to Scripture Rule, I shall ask him a few
Queries more upon the former Head.

First, What Scripture has he and his Brethren to call that eating of Bread
and drinking of Wine, once or twice in a year, in the Pub^^ck Assembly, the
Sacrament?

2. What Scripture have they to instruct them how often they should use it, as
once, twice, or four times in every year? And if they have none, was it not
then left to people according to the Query, at least as to the time?

3. What Scripture have they for consecrating it, or when did Christ say,
Before ye eat it, consecrate it?

4. When did Christ give only the power to a Priest or Presbyter, or Ordamed
Minister to Consecrate it, so as without the said Consecration by some Priest,
or Ordained Minister, it is no Sacrament? And seeing every Christian may eat it
as well as the Minister, why may he not also consecrate it, as well as he,
seeing every true Chris^ian is a Priest?

5. Where did Christ appoint, that these words, Take Eat, this is my body,
should be the words of consecration, and have ye not received all this from the
Papists, and not from Christ?

6. Seeing ye commonly say, that this Sacra^^^^ of the Supper is come in the
room of the Passo^er, and under the Law, every Family had power without a
Priest, to celebrate the Passover; why has not also every Family under the
Gospel (...) much power, without any Ordained Priest or Minister to celebrate
that called the Supper?

7. Seeing every true Christian feeds daily by Faith upon the body of Christ,
according to the Protestant Doctrine, and ought daily to remember the Death of
Christ, in all their eating and drinking, which is also sanctified unto them by
the Word of God and Prayer, what peculiar virtue or efficacy has your
sacramental eating, more than ordinary eating; when done, with godly Fear,
Prayer and Thansgiving, and remembering the Lords Death?

8. Seeing it is clear from Luke 22. 17, 18, 19, 20. that Christ did take the
cup twice; once before he gave them the bread, and once after, bidding them do
the same; why take ye the cup but once? was this only a bare circumstance?

9. Is not the Apostle Paul, 1 Cor. 10. 15, 16, 17. to be understood of quite
another Bread and Cup, than that which is visible and outward, when he says, I
speak as to wise men, judge ye what I say (did he not say this because he was
to speak of the Bread and Cup, in the mystery, as it was altogether a
spiritual and invisible thing, to wit, the real body and blood of Christ
spiritually received, which none but the spiritually wise could understand) The
cup of blessing which we bless, is it not the communi^n of the blood of Christ?
The bread which we Break, is it not the Communion of the body of Christ? For we
being many are one Bread, for we a^e all pa^taker^ of that one Bread. Is it not
clear from all this, that Paul speaks not of any visible and corruptible Bread
but of Christ himself, as he is spiritually and invisibly received by Faith
whom he calls the same spiritual meat and drink, which the Fathers received of
old? see the same Chapter, Verse 3, 4.

10. Do any receive the Supper of the Lord, or Sup with the Lord, but such as
open to him and hear his voice, according to Rev. 3. 20. And is not this
Supper, or Supping with the Lord, altogether inward, spiritual and invisible.

Now whereas I. A. does allege that the Querist has mistaken the second
Epistle of Paul to the Corinthians for the first, because h^ cites these words
in the second Epistle, For the things that are seen, are but temporal, but the
things which are not seen, are eternal; I Answer, that the Apostle Paul writes
to the same purpose, in the first Epistle, and that much more clearly, calling
Christ the spiritual Meat and Drink, as he is spiritually and invisibly
received by Faith.

CHAP. X.
J. A. in his pretended Survey of the seventh Query, (which is concerning the
Sabbathday) alleges, That the fourth Commandment requires, to keep Holy unto
God one day of seven; and seeing that fourth Commandment is Moral, it extends
to all Ages of the World. But in Answer to this, as that the fourth Commandment
required one day in seven, so it expressly mentions that day to be the seventh,
and not any one other of the seven; for the said fourth Commandment did plainly
bind the Jews to the seventh day, which was not lawful for them to change to
the first. And whereas I. A. alleges, That the Accommodation to the particular
time, or Diet to the last day of the Week is indeed Abrogated, but not the
substance of the Command: By this he quite overturneth his former Assertion,
That the fourth Commandment was simply Moral; for if it was simply Moral,
nothing of the least Circumstance of it could be Abrogated. But some of I. A.
his Brethrem^are more wary and considerate, who say, The fourth Commandment was
partly Moral, and partly Ceremonial: The Ceremonial part of it was, that it
tied to the seventh day; the Moral part of it was, and is partly that it
requires some competent time to be appointed for the Worship of God, both
private and public, laying aside all Worldly occasions for that time, as well
out of our Minds as hands, without tying to any limited day of seventh or
sixth: And partly again in respect of its Spiritual signification; for the
outward Sabbath of the Jews, was a Type or Shadow of Christ, in whom all True
Believers find rest to their Souls, from all their heavy Labors and Toils; and
that Christ is the thing signified by the Sabbath, is clear from Coloss. 2. 16,
17. Again that neither I. A. nor his Brethren hold the first day of the Week,
in that strickness of a Sabbath, as the fourth Commandment required is clear,
because the said fourth Commandment required, That in it they should not do any
work, which elsewhere in Scripture is more particularly set down, That they
were not to kindle a Fire on the Sabbath; and he that gathered sticks on the
Sabbath Day was to be stoned to Death: All which proves that the Sabbath of
the Jews was Typical, and consequently that the Morallity of it, was
principally its Spiritual signification, as it did hold forth Christ, no less
than the other Types and Figures. But I. A. allows people to kindle a Fire on
that day, and to Boil and Roast Meat as plentifully as on other days, if he be
of his Brethrens mind, who commonly Feast on that day, and have a larger Table
than at other times. And although I. A. undertake the Vindication of the Church
in Britain, yet he cannot be ignorant, that the greatest part of his Episcopal
Brethren were and are of another mind, viz. That the keeping of the First day
of the Week is no Moral Command; else they would never have allowed Plays and
Markets to be kept on that day. And Calvin, whose Opinions I. A. follows but
too much in other things did not hold, That the keeping of the first day, was
any Command of God, but simply that the Church had agreed to it to meet on that
day: And he says plainly, They might have chused another day as well as that.

Now the Query says, That the Saints did meet together, this is Scripture; so
we acknowledge that the Saints did meet together on the first day of the Week,
and so we do according to their example; and also we acknowledge that some
considerable part of our life time is to be set apart for the solemn Worship
and Service of God; and this not only the Scripture Testimony, but the Law of
God in our hearts does require. And we further judge, that rather more of our
time is to be given to the Service of God, solemnly se^ apart from all worldly
occasions now under the New Testament, (and that Servants and Beasts may have
rest, for God requires that mercy be shown to them also) than was formerly
under the Law, by virtue of the fourth Commandment. And therefore we have
Meetings, and other times of Retirement, at other times of the Week, than on
the first day. As also we do generally abstain from Bodyly Labor on the first
day of the Week, although we cannot call it the Christian Sabbath, for that
were to put it in the room of Christ: But what abuse and profanity is it to
pretend to set apart a day only for the Service of God, and yet to spend it
worse, than any other day of the Week, for most part, to wit, in Idle
Communications, Plays, and Drinking, as too many of I. A. his Brethren openly
do.

And now let us see further, what I. A. does allege for the first day of the
Week, its being appointed to be kept for a Sabbath.

One Argument is, That because Christ rose on that day, and honored it with
his most frequent appearings, after his Resurrection on that day, that
therefore he appointed it to be kept for a Sabbath: But this inference is
without any proof, and is therefore returned to him: And it is manifest, that
at a certain time, when Christ did appear, some of the Disciples were Fishing
with their Nets, Ioh. 21. And if that was the first day of the Week, and
appointed by Christ for a Sabbath, how was it that the Disciples did so openly
transgress it, and yet were not reproved by Christ, but were bidden cast out
the Net by himself. Nor is his other Argument of any greater weight, That
because the Primitive Christians, in the Apostles times and downwards, did
constantly meet on that day, and had their Collections for the poor, that
therefore it was appointed to be strickly observed as a Sabbath: This
consequence is also returned upon him, as barely alleged without proof. And
both we and many other Protestants in France and Holland, constantly meet on
that day; and yet it does not follow, that we or they hold it for a Sabbath,
for many of them do not, any more than we.

Another Argument of his is, Because it is called the Lords day, Rev. 1. 10. To
which I Answer I. A. has not as yet proved it evidently, that by the Lords day
there is meant the first day of the Week, but giving it, that John meant the
first day, as I find generally that Iustine Martyn and others about his time
did call the first day of the Week, the Lords day; yet it does not follow, that
therefore the Lord appointed it to be kept as a Sabbath, for it might well
enough he called the Lords day because he arose upon it, for many day^ have
received Names for much less reason, according to the Ancient Tradition in Old
times, which not being in Scripture is not so certain to us, as that other,
viz. Of Christ his Resurrection day.

Another Argument of his is, Because that Christ Taught the Disciples to Pray
that their flight might not be on the Winter, nor on the Sabbath day, when he
Prophesied of the Destruction of Jerusalem, Math. 24. 20. But to this I Answer,
That the Name of Sabbath does not infer, that any outward day is to be kept for
a Sabbath, under the New Testament, more than the Name of Circumcision does
infer that there is now to be any outward Circumcision; and what Christ spoke
to the Disciples, it was not to them alone, but to all the Jews, who as he did
well know, would still be Zealous for the Jewish Sabbath, after his
Resurrection? As indeed they were, and also for Circumcision; and therefore he
knew what great an Affliction it would be to them to be put to flee on that
day; and accordingly we find, that not only them, but long after the Jews, even
many of them that believed, and also our Christians, did observe the Jewish
Sabbath, and some observed both, that and also the first day, until
Constantine's time. What Christ therefore spoke of the Sabbath, was not to
confirm them, to keep either that or the first day of the Week for a Sabbath,
but to express the great Affliction, they would be in, if they should flee on
that day, which they so much did regard. And beside, some understand the
Sabbath here also by way of Allegory, which I. A. has not re^u^ed.

And whereas the said I. A. alleges, that Romans 14. 5, 6. Is not to be
understood of the first day of the Week, but only of other Jewish days: This is
merely alleged, without any shadow of proof; for no where does Paul, or any
other Penman of the Scripture make an exception of the first day: And
therefore seeing Romans 14. speaks of days indefinitely, the first day is
understood as well as the rest.

CHAP. XI.
IN the pretended Survey of the eighth Query, which is concerning Singing of
Psalms, I. A. is at much pains to prove a thing, which we do not deny, viz.
That Singing of Psalms, is allowed and commanded under the New Testament: For
this we willingly acknowledge, and those who can Sing with the Spirit and
undestanding, they may use either David's words, or words of any other
Holy-men, recorded in Scripture, or any other sound words, as the Lord shall
move them: But all this is no Answer to the Question, which is not concerning
Singing only or simply, but that way of Singing used by I. A. and his Brethren,
without any pretense to an immediate direction, or motion of the Spirit
Infallibly Teaching or assisting them what and how to Sing. Now the Query is,
where does he find such Singing Warranted in Scripture, viz. without the Spirit
infallibly directing them. 2. Their Singing with Meeter or Tooting Rhymes,
Artificially composed by mere Natural Art and Industry; where is such Singing
commanded or practiced in Scripture. And 3. it is Queried since the Apostles
did not turn them into Meeter, why have others since them, done so, as if they
were more wise than the Apostles, or saw further what God required of them. And
whereas I. A. alleges, That Psalms cannot be Sung, except they be Meetered;
If he mean by Meetering, putting them in Tooting Rhymes, or Rhymes ending with
the like Cadencies and Sounds, he shows his great ignorance in Poetry, and
Music; for the best Poesies are without any such Cadencies: Nor have David's
Psalms any such Cadencies of like sounds at the end of the Lines, as they are
written in Hebrew. And although David's Psalms are Penned with certain measures
of Words and Sentences, yet that was by some Divine Skill, which the Spirit of
the Lord Taught him, and not by bare humane Art, as I suppose I. A. will not
deny.

But another great abuse in I. A. is, that he excuses wicked and proud men's
Singing such words of David as these: I am not puffed up in mind, I water my
Couch with my Tears, etc. alleging they may be Sung as well as Read by such
men. But who cannot see the absurdity of this inference, for to Read, and to
Pray, and also to Sing, are very differing; and one may Read the Devils words,
and the words of the wickedest men Recorded in Scripture, but when one Prays,
or Praises, he expresses somewhat of his own condition. And men may read the
Creed or Ten Commands, but yet they are not proper for a Prayer, and the most
of the Psalms are Prayers.

But lastly, whereas I. A. says, He and his Brethren have the same Spirit the
Apostles had, though not the same measure: We may not unfitly Query them, how
he can prove or demonstrate this to us, seeing some of his Brethren have asked
a proof from us, that we had the same Spirit: And if I. A. be in good earnest,
and does indeed believe that he has the same Spirit, which the Apos^les had,
how is it that he does so very frequently mock and scoff at the Infallible
Inspiration of the Spirit, which we plead for, as the common privilege of all
true Christians. And was not the Spirit which the Apostles had, the Infallible
Spirit? And if I. A. thinks he has the same Spirit, either he must needs
acknowledge, that he has the Infallible Spirit, and is so far infallible, or
then he must say, that the Spirit of God is changed, so that whereas it was
Infallible in the Apostles and Primitive Christians, it is become Fall^ble in
I. A. and his Brethren. And if he have the same Spirit, which the Apostles had,
but in the least measure, how is it that he has said above that the Dictate of
the Spirit within is worthy of a thousand Deaths? Let I. A. extricate himself
of these contradictions if he can. And further I ask I. A. whether the Psalms,
he and his Brethren Sing in their Meetings, be these Spiritual Songs, which the
Primitive Christians did Sing; and such as we Read of particularly in the
Church of Corinth, where Psalms are reckoned among the other peculiar Gifts of
the Spirit, such as Revelations and Interpretations; where it is manifest, that
the whole Assembly did not all Sing the same words with their voice; but every
one did Sing as they received it from the Lord, and as he did put it into their
Hearts; and such were the Songs of Zachariah, Mary and Elizabeth, who Sung and
Blessed the Lord by the Holy Ghost. And seeing I. A. says, That they cannot
Sing, unless what they Sing, be turned into Meeter, I ask him, whether the
Songs of Zachariah, Mary and Elizabeth were Sung by them in Meeter, or Rhyme,
and with Musical Dittyes and Tunes Artificially Composed, or whether they had a
Precentor, or any that went before them. And whether such kind of Officers were
in the Church in the time of the Apostles, as Precentors that went before the
people: And whom they were all to follow, accordingly as he Sang after ^his or
that Tune of Music Artificially Composed. Or rather have ye not Learned all
this from the Papists? And was it not Guido Aretinus,^ Popish Monk, that
invented the Scale of Music commonly called the Gamut according to which the
Precentors are Learned to Raise the Psalms. All which is but the bare Act of
Man; and such who plead for Vocal Music in the Church, from the example of
David, and the Law; they may also on the same account plead for the use of
Musical Instruments in the Church; not only as lawful, but as necessary, (which
yet the Episcopal Church here wants) and not only so, but Dancing also, as a
part of Divine Worship, which was used in time of the Law, and especially by
David. And thus by I. A. his Argument, both Instrumental Music, and Dancing
shall be necessary parts of Gospel Worship.

And as concerning wicked men's Singing, it is most clear, that as they are not
to Pray, while remaining wicked, so nor are they to Sing, because all true
Singing is a real part of Divine Worship, which is to be done in Spirit and
Truth; but no wicked nor unrenewed person can so do. And seeing all wicked
persons professing Christianity, are Captives in Spiritual Babylon, how can
they Sing any of the Songs of Zion in a strange Land? Can they Sing that new
Song, which the Redeemed from the Earth Sing? Rev. 14. was not the Lord
displeased with their Singing even under the Law, when the people did
degenerate and become perverse? And did he not threaten that he would turn the
Songs of their Temple into Howlings? And yet according to I. A. the most
perverse and abominable corrupted persons, may and ought to Sing Psalms: But
what Harmony can such Singing make in the Ears of the Lord, while the Heart is
so discordant to the Law of God? And although I. A. has his best and greatest
Patrons, for his Musical Singing, with Artificial Dittyes, and Tunes, and
Rhymes out of the Popish Church; as also for his pleading that wicked persons
may Sing David's words, without making a Lie; I shall here Cite a very fair
acknowledgement out of a late Popish Writer, to the Truth of what we allege
against I. A. The which Writer is Johannes Bona in his Book called, The
Principles of the Christian Life, Part 1. Sect. 44. They are ^yes (says he)
and empty words, when any com^^tteth wickedness; and sings in a Psalm unto
God: I have hated iniquity, and abominated it, Psalm. 118. He that is altogether
in his Dishes, and says, I have forgot to Eat my Bread, Psalm. 101. 1. He
Laugheth the whole day, and exceeds in vain joy, and says, my Tears were my
Bread day and night; he obeys not the Commandments, and he Sings They are
Cursed who decline from thy Commandments, Psalm. 118. Such Prayers (says he)
are Accursed, provoking the wrath of God, toward such, and they deserve to be
punished with severe Pains. Now albeit this Testimony is from a Papist, I hope
no Sober person will call it a Popish Doctrine, but rather a Christian Truth,
which the Evidence of Truth has extorted from him. And it is a shame that I.
A. should be more blind, who pretends to more knowledge.

CHAP. XII.
J. A. in his pretended Survey of the 9th, 10 th, and 11 th. Queries, does
ground his Discourse so much partly upon mistakes, and partly upon barely
supposed alleged principles, which he does not prove, that I shall need to say
very little directly in Answer to the whole, from his page 119, to page 131.
only some of his most considerable mistakes and bare Suppositions, I shall take
notice of, the which being denied, and removed, his whole Superstructure falls
of it self.

First, He blames the Queriest, or Writer of the Queries, For falsely accusing
the or sl^ndering the Church in Britain, as he calls it, as if they did hold
their Ecclesiastical Constitutions formally, as such, for an Infallible Rule,
and their Catechisms and Confessions of Faith equal to the Scriptures. But I
Answer, the Query makes no mention of those terms [formally as such.] But
simply whether they hold their Directory Confession of Faith and Catechism, to
be an Infallible Rule, and equal to the Scripture. Again, Secondly, what is
proposed in the Query is not positively concluded one way or another, as the
Nature of a Query does plainly demonstrate. And yet Thirdly, he plainly
affirms, page 129. That the whole Articles and Difinitions contained in the
Catechism and Confession of Faith materially considered, are very Gospel Rule,
and Scripture Sentence, either expressly and formally, or materially,
implicitly and by good consequence taught therein. How then can he have any
face to accuse the Inquirer, for asking such a thing which he does openly
acknowledge. And here let the Reader take notice, that the Catechism and
Confession of Faith, whereof I. A. gives so great a Commendation, is not that
of the Episcopal Church, but the Presbyterian, viz. that made by the Assembly
at Westminster which is expressly cited by him, cap. 31. art. 4. it is not then
as seems the Defense of the Episcopal Church and Faith, that Ioh. Alexander
undertaketh, but the Presbyterian, and yet I. A. is a Member of the Episcopal
Church, and Officiates therein under John Hamilton, an Episcopal Preacher, who
has recommended his Book, at the Order of the Bishop of Edinburgh. But I
suppose the Episcopal Church in Britain will give John Alexander, or his
Patriot John Hamilton little Thanks for his Service, seeing many Episcopal
Teachers in Britain differ widely in Doctrine from the said Westminster
Confession. And had I. A. no other Confession of Faith, or Catechism to
commend, but that of the Presbyterians, whom his Episcopal Brethren commonly
call Fanatics; and is it turned to that, that they commend their Confession of
Faith, as the only Confession of the Church in Britain? But I can find no
mention in the said Confession, that Episcopacy is Iure Divino.

However since I. A. has undertaken the defense of the Presbyterian Church and
Faith, in all its Articles and Definitions, as very Gospel Rule, and Scripture
Sentence, he must then acknowledge that all these Definitions and Articles of
his Presbyterian Brethren, are at left materially considered, infallible
Oracles. and seeing he confesses they are not all expressly contained in
Scripture, but many of them only deduced by consequence therefrom, by what
infallible consequence can he convince any rational man, that his and their
consequences are just and right since he lays no claim to the least measure of
that kind of direction of the Holy Spirit, teaching him and his Brethren to
draw those consequences, which Christ and the Apostles had, whereby they
argued, and did draw consequences from places of Scripture formerly writ. And
seeing not only Papists and Protestants, but the Episcopal and Presbyterian
draw contrary consequences from the Scriptures, what evidence can I. A. give
us, why we should receive the consequences of the one more than the other. Or
can we think the Lord has left his people so in the dark, as to give no other
knowledge of his Will in a great many things, which are Articles of Faith, but
what can be searched out by long and tedious consequences, of the bare natural
understanding of man, as it is left to it self, to fish and hunt in the dark,
after such consequences, without any such special direction and conduct of the
Holy Spirit, in the least measure, which Christ and the Prophets* and Apostles
had. Nay I do not find that I. A. does acknowledge so much as the least
absolute necessity of any sort of operation or illumination of the Spirit, so
^uch as that they call effective or subjective, order to draw their
consequences from the ^cripture. But if this way of drawing consequences
without the help of the Holy Spirit were so safe and sure, how is it then that
so many of all sorts draw contrary consequences from the same Scriptures? Is
not the great reason of all this, because men are departed from that holy
Spirit, which gave forth the Scriptures, and can only give the true
understanding of them? And therefore is it not plain and manifest, as the Light
at Noonday, that man's natural Spirit, and Reason, and Wisdom, in its highest
perfection, is altogether unable to meddle with Divine Truths, or to search
after them, as it remains alone, hunting in the dark. And certainly this is no
small part of that cursed self-conceit and exaltation of mind, that Rules in
the degenerated nature of man, that they think they can be wise enough without
God's Spirit, they need no direction, or assistance, or illumination to help
them to search into the Scriptures, they can do that well enough with their
natural reason, and a little School-craft of Artificial Logic, and Grammar,
and Natural Philosophy; but that blessed man David was of another mind, when he
prayed unto the Lord, saying, Open my Eyes, that I may see the wonderful things
of thy Law. And as for consequences which men draw, as they are directed and
taught by the Spirit of God, as Christ and the Apostles were, when they drew
any consequence from what was formerly writ, we do own them, and receive them,
and none else. But yet as to the most weighty and necessary things, to wit,
such as are the general principles of the Christian Faith and Doctrine, and
which as such are generally to be received by all Christians, as well these of
the meanest capacity, as others of the greatest, we see the Lord has not left
it to man's industry, to search after them by consequences long or short, but
has delivered them to us in plain express words and terms, and that many times
over and over again (as in respect of many of them) in the Holy Scriptures. And
why is it, that the Scriptures are so full and large in their Testimony to the
Doctrines and Principles of Religion, but to let us understand, that all the
Principles and Doctrines of the Christian Faith, which God requires in common
of all Christians are expressly their delivered and recorded, and put as it were
in a puplick Register. And therefore, for my part, what I cannot find expressly
delivered in Scripture, I see no reason why I should receive or believe it as
any common Article or principle of the Christian Faith or Life; and for such,
to whom God has given that Divine skill to ^ive, or dip into the depth of the
Scriptures, (...) out of the reach of other men, who may ^e true Christians, so
as to collect or gather by just and true consequences, other things that lie
out of the view of their weaker Brethren, they ought not to obtrude them upon
any to be received as principles of Faith, but in that case to have Faith to
themselves, and receive them as peculiar discoveries or Revelations of the
Spirit to them, and such others as God has so enlightened; the which by the
Apostle Paul is called, The Word of Wisdom, to wit, such a peculiar degree of
Wisdom or Understanding in the depth of the Scriptures, as others who yet were
true Christians did not reach unto; and concerning such a peculiar gift of
Divine Wisdom, he said, We speak Wisdom among the perfect? this certainly could
be no common Article of Faith, else he should have Preached it to all. And this
by the same Apostle is elsewhere called, The knowledge of Mysteries, as
distinguished from the common Faith and knowledge of the whole Church. Now if
this were but received among those called Christians, that nothing should be
required by one sort from another, as an Article of Faith, or Doctrine or
principle of the Christian Religion in common to be believed, but what is
expressly delivered in the Scriptures, in plain express Scripture terms, of how
great an advantage might it be to bring a true reconcilement among them, and
beget true Christian Unity, Peace, Love and Concord. And as for the
consequential part of peculiar Doctrines, whether true or false, to leave every
one a freedom or latitude, without imposing upon them the affirmative or
negative, as any bond or tie of Christian fellowship; for if such consequential
Doctrine be false, it is most unreasonable to impose it, and therefore in that
Case, a Dissenter should have his liberty to differ in judgment, without any
breach of Brotherly Unity and Society; and if it be true, yet not being opened
or revealed to another, it cannot be in justice pressed or urged upon him,
where God has not given him the true freedom and clearness of mind to receive
it; and to do otherwise, is to transgress that Golden Rule delivered by Paul,
viz. To walk by the same Rule, according to what we have attained; and if any
be otherwise minded, said he, God will reveal it unto him. And if this Advice
could find place, it would bring the differences among those called Christians,
in point of judgment, into a very small and narrow compass, and they would
understand one another far better than now they do.

But again, seeing I. A. is so absolute and peremptory, that the Presbyterian
Confession of Faith and Catechism, (and wh^ not the Presbyterian Directory
also) materially considered is infallible, and yet is but a Book of their
making, and the consequential part of it, the alone Fruit and product of their
humane Spirit, since they deny all pretense to an inward Dictate or Direction
of Gods Spirit in the Case; why should the said I. A. so often Taunt and upbraid
us with an Infallible Spirit, and Infallible Speaking and Writing, and
Inspiration; for now it seems a mere humane Spirit has inspired those that
gave forth the Westminster Confession of Faith and Catechism, to write every
Article and Sentence of it Infallibly, according to I. A. his high estimation
of them.

But whereas I. A. dares us, To give any instances of any Articles and
Definitions contained in the said Confession and Catechism, that are not
Scripture Sentence materially or formally considered. This has been done many
times over and over again by our Friends in England, and by some of us here in
Scotland, particularly by R. B. in his Catechism and Apology, and by me in my
Book of Immediate Revelation: And there was in the year 1651. an entire
examination of that Confession of Faith published in Print by one W. Parker,
(who was not called a Quaker, and whose words in all things we do not own) and
to the said Examination I. A. or any of his Fraternity is referred, where I am
abundantly persuaded he has said more against it, and many Articles contained
therein, viz. in the said Confession, then ever I. A. or any of his
Presbyterian half Brethren shall be able to Answer; which whole Book lies at
their door to this day (so far as I can understand) unanswered. Another gross
mistake, or rather abuse of I. A. is, that he alleges, The Quakers are
against all Confessions of Faith and Cat^chisms whatsoever, and yet they have
Confessions and Catechisms of their own. I say this is a gross abuse, for we do
own, that there may and ought to be Confessions of Faith given by True
Christians; and also we own, that there may be Catechisms, and that they are
useful in the Church, and accordingly we have such. And though the Writers of
those Confessions and Catechisms, be not absolutely or universally Infallible,
yet we hold that none should publish any Confession of Faith, or Catec^ism, but
in such things whereof they are Infallibly persuaded by the Spirit of the Lord;
and as to other things that may be uncerta^n or unclear unto them, they should
forbear: and so every one should Speak or Write, as they have received the
spirit of Faith: as the Apostle Paul said, We ha^ing re^e^ved the same spirit
of Faith, we believe, and therefore we have spoken; bu^ I. A. thinks he may
Speak and Confess his Faith, without the same Spirit of Faith which David and
Paul had: And as for our Catechisms and Confessions of Faith, if we cannot
prove them, and all the Articles and Sentences in them, to be according to
express Scripture words, then let them not be received. For we profess to urge
nothing, nor to press any thing to be received, as a common Article of Faith,
but what is expressly delivered and Recorded in the Scriptures. And if any
should be so unbelieving and obstinate, as not to believe the express Scripture
words, we may not urge them, or press them thereunto by any Humane or Carnal
Force and Compulsion, but only to labor to persuade them, according to that
evidence and demonstration of the Spirit and Power, as God shall be pleased to
furnish us withal.

Another great mistake or abuse of I. A. is, that he alleges the Tenth Query
is void of Sense, as if it did import, That their Justification and
Sanctification, Faith and Grace, were the Gifts of their Directory, Catechism,
and Confession of Faith; and thus because the Query says, The Gifts of these,
whereas it is plain to any Sober and Rational Person, that by the Gifts of
these, the Inquirer means, the Gifts of Justification, Sanctification, Faith
and Grace; and this is a form of Speech allowed by the Grammar it self, and
practiced by Learned Authors, I suppose far beyond I. A. who say not only the
Town London, or Rome, or Edinburgh, but also the Town or City of London, the
City of Rome, the City of Edinburgh; and therefore why may it not be as well
said, the Gift of Faith, of Justification, of Sanctification; and speaking of
these in general, why may it not be said, the Gifts of these, which is
equivalent to these Gifts: And beside, perhaps all this Quible is only raised
upon a mistake of the Transcriber, wri^ing the Gifts of these, for these Gifts;
but it seems I. A. is barren of matter, when he makes a mountain of so small a
matter, if so be it were an impropriety of Speech. But to deal in earnest with
I. A. seeing he is so declared an Enemy to Divine Inspiration in our days, we
cannot think that he indeed owes his pretended Justification, Sanctification
and Faith unto God, but rather unto those Confessions and Catechisms; for what
Evidence or probable ground can he give us, that he has any Divine Faith, or
that which is more than barely Historical and Traditional?

Another gross abuse of his is, That because we call the Gospel the Power of
God, as we are warranted by the express words of Paul, Romans 1. 16. therefore he
alleges, That we fain to our selves a sort of dumb Gospel, without any Words,
or Doctrine. But to remove this abuse, let the Reader know, that by the Gospel,
we mean not the Power of God abstractly considered without the Doctrine, and
suitable words, inwardly or outwardly Preached, nor yet the Doctrine and Wor^^*
without the Power, and Life, and (...) God, but both conjunctly. And although
we do readily acknowledge that the Doctrine, when it is outwardly Preached by
the Spirit of God, and so has the Power of God accompanying it, is and may be
called Gospel; yet we cannot simply or absolutely limit or confine the Gospel
to outward Preaching of men; otherwise what God or Christ Preaches of his Love
and Mercy to men in their Hearts, should not be the Gospel, nor should that be
Gospel which God Preached unto ^braham, and also unto Adam after the Fall;
seeing to none of these God did use the Mini^^ry of men. To conclude therefore,
what God reveals of his Love and Mercy for men's Salvation, whether without, or
by the Ministry of men Spiritually fitted and called thereunto is the Gospel,
and that Gospel may be called the Power of God unto Salvation, because it is
mighty and powerful in operation; but yet it does not follow, that the
^reaching of the Letter without the Spirit and Power of God, is the Gospel, as
I. A. would have it.

CHAP. XIII.
IN the pretended Survey of the 12th Query, I. A. (...) the Inspirer of the
Quakers, as he sc^ffing^y (...) it, as being both a great Jester, and a great
Fool also, because the Inquirer asks, Whether Original Sin be the Devil,
seeing the Word Original signifies the Beginning. But I ask I. A. why may not
the Devil be called sin, or unrighteousness in a certain sense, as Christ is
called righteousness frequently in Scripture? And what is it that made him that
was an Angel of Light, to become a Devil, but sin; for when God first created
him, he was not a Devil; but he became so, or made himself so, by his sin: And
seeing sin made him become a Devil, why may it not receive his Name? And also
seeing the Devil stirs up men to sin, and is the Author of it commonly in
men's Hearts, it may very well receive his Name, at least by a Metonymie.

Again, is not sin called in Scripture, The Old Man, or Old Adam, whom we are
bidden to put off? According to I. A. his reasoning, Sin cannot be an Old Man,
because a man is a person, and then Sin should be a person also. Again, by his
Argument, God made man, but he made not sin, therefore sin cannot be a man: And
thus according to I. A. the Inspirer of the Apostle Paul, must also be a Fool
and a Jester (which were very Blasphemous to think) because Paul calls sin in
men, The Old Man, and compares it unto man, having its various Members.

Now if indwelling sin may be called man, in any tolerable sense of a
Metonymie, or Allegory; according to Scripture, why not also Devil, Serpent,
Leviathan, as also it is called flesh. And whereas the Inquirer does ask, what
did Christ come to destroy? was it not the Devil and his works? To this I. A.
gives no direct Answer; for certainly that Devil whom Christ destroys in
men's hearts; and that Serpent whose head Christ the Seed of the Woman does
bruise, is sin, which is the Serpents birth in men's hearts, and which receives
his Name, as the Child does the Name of its Parent.

Now as to the words Original sin, as they are no express Scripture words, so
they have an Ambiguous or doubtful signification, and therefore it were better
to leave those words, and to keep to express Scripture. For in one Sense, there
can be no Original sin, because originally all things were good, and sin came
in not with the Creation, but sometime after it.

But how sin has come generally upon all men, as whether by the bare
imputation of Adam's sin, without the consent of his Posterity, or by and
through their consenting thereunto, is the true state of the question, which I.
A. has not as yet resolved. And it seems most absurd that God should reckon
any sinners for Adam's sin, without the least consent or concurrence on their
part, which is not just among men; and certainly what is unjust with just men,
is not just before the Lord, who is infinitely just and good. And seeing none
are Righteous or Just by the Righteousness of Christ, the second Adam, without
their Faith in him, and consenting to his Righteousness; so none are
unrighteous by the first Adam, but such as consent to his sin. But again, when
this consenting to Adam's sin took place in his posterity, as namely whether
before they came into the womb, (as those who hold the pre-existence of all
Souls from the beginning, do affirm, whereof there have been and are diverse
among those called Christians) or whether after they are born, when they grow
up to the capacity of discerning good from evil, is yet another Question, which
I. A. has not touched, far less resolved. And it were well that men were more
inquisitive to find the way, how to get sin put out, than how it came in;
seeing they are generally sensible that that it has entered, and got too great
place in them. But as to the determinate and precise time, when sin has entered
into men's Souls; as it is no part of the Query, so it is none of my present
work to determine. It shall suffice enough to reply unto I. A. that all his
Arguments for the in being of sin in men's hearts, fall short to prove that it
came into them without their own consent; or that God does impute sin unto any
Soul, simply and barely for the Fact of another; for that is to contradict the
common instinct of Justice that is placed by the Lord, the judge of the whole
Earth in all men.

Another Question which I. A. raises on this Head, although it be no part of
the Query, is, Whether that Seed of Concupiscence which is felt to move in
those who are Traveling uprightly toward perfection, be really and properly
their sin, or imputed unto them; for sin by the Lord, when not consented unto,
in any measure or degree. And he resolves it in the affirmative, but with very
weak and insufficient Arguments. 1. He says, By the sin of Adam, all were made
sinners, Romans 5. 16, 17, 18. But what then, does it therefore follow, that they
were made sinners without their own consent; let him show us this any where in
Scripture? 2. He says, Adam was the representative Head of mankind. But I say
again, it does not thence follow, that his sin is the sin of his Posterity
without their consent; no more than it does follow, that because Christ is also
the Head of every man, that his righteousness becomes theirs, without their
consent; and their actual receiving of him, and believing in him. 3. He says,
There are motions, which are sinful, though not consented to, when they are
tampered with, or listened unto. I Answer, to tamper with any evil motion, or
listen thereunto, is some measure of consenting; but when the evil motion is
not tampered with, nor listened unto, in any measure, this reason has no place.
And here he alleges on me, that as he was informed I did once dispute for a
Professors place, which to what purpose he mentions this, I donot understand;
however I tell him, his Information is false, for I never disputed any where in
all my life, for a Professors place. 4. He argues, That as Gracious Principles
are Grace, so an evil principle is sin. I Answer, there is a Principle of
Grace, in the Souls of Bad men, which is Grace in it self, and Truth and
Righteousness, yet it is not their Righteousness, nor Grace, because they join
not with it, and even so an evil Principle in a good man, though evil, and sin
is not his sin, when he does not join with it. 5. He Argues, That which
inclines men to sin, must be sin. But if this Argument hold, then the Devil
must be sin still, because he inclines men to sin. Again, as to what he
alleges that Paul said, Sin did dwell in him, from Romans 7. I Answer, I. A.
has not proved that Paul was at that time in that condition, whereof he makes
mention, and although he speaks of the dwelling of sin, in him, viz. in respect
of his former condition; yet he tells, that not his mind, but his flesh, was
the Subject, where it did indwell. And therefore when I. A. so insultingly
inquireth at me, What is the Subject of that evil thing or motion; for seeing
it is an accident, it must have some subject, without which it cannot exist. I
Answer him from the Apostle; the Subject of it, in good men, is not the mind,
or more noble part, which is immortal, but the flesh. And seeing it is not
lodged in the mind of any righteous man, it cannot defile it, when it is not in
any wise consented unto. Nor does it follow, that because an evil motion may be
in the flesh or mortal part, the Devil is also lodged there too; this is
nothing but a foolish inference of I. A. his making; and therefore let him take
home his silly Jest to himself, where he says, It is better to lodge s^n
alone, than it and the Devil too; for two such Devi^s are worse together, than
any of them it self. I say, nothing of this can be inferred from our Principle;
but let I. A. take heed, lest sin and the Devil too, have not too great place
in him, which so leads him forth to foolish Jesting, and reproaching the
Blessed Spirit of Truth, in its Holy Inspirations, in the Hearts of Gods
People. But why is I. A. so offended with the Inquirer, for asking if Sin be
the Devil; seeing he calls sin, Devil, saying, Sin and the Devil, are two
worse Devils, than one alone.

To conclude this matter, I. A. does plainly acknowledge, That by Christ his
destroying the Devil, is meant the destroying his Power and Kingdom in the
World, page 137. And not the Annihilating the Devils entity and being. Is it
not then clear, that I. A. his own Confession, the Devils Power and Kingdom is
called Devil in Scripture, and what is that but sin; and thus we see, h^w at
last he is forced, at least indirectly, to acknowledge, what he has so
earnestly opposed.

CHAP. XIV.
IN the pretended Survey of the thirteenth Query, I. A. accuses the Spirit in
the Inquirer, As being either an ignerant Blockhead, or else a Captious
Sophister, and withal alleging, That the Question as it is propounded cannot
be Answered; and that therefore it must be purged from a plurality of
Interrogations. But all this Accusation proceeds upon a wrong Supposition, viz.
That Christ has not died for all men: And therefore, although I. A. cannot
Answer the Question according to his own false Principle; yet according to
Scripture it can be well Answered, viz. That Christ has died for all the
ungodly and sinners, that they should live unto him.

In the next place he offers to give some clear demonstrations from the
Scriptures, That Christ did not die for all men. But in his whole Survey of
this Question, consisting of above 13 Pages, he brings not one place of
Scripture, which says expressly, That Christ died not for all men: And for my
part, I have Read the Scriptures all over several times, but to this day I
could never find any such place: But on the contrary, I have found diverse
places of Scripture expressly affirming, That Christ has died for all, as
Isaiah 53. 6. 2 Cor. 5. 14, 15. Heb. 2. 9. and 1 Timothy 2. 6. and 1 Ioh. 2. 2.
And therefore his clear demonstrations, are but his own consequences gathered
not from Scripture, but from his own mistakes; and his absurd Interpretations
of Scripture, the which we are not bound to receive, seeing he has renounced
all claim to the Inspiration of that Spirit that gave forth the Scripture.

And because it would be too tedious, and to little purpose to Answer
particularly to every frivolous Objection he makes against the Doctrine of the
Scripture, Concerning Christ's dying for all men: I shall lay down some general
Heads or Propositions according to Scripture, by which all his Objections shall
be sufficiently Answered.

PROP. I.
ALthough Christ died for all men, and thereby gave a Testimony of Gods great
Love, and also of his own to all mankind, according to 1 Ioh. 4. 9, 10. and 1
Ioh. 3. 16. and Romans 5. 8. Yet it does not follow, that Christ or God has
equally conferred upon all, the Spiritual Blessings procured by his Death; for
the Love of God being free, he might extend it in different measures or degrees
to men, as it pleased him, according to his own infinite Counsel, which we
cannot comprehend: And whereas Ioh. 15. 13. it is said, Greater Love has no
man than this, that a man lay down his Life for his Friends. This does not
import, as I. A. does allege, That Christ died only for his Friends, but it
expresses the superabundant Love of Christ above the Love of all other men, in
that whereas it is the greatest Testimony of the love among men, a man to die
for his Friend; yet Christ has given a far greater, in that he died for his
Enemies, Romans 5. 10.

PROP. II.
CHrist died in so far, even for these who perish; that by virtue of his Death
all such have a day of Visitation, wherein it is possible for them to be saved,
during which day: Christ Jesus does Enlighten them with his true Light, to show
them their way unto God; and also he breaths upon them in some measure,
sufficient unto their Conversion, with his Spirit of Grace to draw and gather
them, whereby it is possible for them within the day of their Visitation to
believe, and so to be saved: And this Grace of Illumination, which has a
Sanctifying and renewing virtue in it comes upon them, as the real effect and
consequence of what Christ has done and suffered for them, God having so
ordered it, in his infinite Love and Wisdom, that this Grace, whereby he
converteth Souls should flow, and run forth unto us in that way, and as it were
through the Conduit of Christ his Blood; so that the Sufferings of Christ were
as the opening of a great Fountain, out of which the abundant Grace of God,
that formerly as it were but droped on mankind, is in the Latter days poured
forth upon them, as it was promised so to be; for which read and compare these
following Scriptures, Isaiah 44. 3. Joel 2. 28. Jeremiah 31. 31. Psalm. 68. 18.
Ephesians. 4. 7, 8. and Ioh. 1. 16, 17. Romans 5. 18.

PROP. III.
WHen once the day of men's Gracious Visitation is at an end, which is possible
to come to pass on many, and does no doubt come to pass on many, even when
living in the World, after they have finally rejected the Call of God in their
Souls, and ^^ully resisted, and hardened themselves against his tender dealings
by his Spirit of Grace, gently working on their hearts: I do not say that
Christ has died for the sins of all, or any one of those, after the said day
of their Visitation is at an end: For although we read in Scripture, That
Christ has died for the re^ission of all sins past; in the time of ignorance
when God winked, and for the redemption of the transgressions under the first
Covenant, according to Romans 3. 25. and Heb. 9. 15. Yet we find not that Christ
has died for all sins of men that were to come, after they were Enlightened.
And although no doubt all sins, as well to come as past, are pardoned upon
Repentance; and that Christ has died for such sins, as are repented of by any
men, at any time, when they truly repent; yet seeing many sins are committed,
by many, that are never repented of, and wherein they die finally Impenitent
and hardened against Gods tender Call and Visitation of Grace in their Souls:
Also seeing some sin wilfully and fall away, after they have received the
knowledge of the Truth, and die in that state, the Scripture is plain, That
there remains no more Sacrifice for them. Also John speaks, Of a s^n that
is unto death, of which he Writes; I do not say, that such a one is to be
Prayed for: And what is such a sin, but a final impenitence, even until the day
of Visitation be over, and God be provoked to give them up, even as many at
this day, because they received not the Truth in Love, are given up to the
strong delusions of Antichrist, to believe Lies, and die in that state.

PROP. IV.
MEn are not according to Scripture called Reprobates within that time, that
God dwells with them by his Grace, in order to convert them, and renew them
by Repentance; far less does the Scripture speak of men's being Reprobated from
all Eternity, or before the foundation of the World, as some allege; although
we read of an Election in Christ before the foundation of the World. And to say
that God does simply Reprobate men, while he is calling them to Repentance, and
graciously inviting them in true Love to be reconciled with him, is an absolute
inconsistency. The time therefore of any man's final Reprobation is after this
day of Grace is over, and God has wholly left striving with him in order to
his Conversion. We must therefore distinguish betwixt persons, and their sins
and sinful state; for also ^in, and state of sin is always rejected and
reprobated, yet not the persons, until their day be over. For the Scripture
speaks abundantly of a day of Grace that all men have, or are to have,
wherein the Lord not only visits them, but even endures with much long
suffering the Vessels of wrath fitted for destruction. These only therefore are
properly Reprobates, who are finally given over to a Reprobate mind, after
their day of Grace is over; and Gods foreknowledge and preordination
respects them only as such.

PROP. V.
ACcording to what is formerly said, it may be further concluded, that although
Christ has died for all men in a day, so that within that day of Grace, all
their sins past and to come as well as present, are pardonable for Christ's
sake, no man being absolutely reprobated, and finally given over, within this
day of Grace; yet that day being at an end, Christ's death is no more a
Sacrifice for, them, nor for their sins; and because of their rejecting so
great Salvation offered them by Christ, all their former sins which formerly
were not imputed unto them, so as to hinder Pardon, are newly charged upon
them, and that in the just Judgment of God, seeing they deny the Lord that
bought them, and account his Blood, as an unholy or common thing. And in this
respect Christ has Died for no Reprobates, to wit, as such: And he has
neither died nor Prayed for the World; in that sense, to wit, as it signifies
them, who die in the final unbelief and impenitency, and so perish, for so I
find the term World sometimes to signify in Scripture. And if I. A. think that
this is a contradiction; 1 Cor. 11 32.
as implying that Christ has died for all men, and yet has not died for
Reprobates, who are a great part, or the greatest part of mankind; I shall mind
him of a Rule in his School-Logick, that he does so highly magnify, to wit,
that Propositions are not contradictory, although the one be Affirmative, and
the other Negative, unless they be in ordtne ad idem, in order to the same, and
in regard of the same Circumstances of time, place, condition, etc.

PROP. VI.
THe Sacrifice of Christ's death did truly extend, for the remission of sins
past, from the beginning of the world; hence all the Believers that lived under
the Law, and Prophets, and before the Law were saved by Faith in Christ, and
had their sins pardoned; not by the Offering of the Blood of Bulls and Rams;
but by the Blood of Christ, who was to die for them, and in whom they believed;
and died in Faith; as is clear out of many places of Scripture, and especially
the Epistle to the Hebrews. And by virtue of Christ's death, and offering once
for all men, have had or have, or shall have a day of Visitation, and offer of
Grace through Christ, even these who lived before Christ came in the flesh, in
that prepared body as well as others. And therefore all who finally perish, and
are lost in whatever Age or time of the World they lived, they must be
accountable to Christ who is judge, both of quick and dead, and Lord of both;
and they shall be punished with Fire of Hell, for neglecting and despising the
Salvation offered by him. And although this is a great Mystery and hard to be
uttered, how this Gospel Invitation, Act. 10. 42.
and Visitation comes unto all, and how all shall be accountable unto the man
Christ Jesus, on the score or account of his dying for them; yet seeing the
Scripture is so plain and clear for it, Act. 17. 31.
it is better to believe it, than curiously to dispute how, or after what
manner it comes so to be: And the opening of this and other great Mysteries of
the Christian Religion, is approaching to many, who as yet do not see them; and
when men are prepared to receive them, God will no doubt give that; and all
other Good things to those that Love and Fear him.

PROP. VII.
ANd whereas I. A. and others do urge, That either Christ has died for those
that perish, absolutely or conditionally: I Answer, partly both, first he has
so far died absolutely even for those, as by his death and righteousness, Grace
is come upon them, sufficient both to Faith and Salvation, within their day of
Grace; which Grace is given them absolutely for that time, and does continue
with them, until the day of their Visitation be at an end, and then it is taken
away from them, the Lord ceasing to strive with them any more for their
Recovery. Secondly, I say, Christ has died conditionally, even for those that
perish, that they might have been saved, within their day, upon the condition
of their believing: And whereas I. A. does object, That seeing the condition it
self, to wit, Faith is the Gift of God, then he either bestows it upon them
absolutely or conditionally; if absolutely, then Reprobates shall thereby be
made Believers, and so be saved; if conditionally, then the sense will be, that
God bestows Faith in Christ upon Reprobates, upon condition that they fir^^
have Faith in him. To which I Answer, that Faith is indeed the Gift of God, and
God is willing to bestow it upon them, and work it in them; not upon the
condition of their first believing, before he give them to believe, which I
confess would imply a contradiction; but the condition on which God is willing
to work Faith in them is, if they do not finally resist his Spirit of Grace,
having offered Faith unto all men, which moves and draws or inclines them
to believe; for to every one that does not resist the motion of Gods Spirit of
Grace, he gives Faith, and works it in them: And though men cannot actually
do any thing that is good, or acceptable unto God, before they believe; yet
when the Visitation of God's Grace is upon them, by the help thereof they may
cease from resisting the Spirit of God: and whereas I have heard it again urged
by others, Either God wills that men should not resist the Spirit of Grace
absolutely or conditionally; if absolutely, then say they, men shall not resist
it; for what God wills absolutely, must certainly come to pass, if
conditionally, then the Argument may be renewed concerning that condition, and
so without end. To this also I Answer, that God wills absolutely, that men
should not, or d^ not resist his Spirit of Grace; for seeing God commands
that men do not resist, it is evident that it is the absolute or positive will
of God, that they do not; for whatever God commands is according to his will.
But it does not follow, that whatever God wills men to do, that must
certainly be done; for how often do men act contrary to the Will of God, in
some sense, although when they do so act, it is not without his permissive
will, whereby he suffers them so to do. Indeed I g^ant, that whatever God
wills that he do himself, that must certainly be done, and it cannot be
resisted; and therefore when God punishes the disobedient, it being his own
act of Justice, and proceeding from his own holy and just will, it cannot be
resisted in that respect. I have the more largely Answered this Objection,
because it is judged by many of the Adversary side, to be unanswerable: But I
hope by what is said, the Impartial Reader, who loves Truth, may perceive,
that there is indeed no strength in it; and it is so far from being a clear
demonstration, that it is nothing else, but a Captious Sophism, and Fallacy.

Moreover, whereas I. A. classeth us with the Arminians and Jesuits, for
holding this Doctrine, That Christ Died for all men. I Answer, seeing both
Arminians and Jesuits profess to hold many other Doctrines, which I. A. does
also profess, as that there is one God, and one Lord Jesus Christ; it is no
just ground of reproach to us, to own that Doctrine, which the Scripture does
own, although Arminians and Jesuits profess to own that also: But it is the
greater shame to I. A. and his party, who profess to be more Orthodox, to be
guilty in denying that, which Adversaries confess; we find that not only wicked
men, but the Devils also confessed unto Christ, which yet is no reproach unto
Christ, nor to the true Confessors of him.

And lastly, whereas I. A. pretends to Answer our Arguments, For Christ his
dying for all men; Some of them he does not fairly represent; and others, being
some places of Scriptures, he does only Answer, by giving us his private
meanings of his own private Spirit, (without any convincing reason) of those
places of Scripture, which we are no wise bound to receive: And at best, all
his Answers proceed upon a bare Supposition, that his own Principle is true;
which is a common Fallacy, called in the Schools Petitio Principii, which is to
say, A begging of the Question.

CHAP. XV.
IN my Answer to I. A. his pretended Survey of the 14 th. Query, I purpose to
use the same way as in the former, viz. To lay down some Propositions, which
may sufficiently Answer to any thing he objects against the Universality of the
saving Light and Grace of God unto all men; and in so doing, I shall both save
my self and the Reader the pains ^o follow him in every Trivial thing that is
objected.

PROP. 1. In the Question concerning the Universality of Gods Grace sufficient
to Salvation; it were altogether wisdom in our Adversaries to forbear pressing
so hard in that point, and so positively conclude against us, and not us only,
but the Scripture it self, That many Nations or Kingdoms of the World are
utterly excluded from all sufficiency of Saving Grace, and possibility of
Salvation; and that upon the account of wanting the Gospel outwardly preached
unto them, and benefit of the Scriptures. Do we not read in Scripture, That God
has given the Heathens to his Son for his Inheritance, and the uttermost ends
of the Earth for his possession? And does not Christ invite the most remote and
desolate places of the Earth to come unto him, saying, Look unto me all ye ends
of the Earth, and be ye saved: Mark it is not said, some ends of the Earth, but
[ all ye ends of the Earth;] even as well those to whom the outward Testimony
of Christ by the Scriptures is not come, as those to whom it is come. And did
not Christ command, That the Gospel should be preached to all Nations, even
those that wanted the Scriptures Testimony, and therefore the Gospel did belong
unto them; even so to speak before it was outwardly Preached unto them, for
because it did belong unto them, therefore was it to be Preached unto them; and
consequently for the same reason the Gospel does belong to many at this day, to
whom it is not as yet outwardly Preached; and did not Paul say, Romans 1. 14.
That he was a Debtor both to the Greeks, and to the Barbarians, as concerning
the Gospel? And how can I. A. or any of his party who dispute so fiercely
against all possibility of Salvation, not only to many thousands among those
called the Heathens, but to many entire Nations of them, make it appear that
they are utterly and finally excluded from all sufficient means of Salvation.
Have they been in Gods secret Counsel to know this? or who has revealed it to
them? And if the outward Testimony of the Scriptures be not as yet come to
diverse Nations of the Earth, this does not hinder, but that the Gospel does
belong unto them, as well as unto others, to whom they are already come, Seeing
God has commanded, that the mystery which was kept secret since the World
began, should now be declared or made known unto all Nations for the obedience
of Faith, and that by the Scriptures of the Prophets, according to Romans 16. 25,
26. And seeing Christ has commanded, That the Gospel should be Preached to all
Nations, Dare I. A. or any of his party give us the Instance of any one Nation
now under Heaven, to whom the Gospel ought not, or may not be Preached, suppose
they altogether at present want the outward Testimony of Scripure, and
knowledge of the History of the coming of Christ in the flesh. But if the
Gospel may be Preached to any Nation now under Heaven, then certainly it
belongs unto them, I mean the Gospel Dispensation; for because it belongs
unto them, and is the free Gift of God unto them: And because Christ Jesus has
procured or obtained that privilege unto the Gentiles, by virtue of his death
and bloodshed for them, Having broken down the middle wall of partition
betwixt the Jews and Gentiles; therefore i^ is to be Preached unto them: Even
as because the King has given some great favor unto his Subjects, it is to be
published or declared unto them, and it is therefore published unto them,
because it is given them; and is not given them, because it is published; and
therefore the Gentiles have some title or claim to the Gospel, even before it
be published, and consequently before the outward publication of it unto them,
they are not utterly excluded from the Dispensation of Gods Grace toward men.
And if any shall say; The Gospel is to be Preached to all Nations indeed,
(seeing Christ has commanded it, and not one Nation is excepted) because that
God has some scattered up and down all the Nations, who are to be saved, as
belonging to Gods Election. To this I Answer, that according to I. A. his way
of reasoning, God has none belonging to his Election in many Nations of the
World, because they are excluded from all possibility of Salvation for want of
the Scriptures.

PROP. 2. Whereas I. A. objects against the universal sufficient Light and
Grace of God, because it is said, 1 Cor. 2. 14. The Natural man does not
discern, neither can he know the things of the Spirit of God. I Answer, By the
Natural man is to be understood, the Soul or Mind of man, as it ^^boureth to
understand Divine things merely by its Natural faculties of Natural wisdom and
understanding, without any Divine illumination: But when it pleases God to
shine upon man in his Natural state, by his Divine illuminaon, then he may know
something belonging to his Souls Salvation, so far as his weakness can permit,
by virtue of the said illumination. For how are men converted from Natural to
Spiritual? God deals not with men in Conversion, as with Stocks and Stones,
but as with Reasonable Creatures, having some capacity of understanding.

PROP. 3. That some in Scripture are said to have neither Ears to hear, nor
Eyes to see, nor Hearts to understand, And that because God has not given it
unto them, which is another objection of J. A. This does not prove, that at no
time God has given to those people any measure of sufficient Grace for this
great and extraordinary darkness and blindness may be upon them, either because
the day of their Visitation is expired altogether, or because of some
intermission, that is only to continue for some time; after which they are
again to have a new Visitation, so that they may both see and hear, and also
understand, if they will not wilfully shut their Eyes.

PROP. 4. These who are said in Scripture, as 2 Thessalonians. 2. 11, 12. To be given
up to strong Delusions, to believe Lies; Are such, who when the Truth was made
known unto them, received it not in love, that they might be saved, as is clear
from v. 10. And therefore it does not follow, as I. A. would have it, That
these who are so fearfully blinded by Antichrists delusions, never had a day of
Visitation, before they were so blinded: But on the contrary it is manifest
they had, because their blindness is a Judgment inflicted upon them, for their
wilful opposing the Light that God gave them sometime formerly.

PROP. 5. Whereas I. A. says, That the Father draws not all men to Christ: I
Answer, As this is no where said in Scripture, so it is contrary to Christ his
Doctrine, who said, After I am lifted up, I will draw all men unto me: And
certainly all whom Christ draws, the Father also draws; for said Christ, My
Father hitherto works, and I work. Nor do the words of Christ cited by I. A.
prove the contrary, Ioh. 6. 45. Every man that has heard and learned of the
Father comes to him: For Christ does not simply say, every one that has heard
of the Father, comes to him; but every one that has learned, as well as heard;
now we do not say that every one has Learned of the Father, although they have
heard in some sort; also there is a right and wrong hearing, some hear
willingly; and this is only the right hearing; but although all hear one time
or another, while their day of Grace last, yet few hear willingly so as to
obey, and therefore they come not unto Christ.

PROP. 6. Whereas I. A. Argues again, That wicked men have not the powers,
principles or habits of Grace, and therefore they have not sufficient Grace;
and he labors to prove, They have not the powers and habits or principles of
Grace, because otherwise they would be Converts and Gracious men. To this I
Answer, Although wicked men have not these powers and habits, as some call
them, actually, yet they have them hiddenly, to wit, in a Seed or principle of
Grace, which virtually contains all these powers and faculties, even as the
Seed of a Tree does virtually contain the Fruit and tree it self. But it does
not follow, that because a wicked man has a good Seed in him, that therefore
he is a good man, no more, than because good Seed is sown in barren ground,
that therefore it is fruitful.

PROP. 7. Whereas I. A. does further all^dge, That the Gentiles did the things
of the Law mentioned, Romans 2. 14. By the mere nature of man, without the Grace
of God; and this because it is not said, They did the things contained in the
Law by Grace, but by Nature. To this I Answer, nor is it said they did the
things contained in the Law by the corrupt Nature of man, as it is corrupted in
the Fall, and no wise healed or restored. And certainly corrupted Nature could
not do the things contained in the Law; for the Law of God in the Hearts of the
Gentiles, did require not only the outward action, but the inward purity of the
heart; and if this was wanting, they did not the things contained in the Law.
But that there was an uprightness of heart in some of the Gentiles, is clear
from diverse examples of Scripture, as from Romans 2. 14. They show the work of
the Law Writ in their Hearts; and in the Case of Cornelius, and also of
Abimelech, Genesis 20. 6. so that God said unto him, I know that thou did this
in the Integrity of thy heart. And therefore that Nature mentioned by Paul Romans
2. 14. is either Nature healed and restored in some measure by the Grace of
God, as Augustine did partly expound it, or the innate word mentioned by James,
to wit, The Word of Life immediately grafted, or planted in the Souls of men,
which is a Divine Nature; for the Greek word used by James in that place, does
most properly signify, that which is immediately planted in men's Nature, as
distinguished from that which they receive by Education or Industry; as when we
say, innate wisdom or understanding, and innate goodness, we mean that which a
man has immediately received from God, from his Birth, or Creation, to
distinguish it from what he has acquired by his own pains or labor, in which
sense I find both the word (...), and (...) to be used by Greek Authors. Now
that the Gentiles had a measure of Gods Grace bestowed upon them, which for
most part they did not improve, is clear as from many other passages of
Scripture, so in particular from the Parable of the Prodigal, who received of
his Fathers Goods and Substance, as well as the Elder Brother, but he spent it
in Riotous living, so that he was left destitute. Now I ask what was that which
the Prodigal spent which his Fathers gave him, and was a Portion of his Fathers
Goods and Substance; surely this was not man's own corrupted Nature, nor any
faculty or power thereof, for that remained still with him: And therefore it
behoved to be the Grace of God.

PROP. 8. Whereas I. A. expounds, All men to whom the Grace of God has
appeared, Tit. 2. 11. To be all Ranks, Stations and Qualities of men, etc. This
his Exposition contradicts his own Doctrine, who so fiercely does oppose the
appearing of Gods Grace, not only unto all particulars, but also to many or
most of the Nations of the Earth, who belong to some of the Ranks, Stations and
Qualities of men, such as these numerous and great Nations in the East and
West Indies, and other remote places, to whom the Doctrine of the Gospel was
not in Paul's time, nor perhaps since outwardly Preached, at least to most of
them. Nor can I. A. show where all men signify any definit number, and that
the smallest part also of mankind. And when Paul spoke of his warning and
teaching every man, his sense is clear, that he excepted none, but still as he
had occasion, he Preached the Gospel freely unto all, telling them, That they
should repent and believe, that they might receive the remission of their sins
through Jesus Christ; who had died for them, and was risen again. But I. A.
says, There are many Nations as well as persons for whom Christ died not; and
these for whom Christ died not, are not exhorted to believe that Christ died
for them; except they shall first make choice of and embrace him, for their
Lord and Savior, as the Gospel offers him. But this is a strange inconsistency
and contradiction? How can they or ought they to embrace him as their Lord and
Savior, if they are not to believe that he has died for them, even when the
account of Christ his dying for mankind is Preached unto them. It God require
men to believe in Christ, it is certainly upon reasonable and equal terms; some
foundation or ground for such a belief is to be made known unto them, As that
God is Merciful and ready to pardon their by past sins; which yet cannot be if
Christ has not died for them.

PROP. 9. Lastly, whereas I. A. does argue, That the Doctrine of Universal
Grace, destroys the Efficacy of Grace, and makes the Effectualness thereof
depend upon man's will, to choose or refuse as he pleases, and so the Grace of
God shall be subordinate to man's will, which is absurd: To this it is easily
Answered, that the Grace of God is still effectual in its Nature, even when it
does not actually work the Salvation of all; for as much as it is sufficiently
able to work it, where it is not resisted, even as the Fire is effectual to
Melt the hardest Metal, if the Metal be duly applied to it, but if the
Metal be removed from the Fire, that the said Metal is not Melted, is not
because of the Fire, its not having efficacy enough, but because the Metal is
removed from it, so the Fire still retains its efficacy as it had before.
Again, the efficacy of Gods Grace depends not on man's will, seeing the will
of man does not influence or excite the Grace of God to make it operate; but on
the contrary, it is the Grace of God that does influence or excite the heart
and will of man, without which it cannot do any thing toward man's Salvation;
and therefore the Grace of God is never subordinate to the will of man, as I.
A. does falsely infer. And whereas I. A. upon this head, Calls the Grace of
God, that can be resisted, (so as the Souls Conversion may be hindered by man's
resisting it) ill natured, and false Grace; and moreover adds, that he will
have nothing to do with such Grace that can be resisted, he speaks here too
rashly and presumptuously* for do we not read of some in Scripture that
resisted the Truth, and also the Holy Ghost? As Stephen charged the Jews, that
they did always resist the Holy Ghost, as did their Fathers; and yet according
to I. A. his Principle, he might as well say, He would have nothing to do with
the Holy Chest that can be resisted, and charge it as ill natured and false,
which were Blasphemous to affirm. Notwithstanding the same, I. A. forgetting
himself a few Lines after, says, We may indeed resist both the means and
motions of Grace, and not improve Grace, as we should and might too: But (says
he) God makes it still eff^ctual to the growth by him designed. This is a
contradiction not only to his former Assertion, but to it self, as implying
that men may improve Grace further than God designed they should. Another very
absurd Assertion I find alleged by him, as if Grace did not incline men to
perfection, and so there cannot be any resistance of it in that respect. But he
may as well say, God does not command perfection, and so not to be perfect is
no sin; for certainly whatever God commands, his Grace inclines men to; yea, it
is his Grace in their Hearts, that is a Law, and command unto them. In the
close of this Section, I. A. falls on to dispute against the posibility of
the falling away of any from real beginnings of Sanctification, the which
because he does it so overly and barely, not bringing Arguments for what he
says, but merely giving us his own private conjectures on some places of
Scripture which are alleged on both sides, as also because it is altogether a
digression from the Queries, I shall not insist upon particularly to refute.
Only for a service unto those, who may desire Information, as touching the
thing it self; because of the seeming contrariety of some places of Scripture,
which hold forth the state of some in the Grace and favor of God, as
unchangeable and not liable to any alteration of falling away from the same,
are to be understood of the State of such persons, after they have come to such
a growth in Grace, so that perseverance in the same is a reward given them of
God, with a respect to their Faithfulness and diligence, wherein they have been
formerly exercised. And such especially is that place, Rev. 3. 12.

CHAP. XVI.
IN my Examination of I. A. his Survey of the 15 th. and two other Queries,
which are the last: I design to be very brief, finding little or nothing in all
that he objecteth against us, on these heads, but mere quibbling and trifling,
together with some manifest abuses and perversions, part of which I shall take
notice of, leaving other things of less moment to the Readers own
consideration. And indeed were it not for the worth, and serviceableness of the
things themselves proposed in the Queries, and to give to my Native Country, as
well as unto other places, a new occasion to Read and Consider those Queries,
and the weightiness of the things proposed in them, I had not taken the pa^ns
to put Pen to Paper in Answer to I. A. notwithstanding his many abusive
reflections against me in particular, considering of what small repute or
esteem he is among his Brethren; for although he appears in his Book, as some
great Pillar mightily concerned in his Brethrens Quarrel and Cause, yet so
small is their esteem of him, or of his work (as it seems) that they have
suffered him to lie in Prison in the Tolbooth of Edinburgh for want of Money to
pay the Charges of his Book, as is not our to many in this place: It is like I.
A. will be more provident the next time he engages against the Quakers, to get
John Hamilton, who has so highly commended his work, or some other to secure
him, from the next inconveniency of that sort.

First of all he begins on this Query, to Quibble about the word [ should] as
if the Inquirer did mean, by these words, That men should not be perfect; as if
these called Ministers did teach, that it was not men's duty to be perfect, or
as if it were not commanded; whereas by the word should, is only meant the
event or attainment, and not the duty, as sometimes the word does signify; a
thing most common in ordinary Speech, as when one says, if such a man had
lived long, he should have been Rich, or he should have been Wise, etc.

Next he alleges, I abu^e some worthy men, because I had cited some, as
holding a Divine condescendence, or (...) and as if the same did consist in God
his remitting or nullifying his Law, in its obligation; but this is a gross
perversion, for I did not mean any such thing thereby, as I. A. does allege,
but only that God out of his infinite goodness and wisdom has given unto men,
under the Gospel Dispensation, a Law that is so Gentle and so full of Clemency,
as that by the same he requires no more of any of us, but according to the
measure of Grace and Strength he does afford unto us; and still as our Strength
and Ability is Increased, the obligation of the Law becomes the greater upon
us. Hence it is, that he who is Faithful in every respect to the measure of
Grace which he has received, is indeed a perfect man, and does please God,
although he be not equal in his attainment unto others, who have more given
them: For to whom much is given, much is required; and to whom less is given,
less is required; which is most clear from the Doctrine of Christ, in his
Parable of the Talents.

And whereas I. A. does plead against the possibility of perfection in this
Life, by diverse Arguments deduced from a misapplication of some places of
Scripture; I shall only point at the defects of his Arguments in general, which
shall suffice to every one of them, if duly applied in particular. 1. One
great defect of his Arguments is, that the most they prove is, That man of
himself, without the Grace and help of Gods Spirit, cannot attain to
perfection; which we do not deny, but this hinders not, that by Grace he may.
2. A second defect is, that his Arguments prove, That the Saints had their
Imperfections and sins, before they were fully washed and cleansed from them,
which we also acknowledge, but this does not hinder, that some time or other,
they witnessed a perfect cleansing before death. A third defect is, his
confounding ^he States and Conditions of the Saints, to wit, Their weak Estate,
when they are but in the warfare, and struggling against sin, with their Last
and final Estate, wherein they have overcome, and got the Victory. And lastly,
to mention no more, his misapplying the word or term perfect, when it is taken
in an higher sense, to the lowest condition of a sinless state, as in the Case
of Paul, when he said, Philip. 3. 12. He was not as yet perfected, where he
^eaneth, certainly, that he had not attained to the highest pitch or condition
of Holiness, that was attainable in this Life; which notwithstanding does not
hinder a sinless perfection; for although Adam was Created in a sinless
perfection, yet certainly he was to have gone on to a higher state of
Perfection: And we Read of Christ who had no sin at all, that he was made
perfect through Sufferings. Again, when Christ said, I work to day, and to
morrow, and the third day I am perfected: This cannot signify that he had any
sinful Imperfection before that time; but his being perfected the third day,
signifies that his work was then to be done, and so that he was prepared for
the Glory that he was to receive thereafter.

Again, whereas he makes some show of bringing our Arguments or Reasons for
Perfection, I find not my self concerned to Vindicate those Arguments, as
managed by him; because he does not propose them, either in matter or form as
they do require; as also that he alleges diverse Arguments as used by us in
the Case, which I know not, if indeed used by any of us. Nor is it my work at
present, to bring Arguments for our Doctrine, that being already done by
others, and partly also by me; but to Answer I. A. in what he has against the
same.

He alleges, that Paul must needs have been in that very condition, which he
there describes, Romans 3. 14, 15, 18, 23. and consequently there can be no place
for the figure called Metaschematismus, as I did allege, except I will say,
that Paul then did not with his mind serve the Law of God. But how weak and
frivolous is his ^cason here? Could not Paul in the same discourse, speak of
something that was truly his present conditions, and of some other thing that
was not? Is it not clear that James does so in his Epistle, when he says of
the Tongue, Herewith Bless we God, and herewith Curse we men. My Brethren these
things ought not to be so. Now according to I. A. his highly admired Logic,
James behoved to be both a Blesser of God, and Curser of men at the same time,
seeing he uses the first person to express both, and the like Impertinency I.
A. is guilty of, in saying the word cleanses, 1 Ioh. 1. 7. Being in the
present Tense, imports the Sanctification of Believers to be imperfect in this
Life; for the word is also used in the present time. And second by I. A. his
reason, the word justifies, Romans 8. 33. imports an imperfect Justification,
contrary to I. A. his express assertion.

Again he alleges, that the words in Ecclesiast. 7. 20. There is not a just
man upon the Earth that does good and sins not; Have the Verb in the
indicative Mood, and not in the Potential signified frequently by the second
future, as I did affirm. But this is a bareevasion, and no direct Answer to my
Assertion? And I say again, the second future, even that of the indicative, may
be turned into the Potential Mood, as it is often at other times, because the
Hebrew Language has no Potential Mood distinct by it self. Again, whereas he
urges, That Solomon must needs understand Actual Sinning, and not a bare
possibility of men's sinning, for who would be ignorant of that? To this I
Answer, that Solomon did not mean a bare possibility, but such a possibility as
did infer the great danger and hazard that men were under to sin, if they were
not duly watchful: And although all men did know this, yet they did need to be
admonished of it; for some parts of the Scripture are for admonition, and
putting us in remembrance, and not barely for Information. How often does the
Scripture tell us, that all men are Mortal, and must die, which yet none are
ignorant of, although they often forget that it is so, and therefore need often
to be remembered. But by I. A. his Logic, either men are ignorant, that they
shall die, or the Scripture says so in vain. Who sees not here, the weakness
of I. A. his Reasons, which I am already weary to repeat, or spend my time and
pains on such stuff; and therefore shall have to an end of the whole. Only I
cannot but take notice, with what confidence I. A. does conclude, That the
Apostles and Prophets their Writing the Scriptures, was an Action surely
defective and i^perfect, as to the exact and complete degree of Love to God and
men, etc. But where does he read any such assertion in Scripture? Or by what
consequence does he prove it? Suppose they did not what they did in the highest
degree, that men could attain to; this does not prove any sinful defect in what
they did. For it did sufficiently Answer to the exactness of the Law, if what
they did was, with all that degree of Love to God and men, that was possible
for them, at that time to perform.

CHAP. XVII.
J. A. in his pretended Answer to the 16 th Query; first of all begins to
accuse the Inquirer, As guilty of a lewd Calumny, in charging his Brethren, for
holding Salvation by Self-works, and Self-Righteousness; whereas they disclaim
Salvation by the best works of the Saints. But I. A. in this, as in other
things, does grossly abuse his Reader, and falsely accuse the Inquirer. For does
not I. A. know, that to Query a thing is no positive conclusion, either for or
against it. And albeit the Inquirer did know, that in words ye cry down all
selfworks, and self-righteousness; yet he had but too much ground to question
you, about them, seeing ye are generally found so much practicing them; and if
they be not so much as useful means or helps of Salvation, why do ye both so
much practice them and plead for them, as I. A. has done at great length, for
Preaching, and Praying, and Singing without the Spirit, all which are nothing
but Self-righteousness. Another fault that I. A. commits here is, that he
confounds the meritorious cause of Salvation, with the subordinate and
instrumental means thereof. For although those called Protestants deny the
Saints good Works, that are wrought by the Spirit, to be strickly the
meritorious cause of Salvation; yet generally, or for the most part, they deny
not, that they are means of Salvation, and necessary in order thereunto, which
yet I. A. seems here altogether to deny. And as to that place of Scripture
cited by I. A. to prove, that the Saints are not saved by any work of
righteousness, even wrought by the Holy Spirit in their hearts, viz. Tit. 3. 5.
He could not have brought a more convincing Testimony against his false
Doctrine, than that very place: For after that Paul said, Not by works of
Righteousness, which we had done, (viz. by any power of our own) he immediately
adds, That God saves us according to his Mercy, by the washing of
Regeneration, and renewing of the Holy Ghost: Which Regeneration and ^enewing
of the Holy Ghost, comprehends the whole work of Sanctification in the Saints.

And here I. A. go^th on at his old rate of multiplying false accusations and
perversions and perversions against us: Some of the chiefest whereof I shall
briefly mention. 1. That we hold a Popish Justification. 2. That in one of our
Books called, A Confession of Faith, p. 21. We deny to be justified by
Righteousness received of us by Faith, and also by a Righteousness imputed unto
us. All which are most gross Forgeries and Slanders, for the words in that page
21. say expressly. That acceptance with the Father is only in Christ, and by his
Righteousness made ours, or imputed unto us. And the said Book denies not that
the Righteousness of Christ is received by Faith, that is the Gift of God, but
both that Faith and imputation, which is only and alone the Creatures act, or
work without the Spirit of Christ, we do justly deny to have any place in our
Justification. 3. Whereas in the said Book, our Friends allege, it is not Acts
of Righteousness as done by us, nor as inherent in us as Acts, by which we are
accepted of God, and justified before him, but by Christ the Author and worker
of those Acts in us, and for us, etc. He most grossly perverteth the sober and
honest intent of those words, as if by them, they understood, only that they
hold not themselves justified by all Acts, as Blasphemy or any other gross sin.
But who sees not that this is a most gross perversion, for certainly, all
Righteous Arts of all sorts they exclude, when they say, not by Acts of
Righteousness; and therefore when they say, it is not Righteous Acts as Acts,
whereby we are justified, their meaning is most plain and obvious, as Acts
being understood, to be only, even as Acts of Righteousness, and not simply and
barely as Acts; though upon this mere Grammatical Quibble I. A. builds all
his loud clamor against them. But I. A. should know better, that when the
Sense is obvious, a word may be understood, that is not expressed in the
Sentence, as so it is in this present Case. A fourth gross Perversion of his,
that he says of me, in my Book called Quakerism no Popery, I affirm, That we
are justified by our inward Graces immediately, I. A. does understand, that I
mean without all respect to Christ, which is a most gross perversion; for the
express words of my Book are these following, The Righteousness of God and
Christ by which we are most immediately and nearly justified, is Christ
himself, (and then I add) and his work of Righteousness in us by his Spirit, So
that I am so far from excluding Christ, that I say in the first place, Christ
himself is our Righteousness. A fifth gross Perversion of I. A. is, that in my
defunction of Justification, I give no other material cause of our
Righteousness before God, but only our Inward Graces; whereas in the said
definition, I mention expressly Jesus Christ, as being the ground and foundation
of our Justification, both in what he has done and suffered for us, without
us, and as really and truly indwelling in us. A sixth perversion of his is,
that I confound Justification and Sanctification together, making no imaginable
distinction betwixt them; and that because I say, we are justified by inward
Righteousness, and sanctified by the very same. But this proves not, that I do
not distinguish them, for one and the same thing may have a respect to
different operations, as well as to different Causes. But this reasoning of I.
A. is as one would argue, that when a Malefactor is both Condemned and punished
for his Crime, that his Sentence of Condemnation, and his punishment are one
and the same, without any imaginable distinction betwixt them. As also that his
Condemnation and guiltiness are the same, seeing by his Crime he is both guilty
and condemned. But as to Justification and Sanctification, that they are
distinguished (although sometimes in Scripture, one and the same word does
signify both) I willingly grant, and do expressly mention them as distinct in
my Book, which I need not here repeat.

And whereas I. A. does not only accuse me in particular, as holding a Popish
Justification, but says further, That Bellarmine himself was never more Popish
on that Head. Surely this his assertion proceeds either from great ignorance or
something worse. For Bellarmine de justif. lib. 5. cap. 17. holds, That good
works do merit Eternal Life condignly, not only by reason of Gods Covenant and
acceptance, but also by reason of the work it self; so that in a good works
proceeding from Grace, there may be a certain proportion and equality unto the
reward of Eternal Salvation; and to the same purpose writes Gabriel Vas^uez, a
Papist: But no such thing is affirmed by any of us, nor by me; but on the
contrary, in my Book called Quakerism no Popery I altogether deny the merit of
the best works; as it signifies an equality of worth to the reward of Eternal
Life. Nor do I in any other case, or sense allow the word merit, with a respect
to the best works of the Saints, but in that sober and qualified sense used by
diverse of greatest note among those called Reformers among the Protestants, as
Melanction and Bucer, and also by the Fathers so called, and which is agreeable
to Scripture, which calls Eternal Life the reward of good works, now reward
and (...) are relative ^^rms, as Richar^ Baxter (highly commended by I. A.
elsewhere) does acknowledge. And not only the said Richard Baxter a great
English Presbyterian, but diverse of the best account in the Episcopal way, as
particularly H. Hammond do hold, that the Saints are justified not by Faith
only, but by Repentance, Love and New Obedience, as well as by Faith, as
Instruments of Justification; and necessary conditions requisite thereunto, and
that Sanctification in the order of Causes is prior to Justification. And James
Durham a great Scots Presbyterian, in his Commentary on the Revelation,
Digress. 11. says, That such who rest upon Christ for Justification, and
acknowledge his satisfaction, ought not to be blamed as guilty of Popery;
although they hold that Repentance, Love and other Spiritual Virtues and Graces
are necessary to Justification as Faith is. Seeing then we have some of the
greatest note, both among those called Presbyterians and Episcopalians who
agree with us, in the Doctrine of Justification; it must needs proceed from
great prejudice, and untowardliness in I. A. to charge us, as being guilty of
Papery, in that, for which we have not only the Scriptures abundantly to
warrant us, but diverse also both Episcopal and Presbyterian, of the best
account, to vindicate us. And as for Henry Hammond, a man of singular esteem in
the Episcopal* Church in Britain, whereof I. A. is a pro^^s^ed Member; he does
not only agree with us on this Head of Justification, but also on many other
very great and weighty Heads of Doctrine so fiercely opposed by I. A. as
particularly in those following. 1. That Christ has died for men. 2. That
there is no absolute decree of Reprobation. 3. That Gods Grace is Universal. 4.
That beginnings of Regeneration may be fallen from. 5. That these words of
Paul, Romans 7. 14, 15. concerning his being Sold under sin, are a
Meta^chematismus, and not the present State that Paul was in. And I. A. is
extremely ignorant, if he know not, that an exceeding great number, if not the
greatest, of the most judicious persons of the Episcopal Church both in Britain
and Ireland, are of the same mind with the said H. Hammond in these things, who
therefore are so far from esteeming I. A. a Patron, or Advocate of their
Church, that they cannot but judge him in so far at best, their Adversary.

Moreover, the great prejudice of I. A. against us appears in this, that
because I deny all merit strictly considered, he infers most absurdly, that
if Justice will not exact the very rigid rigor of the Law from us, and take
the very summum jus, we think to merit our Justification by our Inherent
Righteousness at Gods Tribunal. This I say is an absurd inference, and smells
ranckly of deep prejudice, and perverseness of Spirit, in I. A. in opposition
to which, I say, that unless God did not only not exact in his Justice, the
rigid rigor of the Law, as he terms it, but did not also pardon and forgive us
freely for Christ's sake, multitude of sins, so as not only to remit us a Penny,
but many thousands of Pounds; neither we, nor any man living could be justified
at Gods Tribunal, by the greatest Holiness attainable; for all that the best of
the Saints can attain unto; of Holiness or Righteousness, is but their duty,
and therefore can be no ransom nor redemption, unto God, for the lest by past
sin; far less, for many that they have formerly committed.

And whereas in my Book aforesaid, I charged. I. A. and his Brethren, to be too
much one with the Papists, in the Doctrine of Justification; both of them
denying that the Saints Justified by Christ indwelling in them, as Luther
expressly Taught in his Commentary on the Galatians: And also denying that Gods
Justifying his Children is an inward Sentence, or Dictate of his Spirit
immediately pronounced in their hearts; to which the said I. A. can give no
reply, but a mere evasion, and falls on a fresh to accuse us of Enthusiasme,
which being already Answered in the former part, I need not here to repeat.
Only I cannot but take notice, how ignorantly I. A. opposes the word or term
immediate, to the use of means, which I have already refuted, and showed how
immediate Revelation, such as the Prophets and Apostles had, does very well
consist with the use of means: And so I willingly acknowledge, that true and
right means, are as Vessels, whereby ordinarily our Spiritual Meat and Drink
are conveyed to us, sometimes in the use of one mean, sometimes in the use of
another; but I hope, when we Eat and Drink, that which is conveyed to us, we
Eat and Drink it immediately, See, Taste, Savor, and Handle, and Feel it
immediately, and can well understand, when the Meat is indeed in the Vessel,
and when it is empty; and therefore I. A. his comparison in this respect, does
altogether halt, and is impertinent.

Another great impertinency and abuse I observe in I. A. that whereas I. A.
blamed our Friends, for saying, We are not justified by Acts of Righteousness
(...) Acts; grossly inferring, that thereby they understand, that they are not
justified by sinful Acts, as Blasphemy, Murder, and the like; ye^ h^ himself
(...) the same kind of Expression, as to Faith; saying, The Saints are not
justified by Faith, as it is a (...) Act: And according to I. A. his Logic, he
means, they are not justified by all works, as Blasphemy, Murder, Unbelief,
according to the maxim cited by him, A quatenus ad omne sequitur
Vniversaliter. Nor is he less Impertinent to accuse me of a self contradiction,
because I distinguish Faith, as it is both receptive and operative; for even
the receptive Faith, I hold it to be a work, and also wrought, not only in the
Soul, but in some degree by it, as a co-worker through the operation of the
Holy Spirit. And I say again, to affirm that the Saints are not justified by
Faith, as it is a work, is too nice, and subtle a distinction, unless they mean
thereby, as work wrought by them, and as having an equal proportion to the
reward of Eternal Salvation. And in this sense, that may be as well said, we
are justified by Love, Repentance, and all the Acts of men and Spiritual
obedience, but not as works done by us, and having that quality of proportion
to Eternal Life.

I shall not insist to Answer particularly I. A. his pretended Arguments
against Justification by Repentance, and Conversion, and inward Acts of
Righteousness, as proceeding from the Spirit of Christ in Believers. The whole
force of his reasons being founded on a bare Assertion, that has been often
sufficiently refuted both by us, and diverse noted men in the Epis^^pal Church,
as if Paul did o^pose Faith and all works, or the inward work of Regeneration,
and Renewing by the Holy Ghost, when he says, We are not saved by Works; and
the contrary is manifest from Tit. 3. 5. already cited. As for his saying, That
our Souls are of great price in the sight of God, and yet do not merit Heaven,
and consequently nor the best Works, although they are said to be of great
price with God. I grant, neither our Souls, nor our Virtues merit Heaven, nor
Redemption, as merit signifies equality: But seeing God has counted our Souls
so dear, as to give so great a price for them, as the Blood of his Dear Son,
they may at least be said to have some dignity or worth (which is to say merit)
in them; otherwise God would never have given so great a Ransom for them, if
the Souls of men, in respect of their Nature and Being, had not been of great
value, which is all I understand by the word merit, as used by any of us. And
truly for our part, we very rarely, or never use the word merit, as with a
respect to the Saints best works, unless, when we are constrained, to bear our
Testimony against the ignorance and rashness of those, who so undervalue, and
reproach the Blessed Spirit his works in the Saints, as to call them not only
unclean and underfiled with sin, but sin it self, for which God might justly
condemn them to Hell, as some have not been afraid to affirm.

I take notice also on this Head, how I. A. does acknowledge, that Repentance,
Love and Hope, are necessary to Justification, by way of presence, and
existence, but not as conditions or qualifications required in order to
Justification, which is another frivolous and groundless distinction; for
seeing the Scripture does equally press our Repentance and Conversion, that we
may obtain Forgiveness and Justification, as it does Faith. The one is
certainly as much the condition as the other. And it is not Faith barely
considered, which has the fitness to receive us into the Favor of God, and
his acceptance, but as it is accompanied with sincere Repentance and Obedience;
for as it is a most unfit and incongruous thing, that any man, while remaining
in his unbelief, should be admitted into Friendship and Favor with God, so it
is no less unfit, and unagreeable to the Wisdom and Holiness of God, to receive
them into his Friendship and Favor, as his Children, who remain still
Rebellious and disobedient against him.

As for I. A. his last Assertion on this Head, consisting of above three pages;
wherein he only beats the Air, and fights with his own shadow, upon a gross and
perverse, but altogether groundless surmise; as if the Quake^s did deny any
imputed Righteousness of Christ, in what he did and suffered for us, but as it
is inwardly wrought and inherent in us; for we most willingly and sincerely
acknowledge, that the Righteousness of Christ, in what he did and suffered for
us outwardly in his own person, is imputed unto us for Justification; and so
much I did acknowledge in my Book already mentioned: But we further say, that
all to whom that is imputed, which Christ did and suffered for us outwardly,
must witness a real and true Conformity both to the Death of Christ, and also
to his Holy Life and walk, without which, all men's imputing it unto themselves,
is but an airy Dream and Imagination.

There is yet another gross perversion used by I. A. in his pretended Survey or
Answer of the sixteenth Question; as if the Quakers so called, Seem to deny
that there was any Spiritual Worship, in the time of the Old Testament; And
thus because it is said in the Query, that Christ set up the True Worship in
Spirit and in Truth above 1600 years ago; but nothing but great Ignorance or
prejudice, can from this infer, that there was not any degree of it in the
World in former times. And I. A. might as well argue against the Scriptures,
that because God says in the last days, He would make a New Covenant with the
House of Israel, and Write his Law in their Hearts; That therefore nothing of
this sort was formerly in the World. And thus I have done with I. A. his long
and tedious pretended Survey of this Question, having omitted nothing that
seemed unto me Material; and having found in his whole Discourse consisting of
about 19 pages, scarce any thing, but gross mistakes and perversions.

CHAP. XVIII
HEre again I. A. in his pretended Survey to the 17th and last Question,
begins with a most gross perversion, As if the Quakers (because they would
have men to cease from all their own works, merely acted in the strength of
man's Will, and natural Power, without the supernatural and Spiritual aid and
assistance of the Spirit of God) would have men, to be as senseless Trunks
doing nothing; the bare Rehearsal of which is sufficient Refutation.

Another charge, little less gross is, That the Quakers hold only Babylon to be
within in men's hearts, for which he cites the aforesaid Book called, The
Principles of Truth, in several pages. To which I Answer, Although the said
Book says, That Babylon, etc. is ^ithin, yet it does not say, it is only
within, but on the contrary it plainly affirms, that all who are in outward
Worships (without the leading and enabling of the Spirit of God) painted over
with glorious Words, but inwardly full of Abominations, belong to the Kingdom
of Babylon. And well may that unclean and deceitful Spirit, that acts all
such persons who are levened and governed therewith and thereby, be called
Babylon, by a Figurative Speech, even as the Soul of a man is commonly called
the man, which hinders not, that the people in whatsoever Profession they may
be, who are acted by that evil and Antichristian Spirit, are Babylon. And as
for the Pope, and Popish Church; as we do cordially join with the best and most
sincere Proantests against them, as being the great and principal Members of
that Scarlet Whore Mystery Babylon, in whom Antichrist or that Antichristian
Spirit has its chiefest or most principal residence, (and therefore in no
respect can be said to favor the Pope, or Popish Church, on that or any
consideration, although we with the Salvation of the worst,) so we most freely
declare, that wherever we find any degree or measure of the same Spirit of
Antichrist, and Babylon, as too much of it is to be found in I. A. and too many
of his Brethren* we cannot acquit them, from being Members of the same
Antichristian body; although in this our upright and honest Testimony we expect
neither the kindness of the Pope, nor yet of I. A. far less the Popes Wages or
reward, for being so kind to him, as I. A. does most falsely and grossly allege:
And diverse of our Friends have suffered deeply under the Popish Power, for
bearing a Testimony against him and them; which neither I. A. nor his Brethren
have ever done, but sit warmly at home, without exposing themselves to any
suffering on that account.

Having thus, as briefly as I could, given an Answer to I. A. his Book, against
us, omitting nothing that seemed to be material; I shall neither trouble the
Readers nor my self, with his two Postscripts, to Answer them in particular.
The substance of the first Postscript against me, being already Answered in the
foregoing Sheets, as to what is any wise material. Or if he suppose any thing
is omitted, let him mind me of it in his next; and withal Write an entire and
thorough Answer, to what is already said, both here, and in the Treatise called
Quakerism no Popery, which he has only but here and there nibled at: And I
may, possibly (if God give me freedom and convenience) return him a ^urther
Answer. (...) at present I suppose he has work enough to lie on his hand, and
needs no more.

As for his Postscript against, or for Doctor Everards, Ghost, as he calls
it: I find not my self concerned to Answer him therein, nor defend every word
or Opinion of his, seeing he never went under that Name or Designation with us:
Albeit I must needs acknowledge, both my Friends and I,(such of them I mean as
have read his Book) have a great love and respect to his memory, which all I.
A. his bitter Revilings against him, shall never be able to defame: And we
believe the said Everard has indeed had rare and singular gifts of
Understanding and Openings of Scripture from God, and withal a good measure of
Integrity and zeal for the Truth, according to the time, and Dispensation he
was in and in that respect does truly deserve to be accounted among the
Witnesses of Truth in his day, whatever imperfections attended him otherwise;
or suppose some mistakes of Judgment in some things, or not so warily
cautioning some of his words, as could have been wished. Although I judge that
I. A. does seek to fix or fasten upon him diverse errors of Judgment, of which
he is not guilty, by reason of deep prejudice against him: Partly, whiles he
takes the said John Evrard's words too Literally and Superficially, which are
to be understood more Mystically and Figuratively, and partly while he takes
that as spoken absolutely, which is but spoken comparative, and by way of some
Similitude, and but in some respect.

But before I make a full close, I shall only take notice of two gross and
absurd Assertions, (waving others to another opportunity) in his Postscript to
me. The one is, that the Pope and his Clergy had the true Power and Authority
of Ordination, and calling Ministers before the Reformation, neither as
Christian, nor as Antichristian. Not as Christian, or else all Christians would
have it, nor as Antichristian, seeing these two terms are not contradictory but
contrary; for many things and persons too, are neither Christian nor
Antichristian. To which I Answer, Every true Minister or Pastor has his
Anthority to Execute his Function; as Christian, as nor being a strict and
formal reduplication, but taken specifically; seeing to be a Christian is as
necessary to every true Minister of Christ, as to be a living Creature is
necessary to be a man, or to be a man is necessary to be a Soldier, or
Magistrate, or Lawyer. And whereas I. A. says, That Christian and
Antichristian are not contradictory terms, seeing many persons are neither
Christian nor Antichristian I Answer again, as they are taken indefinitely,
they are not contradictory, but as restricted to such as bear the Name and
Profession of Christianity they are perfectly contradictory, so that every one
that professes himself to be a Christian, (such as the Pope does) is most
certainly either Christian or Antichristian.

The other gross Assertion of his is, That the Church of Rome, was still a True
Church, and not Babylon, until the time of Reformation, viz. about the time of
the Council of Trent, or Luther's arising, with some others to witness against
her; notwithstanding she did hold many fundamental errors, and thus because her
errors were not so discovered and demonstrated unto her, before as since that
time. But what a miserable shift and evasion this is, and how contrary to
Scripture, and the Judgment of the most sound of all Protestant Writers, I
leave the Sober Reader to judge. For does not the Scripture plainly declare,
That Mystery Babylon was to rule over the Nations, and deceive them, and Drink
the Blood of the Martyrs and Witnesses of Jesus for many Hundreds of years? And
when was it, that she deceived all Nations? Was it only since the Reformation,
or rather was not her chiefest tim^ before the Reformation; for since the
Reformation many Nations are come to see her Abomina^ions more than formerly.
And when was (...), That the Kings of the Earth has committed Fornication with
her? Has it not been for many hundreds of years bygone, rather than since the
Reformation, when they have begun to hate her, and burn her flesh with Fire, in
some sense? And when began she to drink the Blood of the Saints? Only since
Luther's days, or the Council of Trent: Surely none who has the least
knowledge of Church History, but will say the contrary, and acknowledge that
she has been a Bloody Murtheress for diverse hundreds of years long before the
Reformation, and consequently was no true Church of Christ. For not only her
unsound and corrupt Doctrines, but her wicked Life, and especially her slaying
the Witnesses of Christ, And exalting her self over the Kings and Emperors of
the Earth, above six hundred years ago (at least) with many other things to be
charged against her, utterly inconsistent with a true Church, does altogether
make her to be no true Church for many hundred of years before Luther. And the
Lord wanted not Witnesses sufficient to demonstrate her Errors unto her, many
hundreds of years before Luther; for in every Century God raised up his
Witnesses against her, as the Church History does plainly and fully relate.
Moreover she had both the Scriptures of Truth to Witness against her, and also
Gods Holy Checks and Reproofs of his Spirit in her Conscience, that was instead
of a thousand, so she wanted not demonstration of her Errors sufficient to
render without excuse for many hundreds of years before Luther's time. And now
let all sober Protestants judge, who does most favor the Harlot Babylon, I. A.
or we; for by I. A. his Doctrine, she is but a Young Woman, as yet, and ^carse
^ad time in the World, to bring up her Daughters of Fornication to that Age and
Stature the Scripture declares. How much more true is the Testimony of those
Protestants, who date her rising above a Thousand years ago, her whole time
being numbered in Scripture to contain 1260, or 1290. days at most, signifying
according to the Pro^hetick Style of Scripture so many years; the period or end
of which time sincere Protest^ants are looking for as near approaching, when
she shall fall as a Millstone cast into the Sea, and never rise again. But by
I. A. his account, she began not to rise, till little more then a hundred years
ago; and consequently before her fall, more then a thousand years are yet to
expire, which is too glad tidings unto her; but they are false, and too sad
tidings to the people of God, if that they were true.

THE END.

