THE Pretended Yearly Meeting OF THE QUAKERS, THEIR Nameless Bull OF
EXCOMMUNICATION Given forth against George Keith, From a Party or Faction of
Men that call themselves the Yearly Meeting, which they would have to be
received, as the general Judgment, and Sentence of the Quakers.

With a brief Answer to the same, showing that for his Zealous and
Conscientious opposing their gross Errors, and reproving the evil and wicked
Practices of them in Pensilvania, whom they own to be their Brethren,
particularly their Persecution of G. Keith, and some of his Friends, that party
has Excommunicated him.

Printed for R. Levis, 1695.

At the Yearly Meeting in London, the 17. of the 3d. Month. 1695.
THis Meeting taking notice of the Judgment and Advice of the last Yearly
Meeting, concerning George Keith, and inquiring whether he had Answered the
Sense and Advice, which in the Name of the Lord, that Meeting then delivered to
him, does find that he has not only not followed the Christian Advice and
Judgment of that Meeting; but has Rejected it, and Printed against it, denying
it to be the Judgment or Sense of the Yearly Meeting, and affirming that
Meeting that gave it forth, not to be the Yearly Meeting, but a party or
Faction.

And also, That he has, since the last Yearly Meeting, been very troublesome
and burdensome to Friends in publick-Meetings in and about this City, as was
Testified in his presence by many faithful Friends, who were Eye and Ear
Witnesses thereof. And in this Meeting the said Geo. Keith, did openly Read a
Paper of his, containing Reflections, Accusations and Exceptions against diverse
Friends, that are members of this Meeting, in which Paper he Iustifleth himself
in those things, for which the last Yearly Meeting Reproved and Censured him,
and in what he has Printed since. And being afterward desired to come into
the Meeting again, and acquainted with the great dissatisfaction which the
Meeting had concerning him, with respect to what he had printed, spoken and
done against Truth and Friends; he brake forth into great disorder, and very
unseemly behavior, uttering many bitter and unsavory Expressions, and in a
very angry manner rose up, and departed before the further Sense and Judgment
of the Meeting could be given him.

All which this Meeting taking into their weighty Consideration, and being
fully satisfied, both by his Printed Books and other outward Evidences, with
respect to matters of Fact, and by that Divine Sense, which in the openings of
the Heavenly Life, ran as a mighty stream through the meeting, and was
confirmed and sealed by many living Testimenies, born in the Name of the Lord,
and in the powerful demonstration of the Holy Spirit; That the said Geo. Keith,
of late has been, and yet is acted by an unchristian Spirit, which has moved
and led him to stir up contention and strife in the Church of Christ, and to
cause Divisions, Seperations and Breaches amongst them that profess the Truth
and that the tendency of diverse of his late writings and actings has been to
Expose the Truth, and the Friends thereof to the Reproach of the World, did
unanimously agree, and declare it to be the Sense and Judgment of this meeting;
And it is the sense and judgment of this Meeting, That the said George Keith is
gone from the blessed Unity of the peaceable Spirit of our Lord Jesus Christ,
and has thereby separated himseif from the Holy Fellowship of the Church of
Christ, and that whilst he is in an unreconciled and uncharitable state, he
ought not to preach or pray in any Friends Meetings, nor he Owned or Received
as one of Us, until by a public and hearty Acknowledgment of the great Offense
he has given, and hurt he has done, and Condemnation of himself therefore, he
give Proof of his unfeigned Repentance, and do his endeavor to remove and take
off the Reproach he has brought upon Truth and Friends, which in the love of
God, we heartily desire for his Souls sake.

Signed by appointment of the Yearly Meeting, and in behalf thereof as their
Act, which is to my own certain knowledge. Benjamin Bealing.

A brief Answer to the foregoing Nameless BVLL of Excommunication
A Paper bearing this Title, At the Yearly Meeting in London, the 17th of the
3d Month, 1695. And having at the end of it these following words, Signed by
the appointment of the Yearly Meeting, and in behalf thereof, as their Act,
which is to my certain knowledge, Benjamin Bealing, came to my House, and was
delivered to some in my Family, the 17th of this Instant 1695; the which Paper
mentions no sort of People, nor what sort of yearly meeting it came from; and
tho it is signed by one Benj. Bealing, who says he signed it by the
apoointment of the Yearly Meeting (yet he tells not what Yearly Meeting) did
so appoint him; and whereas he says to his own certain Knowledge, is that
enough? How does he make it appear to others, that it is to his own certain
knowledge? Is it either Christian or Human, or agreeable to any civil
Constitution, or Religious Society, to give forth a defamatory Paper in the
Name of a People, and not tell who or what that People is? And tho I do not in
the least pretend ignorance, so as not to know some particular persons who have
had a main hand in it, and whose work principally it is; yet it appears not
whom they mean by what they call the Yearly Meeting; if granted it comes from
that called the Yearly Meeting of the People called Quakers, as whether they
mean only such a select number consisting of two persons, sent up to London,
from every County in England, and Wales, or from every Quarterly Meeting in the
several Counties, together with them they call Public Friends, or Friends of
the Ministry, who assume a Power to make Laws, and give forth Edicts or Decrees
to bind and oblige the Consciences of all these many thousands in the three
Nations, and other places of the World, that go under the outward profession
and denomination of Quakers, and profess to be one Body of People with them.
And that this select number of Ministers, and chosen members from the several
Counties, who in great part are Ministers, and Pe^^^^ners paid by the
respective Counties for that Service, and often designedly chosen to bring to
effect something contrived beforehand by a particular Cabal of some particular
persons, excluding generally others of the same Profession, whom they own to be
in Unity with them, from being members in the said Yearly Meeting, or from
being privileged to meddle in Church Affairs with them. If this is meant by
the Yearly Meeting, that has sent this Paper to me; I disown all such
constitution of a Yearly Meeting, as not only not being warranted by Scripture,
but contradictory thereunto; and also to the received and approved Doctrine in
R. B. his Book, called the Anarchy, etc. highly approved by the Principal
Teachers and Leaders among the People called Quakers, and has been twice
Printed by them, and great use has been made of it, especially against such as
have differed from them about some particular cases, and circumstances of
Church Discipline and Government. For thus he says, p. 78, 79. (giving some of
the differences betwixt the Romanists, and the generality of these called
Protestants on the one hand, and the People called Quakers on the other hand)
That whereas those in matters of difference, only allow these of the Clergy, so
called, i. e. the Ministry, to give a Judgment with other select persons
chosen, the People called Quakers exclude no Member of the Church to give his
Judgment. See further to the same purpose, p. 81.85. And I further say, For any
number of men to assume a Power, in an assembly, to extend to all others, as
suppose many thousands, that what judgment, or sentence they shall pass,
relating either to things of Religion, or Persons, shall oblige the Consciences
of all these thousands under the same profession, or professed Unity with them,
is directly contrary to that Christian Liberty wherewith Christ has made every
true Christian free, and is a Popish and Tyrannical Invasion, and Usurpation
over Men's Consciences, which as I have formerly born my Testimony against, so I
still do. And it is apparent enough, that such who have given out this Paper
against we, was not any free Meeting, where any that have a mind (owned by them
to be in Unity) might not be present, and freely give their Judgment, without
any Threatening or Terrification, because, to my certain Knowledge, and
Observation, I saw the Door of the Meeting, where that called the Yearly
Meeting Sat, kept by three or four persons, that refused to let in, some that
desired to come in, and yet were owned by them, and it is sufficiently known,
they who keep the Door let in or keep out such as they think fit: But again,
such whom they let in, if they be not of the Ministry, nor any of the two
chosen out of every County, they are allowed only to be there as standers by,
and Spectators, but have no allowance to give any Judgment in the Case, which
has been a discouragement to some Honest Friends, owned by the Yearly Meeting
as Friends, from coming to the Meeting, being only permitted to be there as
Ciphers.

And yet further, It is sufficiently known, the way that they take, either by
persuasions or terrifications to gain the universal and unanimous consent of
them, called, The Commissioners, or chosen Members from every County; as does
plainly appear by the late most absurd and insolent method, more like the
Spanish Inquisition, than a free Assembly of sincere Christians, they did take
with a Preacher, one of their Commisioners, or chosen Members, who having said
in private, out of the Meeting, he could sooner Die, or loose his Right Hand,
than sign to a Paper disowning George Keith, which coming to their
Intelligence, that there was such a Person, but not knowing who he was, they
were so earnest to find him out, that they caused call over the Roll, or list
of the Names of the Persons sent from the respective Counties, to find out this
person, asking them one by one, to find him out, and the poor man, not daring
to lie, owned he was the Person, and being terrified, lest he should be
severely proceeded against by them; he came (with some others to be Witnesses
to his Recantation) and disowned to me what he had formerly said, tho a few
hours before, he professed so great a concern and tenderness of Conscience
toward me. This passage is so considerable an advance toward the erecting the
Spanish Inquisition among the Quakers, that I hope some will be awakened to
take notice of it, and withstand it.

And lastly, Whatever they may boast of their Act against me, as being the
unanimous Act of the Yearly Meeting; yet seeing many present, owned to be
Friends in Unity with them, gave no signification of their owning that
sentence; and I am loath to be so uncharitable as to think they did own it, not
being so much as enquired, whether they did or not, being considered as
Members; and that diverse, some whereof I have a certain knowledge, did
voluntarily and purposely absent from the Meeting, lest any such thing should
be required of them, as to own such an unrighteous Act, tho it had been more
Noble, and more like a free Christian Spirit purposely to have come (if they
had found entrance) and Witnessed against it: But what the design of this
Omission is for them, to send forth a nameless Paper against me, which is to go
over all places of the World, where the People called Quakers have their
Meetings, declaring it to be their sense, That I ought not to Preach and Pray
in any of Friends Meetings, nor be owned and received as one of them; ye see it
is of an universal extent, without all Limitation of places, which is to make
their Yearly Meeting at London, consisting of a few particulars, as Universal
as the Church of Rome makes her self to be; I say, it is worthy of enquiry
what the design is, that such an Edict or Sentence should go forth against me,
from an Assembly or Meeting, who give themselves no particular designation,
Name, or Denomination of distinction from other People, Is it not this plain
Evidence in matter of Fact, that this their Judgment or Sentence against me is
a work of Darkness, acted and brought forth in the Dark, notwithstanding all
their high pretenses to the light, and to act and do all in the light? Is it
not a Birth without a legitimate Father, a Nameless Child, having no proper
Name to distinguish it, as Bastards frequently and Fondlings, have no proper
Names whereby to know their true Fathers?

As for the Contents of the said Bull, as it is nameless, so it may be said to
have neither Horns, nor Teeth, nor any thing of just matter or substance, which
they in particular charge against me, consisting almost wholly in bare
generals, which prove nothing. They alledg they are satisfied, both by my
printed Books, and other outward Evidences, with respect to matters of Fact,
and by that Divine sense, etc. That the said George Keith has been of late,
and yet is acted by an unchristian Spirit. But this is only said, but no
passages in any of my Books brought against me, to satisfy any moderate
inquirer, nor any outward Evidence, with respect to matter of Fact, so much as
alleged to prove their general Charge; and as for the pretense to a Divine
sense, it is but vain and presumptuous, so to judge a Man to be of an
unchristian Spirit, without external Evidence in matter of Doctrine and Fact
brought against me, none of which they have brought. And seeing by that which
they call a Divine Sense, they have falsely and unjustly judged me, without
giving any proof of their charge. I am bold and free in my Spirit to say their
Sense is not Divine, but Carnal, and Sensual, for no Divine Sense will lead any
man, or men to be false Accusers. But whereas they say, the Divine Sense in the
openings of the Heavenly Life, ran, as a mighty stream, through the Meeting,
they writ nonsensically, confounding the Life, with the sense that the Life
gives, for it is most improper to say, That men's sense runs through a Meeting,
tho the Life that gives it does in the Assembly of the Faithful, as it seals
to a Righteous Judgment; but this their Judgment being unrighteous, it has
neither the Divine Life nor Sense to feal it, but that a Power of Darkness
might run through the Meeting, and deceive many by its false appearance of
Life, is probable.

In my Paper I delivered to them at their Meeting, I demanded them to let me
know what they had against me, either in Doctrine, or Manner of Life and
Conversation, and was most willing to have been brought to a Trial before them,
making my just exceptions against some persons, from being either Evidences
against me, or Judges in the Case, because of their known Prejudice; but
without all due Trial. they have given out this Nameless Bull against me,
having nothing of any real substance or matter of just occasion against me; and
therefore it is but waste, either of Time or Paper, to give them any other but
a general Answer to their bare general Charge, having sufficiently, by way of
Anticipation, to this their rash and imprudent Act, as well as injurious,
cleared my self of all these general Charges they cast upon me, in my Paper I
delivered to them at their Yearly meeting, and in the brief Narrative of the
chief and most material Passages of discourse that passed betwixt some of them
and me in the said Meeting at two several times, both lately Printed together,
wherein I answer at length to their general and indefinit Accusation, That I
have not followed the Christian Advice and Judgment of the last Yearly Meeting;
but if they had not been Conscious to themselves, that that part of it I did
not follow, and for which they have given out this rash, and injurious Sentence
against me, was unchristian; why did they not particularly, and distinctly
mention that Advise, Which was to clear the Body of the People called Quakers,
and their Ministers from the gross Errors charged on some in America, which I
have with a good Conscience refused to do, because to my certain knowledge, and
which I offered at their Meeting, to prove some of their chief Teachers,
present in the said Meeting, are guilty of diverse of the same gross Errors
charged on some in America, and which I have in part sufficiently demonstrated
in Print, in that called a List.

And as I have occasion, may further demonstrate out of their own Printed
Books. But let none think strange that I have not made this discovery of their
gross Errors till now, at least so to expose them in Print, for I sincerely
declare that the worst and grossest sort of their Errors, whom I now expose to
public view; I did not know they were guilty of them, or that they were to be
found in their Books but of late times, and after I had discovered them, to my
own certain knowledge, I was willing to exercise Christian Patience; if by any
means, they might have been persuaded, to have Corrected them, having privately
warned and admonished some of them, and having also at diverse times in a
general way of Testimony in their hearing, declared against these Errors. But
instead of their hearkening to my Testimony, and amending these Errors, they
became my Enemy for telling them the Truth; and now they having cut off all
hope or expectation, that they will receive any brotherly Advice from me, by
this their most Hostile way of appearing against me, I am constrained thus to
appear, not in any Enmity against them, but in Love to the Truth, and the
Honor of it, which I ought to Love and Honor above all men, and also in Love
to the Souls of many ignorant persons, whom they have Blinded and Darkened, and
led into these gross Errors, to the great danger of the Salvation of their
Souls, that they might be undeceived. And whereas they make it a matter of
Accusation against me, that I denied that Paper, called A true Account, which
they call The Christian Advice and Judgment of the Yearly Meeting, to be the
Judgment or Sense of the Yearly Meeting, affirming that Meeting that gave it
forth, not to be the Yearly Meeting, but a Party or Faction, which is the only
true particular thing that I observe in all their Nameless Bull, that they
bring against me. Is this so heinous a matter, to deserve Excommunication, and
totally to be Rejected and disowned, not only as a Minister, but as one of that
People. We see to what a great height they are come to, in a short time, Rome
did not arise to that height in full ten times the length of time, that this
which calls it self the Yealy Meeting, and Church of Christ, has raised it
self unto, within the space of a few years; So that if a man will but speak a
word concerning the Yearly Meeting of the People called Quakers, That it is not
a free Meeting not duly constituted, tho he can ever so Evidently proven, as I
have done sufficiently, no less censure shall pass on him than an
Excommunication, and off-cutting. But thanks be to God, whatever humane
Authority they usurp, to cut me off from some particular visible Meetings or
Persons, they have no Divine authority or Power, to cut me off either from
Christ, or his faithful Followers, and their Bull is but an empty blast of Air,
that has not killed, nor I hope ever shall kill the Life of my Soul, or that
Holy Fellowship, I have had, and still have with a faithful and sincere Remnant
among that People; and for all their emnity hatred, reproaches, revilings,
curses, woes and plagues that they have poured out against me, in public
Meetings, both in Preaching and Prayer, acted to be sure by an unchristian
Spirit, I return them Love and Goodwil, blessing for cursing, good for evil,
earnestly Praying that God may give them Repentance, and Forgiveness, for this
their unchristian way of Proceeding against me, and for all their other Errors,
and that they may be recovered both out of the many gross Errors, they are held
in, by the power of Darkness, notwithstanding their high pretenses to Light;
and also out of their height of Pride, and self Exaltation, which God in his
great mercy grant, if it be his blessed will; and it is my great comfort, that
notwithstanding their great Provocations, I never felt a Curse, or any thing
like it, either in my mouth, or heart against any. And they may be greatly
ashamed to accuse me, in this their nameless Bull, as they do; if they were not
greatly hardened, that I have been very troublesome, and burdensome to Friends
in public, meetings, since the last Yearly Meeting, which being but a bare
general without mentioning any particular words or deeds, or gesture, wherein I
was such, I might reject as little worth noticing.

But I cannot well let pass their exceeding great Partiality, in taking no
notice of the great Abuses, and most unchristian usages I have received from
time to time, from some of their chief Preachers by most uncivil Interruptions,
contrary not only to the Gospel Order, but to the Law of the Nation, whereas
none can truly say, that ever I interrupted any of them; also by their moving
themselves to Preach and Pray, and moving one another, and so closely speaking
one after another on purpose to Exclude my Testimony; and their most bitter
Reflections, Revilings, Reproaches, false Accusations, false Prophecies and
Curses that diverse of them have poured out against me, as particularly Charles
Marshal, W. Penn, W. Bingley, and J. Vaughton, both in Preaching and Prayer;
and tho G. Whitehead has carried it a little more smoothly, than those others,
yet his prejudice has sufficiently vented it self also against me in public
Meetings; yea, even in Prayer, and such profanations of Prayer in the pretended
Exercise of their Extemporal Gift, assuming a most sinful liberty to vend their
sinful passions, and animosities against them, at whom they are prejudiced, as
it is abomination in the sight of God, so it is most loathsome and offensive to
Men of tender Spirits, and gives to many occasion to say, a set Form of
Prayer, is less offensive, and more Edifying than such passionate Rapsodies,
that too many use, and yet do call them Praying by the Holy Spirit. But
whatever pretenses these men have against me, who have published this Nameless
Bull, in accusing me of being Contentious, causing Divisions Seperations and
Breaches among Friends, and other bare general, but false Charges, which
require no particular Answer, the bottom and foundation of all this, and of my
being thought so burdensome and troublesome to them in Meetings, is because they
cannot endure sound Doctrine, especially their deep prejudice against my
frequent Preaching the great necessity of Faith in Christ Crucified, as
necessary to Regeneration, Justification and eternal Salvation, and also the
Resurrection of the Dead, and Christ's coming without us, in his Glorified
Body, to Judge the Quick and the Dead; all which have seemed as new and strange
Doctrine to them, and some have more directly, and some more indirectly opposed
it, and about the time of the last Yearly Meeting, William Edminson at the Bull
and Mouth, in the hearing of hundreds, as well as in my hearing, boldly
affirmed, It was not needful to Preach Christ's Death and Sufferings in Friends
Meetings. William Penn lately affirmed at Ratcliffe-Meeting, (where he falsely
accused me to be an Apostate,) That Friends see not cause to Preach that
Doctrine much, because all England and Christendom, have an Historical Belief
of Christ's Death, and Sufferings, and it does not profit them; and as it was
the Dispensation of the Apostles to Preach Christ outwardly, it is our
dispensation to Preach him inwardly. W. Bingly has Preached, That People that
come to Meetings generally believe well enough in Christ without, but they want
to have Christ Preached within, that they may believe in him within; thus
making two Faiths. And to the same purpose has Charles Marshall frequently
Preached; and also several times he has said in Public Meetings, It is not
needful for a Man to stand up, and Preach Christ's Death and Sufferings from
Morning to Evening, seeing it was generally Believed, And also several times he
Preached in public Meetings, as at Grace Church Street, and at
Devonshire-house, That the Conscience must first be purified, before Faith can
be received. Which false Doctrine I did several times contradict in public, by
showing that by true Faith the Conscience is Purged, and they go along together
and by the Lively Exercise of Faith, the Conscience is gradually Purged, and
not all at once, And John Gratton said about the time of the last Yearly
Meeting, in the Public Meeting in Grace Church Street, To believe that Christ
died, was the Drunkards Faith, and the Whoremongers Faith; adding further, That
none had Benefit by Christ's Death, but such as are Dead with Christ.

And thus generally they Declare their great ignorance of the true. Faith of
Christ's Death and sufferings, Resurrection, and Ascension, and Intercession,
making it only an Historical and Literal Faith; whereas as there is an
Historical and Literal Faith only of it, that Drunkards and ill Livers may
have, as they may have of Christ within Notionally and Historically, so there
is a living effectual Faith of Christ's Death and Sufferings, wrought by the
Living Power of God in the Hearts of sincere believers, which Power does in
Gods ordinary way accompany the sincere Preaching of the Gospel, even
outwardly, and other outward helps, and means of Justification, and all men
have a Benefit by Christ's Death and Sufferings, to wit, a day of Visitation,
and any Light and Grace that is inwardly given to men, and the way and manner
to come to witness a Dying and Rising with Christ, is to believe by the
Operation of the Spirit of God, that Christ Died for Men's Sins, and Rose again,
and to believe that great Love of God, that he spared not his Son, but freely
gave him for us, and also to believe the great Love of Christ, who freely gave
himself for us, by which Faith men come to Witness a being Dead with Christ,
and also a being Raised with him; and seeing this true Faith is wrought in
God's ordinary way by Preaching, therefore the true Faith of Christ's Death and
Sufferings ought to be one of the first and chiefest things that every true
Minister ought to Preach, and build up his hearers in, in order to bring them
to Communion with God, and Christ in Spirit; and that they may witness God and
Christ, to dwell in them, and rule in them.

Another great cause of their passing this unjust Sentence against me, is, That
I refused to call in the Book Printed since the last Yearly Meeting, called,
The Causeless Ground, wherein I expostulate the case, not only with respect to
their too great connivance of the vile and gross Errors, whereof I proved some
guilty in Pensilvania, owned by them to be their Brethren, but also, with
respect to their Connivance at, and covering the evil practices of their
Persecuting Brethren there, and their most illegal and arbitrary Proceedings
against me, contrary to the Fundamental Laws of all Nations, to the danger of
my Life, as well as of my Reputation; for the more particular account whereof,
I refer the Reader, to the above cited Book, called, The Causeless Ground, and
my Printed Answer to their Proclamation, and also to the Printed Trial,
relating to Th. Budd and me, in the Book called, New-England's Spirit of
Persecution, etc. And all this they have passed over, both in their former
Yearly Meeting, 1694. and also in this last, 1695, without the least censure, a
sufficient Evidence of their partiality, and that a prevailing Faction, or
Party of corrupt Men, rules in that called the Yearly Meeting, and that
therefore what Edict, or Judgment goes forth from that pretended Yearly
Meeting, ought not to be called the Act, or Judgment of the Body of that
People, it being sufficiently known that many, even owned by them, as their
Brethren here in England, and elsewhere, have greatly been dissatisfied with
the Persecution raised against us by them in Pensilvania, and have declared
against it, as well as their other Proceedings. And had all there present at
the Yearly Meeting, so called, been unanimous in their unjust Sentence against
me, and ten times more a greater Number with them; yea, suppose they can get
this their unjust Sentence against me, confirmed by all their Quarterly and
Monthly Meetings in England, which yet I think it will be a very hard, if not
impossible thing for them to obtain, yet this does not prove that they are not
a Faction or Party, seeing it is sufficiently known, that for many Years past,
there has been a Breach amongst the People called Quakers, in relation to the
Church Government of Women, and other Circumstantial Things, imposed by a Party
among them.

Now of them, of the other side, that oppose some humane Impositions, called by
some of the Imposers, but civil things, as many do well own, and approve me in
my public Testimony against the vile Erors, held by some of the contrary part;
so I know not any that disown me, or that approve of this Sentence, that this
Party that call themselves indefinitely, the Yearly Meeting, have given against
me, and yet there is a considerable number and body of them.

And lastly, Whereas they seem to blame me, for my departing out of their
Yearly Meeting, before the further sense and Judgment of the Meeting could be
given me, which they say I did in a very angry manner. But they should have
said diverse of them, particularly George Whitehead and Will. Penn did in a
most angry manner, most unjustly and falsely accuse me, and behave themselves
most unchristianly toward me, as will appear by the Printed Narrative I have
made public, and I know no undue or unsavory Expression (which they only
Charge me with in general) I uttered among them, the greatest passion I was in,
was that of Grief, to see their most unjust and inhuman proceedings; and I
remember not in the least, that the Meeting, or any in the Meeting desired me
to stay, after I rose up to go, and therefore I see not, why I should be blamed
for going, having no occasion to stay longer with them, nor any expectation,
they would hear my just Complaint, or give me any Trial, but as it has come to
pass as I expected, they would, have condemned me without any Trial, fair or
unfair.

The 28th day of the 3d. Month, 1695. G. Keith.

FINIS.

