New-England's Spirit of Persecution Transmitted To PENNSILVANIA, And the
Pretended Quaker found Persecuting the True Christian-Quaker, IN THE TRIAL OF
Peter Boss, George Keith, Thomas Budd, and William Bradford, At the Sessions
held at Philadelphia the Nineth, Tenth and Twelfth Days of December, 1692.
Giving an Account of the most Arbitrary Procedure of that Court.

Printed in the Year 1693.

The Introduction.
TO the end that all Impartial People may have a right understanding in the
present Prosecution, I intend to give a short Relation of the first rise and
cause and ground of this present Difference, and Persecution.

In the Year 1689. by the good Providence of God George Keith was earnestly
invited to remove from his Plantation in East-Jarsey, to keep a School in
Philadelphia, which he did; but kept an Usher and spent a great part of his
time in Reading, Meditation, Visiting Meetings, and answering the Conscientious
Doubts and Questions of many People; and there was a more than ordinary seeming
Satisfaction in general among the People called Quakers, that they were so
favored with the assistance of George Keith. But alas! this great love was but
short lived; and as in other Cases one Extreme begets the contrary, so in this;
for their love and respects to him were never so great, but now the Envy and
Hatred of many exceeds; and that upon the account of his Christian Testimony.
For it was but a little time that he had been amongst us, and preached the true
Faith of Christ, both without and within, but some began to be dissatisfied,
and whispered it about in private, which, when he came to understand, he
labored in much love and tenderness to undeceive and satisfy those that he
came to know were dissatisfied; and some did receive good Satisfaction; but
others cast his Labors of Love behind their backs; and much whispering and
backbiting there were in private against the ^octrine held forth by G. K. and
some began to contradict his Testimony in public Meetings; but yet this were
born with, and no open Difference until one William Stockdale accused Geo.
Keith of Preaching ^wo Christ's, because he held forth (as necessary to our
Salvation) The Faith of Christ as he dyed for our Sins, rose again for our
Justification, and ascended into Heaven and is in Heaven in the true and entire
glorified Nature of Man, our Mediator with the Father; and also, That Christ
was spiritually present by his Light and Life, in all his Children. Whereupon
he dealt with him, and endeavored much to convince him, but not prevailing, G.
K. laid it before a Meeting of them of the Ministry, but they did nothing in
the matter, but chiefly blame and contradict G. K. in his Doctrine. Whereupon
G. K. did again renew his Complaint to them of the Ministry at the Yearly
Meeting at Philadelphia the 7th Month, 1691. desiring to know their sense and
judgment, viz. Whether to preach Faith in Christ within us, and Faith in Christ
without us, was to preach Two Christ's, or One? and six Meetings were held in
debate about this matter, and yet nothing done in it: So this past on, and some
Months after Tho Fitzwater openly in a Monthly Meeting accused G. Keith, That
he denied the sufficiency of the Light; which G. K. denied, but T. F. said, he
would prove it at the next Monthly Meeting; which being come, G. K. called on
T. Fitzwater to prove his Charge, which he endeavored to do, and brought W.
Stockdale for his Evidence, but to no purpose, only W. Stockdale again renewed
his Charge against G. K. in the open Meeting, to the admiration of many, to see
his great Ignorance and Impudence; but seeing that T. F. was not like to prove
his Charge against G. K. Thomas Lloyd, and some few others with drew, yet the
generality of the Meeting stayed, and after some time it growing dark, John
Jennet, (a great stickler against G K.) desired that the Meeting might be
adjourned till the next day, which was unanimously agreed unto, and also by
Tho. Fitzwater; the next day all Parties appeared, and great and long
Contention there was most part of that day betwixt George Keith and Tho. Lloyd,
Arthur Cook, etc. G. K. affirming and arguing for the Necessity of the Faith of
Christ crucified, etc. the others denying, and arguing, That the Light wit^in
was su^^cient without the Man Christ Jesus, etc. but finding that the stream
went against them, T. Lloyd, A. Cook and some others withdrew, and the Meeting
(consisting of at least Sixty Monthly Meeting Members proceeded and gave
Judgment against T. Fitzwater and W. Stockdale, the substance of which was,
That they should forbear preaching and praying in Meetings till they had
condemned their Ignorance and Unbelief, etc. but at the next Quarterly Meeting,
a Party withstood the said Judgments, and said, That the Persons being
Ministers, none but them of the Ministry were fit to judge; which many thought
relisht too much of Popery; yet notwithstanding many showed their dislike
thereto, Tho. Lloyd, Arthur Cook, Sam. Jenings, etc. denied ^he ^^^d Meeting
and Judgment; and then it was that T. Lloyd's Party changed their time and
place of meeting against and contrary to the declared mind of their then
Brethren, who gave their Reasons why they consented not to the changing the
Time and Place of meeting; but prevailed nothing with them, for the next first
Day George Keith and Party met at the ^^ual time and place, and Tho. Lloyd and
party went to the Meeting house at the Center, which made the first Separation.
Now the Difference being thus far advanced, caused much discourse and enquiry
into the matter by all sorts of People, and great flocking to Meetings there
was, both in Town and Country, where G. K. came, and his Testimony had much
Reception in the hearts of many; which being perceived by Tho. Lloyd and Party,
the only Expe^ient they could devise, was to condemn G. K. whereupon the 20th
of the 4th Mon. 1692. Twenty Eight of them called Ministers met together at
Philadelphia, and without ever so much as acquainting G. K. published a Paper
of Judgment against him, condemning him as a Person without the fear of God
before ^is Eyes, etc. which done, Thomas Lloyd, Samuel Jenings, Arthur Cook,
John Delavall, and others made it their business to follow G. K. from Meeting
to Meeting, violently opposing his Testimony, and sometimes making use of their
Magistratical Power to effect their designs, which caused great Contests and
Confusions; and G. K. from time to time complaining of their Injustice, for
condemning of him without all Hearing or Trial, upon a time in Chester-County,
Tho. Llyod said, George, if thou think thy self agrieved by that Judgment,
there is Relief for thee; thou may appeal to the Yearly Meeting, which is now
approaching; which advice G. K. followed, and made an Appeal to the said Yearly
Meeting, and proposed twelve particular Heads to be considered, discoursed of
and resolved by the People called Quakers at the said Yearly meeting, and that
they might have Timely notice of the said Appeal, and be the better prepared to
answer it, G. K. procured the said Appeal to be printed. Which was no sooner
done, but they Issued forth a Warrant, and apprehended William Bradford the
Printer, and John M"Comb, who (as they were informed) had disposed of two of
the said Papers, and committed the said W. B. and J. M. to Goal; and also
seized all the said Papers they could meet with, and took away a good quantity
of W. Bradfords Letters, tending to the disabling of him to work for his Wife
and Children; and upon pretense of another Warrant granted without any
Conviction, signed by Samuel Jenings and Robert Ewer Justices, John White, the
Sheriff, took Goods out of the Shop of Will. Bradford half as much more as the
said Warrant was for. Whether these Actions are most like to the poor despised
and persecuted Quakers, or their Persecutors, is left to all Impartial People
to judge.

Here follows a Copy of the Mittimus.
WHereas William Bradford Printer, and John M"Comb Tailor, being brought before
us, upon an Information of Publishing, Uttering and Spreading a Malicious and
Seditious Paper, entitled, An Appeal from the twenty eight Judges to the
Spirit of Truth, etc. Tending to the Disturbance of the Peace and Subversion of
the present Government; and the said Persons being required to give Security to
answer it at the next Court, but they refusing so to do,

These are therefore by the King and Queens Authority, and in (...)
Proprietary's Name, to require You to take into Your Custody the Bodies of
William Bradford and John M"Comb, and them safely keep till they shall be
discharged by due Course of Law. Whereof fail not at your Peril; and for your
so doing, this shall be your sufficient Warrant. Given under our Hands and
Seals this 24th of August, 1692.

These to John White Sherriff of Philadelphia, or his Deputy.

Arthur Cook, Samuel Jenings, Samuel Richardson, Humphery Murrey, Robert
Ewer.


Now though they had got these two poor men into Goal, and though all sober
People did resent their Proceedings very ill, and as proceedding from a cruel
Spirit of Persecution; yet the next day they met again, in order to proceed
against G. K. and several other Persons in the like manner, and sent for two
other Justices that were not called Quakers, to assist them in this work of
Prosecuting several seditious and dangerous Persons, that were like to subvert
the Government! as they pretended; but contrary to their expectation, the said
two Justices that were not called Quakers, viz. Lacy Cock a Lutherain, and John
Holme a Baptist, declared their dissent from them in these Proceedings,
signifying, That the matter was a Religious Difference among themselves, (viz.
the Quakers) and did not relate to the Government; John Holme particularly
advising them To send for Geo. Keith, and let him interpret his own words, and
upon a hearing of him, if it any way appears that he strickes at the
Government, I will (said Justice Holme* join with you against him with Heart
and Hand; but this Advice had no weight with them; whereupon the said two
Justices left them, and our New modelled Persecuting Quakers being warmly bent
to root out Sedition forsooth! proceeded in their Work, and as they had judged
G. K. in their Spiritual Court without all Hearing or Trial, so in like manner
they prosecuted him in their Temporal Court without all Hearing: Why! to have
done otherwise would have given the Lie and Contradiction to their Spirit of
Discerning, which justice Cook declared to be such, That they could judge of
matter of Fact without Evidence; and therefore it would have been ridiculous
for them to have sent for G. K. and asked him, Whether he was the Author of
such a Paper that his Name was to? or to have enquired of him, Whether it was
against the Government that he intended by such and such words therein? No, for
their Spirit of Discerning told them all that, and therefore without more to
do, proclaimed G. K. by the common Crier in the Marketplace, To be a Seditious
Person, and an Enemy to the King and Queens Government: But these Magistrates
would do well to consider the Actions and End of Empson and Dudly, and whether
they have not violated the Fundamental Laws of English Subjects as well as
they, and that in convicting men without Trial, as shall be made appear anon, 1
st. in the Case of George Keith and Tho. Budd, 2 ly, in the Case of William
Bradford, and 3 dly. in the Case of John M"Comb.

1 st. Here follows a Copy of the Publick-Writing that was proclaimed by the
common Crier in the Market place against G. K.

At a Private Sessions held for the County of Philadelphia the 25th of the 6th
Month, 1692. before Arthur Cook, Samuel Jenings, Samuel Richardson, Humphry
Murrey, Anthony Morris, Robert Ewer, Justices of the County.
WHereas the Government of this Province, being by the late King of England*s
peculiar Favor vested, and sithence continued in Governor Penn, who thought
fit to make his and our worthy Friend Thomas Lloyd his Deputy Governor, by and
under whom the Magistrates do act in this Government. And whereas it has been
proved before us, that George Keith being a Resident here, did, contrary to his
Duty publicly revile the said Deputy Governor, calling him an Impudent man,
telling him he was not fit to be Governor, and that his Name would stink, with
many other slighting and abusive Expressions, both to him and the Magistrates;
and he that uses such Exorbitancy of Speech toward the said Governor, may be
supposed will easily dare to call the Members of Council and Magistrates
Impudent Rascals, as he has lately called one in an open Assembly, that was
constituted by the Proprietary to be a Magistrate And he also charges the
Magistrates who are Ministers here, with engrossing the Magistratical Power
into their hands, that they might usurp Authority over him, saying also, he
hoped in God he should shortly set their Power taken from them; which he acted
in a most undecent manner. And further, the said G. K. with several of his
Adherents, having some few days since, with an unusual Insolency, by a printed
Sheet, called, An Appeal, etc. Traduced, and vilely misrepresented the
Industry, Care, Readiness and Vigilency of some Magistrates, and others here,
in their late Proceedings against some Privateers, viz. Babit and his Grew, in
order to bring them to Condign Punishment, whereby to discourage such Attempts
for the future; and has thereby also defamed and arreigned the Determinations
of Provincial Judicatory against Murderers; and not only so, but by a wrong
Insinuation have labored to possess the Readers of their Pamphlet, That it is
inconsistent, for those who are Ministers of the Gospel to act as Magistrates.
--

Now forasmuch as we, as well as others, have born, and still do patiently
endure the said George Keith and his Adherents many Personal Reflections
against us, and their gross Revilings of our Religious Society, yet we cannot
without the Violation of our Trust to the King and Governor, as also to the
Inhabitants of this Government, pass by or connive at such part of the said
Pamphlet and Speeches, that have a tendency to Sedition and Disturbance of the
Peace, a also to the Subversion of the present Government, or to the aspersi^^
(...) Magistracy thereof. Therefore for the undeceiving of all People we have
thought fit by this Publick-Writing, not only to signify that our Proceedure
against the Persons now in the Sheriffs Custody, as well as what we intend
against others concerned, in its proper place, respects only that part of the
said printed Sheet, which appears to have the tendency aforesaid, and not any
part relating to Differences in Religion. But also, these are to Caution such
who are well affected to the Security, Pence and Legal Administration of
Justice in this place, that they give no countenance to any Revilers and
Contemners of Authority, Magistrates or Magistracy; as also, to warn all other
persons, that they forbear the future publishing and spreading of the said
Pamphlet, as they will answer the contrary at their peril. Given under our
Hands and County-Seal, the Day, Year and Place aforesaid.

Arthur Cook, Samuel Jenings, Samuel Richardson, Humphery Murrey, Robert
Ewer. Anthony Morris.


Note, There being an Answer to this Proclamation published in print by G. K.
and T. B. I shall only in this place make these following Observations.

First, They say, At a private Sessions, etc. and then relate a Preamble of the
Government being vested in W. Penn, who had made T. Lloyd ^is Deputy, etc. Did
they think to tell us News in this, or did they think we had forgot Thomas
Lloyd was Deputy Governor? Surely methinks not the latter, since we have been
so smartly remembered thereof by his Agent White, who (when they could not
effect their late great Tax) went about, -- Begging the People to remember the
Poor Gentleman! which many did to their Cost; so that one would think tha^
passage might have been spared: Oh, but it is plain their end therein is to
insinuate, That Geo. Keith being legally and judicially brought before the
Governor to answer to some heinous Crime and Misdemeanour, and that a
Multitude of People were present to hear how he could answer for himself (for
they say, Publicly Reviled, etc.) yet this G. K. like a Rude man, though he
pretends to be a Minister, was so far from behaving himself before the
Governor like a C^ristian, that he fell a Reviling him, and amongst other
scandalous Expressions, said to him, Thou Impudent Man, thou art not fit to be
Governor, thy Name will stink: Certainly their drift was to possess the
Readers with this Belief, as is clear and evident from their following
supposition, or rather suggestion, where they say, He that uses such
Exorbitancy of Speech to the Governor, will easily dare to call the Members of
Council and Magistrates Impudent Rascals, as he has lately called one in on
open Assembly, who was constituted by the Governor to be a Magistrate. Which
also is a base and wicked Insinuation; for George Keith never spoke those words
to any of them as Magistrates or Officers in the Government, neither did he
ever speak to the present Governor all those words together, as is insinuated
by the said Paper, but on the contrary, what he spoke to Tho. Lloyd was in
Monthly Meetings and Religious Controversies, and T. Lloyd has said several
times, That he would take no advantage by words spoke at such times; but we
find them practice the contrary; for on a certain time T. L. stood up, and
affirmed, That G. K. was guilty of Contradiction, and being put to prove it,
said, That fifteen years ago in his printed Books he owned the Seed to be
Christ: Whereupon G. K. said, Thou Impudent man, I do not deny it now, but own
it as much as ever. But by all the diligent enquiry that I have made, I cannot
find that G. K. said, he was not fit to be Governor, but if he had so said, I
query, Whether it was such an intolerable Expression? 1 st. Because its
expressly provided by the second Chapter of the Laws of this Province, That all
Officers and Persons commissionated and employed in the Government, shall be
such as profess and declare, They believe in Jesus Christ to be the Son of God
the Savior of the World, etc. But, 2 dly, The Lloyd its well known, has often
denied and argued against the Faith of Christ, as he dyed for our sins, etc.
And as to G. K. saying, That his Name would stink, T. L. knows in his
Conscience, that it was spoke to him only as he was one of the 28 unjust
Judges, for giving of false Judgment against him, and that without all hearing
or Trial. And as touching the Person whom they say, he called, Impudent Rascal,
it was one whom he know not to be constituted, as they say he was; but his
Brother being so constituted, and refusing to serve, the People of the Town
chose him in his Brothers stead to serve as a M^gistrate within that Town
bounds, which was altogether unknown to G. K. and therefore Paul's excuse, Acts
234. I wist not Brethren that it was the High Priest, might be an Apology for
him. But let us consider the word Rascal; according to Gouldenan's Dictionary,
a Rascal is a Brawler, and Empty Talker, and one that deceives is Neighbor by
false and weak Arguments, and Cole in his Latin and English Dictionary says,
the Latin word Nebulo, comes of the Hebrew word (...) Na^al, and any ordinary
Schoolboy that has but learned his Accidence, knows that Nebulo signifies,
Rascal, Villian, Knave or Rogue, and in Scripture we find the same word, see
Isa. 32. 6. (...) For the Rascal will speak Villiany; and Jer. 29. 23. (...)
They commit Villiany; and as Gouldman in his Dictionary says, a Villian and a
Rascal is of the same Signification. But this Person whom they mention, went
about to deceive his Neighbors by false and weak Arguments, viz. That he did
not expect to be saved by that which dyed at Jerusalem; And that God was not
present in all his Creatures; which Unchristian and Atheistical Principles G.
K. being about to refute in a Monthly Meeting, and holding forth, That God was
present in all his Creatures, this Person stood up, and with much Opposition
Questioning, as Paul's fool did about the Resurrection) said, in a rude and
boisterous manner, What George! Does the Spirit of God speak in Trees?
Whereupon G. K. said (being greatly provoked by his Interrupting of him, and
Unchristian Behavior and Discourse) Thou Impudent Rascal, who says the Spirit
of God speaks in Trees, as it does in men? But to make the thing seem Odious,
the Publishers of this Publick-Writing say, It was in a public Assembly, as if
it had been in some Court, or as if he had been brought before this Magistrate^
(as they call him) upon some Examination, and there, instead of behaving
himself soberly, he presently calls him Impudent Rascal; this they would falsely
insinuate, as also, That before long he will go into the Council Room, and into
the Courts, and there Revile the Councilors and Magistrates, and call them
Impudent Rascals. Oh, the Horrid Impudency of these Men! Let Shame cover their
faces, if they have any left in them!

And whereas they further say, That G. K. with several of his Adherents with an
unusual Insolency having Traduced the Industry, Care and Vigilency of some
Magistrates here, in their la^e Proceedings against some Privateers, etc. and
has thereby also defamed and arreigned the determinations of the Provincial
Judicatory, etc. As if G. K. and several others had printed a Book, and defamed
and arreigned them, and denied their Power of Magistracy; whereas all that
impartially read the said printed Appeal will find that G. K. did not defame
nor arreign them, but they having given a Commission and hired men to fight.
(which was diametrically opposite and contrary to the often declared and known
Principle of the People called Quakers, against a^^ Use of the Carnal Sword,)
it was proposed, amongst other things, to be considered by all faithful Friends
at the Yearly Meeting, whether these men ought not to be condemned and disowned
as Quakers; but it was never intended to deny them to be Magistrates, for as
Magistrates they were obliged to do what they did, and it was Commendable in
them who did so Commissionate and hire men to fight, and also sea^ch the Town
for Arms, etc. But the great Question is, Whether they did not Transgress as
they professed to be Ministers and Quakers? If nay, but that the Care and
Vigilency of these Magistrates here at Philadelphia, (...) Quakers, is worthy
of Commendation, as they intimate, for saving of a Sloop by Force of Arms, how
much more shall their care and vigilency be worthy of Commendation, to raise a
Militia to save and defend the whole Country, it any occasion should offer? but
how steadfast this does manifest them to be to the Quakers Principle of
Refusing in all eases to fight, and that for Conscience, sake, I shall leave
all to judge. I always thought that which was a matter of Conscience to the
Quakers in Old-England, Barbados, and other places, had been a matter of
Conscience to them under a Government of their own, but I find the contrary in
these Magistrates and many others joined with them here: But that which seem^
the most strange to several observing Persons in this place, is, that several
called Quakers in Maryland, Barbados, and other places, that pretend its a
matter of Conscience to them not to bear Arms, yet now will own these here in
that Practice, unless they now think to leave that Article out of their Creed.

In the next place, whereas Peter Boss being offended with the Judgment of the
28.l writ a Letter to Simuell Jenings, being then in Church Fellowship with
him^ showing his dislike thereof; and relling S. J. of some of the Seandals he
lay under, for this they issued forth a W^rrant against him, and put him into
Prison, without ever dealing with him in a Church method, and at the next Court
presented him for the same, to which Court he was bound ^to answer, where he
gave his attendance, with his Witnesses ready, but not brought to Trial,
although much desired by him and his Wife, who urged the Injuries of the delay
thereof.

At the same Court William Bradford and John M"Comb appeared and desired they
might come to Trial, it being greatly to their prejudice to be kept Prisoners,
and saying, it is provided by Magna Charta, That J^stice shall not be delayed
to any, and we being freeborn English Subjects, claim this as our Privilege,
and hope this Court will not deny it us, because not only our Persons are
restrained, but William Bradford's working Tools are detained from him, with
which he should work to maintain his Family.

Justice Cook said, What Bold, Impudent and Confident Fellows are these to
stand thus confidently before the Court.

J. M"Comb, You may cause our Hats to be taken off, if you please.

W. Bradford, We are hear only to desire that which is the Right of every free
born English Subject, which is speedy Justice, and its strange that that should
be accounted Impudence, and we Impudent Fellows therefore, when we have spoke
nothing but words of Truth and Soberness in requesting that which is our Right,
and which we want, it being greatly to our prejudice to be detained Prisoners.

J. Cook, (speaking to W Bradford) said. If thou had been in England thou would
have had t^y back sl^sht before now.

W. B. I do not know wherein I have broke any Law, so as to incur any such
Punishment.

Justice Jenings, Thou art very ignorant in the Law surely, does not thou know
that there is a Law that every Printer shall put his Name to the Books he
prints, or his Pres^is forfeited.

W. B. I know there was such a Law, and I know when it expired.

J. Cook. But it is revived again, and is in force, and without any regard to
the matter of the Book, provides, that the Printer shall put his Name to all
that he prints, which thou have not done.

But waving from that, the Prisoners still pressed for a Trial. To which Justice
Cook said, A Trial you shall have, and that to your Cost too, it may be. And
justice Jenings said, A Trial you shall have, but for some Reason known to us,
the Court defers it to the next Sessions; and that is the Answer we give, and
no other you shall have.

All this time, John White, Sheriff, pleaded vehemently against the Prisoners,
greatly aggravating their (pretended) Crimes; and when complained of, that the
Sheriff, (through whose hands goes all Fines and Forfeitures) should be so
bitter an Attorney against the Prisoners, he cloaked it under the Visor of a
Prothonitor.

So this Court passed over, and the said Persons not brought to Trial, but yet
not wholly barren of Action, nor void of Iujustice; for though they had not only
got W. Bradford into Prison, and taken his Letters from him, (with which he
should work) and his Paper and Books out of his Shop, but also they had got the
Body of John M"Comb, with which one would think they might have been satisfied,
had any thing of tenderness remained in them, the time they committed him being
when his Wife was newly brought to Bed, and who lay very weak in a strong
Fever, and several thought she would not live, and tho he acquainted them of
her Condition, and how destitute his Family was, requsting them to let him go
home, and he would promise to be ready at any time they should call for him;
This they would not grant, but to Prison he was sent; (^ho' to give every one
their due, (...) the Jailer was so kind as to let him go home an hour or two
sometimes in an Evening after it was dark) yet our hot spurred Justices (being
newly booted and spurred with their Five Pound Spurs) being not satisfied with
having his Body, would do what in them lay, to ruin him and his Family; for
whereas he kept an Ordinary, and for his Lisence so to do had paid Governor
Lloyd Twelve Pieces of Eight, which is Three Pound Twelve Shillings for the
last twelve Months before [ No inconsiderable Price for a Licence] yet they now
proceeded to suppress his keeping of an Ordinary, though he had fullfilled, and
in no respect transgressed the Conditions of his Lisence, as will appear by a
Copy of the said Lisence, which here follows verbatim, viz. By the Lieutenant
Governor.
Philadelphia Ss.
JOhn M"Comb requesting Lisence from me to keep an Ordinary in Philadelphia,
and he being recommended to me as a fit and qualified Person for such an
Employ; I do hereby admit and Liscence the said John M"Comb to keep an
Ordinary, or a House of Public Entertainment in the House he now lives in, he
taking care, according to Law, to keep good Orders and sufficient Conveniences
for Man and Horse. This Lisence to continue for a Twelve Month ensuing the date
hereof.

Given at Philadelphia the Tenth day of the 4th Month, 1692. Thomas Lloyd



Now let us hear what great and heinous Crimes are alleged for the suppressing
John M"Comb in his Employ: If he had transgrest any Law, or broke any
Conditions in his Lisence, they ought to have called him before them, and
convicted him thereof, but without ever so doing, they suppress his
so-dear-bought-Lisence, as follows. At a Court held at Philadelphia the 4th of
October, 1692.
THe Court taking notice of John M"Comb's Contemptuous Behavior, as also his
spreading a Seditious Paper in his House, to the Disturbance of the Peace, do
therefore suppress his Lisence, and do Command him not to presume to keep an
Ordinary after the Tenth Day of the next Month, being November, on pain of
incurring the Penalty of the Forfeiture of Five Pound for keeping an Ordinary
without a Lisence: And that notice be given him of this Order.

A true Copy by John White, Deputy Clark.



Note, That the Contemptuous Be^aviour they mention, was his and W. B's
requesting of the Court to come to a Trial, as before is (...); and the
Seditious Paper they mention, was the printed Appeal, which he having bought
two of them, and some Persons happening to see them, got them from him again,
because it suited not with their convenience to go so far as the Printer's; and
J. M. did not buy or receive them to sell again, but his disposing of those two
Papers was accidental, and for which he was imprisoned, and to come to Trial
for it, but this satisfied not these cruel men, for they make that a main
matter whereby to suppress his Lisence [No less than Two Panishments for one
Offence] and yet though they were so zealously warm to prosecute and punish
these Offenders, and which (they said) they could not avoid, without violating
their Trust to the King and Governor; yet without any Violation of their said
Trust they could pass by several others that were much more concerned in
spreading those Papers than J. M. Oh! the Partiality, Deceit and Cruelty of
these Men!

This Sessions passes over, and the said Persons continued under Duress till
the next Sessions, which being come, let us hear the Proceedings, which here
follows, viz. At a Court of Quarter Sessions held by the King and Queens
Authority, and in the Proprietary's Name at Philadelphia the 6, 7, 8, 9, 10 and
12 days of the 10th Month, 1692.
There being present on the Bench, as Justices, Samuel Jenings, Quaker. Arthur
Cook, Quaker. Samuel Richardson, Quaker. Robert Ewer, Quaker. Henry Waady,
Quaker. Griffith Owen, Quaker. John Holmes, Robert Turner, 10th and 12th days.
Lacy Cock, and Anthony Morris on the 12. day.


The Names of the Persons, that presented Peter Boss, George Keith, Thomas
Budd, William Bradford, etc.

Alexander Beardsly, William Carter, John Jennit, Will. Oxly, Emanuel Dauson,
William Allaway, Lewis Thomas, Reece Peter's, John Comes, Christopher Pennock,
Mouns Jones, Thomas Griffith, William Harwood, William Hearn, Will, Finley,
Will. Lawrance.



Observe. That most, if not all of these m^n are known to be highly prejudiced
against G. K. ^. B. and those that join (...) of their zealous Testimony to
Christ without, as well as (...) And John White, Sheriff, is known to be
greatly (...) against them, who pa^kt this jury on purpose to present and (...)
G. K. and (...) as was in some degree well observed by Justice Holme, when
(...) brought in new Presentiments against G. K. in matters concerning their
Religious Differences, for which he was sharply reproved and ^enaced on the
Bench by Samuel Jenings and Arthur Cook, the last saying, They were the
Fathers of the Country, and they had done well, and like honest men, in
bringing in those Presentiments, and they gave them Thanks ^or their care and
pains; but (said justice Cook) if they must be found fault with, who will serve
upon a Grand Jury? and so went on highly resenting those few words justice
Holme had spoke; Arthur Cook not minding that himself had said some little time
before, to a Grand Jury of more substantial men than these (upon their bringing
in a Presentment that did not please him) you are a Company of Infamous Men:
and for which he was presented by the next Grand Jury, (...) supposed that
Presentment was buried in the Clarks study of Oblivion, for we have never heard
more of it.

The 9th day of the 10th Month, Peter Boss called into Court, and set to the
Bar.

Crier, O Yes, Silence is commanded, upon pain of Imprisonment.

The Presentment read,
Philadelphia, the 5th of the 8th Month, 1692. We of the Grand Jury for the
Body of this County, do present Peter Boss, for that he has accused Samuel
Jenings, being a i e. Master-like, as says the English Expositor.
Magisterial Officer, with being an unjust Judge, and of his being Drun^k, and
of laying a Wager with John ^ocum, and for many other soandalous, reproachful
and malicious Expressions, to the Defaming of him, and tending to the
Disturbance of the Peace, contrary to the Law in that case made and provided.

Clark. Peter Boss, What say thou, art thou guilty or not guilty?

Peter Boss, Not guilty in manner and form as there presented.

Clark, By whom will thou be tried?

Peter Boss. By God and the Country.

Clark, Call over the Jury.

Humphery Waterman, Joseph Kirle, Thomas Wharton, Tho. Marle, Richard Sutton,
Samuel Hoult, James Fox, Abraham Hardiman, Nicholas Rideout, Thomas Morris,
Richard Walter, John Whitpane.

Clark. Do thou object any thing against any of these Persons?

Prisoner. Yes, I object against all of them that are called Quakers, because
they are such as I know to be deeply prejudiced against G. K. and all that
favor him, but am willing to be tried by any that are not called Quakers, or
such of them as are not manifestly prejudiced. But they would not allow of his
Exception. Whereupon the Jury were attented. The form of the Attestation, as
follows, viz.

In the Presence of Almighty God and this Co^rt, you shall promise, well and
truly to ^ry and true D^liverance make betwixt the Honorable William Penn,
Proprietary and Governor of this Province, and the Prisoner at the Bar,
according to Evidence.

After which, David Lloyd first, and John White next pleaded very hard against
him, that that Letter did defame Sam. Jenings as a Magistrate, confirming it,
as they pretended, by reading some Passages out of some Law Books, and some
Laws of this Province against defaming Magistrates.

To which the Attorneys of Peter Boss pleaded, That he acknowledged the writing
that Letter, but what was said therein concerning S. Jenings, was not against
him as he was a Magistrate, nor could it be reckoned a Defamation, because
'twas only a private Letter sent to himself, showing his dislike in some
things, and desiring him to clear himself of other gross and scandalous things
that were reported of him, as is usual for one Church Member to do to another;
and they brought a Cafe out of Shepherds Faithful Counselor, that what is said
must be Falso and Maliciose, i. e. falsely and maliciously, otherwise not
actionable. And that if a man speak slightingly of a Magistrate, if it be when
he is not in the exercise of his Office, it is no defaming of him as a
Magistrate, and so no trespass against the Law alleged.

To which David Lloyd replied, That what was spoke against Samuel Jenings,
must needs relate to him as a Magistrate, for take away Samuel Jenings, and
where will the Magistrate be?

And Sam. Jenings said, Take away Sam. Jenings the Magistrate, and where will
Sam. Jenings the Quaker be?

Note, By this it se^meth to S. Jenings that it is as inherent in him to be a
Magistrate as to be a Quaker, and therefore when his Magistracy cease, his
Quakerism (according to him) must cease, and like Hypocrates Twins live and dye
together; but yet he may remain to be Sam. Jenings, when he is neither
Magistrate nor Quaker.

And when his Attornys were a^out further to open the matter, how (...) to him
only as a Church Member, and offered to produce some Pre^^dents in the case,
Arthur Cook, interrupted, saying, They would not have matters of Religion
discoursed there, saying, What must Religion be made a cover to revile and
defame men, by saying, he did not write to him as a Magistrate, but as a Church
Member?

To which G. K. (as his Friend) desired Liberty to speak, as the Law in that
case a^ows, but they were very unwilling to suffer him to say any thing in
behalf of Peter Boss, John White saying, G. K. was not (...) in Curia; but
through much and long Importunity, he was permitted, who then told them, That a
Distinction must needs be allowed of words spoke to a man as he is only in a
private Capacity, and as he is a Magistrate; for when Magistrates, as Arthur
Cook and Sam. Jenings, give us hard words, calling us Ranters, Apostates,
Liars, Wicked and Ungodly men, etc. ye will not say ye give us these Names as
Magistrates; and then if ye can speak to us, not as ye are Magistrates, we may
also speak to you not as ye are Magistrates.

Thomas Harris his Attorney, and G. Keith his Friend, prefered to speak further
to several things that had been alleged by D. Lloyd and J. White, but were
much menaced by Arthur Cook, and so was Peter Boss himself, which was much
resented in the minds of many, that a man has not liberty boldly to speak in
his own defense, nor his Attorneys nor Friends for him, but often when they
were pleading, Commanded Silence upon pain of Imprisonment: Whereupon some
complained, that it was hard that he had not liberty fairly to plead his own
Cause. To which Arthur Cook said, That as a Christian he could bear any thing,
but not as a Magistrate. Which was noticed by many how A. Cook set the
Christian and Magistrate in opposition the one to the other, as if we were not
to expect that when they act as Magistrates, they are endued with Christian
Patience, Meekness, and Long-suffering, as if when they act the Magistrate,
they put off the Christian.

[ Note, That a little before Sam. Jenings and David Lloyd would not allow of
any distinction betwixt the Magistrate and Quaker, and yet now to serve his
turn their Brother Cook grants it: Oh! the Confusion, Deceit and Hypocrisy of
these men!]

G. Keith pleaded further, though with much difficulty, That Peter-Boss being a
Member of the Quakers Church, they ought not to go to Law with him until they
had proceeded orderly with him in the (...) men's Meetings, and given him Gospel
Order; for the things of difference betwixt him and Sam. Jenings relate wholly
to Church Discipline, and belong to a spiritual Court, and not to this.

Da. Lloyd, This is a spiritual Court; for in England they can try Atheism in
this Court.

G. K. But Peter Boss is not accused of Atheism; and if a man profe^^ one
Almighty God, this ^ourt has nothing to do with him for his Opinions or
Persuasions in Religious matters.

Then D. Lloyd read a passage out of a Law Book, That certain words spoke
against a Bishop or Minister, were act ^nable, though (...) actionable which
spoke against a private person; when (said he) is the present case.

A Person standing by, said, May not sin be reproved in a Bishop or Magistrate?
At which they were greatly offended, and caused an Officer to take the said
Person. viz. Ralp^ Ward, out of the Court.

But for the further satisfaction of the Jury, and all others present, that he
did not defame Sam. Jening^ as a Magistrate, Peter Boss greatly pressed to have
his said Letter read, which after some time was done, the with great
Impatience. The which Letter here follows, viz. THe Paper lately published at
Philadelphia by 28. against G. K. and those joined with him, etc. has and is
like to occasion much Trouble and Difference among us, not only because of the
false Things compact in (...), as (...) well known to many VVitnesses, and now
to impose it on all the Meetings, (...) plain down right Popery, and gives just
occasion to all, not only to judge (...) as ^t is for the abuse, but also
inspect further into things, and them these ministering Imposers upon other men's
Consciences, like unto the Roman Clergy. And to show how ill the People do
resent these things, one who was not a Quaker, so soon as the Paper was made
public, says, What D -- lish work is here like to be! a Pack of Fools have
sent their Bud out: what a piece of work you will see in a short time, and how
they will expose themselves, and force others to send it home in Print, says he,
with wo^^e words of some, unfit to mention here, etc. By exposing this your
Edict, you have made all people your Judges, into whose hands it shall come
((...) themselves) for your Unrighteous Judgment, and drawing in those (...)
that have subscribed to they know not what, (...) were not present (...) the
Meetings, so consequently did not hear the words charged on G. K. to be (...)
by him, etc. but have taken all upon Trust, and signed as a man that (...) be a
false VVitness to a Bill or Bond for Money, where none is due. '(...), that
some will see their over-^aste, and repent it, as well as others (...): How can
you expect (...) Act o^ yo^rs will be acconnted Righteous Judgment, to condemn
a man for Words, and cover one another Deeds, as well as (...) word^ in and
among your selves. Has J. S. ever been dealt (...) or his many Enormo^s
palpable gross Miscarriages chargeable upon him, his Greatness and Pride so
Insolent and Lo^ty, none dared to touch him? and for his abuses to a poor
Worm, who w^it to him for Justice and Satisfaction, could have no answer of
said Letter; and being discontented to ^ear him preach to an A^ditory, knowing
his Life to be Unsavory, and an Unjust Judge. I write the second Letter to him
o^ dislike to his preaching, which after he had read (...) it in the Fire: Why
did he not answer it, and get satisfaction from the Aut^or, but that he knew
himself Tardy, resolved to Exercise Bonners Cruelty on my poor paper: And its
matter o^ sorrow (...) diverse among you know enough (...) S. J. but you cover
him and one another, and whom you please to abase, down with him amain; do you
think people are blind, and without sense? be it known, they see, they hear,
etc.

1. Pray let it be quer^ed into, whether it was not true that S. J. did wage
his Horse with John Slocum, to ^ide a Race with their Horses? and whether J.
Slocum did not re^use to take the advantage of him, because S. J. was D^unk,
etc? 2. And pray let it be inquired into, whether S. J. at another time was not
so drunk, co^ld scarce get over the Ship side of Joseph Bryar, when at
Burlington? 3. And pray let it be inquired, whether the said S. J. did not
wickedly in surveyin^ a T^act of Land which Joh. Antrum had actually begun to
do? 4. And pray let it be enquired into, whether S. J. did not take away the M.
adow of Richard Matthews, who being in England, took the Advantage? What the
Effect will be, Time m^st manifest, how Odious he will render others or S. J's
sake, he being a pretty eminent man in London. 5. And pray let be enquired into
the Actions and Abuses of S. J. to John ^keen, deceased, which should have been
answered at Burlington Meeting. 6. And pray let it be inquired into, whether it
was S. J. or J. Simcock that wa^ by two Persons carried to Bed Drunk? 7. And
pray let it be further enquired into, whether it was the said S. J. ^^. Simcock
that was so drunk lost a Coat that was borrowed of another man, etc? Seeing so
many of you have condemned G. K. for words let these Actions be also condemned,
they being as great Pretenders to be Ministers as him. And pray take special
care this be not burnt, as the former, having a Copy of the same.
Peter Boss.



Which being read, Peter Boss produced the Testimonys of several credible
Persons, concerning the matters contained in the said Letter, and pressed hard to
have them read, because they proved some of the things queried, at least. But
they were very unwilling to have them read, saying, it was no evidence unless
the persons were present in Court; (...) it is well known that Attestations in
writing have been often accepted in this Court; and it may be noted, that at
the former Sessions he had his Witnesses ready in Person waiting all the time
of the Court, which was great Charge to him, but by reason of the Extremity of
the Weather, could not be present now: However, at last, through much
importunity they admitted some of the Papers to be read, which here follow,
viz. Concerning a Report which has been about Sam. Jening's riding a Wager with
John Sclocum, I do here testify, That about three Years now past, Sarah
Biddle, Wise of W. Biddle, senior, she being at Burlington, did tell it me
thus, as follows, That she reproving her Son William, who had been riding
hard, she said, his answer was, Why Mother, may not I so well as Sam. Jenings,
he could ride a Race, or did ride one, with John Slocum, and John won his
Horse, but he would not take the advantage of Samuel, because Samuel was
Cacuse, ( John Slocum said) says William to his Mother: This I do here affirm,
that I had it from Sarah Biddles own mouth, and that we understand the word
Cacuse to be drunk.

Mary Budd.
Burlington in West-New-Jarsey, the 1st of October, 1692. Attested before me,
Edward Hemlock, Justice.

Whereas there is a Report of S. Jenings riding a Race with J. Slocum* thus
much I William Bustill do hereby affirm to the truth of said Report, Will.
Biddle, sen. did tell me, that S. Jenings and J. Slocum did ride a Race
together, and that John did win S. Jenings Horse, which was a (...) Gray, and
that which J. Slocum did ride on W. Biddle did buy of J. Slocum* end that it
was at or about the time when the Provinces were divided, and that the Race was
run in some place between Amboy and George Keith's Land in East-Jarsey, as they
Came from Amboy.

October, the 21th, 1692. Will. Bastill.

As concerning a Report of S. Jenings riding a Race with J. Slocum abo^^ three
Years ago, W. Biddle, sen. at Dinner, and (...) Vise in company (...) his own
Horse did tell me, that S. Jenings did ride a Wager with J. Slocum, and lost
his Horse, which I am ready to be att^^^d to, if further need shall (...), as
witness my hand hereunto set, this 2d of Novem. 1692.

Henry Beck.

Memorand. That my Sister Sarah Bainbridge told me, that William Piddle did
(...), that as (...) was riding from East-Jarsey toward his own Horse, he
hea^d a noise, where^pon he looked behind him, and did see Sam. Jenings and J.
Slocum ride after him very ^ast, and J. Slocum said to S. Jenings, I have won
thy Horse as fair as ever any man wo^ ^n, thing in this World.

John Bainbridge.

A concerning the Report that S. Jenings surveyed the Meado^ of Rich. Matthews,
I have this to say, being then and there present, I being assistant at that
time to Simon Charles in surveying Land for Samuel, I went with S. Jenings to
the^ said Meadow, and told him that was the Meadow that I (...) surveyed to
Rich. Matthews: He bid me show him the Lines (...) we went and searched, and
(...) only one (...) or two marked (...) the meadow side, and no more; for
there had been a fi^e, that had not only (...) up most of the Trees there by
the Root, but also the Surface of the (...) it self, so that we could find no
marks in any order; then I produced (...) of the Records of the Survey, which
was the same with this following, viz. Surveyed also that piece of Meadow lying
at the Northwest (...) no^ of the (...) and, extending to the Neck or narrowest
place of (...) same, as it is now marked, all making up the number of 500
acres, (...) notwithstanding Samuel bid Simon p^t it into the (...) he
acceedingly did. Now Elias For being Attorney ^or Rich. Matthews, and hearing
of what Samuel had done, he made application to (...) to Sam. Jenings about
it, and signified to him, (...) could not ^old that Meadow, neither by Equity
nor by (...) testified by me,

Daniel Leeds.
(...) before me Edward Hemlock, Justice
, October. 1. 1692.
Memorandum, That I James Silver, then Servant to Sam. Jenings, (...) Servant's
and Creatures, viz. (...) ^^ating both Servants and Cattle, when not able to go
forwards, and one time broke the Rib of an Ox by his unmerciful Beating, and
taking taking Benj. Moore by the Throat as he was coming of his Bed, bore my
Testimony against it, as unsuitable to the Spirit of Christ, he took occasion
to deal very hardly with me, and let me go almost Naked, and when Winter grew
on, and I complained under the sense of Cold, he threatened to make me creep,
(...) come on my hands and knees to him, like a Dog or Spaniel, or break my
Bones.

Burlington, the 5th Month, 1692. James Silver.

[ Note, This James Silver was a man in years, and a Friend, and one that has
had many Servants himself, whom he thus treated for witnessing against his
great C^^elty.]

John Smith says, That being at Philadelphia on or about the 28th of August,
1692. meeting with Sam. Jenings before his own door, his first Salutation to me
(...), as follows, What! art thou a Keithian, Rascally Fellow, wor^e than an
Infidel, that neither knows Law nor Gospel, must thou p^ate, sorry Rascally
Fellow, I Would call for a Constable, and send thee to the Crew, thou art like
them, a Company of Rascally Fellows; (...) have thee to know, that we are able
to judge both George Keith and the Country. And thus be did revile and call me
Rascal and worse than an Infidel many times over; and this was presently after
he was come from a Meeting, and for no other Cause than saying to one who
hanged up the Proclamation, (against G. K. which they posted up both in Town
and Country* Ye may as w^ll hang the other side forward, for it shows their
^olly, a little Haman-like: This abuse to me was not unlike his former Actions
and Behavior to other his Servants, as instance on a time, James Silver, an
Ancient man, his poor Servant, for showing him his naked Things, and
complaining for want of Clothes, Sam Jenings told him he would make him to
creep on his Hands and Knees, like a Spaniel, and ^ap his back, if he would not
hold his prating, etc.

John Smith.

Note, That several other Testimonies might be here set down concerning S.
Jenings disorderly walking and behavior in his Family and among his
Neighbors, and particularly his Inhumane Whippin^ of his Servant Maid naked in
her Bed, the manner and circumst^^e^s of which I shall here omit for modesties
sake; but these here produced are sufficient to show, that there was cause for
Peter Boss to write to him; and though these Evidences do not prove every thing
queried in that Letter, yet these things being commonly reported abroad, were
cause enough, one would think, for the Quakers to call him to an account, and
search out the bottom of these things, but that he is g^own so so Proud, so
High and Imperious, that none dares to touch him. Nay, lately one of his own
Church Members, no^ coming into Court at his Command, he bid ^etch him
Headlong, and fined him Ten Pound for not coming, and committed him to Goal, to
remain till paid, though the man says, he had no business at Court, and it would
have been to his prejudice to have gone; but a (...) People resenting th^se
Actions of Sam. Jenings very (...), Arth^r Cook said, I ^ll go to my Lord
Judge, and see if I can persuade him. Yet the next day he can put on his
Canonical Robe and imitate a Disciple of the Meek Jesus, and compare himself to
poor Mordecat; and then again before he leaves the Pulpit, and that on a Sunday
or first day of the Week, put on his Magist^atical Robes, and tell the People,
That now he speaks to them as a Magistrate; and because they did not break up
their Religious Meeting at his Command, he calls out, Is there ever an Officer
there? let Proclamation be made iu the King and Queen's Name for all Persons to
depart to their own Habitations, and see if they will dare to sit here. They that
cannot see this man swell^d above the Meekness of a true Minister of Christ,
and transforming himself, like Satan into an Angel of Light, 2 Cor. 11. 13, 14.
I must conclude they are blind, and have lost their senses.

But to leave this Digression, after the reading in Court of as many of the
above cited Testimonies, as they would suffer, the Jury went out upon it, and
brought in Peter Boss only Guilty of Transgressing the 29 Chapter of Laws of
this Province, viz. against speaking slightingly of a Magistrate. Upon which
the Bench gave Judgment, That Peter Boss should pay Six Pound.

And to back the former Instances and hints of the unjust Actions of this man,
take the breviate of a Letter from one of their present Church Members to him,
which is as follows, viz. Samuel Jenings, I perceive thou art no Change^ing,
thou looks like a man for Bulk and Talk, like a Christian sometimes; but really
Samuel, whatever thy self or others think of thee, I do hereby tell thee, and
that under my Hand, That I have met with more truly Noble and Manlike
Treatment, and the Exercise of better Christianity among the Turks, than has
appeared hitherto in thee toward me: Surely Samuel, had thou exercised but
the common sense and capacity of a Rational man, thou could not think that
the Governo^r would send a man three thousand Miles with Instructions to take
care and charge of his Servants, Goods and Stock, should be in a meaner
capacity than his Negro^s, and not have a supply of Nec^ssaries, etc. but this
thou have very irrationally and unmanly denied into me, and both thy sell, and
Wife have proved False and Deceitful unto me: (...) requested me to write for
thee, and promised Satisfaction for my ^abour, and I wrote about 149 Laws of
the Province, and a Copy of the King^ Charter to the Governor, and a List of
the Governo^rs Tenants in the County of Bucks, with the Quantity of Land they
hold, and upon what Ten^^e; b^t (...) a deceitful man thou refusest to perform
thy promise; And know this, that beside thy Promise, I have thy Letter under
thy hand to p^odu^e, as also the Evidence of one of the most Credible Persons
in the Town, whom (...) told, That I had wrot^ a Copy of the Laws for thee,
and thou wast to pay me 18 s. for it. Nay, yet (...), Samuel, when the
Commissioners, which are thy Overseers, (to whom thou art obliged to render an
Account, so often as they require (...) of thee) had ordered thee to let me
have 50 s. for a supply of Necessaries, thou refused to let me have it, unless
I would take it in thy Shop Goods (which would have proved little better than a
Cheat, for thou would have charged 50 s. to the Governor's Account, when, its
like, I should not have had really the value of 25 s. of thee. I once more
consulted the Commissioners, who very freely and willingly wrote to thee a few
Li^es, signed with their own hands, and gave it to me to deliver to thee,
wherein they ordered thee to pay me 50 s. in Silver Money, according to their
former Order; but thou returned them this Answer by me, That thou woudlst not
answer their Bid, bidding me carry it back to them again; which indeed is no
other than an unchristian and unmanly slighting of the Commissioners, and a
base and sordid Contempt of and trampling on that Power which the Governor
has invested them with over thee and his Affairs; one might think by thy
^e^ortment toward them, that thou do neither know thy sel^, nor the Station
in which thou art placed by the Governor; for Samuel, thou art no other than
a Mercinary Servant, and that during the will and pleasure of the Governor, and
the Commissioners are thy Overseers and Controule^s, to who^^ thou art obliged
to render an Account, etc.

Thy true Friend, John Philly.



Then next George Keith called into Court and set to the Bar.

Crier, O Yes, Silence is commanded upon pain of Imprisonment.

The Presentment read,
We of the Grand Jury do present George Keith and Thomas (...) A^thors of a
Book, entitled, The Plea of the Innocent, where in p. 13. about the latter end
of the same, they the said Geo. Keith and Tho. Budd defamingly accuse Sam.
Jenings, (he being a Judge and Magistrate of this Province) of being too high
and imperious in Worldly Courts, calling him an Ignorant, Presumptuous and
Insolent Man, greatly exposing his Reputation, and of an ill President, and
contrary to the Law in that made and provided.

Clark, What say you George Keith, are you guilty or not guilty of this
Presentment.

G. Keith, Before I be dem^nded to plead to the Presentment, I desire to be
heard a few words. Which the Court granting, he said, I would have you to
consider, that both ye and we are as Beacon set on a Hill, and the Eyes of God,
Angels and Men are upon us, and if ye do any thing against us that is not fair
and ju^t, not only these part^ hereaway will hear of it, but Europe also; for
if we be wronged (if God permit) we think to make it known to the World.

Here some were very Impatient, telling him, he menaced the Court, but he would
do well to take heed what he did, for if he spoke or published any thing in
derogation of the Sentence of Court, it was against a Law in this Province, and
he would be punished for it.

G. K. An able Lawyer has said, when a man is w^onged, and can have no other
Remedy, printing is his last: Ye (...) give Loos^rs leave to complain: Our
Friends have done it formerly in Old England when they have been unjustly dealt
by, and particularly William P^nn and George Whithead, I will not say any thing
against your Law, but I suppose the true sense of it is, that if any derog^te
from the sentence of a Court, if the Sentence be just, he is punishable, but
not otherwise. Are your Courts infa^lible? Is it not possible that at times
they may give an unjust Sentence?

David Lloyd, Yea, our Courts are Infallible in Law, George, I assure thee.

G. K. Then why do ye admit of Appeals? If they be infallible, there is no
occasion to appeal to a higher Judicatory.

Then David Lloyd went about to mend the matter, saying, They were Infallible
so far as the Law was Infallible, and so far as they kept to the Law.

Note, This (...) as if he had said, they are infallible so far as they are
Infallible, which is not very good sense, unless they mea^, that they are not
absolutely Infallible, but conditionally, and if conditionally only, it is
possible they may give a wrong Sentence, and he who they give it against may
complain, without just cause of Offense, otherwise their Court here is as
Arbitrary as any in the World.

Next, G. K. desired to know in what Capacity D. Lloyd did plead there against
them, seeing he was not the King's Attorney?

Da. Lloyd, We have no Kings Attorney.

G. K. I understood, that Patrick Robinson is the Kings Attorney.

D. Lloyd, No he is not.

G. K. But he is Attorney General.

D. L. He is neither Kings Attorney, nor Attorney General.

G. K. What is he then?

D. Lloyd, He is the Proprietary's Attorney.

Now G. K. still pressing to know in what Capacity D. Lloyd did plead, it was
answered, That the Court allowed him to plead.

Note, That it was admired by the Anditory, that this David Lloyd should be so
Confident and Brazen-fa^^d, as to tell, in an open Court, that Patrick Robinson
was not the Kings Attorney, and thrust himself into that place, purposely to
vent forth some of his inveterate Hatred and Malice against G. Ke^th and the
rest, which he did to purpose, by str^^ning and perverting the places, by him
brought, from their true sense; and yet this man pretends to be a late Convert
to the Religion of the People called Quakers. If they were all such, it would
make one abhor them for Notorious Hypocrites.

G. K. I desire you to hear me a little further, and that is, That ^ think it
very unfair, that these who are deeply prejudiced against (...), and my
opposite Parties and Accusers, should be my Judges, as part^cularly Sam.
Jenings and Arthur (...) the last of which but a few days ago (the 5 of (...)
mon.) told me at this own house, before diverse Witnesses, and J^on White,
Sheriff, is witness, that when he warned me to the Court, I told him, I thought
to come, but did not think to plead, unless I had a fair Jury, A^thur Cook
said, Tr^ely George, (...) Fo^l One will serve t^ee. Now let the Court judge,
whether this man is fit to sit upon the Bench to judge me, who says, That a
Fo^^ Jury will serve me. Suppose I had been the greatest Malefactor, will any
say, A F^^l Jury will serve to try me? is not this to destroy all Fundamental
Laws? I appeal to you here, the Justice^ and Jury, such of you as are most
manifestly Prejudiced against me, for my faithful Testimony to the Quakers
ancient Principle against all use of outward Weapons, Whether ye do as ye would
be done by? Would ye be willing that a company of men wholly of our side, (though
honest) should be on a Jury to judge you?

Sam. Jenings, We shall take care that ye shall not be our Judges: Which was an
Evasion from the Question, and seemed to be a Jest or Scoff that he pleased
himself with, and which are more frequent with him then Expressions of Mercy
and Justice.

G. K. I have yet something further to say, before I plead to the Presentment,
but being unacquainted with your Formalitys in Law, desire that no advantage
may be taken against me on that account.

Court, No advantage shall be taken against thee on that account.

Clark, What say you, George Keith, to your Presentment, are you Guilty or not
Guilty?

G. K. Not guilty in manner and form. And now that I have answered to the
Presentment, Not Guilty, my chief and only Plea that I think to make use of,
unless ye will say that so to do is a Contempt of the Court, and of your
Authority, which by no means I would be guilty of, my chief Plea is, That I am
not presentable by the Grand Jury for any thing alleged against me, they being
no Offenses against the King, Governor nor Country, what I have said was only
against particular Persons, who if they think themselves wronged by me, may sue
me in their own Names, and I am ready to answer them.

Court and Clark, It is no Contempt of Court, but the season of your so
pleading is over, you should have said so before you pleaded Not Guilty; now
you must submit to be tried by the Country.

G. K. I knew not this formality in Law, ye told me, ye would take no advantage
against me in that respect. But the Clark still pressing him to come to a
Trial, G. K. further said, I think not to make any other plea; for the things
for which I am presented are not against the King, Governor, nor any Nuisance
to the Country, nor against particular Persons, as Magistrates, and therefore
not presentable.

Clark, If ye refuse to be tried by the Jury, the Bench has Power to fine you.

G. K. I shall take my hazard of that; I have able Council that the things
whereof am accused, are not presentable by the grand Jury.

D. Lloyd, If able Council has so advised thee, their Counsel has failed in
this.

G. K. To call a man Proud and Imperious is not Actionable.

D. Lloyd, Tho^ not Actionable, yet Presentable.

G. K. If not actionable, not presentable.

D. Lloyd, That is not a good Consequence.

But let all impartial Readers judge, whether it be not a good Consequence,
that if words spoke concerning particular Persons, not as Magistrates, be not
actionable, that therefore they are not presentable; because, for what are they
presentable, seeing they are neither against the King, nor Governor, nor
Country, nor particular men as Magistrates?

D. Lloyd. There is a Law of this Province, that no words of Defamation must be
spoken against a Magistrate, nor shall any speak slightingly or ab^sively of
them, which thou have done.

G. K. They were nor spoke to him as a Magistrate, nor when he was in the
exercise of his Office; and to call him High and Imperious does not reflect on
him as a Magistrate: If I had called him Ignorant in the Laws, and Unjust in
the Execution of them, this would have reflected on him as a Magistrate, but
not to call him High and Imperious; for Piety, whereof (...) is a Branch, is no
essential Qualification of a Magistrate, tho it be of a Christian and Minister
of Christ; the only essential Qualifications of a Magistrate, are to be knowing
the Laws, and just in the Execution of them.

[ Note, That it is no Reflection on a Tailor, Shoemaker, or the like
Tradesman, to be called Proud, for he may be a good Artificer although he be
Proud, but to be Proud reflecteth on ^im as he professes to be a Christian or
Minister of Christ. And this distinction Sam. Jenings must needs allow, unless
he will say, that when he exercises his Magisterial Office he is no Christian,
but wholly puts off his Qualifications of a Christian, as a man puts off
one Garment and puts on another. But if he will say he is still a Christian,
as well as a Magistrate, then he ought to be humble, meek and forbearing,
especially to his Fellow Church Members, not high and imperious, and exacting
the severity of the Law of them; for even the Law says, Summum jus, Summa
Injuri^, i. e. The Rigor of the Law is high Injustice; for if the Law of
England be Lex Misercordiae, as it is called, then well may the Law of
Christianity be called Lex Misercordiae, i. e. The Law of (...). that is,
forbearing, and exacteth not the utmost farthing.

Note further, That one Reason of these word, being mentioned in the Plea of
the Innocent, viz. That S. Jenings (...) shown him^self (...) imperious in
worldly Courts, was, that a little time before he had commanded to bring one of
his fellow Members ( viz. Samuel Buckly) Headling to the Court, and fined him
ten Pound for refusing to come at his Command, and sent him to Prison, to
remain without Bail till paid. Now admit he did not illegally in this, or
unbecoming a severe austere Magisterial Officer, yet was it not unbecoming a
tender Christian, who should be meek and merciful?

G. K. Having refused to plead otherwise than as above mentioned, Dav. Lloyd
bid the Clark record him Nioil dieit, i. e. he says nothing. To which G. K.
replied, Why should he record me nihil dicit! I think I have said a great deal.
And after some further discourse, G. K. was set aside, and Thomas Budd set to
the Bar, the most material discourse that passed here follows, viz.

The Presentment being read, the Clark said, Thomas Budd, What say yo^, are you
guilty, as you stand here presented, or not guilty?

T. Budd, Not guilty, as there presented, but own my self to be one of the
Authors of that Book, called, The Plea of the Innocent.

Clark, By whom will you be tried?

T. Budd, By God and the Country.

D. Lloyd, as Attorney against him, pleaded, That to call a man proud and
Ignorant, was to reflect on the Governor that constituted (...), etc.

G. Keith, in behalf of Tho. Budd, answered, That what was there said of Sam.
Jenings, as to calling him Ignorant and Presumptuous, was not said of him, as
he was a Magistrate, but as he professed himself to he a Christian and Minister
of Christ; I pened those words in the Plea of the Innocent, concerning S.
Jenings, and know they were not intended against him as a Magistrate, as the
foregoing words in that Book do manifest; but that he is ignorant in Divinity,
that Book gives an Instance, and we now here affirm, else he would never have
said, That to do Gods Business, we needed Gods Power, ^blit to do our own
Business, as men, we needed not a supernatural Power, nor have joined with them
that say, The Light within is sufficient to Salvation without any thing else,
thereby excluding the Man Christ Jesus from having any part in our Salvation.
And our calling him Presumptuous and Insolent did relate to his severe pressing
me to an absolute Submission to their Judgment, in a matter of Conscience,
whenas S. J. refused to submit to the Judgment of Friends, both here and at
London, in worldly matters; also his calling me Apostate, and worse than
Profane, in a public Meeting, as well as in private, and saying, We shall let
thee to know, George, that we shall judge thee, and his signing that Paper of
the 28 against me, wherein they so boldly assert, that they have tenderly and
orderly dealt with me; whenas they never dealt with me.

After some further pleading, the Jury were called, and Tho. Budd was asked, If
he had any Exceptions to make against any of them?

Tho. Budd, Yes, I except against all of them that are called Quakers, because
I perceive they are them that are parties against me.

D. Lloyd, That is too general, and is no Exception in Law.

Tho. Budd, I except particularly against Rich. Walter, because he signed the
Paper of the 28 against us (which this Book was an Answer to) and against Jam^s
Fox, because he signed a Paper in the Quarterly against us; and I except
against Joseph Kirle and John Whitpa^e, because they have spoke against G. K.
and me, and justified these Presentiments against us.

But these Exceptions would not be allowed of, and therefore the above named
Jurors went forth, and next morning brought in their Verdict, That Thomas Budd
was guilty of saying, Samuel Jenings had behaved himself too high and
imperiously in Worldly Courts.

To which Tho. Budd and George Keith pleaded, That it was no Verdict, not being
found to be a breach of any Law, an, more than the Verdict of the Jury at Old
Bayley, which was, That they found W. Penn guilt^ of speaking in
Grace Church Street, which the Court took to be a clearing of him. But this was
nothing regarded by our Justices, for they proceeded and gave Judgment against
Thomas Budd and George Keith, viz. That they should each of them pay five pound
a piece, as a Fine. And tho in this case Sam. Jenings was the Person only
concerned as the Adversary Party, yet he sat on the Bench when they gave
Judgment against G. K. and T. B. Which was judged most unreasonable and
illegal, that Sam. Jenings, (who is the Governor's Receive of all Fines and
Forfeitures) should be so actively concerned in fining these men, having so
manifestly before showed his Prejudice against them. (...), it being expressly
contrary to a Vote of an Assembly of this Province, the 3d Month, 1689 (where
Arthur Cook was Speaker) viz. Resolved; nemine contra dicente, That it is an
Agrievance that any Person who is commissionated or appointed by the Governor
to receive the Governor's Fines, Forfeitures and Revenues whatsoever, shall
sit in Judgment in any Court of Judicature within this Government, in any
matter or cause whatsoever, where a fine or forfeiture shall or may accrue to
the Governor.

But Arthur Cook could now wi^k at this Ag^ievance, and let Samuel Jenings sit
on the Bench when these Persons were fined.

But for a further proof that Sam. Jenings has shown himself too High and
Imperious, observe what follows, viz.

1 st. That when G. K. was pleading in Court, and showing how S. J. had behaved
himself too high and imperious, he said, If this be High and Imperious, I will
be yet more High and Imperious.

2 dly, Upon the Jury's bringing in their Verdict against Tho. Ashly, S. J.
(...) menaces him, viz. Thou told me formerly that I had done my worst, but now
thou art fallen into my hands, thou shall know that I have not done my VVorst
yet.

3 dly, He said to another Person, Thou shall have as little Justice as I can.

4 thly, He said to John Skeen, who had been Governor, and was then Judge,
Thou pitiful W^ip-jack, I despise thee; and yet we find not that Jo^. S^een
had him presented or prosecuted at Court for this more than ordinary abusive
and scurrilous Expression, short of common Humanity; and yet this is he who now
can say, He will bear no affront, (...), showing how unlike he is to a true
Christian, and even to many (...) as Christian Magistrates, who have born with
Patience, (...) Affronts and Reflections from Persons far inferior to them.

5 thly, Another Instance of S. J'^ Pride and Insolency is, that on the, 10 of
the 10 Month, coming out of Court, said to Ralph Ward and John M"Comb, in the
open Street, before many Witnesses, If I draw (...) my Hand against you,
(stretching forth his Arm and shaking it) I will not pull it in until, I have
quelled you all. This presumptuous Expression savoureth too much of Lucifer's
Pride, who said, I will be, like the most High, I will* exalt my Throne above
the Stars of God, Isa. 14. 13, 14. It is too High an Expression, and too
peremptory for any mortal Man to say, If I draw forth my Hand, I will not pull
it in until* I have quelled you all* What is this in a manner, but to equal
himself to God Almighty, Deuteronomy. 32. 40, 41. For I lift up my Hand to Heaven, and
say, I live forever, If I whet my glittering Sword, and mine Hand take hold on
Judgment, I will render Vengeance to mine Enemies, etc. Oh! is it not above the
Power of mortal Man, to say, Is I draw out my Hand, I will not pull it in
until I have quelled you all! Is not this to talk (...) if he were the
Almighty? But know, O vain weak Man! thy Breath is in thy Nostrills, and that
infinite Power that made thee, (if thou draw forth thy Hand against the
Innocent, glorying in thy Power that is but small) may cause thy Hand to Wither
or turn Leprous, and lay thy Body and Power in the Dust, and cast both Soul and
Body into Hell Fire. And therefore Repent of this thy abominable Pride and
Insolency before it be too late.

And though Sam. Jenings is now so zealous for the prosecuting them that say any
thing against Magistrates, yet its not long ago that he spoke much against Tho.
Lloyd, Deputy Governor, and carried about (out of one County into another) a
parcel of Lampooning Rhymes, made against T. L. called, Taffy's Fair, which he
repeated over his Pots of Beer to make sport for the Company.

But to return, although the Jury brought in a special Verdict, which was only,
That Thomas Budd was guilty of saying, Sam. Jenings had shown himself too high
and imperious in Worldly Courts, which is no Transgression of any particular
Law, yet the Bench gave Judgment against them as though they had broke some Law,
which was, That G. K. and T. B. should pay 5 l. a piece. Whereupon they finding
themselves aggrieved by this Judgment, craved an Appeal to the Provincial Court
in Law, which was denied them. Then by Advice of able Council, they requested
an Appeal to the King and Queen, and their Council in England, the King having
reserved all Final Appeals to himself, in the Charter to W. P. But this also
was denied them, (though Robert Turner declared his dissent in this matter, as in
several other their Proceedings) so that the said Persons are left without all
help or remedy, but must undergo the Arbitrary Sentence of this Court.

And as a further Mark of the miserable declension of these men, and of their
cold zeal for the honor of God, take a view of two Laws which they now
execute; the first is the 5th Chapter of their Laws, where it is enacted, That
whosoever shall speak loosely and profanely of Almighty God, Jesus Christ, the
holy Scriptures or Spirit of Truth, shall for every such Offense pay 5 s. The
other place is Chap. 29. where it is enacted, That whosoever shall speak
slightingly, or carry himself abusively against a Magistrate, shall for every
such Offense suffer according to the Quality of the Magistrate, provided it be
not less than 20 s. according to which Law they have fined Peter Boss Six
Pound, and G. K. and I. B. each Five Pound, for speaking slightingly of Sam.
Jenings, as they pretend. Whereas if they had spoke Profanely of Almighty God,
Jes^s Christ, Christ, the Spirit of Truth or holy Scriptures, the Law inflicts
but (...) Were not these men far more zealous for their own Honor than the
Honor of God, they would never let this disproportion of Punishment for
offenses against Almighty God and poor Mortal Man, stand upon Record thus, to
their shame and Infamy.

The 10 of the 10 Month, 1692. William Bradford was called into Court, and set
to the Bar,

The Presentment ^ead, the substance of which was, That they p^^sented the 9,
10, 11, and 12 Articles of the Paper, called, An Appeals etc. (...) being of a
tendency to weaken the hands (...) the Magistrates. And we present William
Bradford for printing of the said Seditious Paper, etc.

Clark, What say yo^, William Bradford, are you guilty as you stand presented,
or not guilty?

W. Bradford, In the first place, I desire to know, whether I am clear of the
Mittimus, which differs from the Presentment.

The Clark and Attorney read and perused the Mittimus and Presentment, and
finding them to differ, said, That when W. B. was cleared according to Law, he
was clear of the Mittimus.

But W. B. insisted to know, Whether on the issue of the Presentment, he was
clear of the Mittimus? And after along debate thereon, answer was made, That W.
B. was clear of the Mutimus on the Issue of the Presentment.

Next, W. B. desired to know what Law that Presentment was grounded on?

D. Lloyd, It is grounded both on Statute and Common Law?

W. B. Pra. let me see that Statute and Common Law, else how shall I make my
Plea? Justice Cook told us last Court, That one reason why ye deferred our
Trial then, was, that we might have time to prepare our selves to answer it;
but ye never let me have a Copy of my Presentment, nor will ye now let me know
what Law ye prosecute me upon.

D. Lloyd and J. White, Its not usual to insert in Indictments against what
Statute the Offense is, when its against several Statutes and Laws made? and if
thou will not plead Guilty or not Guilty, thou will loose thy Opportunity of
being tried by thy Country. And they ordered the Clark to write down, that W.
Brad^ord refused to plead; which he did; but as he writing it down, W. B.
desired they would not take that advantage against him, for he refused not to
plead, but only requested that which was greatly necessary, in order to his
making his own Defense; and several in the Court requesting on the Prisoners
behalf, that the Court would not take advantage against him, they admitted him
to plead, and he pleaded, Not Guilty.

Then the Jury were called over, and attested, viz. Humphery Waterman, Joseph
Kirle, James Fox, Samuel Hoult, Thomas Wharton, Tho. Marle, Nicholas Rideout,
John Whitpare, Richard Sutton, Richard Walter, Thomas Morris, Abraham Hardiman.
But before they were attested, they asked W. B. if he had any Exceptions to
make against any of them that were returned for the Jury?

W. Bradford, Yes, I have, and particularly against two of them, (and which
Exceptions I think are rational,) and that is against Jos. Kirle and James Fox;
for at the time when I was committed to Prison Arthur Cook told me, That Joseph
Kirle had said, That if the proceedings of the Magistrates was thus found fault
with, that they must not defend themselves against Thieves and Robbers,
Merchants would be discouraged of coming here with their ^^ssels, etc. And I
except also against James Fox; because on the first day after Babit and his
Company were taken, I being at Sam. Carpenters, there was Governor Lloyd,
James Fox, and several others, and in discourse concerning taking of the said
Privateers, James Fox greatly blamed W. Walker, because he found fault with
some Justices that were Quakers, for commanding men, and as it were pressing
them to go against the said Privateers; and also James Fox joined with Tho.
Lloyd in saying, He would mark them as Enemies to the Government and well being
of the Province, who were neutrall in the case of going against Babit, etc. By
which Instances I think it appears that these two Persons have prejudged the
Cause that is now to com before them; Joseph Kirle acknowledged he had spoke
such words, and desired to be discharged; but they would not allow of these
Exceptions, although it is frequent in these Courts to change Jurors on bearly
saying they do (...) against such a one.

^. Lloyd and Clark, These are no Exceptions in Law; have thou at any time
heard them say that th^^ printed that Paper? for that is only what they are to
find.

W. B. That is not only what they are to find, they are to find also, whether
this be a seditious Paper, or not, and whether it does not tend to the
weakening of the hands of the Magistrate.

D. Lloyd, No, that is matter of Law, which the Jury is not to meddle with, but
find whether W. B. printed it or not, and the Ben^h is to judge whether it be a
seditious Paper, or not; for the Law has determi^ed what is a Breach of the
Peace, and the penalty, which the Bench only is to give judgment on.

Sam. Jenings, You are only to try whether W. B. printed it, or not.

W. Bradford, This is wrong; for the Jury are Judges in Law, as well as in
matter of Fact. Which D. Lloyd again denied. Whereupon some of the Jury desired
to know what they were to be attested to try, for they did believe in their
Consciences, they were obliged to try and find whether that Paper was
seditious, as well as whether Will. Bradford printed; and some of them desired
to be discharged. -- A great Noise and Confusion among the People.

Some on the Bench showing their willingness to allow of W. B's Exceptions
against the two Jurors, Justice Cook said, I will not allow of it; is there
^our of us of a mind?

Then D. Lloyd began to read the 9, 10, 11, and 12 Articles of the said Appeal,
and commented thereupon, denyiug, 1 st, That any men were hired to fight, but
only to fetch back the Sloop; 2 dly, That there was no Commission given, but
only a Hue-and-Cry or Warrant, as might be in any other ordinary case, and what
was done was in case of great necessity, when a Company of Rogues had
Pyratically stolen away a Sloop to the great terror of the People of this
place; and if the Magistrates must be blamed for their proceedings herein, what
do you think will be the consequence thereof, but to encourage all manner of
wickedness? And Will. Bradford is presented for printing and publishing this
seditious Paper, whereof you of the Jury are to find him guilty, if it appear
to you that he has printed it.

W. Bradford, I desire you of the Jury, and all here present, to take notice,
that what is here contained in this Paper is not Seditious, but wholly relating
to a Religious Difference, and asserting the Quakers ancient Principles, and is
not laid down positive, that they ought not to have proceeded against the
Privateers, but laid down by way of Query, for the People called Quakers to
consider and resolve at their Yearly Meeting, Whether it was not a
Transgression of the Quakers Principles to hire and commissionate men to fight?

Justice Cook, If it was intended for the Yearly Meeting at Burlington, why was
it published and spread abroad before the Meeting?

VV. B. Because it might be perused and considered of by Friends before the
Meeting, even as the Bills that are prepared to be passed into Laws, they are
promulgated a certain Number of days, before the Assembly meets, that all may
have opportunity to consider them.

Then D. Lloyd read the Act against Printing, 14 Car. 2. cap. 33. against Books
being printed without the Printers Name to them, and he said, That was one Act
which they prosecuted W. Bradford upon.

To which G. K. answered, and it may be observed, the singular and
extraordinary Severity of these Justices, called Quakers, who will pick out a
Statute made in Old England, and prosecute a man upon here, which might Ruin
him and his Family, though its not certain whether that Act be in force; whenas
most of W. Penn's and the Quakers Books were printed without the Printers Name
to them, when that Act was in force; and yet we never heard that any Printer in
England was prosecuted for that; and therefore these here have exceeded them in
England; which manifests their Malice and revengeful Spirit, that because they
cannot fix the matter to be any Breach of the Peace (tho^ they pretend it is)
they will prosecute the Printer for not putting his Name to what they suppose he
Printed.

Note, That all the time these Persons were upon Trial, the grand Jury sat by
them, over-awing and threatening them when they spoke boldly in their own
defense, and one of the Jury had Pen, Ink and Paper to write down such words as
they disliked, signifying that they would present them, and Justice Cook other
times bid them take notice of such and such words, thereby over-awing the
Prisoners that they had not liberty to plead treely. And when Tho. Harris, at
the Request of the Prisoner began to say something to the matter, they stopped
him, and bid an Officer take him away, and Arthur Cook said, That he should
plead no more there.

After a long time of pleading, D. Lloyd began to summons up the matter to
Jury, How that the printed Appeal was a Seditious Paper, and tended to weaken
the Hands of the Magistrates, and encourage all manner of Wickedness; and that
it was evident W. Bradford printed it, he being the Printer in this place, and
the frame on which it was printed, was found in his House.

W. B. I desire the Jury, and all here present to take notice, that there ought
to be two Evidences, to prove the matter of Fact, but not one Evidence has been
brought in this case.

Sam. Jening, The Frame on which it was printed is Evidence enough.

W. B. But where is the Frame, there has no Frame been produced here; and if
there had, it is no Evidence, unless ye saw me print on it.

Sam. Jenings, The Jury shall have the Frame with them, it cannot well be
brought here; and beside the Season is cold, and we are not to sit here to
endanger our Health; you are minded to put Tricks upon us.

VV. B. You of the Jury, and all here present, I desire you take notice, that
here has not one Evidence been brought to prove that I printed the Sheet,
called, A^ Appeal: And whereas they say, the Frame is Evidence, which the Jury
shall have; I say, the Jury ought not to hear or have any Evidence whatsoever,
but in the presence of the Judge and Prisoner.

Yet this was nothing minded, but Sam. Jenings summoned up to the Jury what
they were to do, viz. To find, 1st. whether or nor that Paper, called, the
Appeal, had not a tendency to the weakening the hands of the Magistrates, and
encouragement of Wickedness: 2dly, Whether it did not tend to the Disturbance
of the Peace? And, 3dly, Whether William Bradford did not print it, without
putting his Name to it, as the Law requires?

The Jury had a Room provided them, and by that time they had been a quarter of
an hour together, the Sheriff caused the Frame to be carried in to them, for an
Evidence that W. B. printed the Appeal.

The Jury continued about forty eight hours together, and could not agree, then
they came into Court to ask a Question, viz. Whether the Law did rejui^e two
Evidences to find a man guilty? To answer which D. Lloyd read a passage out of
a Law Book, That they were to find it by Evidences, or on their own knowledge,
or otherwise: Now (says ^. Lloyd) this otherwise is the Frame which you have,
which is Evidence sufficient.

VV. Bradford, The Frame which they have is no Evidence, for I have not seen
it, and how do I or the Jury know that that which was carried in to them, is
mine, -- Interrupted -- The Jury sent forth again, and an Officer commanded to
keep them without Meat, Drink, Fire or Tobacco.

In the Afternoon the Jury came into Court again, and told, they were not like
to agree. Whereupon the Court discharged them.

Then VV. Bradford told the Court, That seeing he had been so long detained
Prisoner, and his Utensils with which he should work having been so long
detained, he hoped now to have his Utensils returned, and to be discharged from
his Imprisonment.

Sam. Jenings, No, thou shall not have thy things again, nor be discharged, but
I now let thee know, thou stands in the same Capacity to answer next Court, as
before.

Next Court being come, Will. Bradford attended, and desired to know whether
he should have his Utensils, and be discharged? Arthur Cook answered, Thou
shall not have thy Goods until released by Law.

VV. Bradford, The Law will not release them, unless executed.

Arthur Cook, If thou will request a Trial, thou may have it.

Whereupon I Query, 1 st. Whether it be practicable, or according to Law to
seis^ men's Goods and imprison their Persons, and so detain them under the
Terror of a Goal, one six Months after another, and not bring them to Trial,
unless requested by the Imprisoned?

2 dly. When a Jury is Sworn, Well and truly to Try, and true Deliverance make
between the Proprietor and Prisoner, Whether it be not very illegal to absolve
them from their Oath, dismiss them, and put it to another Jury to try?

Now it may be observed, that nine of these Jurors were Persons prejudiced
against G. K. and the rest, and the other three happened to be moderate Persons
that were not called Quakers, and the reason they could not agree, was (as some
of the said Jurors, called Quakers, have told) that these three Persons stood
upon the Nicity (as they called it) of Evidence that. VV. B. printed that
Paper; whereas the other Jurors called Quakers said, they believed that VV. B.
printed it, and that it was a seditious Paper, etc. and they would not acquit
him.

Does not this show the great declension of these People from their ancient
Principle against the use of Carnal Weapons, that for only proposing it to be
enquired into, Whether it be not a Transgression of the Quakers Principle, for
any of that People to hire and commissionate men to fight, that they will cast
men into Goal, and prosecute them as Seditious Persons for so doing?

Here follows abreviate of a Paper that was presented to the Court, to show,
that it was agreeable to the Quakers ancient Testimony not to fight, which they
took little or no notice of.

A Declaration from the People of God, called Quakers, against all Plotters and
Fighters, etc. Presented to the King, 1660.
ALl Bloody Principles and Practices, we, as to our own particulars, do utterly
deny, with all outward Wars and Strife, and Fightings with outward Weapons, for
any end ( Mark) or under any pretense whatsoever. And this is our Testimony to
the whole World. -- (...) we do certainly know, and so testify to the World,
that the Spirit (...) Christ, which leads us into all Truth, will never move us
to fight an^ war against any man with outward Weapons, either for the Kingdo^^
of Christ, nor for the Kingdoms of this World. -- We have used (...) Force nor
Violence against any man. etc. when we have been wronged we have not sought to
revenge our selves -- So that if we suffer as (...) spected to take up Arms, or
make War against any, its without an^ g^ound from us; for it neither is, nor
ever was in our hearts since (...) owned the Truth of God, neither shall we
ever do it, because it (...) to the Spirit o^ Christ, his Doctrine, and the
Practice of (...) Apostle.

Given forth by George Fox, Rich. Habberthorn, John Boulton, John Furley, jun.
John Stubs, Francis Howgill, Gerrard Roberts, Thomas Moore, Lenord Fell,
Samuel Fisher, Henry Fell, John Hind.


See also Rob. Apology, These. 15.. 15. p. 399. And. 15. p. 40^ he says, As to
what relates to the present Magistrates of the Christ (...) World, albeit we
deny them not altogether the Name of Christian^ because of the public
Profession they make of Christ's Name, yet (...) may boldly affirm, that they
are far from the Perfection of the Christ^^ Religion, because of the state in
which they are, they have not come (...) the pure Dispensation of the Gospel;
but for such whom Christ ha^ brought hither, it is not lawful to defend
themselves by Arms, (...) ought over all to trust in the Lord.

Object. The Scriptures and old Fathers, so called, did only prohibit (...)
Revenge, not the use of Arms for (...) Defense of our Country, Bodi^^ VVive^,
Children, Goods, when the Magistrate commands it.

Ans. If the Magistrate be truly a Christian, or desires to be so, (...) ought
in the first place to obey the Command of his Master, sayin^ Love your ^nemies,
etc.

R^^^ Answer to Brown,. 16. p. 181. Brown mentions the necess^^ of (...) War,
to defend from those that unjustly (...) Thieves Robbers and Cutthroats, etc.
R. Barclay says, Herein ^ speak^ more like an Atheist, than a Christian, and
like one who ^^^lieveth nothing of a divine Providence in restraining evil Men.

FINIS

