AN EXAMINATION OF Dr. BURNET'S Theory of the Earth.

TOGETHER WITH SOME REMARKS ON Mr. WHISTON'S New Theory of the Earth.

By IO. KEILL A. M. Coll. Ball. Ox.



OXFORD, Printed at the THEATER School.

TO THE REVEREND Dr. MANDER THE WORTHY MASTER OF BALLIOL COLLEGE IN OXFORD.
REVEREND SIR,
THIS small Treatise being the Product of some leisure hours, I happily enjoy
in a College that is under the kind influence of your Government, thinks it
self obliged to wait upon you, before it dares venture one step further into
the world. Its dress I freely own is mean; Nevertheless since the design of it
is no other than to show, that true Philosophy does not contradict the
Scriptures, I am inclined to hope it will find a favorable acceptance among
such as have any Concern or Zeal for the advancement of the one, or the
security of the other.

The Principles on which I have grounded my Arguments in the following
discourse being Mathematical, it does more peculiarly belong to You, whose
prudence in so Industriously promoting the Mathematical Sciences, both by your
Direction and Encouragement I cannot sufficiently Commend, when I consider what
vast improvements have been made, and how many Errors of former Philosophers
have been detected by applying Geometry to Natural Philosophy.

I am sensible Sir, how unpleasing it would be if I should Address my self to
You in the usual style of Dedications. A prudent Zeal for the Authority of
Scriptures, an Hearty Concern for the Rights of the Church, a Tender Care and
Unwearied Industry in Promoting the Discipline, Learning, and Interest of an
Ancient Society, are Virtues which oblige the World to pay You those Praises,
which your Modesty will not suffer you to receive. We who live under the
Advantages of these Excellent Qualifications in a Governor, cannot but be
sensible of the Obligations we have to be thankful for them; and indeed the
desire of Expressing my Gratitude, for these Common and many other Particular
Favors You have been pleased to bestow on me, was the great motive of my
presuming to Inscribe this Discourse to your Name; which I desire may be
accepted as the result of Duty and Gratitude from,

WORTHY SIR, Your most Faithful And most Obliged Humble Servant JO. KEILL.

ERRATA.
P. 30. l. 4. for vulgar read vulgar opinion. p. 30. l. 32. for move read
remove. p. 48. l 8. for of read o^. p. 57. l. 1. for things read springs. p. 61
l. 9. dele not. p. 123. l 23. for GO read CO.

AN EXAMINATION OF Dr. BURNET'S Theory of the Earth.
The Introduction.
WHAT Plutarch particularly proves of the Stoics, that they spoke more
improbabilities than the Poets, may be extended to a great part of
Philosophers, who have maintained opinions more absurd than can be found in any
of the most Fabulous Poets, or Romantic Writers. The one as well as the other
fancied that their character did oblige them to say things, which were not
common or obvious to vulgar capacities, and therefore scorning the Instructions
of sense and reason, they only cultivated their own wild imaginations, which
seldom produce any thing but what is extravagant and unaccountable. This will
soon appear to any who will be at the pains to examine either the Ancient or
Modern Philosophers. To begin with the Ancients.

Which of the Poets did ever maintain so ridiculous an opinion, as that it is
impossible for Bodies to move? And yet there have been Philosophers (for so
they were pleased to style themselves) who have brought arguments to prove
motion to be a thing altogether impossible in nature, and have pretended that
these their arguments almost reached the force of demonstration. Is the Fable
of Leda's being first turned into a Swan, and afterward placed in the Heavens
as a fixed Star, more improbable than the opinion of Anaxagoras, that the
Circumambient Ether being of a fiery substance by the vehement force of its
whirling about did tear stones from the earth, and by its own power set them on
fire and established them as stars in the Heavens? Diogenes another Philosopher
said that the stars were like pumice stones, and that they were the breathings
of the world. But Xenophanes the founder of the Eleatick Sect says they are
composed of inflamed Clouds, which in the day time are quenched, and in the
night are kindled again, and that the rising and setting of the stars, is
nothing else but the kindling and quenching of them. Anaximander thought the
Sun did very much resemble the nave of a Chariot wheel, which (...)s hollow and
full of fire, the fire of which appears to us through its mouth, as (...) a
pipe that is burning. And Anaxi(...)enes said that when the Sun was eclipsed,
the fiery mouth of it was stopped and hindered from perspiration. Heraclitus
tell(...) us that the eclipse of the Sun was after (...)he manner of the
turning of a boat, when(...) the concave as to our sight appears uppermost, and
the unequal neithermost. Another Philosopher said, that when the Sun was
eclipsed, it was extinguished. These indeed are strange notions, but yet they
will seem much stranger if we consider that these men lived after Thales, who
had foretold an eclipse of the Sun by (...)is knowledge that the Moon was to be
at such a time in a direct line betwixt him and it. Such an aversion it seems
these Philosophers had to build upon other men's observations, that they would
rather speak unsufferable nonsense, than be at the pains to consider what was
observed before them by wiser men than themselves.

But who without indignation can hear the above mentioned Xenophanes maintain,
that the earth was founded and rooted in an infinite depth, or Epicurus the
World-maker assert, that the Earth was in the shape of a Drum, and that we
dwell upon the plain surface of it, tho, long before either of their ti(...)es,
it was demonstrated by the Mathematicians, that the Earth was of a spherical
figure, and they had given rules to take the dimensions of it? The same
Epicurus affirms, in contradiction both to sense and reason, that the Sun,
Moon, and Stars are no bigger than they appear to us to be, and for an(...)
thing that he knew to the contrary the Stars might be kindled in the Ea(...)t
Quarter and extinguished in the West, or that there might be a new production
of Stars every day, so that every day there arose a new Sun. I am sure a Blind
man, who had never se(...)n either Sun or Stars, could not have given a worse
account of them, than this Philosopher has done; and yet with an unpardonable
boldness he pretended to tell us, how the World was made, when it is plain he
knew not what it was.

He who desires to know more of the wild notions of the old Philosophers, may
consult Diogenes Laertius, or Plutarch's Books of the sentiments of
Philosophers.

But perhaps our Moderns will say, that these indeed were the ridiculous
fancies of the old whimsical Philosophers, and it is no great matter what they
thought, but that now in this Learned and Inquisitive Age they have at last
found out the true and solid Philosophy. They do now perceive the intimate
essence of all things, and have discovered Nature in all her works, and can
tell you the true cause of every effect, from the sole principles of matter and
motion. If you will believe them, they can inform you exactly, how God made the
World; for they do now comprehend the greatest mysteries in nature, and
understand and Economy of living Bodies: Nay they understand also very exactly
the Theory of the Soul, how it thinks, and by what methods it operates on the
Body, and the Body on it. These indeed are great discoveries, and might well
demand our esteem and admiration, if they were real. But that we may see how
well they deserve such a Character, I will here set down some of their
sentiments, both as to the Intellectual and Natural System.

Spinosa pretends to demonstrate that there is but one individual Substance in
the Universe, and that all particular beings are different modifications of the
same substance. Another Philosopher, viz. Dr. More, will have Souls, besides
the three dimensions which belong to Bodies, to have a fourth, which he calls
the Souls essential spissitude, by which it can contract or dilate it self when
it pleases. Mr. Hobbs thinks Incorporeal Substances a flat contradiction, and
that therefore it is altogether impossible there should be any such. But a new
Dr. Burthogge.
Philosopher has much outdone any I have yet mentioned, in a Book lately
Printed concerning Reason; there he assures us that there is but one universal
Soul in the World, which is omnipresent and acts upon all particular organized
Bodies, and makes them produce actions more or less perfect in proportion to
the good disposition of their Organs, so that in Beasts, that Soul is the
principle of the sensitive and vital functions; in Men it does not only perform
these, but also all other rational actions, just as if you would suppose a hand
of a vast extension, and a prodigious number of fingers, playing upon all the
Organ pipes in the world, and making every one sound a particular note
according to the disposition and frame of the pipe, so this Universal Soul
acting upon all Bodies, makes every one produce various actions, according to
the different disposition and frame of their Organs. This opinion he as
confidently asserts to be true, as other men believe that it is false; tho it
is impossible he should any other way be sure of it, but by Revelation, and I
believe he will find but few that will take it upon his word.

Mons. Malbranch the famous inquirer after Truth, having made a long and deep
search how the Soul comes to have its Ideas, has found out at last, that we
perceive not the things themselves, but only their Ideas, which the Soul sees
in God. For says he, the Soul is united to God in a much stricter and more
essential manner than she is united to the Body; and this union is by his
presence, so that it may be said, that God is the place of Spirits, as space is
the place of Bodies. He tells us also, that since God has the Ideas of all
beings in himself, the Soul must needs see what there is in God which
represents created beings; for Bodies are not visible of themselves, they not
being able to act upon our mind, nor represent themselves to it; therefore they
being unintelligible in their own Natures, there is no possibility of seeing
them, except in that being, which contains them after an intelligible manner
See the Preface and Page 125. first part, and Page 147. part second, Oxford
Edition.
. Bodies therefore and their properties are seen in God, so that a man who
reads this Book does not really see the Book it self, but only the Idea of it,
which is in God. Is not a man now much the wiser for this unintelligible
jargon? I would fain know what the Author meant by his seeing every thing in
God by its Idea, for I must confess that the oftener I read his long
Illustration on this point, I understand it the less; and I know as little how
I have my Ideas, as I did before. If he had told me that the Soul saw its Ideas
under the Concave of the Moons Orb, where they say Plato placed them, I could
have had some sort of confused notion of that manner of seeing, but this manner
of seeing Ideas, is far beyond my imagination. I am sure that I can neither see
the Idea of it in God, or any where else; The truth is, I have not so
courageously resisted my senses; as that Philosopher advises, as to be able to
penetrate such a solid piece of nonsense.

The same Philosopher affirms that Bodies of their own nature are neither
heard, seen, smelt, nor tasted, and when for example we taste any thing, the
Body tasted cannot produce any savor in us, but God Almighty takes that
occasion to stir up that sensation in us, to which the body does not really
concur. Nay according to him it is impossible for any man to move his own Arm,
but when he is willing to move it, God takes it and moves it up and down, as
the man, whose Arm it is, wills. If a Rebellious Son or Subject murder his
Father or his Prince by stabbing him, the Man himself does not thrust the
Poiniard into his Fathers or Princes Breast, but God Almighty does it, without
any other concurrence of the Man but his will. These indeed are strange and
unaccountable fancies, But he proceeds still further, and affirms that no
second causes act, so that no Body tho moved with never so great a velocity
against another can be able to drive that other before it, or move it in the
least, but God takes that occasion to put it in motion. At this rate one need
not fear his headpiece tho a Bomb were falling upon it with all the force that
Powder can give it, for it could not so much as break his Skull, or singe his
hair, if God did not take that occasion to do it. The most natural agents with
him are not so much as instruments, but only occasions of what is produced by
them, so that a man might freely pass through the fire, or jump down a precipice
without any harm, if God Almighty did not take that occasion to burn him, or
dash out his brains.

To prove that our moderns are as wild, extravagant, and presumptuous as any of
the Ancients either Poets, or Philosophers, I may instance in Dr Conner, whose
imagination has taken a flight beyond the spheres of sense and reason. Other
Philosophers were only ambitious to explicate nature, and the common effects of
it, but no less a subject can satisfy him, than the Omnipotent Author of
nature, and his extraordinary and miraculous acts, which he pretends to
explain, for he thinks he understands them as well as he does the common
Phenomenon of Nature. This I believe will be granted him without much
difficulty, for there is very good reason, to believe, that the works of
Nature, are as much hid from him, as the mysteries of it, which he treats of,
are from others. And tho he talks that he has well considered the Laws of
motion, and the force of Nature, yet it is plain that he knows not how to
determine what proportion of motion there is in two bodies whose bulks and
velocities are given. One can neither be the wiser or better for what he has
written, except to be convinced of the reasonableness and excellency of modesty
and humility, seeing his attempts are as unsuccessful, as they are shamefully
impudent. And yet his Book must have the Sacred name of Evangelium prefixed to
it, for which the Divines should severely Chastise him, to whom I leave him.

But M. Des Carts the great Master and deliverer of the Philosophers from the
tyranny of Aristotle, is to be blamed for all this, for he has encouraged so
very much this presumptuous pride in the Philosophers, that they think they
understand all the works of Nature, and are able to give a good account of
them, whereas neither he, nor any of his followers, have given us a right
explication of any one thing. So ridiculous are the things he has delivered in
his principles of Philosophy, that it is a wonder how they should be believed
by any, but it is still a greater wonder how they came to be so much applauded
and received among the Learned, as they were. I will here set down some of the
strange Schemes and unaccountable fancies of this Philosopher. He assures that
there is always the same quantity of motion in the World, so that if all the
Men and Animals in the World were moving, which most part of them can do when
they please, yet still there would be no more motion in the World than there is
in the night time when they are at rest, and what motion they had when they
were moving, must be communicated to the Ether when they are at rest. Another
opinion of his about motion, as strange as the former, is this, if there be two
contiguous Bodies A, and B; and if B, were carried toward C, by the very same
action A is transferred from B; so that there is an equal quantity of motion,
and action, in both, tho to all men's senses, the body A seems not to be moved
at all. Another law of motion, as contrary to sense as any of the former, is;
that if there be two bodies, one of which is bigger, tho by a very little than
the other, the lesser, tho moved with never so great a velocity against the
former, which is at rest, can never put it in motion. Notwithstanding these and
many other of his absurd notions, he had a strong party of the Philosophers on
his side, and great was the outcry against Aristotle, for his tyranical
usurpation of the liberty and property of the Philosophers to think and say
what they had a mind; tho what they said was much more absurd than Aristotle's
(...), or the Schoolmens substantial forms, which must give way to Mons. Des
Cartes's ingenious hypothesis, who, as his followers pretended, could solve all
the phenomenon in nature, by his principles of matter, and motion, without the
help of attraction and occult qualities. He was the first world-maker this
Century produced, for he supposes that God at the beginning created only a
certain quantity of matter, and motion, and from thence he endeavors to show,
how, by the necessary laws of Mechanisme, without any extraordinary concurrence
of the Divine Power, the world and all that therein is might have been
produced. Nay he was so bold, that he pretended he could solve that insuperable
problem, viz. having a quantity of matter and motion to produce any animal. But
with what confidence could he pretend to solve so intricate a problem, who
blundered so much in the easiest and most abstracted things in nature, (for
such are the laws of motion) that of the seven rules he has given us about
motion, there is but one of them true.

I wonder therefore why Mr. Wotton in his reflections on ancient and modern
Learning, should say that Des Carts joined to his great genius an exquisite
skill in Geometry, so that he wrought upon intelligible principles, in an
intelligible manner, tho he very often failed of one part of his end, namely a
right explication of the Phenomenon of nature, yet by Marrying Geometry and
Physics together, he put the World in hopes of a Masculine offspring. This I
think is a clearer demonstration than any in Des Cartes's principles of
Philosophy, that Mr. Wotton either understands no Geometry, or else that he
never read Des Cartes's principles, for from the beginning to the end of them
there is not one demonstration drawn from Geometry, or indeed any demonstration
at all. Except Mr. Wotton will say, that every thing that is illustrated by a
figure, ^^ a demonstration, and then indeed he may produce enough of such
demonstrations in his Philosophical works. So far was Des Carts from Marrying
Physics with Geometry, that it was his great fault that he made no use at all
of Geometry in Philosophy. It may perhaps be thought that he understood
Geometry as well as most of his cotemporaries, and therefore Mr. Wotton might
have presumed, that he ought to have joined Geometry to natural Philosophy, but
since he asserts that he actually did so, I think it a convincing argument that
he makes himself a judge of things he does not understand. But what he falsely
ascribes to Des Carts, is really true of Galileo and Kepler, who, by the help
of Geometry have discovered Physical truths that are worth more than all Des
Cartes's Volumes of Philosophy, who was so far from applying Geometry and
observations to natural Philosophy, that his whole System is but one continued
blunder upon the account of his negligence in that point. This I can easily
prove by showing that his Theory of the Vortices, upon which his Systeme is
grounded, is absolutely false. The great Philosop^^r of this age, the most
Ingenious and Incomparable Mr. Newton by his great and deep skill in Geometry,
has showed that the periodical times of all Bodies which swim in a Vortex, must
be directly as the squares of their distances from the center of the Vortex.
But it is evident from observations, that the Planets in turning round the Sun,
observe quite another sort of a law than this, for the squares of their
Periodical times, are always as the cubes of their distances, and therefore
since they do not observe that law, which of necessity they must, if they swim
in a Vortex, it is a demonstration that there are no vortices, in which the
Planets are carried round the Sun.

Besides if the earth were carried in a vortex, it must necessarily move
faster, when it is in the beginning of Virgo, where the fluid is in a narrow
space, (and by consequence moves so much the swifter,) than it would do when it
is in the beginning of Pisces, and that in the proportion of three to two,
which is directly against experience, and observation.

It is impossible therefore upon this, and a great many other accounts, which
Mr. Newton has showed in his principles, that the earth and the other planets
can move in a Vortex. So that the notion of a Vortex being ruined, the whole
Cartesian system must of necessity fall to the ground; and that world, whose
origination he pretended to have deduced from Mechanical principles, must be a
wild chimera of his own imagination.

I cannot pass without reflecting upon another great error in the Cartesian
Philosophy, which he committed purely for want of due observations. And that
is, his reason why at the Moons opposition, or conjunction with the Sun, the
Tides should be greater than at her quadratures. To explain this, he makes the
Moon move round the earth, in an Ellipsis, in whose center the earth is placed,
so that by this means, the Moon will have two Apogeons, and two Perigeons, and
he says that the Moon is in one of her Perigeons always at the time of her
opposition, or conjunction, and by this means she presses then more strongly
upon the Sea, than she does at her quadratures, at which time according to him
she is always in one of her Apogeons, and therefore her pressure must be
weaker. All this is so notoriously false, that there is no Almanack-maker but
can demonstrate the contrary, and if he had but in the least considered the
Theory of the Moon, he might easily have seen that the Moon is as often in her
Apogeons at new and full Moon, as she is in her Perigeons at that time, though it
seldom happens at the lunations that she is exactly in either.

By this it may sufficiently enough appear, that the most ingenious thoughts in
the Cartesian Philosophy, are false, and disagreeable to nature, which I have
showed not only because the Philosophers of that sect have pretended to so very
great things, as to give a true account of all the Phaenomena's in nature,
whilst they understand so very little, that they have not given us a right
explication of any one thing; but also because Mr. Des Carts, the author of
that Sect, was the first who introduced the fancy of making a World, and
deducing the origination of the Universe from Mechanical principles. Which
notion has been so stiffly maintained by his admirers, that by it they have
given the ignorant Atheists (for so are most of that persuasion) some plausible
pretenses for their incredulity without any real ground.

But of all Philosophers, those have done Religion the least service, who have
not only asserted, that the world was made by the laws of Mechanism, without
the extraordinary concurrence of the Divine power, but also that all the great
changes which have happened to it, such as the Deluge, and other great effects
dilivered to us as miracles by the sacred writers, were the necessary
consequences of natural causes, which they pretend to account for. These
contrivers of Deluges, have furnished the Atheist with an Argument, which upon
their supposition is not so easily answered as Theories are made. Which is this.

The World they will say, was never either made or created by God in time, but
did exist from all eternity, without any change, or alteration, but such as
happened from pure Mechanical principles, and causes, and the true reason, why
there remain no records; or traditions of facts done in the time beyond four or
five thousand years, is because there has happened a Deluge, the memory of
which is still preserved, and this Deluge being the necessary consequence of
natural causes, did sweep away all mankind, and with them the memorials of all
former ages, only a couple of ignorant country people some way or other, saved
themselves from the universal Catastrophe, and from their offspring the earth
was again replenished, and arts and sciences invented, which our forefathers
before that deluge understood more perfectly than we do now.

This they will tell you is their hypothesis, and they will not be beaten
easily from it, since it may be defended as well, as any other Philosophical
Theory which pretends to give an account of the origination of the World, and
is as precarious as their own system of principles which they pretend is very
possible, since several Philosophers have showed various ways, how there might
have happened so universal a deluge, from Mechanical principles, and the
necessary laws of motion.

Thus we see how these flood-makers have given the Atheists an argument to
uphold their cause, which I think can only be truly answered by proving an
universal Deluge from Mechanical causes altogether impossible. And therefore I
design to show that the most ingenious Theories framed upon that account, come
far short of the design of the Framers, and that the great and wonderful
effects, which they endeavor to explain, could never have risen from the
causes they assign.

This I intend to do by showing that their Theories are neither consonant to
the established laws of motion, nor to the acknowledged principles of natural
Philosophy, of that Philosophy I mean, which is founded upon observations and
calculations, both which are undoubtedly the most certain principles, that a
Philosopher can build upon. It is in vain to think that a system of Natural
Philosophy can be framed without the assistance of both, for without
observations we can never know the appearances and force of nature, and without
Geometry and Arithmetic we can never discover, whether the causes we assign
are proportional to the effects we pretend to explain. This the various systems
of the Philosophers do evidently show, which are by far more distant from the
truth, than they are from one another. And I hope it will appear yet plainer by
the following examination of Dr. Burnet's Theory of the Earth. Which tho it has
been published many years, and has been animadverted upon by several, yet it
has not been so fully refuted as it might have been, nor has any one showed the
greatest mistakes in it. Nay, Mr. Erasmus Warren, who has wrote the greatest
Volum against it, in my opinion has spoken the least sense about it.

He begins his discourse with a saying of an old Heathen, that Philosophy is
the greatest gift that ever God bestowed on man. Which I will not deny, since
he has been at so much pains to make a Panegyric on the usefulness of it. But
it is plain to any who will be at the pains to read his Book, that God has
thought fit to bestow but very little of that great gift upon him. And that the
world may not think that this is said out of ill nature and without grounds, I
will give them a taste of his Philosophy, Geometry, or Geography, (call it which
you please.) He designs to calculate how much colder the Poles would be if the
earth were of an Oval figure, than if it were perfectly Spherical. To do which
he supposes that a Circle formed into a moderate Oval, will have its Poles at
least a fortieth part farther distant from the equator, than if it were
perfecty spherical. Warren's Geology page 116.
Now according to this proportion, allowing the earth to be 7000. miles in
Diameter and adding a fourth part to render it Oval, viz. 1750 miles thickness;
the earth at each Pole must bear above fourteen degrees latitude more than if
it had been round. So that the hypothesis which removes its Poles so much
farther from the Sun, must also allow the cold thereabouts to be proportionably
augmented. And though in the hundred and fourth degree of latitude (as we must
call it,) on each side of the equator, that is, at the very Poles, there might
have been a perpetual day, etc.

This is the first time I ever heard that there could be more than ninety
degrees between the pole and the equator, but he thinks he has fairly made it
out that there can be a hundred and four degrees between them, and therefore,
there must be four hundred and sixteen degrees in the whole circumference, and
then, every right angle being only proportioonal to ninety degrees, there must
be more than four right angles about one point, and therefore the Corollary of
the 13 th of the first of Euclid must be false. Thus has that subtle
Philosopher not only subverted Dr. Burnet's Theory, but also Euclid's
demonstrations, and that by an argument which the dull Mathematicians could
never discover.

But I will leave Euclid to his mercy, and answer that part of his argument
that concerns the Theory: which is easily done, if he will consider that the
difference between the poles of the earths distance from the Sun, and the
equator of the earths distance from the Sun, even tho the earth were ten times
more Oval than he would have it, is so very inconsiderable that it does almost
bear the same proportion to the whole that a point does to a line, for the
Mathematicians know that the diameter of the earth is but a point, in respect
of its distance from the Sun, and therefore two lines drawn from the Suns
center to any two points of it are very near in a proportion of equality, so
that upon the account of a greater or lesser distance of the parts of the earth
from the Sun, there can be no sensible alteration of heat or cold.

But I am afraid this is a little too far beyond Mr. Warren's capacity, however
to surprise him a little more, I will tell him, he is so far out in his account
of the cold at the poles, that tho the North pole be much colder in the Winter
than it is in the Summer, yet is it some hundred thousands of miles nearer to
the Sun in Winter than in Summer. If he pleases to consult the Astronomers,
they can demonstrate the truth of this to him.

I beg Mr. Warren's pardon for bringing him into this place, I ought to have
been favorable to him, he being one of my Associates against Dr. Burnet. But I
was willing to produce him as an instance, to show how unfit a man who
understands no Geometry, is to write a book of Natural Philosophy.

But to return to the Theory, I cannot but acknowledge, that there was never
any book of Philosophy written with a more lofty and plausible style than it
is, the noble and elegant descriptions the Author gives the subject he treats
of show that he has a great command of Language. His Rhetorical expressions may
easily captivate any incautious reader, and make him swallow down for truth,
what I am apt to think the Author himself, from the sacred character he bears,
designed only for a Philosophical Romance, seeing that an ordinary examination
thereof, according to the laws of Mechanisme cannot but show, that he has acted
the part of an Orator much better than he has done that of a Philosopher. For
in reality none of these wonderful effects, which he endeavors to explain,
could have proceeded from the causes he assigns. And to demonstrate this is the
design of this small Treatise, in which I will not inquire how far the Theory
is agreeable to Holy Scriptures, that being a work already done by others, who
I presume understand that Subject better than I do, neither will I confine my
self to follow the Author from Chapter to Chapter, and find fault with every
thing contained in the Theory, least it should look more like spitefulness and
ill nature than a diligent search after Truth. My design therefore is to choose
out some of the principal heads of the Theory, and having shown them to be
false and disagreeable to the laws of Mechanisme, the rest must all fall to the
ground of course.

CHAP. I. An Examination of the Theorists general Argument which he uses to
prove the Truth of his Theory.
IN the second and third Chapters the Theorist makes way for an Argument which
he alleges in his seventh to prove the truth of his Theory, viz. that all
other ways for the explication of Noah's Flood are false and impossible, and
that he has given the only possible, and consistent Idea of an universal flood,
and therefore it came to pass the way he has assigned and no other. This
Argument we see is founded upon two Propositions. 1 st. That no other way is
possible, and 2 dly That his own Theory is an intelligible and consistent
explication of the universal flood. This last Proposition I intend to examine in
the following Chapter, and the first in this.

The Theorist, to prove all the common ways of explicating the universal deluge
false and impossible, Calculates the quantity of water, which would be
sufficient to cover the whole earth, above the tops of the highest Mountains,
and finds that no less than eight Oceans of water could be sufficient for such
a work. Now it is certain (says he) that such a stock of waters could neither
come from the Sea, the Rain, or subterraneous Caverns, and Channels of the
earth, there being no such quantity of water in nature, as would be requisite
for such a purpose: and therefore the explication of the deluge from these
causes is impossible. Neither will he allow any supercelestial waters to make
up the eight Oceans necessary for the deluge. For if there were any such
waters, the Heavens above where they lay must be either solid or fluid. If
solid as Glass or Crystal, how could the waters get through them to descend upon
the earth? If fluid as the Air or Ether, how could the waters rest upon them
it being heavier than Air? But if you will suppose, that waters were brought
down from this imaginary region, to drown the world, in that vast quantity that
would be necessary, what became of them when the deluge ceased? It would be a
hard task to lift seven or eight Oceans of water up among the spheres, and
there is no room for them here below. Thus the Theorist thinks, that the vulgar
makes the deluge impossible and unintelligible upon a double account, both in
requiring more water than can be found, and more, if found, than can be
disposed of.

This is the sum of the Theorist's Argument, why all other methods and
explications of the deluge are false, and impossible, which I have here
related, because I think it an evident demonstration of the impossibility of
all Natural and Mechanical explications of the deluge whatsoever, even his own
not excepted, as I shall show in its due place: it being impossible for Nature,
not assisted with extraordinary divine power, to bring so much water upon the
earth; and if it were once brought, it is as impossible to move it.

But all this does no way prove, that the deluge might not have been brought
upon the earth by the Almighty power of God. Cannot he bring out the waters
from the deep, or the Abyss as from a Storehouse, and sustain them from
running down again with the same ease he made the waters of the red Sea stand
on an heap, while the Israelites passed through? Is any thing of this nature
too hard for the Almighty to perform? Might not he, if there were not enough in
the abyss, bring water on the earth from the Heavens above, which might have
been there from the Creation notwithstanding the Theorist's question, How could
they rest there? Since the same power might keep them in their place, that
detains the Moon or any other of the Planets in their orbits; and perhaps from
some of these, or from other places best known to the Divine wisdom, some of
this water was brought upon the earth, and afterward removed by the Omnipotent
hand of God who only works great wonders. Is not this a much easier and
shorter account of the deluge than the Theorist's, which is built upon false
and precarious principles, inconsequential conclusions, which after all will
not be sufficient to produce the desired effect?

But it seems the Theorist is not very willing to acknowledge that God Almighty
had any hand in that great Catastrophe of the world, though it be plainly told us
in Scripture that he was the immediate Author thereof, Genesis 6.17. Behold,
(says God) I even I, do bring a flood of waters upon the Earth. Nor do I see
any reason why he ought not to acknowledge the universal deluge of the world to
be Miraculous, as well as the destruction of Sodom and Gomorrah was by raining
of Fire and Brimstone; since they were both sent as punishments for the sins of
men: neither of which, without doubt, had ever happened if man had continued in
the state of Innocence.

The Scriptures give us an account of several Miracles wrought by the hand of
Omnipotence upon occasions, which did not so necessarily require them. Why
ought we then to deny this universal destruction of the earth to be miraculous?
Miracles are the great and wonderful works of God, by which he shows his
Dominion and Power, and that his Kingdom reaches over all, even Nature her
self, and that he does not confine himself to the ordinary methods of acting,
but can alter them according to his pleasure. Were not they given us to
convince us of the sacred truths contained in holy Scripture? Was it not by the
demonstrative force of Miracles that Moses and the Apostles proved their divine
Mission, beyond all that other Framers of Religions could pretend to? And though
our holy Faith stands so well confirmed by real miracles, that we are neither
to make nor admit of any false ones, yet certainly we are not to detract from
the value of the true ones, by pretending to deduce them from Natural and
Mechanical causes, when they are no ways explicable by them. It is therefore
both the easiest and safest way, to refer the wonderful destruction of the old
world to the Omnipotent hand of God, who can do whatsoever he pleases.

CHAP. II. Of the Chaos.
THat the Earth was formed from a Chaos, must be unquestionably owned by all,
who acknowledge the truth of the Holy Scriptures, for they tell us, that in the
beginning the Earth was without form and void, and darkness was upon the face
of the deep: which is a most excellent description of that Chaos, from which
the world arose. From it therefore the Theorist begins to frame his
Antediluvian earth by the sole help of Natural and Mechanical causes. He
supposes the Chaos to be the matter of the earth and heavens, without form or
regularity, reduced into a fluid Mass, wherein are the materials and
ingredients of all Bodies mingled in confusion one with another, without any
order of higher or lower, heavier or lighter, solid or volatile. The first
change he imagins that did happen to this Mass, was, that the heaviest and
grossest parts sunk down toward the middle of it (for there he supposes the
Center of its gravity) and constituted the hard and solid interior part of the
earth. The rest of the Mass which swam above, was also divided by the same
principle of gravity into two orders of bodies, the one liquid like water, the
other volatile like air. For the fine and active parts disintangling themselves
by degrees from the rest, did mount above them, and having motion enough to
keep themselves upon the wing, did play in these open places, where they were
to constitute that body we call Air: the other parts being grosser than these
settled in a mass together under the air, upon the body of the earth,
composing not only water strictly so called, but the whole Mass of liquors or
liquid bodies belonging to the earth; of which there were two kinds, one of
which is fat, oily and light, and the other lean and more earthy, like common
water. Now it being well known that these two liquors mixed together, if left
to themselves and the general action of nature, separate one from another, as
in Cream and thin Milk, oil and water, and such like. So we cannot doubt but
that the same effect would follow here, and the more oily and light parts of
this Mass would get above the other and swim upon it. Thus would the whole
Mass of liquids be divided into two lesser Masses.

Now if we look over again these two great Masses of Air and Water, we cannot
but imagine, that they were both at first very muddy and impure: for the air was
yet thick, gross and dark, there being abundance of terrestrial particles
swiming in it still, after the grossest were sunk down, and the lesser and
lighter, which remained in the Air, did sink too, but more slowly. So that in
their descent they did meet with the oily liquor upon the face of the deep,
which did entangle and stop them from passing any further, so as mixing there
with that unctuous substance, they did compose a certain slime, or fat, soft
earth, spread upon the face of the waters. And this thin and tender Orb
increased more and more as the little earthy particles detained in the air
could make their way to it; and mingled with that oily liquor, till at length
they sucked it all up, and were wholly incorporated together: which was the
first concretion and firm consistent substance upon the face of the Chaos.

After this fashion has the Theorist formed his Antediluvian habitable world,
which does not much differ from the Cartesian method of making the earth: only
Des Carts being somewhat wiser than the Theorist, would not allow the outward
crust, within whose bowels the waters were shut up, to be a habitable earth,
knowing well that neither man nor beast could live long without water. But he
made the crust first broken, and the waters flow out, before he placed any
inhabitants on it. Another small difference betwixt the two hypotheses, is,
that Mons. Des Carts never thought of making the exterior Orb of oily liquids,
which the Theorist asserts to be absolutely necessary toward the formation of
the crust. For if it were not, says he, for the oily liquor which swims upon
the surface of the Abyss, the particles of earth which fell through the air had
sunk to the bottom, and had never formed the exterior Orb of earth.

But notwithstanding this, I believe it may be easily made evident (tho neither
of their Systems are true) that the Therorist's hypothesis is the worst of the
two. Which I will prove from his own concessions: for he has already owned that
the oily liquor is much lighter than the watery Orb. He has mentioned also that
the terrestrial particles when falling from the air, if the Orb were only
water, would sink to the bottom; and therefore those particles must be heavier
than water. From thence, I think, it does necessarily follow, that these
terrestrial particles must also be heavier than the oily fluid which is lighter
than water, and therefore they will more easily descend through it than they did
through water, it being well known that there are several bodies which will swim
in water, but sink in oil.

But that which seems to have deceived the Theorist in this point was that he
had observed that small dust, though specifically heavier than oil, yet being
thrown upon it, it did not sink, and therefore he concluded, that a great deal
of it, if cast upon the surface of oil after the same manner, would not
descend, but form a solid concrete substance upon the surface of the oil. But
this consequence will soon appear to be false, if we consider the true reason
why some bodies, though specifically heavier than the fluid in which they are
put, do not sink, but swim upon the surface: which is this. That there is
scarce any liquid in nature which is absolutely fluid, and whose parts do not
resist separation one from another, and therefore will somewhat hinder or
retard the descent of bodies through them. Now this resistance (all other things
being alike) is always proportional to the surface of the body descending: so
that small bodies, whose weight or force to move or separate the parts of the
fluid, is but very little, may have a surface so large, that they cannot
overcome the resistance of the fluid, that is, they cannot make way for their
descent through the fluid, and therefore must swim upon the surface of it: but
the surfaces of bodies not increasing in the same proportion with their
solidities or weights, small bodies (will have a greater resistance in
proportion to their weight, than greater ones of the same intensive gravity,
and consequently the one will descend when the other cannot. As for example,
suppose a sphere of an inch diameter was put into an oily fluid, whose
resistance was just equal to the force of gravity in the descending body: there
being an aequilibrium, the former would swim in the latter. Now if another
sphere of two inches diameter and of the same intensive gravity were put in the
same fluid, in gravity or force by which it would separate the particles of the
fluid, would be eight times greater than the descending force of the former
sphere; and if in resistance were also eight times greater, it is plain that it
also could not descend: but the resistance being always, (as I noted before) as
the surface of the descending body, is only in the present case four times
greater; which will not equal the force of its gravity, and therefore the
sphere must descend. So in our present case, though some small grains of dust or
earth may swim upon the surface of Oil, yet these when increased by the
addition of a great many others which fall upon them, augment their weight (the
same resistance continuing) and must fall to the bottom.

Besides this, the earthy particles falling from a great height, some of them
descending from places as high as the Moon, as the Theorist will have them,
must needs in their descent ^^^^ire a very considerable degree of velocity,
with which falling upon the surface of the oily Orb, they will not only by that
force descend themselves, but also carry down with them, and condense
whatsoever bodies they met in their way or found swimming upon the surface of
the oil. Now that the force of a descending body is so great as to perform this
effect, I think is clear to any who considers that a heavy body runs down
fifteen foot in a second, and that the spaces through which it does move, are
always in duplicate proportion to its times, as is demonstrated by Galileo and
confirmed by the experiments of Riscioli: from whence by calculation it will
follow that a body would run down four thousand miles in the space of twenty
three seconds, abstracting from the resistance of the air. But if we will
suppose but the hundredth part of this space run through in that time, allowing
all the rest for the resistance of the Medium, yet even in that case, the
velocity would far exceed that of the swiftest bullet that can be shot out of a
Cannon.

Thus, I think, I have made it evident, that the particles of earth, after
falling through the air, could not rest upon the surface of the oily Orb, to form
there an hardened habitable (...), not only upon the account of their greater
gravity, which the Theorist acknowledges, and is also plain by experience,
common earth being near twice as heavy as water; but also upon the account of
the great force by which they must of necessity fall upon the liquid Orb, which
will carry them down toward the Center.

I hope now it will appear to any thinking man, plainly impossible, that either
oil or water should sustain such an immense heavy Orb, in which was not only
the soft earth, which in few places in ten foot deep, but also a prodigious
quantity of stones and minerals much heavier than water: for it is certain that
these great heavy bodies must have sunk to the bottom if they were left to
themselves, and yet these bodies make up the greatest part of our outward
earth. I know the Theorist does boldly affirm, that there was neither Metals
nor Minerals in the primitive earth, but this is both contrary to reason and
Scripture, for the Holy Scriptures tell us, that Tuhal Cain before the flood,
was an instructor of every Artificer in Brass and Iron: and I would fain know,
how there could be such Artificers before the flood when according to him there
was no such thing to be seen as Metals. Besides, it is hardly possible to build
an Ark, that should contain all the terrestrial and aerial animals, without
Iron. The Americans without any Iron made themselves small Cannoes of one solid
piece of Timber which they hollowed by burning, but it would be a strange Tree
that was of the dimensions of the Ark, and could contain so many animals as it
did. These things do (in my judgment) plainly show, that the Theorists opinion
in this point is utterly false.

From what I have already said, I think, it may be clearly demonstrated, that
the Fabric of the (...) can never be deduced from a Chaos, by the sole help of
Mechanical principles and Natural causes. For it is evident to any one who has
eyes (tho there have been some wise Philosophers of another opinion that the
Land is higher than the Water; and it is also plainly experienced, that common
arable earth or clay is much heavier than water and if we descend into the
Mines or Pits, we shall find the matter there to be three or four times heavier
than the earth above. Now it is plain from what I have already proved, that in
a Chaos, the true change that would follow from Mechanical principles and
Natural causes, is, that if all were fluid, the heaviest and solidest Bodies
would subside and fall to the Center, every one taking place according to the
specific gravity; so that the lighter Bodies would always be forced uppermost:
the earth therefore being heavier than the water, must of necessary place it
self nigher the Center, and leave the water to cover the face of the whole Orb.
Thus the surface of the World could never be inhabited by any other Animal than
Fishes. But in how much wiser order than this, has the great Creator of the
World placed all the Bodies of the earth, so that notwithstanding the greater
gravity of the Land, it is raised higher than the Sea, and thereby made fit and
habitable both for man and beasts, without the help of Natural and Mechanical
causes, which would have produced the contrary effect.

Several other arguments might be brought to demonstrate that the f^^me of this
World was the result of wisdom and counsel, and not of the necessary and
essential Laws of motion and gravitation, which could never have either made or
supported the World. I always wondered at the wild and extravagant fancy of the
Philosophers, who thought that brute and stupid matter would by it self,
without some supreme and intelligent director, fall into a regular and
beautiful structure, whose parts should be so extremely well adapted to various
uses, as if they had been the result of wisdom and contrivance. I will conclude
this Chapter with a discourse of the Theorist in his 10 th Chap. lib. 2.

In the construction of the Body of an Animal, (says he) there is more of
thought and contrivance, more of exquisite invention, and fit dispositions of
parts, than is in all the Temples, Palaces, Ships, Theaters, or any other
pieces of Architecture the World ever yet saw, and not Architecture only, but
all other Mechanism whatsoever, Engines, Clock-work, or any other is not
comparable to the Body of a living creature. Seeing then we acknowledge these
artificial works, wheresoever we meet with them, to be the effects of wit,
understanding and reason; is it not manifest partiality or stupidity rather, to
deny the works of nature, which excel these in all degrees, to proceed from an
intelligent principle? Let them take any piece of human art, or any Machine
framed by the wit of man, and compare it with the Body of an Animal, either for
diversity and multiplicity of workmanship, or curiosity in the Minute parts, or
just connection and dependence of one thing upon another, or fit subserviency to
the ends proposed of Life, Motion, Use, and Ornament to the creature: and if in
all these respects, they find it superior to any work of human production, as
they certainly must, why should it be thought to proceed from inferior and
senseless causes? ought we not in this as well as in other respects to
proportion the causes to the effect, and to speak truth, and bring an honest
verdict for Nature as well as for Art?

I desire the Theorist may apply this excellent discourse to himself, and
consider whether this Argument which he produces against the Epicureans and
Atheists, does not fully show the absurdity of his own Theory.

CHAP. III. Of the Mountains.
THE Theorist frames his Antediluvian Earth, smooth, regular and uniform,
without Mountains and without a Sea. The proof which he brings for this bold
assertion, is, that the Globe of the Earth could not rise immediately from a
Chaos into the irregular form, in which it is at present; the Chaos, says he,
being a fluid Mass, which we know does necessarily fall into a spherical
surface, whose parts are equidistant from the Center, in an equal and even
convexity one with another. And since upon the distinction of the Chaos, and
separation into several elementary Masses, the Water would naturally have a
superior place to the Earth, it is manifest there could be no habitable Earth
formed out of the Chaos unless by some concretion upon the face of the Water.
Then lastly seeing this concrete Orb of Earth upon the face of the Water would
be of the same form with the surface of the Water it was spread upon, there
being no causes that we know of, to make an inequality in it, we must conclude
it equal and uniform, and without Mountains, as also without a Sea. For the Sea
and all the Mass of Water was enclosed within this exterior Earth, which had
no other basis or foundation to rest upon.

This is the Theorist's great argument why the face of the primitive earth was
smooth and uniform and without Mountains; which if we consider narrowly, it
will appear to depend upon a precarious and false supposition, namely that the
great Mass of matter which we have now for our earth, was, when in a Chaos, an
entirely fluid Mass, which is a hard thing to be granted, since the greatest
parts of Bodies we have in the earth, at least so far as we can discern, are
hard and solid, and there is not such a quantity of water in the earth, as
would be requisite to soften and liquify them all. Besides, a great part of
them, as Stones and Metals, are incapable of being liquified by water. We must
conclude therefore that the Chaos was not so fluid a Mass, as would be
necessary for to have it is surface even and uniform. Why might not there have
been in this great Mass huge lumps of firm and solid matter, which without any
form, order, or regularity, might be jumbled together, and swimming up and
down, some on the surface, and some within the fluid? I will leave it to any to
judge which appears most like a Chaos, this which I have described, or his,
which is a regular, uniform fluid of a spherical figure, so composed and mixed
with all Bodies that no part of it, at least at the same distance from the
Center, is thicker than another: which must necessarily fall out, if the Chaos
had an exact spherical figure, as the Theorist supposes. If it were otherwise,
it is plain by Hydrostatical Principles, that there the fluid would rise
highest, where it is thinnest, or lightest; and consequently it would not have
its surface uniform, equally even and distant from the Center.

Indeed, methinks the Theorist's first figure of the Chaos, does very much
contradict his own hypothesis. There you may see represented great pieces of
hard and solid matter of no regular figure, swimming confusedly in the fluid;
any one of which seems to bear a far greater proportion, to the whole Mass
than the highest hills could do to the whole Earth.

But perhaps it may be said that all these hard and solid Bodies being heavier
than the fluid in which they swam, fell down and composed the Central solid.
And so far I must own indeed, that all the Bodies in that great Mass, which
were heavier than water, if left to the laws of gravity, would necessarily fall
down toward the Center. But certain it is that in such a great heap of matter,
and so different mixtures of all sorts, Mollia cum dures, fine pondere habentia
pondus.
there must be several that were specifically lighter than the water in which
they swam, and therefore after that the heaviest had fallen to the Center, they
would still float upon the surface, so much of them being under water as would
equal in quantity a bulk of water of the same gravity with the whole Mass, as
it is demonstrated by Archimedes 5. Proposition. Lib. 1. De Insidentibus
Humido; so that all the rest of the Mass standing out or being higher than the
fluid would compose a Mountain. And that hills may be thus made, I think is
confirmed by the observation of those who have failed in the Northern Seas,
where they see great Mountains of Ice floating upon the top of the waters, and
yet there is but a very small difference between the specific gravity of water
and Ice, it being as eight to seven according to Mr. Boyle's observations. If
then we will suppose all Mountains hollow and full of Caverns, there being a
great many to our certain knowledge that are so, or else joined to some light
matter, so that the whole composition may be lighter than water or the fluid
Chaos; this would necessarily produce Mountains.

And now I hope the Theorist will own that the evenness and uniformity of the
earth is not so necessary a consequence from its production out of a Chaos, as
he at first imagined: since I have showed him how mountains might have been
formed from his own principles of Statick^ and Gravitation. Yet I am of the
opinion that there were other principles concurring to the formation of the
world, besides gravitation and the known laws of motion, which I think if left
to themselves would never produce any tolerable or habitable world.

But supposing the efficient cause of Mountains unknown or impossible to be
assigned; yet still there remains the final cause to be inquired into, which
will do as well for our purpose. For if I prove them to be as useful to the
inhabitants of the primitive earth, as they are now to us, and that in our
present state they are absolutely necessary, not only for our well being, but
also for our bare subsistence; I think from thence it will demonstratively
follow that they were in the primitive earth as well as in ours. And therefore
the groundless assertion of the Theorist that the face of the Antediluvian
earth was smooth regular and uniform, is as false as it is bold and daring.

I know there is a sort of men in this age who have excluded all final causes
from the consideration of a Philosopher, as being unworthy of his enquiry,
supposing his business is only to find out the true formal and efficient causes
of all things, and not to concern himself with the design of nature, or the
great end for which the God of Nature made any thing. But indeed these men have
been so unhappy in their searches, that I dare boldly say they have not so much
as discovered the true real and efficient cause of any one of the Phenomenon
which was not known and better explained before; though they have pretended to
lay open the essences and formal causes of all things, and to show the manner,
how the Universe was formed from the principles of Matter and Motion.

But whatever they pretend, certain it is, that final causes are worthy of the
consideration of all men, and much more of a Philosopher. By them we are led
into the admiration of the wisdom of God, and discover his care and providence
over the world; By them we demonstrate that the World could never be made by
chance; but it must be a being of Infinite wisdom that formed it for such
various uses as are to be seen in it. And therefore by all wise and considering
men they are much more to be valued than efficient causes, if they could be
discovered; which only tell us how the thing was performed, and not the use for
which it was designed. It Is true indeed, it is not easy to discover the use of
every thing in the Universe; but from the admirable contrivance of those
things, the uses of which we do know, and from the infinite wisdom of God, it
may be easily concluded, that every thing in nature has its use, and is in some
manner serviceable to the good of the whole.

They who desire to see more concerning the usefulness of final causes, may
consult Mr. Boil of final causes, Mr. Ray's wisdom of God in the works of the
Creation, and some late ingenious essays upon the nature and evidence of faith
by Dr. Cockburn.

I must confess I cannot but think it a strange and presuming boldness in the
Theorist to assert, that Mountains are placed in no order one with another,
that can either respect use or beauty: and that if they are singly considered,
they do not consist of any proportion of parts, that is referable to any
design, or has the least footsteps of art or counsel. Notwithstanding this
strange assertion, I am sure, if we were without these shapeless and ill
figured old Rocks and Mountains, as he calls them, we should soon find the want
of them. It being impossible to subsist or live without them.

For setting aside the use they may have in the production of various Plants
and Metals, which are useful to mankind, and make a part of the complete
whole, and the Food which they yield to several Animals, which are designed by
Nature to live upon them; The high Hills being a refuge for the wild Goats, and
the Rocks for the Conies; and not to mention the end they serve for in
directing the Inland winds, and altering the weather, in fencing and bounding
Empires and Countries, in all which without doubt they do us very considerable
service; there is moreover one great and Universal use, which makes them
absolutely necessary for the subsistence of Mankind. For without them it is
certain we should have no Rivers, nor fresh currents of waters, and
consequently we should want one of the greatest supports of Life. This the
Learned and Ingenious Mathematician and Philosopher Mr. Edmund Halley has
effectually proved in the Philosophical Transactions, where he gives us an
account of the rise of Springs and Rivers from Vapors, Philosophical
Transactions Number 192.
That are raised copiously in the Sea, and by the winds are carried over the
low Land to the high ridges of Mountains, where they are compelled by the
stream of the air to mount up with it to the tops of the Mountains, where they
presently precipitate, gleeting down by the cranies of the stones, and part of
the Vapor entering into the Caverns of those Hills, the waters thereof gather
as in an Alembick, into the basins of stone it finds; which being once filled,
all the overplus of water that comes thither, runs over by the lowest place and
breaking out by the sides of the Hills, forms single Springs, many of these
running down by the valleys or gutts between the ridges of the hills, and
coming to unite, form little rivulets or brooks, many of these again meeting in
one common valley and gaining the plain ground being grown less rapid become a
River, and many of these being united in one common channel make such streams
as the Rhine, the Rhone, and the Danube, which last one would hardly think the
collection of waters condensed out of vapors, unless we consider how vast a
tract of ground that River drains, and that it is the sum of all those springs
which break out upon the South side of the Carpathian Mountains, and on the
North side of the immense ridge of the Alps, which is one continued chain of
Mountains from Switzerland to the black Sea, so that it may almost pass for a
rule, that the magnitude of a River or the quantity of water, which it
evacuates, is proportional to the length and height of the ridges from whence
its fountain arises.

All this I take to be undeniably evident. For that vapors are raised by the
heat of the Sun from the Sea in such vast quantities as will be sufficient to
serve all the Rivers, the same ingenious Mr. Halley has demonstrated by
Calculations. But it is also demonstrable that these vapors being of the same
specific gravity with the air in which they swim, must follow its motion, that
is, they must be carried by the winds over land until they meet with such an
obstacle as a hill in their way which resists their motion, where they must
precipitate and gleet down by its side and so form Rivers and Springs. All this
is not only clear from reason, but is also confirmed by the experience of the
same Mr. Halley while he was at St. Helena as he tells you, in the
Philosophical Transactions.

And now methinks it is plain that hills are so very far from being placed in
the earth without any art or contrivance, that they demonstrate to us the
admirable wisdom of their great maker, who has thus formed them for so
necessary ends. If the earth were smooth, regular and uniform; water without
doubt would stagnate and stink, for how is it possible for water to run where
there is no rising ground, no upper land from which it is to descend to the
lower and even parts of the earth.

I know the Theorist thinks, that he has clearly solved that great difficulty
by the oval figure of his Antediluvian earth, in which he fancies that Rivers
will run notwithstanding the earths regular and even surface. But when I come
to discuss that point I will show that the earth has not, nor ever had any such
oval figure as he supposes, and upon supposition it had, yet even in that case
there could be no current Water or Rivers; and where there is no current waters
there must be but uncomfortable living. How many great parts of the world lie
perfectly destitute of inhabitants for want of waters? Travelers tell us
fearful stories of the incredible extremities they have suffered in going
thorough the Deserts of Arabia for want of fresh waters.

It is plain therefore, that if the primitive earth was inhabitable there must
be Mountains in it, for I think I have already proved that in a smooth regular
earth there could be no Rivers. And the great advantages, which Countries reap
by being well furnished with Rivers, is very evident; for without them there
could be no great Towns, nor any converse with far inland Countries; since
without them it is almost impossible to supply a vast multitude of People with
things necessary for life. If we should suppose the Thames taken away from
London, or it is course diverted so as to be at a great distance from it; there
is no doubt but that City would quickly to its loss, very much find the want of
so great an advantage; and from being one of the greatest in the space of some
few hundred years, it would come to be one of the least Cities of the Universe.

It cannot be said, though Rivers are now in the present state of the world of
great use and benefit to mankind, that in the antediluvian earth there was no
such necessity for them, there being no such great traffic as now, nor such a
number of people to be maintained by it. For this seeming objection is clearly
solved by the Theorist himself in his third Chapter Book I. where he proves the
number of the antediluvian people to have been at least as great as they are
now, and the world altogether as well peopled. And if so, since men lived then
to a very great age, (some of them to nine hundred years) they would be well
taught by experience, and understand most of those things which are useful and
profitable for them, as well as we do now. But I need not go about to prove
there were Antediluvian Rivers, since it is plainly asserted by Moses that
there were such in the second Chapter of Genesis, whose authority I hope the
Theorist will not deny. For he himself acknowledges their existence before the
Flood, and endeavors to explain their rise without the help of mountains;
which explication in its due place I will prove to be false and impossible.

Since therefore it is plain from Reason, from Scripture, and the Theorist's
own concessions, that there were Rivers in the primitive Earth, and seeing it
is impossible for any such to be without Mountains, without higher and lower
grounds (the Theorist's Oval-figured earth not being sufficient for such an
effect) From thence it does (...) evidently follow, that Mountains were before
the flood. And therefore his assertion that the primitive earth was smooth,
regular and uniforme, is false and absurd.

CHAP. IV. Of the Perpendicular position of the Axis of the Earth to the plane
of the Ecliptic.
AMong other Characters of the Golden Age with which the Theorist endows his
primitive Earth, one is a perpetual Spring which was then all the world over,
all the parts of the years being of one and the same tenor, face, and temper.
Then, says he, there was no Winter nor Summer, Seed time or Harvest, but a
continual temperature of the Air and Verdure of the Earth. The reason which he
brings for this assertion is, that at first the Axis of the Earth was parallel
to the Axis of the Ecliptic, and consequently the plane of the Equator being
coincident with the plane of the Ecliptic, the Sun in its diurnal motion would
seem to move always in the Equator, making equal Days and Nights throughout
the year.

Notwithstanding this fine description of the Theorist's, I hope to make it
appear in this Chapter, that the right position of the Earth (as he calls it)
is so very far from being desirable as he imagins it is, that it is one of the
worst it could have, and that therefore the Earth was never placed by God
Almighty at the beginning of the world in such a position. For I here lay it
down as an axiom which I am confident the Theorist will allow, that God at the
beginning placed the Earth in such a position as was most advantageous to the
whole, and tho perhaps another position might have been fitter for some
particular place, yet the whole would have been the worse for it: God by his
infinite wisdom and goodness always choosing such constitutions and positions
of things as bring with them the greatest good and utility to the Universe.

Let us therefore consider whither this right position, which the Theorist says
was that of the primitive Earth was the best it could have, and if after
examination we find that no such Character as that of best belonged to it, but
rather the contrary, it being by far more disadvantageous to the Earth than the
present one, we may confidently conclude from the above mentioned axiom that
the Earth never had any such position.

That great and learned Astronomer Kepler, who certainly had more than an
ordinary penetration (nay perhaps a divine impulse) in discovering the works of
Nature and Providence, in his Epitome Astronomiae Copernicanae, has showed that
the present position of the earths Axis is by far preferable to any other,
especially to that of the perpendicular position to the plane of the Ecliptic,
for he tells us in his Lib. 3. Part 4. That if the Axis of the earth about
which it turned stood at right angles, with the plane of the Ecliptic, and the
earth in the mean time turned round the Sun as it does now, that then indeed
the Sun would seem to rise and set every day, and make its circuit from West to
East, under the fixed stars in the space of a year, but then there would be no
division of the Ecliptic into halves, quarters, and signs, no distinction of
the year by its different qualities of heat and cold, every night would be
equal to every day, there would be two places in the Earth to whose inhabitants
more than half the Sun could never appear but its Center would continually turn
round in their Horizons, never rising higher nor falling lower, the nearer one
came to the equator, so much higher would he have the Sun in his meridian, but
in the same place it would always be at a constant height at twelve of the
Clock. In the equator, the Sun throughout the whole year would always be
vertical when it comes to the meridian, and there only, would there be an
intense and perpetual Summer, when at the poles, and in places near them, there
would be an eternal Winter without any intermission of Frost and Snow. The Sun
also would always Rise and Set in the same points of their Horizons, and
therefore, there would be no alteration in the Earth, but upon the account of
day and night, and no sort of changes in the year which would always keep the
same tenor and face, the annual motion of the earth being of no use.

These are the effects which the Learned Kepler has showed, would necessarily
follow from the position of the Earths axis, which besides, that it makes the
Earths Annual circuit round the Sun of no sort of use and advantage to it, (And
this I suppose cannot well agree with the infinite wisdom of its Maker,) it
brings with it such a train of consequences, which if men would consider, I
believe there would be few so fond of changes, as to be willing to have the
present oblique position altered for the perpendicular one of the Theorist,
which would render this whole Island no better than a wilderness, and the
greatest part of the Earth not habitable.

For under the AEquinoctial, to whose inhabitants, the Sun would continually at
twelve of the Clock, shine perpendicularly and even throughout the Torrid Zone
there would be an intolerable scorching heat; In the Frigid Zone the cold could
not be endured, and the greatest part of the two temperate Zones would not have
a sufficient quantity of heat to ripen their fruits. All men in England are
sensible that the heat we have in Summer, is but just great enough to bring our
Corn and Fruits to perfection, and therefore if the heat we have in Summer,
were no greater than it is now about the 10 th of March, or the 11 th of
September, the Ground would not be able to produce any vegetables to supply us
with food, so that all of us must have changed our Climate for some more
fertile Soil which receives more of the Suns influence.

This may serve to show how vain and false the Theorist's assertion is, that
the primitive earth had its axis perpendicular to the plane of the ecliptic,
and that this position is so far from being the best it could have, that it may
be justly reckoned among the worse sort of positions. I come now to show the
great advantages we reap by the present position of the Earth, and how apt it
is to serve the ends for which it was designed by its wise contriver.

Kepler in the above mentioned book tells us, that the earth was designed a
place for those things which are liable to Generation and Corruption, and
therefore it was by no means fit that the Sun should shine upon every part of
it throughout the year with an equal tenor and force, but there ought to be
such alterations and changes of his heat as are necessary to produce the
designed effects, for it is plain that different degrees of heat are required
for the production and ripening of most Plants, the heat that is requisite for
the first growth of a vegetable, not being sufficient for the ripening and
perfecting the seed thereof, and that degree of heat which is necessary for
bringing the seed to perfection, would quite wither the green and tender herb.

Now all this is obtained by the present position of the Earth, and the
inclination of its Axis, to the plane of the Ecliptic, for from thence arises
the variety of Seasons, and different degrees of heat and cold. We perceive in
the Spring time, that we have the heat of the Sun still increasing in such a
measure, as the Plants require for their nutrition and growth. At last the Sun
arrives at his greatest meridian height, and then the Plants bring forth their
Seeds which grow every day more and more perfect and then are fully ripe and
fit for food, and when the Sun has performed his work in our part of the World,
he returns again to the tropic of Capricorn, to make room for the Snow and
Ice which comes in the Winter for the moistening and preparing the earth for a
new Crop. And tho in the Torrid Zone, they never have any Snow or Ice, yet at
the time of the year when the Sun is vertical to them, there falls such a
quantity of rain, as not only cools the Air, and makes the Heat of the Sun
tolerable, but also fattens the ground and prepares it for the production of
fruits.

But there is one more considerable advantage which we reap by the present
position of the earth which I will here insert: because I do not know that it is
taken notice of by any. And it is that by the present inclination of the earths
axis to the plane of the ecliptic, we who live beyond forty five degrees of
Latitude, have more of the Suns heat throughout the year than if the Sun shined
always in the equator, that is if we take the sum of the Suns actions upon us
both in Summer and Winter, they are greater than its heat would be if it moved
always in the equator, or which is the same thing, the aggregate of the Suns
heat upon us while it describes any two opposite parallels, is greater than it
would be if in these two days it described the equator, whereas in the Torrid
Zone, and even in the temperate almost as far as forty five degrees of
Latitude, the sum of the Suns heat in Summer and Winter is less than what it
would be were the axis of the Earth perpendicular to the plane of the ecliptic.

I know Dr. Bently in his last Lecture for the Confutation of Atheism, asserts
that tho the axis had been perpendicular, yet take the whole year about we
should have had the same measure of heat we have now. But I am not surprised to
find an error of this nature asserted by one who as it appears is not very well
skilled in Astronomy; for, in the same Lecture, he confidently says, that it is
matter of fact and experience that the Moon always shows the same Face to us,
not once wheeling about her own Center, whereas it is evident to any one who
thinks, that the Moon shows the same face to us for this very reason, because
she does turn once, in the time of her period, about her own Center. But it
were to be wished, that great Critics would confine their Labors to their
Lexicons, and not venture to guess in those parts of Learning which are capable
of demonstration, for this is our present case, and I undertake to show, that
we who live in this part of the World, and have greatest need of the Suns heat,
have more of it take the whole year about, than if the Sun moved continually in
the equator, whereas they that live in the Torrid Zone and in places near them,
and who are rather too much exposed to the heat of the Sun, than too little,
have by this means less of his heat than they would have had the earth observed
a right position.

I think this consideration cannot but lead us into a transcendent admiration
of the divine wisdom, which has placed the earth in such a posture as brings
with it several conveniences beyond what we can easily discover without study
and application, and I make no question, but if the rest of the works of nature
were well observed, we should find several advantages which accrue to us by
their present constitution which are far beyond the uses of them that are yet
discovered, by which it will plainly appear that God has chosen better for us
than we could have done for our selves, but to return to our assertion which I
design to prove by the Canon invented by that excellent Geometer Mr. Edmund
Halley in the Phil. Trans. Numb. 203. viz. That the Sum of the Sines of the
Suns Meridian Altitudes in any two opposite parallels, being multiplied into
the Sine of the semidiurnal Arch, and thereunto adding in Summer, or
substracting in Winter, the product of the length of the semidiurnal Arch, (
taken according to Van Ceulen's Numbers) into the difference of the above said
Sines of Meridian Altitudes: the Sum in one case, and difference in the other
shall be as the Aggregate of all the Sines of the Suns Altitude, during his
appearance above the Horizon in the proposed day. Thus that I may use Mr.
Halley's own example. Let the Solstitial Heat in and be required at London,
Lat. 51. 3 2.

Diff. Ascen. 33-11.

Arc. Semidi. aestiv. 123-11,

Arc. Semidi. hyb. 56-49. Sin. '638923

Arc. aestiv. mensura 2,149955.

Arc. hyber. mensura 991683.

Then 1, 140931 in, 836923 + '624417 in 2, 149955 = 2, 29734 And 1, 140931 in,
886929 -, 624417 in, 991638=33895 So that the Suns action will be as 2, 29734
in the day of the Summer Solstice and as 0, 33895 in the Day of the Winter
Solstice.

According to this Canon I have computed the Heat of the Sun for every five
degrees of its declination both North and South, at the Latitude of 51 degrees
as in the following Table, The Suns Declin. Heat in North Declination. Heat in
South Declination. 0 1, 25864 1, 25864 5 1, 47393 1, 04839 10 1, 692937,845079
15 1, 91489,65091 20 2, 13919,46916 23 2, 2991 `37980 By which it will appear
that the heat of the Sun in the Latitude of 51 degrees while it describes by
its diurnal motion any too opposite parallels, is greater than if the Sun these
two days had described the equator, as for example, the heat of the Sun in the
20 th degree of North declination is as 2, 13919 and in the 20 th degree of
South declination as, 46916 which two added together make, 2, 60135 which is
more than double the number 1, 25864 which represents the heat in one
equinoctial day, and so in all the rest of the parallels. After the same manner
the action of the Sun in Summer and Winter may be easily Calculated for any
Latitude or distance from the equator, by which it will plainly appear that
the heat of the Sun while it moves from Aries to Libra, that is during the time
it runs through the six Northern signs together with its heat while it moves
from Libra to Aries again, in the six Southern signs, is greater to us who live
beyond the 45 th degree of Latitude, and consequently stand most in need of the
Suns heat, than it would be had the axis of the earth stood at right angles
with the plane of the ecliptic, by which the Sun would seem to move in no
other circle than the equator as the Theorist imagines it did before the Flood.

The next thing I am to make out is that the heat of the Sun in the Torrid
Zone, and even in the two temperate Zones almost as far as to the 45 th degree
of Latitude is less than it would have been had the Theorist's position of the
earth been the true one and this is manifest by the following Table Calculated
by Mr. Halley in the above mentioned Philosophical Transactions. Lat. Sun in
Sun in Sun in 0 20000 20290 18341 10 19696 18341 15834 20 18794 21737 13166 30
17321 22651 10124 40 15221 23048 6944 50 12855 22991 3798 60 10000 22773 1075
70 6840 23543 000 80 3473 24673 000 90 0000 25055 000 Where it plainly appears,
that the aggregate of the Suns heat while he is in and and so in any other two
opposite parallels, is less to those who live in the Torrid zone, than if the
Sun by his diurnal motion had described continually the equator.

Thus we see how admirably convenient the present position of the earth is upon
several accounts, and how excellently it is fitted to our use and purposes
above any other that we can imagine and therefore we can never enough admire
the Divine wisdom for such an excellent contrivance, This shows us also how
much we ought to regard final causes in Natural Philosophy, which in things of
this nature are by far more certain and convincing than any of the Physical and
Mechanical ones which the Theorist brings to prove the truth of his assertion
which have brought him into many strange and dangerous errors, it being just
that God Almighty should deliver these men up to follow strange delusions, who
neglecting to proceed upon final causes the true principles of Natural
Philosophy, and to square their notions according to the Divine Revelations
contained in Holy Scripture have followed the wild and extravagant Fancies of
their own imaginations.

Another Argument which may be brought to convince the Theorist that the axis
of the earth was at first inclined to the plane of the ecliptic as it is now,
is, that it is certain by observation that Saturn and Jupiter (whom the
Theorist will allow to have suffered no Deluge as yet) have their axis not
perpendicular but inclined to the planes of their orbits, and the position is
true of all the other Planets as far as they can be observed, and therefore it
is reasonable to suppose that the same must have been the position of the earth
at the beginning, for where universally the same effect is observed, there it
will be agreeable to the maxims of Natural Philosophy, to assign the same
cause, nature being uniform and not taking different methods to perform the
same thing.

It remains now that I examine the reasons the Theorist alleges to prove that
the earth before the flood had its axis perpendicular to the plane of the
ecliptic; it is says he, the immediate result of gravity or libration that a
body freely left to its self should settle in such a posture as best answers to
its gravitation, and this earth whereof we speak being uniform and every way
equally balanced, there is no reason why it should incline at one end more
than at the other toward the Sun, as if you will suppose a Ship to stand North
and South under the equator if it was equally built and equally balanced it
would not incline to one Pole more than to the other but keep its axis parallel
to the axis of the earth, so those great Ships that sail about the Sun once in
so many years whilst they are uniformly built and equally poised keep steady
and even with the axis of their orbits, but if they loose that equality and the
center of their gravity change the heavier end will incline more toward the
center of their motion, and the other end will recede from it, so particularly
our earth which makes one in that airy fleet when it escaped so narrowly being
shipwrackt in the great Deluge, was however so broken and disordered that it
lost its equal poise and thereupon the center of its gravity changing, one Pole
became more inclined toward the Sun and the other more removed from it, in
which skew posture it has stood ever since.

Here the Theorist puts his false reasoning in fine words, and dresses it out
in gayety according to the present mode, that it may go the smoother off, but
at the same time he shows us how little he is skilled either in Astronomy or
Geometry, for he tells us in one place, that the earth stands inclined to the
Sun or the Ecliptic, but how a sphere can be inclined to a plane passing
through its center is far beyond my Geometry to conceive. I am sure he will
find no such thing said by the Geometers or the Astronomers before him, but he
may be easily pardoned for this small error, because he meant well, viz. that
the axis of the earth was inclined to the plane of the Ecliptic with which it
makes an angle of 66 But he has committed a far greater blunder than this which
is not so easily to be forgiven him, for a World-maker ought at least to
understand something of Astronomy and of the Copernican system which he
embraces, but it is plain that he does not know the Elements of that system,
since he asserts that one Pole of the earth is more inclined to the Sun than
the other, this is a position I never heard was given to the earth before. I
wish he would inform us which of the two Poles is most inclined to the Sun, for
I am sure Copernicus, Kepler and Gallileo the first revivers of the Pythagorean
system never said any such thing, they held that both Poles were equally
removed from the plane of the ecliptic,, the axis which joins them making with
it an angle of 66 and keeping a position always parallel to it self and
therefore whatever inclination one Pole had at any time of the year to the Sun,
the opposite Pole would have the same inclination at the opposite time of the
year, and therefore both Poles are equally inclined to the Sun.

It Is true indeed that if one hemisphere were heavier than the other; the
heaviest Pole would always look toward the Sun to which it gravitates, and by
consequence there would be no parallelisme observed in the axis of the earth,
for if there were a Globe swimming in water, one of whose Poles were heavier
than the other, it is demonstrable that the heaviest side would always be
toward the center of the earth, but since the earth does always keep its axis
parallel to it self, and by that means makes the variety of seasons which
otherwise would not happen, I think it a demonstration that the Theorist's
opinion in this point is false and ridiculous. For if at the Deluge the earth
had lost its equal poise, and its Center of gravity had been altered as he will
have it, the true effect of this alteration would be that the Pole which was
next to the Center of gravity had been always turned toward the Sun, and the
people living near it had enjoyed a perpetual Summer and one continued day
without any night, whilst those in the opposite Pole had lived in perpetual
darkness, Frost and Snow, having but one eternal Winter without any vicissitude
of seasons. These therefore being the necessary consequences of such a change
of gravity in the earth as the Theorist imagines, and since none of them did
ever happen to it, but the earth does still keep its axis parallel to it self;
I think it is demonstratively evident that the earth received no such shock by
the Deluge as was sufficient to alter the Center of its gravity, and
consequently the position of its Poles in respect of the Sun.

It Is true, a sphere put in aequilibration, and made turn round about a point
without any other motion, necessarily keeps all its diameters parallel to
themselves, and by consequence the axis which is one of them must also be
parallel to its self, for since the time of its revolution is determined, it
will perform its period in that time with the least motion possible, which is
only when all the diameters of the sphere in all parts of its orbit are
parallel to themselves as is demonstrated by the Geometers, Nature generally
taking the shortest courses in all its operations, at least it takes that one
and determinate method for performing its work, which the Philosophers call the
unicum in natura, I wonder therefore why some should make a third motion for
the Earth, whereby it keeps its axis always parallel to it self, for this is
rather the effect of rest than any new motion; for it is not the parallelism,
but the declination of the axis from exact parallelism, (by which the Stars
seem to move tho very slowly according to the series of the signs) which ought
to be called a new motion.

But I will pass from this Subject, and consider the Theorists Argument for the
right position of the Earth drawn from its aequilibration, which he says is
the immediate result and common effect of gravity or libration. For a Body
says he freely left to its self in a fluid medium will settle it self in such
a posture as will best answer to its gravity, and the Earth being uniformly
balanced, there is no reason why it should incline at one end more than at the
other toward the Sun. This he illustrates by the similitude of a Ship equally
balanced, and placed North and South under the equator. But after all this
Argument and Similitude, I can see as yet no reason why the axis of the Earth
should be perpendicular to the plane of the Ecliptic more than any other of
its diameters, for it is demonstarted by the writers of Hydrostaticks, that a
sphere whose center of Gravity is the same with its center of Magnitude if put
in a fluid of the same specific gravity with it self, will retain any given
position, and therefore there can be no reason drawn from the earths gravity or
equilibration why the position of its axis should be perpendicular to the plane
of the Ecliptic rather than any other of its diameters.

CHAP. V. Of Rivers.
THE Theorist having represented to us the first Earth as a smooth regular and
uniform body without Mountains and without a Sea; In the 5th Chap. of his
second book he starts a great difficulty how it was watered, from what causes,
and in what manner, how could Fountains rise or Rivers flow in an Earth of that
form and nature? he has shut up the Sea with thick walls on every side, and
taken away all communication that could be 'twixt it and the external earth, he
has removed all the Hills and Mountains where the Springs use to rise, and
whence the Rivers descend to water the face of the ground, and lastly, he has
left no issue for these Rivers, no Ocean to receive them, or any place to
disburthen themselves into. So that his new found World is like to be a dry and
barren wilderness, and so far from being Paradisaical that it would scarce be
Habitable.

These indeed are great difficulties, and the Theorist has acknowledged them to
be such, for he says there was nothing in his whole Theory that gave so rude a
stop to his thoughts as that part of it concerning the Rivers of the first
Earth. But as the difficulties are great, and as one would think insuperable,
so no doubt the glory that redounds to the Theorist must be nothing less, if
they be clearly taken away.

To understand therefore what the state of the primitive Rivers and waters
would be, he finds it necessary to consider and examine how the rains fell in
the first Earth, and he tells us that the order of nature in the Regions of the
an would be very different from what it is now; there could be no violent
motions there, nor any thing that proceeded from extremity of cold, as Ice,
Snow, or Hail, and as for Winds, they could neither be impetuous nor irregular
in that Earth of his, seeing there were no Mountains, nor any other
inequalities to obstruct the course of the vapors, nor any unequal seasons,
nor unequal actions of the Sun, but as for waters, meteors, dews and rains,
there could not but be plenty of these in some part or other of that Earth; for
the action of the Sun in raising vapors was very strong, and very constant,
and the Earth was at first moist and soft, and according as it grew more dry,
the rays of the Sun would pierce more deep into it, and reach at length the
great abyss which lay underneath and was an unexhausted storehouse of new
vapors. Now the same heat which extracted these vapors so copiously, would
also hinder them from condensing into rain in the warmer parts of the Earth,
and there being no mountains or contrary winds or any such causes, to stop or
compress them, they would take their course where they were least resisted,
which is toward the Poles and the colder regions of the Earth; for East and
West, they would meet with as warm an air, and vapors as much agitated as
themselves, which therefore will not yield to their progress that way, but
North and South they will find a more easy passage so that the concourse, of
vapors which were raised chiefty about the Equinoctial and middle parts of it
would be toward the extreme parts or the Poles. When these vapors thus driven
by the heat of the Sun were arrived in the cooler Regions near the Poles they
would be condensed into rain, for wanting there the cause of their agitation,
namely the heat of the Sun, their motion would soon begin to languish, and they
would fall close to one another in the form of water.

Thus he thinks he has found a sufficient source for waters in the first earth,
which would never fail, neither diminish nor overflow. But though he esteems this
an inexhaustible storehouse, and an easy way to furnish Waters, yet if it be
narrowly examined he will find it not in the least sufficient for such an
effect.

For first according to his own hypothesis there could be no Rivers for a long
time after the formation of the Earth till the Sun had cracked the outward crust
thereof, and its heat had reached the great abyss which the Theorist must needs
own will require a very considerable space of time, one would think it would be
several hundreds of years before the Suns heat could perform such an effect,
during all which time the inhabitants of the Earth must be without waters and
rivers, and lead very sad and uncomfortable lives. Is this the fruit of the
Golden Age? or is this consistent with the happiness of the antediluvian
Fathers? in my opinion it is directly contrary to the Scriptures, for they give
us an account of rivers immediately after the formation of the Earth.

But 2 dly, I will hereafter prove that the Suns Beams did never yet reach so
deep in the Earth as the thickness of the first crustation must have been, and
consequently there never could arise any vapors from the abyss to furnish the
rivers.

3 dly, Supposing the heat of the Sun to have cracked the crust, and to have
raised vapors from the abyss, yet it is certain it could not do it in such a
quantity as would be sufficient to furnish the Earth with waters. And now the
Theorist will tell us, what can be more sufficient than the whole orb of water,
sure this would do or else nothing could, this he will say is an inexhaustible
treasure that the rivers could never drain, and therefore there was no fear of
want of waters from thence. Yes there was reason to fear it very much, for
supposing that there was enough in the abyss, yet perhaps the action of the Sun
would not raise so much as would be sufficient to water the Earth, so there may
be enough of Gold in the bowels of the earth, but if we cannot come at it we
shall never be the richer for it.

That I may examine this, I will suppose that the mouths of these cracks which
the Sun is said to have made by its heat to be a 1/10000 part of the surface of
the earth, this will exceed 2600 square miles which I think is as much as the
Theorist can reasonably allow them, for if it were but one continued crack
round the equator of a miles breadth it would not exceed 25000. miles.

2 dly, I will suppose with the Theorist that one half of the surface of the
present earth is Land and the other is Sea, and by consequence the mouths of
those pits or cracks must be one five thousandth part of the whole of the now
Ocean. Now it is evident that vapors drawn by a determinate heat from any
quantity of water in a determinate time are always proportionable to the
surface of that water: for from a double surface there will be exhaled a double
quantity of vapor, from a triple surface a triple quantity of vapor, and so
on. Therefore the surface of the Sea being 5000 times bigger than the mouths of
these cracks, there will be exhaled from it 5000 times more water than what in
that case could be drawn from the abyss. And therefore if the whole crust of
the Antediluvian earth were but of the same bigness with our now dry land, it
would have but one five thousandth part of the water to furnish it, that our
present earth has; but because according to the Theorist, the surface of the
dry land was then twice as big as it is now, there being at that time no Ocean
which takes up one half of the surface: therefore it is plain that any
particular Country in that case would have ten thousand times less water than
it now has, there being five thousand times fewer vapors to water a double
surface of Land; that is, in a Country, as big as the Island of Britain, there
would not be so much as one River, nor so much rain in a year as does now fall
in one day.

We see therefore how well the Theorist has watered his Antediluvian earth from
the inexhaustible treasure of the abyss as he calls it. For however immense
that great storehouse was, yet still there would be a great scarcity of water
on the surface of the earth.

Not. Except we will suppose the heat of the Sun in the primitive world
considerably greater than it is in our earth, there must be less water drawn
from the abyss than what I showed from the former Calculation, and that because
the Sun could not shine so long upon the surface of the abyss through the cracks
as it does now upon the Sea, by reason the crust of the earth would intercept
all the rays of the Sun till it came to be of a considerable height as is
plain by this Figure. Where if S represent the Sun in the equator, and PQ the
sensible Horizon, mn the surface of the abyss opened by the pit PnmR the Sun
must be at the height HS above the Horizon before its heat can reach the
surface of the waters. The heat also upon the surface nm would not be so great
by reason of the cold orb of earth which did incircle it. And upon these and
some other accounts the Sun would not raise so much water from the abyss as it
does now from the same quantity of surface in the Sea, but I will not take any
advantage of these considerations leaveing them to be a recompense for the
greater influence of the Sun which the Theorist says it had upon the
Antediluvian earth.

From hence we may fully answer an objection of the Atheists against a
providence, for say they, where is the wisdom of the Creator in having so much
useless Sea to no purpose and so little dry Land, for which men are every day
fighting, might not the half of the Sea have been dry Land. which might have
been serviceable to mankind? But this as most of their other arguments against
providence proceeds from a deep ignorance of Natural Philosophy. For if there
were but half the Sea that now is, there would be also but half the quantity of
vapors, and consequently we could have but half so many Rivers as now there
are, to supply all the dry Land we have at present and half as much more, The
wise Creator therefore, did so prudently order it, that the Sea should be large
enough to supply vapors for all the Land, which it would not do if it were
less than it now is.

But I will suppose with the Theorist, that there was a quantity of vapors
exhaled by the heat of the Sun from the abyss sufficient to furnish plentifully
the whole earth. Yet still there is a great doubt how Rivers could be formed:
for what ways could the vapors take their course to be condensed and form
Springs if there were no winds to carry them, certainly they would stagnate
near the mouths of the cracks and leave the rest of the earth never a whit the
better for them, and every one that wanted water must go as far as the equator
to fetch it. No says the Theorist there was no need for that, the vapors
being very much agitated and rarefied by the heat of the Sun, and being once in
the open air, their course would be that way where they found the least
resistance to their motion, and that would certainly be toward the Poles and
colder regions of the earth, for East and West they would meet with as warm an
air, and vapors as much agitated as themselves which therefore would not yield
to their progress that way: But toward North and South they would find a more
easy passage, the cold of these parts attracting them as we call it, that is,
making way to their motion and dilatation without much resistance, as mountains
and cold places usually draw vapors from the warmer.

Here is a new use or employment the Theorist has found for the Mountains and
Cold to be Gentlemen-ushers, for the vapors, and make way for their motion. He
had told us before that the Cold and Hills attracted vapors, but because that
word was not Philosophical, (being exploded and ridiculed by those who call
themselves new Philosophers) he explains himself and tells us by attraction he
meant the making way for their motion and dilatation; but how a Mountain can
make way to the dilatation and motion of vapors is far beyond my pitch of
understanding, to me it seems reasonable that they should resist both, and
hinder the vapors either from moving forward or dilating themselves. Sure I
am, Cold is so far from being any ways conducive to the dilatation of vapors,
that it does always condense them, as is plain by cold stone walls which
always condense the vapors that fall upon them.

But the vapors says the Theorist, are very much agitated by the heat of the
Sun, which gives them their motion; and therefore they would take their course
toward the Poles where they find the least resistance. What other motion the
heat of the Sun can give them, but upwards I cannot imagine, for by it they are
raised and made specifically lighter than the air in which they swim, and
therefore by a known principle in Hydrostaticks they must rise till they come
to air of the same gravity with themselves, but then what should drive them to
the Poles? their great agitation says he, and the little resistance they find
that way, the air in the East and West being more agitated than that toward
North and South, and therefore will more resist their motions.

This is a very dark answer, for I cannot conceive why the air upon the North
or South side of an atome of vapor should be more agitated than that upon the
East and West side, for sure I am, there is the same degree of heat on all
sides of it, and therefore upon that account it should find an equal resistance
every way. Nay the Theorist, or such an other Philosopher might with as good
reason have proved, that their course would have been only East and West, for
there the air was very much rarefied and made thin by the heat of the Sun, the
air toward North and South, not being so much rarefied was thicker, and
therefore would resist more, as water which is a thicker medium does more
resist the motion of bodies in it than air. This seems to me to be a much
better grounded opinion than the Theorists, though both of them are absolutely
false, and may be disproved by the very same reasons, for how can any man fancy
that vapors only driven by the heat of the Sun, would travel some thousands of
miles through a fluid body of air as dense as themselves, this seems to be
against the common notions of every man, and therefore I think needs no
particular calculations; I cannot but believe that the Theorist did see these
absurdities, since they are so very palpable, but finding no way to extricate
himself from these difficulties, he was fain to make the best shift he could,
which is a very bad one, and still the worse by his management.

But so far is the Theorist mistaken in this point, that supposing the great
agitation of the vapors, yet it is certain that their true course would be
quite contrary to what he asserts, namely, from East to West, and not toward
the North and South parts of the World, for they would be carried that way by a
wind, which would continually blow from East to West. This I think I am able to
prove demonstratively thus.

It is well known to all the Philosophers, that the air is a very elastick
fluid body, so that being comprest with the weight of the incumbent atmosphere,
it will endeavor to expand it self, and fill up a great space. If all the air
therefore were equally dense or comprest, every part would equally resist
another pressure, and from thence there could arise no motion, but if we
should suppose in this atmosphere one part thinner and its tension weaker than
the rest, it is certain that the circumambient air, whose force to expand it
self is stronger, will rush in upon it, and keep up an equilibrium in the air.
Now suppose EZWN represent the Orb of Air, which surrounds the earth T, and the
Sun were shining directly upon the Air at Z which therefore by the great heat
of the Sun will be very considerably more rarefied and expanded than the Air at
E, but afterward the Sun shifting to the West, and coming to shine directly
upon W, and Air at Z being rarer than the Air at E, and the heat of it being
gone, its tension or force to expand it self, will not be so strong as the
tension of that which is at E, and therefore the Air at E, will rush into Z and
keep up the equilibrium, Thus also when the Sun declines to W Westward, the
heat there being greater than it is at Z, the Air there will be rarer tho of
the same tension with the Air at Z, but afterward the Sun moving toward N,
that which is at W cooles, and being rarefied its tension will grow weaker, and
therefore the Air at Z, will press in upon the Air at W, and condense it till
its tension becomes so strong that it is able to resist any further pressure;
after the same manner will the Air move from W to N, and from N to E, that is,
there will be a continual wind blowing from East to West according to the
motion of the Sun; for wind is nothing but a strong stream of the Air moved
according to such a direction. But this is testified by the experience of all
who Sail toward the Indies, for they find a wind in the Atlantic and
AEthiopick Oceans which continually blows from East to West.

Since therefore this is clearly agreeable both to reason and observations,
there is no further doubt to be made of it. The wind therefore in the Torrid
Zone of the primitive earth blowing continually from East to West, must of
necessity carry with it all those bodies which swim in it, and are of the same
density with it self; All the vapors and exhalation therefore that can be
drawn either from the abyss or earth by the heat of the Sun, since they swim in
an Air of the same density with themselves, must be carried from East to West
by the motion of the winds, which is always directed that way.

And now I hope it will be plain even to the Theorist himself (tho men are
seldom convinced of the falsehood of their own notions) that the vapors which
are raised by the Sun under the Torrid Zone of the primitive earth could never
have reached either of the Poles, and therefore most part of the Inhabitants of
the earth must still have been without water since it is impossible any supplies
could be brought to them from the Equator.

CHAP. VI. Of the Figure of the Earth.
THE Theorist as he thinks having found a sufficient stock of waters for the
supply of all the Rivers in the earth, does now enter upon the solution of
another great difficulty, which is to show, how in a smooth and regular earth
the waters could run, and what way they would take their course after their
arrival at the Poles in vapor; for since there were no Hills, nor Mountains,
nor high Lands, in the first Earth, the vapors falling in the Frigid Zones and
toward the Poles, there it seems they would stand in Lakes and Pooles, having
no descent one way more than another. The Theorist therefore to take off the
objection, will have the earth not to be of an exact Spherical, but an Oval
figure, in which he says it is manifest that the Polar parts are higher than
the AEquinoctial that is more remote from the Center as appears by his figure,
and this he tells us will do the business, For by that means the vapors which
fall at the extreme parts of the earth will have a continual descent toward
the middle parts thereof, and by consequence it will be a sufficient descent
for the running of Rivers.

Now I will readily grant that the figure of the earth is not Spherical but
Spheroidical, but I can see no reason why it should be an oblong Spheroid and
not a broad one, for it may be of a Spheroidical figure, tho the Axis of it
were shorter than the Diameter of its equator, and if it were so, I would fain
know by what means the vapors would flow from the Poles to the Equator.

But the Theorist gives us an account how the Earth came to be formed after the
fashion of an oblong Spheroid. It Is true says he, if the Earth were as fluid a
substance as it was in the Creation and stood immovable without turning round
its own Axis it would certainly settle it self into a Spherical figure, but
because it turned very swiftly round its Axis, the Fluid by that agitation
would endeavor to recede from its Center of motion, and form it self into a
figure very nearly Oval, as we see in the Sea, or in any Lake when the waters
are driven by the wind upon the Land the Waves extend themselves in length, so
in our watery Globe which is turned about its own Axis, the whole bulk of water
under the equator being much more agitated than that which is toward the Poles
(where the fluid in its diurnal motion describes lesser circles) it will
endeavor to recede from the Center of its motion, and because it cannot get
quite off and fly away, by reason of the Air which every way presses upon it,
and the straitness of its Orb in these places, neither could it flow back
without a great check and resistance from the same Air, it could not otherwise
free it self than by flowing toward the sides, for waters which are hindered
in their motion will take the easiest course they can have. Now from this
detrusion of the waters toward the side, the parts toward the Poles must come
to be much increased, and those toward the equator discharged of abundance of
water, which otherwise would have layen upon them, and by consequence the earth
must have been of an Oblong or an Oval figure.

Now supposing all this reasoning true and solid (as indeed it is not) that the
earth by its circum-rotation round its Axis, had formed it self into the figure
of an Oblong Spheroid. Yet still I cannot conceive how this will help the
matter, for even in that case, the waters would not flow from the Pole to the
Equator: Yes they will says the Theorist, since all fluids will descend as
far as they can, and this is the only way of descent by which they come nearer
to the Center than by any other. It Is certainly true indeed that all fluids
will descend continually till they meet with some obstacle which resists their
motion downwards, where they must stop and go no further. And this is the
reason why in our present case there could be no motion or flux of the Rivers
from the Pole to the Equator. For the rotation of the earth round its one Axis
being still the same, the cause which thrusts the water from the Equator to
the Pole will also continue the same and invariable, and by consequence it will
hinder the water from returning again toward the Equator. And therefore
supposing that the Earth were formed into an Oval figure, yet could there not
be any course for Rivers; for only so far would the water ascend toward the
Poles, till the force which protruded it that way came to be in an AEquilibrium
with its gravity, and there it would stop neither ascending any further, nor
descending again as long as the same cause continued to act; that is, as long
as the Earth turns round its own Axis in the space of twenty four hours, but
if the Earth should cease to move round, then indeed in that case and no other,
the water would return to the Equator. For let the Figure, PAEPQ represent the
Earth P, P the two Poles, and AEQ the Equator, and B a Body upon the surface
of the Earth, I think it is evident that the Body B will so far ascend toward
the Poles, till the force which protrudes it that way be in aequilibrium with
the force which draws it to the equator: for if at B one were greater than the
other, for example, the force by which it is drawn to the Poles, were greater
than its gravity, or its tendency toward AE, then it would still move on
toward the Pole, till both forces come to act equally and there it would rest,
as long as these two forces continued in AEquilibrium which must be so long as
the Earths diurnal motion lasts. Now whatever Bodies either solid or fluid, are
brought and laid upon the surface of the Earth at B, these being drawn or pusht
with the same accelerating force, either to the Pole or the Equator, that the
first fluid had, which was constituted at B, the same causes continuing to act
upon both, they will rest there also, and consequently will not descend to the
Equator. Thus I think I have made it evident from the Theorists own
principles, and his Oval figure of the Earth, that there could be no course of
Rivers in the Antediluvian world, if his Theory were true, and therefore seeing
there were Rivers then as well as now, for he himself has acknowledged them,
and it is plainly asserted by the Scriptures that they were from the beginning,
I think it is a certain demonstration that the whole account of his
Antediluvian Earth is false and Chimerical.

I come now to examine the Theorists reasons by which he proves the Earth to be
of an Oblong Spheroidical figure. He tells us that the fluid under the equator
being much more agitated than that which is toward the Poles which describes
in its diurnal motions lesser arches, and because it cannot quite get off and
fly away by reason of the Air which every way presses upon it, it could no
other ways free it self than by flowing toward the sides, and consequently
form the Earth into an Oval figure.

That the Reader may observe how excellent the Theorist is at drawing
conclusions, I will put this reasoning in other words thus. All Bodies by
reason of the Earths diurnal rotation, do endeavor to recede from the Axis of
their motion; but by reason of the pressure of the Air, and the straightness of
the Orb, they cannot recede from the Axis of their motion, therefore they will
move toward the Poles where they will come nearer to the Axis of their motion,
as if you would suppose a Body at the Equator which does endeavor to recede
from the Axis of its motion, but because it cannot quite fly off and get away,
therefore it will move toward the Poles, that is, it will come nearer to the
Axis of its motion than if it had stayed at the Equator. It seems to me that
the Theorist in this part has endeavored to give us a proof of his great skill
in Logicks, for he from a possible supposition, has endeavored directly to
prove its contradictory, that is, because all Bodies do endeavor to recede
from the Axis of their motion, therefore they will endeavor to go to the Axis
of their motion. But I will now examine his Argument more particularly, and
first I will grant to the Theorist, that all Bodies turned round about any
Center do endeavor to recede from it and fly off in the tangent. For this is
both evident to reason and experience; but since the Air does always move
round the Earth, it is plain that it will also endeavor to recede from the
Center of its motion, and by consequence, it will be no hinderance to the water
to do the same, neither can it be said, that the straitness of the Orb will
hinder the fluid from receding, since there is no reason to assign any such
strait limits to our Globe, for our Air is not enclosed with walls, but beyond
our Atmosphere there lies a free and open space: besides if there were any such
straitness, without doubt it would be every where equal and the same, and by
consequence, as it hindered the fluid from rising at the Equator, so it would
also hinder its rising at the Poles, and then there would not in that case be
any Oval figure at all.

I am sure the Theorist can give no reason why he should make the Air resist
the motion of the fluid upwards at the Equator, and yet yield to its motion
upwards at the Poles, since it is certain that the Air presses as much one way
as another: it will by the same force hinder a fluid from rising at the Pole,
by which it resisted its rising at the Equator, and therefore it is plain,
that the Earth could not upon any such account be of an Oblong Spheroidical
figure, whose surface at the Equator is nearer its Center than its Poles are.

So far is the Theorists Opinion distant from truth in this point, that from
the same very principle of a Centrifugal force it does evidently follow that
the surface of the Earth toward the Equator is higher or further distant from
the Center than it is at the Poles, which is directly contrary to that figure
which he supposes it had in its primitive state. Now to prove this, I will
suppose first, that at the beginning of the world the Earth was fluid and
spherical, but afterward God Almighty having given it a motion round its own
Axis, all Bodies upon the Earth would describe either the Equator, or Circles
parallel to the Equator, and by consequence all would endeavor to recede from
the Center of their motion.

It is to be here observed, that if a Body does freely revolve in a Circle
about a Center as the Planets do about the Sun, that its centrifugal force, (or
that force by which it is drawn toward the Center) is always equal to its
centrifugal force by which it does endeavor to recede from the Center: for the
force which detains a Body in its orbit must be equal to the force, by which it
endeavors to recede from its orbit and fly off in the tangent. This may be
clear by the example of a Body turned round a Center by the help of a thread
which detains the Body in its orbit; the thread being stretched by the motion
of the Body will endeavor to contract it self equally toward both ends by
which it will pull the Center as much toward the Body as it does the Body
toward the Center.

Now this Centrifugal force is always proportional to the periphery which each
Body describes in its diurnal motion by the first Theor. of Hugenius De vi
Centrifuga: so that under the Equator which is the biggest circle the
centrifugal force would be greatest, and still grow less as we approach the
Pole where it quite vanishes, there being there no diurnal rotation. And
without doubt all Bodies having this centrifugal force by which they endeavor
to recede from the Center of their motion, would fly off from the Earth if they
were not kept in their orbit, by their gravity, or that force by which they are
pressed toward the Center of the Earth, which is much stronger upon our Earth
than the centrifugal force; and because the gravity upon the surface of the
Earth is always the same, but the centrifugal force alters and grows less the
nearer we come to the Poles; it is plain that the gravity under the equator
having a greater force to oppose it than that which is near the Poles will not
act so strongly in the one place as in the other, and consequently bodies will
not be so heavy under the equator as at the Poles.

If the Circle See the Figure of the 105 th Page.
AEPQP represent the Earth, AEQ the equator and P, P the Poles, if C be a Body
in the equator, it is evident that it will be pulled by two contrary forces,
namely that of its gravity which pulls it toward the Center, and that of its
centrifugal force which pulls it from it. Now if both these forces were equal
it is evident it would go neither of these ways; but if one were stronger than
the other, it would move where the strongest force pulls it, but only with a
velocity which is proportional to the differences of these two forces, and
therefore it would not descend so fast as if there were no centrifugal force
pulling against it. That is a Body in the equator does press less toward the
Center than at the Pole where there is no centrifugal force to lessen its
gravity. Bodies therefore of the same density are not so heavy in one place as
in the other.

Now in a spherical fluid, all whose parts gravitate toward the Center, I
think it is evident from the principles of Hydrostaticks and fluidity, that all
those Bodies which are equally distant from the Center, must be equally pressed
with the weight of the incumbent fluid, and if one part come to be more pressed
than another, that which is most pressed will thrust that out of its place
which is least, till all the parts come to an aequilubrium one with another,
and this is known by a common and easy experiment, if you take a recurved tube
as in the figure, and fill it with water or any other fluid, it will rise
equally in both Legs of the Tube, so that the surfaces CE and FI are equally
pressed by the weight of the incumbent columns BCED, GFIH, but if one of the
Legs of this Tube should be filled with oil, or some other lighter fluid, and
the other with water, the lighter fluid will rise higher than the other, for
otherways, these surfaces which are equally distant from the Center could not
be equally pressed.

Just so, if the Figure PAEMPS represent a fluid sphere, which we may imagine
composed of a great many communicating Canals or Tubes, the fluid in every one
of which presses upon the Center, now if the fluid in every one of these Tubes
was of equal weight or gravity, it is plain that by that means they would be
also of an equal height from the Center; for by that means only would the
Center be equally pressed by the weight of all the Tubes; but if the fluid in
the canal AEOM were lighter than the fluid in the canal POS, it is plain that
in this case the fluid POS pressing more on the Center than the fluid in AEOM,
the surface of the fluid in the canal AE OM will rise to a greater height or
distance from the Center, so that by its greater height which recompenses its
lesser gravitation it will press equally upon the Center, with the fluid in the
canal POS. After the same manner See the Figure in the next Page.
if the fluid in the canal GOH, were heavier than the fluid in the canal AE OM,
but lighter than that which is in POS, than would the canal, GOH be shorter
than AE OM but longer than POS, and the Figure composed of all these Tubes
would be in the form of a spheroid which is generated by the circumrotation of
a semi elipsis round its axis, but as I have already showed that if AE OM
represent the semidiameter of the equator, that all Bodies in it are lighter
than in POS, the Axis of the equator (we take the Diameters and Axis here not
as pure Mathematical lines, but as small Canals or Tubes,) and just so those
Bodies which are in the Tube GOH, I have proved to be lighter than those in
POS, but heavier than the Bodies which are in AE OM, the centrifugal force in
GH, being less than that which is in AE M, and there is no centrifugal force in
the Poles, PS. It is plain therefore that the Tube AE OM, will be longer than
GOH, and GOH will be longer than POS, that is, the Diameter of the Equator
will be longer than the Axis of the Earth, and consequently the Figure of the
Earth will be after the fashion of a broad speroid which is generated by the
rotation of a semi Ellipsis round its lesser Axis. This I hope will be
sufficient to convince the Theorist of the falseness of his own assertion,
since it is plain demonstration, that an Earth formed from a Chaos must have a
very different Figure from what he supposes it had.

But I will now proceed farther and inquire, how much the gravity is diminished
at the equator, or any other parallel by the centrifugal force, which all
bodies acquire by being turned round the Earths Axis, that from thence we may
endeavor to determine what proportion the Diameter of the Earths equator has
to its Axis, to Calculate which, I will first suppose that the mean
semidiameter of the Earth is 19615800 Paris feet according to the late
observations of the French Mathematicians, and since the Earth turns round its
Axis in the space of 23 hours 56, for in that time the same meridian returns to
the same immovable point of the Heaven again (but the Sun in the mean time
seeming to be moved a degree according to the series of the signs is the cause
why there is four minutes more required, before the meridian can overtake him)
from thence it follows, that a Body under the equator moves through 142688
feet in the space of one second of time. Now according to the Theorem given us
by Mr. Newton in his Philosophiae Naturalis principio Mathematica Schol, prop.
4. Lib. 1. The centrifugal force of any body, has the same proportion to the
force of gravity, that the square of the arch which a body describes in a given
time divided by its diameter, has to the space through which a heavy body moves
in falling from a place in which it was at rest in the same time, and supposing
a heavy body falls 15 foot in a second of time, by Calculation it will from
thence follow, that the force of gravity has the same proportion to the
centrifugal force at the equator, that 289 has to unity; and therefore by this
centrifugal force which arises from the Diurnal rotation of the Earth round its
axis, any body placed in the equator loses 1/289 part of its gravity which it
would have were the Earth at rest, or which is the same thing, a heavy body
placed at either of the Poles (where there is no diurnal rotation, and
consequently no centrifugal force,) which weighs 289 pounds if it were brought
to the equator will weigh only 288 pounds.

Having thus determined the proportion of the centrifugal force at the equator
to the force of gravity, it will be easy from thence to show their proportions
in any parallel, for it is compounded of the proportion of 1 to 289, and of the
cosine of the Latitude to the Radius; for if two bodies describe different
peripheries in the same time their centrifugal forces are proportional to their
peripheries or to the semi-diameters of these Peripheries, as is determined by
Mons. Hugens in his Theoremata de vi centrifuga and motu circulari: but the
Periphery which a body in the equator describes has its semi diameter equal to
the radius or semi diameter of the Earth, and in any other place the parallels
in which Bodies move have the co-sines of their Latitude for their
semidiameters, and therefore it will follow that the force of gravity is to the
centrifugal force in a proportion compounded of the radius to the cosine of
the Latitude and of 289 to 1. and therefore at the Latitude of 51 degrees, 46.
minutes (for example) it will be as 466 to 1.

But we must observe that it does not from thence follow, that a body in that
Latitude loses 1/466 part of its absolute gravity which it would have were the
Earth at rest; for that could not be, unless the centrifugal force acted
directly contrary to the force of gravity, which it does no where but at the
equator, for in the Figure let the circle QPE represent the Earth QE, the
diameter of the equator O its Center, and let B represent a Body which we
suppose to hang by the thread AB, and is placed any where between the Pole P
and the equator Q, and let BD be drawn perpendicular to the axis. It is plain
that if the Earth had no diurnal rotation, the Body B would draw the thread AB
into the position AC, since by that means it descends as near as it can to the
Center, and there it would stretch the thread with all the force of its
gravity; or if we will suppose that the centrifugal force acted according to
the same direction AC, it would than directly oppose the force of gravity, and
the thread would remain in the same position, but it would be stretched with a
force proportional to the differences of these two forces.

But because the Body B turns round the Center D, it will endeavor to recede
from it according to the line CB, in which direction the centrifugal force
acting, it will not directly oppose the force of gravity, but it will draw the
thread from the position AC into the position AB, let BG be drawn perpendicular
to AC. If BC represent the centrifugal force acting according to the direction
BC, it is equivalent, as is commonly known, to two forces one of which is as
GC, and acts according to the direction GC, which is contrary to that by which
it descends to O, the other is as GB, and acts according to the direction GB,
which is no way contrary to the force of gravity, If therefore BC represent the
total centrifugal force of the Body B, that part of it which directly opposes
the force of gravity will be as GC: from whence it follows, that the decrease
of gravity in going from the Pole to the Equator is always as the square of
the cosine of the Latitude: for draw BH parallel to the Axis PP, and because
the triangles HCB, CDO are aequiangular, therefore HC is to CB as CO is to CD,
or as QO is to CD, but QO is to CD as the decrease of gravity at Q is to the
centrifugal force at C, and therefore HC is to CB as the decrease of gravity at
Q is to the centrifugal force at C. But if CB represent the centrifugal force
at C, GC will represent that part of it which acts directly against the force
of gravity, and consequently the decrease of gravity at the equator is to the
decrease of gravity at C as HC is to GC: now HC is to GC in duplicate
proportion of HC to CB, or of CO, or OQ to CD, by the 8 th of the 6 th of
Euclid; and therefore the decrease of gravity at Q is to the decrease of
gravity at C, as the square of CO is to the square of CD which was to be
demonstrated.

From whence it is plain that if HC represent the decrease of gravity at the
equator, and GC its decrease at C, then will GH represent the difference of
these two diminutions, or the difference between the gravity at Q and the
gravity at C, but HC is to HG in duplicate proportion of HC to HB, or of OC to
DO, that is the decrease of gravity at the equator is to its increase at C, as
the square of the radius is to the square of the sine of the Latitude.

By this also it will appear that the direction of heavy Bodies is not to the
Center of the Earth, as has been always supposed, For if we take a heavy Body
and hang it by a thread, the thread produced will not pass through the Center
any where but at the Poles and the Equator, for in the Figure the thread is
carried by the centrifugal force of the Body B from the position AC, into the
position AB where it will rest.

Now to determine the angle CAB which the line of direction of the Body makes
with the line AC, let AN be drawn parallel to BC, and produce OB till it meet
mith it in N, and let us consider the Body B as drawn by three powers according
to three different directions BO, BL and AB the power which pulls it according
to BO is its gravity, that which draws it according to the direction BL is its
centrifugal force, and that which acts according to AB is the strength of the
thread, by which the Body is hindered to move according to either of the other
two directions, and therefore it is an aequilibrium with the other two powers,
but by a Theorem which is demonstrated by several of the writers of Mechanics,
but particularly by Mons Hugens in his small Treatise De potentiis per fila
trahentibus. If a Body be pulled by three different powers which are in
aequilibrio with one another, according to three different directions AB, BK,
and BO, these three powers will be as the three sides of the Triangle ABN, viz.
as AB, AN, and BN respectively; or as AB, BC and AC: BN being very near
parallel, and consequently equal to AC, since they do not meet but at a great
distance. From hence it follows that the force of gravity is to centrifugal
force as, AC is to BC: but a method has been already shown how the proportion
of the force of gravity to the centrifugal force may be determined, and
therefore the proportion of AC to BC, may be also determined, which at the
Latitude of 51, 46, is as 446 to 1. Therefore in the Triangle ABC, the
proportion of AC to BC is known and the angle ACB being equal to the angle COQ
which is subtended by the arch CQ the Latitude of the place, from thence by the
Tables of Sines and Tangents the angle BAC may be known, which in the above
mentioned Latitude is about five minutes.

From hence also it will appear that it is not the line AC, which being
produced passes through the Center, but the line AB that is perpendicular to
the curve PQ, for all the particles of the fluid will settle themselves in such
a position that their lines of direction downwards must be perpendicular to the
surface of the Body which they compose, for otherwise the parts of the fluid
would not be in an AEquilibrium one with another, and therefore although the lines
of direction of heavy Bodies do not pass through the Center of the Earth, yet
are they still perpendicular to their Horizons, and upon this account there
could arise no error in levelling of lines, and in finding the risings and
fallings of the ground.

Upon this account also it will appear that the surface of the Earth is not
spherical, for if it were, than would all lines drawn from the Center be
perpendicular to the surface of the Earth, since it is the known property of a
sphere that they must be so, but I have already showed that it is not so in the
Earth, and therefore it is plain that the Earth is not a Sphere. That therefore
I may enquire more particularly into the Figure of the Earth, I will resume my
former hypothesis, that the Earth is composed of an infinite number of Canals
which communicate with one another at the Center and are all equiponderant, of
which we will consider two as OQ and OC, and let OQ be =r, OD=x and DC=y, let
the absolute gravity be called p, and the centrifugal force at the equator n,
OC is equal to ^, the weight of the Canal OQ is equal to the absolute gravity
of the whole canal, minus the centrifugal force of each particle contained in
it, and because the centrifugal force of each particle is as its distance from
the Center, and therefore it increases in an Arithmetical progression, the
greatest of which is n, consequently the sum of all the centrifugal force is =
nr, but upon the hypothesis, that gravity is the same at all distances from the
Center, the absolute gravity of the canal OQ is pr, and therefore its real
weight upon the Center OQ is pr- nr. After the same manner the absolute gravity
of the canal OC is ^ but the sum of the centrifugal forces of all the fluid in
the canal OC is equal to the centrifugal force of the fluid in CD (as may be
easily proved from the consideration of inclined Planes) But the centrifugal
force at C being to the centrifugal force at Q as CD is to OQ (that is, as y is
to r) the centrifugal force at C will be equal to ny / r and because the
centrifugal force of each Particle is as its distance from the point D which is
the Center of the Circle, that the fluid in the canal CD describes, and
therefore the centrifugal forces in counting from the point D must increase in
an Arithmetical progression, the greatest of which is ny / r and therefore the
sum of all the centrifugal forces in CD must be equal to nyy / 2r therefore
the weight of the canal OC is ^ - nyy / r= pr- nr which equation expresses the
nature of the curve that is made by the section of the earth with a plane
through its poles, and by this, the proportion of the axis of the earth to the
diameter of the equator may be easily determined; for when CO coincides with
OP, then CD or y becomes equal to nothing, and the equation is ^= pr- nr or
px=pr- nr, and therefore by the 16 th of the 6 th p has the same proportion to
p- n that r has to x or OQ to OD, but p is to p- n as 289 is to 288 or as 578
to 577 which therefore is the proportion of the greatest diameter of the Earth
to its least; but this is upon supposition that gravity is the same at all
distances from the Center, but if we will suppose that the gravity of bodies
without the Earth is in a proportion reciprocal to the squares of their
distances from the Center, the gravity of those bodies which are within the
Earth will be directly as their distance, both which do best agree with the
observed Phenomenon of nature; then will the gravity at the Equator be to the
gravity at the Poles as 689 to 692, which numbers in this Hypothesis do also
express the proportion of the Diameter of the Earth drawn through its Poles to
its Diameter drawn in the plane of the Equator.

It is upon the account of this diminution of gravity, according as we approach
the Equator, that pendulums of the same length in different Latitudes, take
different times, to perform their vibrations; for because the accelerating
force of gravity is less at the Equator than under any parallel, and under any
parallel it is still less than under another which is nearer the Poles, it does
plainly from thence follow that a body placed in the Equator, or in any
parallel will take a longer time to descend through an arch of a given circle,
than it would do at the Poles, and the farther a body is removed from the
Poles, the longer time it will take to descend through any given space.

From hence it follows that the length of pendulums which perform their
vibrations in equal times in different Latitudes are directly as the
accelerating forces of their gravities. For the time a Body takes to descend
through an Arch of a Cycloid, is to the time it will take to fall through the
Axis of the Cycloid always in a given proportion, viz. as the Semiperiphery of
a circle is to its Diameter by the 25 th Prop. of Hugens Horologium
Oscillatorium; and therefore when the times in which a body descends through
the Axes of two different Cycloids are equal, the times of the descent through
the Cycloids will be also equal, but when the times of the descent through the
Axes are equal these Axes, and consequently the lengths of the pendulum which
vibrates in these Cycloids are proportional to the accelerating forces of their
gravities.

By this, if we know the length of a pendulum which performs its vibrations in
a given time, in any one part of the Earth it is easy to determine the length
of a pendulum which performs its vibrations in the same time, in any other part
of the Earth as for example: the length of a pendulum which vibrates seconds at
Paris is three foot eight lines and a half, let it be required to find the
length of a pendulum which vibrates seconds at the Equator. Because the gravity
at the Pole is to the gravity at the Equator as 692 is to 689, therefore the
decrease of gravity at the Equator is 3/692 parts of the whole gravity: but as
I have before demonstrated the decrease of gravity at the Equator is to its
increase in any other Latitude, as the square of the radius is to the square of
the sine of the Latitude; now the Latitude of Paris being 48^^ 45 its sine is
75. 183, and therefore the square of the Radius is to the square of the sine of
the Latitude as 1000000 to 565248, but as 1000000 is to 565248, so is 3.000 the
number which represents the decrease of gravity at the Equator to 1. 695, the
number which represents its increase at Paris which added to 689 the gravity at
the Equator makes 690.695 the number which will represent the gravity at Paris.
But I have already showed, that as the gravity at Paris is to the gravity at
the Equator, so is the length of a pendulum which vibrates seconds at Paris to
the length of a pendulum which vibrates seconds at the Equator that is as
690,695 to 689, so is 36,708 the length of a pendulum at Paris which performs
its vibration in a second to 36,616, which therefore is the length of a
pendulum which performs its vibrations in a second at the Equator: so that the
difference btween these two pendulums is 92/1000 parts of an inch which comes
pretty near the observations of Mons. Richer, who at the island of Cayen, whose
Latitude is 5 degrees, found that a pendulum which vibrates seconds there, was
a tenth part of an inch shorter than a pendulum which vibrates seconds at Paris.

Thus we see that the principles and hypothesis and withal their consequences
upon which the broad Spheroidical Figure of the Earth is founded do exactly
agree with observations, and therefore there is no doubt to be made but that
the Earth is really of such a Figure, and that the hypothesis upon which this
Figure is grounded ( viz. the diurnal rotation of the Earth and by consequence
the centrifugal force of all Bodies upon it) must be admitted for a true one;
since the different vibrations of Pendulums of the same length in different
Latitudes can depend upon no other cause: for the change of Air is not able to
produce any such effect, for if the Air made really any alterations in the
vibrations of a Pendulum it would produce a quite contrary effect, than what is
observed; for Pendulums near the Equator would move faster than they would do
in places of greater Latitude; the Air in the one place being more rarefied is
much thinner and siner than it is in the other, and therefore gives less
resistance to Bodies which move in it.

In this reasoning we have supposed the Earth to have been at first fluid as
the Theorist has done before us, but if we will put the case that the Earth was
at first partly fluid and partly dry as it is at present, yet because we find
that the land is very near of the same Figure with the Sea (only raised a
little higher that it might not be overflowed) composing with it the same
solid, and I have already showed that the Surface of the Ocean is spheroidical
and not spherical, there is no doubt to be made but that the Land was formed
into the same Figure by its wise Creator, at the beginning of the World, for if
it were otherwise, then would the Land toward the Equator have been
overflowed with water, which as I have already proved, must have been higher at
the Equator than at the Poles; and therefore the Sea would rise there and
spread it self like an inundation upon all the Land.

But for a further confirmation of the spheroidical Figure of the Earth, let us
consider some of the other Planets especially Jupiter who turns round his own
Axis in the space of ten hours: It may easily be observed that his Axis is
considerably shorter than the Diameter of his Equator, and that in the
proportion of seven to eight, is the observations of Mr. Flamstead and Mons.
Casini do testify; and therefore we need not doubt but that the Earth which is
a Planet like the rest and turns round its Axis as they do, is of the same
Figure.

But the Theorist in his Latin Edition of the Theory, as also in his Answer to
Mr Warren, seems to insinuate, that the only way to find the true Figure of the
Earth is by measuring of it, and by that means to find what proportion the
degrees of the Meridian in different Latitudes have to one another; for if they
were exactly equal one to another, and also equal to the degrees of Longitude
counted upon the Equator, then without doubt the Figure of the Earth would be
Spherical, but if otherwise Spheroidical.

Now tho I have already determined the Earths Figure from other Principles; Yet
to comply with the Theorist in this point, I will give him an account of a Book
whose extract I have seen in the Acta Eruditorum Lipsiae publicata for the year
1691. written by one Ioh. Casp Eisenschmidt a German who calls himself Doctor
of Philosophy and Physic. The Title of the Book is, Diatrihe de Figura
Telluris Elliprico-Sphaeroide. And it is Printed at Strasburg in the Year 1691.
The Learned and deep-thinking Author of this Book after he has Answered, at
least has endeavored to Answer the Arguments of Archimedes and others, by
which the Figure of the Earth was proved to be Spherical, does embrace the
Opinion of the Theorist, and asserts that its Poles are higher or further
distant from the Center than its Equator: To prove this, he sets down an
account of the different magnitudes of degrees of the Meridian according to the
observations made of them in different Latitudes, and comparing them one with
another, he found that they continually decreased as the Latitudes increased,
and indeed, as he says in the same proportion, as appears by the following
Table, which I have inserted from the above named Extract.

Observers. The Latitude of the Places observed. The Magnitude of a Degree in
Roman Miles. Eratosthenes. 27 100 Ricciolus. 44 80 Mons. Piccard. 49 74
Fernellius. 49 73 Snellius. 52 71

From this he concludes that a plane cutting the Earth along its Axis would not
be a Circle but an Ellipsis, whose longer Axis would pass through the Poles and
coincide with the Axis of the Earth; but its lesser Axis would be the common
Section of the Equator with the Ellipsis, and from thence he infers, that the
Earth is not of a Spherical, but an oblong Spheroidical Figure. After that he
disputes against Mr. Newtons Hypothesis, which makes the Earth of a direct
contrary Figure, and thinks that the accurate Observations by him related, are
by far to be preferred to the Hypothesis upon which Mr. Newtons Calculus is
grounded.

None but a man of prodigious stupidity and carelessness could reason at this
rate! If he had asserted that the Earth was of an Oval Figure because Grass
grows or Houses stand upon it, it had been something excusable; for that
Argument tho it did not infer the conclusion, yet it could never have proved
the contradictory to be true. But to bring an Argument which does evidently
prove that the Earth has a Figure directly contrary to that which he would
prove it has, is an intolerable and an unpardonable blunder; for if he had but
protracted the Figure, and drawn equal Angles from the Center, he might have
easily perceived, that the Angle whose Crura were longest, would have the
greatest Subtense. Thus if the Angles DAE and BAC were equal, but AD were
longer than AB, it is evident that the subtense DE would be longer than the
Subtense BC, for if you take AM and AN equal to AB and AC and draw the Line MN,
the Angles being small, BC and DE will differ very little from straight Lines,
but BC is equal to MN, which is plainly less than DE, and therefore it is
evident that BC is less than DE, that is, where the Subtenses or the degrees
are greatest, there also is the greatest Diameter: but it is plain by the
Observations which Mr. Eisenschmidt relates, that the degrees are biggest at
the Equator, therefore the greatest Diameter of the Spheroid must be that of
the Equator, and not the Axis of the Earth.

So far is this Argument drawn from Observations from destroying Mr. Newtons
Hypothesis, that it would most evidently confirm it, if the Observations were
exact enough, which I believe they are not.

I cannot but wonder at the strange Logicks of our Modern Philosophers who are
able to draw any conclusion they have a mind for, from any Principles that can
be given them. No man that looks narrowly into their Books can want Instances
in this matter, But in case this is not so well observed, I have furnished the
Reader with two examples of this sort. The one is the Theorists way by which he
proves the Earth to be of an Oblong or Oval Figure from the Principles of a
Centrifugal force which all Bodies have that are on it. Now I think I have
plainly shown that the true Conclusion he ought to have inferred from this
Hypothesis is, that the Earth had a quite contrary Figure from what he fancyed
it had. But Mr. Eisenchmidt has given us a yet plainer proof of this thing, for
because he found that the Degrees of Latitude near the equator were bigger
than those which were near the Pole, he very innocently concludes that the
Earth had its Axis longer than the Diameter of its Equator; but if he had
understood the first six Elements of Euclid, or indeed those of common sense he
might easily have demonstrated the contrary: it is strange that when there is
but one Right and one Wrong Opinion in this Point, that he should be so unlucky
as to hit upon the false one to maintain it.

CHAP. VII. Of the Dissolution of the Primitive Earth.
HITHERTO I have refuted the Theorists for Motion, Position, and Figure, of the
Primitive Earth. I am now to consider his method of Dissolving the Fabric he
has raised, and to Examine how and by what causes, the first Earth which had all
the Beauty of Youth and Blooming Nature, Fresh and Fruitful, and not a Wrinkle
or Scar on all its Body, came to be dissolved; how the Fabric was broke, and
the Frame of the whole torn in pieces, how it came to be a shattered and
confused heap of Bodies, as we now see it, placed in no order one to another,
nor with any correspondency or regularity of parts, as the Theorist represents
it to be.

He tells us that one would soon imagine that such a structure as that of the
first Earth was, would not be perpetual nor last many thousands of years, if
one consider the effect, the heat of the Sun would have upon it, and the Waters
under it, drying and parching the one, and rarifying the other into vapors:
For according to him, the course of the Sun was such at that time, that there
was no diversity or alteration of Seasons in the year, as there is now; by
reason of which alteration of Seasons, our Earth is kept in an equality of
temper, the contrary Seasons ballancing one another; so that what moisture the
heat of the Summer sucks out of the Earth, is repaired again in Rains the next
Winter, and what chaps are made in it are filled up, and the Earth is reduced
to its former constitution. But if we should imagine a continual Summer the
Earth would proceed in dryness still more and more, and the cracks would be
wider and pierce deeper into the substance of it. The heat of the Sun therefore
according to the Theorist, acting continually upon the Earth, would have
reduced it in the space of some hundreds of years to a considerable degree of
dryness, in certain parts, and would also have much rarifyed and exhaled the
water under it; so that considering the structure of that Globe, the exterior
Crust, and the Water under it he thinks it may be fitly compared to an
AEolipile or an hollow Sphere, with Water in it, which the heat of the fire
rarifies and turns into Vapor or Wind; the Sun here is the Fire, and the
exterior Earth the shell of the AEolipile, and the Abyss the water within it;
as soon then as the heat of the Sun had reached the waters in the Abyss it
began to rarify them, and raise them into Vapors, by which rarifaction they
required more room, than they did before, and finding themselves pent in by the
exterior earth they pressed with violence against that Arch to make it yield
and give way to their dilatation: and by this means the Earth was broken, and
the frame of it torn in pieces as by an Earthquake, and those great portions
or fragments into which it was divided, fell down into the Abyss, some in one
posture and some in another, and was the cause of a general Deluge. I shall now
examine these causes which the Theorist has given for the Dissolution of the
Earth, and in this Chapter I will first enquire whither the heat of the Sun can
reach so far as the great Abyss to rarify the waters thereof.

First then I have proved in the third Chapter of this examination, that there
were Hills and Mountains in the primitive Earth as there are now in ours. I
have also shown that the Axis of the earth was then inclined the same way to
the Plane of the Ecliptic as it is at present; from thence it plainly follows
that there was then, the same variety of Seasons and Alternations of Heat and
Cold in the primitive earth, that there are now in our earth, and by
consequence, all the Arguments drawn from the great heat and strong action of
the Sun upon the Antediluvian earth must fall to the ground, there being then
no greater heat of the Sun on the earth than there is at present.

But 2 dly, there are places in the earth, as the Island of Barbados and some
other Islands near the Equator, where there is little or no variety of Seasons
or alteration of the Suns heat, but it continues to shine very strongly upon
them throughout the whole year, and yet in none of them is there any of these
great Chaps and Cracks which the Theorist says were made in the primitive
earth by the strong action of the Sun; tho it has shon above thrice as long
upon these Islands as it did upon the Antediluvian World:

3 dly, It is certain that if we judge according to experience that the heat of
the Sun does not reach far into the Earth, and that its beams can go but a very
little way into the Crust; for in Vaults and Caves there is no sensible
alteration of heat in Summer and Winter, even tho they have a communication
with the open Air, And in the deep pits of the Royal Observatorie at Paris it
has been found by experience, that a Thermometer placed there, in the coldest
day of Winter does not sensibly vary from what it was in the greatest heat in
Summer; and they who work in Mines can tell how little difference they observe
of heat in the Summer, more than in the Winter, in places underground. But if
the heat of the Sun could penetrate for any considerable depth the Crust of the
Earth, it is plain, that when its heat is strongest and most intense upon the
Surface, it would also be most intense within the Crust; but the forementioned
experiments do prove that within the bowels of the Earth there is no sensible
difference between the heat of the Sun when its action is strongest from what
it is when its action is weakest. Since then the heat of the Sun does not
penetrate the Earth so as to be sensible even for the small space that we are
able to dig thorough, how can we imagine it possible that it should ever reach
the Abyss through the whole exterior Crust of the Earth so as to be able to
heat the water and raise it into Vapor?

But that I may bring this point to a Calculation as near as I can, I will
suppose that the heat caused by the direct influence of the Sun upon any
Surface is always (all other things being the same) as the quantity of Rays
of heat which falls upon that Surface; which I believe the Theorist will allow:
I will also suppose that fewer Rays of heat passed thorough the solid Orb than
if it had been composed of several concentrical Surfaces placed at some
distance from one another, every one of which transmitted only the one half of
the Rays of heat which fell upon it: this I think may be also easily allowed;
for it is plain, that the Surface of the Earth does not transmit the half, nay
not the hundredth part of the Suns beams which fall upon it. These things being
supposed, it is plain that but one half of the Rays which fall upon the first
Surface would fall upon the second, but one fourth of them upon the third, one
eighth part of them upon the fourth, and one sixteenth part upon the fifth,
etc. so that they would still decrease in a Geometrical proportion of 2 to 1;
and if there were but one hundred of these Surfaces, the number of Rays which
fell upon the first would be to the number of Rays which passed thorough to
the last as 299 to 1, or as the ninty ninth power of 2 is to 1. How great a
disproportion then would there be between the number of those Rays which fell
upon the first surface and those which fell upon the last? for the ninty ninth
power of 2 is a number which if written at length would consist of a hundred
Figures: but if we should imagine all the spaces between the Surfaces filled up
with solid and not diaphanous matter as it really is so in the Crust of the
Earth, the heat upon the surface must be much less than what it would be by the
former proportion.

From thence we may conclude that if the heat of the Sun upon the Surface of
the Antediluvian Earth was not much greater than it is now, it could never
reach so far into the Crust as to be able to raise Vapors from the Abyss: or
if it was so great as to be able to raise Vapors from thence, that is, if it
was then as great upon the Surface of the Abyss as it is generally upon the
Surface of the present Earth, it must have been almost infinitely greater upon
the Surface of the Antediluvian World. Certainly there could be no necessity
for a Deluge in that case, except it were to cool the Earth again after such an
excessive heat, which must have destroyed all the Animals, Plants, and Trees
which were upon the earth, and have turned them into Glass.

But perhaps it may be urged that the heat of the Sun does generate and prepare
Metals which ly hid in its bowels; To which I answer, that I have already
brought a sufficient demonstration that the heat of the Sun does pass but a
very little way within the earth, and therefore the Opinion that Metals are
generated by the Suns influence must be false; for they generally lie far hid
within the bowels of the earth, and therefore without the reach of the Suns
influence.

But the Theorist affirms further, that there was a continual Summer in the
Antediluvian earth, and therefore if the heat of the Sun made a crack in the
earth in one year, there being no Winter or Rains to repair the chaps that were
made in the earth, this crack would continually grow deeper, till at last it
would reach to the Surface of the Abyss. Let us now bring this general way of
speaking to a Calculation, and try if the heat of the Sun could this way reach
the Abyss. To determine which, I will suppose that through length of time, the
Sun has made a crack in the earth of a Miles depth and one hundred foot in
length extended from East to West, and let it be proposed to Calculate what
proportion the heat upon any point of the Surface bears to the heat upon the
bottom of the crack. In the Figure let PSAQ represent the Equator in which the
Sun moves, PRT the Earth, PQ the sensible Horizon, and P nmR the Pit made by
the heat of the Sun in the Crust of the Earth: it is plain that the Sun shines
on the point R on the Surface of the Earth all the time it is moving through
the Arch PQ, but it shines only on the point m in the bottom of the Crack while
it describes by its motion the Arch SA. Now the Action of the Sun upon any
point is always more or less strong in proportion to the sine of the Angle of
incidence of its Rays, that is, if the Sun be at S, and afterward come to A,
the action of the Sun upon the point R when it is at S, is to its action when
it comes to A, as the sine of the angle SRP is to the sine of the Angle ARP.
From whence it follows, that the action of the Sun upon the point R is to its
action upon the point m, as the sum of all the sines of the Suns Altitude
while it shines upon R is to the sum of all the sines of the Suns Altitude
while it shines upon the point m, that is if the times it shines upon R and m
be taken for Basis's or the Arches PQ and SA which are proportional to them, be
extended into straight lines HSAO, and SA, and all the sines be erected on them
perpendicularly, AE being the Sine of the Arch AH and SD the sine of the Arch
SH, and the Curve line HDEO be drawn thorough the extremity of the sines, the
heat upon the point R is to the heat upon the point m, as the space HDEO is to
the space SDEA, But the Periphery PSAQ being a semicircle (for the Diameter of
the Earth is but a point in respect of the Suns distance from us) It is plain
that the space HDEO is two figures of sines, which the Mathematicians have
demonstrated to be equal to two squares of the Radius; and it is also by them
demonstrated that the space SDEA is equal to a rectangle contained by the
Radius and the sine of the Arch SA; but as I have already showed the heat of
the Sun upon the point R is to its heat upon the point m as the space HDEO is
to the space DSAE. It is plain from thence, that the heat or action of the Sun
upon the point R is to its action upon the point m as two squares of the Radius
is to a rectangle contained by the Radius and the sine of the Arch SA, that is,
as twice the Radius is to the sine of the Arch SA, by the first of the 6 th of
Euclid: But because P n is to PR as 5000 is to an 100, or as 50 to 1, therefore
by a trigonometrical Calculation the sine of the Angle S mA, or of the Arch SA
is 19594 supposing the Radius a 100000, the heat therefore upon the point R is
to the heat of the Sun upon the point m, as 200000 is to 19594, and
consequently the one is more than decuple of the other. If therefore the heat
upon the bottom of the Crack was so great as to reach further into the Crust,
it must have been at least ten times greater upon the surface of the Earth; and
if the heat of the Sun upon the bottom of the Crack was as great as is
necessary for to raise the waters in the Abyss into Vapors, or as great as our
Summers heat is, the heat upon the surface of the Earth must have exceeded the
heat of red hot Iron, which is only seven times greater than the ordinary heat
of the Sun in Summer.

But notwithstanding all this, should I grant to the Theorist that the heat of
the Sun had reached the Abyss, and had raised the Vapors so that the crust of
the Earth fell down and was broken in pieces, yet I cannot see how from thence
there could follow any universal Deluge, or indeed any Deluge at all, tho the
Theorist does endeavor to explain it thus.

When the Earth says he, was broken and fell into the Abyss, a good part of it
was covered with water by the mere depth of the Abyss it fell into; and those
parts of it that were higher than the Abyss was deep, and consequently would
stand above it in a calm water, were notwithstanding reached and overtopp'd by
the waters during the agitation and violent commotion of the Abyss; for it is
not imaginable says he, what the commotion of the Abyss would be upon this
dissolution of the Earth, nor to what height its waves would be thrown when
these prodigious fragments were tumbled down into it. If you would suppose a
stone of ten thousand weight taken up into the Air, a Mile or two, and then let
fall into the middle of the Ocean, it is Credible that the dashing of the water
upon that impression would rise as high as a Mountain; but if you will suppose
a mighty Rock, or a heap of Rocks to fall from that height, or a great Island
or Continent, these would expel the waters out of their places with such a
force and violence as would fling them above the highest Clouds.

This is in short, the method the Theorist has found out for making an
universal Deluge. But if I can prove from his own Principles, that long before
the Deluge happened, all the Waters in the Abyss were drawn up by the heat of
the Sun to supply the Rivers that were necessary to water the Earth, I would
fain know what would become of his Deluge, or how he can make in that case the
fall of the Crust to be the cause of an Universal Flood: for by all the
conception that I can have of it, the water which was upon the surface of the
Earth, by the fall would rush into the Abyss; and it would be so far from
making any Flood, that it would leave the surface of the Earth and make dry
Land appear where formerly there was none. To prove this I must first enquire
what proportion the quantity of waters which the Sea receives from the Rivers
of the Earth in any time bears to the quantity of water in the Ocean; and by
consequence I will Calculate the time the Rivers would take to fill the Ocean
if it were empty, and they ran as they do now, or which is the same thing, I
will find what time the Sea would take to empty it self into the Rivers
supposing that it was not recruited again by the continual course of fresh
waters, which run into it, that is, if the Abyss did formerly supply all the
Rivers with water, before the flood, and none of them ran into it again, as the
Theorist supposes they did not, I am to find what time it would take to empty
it self, on the surface of the Earth. And if I can prove that it would quite
empty it self on the surface, long before the Deluge happened, I think from
thence it would necessarily follow that there would be no Deluge at all, by the
fall of the Crust.

To begin therefore, I will suppose as the Theorist has done, in his second
Chap. Book first, that one half of the surface of the Terraqueous Globe is Sea,
and the other Land, and that if we take the Sea one place with another, it is a
quarter of a mile deep. Now the surface of the whole Earth being 170981012
Italian miles, the surface of the Sea is 85490506 square miles, which being
multiplied by th (the Sea being th of a mile deep) the product is 21372626
Cubical miles, which is the quantity of water contained in the whole Ocean.

Now to Calculate the water the Ocean receives from the Rivers, we must
consider some great river whose breadth depth and swiftness are best known,
such is the Po which passes through Lombardy and waters a large Country of 380
miles in Length: Ricciolus in his Geographia Reformata tells us, that its
breadth before its division into a great many Channels, by which it falls into
the Sea, is a hundred Bononian Perches, or a thousand feet, and its depth is
one Perch or ten Feet, and therefore its perpendicular Section, from one side
to the other is a hundred square Pearches, or 40000 square Feet: Its swiftness
also is so great, that the course of the water is about four Italian miles in
an hour, or which is the same thing 2000 Italian Perches, for there are 500
Perches in a mile; The Po therefore carries into the Adriatic 200000 Cubical
Perches of water, in the space of an hour, and therefore the quantity of water
it brings into the Sea in a day is 4800000 Cubical Perches or 380000000 Cubical
Feet of water; but one Cubical mile contains 125000000 Cubical Perches, and
therefore if the Po takes one day, to bring into the Adriatic 4800000 Cubical
Perches of water, it will require twenty six days, to carry into the Sea
125000000 Cubical Perches, or one Cubical mile, or which comes to the same
thing, twenty six Rivers every one of which is of the same swiftness with the
Po will pour into the Sea one Cubical mile of water in a day.

I must in the next place determine what proportion all the Rivers in the Earth
bear to the Po, which to determine exactly would be a task, not easily to be
performed; but I think we may determine it near enough for our present purpose,
by supposing that the quantity of water received into the Sea, by the great
Rivers in any Country, is very near proportional to the extent and surface of
that Country; And consequently the Country which is watered by the Po, and the
Rivers which run into it, bears the same proportion to the surface of the whole
dry Land, that the Po does to all the Rivers in the Earth: But I have observed
from the exactest Maps I could see, that the Po from its Origin in the Alps, to
its end where it runs into the Sea, is in length three hundred and eighty
miles, and that the Rivers which fall into it from each side, come from Springs
of about sixty miles distance from the Po; consequently the Po and the Rivers
which run into it, water a Country which is 380 miles long, and 120 broad, all
which makes 45600 square miles; but the surface of all the Land being equal to
half the Terraqueous Globe is 85490506 square miles, and therefore according to
the proportion formerly mentioned, the water which is carried into the Sea by
all the Rivers, is 1874 times greater than what the Po carries into the Sea.

It is true, there are in the Earth some barren places which have no great
quantity of water or Rivers in them, but they being but small will not much
alter our account, and for an Equivalent, we can easily prove, that tho there
are some Countries not so well stored with Rivers as Lombardy, yet there are
several others which are much better furnished with them, particularly the
South part of America, where there are Rivers, which according to credible
relations are above fourscore miles in breadth, and therefore by allowing a
proportional depth, they will be several hundreds of times bigger than the Po.

Now I have already Calculated, that twenty six Po's will pour into the Sea one
Cubical mile of water in a day; and consequently in 365 days, or in the space
of a year they will pour into the Sea 365 Cubical miles of water: hence it
follows, that if 26 Rivers as big as the Po, pour into the Sea 365 miles of
water, in the space of a year, from 1874 Rivers as big as the Po, there will be
brought into the Sea in the same time 26308 Cubical miles of water; and
therefore by the rule of proportionals, in the space of 812 year, the Rivers
will bring into the Sea 21372626 Cubical miles of water, which is a quantity of
water as great as the Ocean: and therefore in that time they would fill the
great Channel of the Ocean if it were empty, and their course the same, both
for quantity of water, and swiftness that it is now: And since the Sea
furnishes the Rivers with all the water that runs through them, it is plain
that the Sea would empty it self in the space of 812 years if none of the
Rivers ran into it again.

Since therefore according to the Theorist, the Abyss was the storehouse which
furnished the Rivers of the Antediluvian Earth with water, and none of them,
according to him, ran into it again, and because all the waters which were
anciently in the Abyss, are now in the Ocean, it must needs follow, that in the
space of 812 years it would be quite empty, upon supposition that there were as
many Rivers in the primitive Earth as there are now in ours; but because there
was then twice as much Land to be furnished with Rivers (there being then no
Seas as the Theorist says) we must in proportion allow twice as many Rivers to
water the double quantity of dry Land, and therefore by such a double quantity
of Rivers, the Abyss would be emptied in half that time.

Perhaps the Theorist will say, that the Rivers were not altogether furnished
by Vapors drawn from the Abyss, but by those also that were exhaled from the
surface of the Earth, and that after the water in the Rivers had run toward
the Equator and middle parts of the Earth, the water was again raised into
Vapors by the great heat of the Sun, and carried back toward the Poles in
order to supply the Rivers again. But this is no objection to our present
Argument, for tho the Vapors drawn from the surface of the Earth, would no
doubt increase the quantity of water, in the Rivers, yet still there would be
drawn from the Abyss, the same quantity of Vapor as was before; the same cause
still continuing to act, would still produce the same effect, and the Abyss
having at first furnished the Rivers with a sufficient quantity of water, would
still continue to do the same, and in the same quantity; and therefore it
signifies nothing against the former Calculation, how much Vapor was drawn
from the surface of the Earth, or how much the Rivers were increased by it.

Since then I have sufficiently proved on the supposition of his Principles,
that all the water, in the Abyss was long before the time of the Deluge, drawn
out of the Abyss, and placed on the surface of the Earth; I would fain know how
in that case the Theorist can explain an Universal Deluge by the fall of the
outward Crust of the Earth upon the Abyss: for in my Opinion, this fall would
have been so far from being the cause of a Deluge, that it would have proved
the true way to deliver the Earth from a Deluge of waters which was then on it.
For all the water which was in the Abyss, being drawn up on the surface of the
Land, and the Earth being of a Spheroidical and Oval shape, without Hills and
Mountains, upper and lower Grounds, but exactly of the same Figure which its
gravity and centrifugal force formed it into, when it was fluid; the great Mass
of water which was then upon the Earth must have settled it self also in the
same Figure, it having no banks to retain it within its Channel, or Mountains
to keep it within bounds; and the true effect of the fall of the Crust, must
have been to have discovered the Land, and the waters would have run from the
surface of the Earth into the Abyss, and there would have formed a Sea, and
made that Land appear which before was covered with waters.

Notwithstanding what I have already proved, I will now suppose, that all the
water which is now in the Ocean, was in the Abyss at the time of the Deluge,
and that the Crust of the Earth was broken and cracked, and fell down on the
surface of the Abyss; yet still I cannot understand how this fall could produce
an Universal Deluge, and make the waters swell above the tops of the highest
Mountains. For the Theorist has Calculated, that it would at least require
eight Oceans of water to cover the face of the whole Earth, and raise the
waters to a height that would be requisite for drowning of the world. Now there
being but one Ocean of water in the Abyss, how is it possible that any however
violent agitation and force by which the waters were driven upwards, should
multiply this one Ocean of waters into eight Oceans? this I am sure is a thing
as impossible for him to explain as it is for me to believe: it is plain indeed
that the fall of the Crust especially if there were any considerable distance
between the Abyss and it, would raise the waters to the tops of the highest
Mountains, and would in some places produce a partial Deluge; but it is
evident, that it is impossible in nature, let the motion be never so violent,
that one Ocean should be sufficient to cover the whole Earth, and that above
the tops of the highest Mountains, when eight Oceans are the least that can be
required to perform such an effect. The waters indeed at different times, might
have covered the whole Earth successively; first by making a Deluge in one
place and then in another, but this could never have been brought to pass by
the fall of the Crust at once. Besides the Scriptures inform us that the whole
Earth was under water at the same time, and that all the high Hills, that were
under the whole Heaven, were covered: now it is as impossible that one Ocean
should suffice to drown the whole Earth, and cover the tops of the highest
Hills, tho for the space of one moment, as it is to make one pint of pure water
fill a vessel which holds a Gallon. This Argument which I have now used is the
Theorists own, which he has alleged in his 2 d and 3 d Chapters against all
other ways of destroying the Earth by a Deluge; but he did not then observe,
that it concluded as strongly against his own Theory, as it did against any
other which pretends to explain the Deluge without the supposition of more
water than what was Lodged in the Ocean or the Clouds.

But tho I should suppose that there was sufficient water in the Abyss to cover
the face of the whole Earth at once, yet I cannot conceive how such a flood of
waters that was raised by the fall of the Crust, could last for so long a time,
as the Scriptures inform us Noah's flood did, which was an hundred and fifty
days without abating on the face of the Earth. We know that water driven with
great violence upwards falls down again in a very short space of time; and can
we Imagine that the water which was raised by the fall of the Crust, could last
many days, or indeed many hours, without descending again to its ancient
Channel? But the Scriptures assure us that the water in Noah's Flood
continually increased, and prevailed on the Earth for the space of one hundred
and fifty days; it is plain therefore, that for this very reason the Flood of
Noah could never be produced by the fall of this outward Crust of the Earth.

The Conclusion.
THERE are two sort of Arguments that may be brought against the Theory, the
one depends only on the principles of Reason and Philosophy, and the other on
the Authority of the writings of Moses: but these which might be gathered from
Moses would be of no force against the Theorist; Archaeologiae Philosoph. p.
320, 321.
since he denies the truth of his narrations, which he imagines to be invented
by that excellent Lawgiver to please and amuse the Jews: I have therefore in
this Treatise only made use of Arguments which are drawn from Philosophy, which
he cannot refuse to admit since he appeals to them, for the Truth of his own
Hypothesis.

Because the Theorist tells us, that all things were made according to the
three Mathematical sciences of Arithmetic Staticks and Geometry, and that to
understand the manner of their composition, we must proceed in the search of
them by the same Principles, and resolve them into these again; I thought
therefore I might fairly examine his Theory by the rules of those three
Mathematical Sciences; and I hope that I have shown, that it is built on
principles which are directly repugnant to each of them: But because Arguments
drawn from the Mathematics are not easily understood by those that are
unacquainted with that Science, I have endeavored to choose only those
Arguments which are plain and obvious and which depend only on Arithmetic and
the common principles of Hydrostaticks; so that except in one or two places,
there is nothing in this Treatise but what may be easily understood by those
who have a moderate knowledge in these Sciences.

The points I have examined according to these rules are, First The Origination
of the Earth from a Chaos, which as it is delivered down to us by Moses, must
be undoubtedly owned by those who acknowledge the Divine Inspiration of that
Writer; But as the Theorists method of forming the World is not agreeable to
the Mosaic History; so I think I have showed that it is repugnant also to the
Laws of Nature and Gravitation, which by his method could never have produced
any habitable World.

2 dly, The form of the Antediluvian World, which the Theorist says, was
smooth, regular, and uniform, without mountains and without a Sea. This he
asserts to be a necessary consequence of its rise from a Chaos; but I have
proved that it is not so necessary, that an Earth arising from a Chaos, should
be uniform and smooth as he supposes. I have also showed the great use of
Mountains, and how necessary they are for our subsistence in the present Earth,
and that they are so far from being placed here without design, as the Theorist
imagins, that there is scarce any thing in nature that shows more of wisdom and
contrivance than they do, being absolutely necessary for the furnishing and
maintaining Rivers with fresh waters; which is a demonstration that they were
in the primitive Earth as well as they are in ours.

3 dly, The right position of the Earths Axis, which I have proved to be so far
from being excellent and fitted for a Paradisiacal World, that it would make
the greatest part of the Earth not habitable. I have also enquired into the
great advantages we reap from the present position of the Earths Axis, which is
by far preferable to any other, especially to the perpendicular position of the
Axis of the Earth to the plane of the Ecliptic.

4 thly, The method the Theorist has found out to form the Antediluvian Rivers
when there was no Sea to furnish them with waters, or any Channel or Ocean to
receive them. This I have proved to be impossible on several accounts since the
heat of the Sun could never bring up so much Vapor from the Abyss, as would be
necessary to furnish all the Rivers of the Earth with water; and tho we should
grant that Vapors were drawn from the Abyss in places near the Equinoctial as
he supposes, yet it is impossible that it should ever reach the Poles, there to
form the Springs from which the Rivers were to run; Or if Vapors were once
brought to the Poles by whatever cause we can imagine, yet it is impossible that
they should ever run back from the Poles to the Equator; since according to
him the Earth was perfectly smooth and uniform without any upper grounds from
whence the water was to descend to the lower places of the Earth.

5 thly, The Figure of the Earth which the Theorist rightly affirms not to have
been exactly Spherical, because at the Commencement of the Diurnal rotation, it
being Fluid all the parts of it would endeavor to recede from the Axis of
their motion: but as he has guessed that it did settle into an Oblong
Spheroidical or Oval Figure, on no other account, that I know of, but because
he thinks such a one would best answer his design, so I think I have clearly
enough demonstrated, that the Earth has formed it self into a quite contrary
Figure, whose Axis is shorter than the Diameter of the Equator; and I have
proved from Observations, that the Earth is really of such a Figure.

6 thly, The causes the Theorist has assigned for the breaking of the outward
Crust which he affirms to be done by the great heat of the Sun. But this I have
clearly proved to be a cause altogether insufficient for such an effect, since
the heat of the Sun could never reach so far into so thick a Crust as to be
great enough to raise water into Vapors. But lastly, granting the Crust to
have been broken, and to have fallen down into the Abyss, yet I have proved
from the Theorists own Principles, that there could follow no Universal Deluge,
there being not so much water in the Abyss as was sufficient to cover the face
of the whole Earth.

Throughout the whole Examination, I have observed the Theorists advice, and
have considered only the substance of the Theory without making any excursions
upon things that are accidental and collateral, which as he says do not
destroy his Hypothesis. These are the main foundations on which his Theory is
built, and since I have proved them all to be not only precarious, but
impossible, his whole Hypothesis must fall with them. Perhaps many of his
Readers will be sorry to be undeceived, for as I believe, never any Book was
fuller of Errors and Mistakes in Philosophy, so none ever abounded with more
beautiful Scenes and surprising Images of Nature; but I write only to those who
might perhaps expect to find a true Philosophy in it. They who read it as an
Ingenious Romance will still be pleased with their Entertainment.

FINIS.
SOME REMARKES ON Mr. WHISTON'S Theory of the Earth.
THOUGH I think it impossible to give a True and Mechanical account, of that
great Deluge of waters which once overflowed the Face of the whole Earth, it
being a work not to be performed without the extraordinary contrivance of the
Divine power; yet I cannot but acknowledge that Mr. Whiston the Ingenious
Author of this new Theory of the Earth, has made greater discoveries, and
proceeded on more Philosophical Principles than all the Theorists before him
have done. In his Theory there are some very strange coincidents which make it
indeed probable, that a Comet at the time of the Deluge passed by the Earth. It
is surprising to observe the exact correspondence between the Lunar and Solar
year, upon the supposition of a circular Orbit, in which the Earth moved before
the Deluge. It cannot but raise admiration in us, when we consider, that the
Earth at the time of the Deluge was in its Perihelion, which would be the
necessary effect of a Comet that passed by at that time, in drawing it from a
Circular to an Elliptical Orbit. This together with the consideration that the
Moon was exactly in such a place of its Orbit at that time, as equally
attracted with the Earth, when the Comet passed by, seems to be a very
convincing Argument that a Comet really came very near, and passed by the
Earth, on the day the Deluge began.

But notwithstanding this, I believe it will be evident by the following
considerations, that a Comet could never have produced those various effects
that Mr. Whiston has attributed to it; and it will also further appear that the
Deluge was the immediate work of the Divine power, and that no secondary causes
without the interposition of Omnipotence could have brought such an effect to
pass. But first I will make some Remarks on the Origin of the Primitive Earth,
and method by which Mr. Whiston supposes it was formed.

Mr. Whiston's first Hypothesis is, that the ancient Chaos, the Origin of our
Earth was the Atmosphere of a Comet; but this supposition, tho he endeavors to
prove it by several Arguments, does not seem probable for the reasons
following. First the Scriptures represent the Primitive Ancient Chaos as a very
dark and obscure Body; for they say, that it was without form, and Void, and
that Darkness was upon the face of the Deep: this will further appear by the
next verse, where God is said to have made light upon the first day of the
Creation, which is a clear proof that there was none before that time, but that
the whole Chaos was originally a dark and confused heap of Bodies. Now it is
certain, by the Testimonies of all those who have made any Observations about
Comets, that their Atmospheres are very bright and luminous Fluids through
which the beams of the Sun diffuse themselves very freely, and many of them are
again reflected back to us: and indeed, if we consider their pellucidness, and
the vast quantity of Light which passes through them, without reflection, it is
not easy to imagine how they should appear so lucid to our Eyes. Nor do I
believe that it is possible to find among all the pellucid Bodies of our Earth
any one, which being placed at the same distance from us, as the Atmosphere of
Comets are, would appear so bright, or reflect the light so strongly as they
do. For it is easy to be observed, that diaphanous Bodies are not so luminous,
nor do they reflect light in such a quantity as it is reflected from opake
Bodies. It cannot be said that the light by which we perceive a Comet, is only
reflected from the top of its Atmosphere, and that it does not pass through the
Body of it to illuminate all the other parts of it, which are therefore
involved in thick darkness; for it is evident that light passes clearly through
the whole Body of the Atmosphere, and illuminates the central solid, which
strongly reflects the light to us back again.

I know Mr. Whiston supposes, that this great darkness mentioned in the
Scripture, proceeded from the subsiding of the vast Dense and heavy Fluid, or
large Abyss, which he says encompassed the central solid, and was it self
covered over with a collection of Earthly, Watery, and Airy particles,
intercepting and reflecting all the Rays of light which fell upon it: but this
I think does not well agree with the tenor of Scripture, which represents the
Chaos in its very Original state, as involved with darkness and obscurity. It
is also repugnant to all the ancient Traditions we have about it, which
represent it as a dark and confused heap of Bodies, from the very beginning of
its existence, till the time of the Creation or Formation of the Earth. It is
plain also that the Abyss or Deep mentioned in Scripture, could not be that
dense and heavy fluid Mr. Whiston speaks of, on which he says the upper Crust
of our Earth is founded; it being certain, that the Scriptures are to be
understood of an Abyss which was then dark, and afterward when light was
Created, was illuminated and made visible. For when light is said to have been
made, without doubt we must suppose, that it was produced in some place which
before was involved in darkness, and then exposed to the light, which can never
agree with Mr. Whiston's Abyss, which he makes to be encompassed with a dense
and opake Crust perfectly impenetrable by the light of the Sun. It appears
therefore, that this darkness mentioned in the Scriptures must be undestood to
be somewhere else than on the Surface of a dense and heavy fluid that surrounds
the central solid.

It is also to be observed, that it is not easy to conceive how these Earthy,
Watery, and Airy particles, should fall so thick and fast on one another, as
would be sufficient to intercept all the light which fell upon them, and quite
darken the Atmosphere, without suffering the least glimmering of light to pass
through them. For as Mr. Whiston observes, the heat of a Comet when it passes
its Perihelion is so excessively great, as to last many thousand years; and we
cannot doubt but that great commotion and confusion which is raised by this
heat must last proportionally, and as the heat does gradually decrease, so must
the commotion in the Atmosphere decrease proportionally: by which the most
solid and heavy Bodies would soonest fall down. And one would think that it
would not be the work of one or two years, but it would require some thousands
of years after the solid Bodies first began to fall before the Atmosphere,
could settle it self into a regular and uniform Body. And therefore since all
these diaphanous and solid Bodies which composed the outward Crust fell so
slowly and by degrees on the Abyss, and since at the time they were all there,
they were not able to darken the Atmosphere; I think that by their slow and
gradual descent, they would not fall so thick upon one another, but that the
Comets Atmosphere would still be penetrated and illuminated by the light of the
Sun.

But if I should grant to Mr. Whiston, that there were such dark and thick
Clouds in the Atmosphere of the Comet as were sufficient to intercept all the
light that should be derived to it from the Sun; yet if we consider that the
central solid of a Comet, is a Body which by reason of its near approach to the
Sun, is scorched and burned by very intense heat, and that all solid and hard
bodies when they are heated to any considerable degree are clear and luminous;
we must acknowledge that the proper and native light of Comets, if I may so
call it, is very considerable; and therefore upon this single account of a
Comets proper light, it cannot be such a dark and obscure Body as that Chaos
was from which the world had its Origination.

Since then the Atmospheres of Comets are clear and pellucid luminous Bodies,
through which we can distinctly view their central solids; and since the Chaos
out of which the world was made from its very Original, was a dark and confused
heap of Bodies without the least glimmerings of light, which was not created
till the first day of the Hexaemeron; it is plain that this Chaos could never
be the Atmosphere of a Comet, and therefore Mr. Whiston's first Hypothesis is
but ill grounded.

It is also to be observed, that the greatest part of these solids, which
compose our upper Stratum, consist of Stones, Sand, and Gravel; and that they
when they are once heated to any considerable degree, are necessarily melted
and turned into Glass. Now if they had ever existed in the Atmosphere of a
Comet, when it was near the Sun, they must have sustained a degree of heat some
hundreds of times greater than the heat of red hot Iron; and consequently they
must have been melted: and during the time of their immense heat they would
have composed a fluid, which afterward when the Comet was cooled, would appear
in the form of Glass; by which it is plain, that those Bodies never were in the
Atmosphere of a Comet, for otherwise they could never have appeared to us in
the form they are in at present.

Mr. Whiston asserts, that there are very many, and very considerable
Phenomenon of nature, which require a central force, or internal heat,
diffusing warm steams every way from the center to the circumference; and
especially he seems to be pleased with Dr. Woodwards method of raising Vapors
through the Earth to furnish the Rivers with water by the help of a central
fire; which he thinks is easily accounted for, by supposing the interior solid
of the Earth to have been the Nucleus of a Comet, that once in its approach to
the Sun had acquired an immense heat which it does still in a great measure
preserve: but this Opinion, tho it has been maintained by a great many Learned
Men, seems to be very improbable. For if I should suppose that there was such a
central fire, yet it is not to be imagined, that it could ever diffuse it self,
and penetrate the exterior parts of the Earth. We know by experience, that if a
stone wall of four or five foot thickness be heated red hot upon one side, that
the other continues as cold as before, without being sensibly affected with the
heat which is intense on the opposite side. Since then we see that an intense
heat is not able to penetrate through a stone wall, how can we suppose, that it
should diffuse it self through a dense and heavy fluid, an hard and diaphanous
Crust of some hundreds of miles thickness?

I know none of the Phenomenon of nature that do necessarily require a central
fire. For as to burning Mountains and Volcano's, if Mr. Whiston will be pleased
to consult Borelli de incendiis Montis AEtnae, he will easily be convinced,
that its fire does not proceed from the Center, but that it is kindled very
near the surface of the Mountain. And as for Rivers, I believe it is evident,
that they are furnished by a superior circulation of Vapors drawn from the Sea
by the heat of the Sun, which by Calculation are abundantly sufficient for such
a supply. For it is certain that nature never provides two distinct ways to
produce the same effect, when one will serve. But the increase and decrease of
Rivers, according to wet and dry Seasons of the year, do sufficiently show
their Origination from a Superior circulation of Rains and Vapors. For if they
were furnished by Vapors exhaled from the Abyss through subterraneous Pipes
and Channels, I see no reason why this subterraneous fire, which always acts
equally, should not always equally produce the same effect in dry weather that
it does in wet. Besides this, since the Mountainous Columns are erected not on
the Surface of the water, but stand immediately on that dense and heavy fluid
which covers the central solid; I cannot easily conceive how water should ever
come to the bottom of the Fissures to be raised into Vapors. Nor can I well
conceive that prodigious heat, that must be sufficient to raise as much Vapor
through some small Fissures in Mountains as the heat of the Sun is able to do
from the whole Surface of the Sea.

I know the maintainers of this Opinion use to allege, that there are Springs
and Fountains on the tops of Mountains, which cannot easily be maintained by a
Superior circulation of Vapors: but I beg those Gentlemen's pardon, for I can
give no credit to any such Observations; for I am well assured, that there are
none of those Springs in some places where it is said they are. And
particularly that Learned and diligent Observer of Nature Mr. Edward Lloyd the
Keeper of the Musaeum Ashmoleanum assured me, that throughout all his Travels
over Wales, he could observe no such thing as a running Spring on the top of a
Mountain. On these considerations, I think it is not in the least probable,
that Rivers and Springs proceed from Vapor, that is, raised by a subterraneous
heat through the Fissures of the Mountains.

I come now to consider the way Mr. Whiston makes use of, to explain the
formation of the Sun, Moon and Stars, by which he says in the Mosaical account
of the Creation, no other thing is understood than the rendering of them
visible and conspicuous to a Spectator on the face of the Earth: for before the
fourth day according to him, the Air was much crowded with thick and opake
Clouds, which would very much darken the face of the Earth, and keep a
Spectator on it from being able to perceive either Sun, Moon or Stars, which
were created long before that time. In this place I think Mr. Whiston has not
exactly observed his first Postulatum, viz. that the obvious and literal sense
of Scripture is the true and real one, where no evident reason can be given to
the contrary. For since the formation of the Sun and Stars at that time was
possible, and the Scriptures positively tell us, that they were made by God
Almighty at that time; I think there can be no evident reason given which will
be sufficient to justify such a forced and strained sense as he has here put on
the words of Scripture.

But tho I should suppose that the literal sense of Scripture did not in the
least contradict such an exposition, yet it appears to be impossible on his
Hypothesis for these reasons. First, I have already proved that the Atmosphere
of a Comet is a very clear and pellucid Body that does freely admit both the
light and heat of the Sun through it; and consequently there is no doubt to be
made, but that an Eye placed within would have the Sun very visible and
conspicuous to it. It is evident therefore, granting this Hypothesis of the
Earths being formed from the Atmosphere of a Comet, that the Mosaic account of
the formation of the Sun and Stars can never be understood of rendering them
visible; since according to such an Hypothesis they must have been always so.

2 dly, Whatever Mr. Whiston may imagine of the Sun, yet it is certain that the
Moon at the time of the Mosaic Creation was formed or at least placed in its
orbit, and made to turn round the Earth; for no Comets have any secondary
Planets which move round them: since then the Moon did not before that time
appertain to the Earth but was really at the time of the Mosaic Creation, if
not Created and formed, at least brought into a new orbit, and made to move
about us to give us Light in the night time; we must necessarily acknowledge,
that when God is said to have made the Moon, there must be something more
understood than a mere rendering of it visible; and because the word Made, is
equally applied in Scriptures both to the Sun and Moon; there is no doubt but
that it is to be understood in the same sense of both, that is in a literal
one, viz. That they were really Created, when in Scripture they are said to be
made on the fourth day of the Mosaic Creation.

3 dly, Mr. Whiston supposes that the Sun acted so very strongly the second day
of the Creation on the Earth, that it was able to draw a prodigious quantity of
Vapors into the Air, such as were sufficient enough when they fell in Rain, to
produce all the Seas, Lakes and Rivers that were in the Primitive Earth: but
how the Sun could have such an extraordinary influence on the Earth without
being visible, is a question which I believe cannot be easily answered; for
there is a great difference between the heat of the Sun when it shines bright
and clear, and its influence when it is obscured with Clouds and Vapors;
Indeed one would think that it would require a prodigious heat, to elevate such
a quantity of Vapors in one half year as would fill all the Channels of the
Seas and Lakes with water. I am sure that the Sun now when it is brightest is
not able to perform any such effect; for if we should collect all the Rain that
falls in the space of a year on the surface of the Earth, it would not rise on
the whole surface of the Earth, above a foot and a half high; which is not
enough to make the thousandth part of an Ocean. Since then according to Mr.
Whiston, the Sun was capable on the second day, to perform an effect some
hundreds of times greater than its heat when it shines clearest and brightest
is able to do on our Earth, I think we may undoubtedly conclude that it must
have been visible even at that time; that is, it must have been visible before
it was said to have been made, which cannot be imagined in whatever sense we
take the word made.

Indeed I cannot but think it strange, that Mr. Whiston should suppose, that
there was some hundreds of times more water drawn by the heat of the Sun in one
half year, than there is now exhaled from our Earth in double that time; since
he himself acknowledges, that we do every day enjoy more of its Heat and Light
than the Primitive Earth could be supposed to have done for a considerable
space of time: this I confess seems to me, to be a very wonderful and
unaccountable effect, and not at all proportional to its cause; but if he will
suppose that it was really so, I need not argue much against it, since I am
sure, such a supposition must necessarily allow the Sun to have been at that
time visible.

Mr. Whiston's third Hypothesis is, that the diurnal rotation of the Earth, did
not commence till after the fall; so that till that time, Days and Years were
exactly equal and the same; the Earth having no other motion but its annual one
round the Sun, all the World would have for one half of the year a continual
Day, and for the other a continual Night. Here I must freely own my self to be
one of those Readers to whom Mr. Whiston says this assertion will appear one
of the greatest of Paradoxes; for when I consider the vast and prodigious cold
that must be occasioned on the Earth, by the total absence of the Sun for one
half year together, I think that it would be so excessively great, as that
'twould have been impossible to be endured by Creatures made of Flesh and
Blood. We are extremely sensible of the great cold we sustain by having our
Night in the Winter sixteen hours long, but yet it is nothing to what it would
be, were the Sun for half a year together absent from us: how cold and
uncomfortable a darkness must that have been in which our first Parents passed
the one half of their Paradisaical life, when in the other half they must have
been scorched and roasted with the immense heat of the Sun, which shined on
them continually for as long a time, as they were before in the dark. This heat
in my opinion, would have quite withered the Herbs and Plants which were then
designed to be the food of Mankind; it would have forced our first Parents to
seek for shelter in Dens and Caves, which would have been, in such a state,
more convenient than the Garden of Eden; and it would have been altogether as
unsupportable as the former cold. It is evident that such a state would be so
far from being agreeable with that happy and pleasant Paradisiacal life which
our first Parents are said to have lead in their state of Innocence, that the
Legend-makers and Poets, thought it a fitter representation of Hell and its
Torments, than of that state of happiness; some of them having feigned that
there were Ghosts brought from Hell on purpose to inform us that a great part
of the miseries of the damned consisted in their being driven from extreme hot
places to extreme cold ones.

There is one very convincing Argument against this supposition arising from
the consideration of the nature of Animals, whose Blood and other liquors that
run in their Bodies are not able to endure two such opposites as the extreme
heat caused by the Sun while it shined for one half year without intermission
on the same place; and the extreme cold that must arise through his absence for
the same time. For if we should suppose that these animal liquors were of such
a constitution and internal heat as not to be frozen by an extreme cold, yet it
is certain that they must evaporate and be exhaled by the extreme heat that
came after it in the day time: or if they were able to sustain such an extreme
heat without evaporation; then without doubt they could not preserve themselves
from freezing in an extreme cold which they must have suffered in such a Winter
or half a years night.

I know there are Animals which live near the fire, and are able to endure an
extraordinary heat; as there are others that live near the Pole and in very
cold Climates: but it is not imaginable there can be any such that can live
both in excessive heat and excessive cold; it being impossible that ever they
can endure two such opposite extremes. Tho this seems to be a very pressing
difficulty against such an Hypothesis, yet there is another that I think as
insolvable, arising from the consideration of the nature of Plants.

We know that there is a certain determinate degree of heat necessary for the
production and vegetation of most Herbs, and for the ripening of their Seed; so
that a less degree of heat would never bring the Plant to perfection, and a
greater would quite wither it before its Seed could be ripened and fit for the
production of a new Plant of the same species. It is easily observable how
great difficulty there is, and how much pains must be taken, by hot beds, and
other artificial helps to raise Plants in this Climate, which are transplanted
hither from the Torrid Zone: but this difficulty proceeds no doubt, from the
want of such a due influence of the Sun as was necessary for the production of
these Plants; so that by reason of the great difference between the heat which
they had in their own proper Soil, and that which they participate of here, it
is hard to bring them to perfection: but if we should suppose this alteration
to be some hundred of times greater than it is, without doubt we should
conclude it impossible for any such Plants to grow with so little a degree of
heat. But this must have been the true case of the Plants in the Primitive
Earth: At first before the diurnal rotation of the Earth began, they sustained
a degree of heat some hundreds of times greater, than the greatest heat we have
in Summer; but after the Earth began to turn round its Axis, the heat and
action of the Sun on them came to be of the same force and tenor that it is of
at present; but I have observed before, that all plants and Herbs require a
certain determinate degree of heat and influence from the Sun; and as a much
greater heat will wither them, so less will never bring them to perfection: on
which account it seems to be naturally impossible, that ever any of these
Plants, whose nature and constitution was fitted for the heat of the Sun,
before the commencement of the Earths diurnal rotation, could ever be brought
to perfection after it began to turn round its Axis in the space of twenty four
hours, by which the action of the Sun would be very much less than before. If
therefore the Earth had no diurnal rotation till after the fall; and if then
only it began to turn round its own Axis, there must have been such great and
extraordinary changes and alterations of heat and cold introduced by this new
rotation as would necessarily require new Species of Plants and Vegetables of
different natures from the former ones, which would better agree with the new
rotation and constitution of the Earth, and the action of the Sun. That is, God
Almighty must have created new and different sets of Plants, or at least have
quite altered and changed the natures of the old ones, which we can hardly
imagine to be done.

It is on the account of these reasons that I cannot be induced to believe Mr.
Whistons Hypothesis, that the Earth had no diurnal rotation before the fall, to
be probable; it seeming to be far more agreeable to the Laws of Nature and
Philosophy, that the Earth received both its annual and diurnal motions at the
same time, viz. when it was first Created.

These are the chief and principle Remarks that I have made on the Original
State and Formation of the Earth; I will now briefly consider his Theory of the
Deluge which is in short thus.

He supposes that a Comet at the time of the Deluge came very near and passed
by the Earth; that the Comet, when it came below the Moon, would raise a vast
and strong Tide, both in the Seas that were then on the Surface, and in the
Abyss, which was under the upper Crust of the Earth, after the same manner as
the Moon does at present in the Ocean; that this Tide would begin to rise and
increase all the time of the approach of the Comet; and would be at its
greatest height, when the Comet was at its least distance from the earth. By
this tide and the attraction of the Comet, he supposes that the Abyss would put
on an Elliptick or rather an exactly oval figure; whose surface being much
larger than the former spherical one, the exterior crust of earth, which lay
upon it, must conform it self to the same figure, which it could not do as long
as it remained solid and conjoined; and therefore it must of necessity by the
violent force of the tide be stretched and broken, and have innumerable
fissures made quite through it. After this he supposes that the Comet in its
descent toward the sun passing close by the body of the earth involved it in
its Atmosphere and tail for a considerable time, and left prodigious quantities
of condensed and expanded vapors on its surface, a great part of which being
very much rarified after their primary fall, would be immediately drawn up into
the Air again, and afterward descend in violent and outrageous Rains upon the
Earth; and would be the canse of the forty days rain mentioned in Scripture.
The other great Rain, which together with the former, lasted an hundred and
fifty days, was occasioned as he thinks, by the Earths being involved a second
time in the Comets tail; from which, and from its Atmosphere he derives one
half of the water, which served for the Deluge. The other half he supposes was
deduced from the subterraneous Abyss, the fluid whereof he says was forced upon
the Surface of the Earth, by the vast and prodigious pressure of the incumbent
water that was derived from the Comets Atmosphere and Tail, which he supposes,
would press downwards with a mighty force, and endeavor to sink the outward
Crust of the Earth into the Abyss: by which vast quantities of the
subterraneous fluid, would be forced and raised upon the Surface of the Earth,
through the Cracks and Fissures, that were made in the Crust by the violence of
the Tide in the Abyss. By these methods Mr. Whiston supposes that there was
water enough brought on the Surface to cover the face of the whole Earth for
the perpendicular height of three miles, that is, above the tops of the highest
Mountains. But he further supposes, that neither that water which was derived
from the Comet, nor that which was forced up from the bowels of the Earth, was
pure Elementary water, but rather a thick and muddy fluid, which he says being
heavier than water, sunk to the bottom and covered the Earth, for the depth of
166 feet. After having thus formed the Deluge, his next great work is to remove
these waters which were brought on the Earth; and this he supposes to be
performed by a wind, which dried up some, and forced the rest through the
Cracks and Fissures of the Earth into the Abyss, in which a great part of them
had been before, and from whence they were derived.

These are the suppositions by which Mr. Whiston pretends to account for all
the Phenomenon of the Deluge. But tho I can easily allow the first Hypothesis
to be true, viz. That a Comet at the time of the Deluge came very near and
passed by the Earth, since its approach at that time is not only made possible
but also very probable by him; yet I cannot admit of the particular
explications he has given of several of the Phenomenon of the Deluge; a great
many of them, as he has explained them, seeming to be no ways agreeable to the
Laws of Mechanics and Philosophy.

For first, tho it is certain, that a Comet, when it passed by the Earth, would
raise a very strong and prodigious Tide in the Seas that were then on the
Surface; yet I cannot perceive, that such an effect would be produced in the
Abyss, which he supposes to be a dense and heavy fluid encompassed on all sides
with a thick and solid Crust of Earth lying closely upon it. For Tides being
only a violent swelling and motion of the waters produced by the attraction of
some great Bodies that come near them, if we should suppose that the waters
were every where shut up within a solid Orb lying on them, so that there were
no room or space left for them to move in, it is plain that in such a case
there could be no Tide or agitation of the waters, but they would remain in the
state they were in before; nor could they press stronger on that Orb which
enclosed them, than Sand, Gravel, or any other firm and hard Bodies would do,
that could fill their place; all Bodies whether firm or Fluid, being equally
attracted, when the attracting Body is at the same distance from them. This
being then the true case of the Abyss, which Mr. Whiston supposes to be
enclosed by the thick solid and upper Crust of the Earth, which pressing so
close upon it as to leave no void space, at least not such a one as would make
room enough for any considerable commotion of the waters; and because fluids
are not more attracted than solids are; it is plain that by the Tide of the
Abyss, and the attraction of the Comet, there could never be produced any
greater effect on the Crust, which encompassed the subterraneous fluid, than if
the whole Earth had consisted of firm and solid matter, without any Abyss. It
is certain therefore, that since there was no tide in the Abyss, there could be
no cracks and fissures made in the Earth by it.

To explain the great rains, which fell on the Earth during the time of the
deluge, Mr. Whiston assumes a proposition which I believe he can hardly prove,
viz. that after the Earth was involved in the Comet's Atmosphere and tail, and
had acquired a prodigious quantity of condensed and expanded Vapors that fell
on its surface, a great part of them being much rarified, would be drawn up
again into the Air, and afterward descend in violent and outrageous rains. Now
if we consider the incredible velocity, with which these Vapors descended
(which Mr. Whiston calculates to be so great, that they descended eight hundred
and sixty eight miles in a minute) and the great resistance they met with in
their descent through the Air, and the force by which they fell on the ground;
we must necessarily acknowledge, that they must have been condensed and turned
into Water, by such a resistance and fall. For it is certain, that when Vapors
fall, they must meet with a great check and resistance from the Air, by which
their parts will be pressed close together; and as their velocity increases, so
would the resistance and their density till at last their parts come to be as
closely united as it is possible, and then they would fall in the form of Water.
Thus it is without doubt, when it rains; for we must not imagine, that rain
drops have the same form and density in the Clouds with which they arrive at
the ground; for Water being of a greater intensive gravity than Air, it is
impossible, that it should be sustained in it, but when it is expanded into
Vapor. Now it is plain by observations on the Barescope, that, whenever the
Vapors begin to descend, the Air is lighter than it was before; it therefore
not being able to sustain them, they must fall to the ground; but in their way
they meet with a great resistance, and check from the Air, and so must
necessarily be condensed and fall in drops of Water on the ground. And since
the resistance of the medium is always as the square of the velocity with which
the Body moves through it, and because the velocity of vapor which fell from
the Comet to the Earth, must have been according to Mr. Whiston, some thousands
of times greater than the velocity with which common Vapor or Rain descends,
it must needs follow, that the resistance the Vapor, which was derived from
the Comet, met with, was some millions of times greater than the resistance of
common Vapor when it descends; but the resistance of common Vapor, when it
descends, is great enough to condense it into water; it is evident therefore,
that all such Vapors as descended from the Comet must have been of necessity
condensed into water long before they ever touched the Earth. Seeing then they
descended on the Earth in the form of water, and seeing there was no sufficient
cause that could immediately raise and mount them up again, the heat of the Sun
not being great enough for such an effect; it is plain, that they could never
rise up again to produce the forty Days Rain mentioned in Scripture.

Mr. Whiston having, as he imagins, explained the great Rains, which fell on
the Earth at the time of the Deluge, does in the next place proceed to show,
how the waters of the Abyss were forced up to the Surface of the Earth, and
became a great cause of the Universal flood. This he supposes to be performed
by the vast quantity of waters, that had descended from the Comet, which, he
says, being of a prodigious weight would press the Crust of the Earth
downwards with a mighty force, and endeavor to sink it deeper into the Abyss;
by this pressure the waters of the Abyss would be forced upwards through the
Cracks and Fissures newly made by the violence of the Tide on the Surface of
the Earth. He endeavors to illustrate this method of Operation by the Example
of a Stone or Marble Cylinder, exactly fitted to a hollow Cylindrical vessel,
that it may just ascend or descend freely within it: He supposes the Stone
Cylinder to have holes bored in it quite through, parallel to its Axis, and let
down in the hollow Cylinder, which is half full of water, till it touch the
water; then if each of the holes be filled with Oil or some other fluid lighter
than water he says, that the weight of the Cylinder pressing on the water,
would squeeze the Oil on its Surface through the holes, and throw it out with
some violence, and this would be a just representation of the Deluge.

I must beg Mr. Whiston's leave to think this experiment very far from being
any way a just representation of the flood; the case being very different, when
the Solid is specifically heavier than the Fluid in which it is put, from what
it is, when the Solid is specifically lighter than it. In the one case, the
Solid would descend and force both Oil and water up with a considerable force,
if the holes be sufficiently small: In the other case, when the lighter Solid
is put down, and swims in the fluid, neither Oil nor Water can ascend, because
the Body it self cannot descend. Now by Mr. Whiston's own Hypothesis, the Crust
of the Earth is lighter than the Fluid in the Abyss; and therefore it is clear,
that it can neither descend as the Stone Cylinder would do in water, nor force
the Fluid in the Abyss to ascend, by its pressure. This will clearly appear by
Mr. Whiston's representation a little rectified. For if instead of the Cylinder
of Stone, we should take a Cylinder of Wood, which is lighter than Water, and
bore it through with holes as the other was, and put it into the Water, till it
swims, and afterward pour Oil into the holes; it is plain that neither Water
nor Oil could ever be raised to the top of the Cylinder: Nay the Water would be
so far from rising higher by the additional pressure of the Oil, that I can
demonstratively prove, it would fall lower, and the Solid would not sink so far
into the Water, as it did before the Oil was put in. For let ABCD represent a
Vessel half full of Water, in which F is a Solid swimming; it is evident, that
the Solid will so far descend in the Water, till the Surface ik of the Water be
as much pressed by the weight of the Solid, as the Surfaces hi, kl are by the
weight of the incumbent fluid.

Now if we should pour Oil into the same Vessel above the Water and above the
Solid, as in the Figure, where mEG n represents Oil; it is plain, that the
Surfaces hi, kl are pressed with the additional Columns of Oil mE or, qpG n,
which being greater than ropq, the additional Oil wherewith the Surface ik is
pressed, will have a stronger pressure than the Surface ik has; and therefore
the Water at hi, kl, being more pressed than that which is at ik, it must
descend, and force that which is at ik further up: that is, the Solid will be
forced upwards, and will be so far from being heavier than 'twas in respect of
the water, that it will be relatively lighter; and this must have been the true
case of the Water at the Deluge. For when it fell on the Surface of the Earth,
it would descend into all the Cracks and Fissures thereof, till it had quite
filled them; for water cannot ly on any Surface except all the Holes and
Fissures of that Surface be first filled. This adventitious water in the
Fissures pressing more strongly on the Surface of the Abyss than the Water,
which lay on the Surface of the Crust could do, would force the Fluid
immediately under it to descend, and that which is under the Crust to ascend.
Thus I think, it is absolutely certain, that in this case, the water in the
Abyss would be so far from being able to ascend, that it must necessarily
descend by the pressure of the incumbent water; and the whole Crust must have
been raised higher, not immerg'd deeper in the Abyss.

There is but one possible case, wherein the pressure of the water could sink
the Crust deeper into the Abyss, and that is, if the waters which lay on the
Surface, could not descend through the Cracks and Fissures of the Earth. And
tho I can see nothing that can hinder them from descending; yet if I should
suppose, that they did not, I can evidently prove by Calculation, that such a
pressure could never raise the Abyss above the Surface of the Crust.

To demonstrate this, I assume the height of the water, which was derived from
the Comet, to have been a tenth part of the thickness of the whole Crust; tho
doubtless this is much greater than in reality it can be allowed to have been:
and because, according to Mr. Whiston, the Columns of which the Crust is
composed, are about four times heavier than common water, it follows, that a
Column of the same specific gravity with the rest of the Crust, whose base is
equal to the base of the incumbent Column of water, and one fourth part of its
height will weigh as much, or press the Crust as much downwards as the whole
Column of water could do; but the height of the water being a tenth part of the
depth of the whole Crust, the height of the additional Column that weighs as
much as the water, must be a fortieth part of the depth of the Crust. From
hence it follows, that the height or thickness of the Crust before the
additional Column is laid on, is to its thickness after the additional Column
is laid on, as 40 is to 41. The whole problem then is plainly reduced to this;
Having two Cylinders or Columns of the same intensive gravity, but of different
heights that swim in any Fluid, to find what proportion the parts or heights
immerged bear to one another. By a known proposition in Hydrostaticks, the part
immerged of each Cylinder, bears the same proportion to the whole Cylinder,
that the intensive gravity of the Cylinder bears to the intensive gravity of
the Fluid; from thence it is evident, that the parts immerged have the same
proportion that their respective whole Cylinders have to one another; which in
the present case is as forty to forty one. By this it is clear, that the
additional weight of the incumbent water would not sink the Crust above one
fortieth part deeper into the Abyss, than it was before; and therefore it could
never rise by such a pressure so high as the Surface of the Earth. But if we
should suppose that the pressure on the Crust should be so great as to press
the Abyss upwards, and the waters in it to the Surface of the Earth; it is
certain, that in such a case, when the waters in the Abyss had ascended to the
Surface, there must be a communication between the Abyss and it: by this
communication, the waters on the Surface must necessarily descend and ly
immediately on the Abyss; and so the case would be reduced to the former one,
where the water is supposed to press immediately on the Fluid in the Abyss; by
which pressure, the Crust would be so far from sinking deeper, that it would be
raised to a greater height, as I have shown before. From all this it is
demonstratively evident, that by no sort of pressure of the incumbent fluid the
Abyss could be forced upwards to spread it self on the Surface of the Earth.

Another Argument, which may be urged against deriving water from Mr. Whiston's
Abyss, is this; He supposes the Abyss to consist of a very dense Fluid, whose
intensive gravity is greater than the gravity of the Crust which subsided into
it: but this Crust being three or four times heavier than water it must be
immediately contiguous to the Abyss; so that there can be no room for any
considerable quantity of water to ly between them; and therefore it is plain,
that whatever water was raised from the Abyss must be only on the Cracks and
Fissures of the Earth. But Mr. Whiston supposes that the half of that water at
least which was necessary for the Deluge was derived from the Abyss, that is,
as I shall hereafter prove, there must have been eleven times more water
derived from the Abyss than there is in the whole Ocean; which is a prodigious
greater quantity than the Cracks and Fissures can be supposed able to contain.
Perhaps Mr. Whiston will grant, that the greatest part of what was drawn from
the Abyss was not pure water, but that dense and heavy Fluid on which the Crust
subsided: but if it were so, it is certain that such a Fluid being heavier than
water, must have taken its place next to the Surface of the Earth, and have
filled up all the pits, holes, and valleys that were on the Earth; nay it would
have driven the Sea out of its Channel, and would have completely filled its
place, where it would have remained to this day. It is most evident, that if
such a thing had happened, there would have been vast quantities of that dense
and heavy Fluid still abiding on the Surface of the Earth, and in pits, and
holes, there being nothing to drive it from thence into the Fissures again: But
yet it is evident from Observations, that there is not any such thing in Nature
to be seen, and that there is no where to be found any quantity of such a dense
and heavy Fluid, which Mr. Whiston supposes covered the Earth at the time of
the Deluge. There is only a little Quicksilver which is found in some Mines in
the very bowels of the Earth; but the quantity of it is so small and
inconsiderable, that we cannot possibly suppose it to be the remains of the
Fluid in the Abyss. For if ever there had been any such Fluid on the Surface of
the Earth, there must have certainly remained greater quantities of it to this
day, since as I have observed before, the very Seas must have been full of it.

I freely acknowledge Mr. Whiston's Hypothesis about Shells, Bones, Teeth, and
other Exuviae of Land and Sea Animals, found and dug out of the Bowels of the
Earth to be very Ingenious and more Philosophical than any other Hypothesis
that I have yet seen; so that to me it seems indeed probable, that the water
which made the Deluge from whence soever it was derived, had in it much Mud and
Earthy matter; which after the waters were gone off, settled on the Surface of
the old Earth, and became a new Crust; in which these Shells, Teeth, and Bones
subsided. This Hypothesis I think, does very naturally explain all the
Phenomenon Dr. Woodward mentions in his Theory, and on that account it may be
easily admitted as a true one.

I come now to consider Mr. Whiston's way, by which he supposes all the waters,
that were necessary for the Deluge, were drawn off the Earth. He imagins this
to be performed partly by a wind which dried up some, and partly by the descent
of the waters through the Cracks and Fissures of the Earth; to which the wind
by hurrying the waters up and down would be very sufficient. Before I examine
these causes, it is fit that I should make an estimate of the quantity of
water, that would be necessary to cover the whole Earth above the tops of the
highest Mountains. Dr. Burnet in his Theory of the Earth, reckons it to be
about eight Oceans of water, supposing the Surface of the Sea to be equal to
the Land, and to be every where a quarter of a Mile deep, taking one place with
another. But on the same supposition, I believe, I can more exactly determine it
to be near three times as much. I must here assume, that the height of the
highest Mountain above the level of the Ocean, is above three Miles
perpendicular height. I know Varenius in his Geographia Generalis, Calculates
the height of the Pico in the Island of Tenerife, to be one German Mile, or
above four English Miles in height: and tho I am inclined to believe, that its
height is yet greater than Varenius makes it (for he seems to allow too much,
both for refraction and errors in the Observations;) yet because three Miles is
the height, Mr. Whiston seems to allow the waters at the Deluge, I will
suppose the Hills no higher; and from thence I will Calculate what water would
be necessary to make an Universal Deluge.

It is evident, upon such a supposition, that the waters must be raised beyond
three Miles perpendicular height that they may be as high as the tops of the
Hills. Now it is easy to Calculate how much water would be necessary to raise
the Surface of the Sea to such an height. The Ocean being by Hypothesis a
quarter of a mile deep, there are twelve such quarters in three Miles, and
consequently there must not be less than twelve Oceans of water lying on the
Surface of the Sea, that it may be of the same height with the water which
covered the Land.

Let me in the next place suppose the whole surface of the Land thickly beset
with Mountains, every one of which was three Miles perpendicularly high: now
because three Miles has but a very small proportion to the semidiameter of the
Earth, it is evident, that the Orb, or rather part of an Orb, consisting of
waters and Mountains, would be also equal to a Cylinder, whose height is three
Miles, and its base a Circle equal to the Surface of the Land. But because the
Hills are supposed to be of a conical Figure, and cones by the 10 th of the 12
th of Euclid, are the third part of a Cylinder on the same base and of the same
height, it is evident that the Hills would make but one third part of the
former Cylinder; that is, all the Mountains if they were levelled, would raise
the Surface of the Earth a mile higher than it is: from thence it follows, that
the water, which lay on the Surface of the Land at the time of the Deluge, was
equal to a Cylinder, whose base was equal to the Surface of the Land, and its
height two miles. And because in two miles there are eight quarters of one
mile, it is plain, that the water, which was necessary to cover the Land, must
be equal to eight Oceans of water; which together with the other twelve, makes
twenty Oceans of water. But because the whole Land is not so thickly covered
with Hills as I have supposed, (it being indeed not possible that it should be)
and because there are but few Hills so high as I have supposed them all to be,
we must at least allow two Oceans more on these two accounts: so that the whole
amounts to two and twenty Oceans of water, which together with the water that
does now compose the present Ocean, makes three and twenty Oceans of water,
which is the least that can be necessary for an Universal Deluge. If the height
of the greatest hills were four miles above the Surface of the Ocean, as most
probably it is by Varenius's Calculation, the water, that must be required to
drown the whole Earth, must be no less than twenty eight Oceans of water. But I
will here suppose there was no more water, than what was required by the former
supposition.

Tho it be easy for Mr. Whiston to suppose all this, or even a much greater
quantity of water to be derived from the Atmosphere of a Comet; yet I believe
he will not find it so easy a task to remove it again from the Earth. He
himself acknowledges, that the Air could receive and sustain but very
inconsiderable quantities of it in comparison of the entire Mass of waters,
which then lay on the Earth. It is not possible, that this water could descend
through the Cracks and Fissures of the Earth, which of necessity must have been
all full at the time of the Deluge: for water cannot ly on the Surface of the
Earth, till all the Cracks, Holes and Fissures in it be first filled. This is
so evidently certain both to sense and experience, that I think it beyond all
contadiction true; it being as impossible to make water ly on the Surface of
the Earth, before all its Cracks, Pits, and Holes are filled, as it is to make
a Vessel retain water, whose bottom is bored through with holes.

But tho I should suppose that the Cracks and Fissures remained empty during
the Deluge (which is indeed an impossible supposition;) yet it is certain, that
these Fissures could receive but little more water than what was at first
derived from them. For the Crust of the Earth according to Mr. Whiston, lying
immediately on the dense and heavy Abyss, and water being lighter than it, it
is absolutely impossible, that ever water should settle it self between the
Crust and the Abyss. It is therefore clear, that no more water could descend
through the Cracks and Fissures of the Earth than what they were able to
contain, or what had first ascended through them to the surface of the Earth;
which Mr. Whiston supposes to be half the water necessary for making the
Deluge, and must be according to the former Calculation, at least eleven Oceans
of water: Tho indeed I cannot easily understand, how it is possible for them to
contain and receive so much. What then can we imagine would become of the rest?
for after that the Channel of the Sea was completely filled, there would remain
eleven Oceans more to be disposed of; which there is no imaginable place in the
Earth able to receive. And therefore it is clear even to a demonstration, that
all this water could never be removed by natural means.

These are the chief and most substantial points I have considered in Mr.
Whiston's New Theory; I might have made several objections against other parts
of it, and particularly I might have taken notice of some mistakes he has made
in Geometry; but because the Truth of his Theory does not depend upon them, I
have passed them over. If Mr. Whiston will be pleased to make any answer to the
Objections, I have here made; I would desire of him, that, whatsoever
difficulties he designs to remove, he will do it by clear and distinct
reasoning from Mechanical Principles. If he find himself pressed with any
objection, which he cannot answer, I doubt not, but that he will have the
Ingenuity to own it. I know there are some Philosophers, that never miss to
tell their Readers, they reason clearly and distinctly, when no body else can
discover the consequence but themselves. And when they are sore pressed with
any difficulty, they make a long discourse about some thing the Reader knows
not what, and endeavor to get off in a mist of words; but I expect no such
dealing from one of Mr. Whiston's Candor and Sincerity.

FINIS.

