A LOOKING-GLASS For all those called PROTESTANTS IN THESE Three Nations.

Wherein they may see, who are True Protestants, and who are degenerated and
gone from the Testimony and Doctrine of the Ancient Protestants.

AND

Hereby it is made to appear, that the People, called in derision Quakers, are
true (yea the truest) Protestants, bccause their Testimony agrees with the
Testimony of the Ancient Protestants in the most weighty things wherein the
Lord called them forth in that day.

Particularly, with the Testimony and Doctrine of William Tindal, who is called
a Worthy Martyr, and Principal Teacher of the Church of England; Faithfully
Collected out of his Works.

By GEORGE KEITH.

London, Printed in the Year, 1674.

THE EPISTLE
To the Impartial Readers unto whosoever hands this may come.

COme all you called Protestants in these three Nations of England, Scotland
and Ireland, whether you be of the Faith and Principles of those called
Episcopalians, or whether you be Presbyterians so called, or Anabaptists, or
Baptists, or Independents, or of any other Name or Denomination, Behold a
Looking-Glass for you all, whereinto, if you will look, you may see, whether ye
be true Protestants, or not. You do all indeed lay claim to the Title of
Protestants; But as they were of old, who called themselves Jews, but were not;
so in this day, there are many who call themselves Protestants, but are not,
for they agree not with the Ancient Testimony and Spirit of the Protestants,
but are exceedingly degenerated from them, both in Life and Doctrine, who if
they had been true to the Protetant Cause, for which God raised up the first
Protestants, above one hundred years ago, had not only retained the Life and
Doctrine of the Ancient Protestants, but had advanced further, and gone beyond
them both in largness of Discoveries, and Purity of Life, for at that time, it
was but as the Twy-light, or Dawning of the Day, so that they had not attained
unto so clear and perfect discoveries of Truth, as were afterward to come: but
oh, how have the most of them all, who in this day are called Protestants, not
only been deficient in advancing and carrying on that Testimony and Cause for
which the Lord raised up the Primitive Protestants, but are fallen exceeding
short of them, yea degenerated and back sliden from them in those weightiest
and most material things, which they bore Testimony unto in their day, as they
were called forth of th Lord, and furnished by him, not only to appear for his
Truth in Words, but with a most noble and invincible Courage to Seal it with
their Blood, among whom William Tindal was one of the most Eminent, whose Works
and Labors, by the Blessing and Grace of God, were of great use to propagate
knowledge unto the people of these Nations in that day, wherein Ignorance and
Darkness so much abounded. This William Tindal, was a man not only of a pious
and good Life, but well Learned, as appears in that he Translated the Bible,
both the Old and New Testament, so called, out of the Tongues in which they
were originally writ, into the English; whose Translation is the first English
Translation that is extant, and a good work it was in that day, and of great
service among the peolpe, which made the Romish Clergy so angry (who would have
still hoodwinck'd the People in Ignorance) that they ceased not until they got
him burnt, who suffered Martyrdom for the Truth, in West Flanders, in the days
of Queen Mary; But above all, he was a Man endowed with a good measure of the
Spirit of God, and taught of God, as both his own Works, and the History of his
Life Recorded by Fox in his Martyrology, does sufficiently make manifest unto
any who have a Spiritual discerning: and if there be any things found in his
Works, which Answer not perfectly to the Truth, it is to be imputed to the
Darkness and Ignorance of that time, which God wincked at; nor should these
things, which were given him, as Testimonies from the Lord, to bear in his day,
be the less esteemed and received, because of any Weakness or Imperfections, as
touching some things, wherein he might be swayed by the darkness of that time
in which he lived; But rather we should be thankful unto God for his Mercy, in
that he lighted such a Candle, and set it on a Candlestick to shine as a Light
in a dark place, while Darkness was so thick throughout all the Land. I could
cite the Testimonies of many other Witnesses, who sealed their Testimony with
their Blood unto the Truth, both in England and Scotland, and also in other
places. But this being done partly by others formerly, and as it may please the
Lord so to order it, it may yet be done more largly, only at this time I found
my self moved in the Zeal of the Lord, to give forth this small Treatise, being
a faithful Collection of the words of the aforesaid William Tindal, extracted
by me, out of his Printed Works with my own hand, without adding unto, or
diminishing from them, so much as one word, only the Titles I have added before
each Purpose, by way of Index. My design is to make it known, that we, the
People in derision called Quakers* are truest Protestants; for all, who have
any knowledge of our Principle, whether by reading our Books, or hearing our
Declarations, cannot but see, that those Testimonies of William Tindal are more
agreeable unto our Principles, than unto those of any other People in these
three Nations.

Some clear Testimonies unto the Truth, (as it is owned by the People called in
derision Quakers collected out of the Works and Books of William Tindall Martyr.

CHAP. I.
Concerning Christ's dying for all Men.

In his Prologue upon the Prophet Jonas.

WE be all equally Created, and Formed os one God our Father, and indifferently
bought and redeemed, with one blood of our Savior Jesus Christ.

CHAP. II.
Concerning both the Law and Gospel, being in Man's heart.

In the same Prologue upon Jonas.

AS the Law which fretteth thy Conscience is in thy heart, and is no outward
thing; even so seek within thy heart the Plaster of Mercy, the promises of
forgiveness in our Savior Jesus Christ: according unto all the ensamples of
Mercy that are gone before. And with Jonas let them that wait on Vanities, and
seek God here and there, and in every Temple, save in their hearts: go and seek
thou the Testament of God in thy heatt; sor in thy heart is the word of the
Law, and in thine heart is the word of Faith in the promises of Mercy in Jesus
Christ; so that if thou confess with a repenting heart, and knowledge; and
surely believe that Jesus is Lord over all sin, thou art safe.

CHAP. III.
Concerning the outward and inward part of the Scripture.

In the same Prologue.

THE Scripture has a Body without, and within a Soul, Spirit, and Life; it
has without, a Bark, a Shell, and as it were, an hard Bone, for the fleshly
minded to gnaw upon; and within it has Pith, Kernel, Marrow, and all sweetness
for Gods Elect, which he has chosen to give them his Spirit and to Write his
Law, and the Faith of his Son, in their hearts.

CHAP. IV.
Concerning the Heathen, that they had the Spirit of God, and that Pharoh had
the Spirit of Grace, before his heart was hardened.

In his Prologue upon Matthew.

ANd Paul Writes Romans 1. that the Heathen because when they knew God, they had
no list to honor him with Godly living; therefore God powered his Wrath upon
them, and took his Spirit from them, and gave them up to their hearts lusts to
serve sin, from Iniquity, to Iniquity; till they were thoroughly hardened, and
past Repentance. And Pharoh, because when the Word of God was in his Country,
and Gods People scattered, throughout all his Land; and yet he never loved
them, nor it; therefore God gave him up: and in taking his Spirit of Grace from
him, so hardened his heart with covetousness, that afterward no Miracle could
convert him, hereunto pertains the Parable of the Talents.

CHAP. V.
Concerning Good works through working of the Spirit of God, how that they help
to continue us in the favor and Grace of God.

In the same Prologue.

LEt us Arm our selves with this remembrance, that as Christ's works justify
from sin, and set us in the favor of God; so our own deeds through working of
the Spirit of God, help us to continue in the favor and the Grace, into which
Christ has brought us; and that we can no longer continue in favor and Grace,
than our hearts are to keep the Law.

CHAP. VI.
Concerning a believer, and spiritual Man that is renewed, how he needs no
outward Law.

In his Treatise on the Parable of the wicked Mammon.

AS thouneedest not to bid a Tree to bring forth Fruit, so is there no Law put
into him that believes, and is justified through Faith (as says Paul in the
first Epistle to Timothy chap. I.) neither is it needful: for the Law of God is
Written and Graved in his heart, and his pleasure is therein.

And in another Treatise of his, called the Obedience of a Christian Man.

He now that is renewed in Christ keeps the Law, without any Law written, or
compulsion of any Ruler, or Officer, save by the leading of the Spirit only.
Chap. Obed. of Subjects.

CHAP. VII.
Concerning Faith, how that the true Faith, is a feeling Faith.

In his Answer to Sir Tho. Mores Dialogue, 1530.

THere are two manner of Faiths, an Historical Faith, and a Feeling Faith. The
Historical Faith hangs on the Truth and Honesty of the Teller, or on the
Common Fame and Consent of many: as if one told me, that the Turk had wone a
City, and I believed it, moved with the Honesty of the man: now if there comes
another that seems more Honest, or that has better persuasions that it is
not so, I think Immediately that he lied, and lose my Faith again. And a
Feeling Faith is, as if a man were there present when it was won, and there
were wounded, and had there lost all that he had, and were taken Prisoner there
also. That Man should so believe that all the World could not turn him from his
Faith: even likewise if my Mother had blown on her Finger, and told me that the
Fire would burn me, I should have believed her with an Hystorical Faith, as we
believe the Stories of the World, because I thought she would not have mocked
me: and so I should have done, if she had told me that the Fire had been cold,
and would not have burned: but as soon as I had put my Finger in the Fire, I
should have believed, not by reason of her, but with a feeling Faith, so that
she could not have persuaded me afterward the contrary. So now with an
Historical Faith, I may believe that the Scripture is Gods, by the teaching of
them, and so I should have done, though they had told me that Robinhood had
been the Scripture of God, which Faith is but an Opinion, and therefore abides
ever fruitless, and falls away, if a more glorious reason be made unto me, or
if the Preacher live contrary.

But of a Feeling Faith, it is written, John 6. they shall be all taught of
God, that is, God shall writ it in their hearts with his Holy Spirit, and also
teftifieth Romans 8. The Spirit bears record unto our Spirit, that we be the
Sons of God; and this Faith is none Opinion, but a sure feeling, and therefore
ever fruitful, never hangs it of the honesty of the Preacher, but of the
Power of God, and of the Spirit: and therefore if all the Preachers of the
World would go about to persuade the contrary, it would not prevail no more
than though they would make me believe the fire were cold, after that I had put
my finger therein. Of this ye have an ensample, Job. 4. of the Samaritanish
Wife, which left her Pitcher and went into the City, and said, come and see a
man, etc. but when they had heard Christ, the Spirit wrought, and made them
feel, whereupon they came unto the Woman and said, We believe not now, because
of thy saying, but because we have heard our selves, and know, that he is
Christ, the Savior of the World: for Christ's Preaching was with Power and
Spirit, that makes a man feell and know, and work too, and not as the Scribes
and Pharisees preached, and as ours, make a man ready to cast his gorge to hear
them, rave and rage as mad men.

CHAP. VIII.
Concerning the Inward Preaching, Teaching, and Speaking of the Spirit of God,
unto the Soul, and inward reading and hearing, and that true Believers believe
the Principles of their Faith, not because they are written in books, but
because they are inwardly taught by the Spirit of God.

In the same Treatise of his Answer to Sir T. Moors Dialogue.

WHen thou art asked why thou believe that thou shall be saved by Christ, and
of such like principles of our Faith, answer thou wottest and feel that it
is true, and when he asks how thou know that it is true, answer, because
it is written in thine heart; and if he ask, who wrote it, answer the Spirit of
God; and if he ask, how thou came first by it, tell him, whether by reading in
Books, or hearing it Preached, as by any outward Instrument, but that inwardly
thou wast taught by the Spirit of God; and if he ask whether thou believe it
not, because it is written in books, or because the Priests so Preach, answer
no, not now, but only because it is written in thine heart, and because the
Spirit of God so Preaches, and so testifies unto thy Soul; and say, though at
the beginning, thou wast moved by Reading or Preaching, as the Samaritans were
by the words of the Woman, yet now thou believe it not therefore any longer,
but only because thou have heard it of the Spirit of God, and read it written
in thine heart.

CHAP. IX.
Concerning the feeling of the working of the Spirit, and that none ought to
think that his Faith is right, who has not this feeling.

In his Parable of the wicked Mammon.

HOW dare a Man presume to think that his Faith is right, and that Gods Favor
is on him, and that Gods Spirit is in him, when he feels not the working of
the Spirit, neither himfelf disposed to any godly thing. And again, where the
Spirit is there is feeling: sor the Spirit makes us feel all things; where the
Spirit is not there is no feeling.

CHAP. X.
Concerning Justification. How to be justified, is to be made inwardly
righteous, good and holy; and when he pleads, that we are not justified by
works, he means by warks, the outward works; but does not exclude inward
righteousness, Regeneration, and Sanctification, from having any place or
respect in our Justification; but does indeed include it.

In the Parable of the wicked Mammon.

SO now by this abide sure and fast, that a Man inwardly in the heart, and
before God, is Righteous and good, through Faith only, before all works:
Notwitstanding, yet outwardly and openly before the People, yea, and before
himself is he Righteous through the work: that is, he knows, and is sure,
through the outward work, that he is a true believer, and in the Favor of God,
and Righteous and good, through the mercy of God; that thou may call the
one, an open and outward Righteousness; and the other, an inward Righteousness
of the heart (so yet) that thou understand by the outward Righteousness, no
other thing, save the Fruit that follows, and and a declaring of the inward
justifying and Righteousness of the heart; and not that it makes a Man
Righteous before God, but that he must be first Righteous before him in the
heart; even as thou mayeft call the Fruit of the Tree the outward goodness of
the Tree, which follows and utters the inward natural goodness of the Tree.

Again in his Answer to T. Mores fourth Book.

That thing which makes a Man love the Law of God, does make a Man Righteous,
and justifies him effectually, and actually; and makes him alive, as a
Workman, and cause efficient.

CHAP. XI.
Concerning the Sabbath.

In his Answer to T. More his first Book.

AND as for the Sabbath a great matter! we be Lords over the Sabbath, and may
yet change it into the Monday, or any other day, as we see need: or may make
every tenth day Holy Day, only if we see a cause why, we may make two every
Week, if it were expedient, and one not enough to teach the People. Neither was
there any cause to change it from the Saturday, than to put difference between
us and the Jews; and lest we should become Servants unto the day, after their
superstition. Neither needed we any Holy Day at all, if the People might be
taught without it.

CHAP. XII.
That Magistrates may Preach, and that every Man that is well taught may
Preach, or Teach, in case of necessity; as when the ordinary Preachers are
ignorant, and Preach false Doctrine, and that Women may Teach.

In his exposition on Mat. 5.

ALL Kings and all Rulers are bound to be Salt and Light, not only in example
of living, but also in Teaching of Doctrine unto their Subjects, as well as
they be bound to punish evil doers. Does not the Scripture testify that King
David was chosen to be a Shepherd, and to feed his People with Gods Word? It is
an evil SchoolMaster, that cannot but beat only; but it is a good Schoolmaster,
that so teaches, that few need to be beaten.

Again, moreover every Man ought to Preach in word and deed unto his Household,
and to them that are under his governance. And though no Man may Preach openly,
save he that has the Office committed unto him; yet ought every Man to
endeavor himself, to be as well Learned as the Preacher, as nigh as it is
possible. And every Man may privately inform his Neighbor; yea, and the
Preacher and Bishop too, if need be: For if the Preacher Preach wrong, you may,
any Man, whatsoever he be, rebuke him, first privately; and then (if that help
not) to complain further; and when all is proved, according to the order of
Charity, and yet no amendment had: then ought every Man that can to resist him,
and to stand by Christ's Doctrine, and to jeopard Life and all for it; look on
the old ensamples, and they shall teach thee -- when we have proved all that
Charity binds us, and yet in vain; then we must come forth openly, and rebuke
their wickedness in the face of the World, and jeopard Life and all thereon.

And in Answer to T. M. 1. Book.

If Baptism be so necessary, as they make it, then love thy Neighbor as thy
self, does teach Women to Baptize, yea and to teach, and to rule their Husbands
too, if they be beside themselves.

Again, in his Answer to Mores 4 th Book.

If a Woman learned in Christ, were driven into an Isle, where Christ was never
Preached, might she not then Preach and teach to Minister the Sacraments, and
make Officers? the case is possible, show you what should let, that she might
not, love thy Ncighbour as thy self, does compel.

CHAP. XIII.
Concerning Philosophy, how it is not needful to understand the Scripture.

In his Parable of the Wicked Mammon.

MAny are not ashamed to rail and blaspheme, saying how should he understand
the Scripture, seeing he is no Philosopher, never has seen his Metophysick.
Moreover, they blas pheme, saying, how can he be a Devine, and woe tteth not
what is subjectum in Theologia. Nevertheless as a man without the Spirit of
Ariristotle or Philosophy, may by the Spirit of God understand Scripture, even
so by the Spirit of God understands he, that God is to be sought in all the
Scripture, and in all things, and yet wotteth not, what means Subjectum in
Theologia, because it is a term of their own making.

CHAP. XIV.
Concerning Heretics, that they should not be corporally punished.

WHereas T. More alleged that S. Paul gave two Heretics to the Devil, which
tormented their flesh, which was no small punishment, and happily he slew them:
W. Tindall answers, "O Expounder of the Scripture! like Hugo Charensis, which
expounds Hereticum hominem de vita, take the Heretic out of his life: we
read of no pain that he had whom the Christians Excommunicated and gave to
Satan to slay his flesh, save that he was ashamed of himself and repented, etc.

A Testimony of John Frith, another English Martyr, against outward and bodily
compelling and punishing of them that believe not aright.

In his Answer to the Lord Rochester Bishop.

To say that Christ would have his Disciples to compel men, with Prisonment,
Fetters, Scourging, Sword and Fire is very false, and far from the mildness of
a chaste Spirit, although my Lord approve it never so much; for Christ did
forbid his Disciples such Tyranny, yea rebukes them, because they would have
desired, that Fire should descend from Heaven and consume the Samaritans, which
would receive not Christ: but with Violence will God have no man compelled unto
his Law. Paul also testifies, 2 Cor. 1. that he had not rule over the
Corinthians, as touching their Faith. And again, As no man can search the
heart, but God only, so can no man judge or order our Faith but God only
through his Holy Spirit.

Collected faithfully by me G. K. out of the Works of W. Tindall and John
Frith, who are called Worthy Martyrs, and Principal Teachers of the Church of
England, in the Title Page of the Book Printed at London by John Day, Anno 1573.

COme hither all you called Episcopalians, Presbyterians, Independents,
Baptists, and any others, and let us try your Faith, whether it be the same,
with that of the Ancient Protestants, as also we are willing, that our Faith be
put to the trial, that it may appear, whose faith is most agreeable to the
faith of Ancient Protestants and Martyrs; one of the most eminent whereof was
this William Tindal: who above one hundred years ago, was a principal Teacher
of the Church of England, and died a Martyr.

1. First, his Faith was, that as we are all Created of one God, so we are all
indifferently bought with one blood of our Savior Jesus Christ, so tbat Christ
his shedding of his blood, is as universal for men, as the work of their
Creation: and this is our Faith who are called Quakers, to wit, that Christ
has tasted death for every man, and that he has dyed for all according to the
Scriptures. But whether is this your Faith yea or nay?

2. Secondly, his Faith was, that both the Law and the Gospel, are in the
Hearts of Men, and is none outward thing, and that we should seek within our
hearts the Plaster of Mercy, yea that we should seek the Testament of God in
our hearts, and the Word of the Law, and of Faith, and that we should let them
go who seek God here and there, and in every Temple save in their hearts: and
this is our Faith, who witness unto the Words in the Heart, and bid people seek
God within them, and Christ within, and not without them, in Temples made with
hands, or outward Observations. But whether is this your Faith, yea or nay?

3. Thirdly, his Faith was, that the Scripture had a body without, a bark and
shell, and as it were a hard bone, but within it had a Soul, Spirit and Life,
etc. and this is our Faith, who say, the Letter kills, and the Letter of the
Scripture is not the Word, but the Life is the Word that is within, and is no
outward thing: But whether is this your Faith yea or nay, who say the Letter is
the Word, and deny the Word originally to be in the Heart?

Fourthly, his Faith was, that the Heathen once bad the Spirit of God, and that
Pharaoh, before his heart was bardened, had the Spirit of Grace, and this is
our Faith who say, the true Light which is Spirit, does enlighten every man
that comes into the world, sufficiently unto Salvation, and that a
manifestation of the Spirit is given unto every man to profit withal. But
whether is this your faith yea or nay? who deny the saving Light of Christ to
be Universal.

Fifthly, His Faith was, that Goodworks through working of the Spirit of God,
are absolutely needful to continue us in the favor of God, and in a justified
state, and this is our Faith, but whether this is your Faith yea or nay, seeing
many of you say, David continued in the favor of God, and justified, while he
committed Murder and Adultery.

Sixthly, His Faith was, that a Believer needed no outward Law nor Rule, for he
keeps the Law, by the leading of the Spirit only, and this is our Faith, but
whether is this your Faith, yea or nay, who say the Scripture, (which is
outwardly) is the only Rule, and will not acknowledge the Spirit within to be
the Rule.

Seventhly, his Faith was, that the Scriptures are to be believed that they are
of God, because of the Inward Testimony and teaching of the Spirit of God, and
that the true Faith is a feeling Faith, and a sure feeling, and who have this
Faith, are taught of God himself, as immediately as when a man is taught that
the fire is hct, by putting his finger in it, here the fire teaches him
immediately, that it is hot, and he needs no man to tell him, and this is our
Faith in all these parculars, who witness unto the immediate Teachings of God
by his Spirit in our hearts. But whether is this your Faith yea or nay, who
deny spiritual feeling and sense to be essential to true Faith, telling people
they must not seek to live by spiritual sense and feeling, but by Faith; as
also telling them, that Faith may be without assurance. This is contrary to,
Will. Tindall his Faith, and contrary to the Scriptures Testimony, which
calls Faith and Guidence, a Seeing, a Handling, all which imply both
spiritual Sense and Assureance.

Eighthly, His Faith was, that men were to believe the Principles of their
Religion, not because they are written in books but because they are inwardly
taught by the Spirit of God, and this is our Faith, but whether is this your
Faith, yea or nay, who say, the Scriptures are the formal object of Faith, and
the first Rule or moving Cause by way of object, to make us believe, and who
say, immediate Revelation is ceased, and is not the general privilege of all
true Believers.

Ninthly, His Faith was, that the Working of the Spirit was to be felt, and was
to be known by feeling, and that none should think his Faith right, who has
not the feeling of the Spirit, and this is our Faith, but whether is this your
Faith, yea or nay, who deny tbe feeling of the Spirit, properly so called, and
mock and deride us when we speak of feeling, and when ye ask us, how know ye
that you are moved and led by theSpirit to such things, we answer, by our
feeling, which bath certainty, and evidence in it that is sufficient. This
Answer ye reject, as Fanatical, Heretical, and what not?

Tenthly, His Faith was, that men are justified by an inward Righteousness
wrought by the Spirit of God in the beart: and this is our Faith, but whether
is this your Faith, yea or nay, who deny that any are justified by an inward
rigbteousness in their hearts, although wrought in them by the Spirit of God.

Eleventhly, His Faith was, that the first day of the Week, was not commanded
by God to be kept boly, but the Church keeps that day, because of convenience
for instructing the people, and worshipping God: and this is our Faith, but
whether is this your Faith, yea or nay, who say, that day is of Gods commanding
to be kept as a Sabbath.

Twelfthly, His Faith was, that Magistrates may Preach, and every man may
Preach or Teach, who is taught of God, in case of necessity, and that Women may
teach: and this is our Faith, but whether is this your Faith, yea or nay, who
would monopolise it unto the Clergy, or a certain order of Literate Men.

Thirteenthly, His Faith was, that Philosophy and School. learning was not
needful to understand the Scripture, nor to be a Preacher or Divine: and this
is our Faith, but whether is this your Faith, yea or nay, who lay so great
stress upon Philosophy and School-Learning, that ye permit none to be
Preachers, or Doctors of Divinity who have not them.

Fourteenthly, His Faith was, as also the Faith of John Frith, another
Principal Teacher in England, and Martyr, that Heretics were not to be
punished with Prisonment, Fetters, Scourging, Sword and Fire: and this was the
Faith of many others in that day, and this is our Faith; but whether is this
your Faith, yea or nay, whose chiefest Arguments against us, the people in
derision called Quakers, have been Prisons, Banishings, Scourgings, spoiling of
Goods, and such like carnal and violent ways.

Writ by me George Keith, one of these People, in derision called Quakers, who
am a true and cordial Protestant.

The End.

