George Keith's VINDICATION From The Forgeries and Abuses OF T. Hick, and W.
Kiffin, With the rest of his Confederate Brethren of the Barbican-Meeting, held
London the 28th of the 6th Month, 1674.

Printed 1674.

George Keith's VINDICATION FROM THE Forgeries and Abuses of T. Hicks, W.
Kiffin, etc.
HAving waited long for an Opportunity to vindicate my Innocence from the
Forgeries and Abuses of T. Hicks and W. Kiffin, with the rest of the
Confederates of the Barbican-Meeting, held at London the 28th of the 6th Month,
1674. In which Meeting they publicly abused me behind my Back, when I was not
present to answer for my self, nor could be present, having gone out of England
into another Nation several Days before any Thing was published of their
Barbican-Meeting: And seeing I was publicly injured both by T. H. and them, as
others of my Friends and Brethren were, I judged it reasonable to desire a
public Meeting with them, that I might have an Occasion as publicly to clear
my self, as I was publicly abused; therefore I joined Issue with my Friends G.
Whitehead, W. Penn and S. Crisp, who were also publicly abused with me, in
diverse Letters to desire them to give us a public Meeting for clearing our
selves of the Forgeries of T. H. One Meeting they granted us at Barbican, the
9th of the 8th Month; but so loath were they to hear us make good our Charge
against both him and them, that the Meeting of that Day was spent, and yet our
Proof of the very first Artiole of our Charge not taken by them into
Consideration: Another public Meeting we appointed our selves, which was
reasonable, seeing they still deferred to hear us prove our Charge against T.
H. but T. Hick^ did not come to this Meeting, though he was greatly concerned
in it, and had timely notice given him thereof, only some other Baptists* with
Jeremy Ives, as personatin^ T. H. did appear; but neither at this Meeting (by
Reason of their most unreasonabl^ evading our Charge) got we over the first
Article; and since that time they seemed to yield to another Meeting, wherein
my Charge against T. H. might be heard; but withal told our Friends and us,
that they would not hear any other Thing until T. H. should be heard in what he
could object against the Quakers, as being No Christians: And though I had a
great Desire to have a public Opportunity to clear my Innocence, yet seeing I
could not have it, but upon that unreasonable Condition, invented by them only
to evade the Pursuance of our Charge against T. H. I yielded rather to want
that Opportunity, especially seeing the Meeting they yielded unto was not a
Public Meeting as the former, but a private Meeting of some select Persons on
each Side: And indeed, such a private Meeting has but little Service in it to
clear one publicly from a public Abuse, which I have found in Part by
Experience; for having had a private Meeting with T. H. before diverse Witnesses
on each Side, wherein I had openly proved him to have grossly abused me, and
brought him to that Straight, that he had nothing to answer, but that he
referred himself to the Hearers; and some of the Hearers openly affirmed, who
were neither of the Baptists nor Quakers, that T. H. had abused me: Yet after
all this I find T. H. and his Confederate Brothren renew the former Abuse: And
having now for a long Time waited the Opportunity of a public Meeting with
those Baptists, to clear myself of the Abuse of T. H. and his Consederates, and
yet cannot obtain it; I find it lying as a Weight upon me, to take an Occasion
of this Nature to clear my self, not so much for my self or my own Reputation,
I can truly say, as for the Truth^s sake, and to remove the Stumbling Block out
of the Way of the Simple.

My first Charge against T. H. is of Forgery, in his Continuation of the
Dialogue* p. 49 where forgedly he brings me in saying thus, This Christ came to
seek and save, and all his Ministers preached People to this, the lost in Man,
that it might be found, a lost God, a lost Christ; this was the Sum and
Substance of their Doctrine, Im Rev. p. 75, 76. Upon which he thus discanteth
(after he has abused my Words both by adding and diminishing) Blush O Heavens,
and be astonished O Earth! was ever such a Thing as this hear^ of before, That
Jesus Christ came to seek and save a lost God, a lost Christ? Was ever God and
Christ in a lost Condition?

Now Friendly and Impartial Reader, if thou love to be undeceived, and be but
willing to see the Abuse and Forgery of T. H. in this Particular; do but read
the Words of my Book, as they stand entirely therein, and without any more
Pains thou will see the Deceit and Forgery, first, by adding the Word THIS,
saying, This Christ came to seek and save; and then by alleging on me, that I
say, Jesus Christ came to seek and save a lost God, a lost Christ, which
Passage is gross Forgery and Abuse; for I no where say in my Book, That Jesus
Christ came to seek and save a lost God, a lost Christ: It Is true, in p. 76. I
cite the Words of Christ, That Jesus Christ came to seek and save that which
was lost; but I do not say that Lost, which Christ came to seek and save, was
God, nor indeed is it deducible from my Words by any just or reasonable
Consequence and God, who searches my Heart, knows, I never intended any such
Thing, as that Christ came to seek and save a lost God. I cited the Words of
Christ, and I hope there is no Blasphemy in them, viz. Jesus Christ came to
seek and save that which was lost; but these Words I do not apply to God and
Christ, as if God and Christ were that lost which Christ came to seek and save;
and this may appear from my Words themselves, which run by Way of Parallel or
Comparison, viz. And as Jesus Christ came to seek and save the lost; so all his
Ministers ever preached People to this, the lost in them, that it might be
found, that they may find a lost God, a lost Christ, whom they had lost, and
from whom they were separated by their Sins; This was the Sum and Substance of
their Doctrine, to turn them to God, and to his Son Jesus Christ, near them:
Now in these my Words I draw a Parallel, wherein two Propositions run parallel,
in both which the Word Lost is; but it is not, nor cannot in both Propositions
be understood of God and Christ; but only in the last Proposition by Lost is
understood God and Christ, whom they had lost, and from whom they (viz. Men)
were separated by their Sins: I say, in these two parallel Propositions, by
lost cannot be meant one and the same thing, no more then in Romans 5. 18. where
it is said, As by the Offense of one Judgment is come on all to Condemnation;
so by the Righteousness of one the free Gift is come upon all to Justification
of Life: Here the Word One in both Propositions is used; but in the one it
signifies the first Adam, in the other it signifies Christ the second Adam;
so by Lost in the first Proposition, I mean Men, who were lost, or lost
Sinners, as also that pure Formation or Creation in Men, which by Man's Fall
came to be veiled and slain in him, but not annihilated; and by Lost in the
second Proposition. I understand God and Christ, whom Men had lost, and so all
the true Ministers of Christ preached Men to God and Christ whom they had lost,
that they might find him, to wit, God and Christ, who was near them in their
own House, that is, in their own Hearts; and so the plain and open Sense of my
Words is this, That as Jesus Christ came to seek and save the lost Souls of
Men, and to raise up and recover the Image of God in Men again; so all the true
Ministers of Christ preached People to God and Christ near them, whom though
Men had lost, yet were near unto them, to save them, and to bring them again
into the Enjoyment of him, and Fellowship with him.

The second Part of T. H. his Forgery in this Particular, is by diminishing
from my Words, and cutting off from a perfect Sentence the last Part of it,
which is explanatory of the first, viz. from this perfect and entire Sentence
-- That they may find a lost God, a lost Christ, whom they had lost, and from
whom they were separated by their Sins; which Words [ whom they had lost, and
from whom they were separated by their Sins] do clear me, that I did not mean
that God or Christ was in a lost Condition, or that God had lost himself, but
that Men by their Sins had lost God and Christ: And indeed, that which gave me
Occasion to use the Word Lost, was the Parable of Christ concerning the Woman
having lost her Pieee of Silver in her House, Luke 15. 8, 9. And she lights a
Candle, and sweepeth the House, and seeks diligently till she find it, and
when she finds it, she calls her Friends and makes merry with them,
through Joy that the lost Piece of Money is found: And this House (say I) where
the lost Piece of Money was lost, and is found, is Man's Heart; it was lost by
Adam's Fall, yet it remained still in the House, and in the House in Man's
Heart its to be found; and the Candle is lighted in this House, and it must be
swept to find it: By all which Christ Jesus points at this Principle, his
Kingdom or Appearance by his Light in Man's Heart; and the Scope of all these
Parables is, to turn in Man's Mind to the Kingdom, the Light of Christ in the
Heart, to find the Treasure, the Pearl, the lost Piece of Money there, to find
it where it was lost, and is hid; for there it is to be enjoyed and possessed;
no Man possesses more of God or Christ but what is revealed in himself: See my
Book, Im. Rev. p. 75. Now of this twofold Abuse and Forgery, I charge not only
T. H. but W. K. and his Confederate Brethren of the Barbican-Meeting, who in
their Book, called, The Quakers Appeal Answered, fall into the same Error with
T. H. both adding and diminishing: first adding, as where they say. This Christ
came to seek and save, and all his Ministers preached People to this, the Lost
in Man, a Lost God, a Lost Christ; where they make the Word This relate to God
and Christ; this is an absolute Forgery; for neither in p. 75. nor p. 76. do I
use the Word, This Christ came to seek and save, far less do I apply it to God.
And secondly, diminishing, a lost God, a lost Christ, leaving out the last Part
of the Sentence [whom they had lost, and from whom they were separate by their
Sins.] In a Meeting with T. H. before many Witnesses I accused him of this
Forgery, telling him, that if he would take this Liberty to add to, and
diminish from a Man's Words, he might as well allege from the Scripture, that
it says, There is not a God, by leaving out the Words, The Fool has said in
his Heart: But to this T. H. answered three Things in that private Meeting I
had with him, which he there sets down in the Book called, The Quakers
Appeal answered; to all which three* I did particularly answer, whereof he
says nothing, and in that has dealt unfairly and cowardly: But seeing he
tells them over again, I shall now take them into Consideration; First, says
T. H. It Is true, those Words were added, viz. Whom they had lost; yet they were
no otherwise serviceable to him, then as a Blind to deceive his unwary Reader;
for first, by Lost in his whole Discourse in that Book cited is intended of God
and Christ, which he there calls, the Principle, Kingdom or Appearance of
Christ by his Light in Man's Heart. To this I answer, If I had used these Words
but as a Blind to deceive the unwary Reader, as he alleges, that is no Excuse
for him to leave them out; he ought to have set down the perfect Sentence, and
if there had been any Deceit in it, to have shown it; but it is manifest that
these Words were wilfully and deliberately clipped off by him, because they do so
apparently cross his naughty Design of abusing me: But next I say, its but a
sorry and unreasonable Allegance, that I use these Words only as a Blind to
deceive the unwary Reader; his Reasons are too void and empty of Reason to
prove any such Thing, as first, that by Lost in his whole Discourse in that
Book cited is intended of God and Christ. I answer, This is utterly false, and
a most gross Untruth; for in several Places in my Book I speak expressly of lost
Man, and the Soul of Man, as lost and saved; for Proof of which, see these
following Quotations out of my Book of Immediate Revelation, as p. 39. within
two Lines of the End I say, The Gospel is the preaching the glad Tidings of
Salvation unto poor lost Man by Jesus Christ himself immediately in his Heart:
Mark here two Things; first, that I expressly speak of lost Man; secondly, that
the Gospel is the preaching the Glad Tidings of Salvation unto poor lost Man,
whereas according to T. H. his Forgery it had been, the preaching the glad
Tidings of Salvation unto lost God, which is Blasphemous. Again, see p. 13.
line 35. where I say, So that as the Lord remembers Mercy unto lost Man in the
midst of Wrath, etc. Mark again, here I speak of lost Man. Again, in this same
p. 13. lin. 5, 6, 7, 8. I speak expressly of the Salvation of the Soul, and of
its Delivery from the Bondage of Corruption, line 13. Again in this same p. 13.
about the middle of the Page I say, Whereas the Mercy goes forth in the
Judgment toward Man in the fallen State to recover and convert him: Mark, I do
not say, according to T. H. his base Forgery) whereas the Mercy goes forth in
the Judgment toward God in a lost Condition, to recover and convert God; but
toward Man in the fallen State to recover and convert him: Also I do very
plainly and expressly distinguish betwixt the Soul or Mind of Man, and the Seed
of God in the Soul: see p. 8. lin. 9, 10, 11, 12. and p. 23. lin. 28, 29, 30.
etc. I need not cite more Places, these being sufficient to show T. H. his ba^e
Forgery. Secondly, says T. H. The Sense I put upon the Word Lost, is no other
then what W. P. allows, Lost, says he, as taken by T. H. is meant of Man's
lost Condition, and as there used by G. K. is understood of God and Christ,
whom Man had lost, Reas. ag. Rail. p. 61. To this I answer; This Cover of T. H.
is as narrow and weak as the former; for W. P. says true, that by Lost I
understand God and Christ whom Man had lost, when I say that they may find a
lost God a lost Christ, etc. But when I say, Christ came to seek and save that
which was lost; by Lost in this Proposition, neither I, nor W. P. say, that by
Lost, which Christ came to seek and save, is meant God; so that by the Word
Lost in my Book, I do not mean only God and Christ, nor always, but sometimes
Man, and sometimes that pure Creation or Formation of Holiness and
Righteousness which God placed in Man in the Beginning, and sometimes God, whom
Men had lost; and so impudently wicked is T. H. that he blames me for an
Expression, and yet uses the same Expression himself, and commends it as
safely spoken, viz. If you had said, that Jesus Christ came to seek and save
Sinners who were in a lost Condition, and to stir them up to seek after God
whom they had lost, you had spoken safely: And in very deed, I speak all this
upon the Matter, as is clear from the aforesaid Quotations: But I desire the
Reader to take notice, that the whole Stress of T. H. his Allegation against me
is, that by lost in all my Book, I intend only God and Christ, as appears not
only from what he says in the Quakers Appeal answered, but what he says in
his third Dialogue, p. 35. Its true (says T. H.) George Keith speaks of People
finding a lost God, whom they had lost; but still if Lost be meant only God and
Christ, how can Christ be said to seek and save a lost God? Here T. H.
supposes a gross Untruth, which is a Forgery, to wit, That by Lost I mean only
God and Christ; I have shown the contrary above by plain Citations out of my
Book.

The third Reason of T. H. for* his Allegation is, That the Sense in which he
represented me, was according to the Opinions of others of my Friends. To this
I answer (as I formerly did) that now, since he could not prove his Forged
Sense from my own Words, and he goes about to prove it from the Words of other
Men, is not fair, nor answerable to his Undertaking, which was to prove that G.
K. said so: And how does he seek to prove this? Because W. P. or J. N. said so:
But by this beggarly Evasion he may run round in a Circle continually, and do
nothing, but manifest his own Impudence; for how will he prove, that W. P. I.
N. or any real Quaker said so? he may as well say, Because G. K. said so: But I
challenge him to produce the words of any of my Friends that ever said, That
God and Christ was in a lost Condition, and that Christ came to seek and save a
lost God.

There remains another Citation out of my Book of Immediate Revelation, made
use of by T. H. not in his Dialogues, but in The Quakers Appeal Answered: But
surely he could not have fallen upon a Place in all my Book that does more
manifestly clear me, and demonstrate T. H. to be a vile Forger, in alleging on
me, that I say, Christ came to seek and save a Lost God, a Lost Christ: For
none of all these words cited by him, speak any thing of Christ his seeking and
saving a Lost God; but, That God sent his Son into the World, to seek and save
the Work of his own Hands, that of the pure Creation in man, which though shut
up in Death, yet it remained, and perished not, as to its being. Now I
challenge T. H. to show me where I, or any of my Friends say, That the Work of
God's own Hands is God, or that the pure Creation in man is God. It is true,
according to the Scripture express Terms and way of speaking, we say, The Seed
is Christ, and that Christ does suffer, and is crucified in some; and that he
is formed, or has a spiritual Formation in his Saints, by which he lives and
indwelleth in them; and this spiritual Formation of him is called Christ by way
of Synecdoche, as being a Member of him; or by way of Metonymy, as being that
Immediate Principle, in which he dwells, and through which he reveals
himself unto his Saints; who is the Eternal, the Infinite and Uncreated Word
and Light, who is God over all, blessed forever. But that ever I, or any have
said, that this Formation is God himself, or Christ as he is God, I put T. H.
to show it, and if he cannot, he is a Forger. And when we say, Christ is
crucified or slain in Wicked Men, let T. H. show where we say, that Christ, as
in himself, or as he is God, is or can be crucified or slain in any man or men:
This I am sure he cannot produce from any words of mine; nor do I think he can
from any words of any man upon Earth, called a Quaker; yea, T. Hicks clears me
sufficiently of this Charge, by citing my words, where I say (Immed. Revelat.
page 77.) That Christ, as he is and lives in himself, being an Eternal
Incorruptible Life, he cannot be crucified, but in his Appearance he may be.
This clears me, that I hold it to be true, that Christ as God cannot be
crucified or slain in men; and yet the Scripture speaks in diverse places of
his being crucified in them, as Rev. 9. Gal. 3. 1. Heb. 6, 6. which therefore
must be understood in respect of his Appearance or Manifestation in men, and
not as God, or as in himself; for to affirm, that Christ as he is God, can be
crucified or dye, I hold it one of the greatest of Blasphemies.

Thus, Reader, having cleared my self of the Forgeries of T. H. as to this
Particular, I refer it to that which is noble, ingenuous and impartial in thy
Conscience, to judge whether T. H's Blush O Heavens, and be Astonished O Earth,
be not applicable to himself for his so grossly and im^udently Abusing both me
and the World, by his so base and impudent Forgery.

One thing more I shall take notice of here, and that is T. H's alleging, That
G. K. affirmed to him (in the hearing of many credible Witnesses) That the Book
entitled, Imm. Revelat. was written by the Immediate Inspiration of the Spirit
of God. But to what Purpose T. H. produces this here (granting that I had said
these words) is evident, to wit, That he may cast an Odium upon me, it being a
great Crime in his Esteem, for any man in these days to pretend to the
Immediate Inspiration of the Spirit of God. But T. H. may in this be
disappointed, as in other his base Designs: However, he does clear himself (to
give him his due) sufficiently, as to this Matter, to wit, That he is not
guilty of the least Pretense to the Inspiration (or In-breathing) of the Spirit
of God, which Inspiration of the Almighty gives Understanding, as the
Scripture says expressly; and he who speaks or writes of the things of God
without Inspiration, he does it without a true and right Understanding, as is
manifest in the scriblings of this Forger T. H. And surely he that writes
Lies, Perversions, Forgeries and Slanders against any man or men, it is easy
to determine what Spirit has inspired him so to do, even the Spirit of him who
was a Liar and Murderer from the beginning. And as to the Inspiration of the
blessed Spirit of God, it is that by which my Soul was first made alive unto
God, and by which it is preserved alive unto this day, to serve him, and give
Honor and Glory to his Name: And by the same did I receive a true
Understanding from God of what I did write in that Book, and had his Direction
therein, in some measure; which Inspiration of the Spirit I do not appropriate
to my self; for I know that it is given in the several Measures of it,
according to the good Pleasure of God, to every true Christian; and every true
Minister of Christ has it to lead him and direct him what to Say, Preach and
Write for the Service of others; and they who have it not, and believe not such
a thing, but deny it, and are Enemies to it, I testify for God, they are
neither true Ministers of Christ, nor true Christians I remember a good Saying
of Bernard, concerning the Necessity of Inspiration unto Prayer* Tepida est
omnis oration, quam non prevenit inspiratio, i. e. All Prayer is Lukewarm,
which does not proceed from Inspiration. And said Augustine, Tractat. Ep. John
3. There is an inward Master, who teaches; Christ teaches; his Inspiration
teaches; where his Inspiration and his Unction is not, the Words outwardly
make a Noise in vain. Many other Places could I cite, both out of Scripture and
Antiquity, concerning the Necessity of the Inspiration of God to be with his
People in all Age. But when we speak of the Inspirations of God, that are given
to us of God in our waiting upon him, and by which we are directed and helped
what to Speak, or Pray, or Write, we do not hereby Equal our Selves, our
Writings or Labors unto the Apostles, and their Labors and Writings: But a
Measure of the same Spirit we have received, which they had, which Spirit is
one; and it is not idle, or without Operation in them who receive it; and its
Operation is, to breath (or inspire) Life, Light, Power, Virtue, Holiness and
Righteousness, Wisdom and Knowledge in them who attend unto the same.

Thus having cleared my self of the weightiest Abuse of T. H. I proceed to give
the Reader a small Hint at other 2 or 3 Particulars, which are also very
abusive and gross: One is, that because I say in my Book of Immed. Rev. page 4.
That there is a Necessity for these under the New Covenant-Dispensation to have
things revealed unto them from the Lord (that are not Essentials of the
Christian-Religion, but things relating to our Conversation in the World, see
page 3.) which are not to be found in Scripture particularly, not so much as by
Consequence: T* H. brings in these words as a Proof, That according to the
Quakers Principle they may excuse the Payment of a Just Debt, under Pretense it
is not revealed unto them, Contin. Dial. page 69. But surely had not Impude^ce
come to a wonderful Excess in T. H. he could never have committed such a gross
Abuse on my words, which are so far from giving the least seeming Color for a
Ground to build his Forgery on, that in the same place I expressly say, page 4.
That the Spirit of the Lord never can nor does command us to do things which
are intrinsecally, or in their own Nature Evil, or contrary to the Scriptures:
But refusing to pay a just Debt is contrary to the Scriptures; As also, it is
particularly found in the Scripture, that we owe nothing to any Man but Love;
therefore we should pay our Debts: This Consequence is clear, and therefore
none but such a wretched Forger as T. H. could have cast such a Groundless
Calumny on my innocent words. And like unto this is that other mentioned by T.
H. of a Woman's casting off her relation unto her Husband, as warranted by our
Principle, and my words before cited, Contin. Dialog. p. 62. But that no such
thing is to be done, is particularly to be found in Scripture and therefore T.
H. is an abusive Forger and Perverter. Another Abuse of T. H. against me is,
that he does quote me as a Proof, That the Seed of God only in man is taught,
and nothing else, Contin. Dialog. page 66. Also, That God preaches to himself,
and is obeyed only by himself, Contin. Dialog. page 84. His alleged Proof is,
that I say, The Great work of the Ministry is, to point the Hearers to this
(that is, the Seed) in them. Now let any of the weakest Capacity judge if there
be any thing in these words, giving the least Color of Proof, that either the
Seed only in man is taught, or that God preaches to himself: Surely, a Blush O
Heavens, and be astonished O Earth, may very deservedly be given at the
Wickedness of T. H. for his so gross Perversion: Who but one of the most
wretched Impudence would draw such a Conclusion, The Work of the Ministers was,
to point and direct the Hearers to the Seed in them, and to Christ in them, and
God in them; Therefore only the Seed in them, and only God and Christ in them
is Taught? whereas the plain contrary does follow, viz. That God and Christ in
that pure and divine Seed in men is the Teacher, and not the Taught; and this
is the very Aim and Design of my Book, that God and Christ is the Immediate
Teacher of his People in their Hearts. Another of his Abuses is, That because I
say, Jesus Christ is both the Seeds-man, the Seed, and also the Precious Fruit;
he alleges on me, that I say, The Work of Sanctification in us, is Christ
himself, Contin. Dialog. page 57. Now when I say, Christ Jesus is the Fruit, I
speak according to plain Scripture, which speaks of Christ formed in the
Saints; so Christ formed in the Saints is the precious Fruit or Product, which
he himself, as he is that Eternal and Divine Word, brings forth in them: But
the Work of Sanctification, is the Effect of Christ thus formed, and not Christ
himself, unless we speak metonymically, as when the Cause is sometimes called
by the Name of the Effect; as, when Paul said, That he, to wit, Christ, is made
unto us Wisdom, Righteousness, Sanctification, etc.

Thus, Reader, having briefly cleared my self of T. H. his Forgeries and
Abuses, unjustly put upon me, I shall conclude with giving thee a small Hint,
to let thee see, that notwithstanding T. H's Pretense so much to Logic, how
weak he is therein, and that is, his Illogical and Unreasonable Conclusion,
that because G. F. says [A man by the Spirit may discern where the Seed is in
Death, and where it is not in Death; and where the Soul is living, and where it
is in Death] From this Thomas Hicks infers, That, according to G. F. there is
no Distinction betwixt the Seed and the Soul, but the Seed is the Soul:
Observe, says T. H. he speaks the same of the Seed he does of the Soul. Now
let us improve this sort of T. H's Logic and by the very same way of Reasoning
we may prove Thomas Hicks to be an Ass or a Horse: as thus, An Ass or a Horse
is a Living Creature, but Mortal, and T. H. is a Living Creature, but Mortal;
an Ass has a Head, a Nose, Face and Ears, and so has T. Hicks; an Ass can
Eat, Drink, Sleep, and so can T. Hicks; here I speak the same of an Ass that I
do of T. H. and so I may do of an Horse, a Toad, a Viper, a Dog, a Rat; the
Conclusion therefore is, according to T. H's Logic, that T. Hicks is an Ass, a
Horse, etc. But true Logic, and indeed true Understanding, as we are men,
teaches us, That it is not the Agreement of some, but of all essential or
necessary Attributes, that make Two to be one and the same Thing. Now though
some things may be said in common, both of the Soul and the Seed; yet other
things cannot: As, the Soul is Corruptible, can and does sin; but the Seed of
God is Incorruptible, sins not, nor can sin; therefore the one is not the
other. But that the Seed is burdened, or laden as a Cart with Sheaves, by the
Sinner, will not prove, That the Seed can sin; for Christ Jesus bore our Sins,
and they were a Load and Burden upon him, who yet sinned not, nor ever could
sin.

Another Instance I shall give of his Weakness and Shallowness in another of
his Reasonings against G. F. as where he thus reasons page 21. Dial. 3. But
if every spiritual Substance be Infinite in it self (as Fox concludes) then
either there are no Angels, or Angels are no spiritual Substances; or if they
be spiritual Substances, they are no Creatures, but Infinite in themselves; and
consequently, as many Angels as there are, so many Gods there must be.

But note, Reader, G. F. spoak but of a spiritual Substance in the singular
Number; Now if G. F. or any other should affirm, that Nothing is purely a
Spirit or spiritual Substance, properly and strictly so considered simple and
without all Composition of Body, but God only, what has T. Hicks to say
against it, why, then it will follow, that an Angel is not a spiritual
Substance? Well! But how will he prove, that an Angel is a spiritual Substance
(I say, strictly and properly considered) that is to say, That an Angel has no
sort of Body or Corporeity; but is altogether Spirit, without all sort of Body,
however subtle or spiritual? Surely, many Learned and Pious Men, both ancient
and modern, hold that Angels and Souls of Men have some subtle or spiritual
Body; and so are not altogether simple, uncompounded Beings, but consisting of
Spirit and Body. But these Contemplations (I confess) are too high for T.
Hicks's weak and shallow Brain.

George Keith.
THE END.

