A Just Vindication Of My Earnest EXPOSTULATION, Added to my Book, called The
Antichrists and Sadduces detected, etc.
Directed to the Pious and Learned, in the Church of England, and among the
Dissenters, against the Trifling Exceptions of Edward Pennington, which he
calls Some Observations, etc.
PAssing by his Unchristian and Uncharitable Censures, of my being guilty of
Pride, Ambition, Malice, etc. and Monopolizing Knowledge among the Quakers;
which last he goes to prove, with a lying Story he takes out of a lying Book,
published against me, saying, It seems he told a Friend of ours in America, If
you serve G. K. so, G. K. will leave you, and then ye shall wander about for
lack of Knowledge, and shall not find it: Which is an abominable Falsehood: And
this and the like false Accusations, are the best Armor, these my Adversaries
have to Fight against me, as also his falsely charging me, with imposing fond
Notions, and Unscriptural Creeds upon them (but what he calls so, were no
other, then some of the great Fundamentals of the Christian Religion, the
Denial whereof I have sufficiently proved them guilty of, in the Meeting at
Turners-Hall, 11th. of the 4th. Month, 1696. and in the Printed Narrative of
the Proceedings there) I think fit to give some brief Reply, to his Charge, p.
4, 5. where he says, I once gave a different Character of their Learning and
Piety too, to whom I directed that Expostulation, for which he cites some
Passages in a Book of mine, called Help in time of Need. Printed above 30 Years
ago. But none of these Passages prove, that I did judge there were none among
them all, Pious and Learned, for indeed I was never so uncharitable. This Man
who will needs print Books, had need to go to School to learn that from
Particulars to the Universal, the Consequence is not good. What I said against
the Philosophy then taught, in the Colleges of that Nation, many learned and
Pious Men in both Nations, will assent to be true, to wit, the Jesuit
Philosophy; for that was it which was then taught, and which I learned almost
Word by Word out of Jesuit Authors: And since that time, both that College, and
I suppose all the other Colleges in both Nations, have changed that sort of
Philosophy, out of their dislike to it, as I my self had done, before I was a
Quaker. But what if I should blame the Philosophy that is now taught in all the
Colleges? Is there no other good Learning, but that called Philosophy? He has
but little Learning, that so argues. What I then said against Schools and
Universities, was against the ill Constitution and great Abuses in them at that
time, but not against Schools, well and duly constituted, as neither was
Luther, whose Authority I cited against them. Next as to what I said concerning
Prelacy, and Lording Bishops, (for so I cautioned it) in that Book. Neither
does this prove, that I did conclude there could be no pious Bishops; for
within a few Lines, in that very page, I did own there were some Bishops in
Queen Mary's Days, to whom the Lord had a regard, according to their
Faithfulness to what they saw; by Lording Bishops, it is obvious, what I meant,
even the same that is meant 1 Pet. 5. 3. being Lords over God's Heritage. But
does this prove, that I did judge there are none to be found Pious and Learned
among any here in England, Episcopal or others. Even, Bernard, Thauler, and T.
Kempis, with diverse others that lived in the Church of Rome, many Protestants
as well as I, have esteemed both Pious and Learned. Indeed I have to my
Experience, found such great Lording and Tyrannical Imposition in George
Whitehead, and William Penn, with their Lording Brethren of the Yearly Meeting,
1695. as I never found in any of the Bishops, either English or Scottish; for
by none of them was I ever Excommunicated: but by the Former I was
Excommunicated, for bearing my Faithful Testimony against most Vile Errors,
opposing the Great Essentials of Christianity, that I found among them. But
however, to take away all Shadow of Clamor against me, on the account of any
hard or uncharitable Censures I had formerly at any time passed on any of the
several Professions of Protestants, whether Espiscopal or Dissenters of all
sorts, or on the account of the hard and uncharitable Names I have at any time
given to any of them, that were not deserving them. I have often by Word of Mouth
freely and openly acknowledged my Rashness in so doing, and in my Book of
Retractations, shortly to be published, I revoke and retract them All that I
have said or writ, or printed at any time against any, that did not deserve the
same, though it were easy for me to prove, that they who now thus accouse me,
have far exceeded me, in giving hard Names, and passing hard Censures upon the
Ministry of all Protestant Professions differing from them. But the things is
so evident, that it were to waste Paper, to prove it, That they have generally
called them Thieves, Robbers, Conjurers, Witches, etc. But let them own and
declare, whether notwithstanding these hard Censures and Names, they have given
generally to all Dissenting from them, of all Professions of Protestants, do
they extend this severe Censure to all and every one of them? Are all and every
one of them Witches Conjurers Thieves, Robbers, the Pest of the World, the Bane
of Soul and Body of the Universe, Idle Gormandizing Priests, etc. the unlovely
Epithets. they have given Dissenters from them, both Episcopal and
Nonconformists, in general, do they make no exception? Is all Britain become
such a Sodom, that there are not ten Pious or Righteous Persons to be found in
it among all the Millions that dissent from them? If they will affirm it is so,
their uncharitableness is detestable; but if they will allow, that some
Righteous and Pious Persons are to be found among them, then why do they
quarrel with me, for allowing the same, and that there are Learned Men among
them, far beyond any stock of Learning any of the Quakers lay claim to, I
suppose they will not gainsay; what is then my Trespass, for allowing that
there are such in the Church of England, and among the Dissenters, when they do
the same?

And whereas they say, page 6. Has he ever retracted this? If not, what
encouragement have ye to become his Journey-Men, to work under him? To the
former I say, I have both by Word and Writ, and is designed by me to be in
Print very shortly, retracted all the hard Censures and Names that I have at
any time given to any, who have not deserved them, as is abovesaid. But what a
base Insinuation is it in them, that I would have any of the Pious and Learned
of the several Protestant Professions, to become my Journey-men to work under
me? Is there any thing like this in my Expostulation with them? O shameless
Men! Have ye no better Weapons to fight against me, but such Lying
Insinuations! Let my Exp^stulation be examined, and nothing of that sort will
be found. Nay, I have not desired any of their Assistance to defend me (I am
content they let me stand or fall to my own Master; for my Trust is, that God
will uphold me) but my Expostulation was with them, and my Serious Invitation
unto them, by their Pious and Learned Writings, to oppose and refute those Vile
Errors, boldly avouched and publicly broached in the late Printed Books of
some Leading Men, among a Gang and sort of Quakers.

He says, He shall digest the Matter he proposes to treat upon into ten
Heads. But what indigested matter he brings forth to his and their shame, whom
he defends, I think to take some notice. The first Head is my representing the
Quakers, as worse than Papists. On this Head he is guilty of gross Untruth and
Falsehood in two Particulars. 1. That I represent the Quakers as worse than
Papists. But the very Words he cites cut of my Expostulation clear me, I charge
not the Quakers indefinitely, or universally, but a sort and gang of them, if
he be such an Idiot to make no distinction betwixt a part and the whole, how is
he fit to print Books 2. That he makes me represent them, I so charge,
absolutely worse than Papists: Whenas I cautioned my Words thus, -- Vile Errors
not only as bad as any Popery, but much worse than the worst of Popery in
DIVERSE RESPECTS.. Observe, in Diverse Respects: I said not absolutely, and in
all respects, but in diverse respects. And this I can very easily prove. And as
to his Insulting Queries, to answer to some of them; which Answer will
comprehend an Answer to them all. Do we promote Errors, (says he) worse than
worshipping a piece of Bread as God? I say, that is a Transition from the
subject of the Controversy betwixt them and me, to another foreign subject,
viz. Transubstantiation; it seems this bold Novice has not leareed that Maxim,
Verba sunt int^lligenda secundum subjectam materam, i. e. Words are to be
understood according to the subject matter If I say, this is not one of these
respects, wherein I have charged them, this Junior Sophister is at a nonplus.
But seeing I have clearly proved that G. W. has Destroyed the true Object of
the Christian Faith and Worship, by denying Christ to be either God or Man, as
I have showed in my Narrative, and, That it is needful to our Salvation, to
believe in Christ as he suffered at Jerusalem. These men's Error may be justly
thought equal to that of the Papists, in that very respect, if not to exceed
it. The adoring a false Christ within, is fully as great Idolatry, as the
Papists adoring a piece of Bread without. And it is a false Christ within,
which they adore, who set up a false Notion of Light within, and a false Lying
Spirit that has led them to Vilify and Reproach the Man Christ Jesus without
them, and boldly to slight his precious Blood, and call Christ without,
glorified in the Heavens, an imagined God beyond the Stars, that is denied by
the Light within; therefore that Light within, that denies Christ without, who
is the true Christians Savior, and who is both God and Man, is not the true
Light, but a Lying Spirit of the Devil. And let sincere Christians judge,
whether is the greatest Idolatry, to worship the Devil within, or a piece of
Bread without? I am sorry they give me this occasion to detect them; but since
they will needs give it, it is fit they be answered. And the same or like
Answer will suffice to his Queries, about worshipping Images, Praying to Saints
and Angels, Merits and Purgatory: And as to Merits, I am sure most Papists are
more sound than some of them; for whereas Papists generally profess highly to
value Christ's Merits, and own their first Justification to the Merit of
Christ's Obedience and Righteousness without them: William Penn has called
this Doctrine, A Doctrine of Devils, and an Arm of the Sea of Corruption,
deluging the whole World. In vain are all his shufling Aggravations against me,
upbraiding me with my being changed in my Opinion, of what these Quakers were:
I have owned it again, and again, that I am changed in my Opinion of them; but
how does this prove me an Apostate, or ill man? Are they all ill Men, that have
the same Opinion of them as I now have? And as I have formerly told them, they
have changed their Opinion of me, as much as I have of them, so that in that
respect, they have no advantage against me. I own it, they deceived me, they
were the Deceivers and I was the Deceived; and which was worse, let the
Intelligent judge. But now I bless God, I am undeceived in them, I know them
better: And what would they have more?

The Second Head, has nothing in it worth noticing, but their Unjust charging
me with Malice, both with respect to them, viz. that Gang of Quakers
abovementioned, and with respect to such whom I directed my Expostulation
unto, their Application of that place in Acts 21. 28. against me, is very
Abusive and Shameless. The Jews cried, Men of Israel, help. But against what?
against Paul, and the worthy Name of Christ which he bore Testimony to. Did I
make any such Cry, to help against that worthy Name, or any true Professors of
it, by my Inviting them to oppose the Vile Errors that are contrary to it? But
how does he prove that I am malicious to the Pious and Learned in the Church of
England, or among the Dissenters? They, and not he, nor his Gang are a fit
judge of this. Am I malicious either to the one or the other, to tell them, I
would not have the Bapists outdo them, in Zeal for the Christian Faith? Is it
not an evident Argument of my love to them? His base Insinuation, that I would
stir up Persecution against them, seeing I had so fairly cautioned against any
such Jealousy, both in this Expostulation, and in my Printed Narrative, I
think not worth the least regarding.

The Third Head, so far as it contains a false Reflection on me, I shall not
notice, but in so far as it tells a most impudent Untruth, with respect to the
People called Quakers, I cannot omit it; for whereas I have said, That many of
their chiefest Teachers, have with great boldness provoked such as differed
from them, to public Disputes. This he denies to be true: But with what Face
of Brass could he deny it? That is a thing so notoriously known, which
thousands both of the Church of England and Dissenters, can testify. But the
Color he would put upon it is, That what they did, was to clear themselves,
and to detect the Abuses put on them. As if they had been only on the defensive
part, in all the public Oppositions they made in Congregations, and elsewhere;
whereas it is abundantly known, they were the first Aggressors, and first of
all began to charge all the Ministry in the Nation, with being False Teachers,
Hirelings, holding false Doctrines; and though it were to carry Water to the
Sea to prove it, yet let but their own Books in Print, particularly George
Fox's Journal, and Edward Bou^oughs collected Treatises, bear witness to any
such Novices among the Quakers that know it not. And was G. F's Primmer, to the
two Universities, which he himself could not read, and his Battle door,
containing Words of many Languages, of which he knew not one Letter, only to
clear the People called Quakers.

The Fourth Head contains nothing but repeated Recriminations and Reflections
against me, already Answered; except that in the latter part of it, they
propose it, Whether it would not be most equal and reasonable for them, viz.
such to whom I have directed my Expostulation, to begin with me, by calling me
forth to a public hearing upon my former Books. To this I Answer, that I am
most willing they do, and what I cannot justly and safely defend of any
passages in my former Books, I will fairly retract. But whereas they upbraid me
again, and again, with contradicting my former Doctrines and Principles, as to
Articles of Faith, I cannot find that they have proved it against me in one
particular. But that they to whom I directed my Expostulation, should begin
with me, I suppose they will not think so proper, because whatever just Offense
I have given to any of them, my late Adversaries of that Gang among the Quakers
have far exceeded me, and they have that which casts the Balance as to them,
that they justify all they have said, and printed against them, to every
tittle, to maintain their Infallibility; which I have not done, but in diverse
things I confess my Mistakes, and wherein I have justly offended any, I humbly
ask their Forgiveness.

The Fifth and Sixth Heads, having sufficiently Answered them both in my
Narrative and Expostulation, I see not the least cause to say any thing unto,
but leave them to the Readers impartial Consideration. Only I take notice of
the bold Untruth he charge me with, of my proposing the disturbing of their
Meetings; for I cautioned it expressly, that what should be done to refute their
Vile Errors, might be done at the end of their Meetings, or at other set times;
and this is more regular, than what diverse of them have done, to make
Opposition in the Meetings of others, before their Meetings were ended, as
Jacob Talner lately did, in one of our Meetings, who is one of their Preachers:
And seeing they justify what some of them did, by way of public Opposition,
to clear themselves, and to detect the Abuses put on them, and that they allow
this to be equal and reasonable, and no trespass against the Civil Peace; and
that many, or rather indeed all of other Professions, do judge that the Quakers
have misrepresented them, and put Abuses on them, why should they not think it
fair, that these of other Professions, who think themselves injured by them in
point of Doctrine, should have freedom in public, to their Faces, to clear
themselves. And why should not I also by the same Argument, have full Liberty
to clear my Innocence, and detect the Abuses they have put upon me, and that
Face to Face, without any breach of the Civil Peace? Was the taking away the
Preachers Hourglass with G. F. justified, but a clearing themselves? And
Solomon Eccles coming into a public Assembly, here in London, all besmeared
with Man's Excrements, and one that got on the Pulpit, and began to sow and
stitch with a Needle?

The Seventh Head, is nothing but an unjust Insinuation, That I would excite
the Civil Authority against them, and that I would fain instruct the Civil
Authority, what their Duty is in this Case. But they bringing no Proofs of
their Charge against me, it were a superfluous labor in me to Answer them on
this Head. I am very hopeful that as formerly I have had the Countenance of
some in Civil Authority, in my public Opposition to their Vile Errors, so I
may have the like for the future. Their Insinuation, That such Encouragement of
any in the Civil Authority, would be a breach of an established Act of
Parliament, is so silly and ignorant, that it deserves not the least
Consideration.

The Eighth Head is a barefaced Calumny, My high Opinion of my self in setting
up for Director, both of Church and State, in Methods to be used for the
preservation of the Protestant Religion. Does any honest Man, that proposes
his humble Opinion, what may be good for both the Protestant Religion, and
State of the Kingdom, deserve such an unworthy Character? Is not the like
commonly practiced from time to time, without the least offense? Had not diverse
of the Teachers among the Quakers, particularly G. F. the Younger, given far
greater occasion to be judged, having a high Opinion of himself, in what he
printed of Advise to the King himself, viz. Charles the Second, and what others
have Printed of the like Nature, and what G. F. the Elder, and E. B. have
printed to Parliaments?

In the Ninth Head, whereas they charge me, with being either grossly insincere,
or else very ignorant of the Law in such Cases, which deeply affects both
Persons and Estates, by Imprisonments, Fines, and Pillory, viz. because I said,
If Order were given by them, bearing Authority in this Nation, that all such
Books of them, as contain Vile and Abominable Errors were suppressed, they viz.
my Opposers among the Quakers should have no Cause to complain. To this I
Answer, 1. Were not by the same Argument they insincere or ignorant, who have
charged not only some of their Brethren, but differing from them in Punctilio's
of their Church Government and Women's Meetings, as in particular Christopher
Tailor his charging William Rogers with high Blasphemy, in a Printed Book of
his, but also in charging with Heresy and Blasphemy, many of the Ministry in
the Nation, reputed Orthodox by Civil Authority? But, 2dly, must not their Vile
Errors and Heresies be opposed, and the Authors of them witnessed against, and
warning given against them, otherwise all that do so, must they be reckoned
Persecutors and Malicious. O ye partial Judges, why judge ye so partially and
insincerely that in another, wherein ye are so guilty your selves? If that were
any Guiltiness, to call Error and Heresy by their true Names.

In their Tenth, and last Head, they labor to state the Case betwixt their
Books, and my Books, from Pensilvania, as far different, and that my Books were
justly suppressed by them, here at London, they think it was but common
Prudence, to hide the Bone of Contention, lest my quarrelsom Books, as they are
pleased to call them, should infect some with the same Spirit of Discord. But
they plead hard, that their Books should not be suppressed. To this I Answer, 1.
Had it not been more honesty in them, as well as Christian Prudence, to have
disowned these gross Errors, which I evidently proved against them in
Pensilvania, out of their own Letters and Manuscripts, as well as by other
Proofs, than to have hid and cloaked them, and Excommunicated me, for my
faithful opposing them. 2. But where is the far different case? why they should
suppress my Books, and the Civil Authority should not suppress theirs? Why? my
Books would have been a Bone of Contention, to infect some with the same Spirit
of Discord. But must not the Truth be contended for? Are we not commanded to
Contend earnestly for the Faith once delivered to the Saints? and such was the
contention of my Books, and of my Spirit. The case indeed, I confess, is very
different, but to their great disadvantage, and to my great advantage. They did
well, they think, to suppress my Books, lest some Discredit or Reproach should
fall on them, if it should be known, that any of them did hold such Principles,
which all true Christians abhor, being contrary to the Essentials of
Christianity. But their Books must have free and full Scope to pass current
through the Nations, that have been a far greater Bone of Contention, and
tending not only to bring Infamy upon all other Christian Professions and
Professors, but Reproach and Contempt upon the Person and Doctrine of our
blessed Savior, and his holy Prophets and Apostles, as not only I, but others
have made clearly to appear, and may be yet made more to appear in due time.

His idle Story, about the Revolutions, which they have so nauseously repeated,
and which I have often fully Answered; to answer it any more, would be a needless
Repetition, therefore I let it pass with his other Impertinencies and
Calumnies, not worth the noticing. But were I inclined to retort his idle Story
of Erasistratus against me, on the Hypothesis of the Revolution, (or
Transmigration) I might say these my late Adversaries, who place all upon the
Inward Principle, excluding the Man Christ Jesus from being our Savior, are
the old Stoics, Epicureans, Pelagian Britains redivive, and other Ethnic
Philosophers, who bitterly opposed the Christian Faith. But though they have
not their Souls, I am sure they have their Heathenish, Antichristian Principles.

G. K.

THE END.
London, Printed by J. Bradford, in New-street, without Bishops-gate, near
Hand-Ally, 1696.


