Immediate Revelation, OR Jesus Christ the Eternal Son of God, revealed in man
and revealing the knowledge of God, and the things of his Kingdom, immediately.
OR The Holy Ghost, the Holy Spirit of promise, the spirit of Prophecy, poured
forth, and inspiring man, and induing him with power from on high, and
baptising him thereunto, giving him wisdom, understanding, and knowledge from
above, (and giving to some, utterance, and moving them, by his own immediate
assistance to speak forth, and declare the wonderful things of God.) NOT CEASED
But remaining a standing and perpetual Ordinance in the Church of Christ, and
being of indispensible necessity as to the whole body in general, so to every
member thereof; every true Believer in particular, asserted and demonstrated.
And the objections that have any seeming weight against it answered.

Prove. 29. 18. Where there is no vision, the people Perish.

Writ by George Keith Prisoner for the Truth, in the Tolbooth of Aberdein, the
29th of the third Month. 1665.

Printed in the Year. 1668.

A few words by way of Preface:
IT has been in my heart once and again from the Lord to write some things
unto the people, and especially the Professors of this Nation, concerning this
great and weighty matter of Immediate Revelation, which they say, (both
Teachers and People) is ceased, we say, is remaining, and we know it to be so,
from the blessed experience given us of God therein, even that it remains,
and is of necessary continuance in the true Church, and among the true Saints,
and is not only necessary for the preservation, safety, and comfortable walking
of the Saints with God, but is also necessary in order to men and women's
becoming Saints, for through Immediate Revelation it is, that any man who is
naturally void of the true and saving knowledge of God, and acquaintance with
him comes to attain it. The discussing of this controversy is of very great
weight, for this error of theirs, concerning Immediate Revelation is such a
Fundamental one, that the greatest part of their other errors, are built on it,
and indeed the whole superstructure of their Church, and Ministry and Worship,
at to its outward constitution, so that if this their foundation be found and
discovered to be false, viz. That there is no Immmediate Revelations now a
days, as the common privilege of the Saints, then down falls the whole
superstructure of the outward constitution of their Church, Ministry and
Worship, which all of necessity must be false if the foundation on which they
are builded be such. And here I shall instance several particulars of great
weight which are all built upon this false foundation aforesaid. 1. That the
Scriptures outward testimony is most necessary and that no true and saving
Knowledge of God, is to be attained but by the Scriptures being read or heard.
2. That there is no immediate furnishing, gifting and fitting, and qualifying
men to be Teachers in the Church, by immediate inspiration and pouring forth of
the spirit of prophecy, without any respect had to sex, or humane
qualifications of better learning such as was frequent in (...) Apostles times,
as in Acts 2. 1. Cor. 14. All this say they is ceased, so James Durham (a noted
man among the Presbyterians) says page 471. in his digression concerning
prophesying, that as it is taken for an immediate revealing of Gospel truths,
it is now ceased, so say they generally, hence their Divinity Schools and
Colleges are come up, both among Papists and Protestants whereby young men
(being sent of their Relations in order to a livelihood) learn the Art and
Trade of preaching and praying; and continues so many years, till they be
licentiated, as ever a Shoo maker, or other Tradesman, serves his
Apprenticeship, and they make humane learning, or the knowledge of Letters, and
essential qualification to a Minister, so as he cannot be a Minister without it
but grace only accidental, and not necessary to his being a Minister but to
his better being, so the aforesaid I. D. now such a learning of the things of
God, as is taught by man Divinely inspired, who teach from the inspiration of
God in them, and whose care it is to turn and bring up them, whom they teach,
unto the same light, life, and spirit of God, from which they speak, that they
may learn in that, and so come to be partakers with them, of the same knowledge
and wisdom, from the same fountain, we dearly own, such was the School of the
Prophets, where the Teachers were the true Prophets of God, and taught from
Gods spirit in them, whose teachings being in the evidence and demonstration of
Gods spirit, proved effectual, unto the Scholars or learners, so that they
became prophets also, and received of the same spirit and this dispensation,
which was both among Prophets and Apostles we witness to be among us, through
the mercy and goodness of the Lord at this day, even the po^ring forth the
spirit of the Lord no less upon the hearers then was at first upon the
Teachers, whereby they also are become able to teach others, both males and
females prophesying, or speaking forth the great things of God, as the spirit
gives utterance, declaring the great things of the Gospel, in its effectual
workings on their own hearts, now that Prophesying is frequently taken in
Scripture, in this sense, (and not only for a foretelling of things to come) is
clear from, Romans 12. 6. Rev. 10. 11. and 11. 13. and 19. 10. compared to Rev.
12. 17. Joel 2. 28. 1 Cor. 14. 24. 31. 3dly. Another great error following upon
the aforesaid is that, no man in these days is infallibly assisted to write,
speak, preach, or pray, or praise, as the Prophets and Apostles and Evangelists
witnessed of old. 4thly. That there is no Immediate Call unto the Ministry.
5thly. That none are to wait for an inward call, motion, impulse, or
inspiration and assistance to preach, or pray, or give thanks, so as to forbear
until it be given them. Nor that any should expect, an Immediate Call. and
impulse or motion, to the doing of any thing whatsomever that way being ceased.
6thly, That the Scriptures are a filled up Canon, and the only rule of faith
and obedience, in all things, and no more Scriptures to be writ, or given forth
from the spirit of the Lord. 7thly. That their is no infallible way of
discerning the true Ministers and Members of Jesus Christ, as who be living,
and w^o not, whence proceeds that promiscuous m^t multitude of teachers and
people, where of their Church is composed, who are generally void of any
experience of a gracious work on their hearts.

The Controversy truly stated, and clearly and distinctly opened.
Concerning Immediate Revelation, whether ceased, or remaining, and needful to
remain, in the true Church.

BEcause in all matters of debate, the true State of the controversy is so
needful to be known, that without the clear and distinct knowledge thereof. The
arguments brought to prove the thing affirmed, do not so manifestly convince,
nor are the objections against it so evidently answered, therefore I find it
^it, to open up and hold forth, the true state of the controversy, clearly and
distinctly, concerning this of Immediate Revelation, whether ceased, or
remaining, and needful to remain in the true Church, showing both what we do
not understand thereby and what we do understand, for the removing these sad
and woeful mistakes and prejudices, from off the minds of people, who contend
against us herein.

1. First, We do not hereby understand the Prophesying, or foretelling of
things to come, this gist of foretelling things to come, being so accidental a
thing to a Saint, and true Christian, that many Saints may altogether want it
and many who are not Saints may have it, yet though we do not at all plead for
the indispensible necessity of Prophesying, as limited to this signification of
foreseeing and foretelling things to come [to which add the knowledge of things
either by past, or present, or any other things, which are neither essentials of
Religion nor needful to be known) Nevertheless we affirm, such a thing has
been, may be, and frequently is in the true Church, as even a foreseeing, and
foretelling of things to come which the Lord at times reveals unto whom he
pleases, both for the comfort of the Godly, and the terror of the wicked, This
many of the national way acknowledge, and experience proves, so that
concerning this kind of Prophesying; which is the foretelling of future events,
the controversy is not at all stated, betwixt these of the national way and
us, for none of us plead its absolute and ^dispensible necessity to any, and
they acknowledge, it may be given to some.

2. ^condly, We do not hereby understand, the Revelation of any other Gospel,
or way unto Heaven, or any other essentialls of the Christian Religion, then
what was revealed in the beginning, and has been in all ages, revealed and
made known unto the Saints, more or less, and is fully and sufficiently
declared, and witnessed too, in the Scriptures, which we do freely acknowledge
to be a full and perfect Testimony of all the essentials of the Christian
Religion. Yet as in former times, their have been greater and more manifest,
and full, and clear discoveries, of the same Gospel, and way of God, and
mysteries of Religion, let forth unto the Saints of one generation, then unto
the Saints of another, as is clear from Ephesians. 3. 5. So may it be now, and we
know it to be so, in our experience. Observe then the difference, that's betwixt
these two, the new Revelation of new things, and the new Revelation of the g^od
old things, which are the essentials of Religion, and have ever been, and ever
shall be in substance the same, though under different discoveries, the first
of these two, we do not plead, for, but the latter, viz. That we have, (and
must have in order to a saving, sanctifying, and sufficient knowledge) a new
Revelation of the good old things, such as of God, of Christ, of the holy
spirit, of repentance, conversion, sanctification faith, hope, love, joy,
peace, and other fruits of the spirit, of worship, prayer, and thanksgiving, of
the Church, and communion of Saints, etc. For that the old Revelation of these
good old things, given unto the Saints in former ages, cannot serve our turn,
the faith of another man, and his knowledge and experience, is not sufficient
unto me, but I must be saved by my own faith, or the faith, knowledge and
experience given me of God, of the self same things, so, nor can the Revelation
and discovery of them given of God, unto others suffice unto me, nor were these
thing, recorded in writ, that I or any other man should sit down, upon the
History, or Relation of what God had wrought, or revealed in others, but to
point and direct us inward into that same principle of life, which wrought and
revealed these things in them, that we may wait for it, and find it, revealing
and working the same things in us, and so to become partakers of the same
precious faith, knowledge and experience with them. And if we are to partake of
the same precious faith with them, so also are we to partake with them of the
same precious Revelation, and inspiration of the word of God, by which their
faith was wrought and which was its object, and foundation, as also it is ours,
and con^inues to l^e the same in all generations. Now though we say, that the
Scriptures are a full and perfect testimony of all the essentials of the
Christian Religion, yet we believe (contrary unto these of the National way)
that they are not a Canon so filled up, as no more, is to be added unto them,
from the same immediate inspiration and Revelation of the spirit of God,
through his servants, of the same authority with them for though no new
essentials are to be added, yet a new, and fuller and clearer Testimony may be
added, concerning the same old essentials, for indeed less then the one half of
the Scriptures is a full and perfect Testimony of all the essentials, yet this
proves not the other parts to be useless, and imperfect.

But though we affirm, that no other essentials, are to be revealed to us, but
what are declared in the Scripture, nevertheless we say this, that a great many
particular things, both by way of precept and prohibition, permission and
approbation, and counsel from the Lord, are both revealed, and are necessary to
be revealed, unto us, which are not essentials of the Christian Religion, nor
principles of the Doctrine of Christ, but things relating to our conversation
in the World, and our walking with God with faith and comfort, according to his
will, with the knowledge of which we are to be filled in all things, and the
word of the Lord is to dwell in us richly, touching all things that occur,
revealing in us the will of God, as commanding or forbidding, or licensing us,
how to carry, and be conversant about them. For it being the great promise of
the new covenant that the Lord will guide his people continually, and be with
them in counselling, directing and leading them in whatever they do, or
whithersoever they go, and seeing he requires it of them, that in all their
thoughts, words and deeds they look unto him and wait for his counsel and stand
therein, in his approbation and justification, doing all to the least
particular, in his will and name, even their very eating and drinking, their
marrying and giving in marriage, their plowing and digging, or any other
employment, their going, or coming to a p^ce, and abiding therein, doing all
this and many more particulars could be mentioned in Faith, that is to say, in
the feeling and certain knowledge, that in the will of the Lord, feeling his
approbation and good will therein, they are found in such things, from the
Revelation of his life in their particulars. It is very evident, that their is
a necessity for these under the new covenant dispensation of living in, and
walking after the spirit, to have things revealed unto them from the Lord,
which are not to be found in the Scriptures, particularly, not so much as by
consequence, for indeed the Scriptures point us inward to the spirit of the
Lord in our hearts, which is more nigh, then they are Blessed, are they and
shall be, who make the testimony of Gods word and spirit in their hearts, the
men of their counsel, they know the sure certain Path, wherein the waysaring
man, though a fool cannot cry. But this we further say, which I add for a
caution, that the spirit of the Lord, who is goodness and righteousness it self
never can, nor does command us to do things that are intrinsecally or in their
own nature evil, or contrary to the Scriptures.

3. Thirdly, We do not hereby understand, any of these ways following, as of
necessary continuance. 1. Not any outward audible voice, framed by the Lord
immediately in the air, and presented to the outward ear. 2. Nor any outward
visible appearance presented to the outward eye, neither by the Ministry of
Angels, nor by the Ministry of Christ, in the outward. 3. Nor dreams and
visions upon the imagination in the night season, nor yet by transes so called,
which is by a cessation of the exercise of all the outward senses. 4. Nor any
outward miracles. 5. Nor the discovery and Revelation of things from God,
merely in the principle and light of reason, or in that principle, wherein a
man is capable to know the things of a man, as a man, as he is placed in a
region above the beasts, and all other inferior living creatures, for indeed
man, as a man, has a principle in him, which is natural and essential to him,
in which he is capable to know higher things, then the other animals can, in
their animal principle, and through this principle, which he has in him, as a
man, he not only knows many things, as of Arts and Sciences natural, but also
he is capable therein to receive a knowledge from the Lord, without any outward
means, by any inward manifestation, and that either of things natural, or
supernatural, now what a man has revealed or communicated to him of knowledge
from God, touching natural things, in the natural principle, of his natural
understanding or reason, he has a sufficient satisfactory intuitive knowledge
of them, because they are proportional unto his natural understanding, but when
things which are supernatural or revealed unto him, in the principle of his
natural understanding merely, though never so immediately even from the spirit
of the Lord inwardly manifesting them, his knowledge is not full and
satisfactory, as not being intuitive, but abstractive, for the mind of man can
know no things in in^tively fully and satisfyingly but when it reaches them,
in a principle that is proportional unto them, and which can apprehend them, in
their own-proper forms, properties; qualities, and idea's which the natural
cannot do, as touching supernatural objects, but only as touching natural for
supernatural objects require a supernatural organ^or principle, in which they
can only be known intuitively, and with satisfaction.

4. Fourthly, The way and manner of Immediate Revelation, concerning God and
the things of his k^ngdom, and the leadings and movings and workings of his
spirit, which tend unto, and accompany salvation, which we plead for, as of
necessary continuance, which only gives, or can give, the true saving
satisfactory, and intuit^ve knowledge of these supernatural things aforesaid,
is that alone manifestation and Revelation, which is discovered and given from
the Lords spirit, unto the mind of man, in the seed and birth of God in him and
which the mind in that seed and Birth alone, receives. This seed and birth of
God, is only that suitable and proportionate Organ, instrument, or principle in
which divine and supernatural things can be sufficiently and satisfyingly, that
is to say, intuitively, known, for as the objects are divine and supernatural,
so this seed and birth of God is divine and supernatural also therefore it has
a suitableness and proportion unto them which the natural has not, therefore
the natural man, cannot (intuitively and evidently) understand the things of
God, as says the Apostle, because they are spiritually discerned, and he wants
the spiritual birth; which is the only su^cient Organ, or instrument, whereby
the mind can understand them. Now the mind that is clothed with the seed and
birth of God, is the spiritual man, that is able to understand and discern
spiritual things, because he has the Organ or instrument, which can teach them
in their own proper and immediate forms, properties, qualities, and idea's,
this seed and birth of God has only the true spiritual senses of seeing,
hearing, tasting smeling and feeling the word of life, and the wonderful powers
and virtues thereof, and which can only give unto man to discern, how that
Heavenly and divine word does work its wondrous effects in man, and how it
moves, leads, guides, inlightneth, quickneth, gladneth and refreshes him,
and every way influenceth him: it is the ignorance and want of the true
knowledge of this seed and birth of God, which occasions such woeful ignorance
and mistakes amongst people, touching immediate revelation, and the true manner
of it, for they do not (neither Teacher nor people) acknowledge this seed and
Birth of God upon the saints, to be a substantial living principle in which
they have all the spiritual and supernatural sensations of spiritual and
supernatural objects, really present and manifest, seen, heard, smelled, tasted
and felt, as really as the outward birth is a substantial living principle, in
which we have the natural and animal senses and sensations of outward and
natural things, they only conceive regeneration to be but an accidental (though
supernatural) change on the mind, and that in its regeneration, it puts on
no substantial principle, but only some supernatural accidents, so that
according to them, the seed and birth of God i^ but an accident, but we know it
to be a substance and feel it to be so, as manifestly as we feel and know this
outward birth of flesh and blood to be a substance, for it has all the
properties and characters of a substance, that the outward has, it gives us
to see, hea^, smell, taste, and f^l the substantial things of the spiritual
inward and invisible world, which is the throne and kingdom of God, as the
outward gives us to see, hear, smell, taste, and feel the substantial thi^ of
this natural outward and visible world, so that it is as false and vain a thing
to say, the inward birth is but an accident, as to say, the outward birth is
but an accident, seeing the (...) has as real spiritual senses, as the other
has natural (...), which no accident can have, and if any further ask, who are
desirous of information from a true and honest desire of what nature it is, and
if it be a particle or portion of the very Deity, or Godhead, or if not of
what it is, and by what is it nourished, I answer to speak properly, and after
the proper language of men, it is not a particle, or portion, of the Godhead,
as the outward body of ^esh and blood, is a particle of the great outward
world, for the Godhead is not divisible, nor discerptible unto particles,
being a most simple pure being void of all composition, or division, containing
in himself all creaturely perfections in the greatest simplicity and eminency,
above what is conciveable unto creatures, but it is of the heavenly, spiritual
and invisible substance and being, that is the most glorious being and
principle, in which God, as Father, So^, and holy Ghost does dwell, and
tabernacle, and shine forth in the most glorious brightness, beauty, sweetness
and majesty that the noble^ of creatures in their highest supernatural
elevation, can reach unto, behold him, and ha^ fellowship with him, which i^
the holy of holies, and the heaven of heavens, or that third heavens, in which
Paul on earth saw and felt things inutterable, and out of these heavens, does
the seed of God come, who gives it from himself out of Heaven, and sows it
in the heart of man, and form^h it by his own immediate arm, and power
according to his infinite wisdom, and waters it daily and hourly, with
influences from heaven, which have of the virtue and breath of his own eternal
life and spirit in them, whereby this seed grows up into a perfect
substantial birth of o^ heavenly and incorruptible nature, (though till it come
to its perfect formation, it can suffer hurt, so far as to be slain* through
man his joining unto the contrary seed and birth), which is Christ formed
within, the body of Christ, his flesh and blood, which comes down from heaven,
and gives life unto man, unto that soul or mind of man, which eats it and
feeds upon it, and it is called the body and flesh and blood of Christ,
because his eternal life and spirit dwells in it immediately, and co^ateth
unto man the knowledge of the glory and beauty of himself, only in and through
this seed and birth, which living substantial communication and knowledge of
Christ, and of the Father in him, and of the holy spirit, who proceeds from
both, man only can receive, as his mind comes to put off the body of sin, and
to put on this seed and birth of God, this new man, this house and birth from
Heaven, in which he is a partaker of heavenly things, by seeing, hearing,
tasteing, smeling, and couching or feeling them, and has the enjoyment of God,
and ^ellowship with him, who is the Lord of Heaven, and with the Angels and
Saints, who are the fellow Citizens of this City, Jerusalem from above, mount
Zion the City of the living God, unto which the Saints are come, on which they
stand, in which they love, and have fellowship, and eat together of the feast
of fat things, and the Wine well refined in the kingdom of the Father, is
given unto them in an overflowing cup, which things the natural man, who is
only clothed with the natural birth and principle, cannot reach to understand,
not so much as a blind man can understand colors, or a deaf man sounds,
therefore he either denies them, or forms monstrous and false conceptions
about them. Hence it is, that the Schoolmen and national teachers, deny that
the Saints in these days, have any intuitive knowledge of God, and though they
acknowledge, that the spirit of God has immediate operations and in^uences of
a supernatural kind in the saints, yet they deny them to be objective
manifestations, that is to say, that they can be known in themselves as
immediately seen, heard or felt, by way of voice, or visible, inward
appearance, nor do they acknowledge that any of the Saints on earth now adays,
know God or his spirit, or the things thereof in any other manner, but that
which is abstractive and not intuitive. The intuitive knowledge is that whereby
a man knows things in their own prop^ forms qualities, properties and idea's,
as when I know a man by leeing himself, hearing his own voice, when I know a
land, by seting it self and all the fine Cities, fields and gardens to it, smell
of the sweet smeling flowers, eat of the fruit, and drink of the Vines which
grow in it, the abstract ve knowledge is only that which is but received from
the borrowed, (...), and like (which are ever far unlike) forms, properties,
qualities and idae's of things, as when I only hear a report of these things,
by words of a man's mouth, or read a description of them in writs, or draughts
or figures, or what I can conceive of them in my own mind, not from themselves,
really presented unto me but from unlike likenesses of them, even as unlike as
the dead Image of a man's face, is to his own living face, or painted bread
meat and drink is to that which is real and so according to this distinction,
they say, all the knowledge of God which the Saints have on earth is but only
abstractive, that is to say, abstracted and gathered from the words of others,
who heard and saw him face to face, and from what they can conceive of him from
their words recorded in scripture, or from these Prints and footsteps of him in
the Creation, which is but a dark shadowing unsatisfactory knowledge, we on the
other hand from both our own blessed experience, and the Scriptures testimony
affirm that the Saints have an intuitive knowledge of God, and his power and
virtue, spirit, light and Life, and the wondrous sweet and precious workings
and influences thereof, so as too hear himself (...) taste and see that he is
good, to feel him, to smell and favor of his good ointments according to these
Scriptures following wherein the spiritual disceerning is held* forth under the
names of all the five senses, as first of seeing, Psalm. 34. 8. 63. ^2. 106. 5.
Isai. 29. 18. 33. 17. 52. 10. Matthew, 16. 28. Mat. 5. 8. Acts 2 17. Rev. 22. 4.
II of hearing, Psalm. 51. 8. 81. 8. 85. 8. 143. 8. Luke 8, 8. Rev: 3. 6. 20. 22.
John 10. 3. 4 Heb. 3. 15. III. of tasteing, Psalm. 34. 8. 119 103, Prove. 24. 13.
14. Luke 14. 24. Heb. 6. 45. 1 Pet. 2. 3. IV. of smeling, Cant. 1. 4. 2. 13. 4.
10 11. Hos. ^4, 6. V. of feeling and hanoling* (...) 17. 27. Ephesians. ^4. 19.
Philip. 1. 9^ the words in all knowledge and judgment should be translated in
all knowledge and feeling, for it is (...) 1 John (...). 1. and (...) 5. 14. We
read expressly of the fences, which d^rn between good and evil, In like manner
the things of God themselves are held forth in Scripture, under the names of
sensible things, and which are most taking, pleasant and refreshing unto the
senses, as light fire, water, oil, wine, ointment, honey, marrow and fatness,
bread, flesh, Manna, and many other such like names.

But says the natural man, these are only but metaphors and figures to which I
say albeit, these names be so, yet that hinders not, but that the spiritual
mysteries represented under them, and signified by them, are real and
substantial things, as really affecting the spiritual senses of the spiritual
man, with joy, refreshment and pleasure, as the outward things affect the
natural or animal senses of the natural man. And indeed these outward things
are but figures of the inward and spiritual, which as far exceed and transcend
them in life, glory, beauty, and excellency, as a living body does the shadow,
so that this whole visible world with all the glory of it, is but a shadow in
respect of the spiritual and inward, signified thereby. And no more can a man
know of the glory of this spiritual world and kingdom, while he is in the
unregenerated state, by all that he can hear, or read, or conceive of it, but
the shadow, for he can have no sensation of it self, and all these things in
the outward world, the most excellent of them all, unto which it is likened,
are but its shadow, and a very dark shadow of it, yea and all the Scripture
words, can signify no more unto him, so as to give him any further knowledge,
then of the shadow, for the spiritual things themselves, he cannot reach unto,
when he hears or reads them named, and spoken off, he has no perception of
themselves but of their shadow, for as to themselves, he is blind; deaf, and
senceless, and this state man came into, through his fall, he died as to his
spiritual li^e, he put off the birth, wherewith he was clothed from above, in
which only he had the discerning and enjoyment of the things above, and of the
Lord of them, and when he dyed as to this seed and birth, which was very young
and tender, and not attained unto its confirmation; he loosed his sensation and
feeling of these things, and of God himself, and all his posterity who are not
attained unto the regeneration want this ^ensation and feeling; therefore when
the Lord conversed with men in this state, in order to recover and save them,
he appeared unto them, in a shadowy manner, as all appearances are, both
outward, and inward, which are not in the seed and birth from above and held
forth unto them; the things of the Kingdom of Heaven; under shadows till the
seed should come to be put on, in which the things themselves should be seen,
tasted, felt, and enjoyed. So that all these ways of God's appearing and
revealing himself, in by, or under outward appearances, or in dreams and night
visions were but very shadowy and remote, and rather mediate, then immediate,
Thus alone appearance and revelation of God in his own seed and birth in man,
is the most near, and most immediate; and gives unto man, the most int^itive,
and clear, and open and satisfactory knowledge of God, that he is capable of in
his highest supernatural elevation; so that there is no knowledge nor enjoyment
of God, that the Creature can receive above the seed, nay not the Angels, and
Saints departed this World, only they have a fuller enjoyment, be very much,
but not another in the kind of it, then what is received in the seed and birth
of God. Now as touching these outward apparitions of God, they were most
frequent, under the law, and the times wherein the fathers lived, but more rare
under the times of the Gospel, which holds forth this much, that under the law,
this most noble and most immediate kind of Immediate Revelation in the seed and
birth of God, was the more rare, and less known; for though they had the seed
and it was in the formation in them, yet in most of them, it was not completely
formed, nor brought forth, but as it were in the womb, and under ground, for
the bringing it forth into such manifestation as therein with open face to
behold the glory of the Lord belonged to the more Gospel times that were to
come in the latter days; I call them, the more Gospel times, because there has
been, no age, nor generation, but has had somewhat of the Gospel, and new
covenant dispensation in it, even the darkest time, only it has been in some
ages more manifest then in others* so that under the Law, and first covenant
dispensation, the Gospel was much hid, and what the people knew, or felt of the
glory of the Gospel, as to the General, it was through the vail of types and
shadows, though it might be otherwise as to some who had g^ven them of the
Lord, even under the very times of the Law to behold with open face the very
same glory of the Lord, which the Saints attained unto in the more evangelick
times, but that was by a special privilege and dispensation. And now seeing
the glory of the Lord, does so openly appear, and is so immediately manifested
unto the Saints, in the divine seed and birth, in which also they can know his
mind and will in any thing he pleases to reveal in them after this manner,
therefore have the other manners by outward apparitions much ceased, nor are
they at all needful to continue yet we dare not so limit the Lord, as to say,
he never shall so appear to any, for he may if he please, but it is a thing
that we neither desire, nor expect, his inward appearance and manifestation in
the seed being that, which does abundantly satisfy these, who are come thus to
know him, and converse with him.

Now albeit (as it has been said) that none are partakers of that Immediate
Revelation, which gives as with open face to behold the glory of the Lord in
the light of his countenance and in the manifestation of his love, joy, peace,
friendship, ^and fatherly favor, but those who have attained unto the birth
that is from above, of the immortal and incorruptible seed, yet the^ is a
Revelation end that immediate, in the very seed given forth from God, unto
these, who are not yet born of that seed, even unto all in a day, whereby they
may attain unto that state of being born of it, which is the Revelation of the
wrath and displeasure God against them in the unbegotten state, as therein,
being Children of Wrath and a most manifest demonstration of his anger and
righteous judgment, which works in them as fire to devour the adversary and
though i^ be revealed (...) out any mercy unto the evil, and unrighteous birth,
to which no mercy belongs but judgment and wrath, yet the mind, or soul of
man, is capable of the mercy, and the mercy goes forth in the judgment to
qualify and mitigate it, so that the soul; may be able to endure it. And were
it not because of the mercy that is mixed with the judgment, no wicked
unconverted man could be saved or converted, for the judgment that goes forth
without mercy has the same operation against the soul who is clothed with the
evil birth, as against the birth it self, and that is only to punish, to
torment, to execute vengeance, and to Plague, and Minister wrath, tyibulation,
sorrow, and anguish, which tends unto no repentance, and softning of heart
nor unto any separation betwixt the soul, and it, so as to slay the birth, and
save the soul. (And thus it is with the fallen Angels, and the souls of the
damned, and all these whose day of visitation is over) for this effect has
only the mercy in the judgment, which works to soften, to melt, to bow, and
subject the soul, in true humility unto the Lord, and beget in it a true
willingness and satisfaction, to come under the judgment, and drink this
bitter cup, and be baptized with this fire-baptism, to the end it may be
delivered from the bondage of corruption, which is the body of sin and death,
and may be fitted to put on, the new man, the birth from above of the
incorruptible seed, in which only it can enjoy, and have fellowship with God,
in the love, the peace, the joy, that is unspeakable and full of glory, and
passing understanding. And whereas the mercy goes forth in the judgment,
toward man in the fallen state to recover and convert him, their is also some
secret manifestation thereof unto him, and of the love, compassion, bowels, and
good will of God, that is toward him; which is necessary to be held forth, as
a foundation and ground of his faith and hope, that God will be merciful unto
him, if he but come under the judgment, and permit it in him, to have its
operation of purging and refining. Yet because in the unconverted state, he is
only a child of wrath, and not at all a child of love, but only in a capacity
to become a child, or vessel of the love and mercy of God; therefore does the
wrath most appear, and manifest it self in him, and the mercy and love as a
little seed is shut up as within the wrath and the judgment, which sends
forth (after some wonderfully secret conveyance, some manifestation of it self
their through, which the soul is capable to know as at a distance, and through
the judgment and wrath so that as the Lord remembers mercy-unto lost man, in
the midst of wrath, the poor soul can look at the mercy and discover it in the
midst of the Wrath, but it is so manifested, that it begets in the heart a
most infallible conviction, that the mercy and love, which it discovers, as
at a distance, and in the wrath, cannot at all be enjoyed, and had fellowship
with, as in it self and in such any immediate manner, as the Saints witness,
until the wrath, and the judgment be passed through. This fiery wall must be
climbed, this sea must be swimed over, this gulf must be shot, before this
immediate manifestation and enjoyment of the mercy and love of God, can be
reached unto, which is the heavenly prize, the City of refuge, the land of rest
and peace, on the other side of the lake or (...), and this manifestation of
the mercy and love of God, shining forth as within the vail of the judgment
and condemnation is the gospel, or glad tidings that is preached in every
creature, that is to say, in every man and woman, under heaven, which does
occasion true joy and gladness of heart, in man and woman to arise after a
sort, because of the mercy, love peace and good will of God though not
attained, in the birth that is from above yet attainable. This is that Ark of
the covenant, and the mercy seat, that is hid in the holy of holies, within
the vail where the Gentile or the Stranger cannot enter, nor can any whilst the
first Tabernacle stands, and the vail is not done away, yet the glory thereof
shines forth through the vail as a light in a dark place. And this is it which
makes the ministration of death and condemnation so glorious and acceptable
unto the soul, because it discovers though darkly, and as in great obscurity,
the ministration of life and justification within it, as attainable, and to be
attained, after the other is passed through, and thus it may appear, how great
a difference there is, in the very kind betwixt the immediate revelation, that
the Saints, and begotten of God are capable of, and do enjoy, and the immediate
revelation that the wicked and unbegotten are capable and partakers off. For
the begotten know and enjoy the love and mercy of God immediately, feel, taste
and savor it.

The unbegotten, have an immediate revelation of the wrath and judgment, but
not of the love and mercy, for the love and the mercy is only revealed in them,
immediately through the wrath, and the judgment, that is to say the wrath, and
the judgment intervening and coming betwixt. And that the mercy and love of
God, is only so hiddenly remotely, and darkly to be known unto the soul, in the
unbegotten state, is not only because of the judgment and wrath of God,
intervening, (which hi^dreth it to break forth in the brightness of
manifestation as it does in the Saints) until it be quenched, but also because
of the impotency and inability, of the soul, in that state to apprehend it, for
that it is all over, veiled with the evil and unrighteous birth, and though
within this birth it has the true inward man which is capable to hear, see,
taste of God, and converse with him, in the love immediately were he but
quickened and made alive, yet in the (...) state, this true inward man is dead,
his ear is deafned, his eye blinded, his mouth shut, his tongue bound, and so
also his hands and his feet, through the unrighteous birth, that is in the
dominion therefore man in this state, because of this vail of darkness, which
deadneth and blinds, cannot enjoy the mercy and love of God, nor know it
immediately, yea even when the mercy and love shines through the wrath, and
the judgment, and also peirceth through the birth of unrighteousness, to reach
unto the true inward man, shut up in death, to redeem this lawful captive, and
bring this prisoner out of the pit, to unstop the de^ear, and enlighten the
blind eye, the evil birth does often hinder, and quench, and drive back the
manifestation, and drowneth or swalloweth it up, that the soul cannot take hold
of it, so as to have it, as an a^ding and permanent-object in its v^w, or
observation. but it appears as in a sudden, like a flash of lightning in a
dark night and suddenly again disappeareth, or like unto the spark or glance
cast by the fire struck out of a (...) in the dark for the darknes^ through
which it shines, after its being a little divided, and disclosed, does again
close, and drives it inwards again into its center, and suddenly again it
appears. and suddenly again it disappeareth, because of the contrariety and
stuff, that is betwixt it and the darkness, now that in which the flash, spark
or glance of the love and mercy of God, is apprehended is not the natural man,
which is utterly incapable thereof, but the dead spiritual man, that is a
little rev^ved through the living touch and manifestation. But the judgment
and wrath of God that is revealed as a flaming fire is more able to grapple and
fight with the darkness, and can keep its place longest in the heart, in this
state, yea it is the judgment, which is first brought forth into victory over
transgression, and the Prince of it, and then the mercy shines forth, in great
sweetness, ^eauty, brightness, and majesty, and rejoices over the judgment,
and turns its severity and rigor into the greatest meekness and gentleness,
after all the contrary is expelled, wrought out and destroyed, and then does
the light of the glory of God shine in an unspeakable brightness, in the
purified soul, as a permanent and abiding object so as to dwell and tabernacle
therein, to rest upon the soul, and abide in it, and heir the Kingdom of
righteousness, peace and joy is witnissed, to be of an everlasting and
unchangeable continuance, and the glory of the Lord, so to be arisen, as it
goes down no more, this is the day that has no night, that is endless and
everlasting.

5. Fifthly, By immediate revelation, its being of necessary continuance in the
true Church, or among the true Saints we understand not only immediate
supernatural operations' and influences of the spirit of God in and upon the
mind and understanding of man, which the Schoolmen call revelations ex part
subjecti, i. e. upon the part of the subject, to assist and enable or elevate
the mind, to know and understand savingly, but also such inward manifestations
and appearances, and illuminations and influences as are the very immediate
objects of our mind, which has real sensations and feelings of them, as
aforesaid, in themselves, without the need of words, or any other thing by way
of object to represent them, which the Schoolmen call revelations ex part
objesti, i. e. upon the part of the object. so that a real object, or objects,
are immediately by the Lord set before the mind of man, which he sees and
perceives, when they are presented, and when not, as my outward eye sees when
it is light, or dark, or what is presented in the light, and when it is
presented, and when it is taken away out of my sight, that which is given from
Gods spirit unto man's mind, upon the part of the subject, by way of any help or
assistance to enable it to know, and understand the things of God, as they are
presented under, in or by, or through the scriptures, the Schoolmen call it
medium incognitum assentiendi, an unknown midst of knowing or assenting, it
helps me to know, but I know not it self, in it self, it is not the very object
(say they) of my knowledge, and if it be not the very immediate object of my
knowledge, it is not known, but a hid unknown thing, and so according to them,
the help of Gods spirit, his influence, his concurrence, and coeoperation, his
motion, and praemotion, his lightnings and quicknings, and breathings, and all
his other communications and working, and works in man's mind, are things wholly
sealed, hid, shut up, veiled from, and unknown to the mind in whom they are, it
has no immediate feeling or perception of them, or immediate knowledge of them
more then a tree that grows in the field, and is influenced with the light and
warmth of the Sun, and watered with the rain and dew from heaven, but the tree,
having only the light of vegetation, but not the life of sensation knows not,
what influenceth, or waters it, sees not that glorious heavens that so
bountifully powers down its influences on it, nor has it any sensible taste
or relish of the water that falls on it, and which it drinks in, for its
nourishment, and so knows not (to speak properly) when it is watered, and when
not, when the Sun goes down, and when it rises. Thus it is with the Saints
according to the Schoolmen and national teachers, who because they want the
spiritual senses themselves therefore they deny that the things of God as
aforesaid are objective, that is to say sensible, or perceiveable, in
themselves.

Hence it is, that in the ignorance, blindness, and insensibleness of their
minds, the) query us so much. How know you that you have the spirit of God, how
know you, when he moves you, to speak, pray, or give thanks, how know you that
that refreshment and joy and comfort, which you say, is given you from the
spirit, is true and not a delusion of Satan. And when we answer that we know
the spirit of the Lord in his shinings, warmings, quicknings, waterings, and
refreshings, from and by himself, in his own immediate manifestation in our
hearts, minds and spirits, which have a seeing, hearing, smelling, tasting and
feelling of him, in the divine seed and birth, which has all these sensations
in it, that are infallible, whereby we know that it is he, and not another, the
spiritual senses can discern betwixt good and evil, both in root and branch,
fountain and streams, principle and action, the good spirit from the evil, and
the influence and work of the good, ^om the influence and work of the evil, as
the natural eye can (...) betwixt light and darkness, white and black, or the
natural ear betwixt sounds pleasant and unpleasant, or the natural ta^ betwixt
sweet and bitter or the feeling betwixt hard and soft, rough and smooth. And as
all the natural senses are infallible and cannot err, when the organ is sound,
and he medium fit and suitable, and the object duly proposed, so is it, as
touching the spiritual senses, which are also infallible, touching their
objects, when they are duly proposed, through a fit medium, upon, or unto a
sound organ. Now the Organ is the civine feed and birth aforesaid, which if
nothing of the evil and contrary Nature lie too near to hurt it, will do its
office and discover the things proposed most clearly and distinctly the medium
or midst is that pure heavenly Air breath, or spirit, which proceeds from the
Lord, in which his pure light shines forth into a most perfect manifestation of
what is proposed, wherein also the pure heavenly and divine voice or sound of
the spirit of God, which does wonderfully and unspeakably refresh quicken and
comfort, it formed, and conveyed into the spiritual ear, and all the objects,
whither of the spiritual sight, or hearing, or tasting or feeling or ^elling,
are proposed and presented by the Lord himself, in the seed, who is also the
most noble and glorious object and does give an objective manifestation of
himself, to be seen, heard, and tasted of, in such a manner, as is inutterable
and never entered into man's heart to conceive, but God has revealed it unto us
by his spirit.

Now these who deny objective manifestations, revelations and proposals, will
not receive this answer nor can they to long as they abide in their opinion,
which is, that these things aforesaid are not objective in themselves, and so
are not sensible, or feelable, nor can men have a feeling, or tasting of them,
but there are some among the people who are ashamed of this answer of the
priests, and affirm against them with us, that the power, virtue, spirit light
and life of God, may be seen, felt, relished and tasted of in it felf, no less
then the natural virtue of natural things, as of spices, flowers, ointments,
wine and bread, light and warmth can be felt and descerned to the natural
senses. Now if any grant that the things aforesaid, and the divine power,
virtue, light, life, and spirit of God, can in itself be felt, and tasted of,
that it is sensible by or unto the spiritual mind, such must also grant, that
it is objective, for because it is objective, therefore it is sensible, or may
be felt, as because outward light and colors are objective, therefore they are
visible, or I can see them, and because an outward sound is objective,
therefore it is audible, and I can hear it, and so of the rest, for what ever
is objective is sensible, and whatever is sensible, feelable, or perceiveable
in it self is objective, but what is not objective is not feelable, cannot be
felt, tasted, favored. And so if the Lord himself be not objectively manifest
in us, he cannot be seen, nor heard, nor tasted, nor felt, and thus it is
according to the School men and national teachers doctrine, who generally being
men void of all sense and feeling of God have in the blindness of their minds,
and in the wisdom from below, that is carnal earthly and divilish, framed and
invented this perverse doctrine for their own gains and ends, that all seeing,
and hearing of God himself; or immediate converse with him, by object ve
manifestations is not a thing to be expected, as being ceased, and never given
as a general privilege unto the Saints; but only unto some particular persons
by way of special privilege and extraordinary, and some who have both seen and
tasted the things of God in themselves, in some small measure, have been
staggered through their leaning more unto the false Doctrine of their teachers,
in this thing, then unto their own felt and known experience, whereby (I am
persuaded) some contrary to what they have s^en heard, tasted and felt from the
presence and appearance of God in themselves, have denied objective Immediate
Revelation, and used that distinction with others, of subjective, or effective,
and objective revelations, affirming the effective and subjective only to
remain, but denying the objective.

This distinction I find not only used by Robert Baron, an Episcopal man; who
some years ago professed to teach Theology, in the City of Aberdeen who in his
book entitled Apodixis Catholica de formali objecti fidei, treats of it at
large, and calls the revelation, ex part subjesti medium incognitum, as
aforesaid, but that ex part objecti, medium cognitum, a known midst, Tract. 9,
Anth. Dup. puncto 2. number. 14. 14. 15. and p. 6. number. 5. 6. But also I find it
made use off by George Gillespie a man famous in the Presbyterian way, in his
book of miscellanies cap. 21. page 261. And the national Teachers to day, both
Episcopal and Presbyterial much use it, affirming all objective manifestations
of the very truths of the Gospel, and essentials of religion to be ceased, and
no otherway to be objectively revealed, but by the Scriptures outward
Testimony, so that but as a man bears such and such word of Scripture in his
mind, and is exercised in the thinking, meditating, and turning them over and
over in his mind, at such and such times he only has the actual knowledge of
God, but if he should come to such a stilness and silence of mind, as not to
think upon scripture words, and turn them over in his mind, or not to have the
eye of his understanding fixed upon them, in that time he should have no actual
knowledge of God, or any of the things of his kingdom, because they are the
alone objective manifestations of the things of God, and of God so if they be
out of view, they can know nothing actually, as when the object is removed out
of my sight, I cannot see it, and if it be removed out of the view of my mind.
I cannot remember it. We on the contrary affirm, and I affirm it from the
manifold and blessed experience given me thereof from God, and many are
witnesses with me in this matter, to the stopping the mouths of all
gainsayers, that God himself, his power, virtue light, life and spirit, his
truth, his goodness, holiness, rightteousness, his beauty and glory is prelent
in us by way of object, is objectively manifest, so that he can be heard, seen,
tasted and felt, if all scripture words were out of our present remembrance, so
that if we had not one scripture expression in our veiw, to mind it, or turn it
up and down in our minds, we could feel and enjoy the Lord, and have fellowship
with him, whose eternal life, virtue and power is present, as a most glorious
object in us, so that if we retain this object, God in our knowledge, in our
mind in our feeling, in the seed and birth of his own sowing and begetting in
us, and all words should be let pass, so as not at that time to mind them we
should have, and often have had a true knowledge, and enjoyment of God, even
beyond what ever any words could contribute unto us, yet we despise not words;
nay we dearly esteem and value them as a sweet and precious testimony, of the
eternal life, from which they came; but then only do we feel and find the
sweetness and comfort of them, when the same eternal life, which first breathed
them forth, does either again breath or speak them forth in us, or sends
forth of his living and powerful influences into them, as they have a place in
our minds, or memories, which when that life withdraws its influences from
them, though they remain in our minds, they are but as an empty vessel, which
we cannot make use off for our refreshment, till the life again open, and send
forth of its living streams into them, so, but as the life influenceth them, we
lay them by, out of our very thoughts, for we find it to hurt and weaken and
deaden us, to think any thoughts, even from the Scriptures, but as the life and
spirit of God influenceth and concurreth, so that we still are for putting the
Scripture in such a close conjunction, with the life and spirit from which they
came; that we may not, nor dare not make use of the Scripture, but in the life
and spirit, as that opens, and influenceth, so that we are not for separating
the letter, from the spirit. or the words from the word and life, but for
conjoyning them, these only separate the letter or the words of the spirit from
the spirit, who make use of them, so as to think, or speak them, otherwise then
in the openings and influencings, breathings and living communications of the
spirit, who think or speak the spirits words, not in the spirit of the Lord but
in their own spir^t, which we dare not, nor ought not to do, and if at any time
we do it we find our selves rebuked and chastised by the Lord therefore.

But now though we limit, bind up, and tie the words of the Scripture, unto the
Spirit, so as not to use them, but in and by the spirit, yet we may not bind
up, limit, tie and confirm the spirit, within such narrow bounds, as the
Scripture word, nay nor within any words whatsomever. so as if we could not
enjoy the spirit of the Lord, nor feel, nor taste, nor savor of his divine
power, and virtue, but in or by words, for the power and virtue of Gods spirit
can be felt, savoured and tasted in it self, without all words, and depends not
on words in order to its being tasted and felt, more then spices, perfumes, or
ointments depends on words to make them to be felt sme'led, or savoured, so
that the manifestation of the sweetness and sweet savor of the life and
spirit, depends on no words but the manifestation of the words depends on the
spirit which have no glory nor sweetness, nor refreshment, but what the spirit
makes manifest in them, through his shinings, breathings, quicknings, and
living communications.

6. Sixthly, And whereas a great part of the controversy, betwixt our
adversaries and us, touching this matter of Immed ate Revelation, does relate
unto that of infallibility, they affirming, that none in these our days are
led, assisted and guided, in what they think, speak, write, or do, by an
infallible spirit, so as that the spirit is to be tasted, or leaned into, in
his own inward manifestation, alone, and without any outward testimony, if
their were no outward, to stand by it, or where the outward is, yet to prefer
the inward unto it, as more evident and manifest unto us in whom it is given, I
find it with me, in a few words to open this also, and state the controversy
touching this thing of infallibility.

Now when we affirm that we are taught and led infallibly, and think, speak,
write, or do infallibly, we understand it not, promiscuously, and in that
latitude, as if in every thing, whither we act in the spirit of the Lord, or
not in his spirit, but in our own, we did act think speak, or write infallibly,
nor do we affirm, that there is such a close and near conjunction, as yet made
up betwixt the spirit of the Lord and us, as if in nothing we could act; in a
disjunction from the spirit, but should find such a powerful constraint, and
bounding of our spirits in all things whatsomever, within the leadings, and
assistings of the spirit of God, that we could not act or do things alone, in
our own spirit, yea and in a wrong spirit, for we do freely acknowledge, that
such is our state and condition, as we are capable to run out and both think,
speak, write and do things, that are not only not infallible, but may be very
wrong and false, yea whatever we do in our own spirit, in a disjunction from
the immediate manifestation and coeoperation and assistance of Gods spirit, we
ought to suspect it, and judge it fallible, and so not at all to lean to it in
more, or less, but this we say, whatever we think, speak, write or do, in the
spirit of God his immediate manifestation, and coeoperation in us, as we are
sound in conjunction therewith is infallible, and what the seed and birth of
God in us judges, or discerns, or does, that is ever infallible, the eye of
the seed always sees infallibly, its ear always hears infallibly, its hand
always acts infallibly, its foot treads every step of its way infallibly,
and if we see, hear, act and walk in it, and with it, we are so far, and no
further nfallible, so that this infallibility as it relates unto the seed,
birth and spirit of God, is absolute, but as it relates unto us is limited and
conditional, and is rather a possibility, of not being deceived, then an
impossibility of being deceived And it is the gross and woeful ignorance of
people, touching the nature of this divine seed, and birth and its sensations
which (...) gives unto man, of divine things, that occasions them to think
infallibility, such an impossible thing, for they are so sunk down into the
natural principles of the animal and humane life, that they apprehend not a
higher principle to be in the very Saints as a substantial living birth giving
unto that mind which is clothed with it, true and real tensations of divine
and spiritual objects, and seeing they know no other principles but the two
inferior, one animal, or brutal, and the other humane, or natural to man, as a
man, which cannot reach to divine and supernatural things as in themselves, it
is no wonder they account infallibility such a hard and impossible thing but if
they did once but apprehend or conceive ought of this divine birth, as a
substantial principle giving unto man as real sensation and feelings of divine
and supernatural things, as the outward substantial natural birth gives him of
outward things, or as the principle of his own natural understanding gives him
an infallible natural knowledge of things naturally intel igible, whereof there
are many instances in the Sciences of the Mathematics and Metaphysics so
called they could the more easily at least be convinced of this thing of
infallibility, that such had an infallible knowledge of God, and this
requirings, and leadings and the things of his kingdom, who have attained unto
this divine substantial supernatural birth, to see, taste and feel divine, and
supernatural objects therein, for if the Animal principle be infallible in
respect of its obj^ct, which it sees, hears, smells, tastes and fee's, and if
the humane principle, or natural understanding be infallible in respect of its
objects, as in the sciences before said, which is by all acknowledged, then it
could not be denied, but that the divine and supernatural birth and principle
which gives unto man's mind by way of Organ, as of seeing, hearing, tasting,
etc. The spiritual and supernatural knowledge of spiritual and supernatural
objects is no less, if not more infallible at least more evident in respect of
its objects, but this is the loss, they conceive not aright of this seed and
birth, nor do they acknowledge any other operations in the mind of man,
touching God and spiritual things, but what are mere mental abstractions, but
deny all spiritual sensations of spiritual objects, properly so called, for
this were to acknowledge immediate objctive reve^ations, which they so much
oppose and contradict.

7. Seventhly, I find another great mistake among our adversaries in this
matter touching immediate revelation, and the teachings of Gods spirit, as if
thereby we did understand such a dispensation, as excludes and shuts out the
service and usefulness of all means, and instruments whatsomever, whether books
or men. Now for the removing of this prejudice, and clearing us in this matter,
I find it in my heart, to add somewhat to this purpose. It is not the
usefulness of outward means, that our testimony is against, but such as an
absolute indispensible neccessity of them, as if without them, no knowledge of
God, nor fellowship with him could be had. Indeed we have often known, and do
know the usefulness of means or instruments, and have found much comfort
through them, and there is a real suitablness, and aptness in means to
beserviceable in conveying the influences and communications of the life and
spirit of God into our bosoms, which he pours forth through them into us, at
times, when he pleases and makes them as conduit pipes to transmit them unto
those to whom they are given, these are the golden pipes, which convey the
golden oil, mentioned in Zechary. And we are p^rswaded of it, that it is a
great offense against God, for any of never so high attainment on earth, though
come to possess never so near and immediate fel^owship with the Lord, to flight
and reject the service of any mean, though never so mean or small, which the
Lord appoints unto them, for the Lord will be absolute, and sovereign, and
free in the communications of himself, his life, power, will and council unto
men, so as to dispense these his heavenly blessings unto them, either with
means, and through them, or without them, according to his good pleasure, and
we find that sometimes he uses outward means, and sometimes he uses them not,
but coveyeth unto us, from and through his own feed and birth in us, the living
manifestations and communications of his life, will and council, many, yea most
times without all means, or instruments from without for most times we are
left alone as to instruments or means without us, but as we abide faithful with
God, he abides with us always, and we are never left alone as to him, for in
him we live, move, and have our being, even as to our spiritual life, which can
no more subsist without his living communications and inbreathings, or
inspirations, than our natural life can subsist without A^. The benefit that
the Lords people find in one another, as instruments unto one another for good,
for their mutual refreshment, quickening, strengthening, and edification. makes
their very outward fellowship and meeting together very acceptable and
desirable, when it may be had in the will of the Lord, yea fellowship with the
Saints is the next desirable thing, unto fellowship with God. Wherefore we
cannot but acknowledge a great usefulness in instruments from without but we
may not overvalue them, so as to set them up in Gods room; as if we could not
live without them, the Lord himself is become the life of his people, he is in
them, (in that which is of his own sowing, planting and begeting in them) an
everlasting fountain and well spring of life and refreshment, opening and
shutting according to his good pleasure, and communicating unto man of himself,
through his own seed and birth, sometime through the seed in a man's own vessel,
and sometime through the seed in an other man's vessel, so that the seed and
birth of life it self, in the vessel is the greatest and most principal, and
absolutely necessary mean and instrument of conveying life unto man, and the
vessel at best is but the secondary and subordinate mean or instrument, which
can do nothing, but as the life opens in the seed and conveyes it streams and
influences their through. Now here is wisdom (which only the Lord gives) to
know the time, means, and instruments, (for many things are called means that
are not so (and these only are the true means, which are off the Lord, his
choosing and fitting, as also to know when they are serviceable, and that is
only when he uses them, and causes his eternal life to spring forth and break
through them: they are but as vessels and conduits which can conveigh no
liquor, nor water, but such as is poured forth into them, nor may they
conveigh, but what is given to them to spare, as the overflowings of their own
cup, and it is to no purpose, nor doteh it any good but hurt, and is idolatry
for any man to run to use the mean, though it be of Gods own choosing and
fitting, when the Lord does not use it, appears not in it pours not forth
in it, of his living streams, It is even as if an hungry man should sit down at
a covered table that has no meat set on, or as a thirsty man should put an
empty flagon, or cup, or conduit to his head, which fills his belly with
wind, instead of drink if he suck at it, now when the Lord appears in any
mean or instrument, and shines through it, sends forth of his living
communications their through unto others, such a way of communication, though
it be through a means yet this hinders it, not in a true sense to be immediate,
because the mean h^ir is transmitting, and not intermitting, and the
transmitting mean hinder not the immediateness of the communicatione, but only
the intermiting, as when, light, sounds and shapes of visible things come to
our eyes through and by the means of the air etc. This hinders not our vision to
be immediate, and so if the light and life of God shine through any means, or
instruments unto us for our refreshment, we receive it no less immediately,
then if we had it without al outward means whatsoever, but these who minister
not immediately from the immediate communication of life in their own hearts,
are no true means, can do us no good, for they cannot minister and transmit the
communications of life, who have it not in themselves, such are but wells
without water, and clouds without rain,

George Keith,

The second Part, God speaking in man by the word proceeding immediately from
his own mouth.
THis being the main and chief principle (together with that other, that Jesus
Christ the light of the world, does enlighten every man that comes in o the
world, according to John. 1. 9. whereby man heeding this manifestation of light
that comes from him and following it in its drawings, movings, and requirings,
and giving up to be led thereby he may come into the true and saving knowledge
of God, and of his son, and holy spirit) not only professed but witnessed and
professed by us the people of the Lord, in d^rision called Quakers, wherein we
differ, as from the many religions and professions abroad, so from that which
is professed by the people of these three Nations, and generally from all the
so called protestant reformed Churches and professors, and teachers, as they
stand at this day (though the primitive Protestants in some measure owned it)
and they all one and an other of them (but more especially the Teachers, and
Ministers, and Bishops so called) so stiffly and furiously opposing it, and the
assertors, and witnesses thereof to the stirring up of the Rulers, and powers
of the earth to persecute them, with prisoning, banishment, and other cruel
usages, and spoiling of their goods, and the people through the instigation of
their Teachers, who falsely in many things report us not only cruely mock, and
revile us but many of them fall a beating and buffeting of us for the truths
fake, and in love and compassion to their souls, and in the fear and will of
the Lord I am drawn to give my Testimony concerning this, and to hold forth to
the people the Truth and ne^y (...) (...) demonstrating it (in so far forth as,
words may be serviceable thereto) according to the measure of knowledge I have
received from the Lord concerning this thing, That our persecutors (such of
them who through the ignorance that is in them oppose us, being informed, and
convinced of this truth, by the light of Christ which shines in their
consciences (in the darkness) which will not fa^ to testify and witness to the
truth of my testimony herein, may cease any further cruel using of us, least
they be found fighters against God, and cause the innocent to suffer which the
righteous judge of the world will not suffer to pa^ unrevenged, and for the
sake of the poor people of this Nation ^or indeed for want of the knowledge of
the unsearchable riches of Christ) who are as lost sheep going astray upon the
barren mountains, whether their shepherds have driven them in this cloudy dark
day, or rather night, of thick Egyptian darkness wherewith they are so blinded
in their minds, that they are past feeling of God his heavenly power and virtue
the only true food of their souls, the only true pasture and fold of rest,
their resting place. which the most of them never knew, and such who at any
time, have known any thing of it have forgotten it. Oh what a let^argie has
overtaken them who have so long and so much professed the name of Jesus Christ,
among whom there have been some, who in some measure sometime a day could
feelingly and experimentally speak of what God had done in their souls, what
Christ had wrought in them, could ^ell of sweet hours of fellowship and
communion with him, his coming into their souls, and supping with them, and
they with him, his revealing the bid, invisible, in comprehensible,
(inconceivable to the natural understanding) glory of his love, and shedding it
abroad in their souls, speaking in them, words o^ l^e, words of power, living
words, spirit and life, inutterable, impossible to be expressed* speaking as
never (...) (...) spoke or could speak, could they have any satisfaction but in
his presence, his life giving countenance but in the voice of their beloved,
could it content them to hear man speak, when their beloved spoke not? was it
not a burden unto them to hear or read what God had wrought in them, but as the
living voice of the beloved of their souls did accompany, and witness afresh
these things in them, causing their hearts to burn and earn with in them, he
opening in them the Scriptures, opening their understandings, how did their
hearts burn, with coals of Love kindled at the fountain, God who is love, how
did their hearts leap for joy, at the sound of his voice, how were there bowels
moved in them, when he spoke, how did the handles of the lock drop with sweet
smelling myrrh: when they rose up to open to their beloved, how could they
discern, when he spoke, It is the voice of my beloved (could they say) that
speaks unto me, arise my beloved, my fair one, and come away.

Such and the like experiences as we read that the people of the Lord witnessed
in the Scriptures, so could some who have lived in this Nation, and perhaps
some yet living witness the same also, and could have said A men to the truth
of all these things, but alas, alas, into what a dead sleep, and let^argie, are
they fallen which has so stupefied and benumbed them, that they are become past
feeling of these sweet experiences, how has the thick darkness, whereinto they
are fallen, and are sunk, so choked them, and quite wiped out the true
remembrance of these things, they have so forgot them, as if they had never
known them, and now they are turned with the sons of Belial to mock at these
things, calling them fancy, delusion, imagination, melancholy, some
hypochondriack humor, a spirit of witcherie: and delusion, and to persecute
them who witness this blessed dispensation of life and glory, (though in a more
steady and fuller manner and measure) and to (...) the servants and Ministers
thereof, with the ^me of deceivers, and false Prophets, oh, oh* how have ye
fallen from heaven to earth, how are ye sunk into the pit; wherein there is no
^ater, how have ye lost your glory turned your glory into shame, and followed
after lying vanities, how have ye suffered your selves to be ^ulled a sleep in
the whores lap, with her bewitching v^ who has cut your Locks, wherein your
strength lay, (...) (...) it is departed from you, and the Philistines mock
you, having put out your eyes, and you are become a hissing and reproach to
day, and yet ye will not cease to reproach, you are spoiled your selves, and
yet ye will not cease to spoil, the enemy is getting his will of you, to the
causing of you shrink from your cause, ye have lost your ground, ye have
thought shame of your cause, that which by you was called the cause of God, the
Covenant and oath of God, the work, and interest, and concernment of Jesus
Christ, ye have left it at your heels, and the most of you trampled on it, and
now ye fret, and rage, because ye are provoked to jealousy by a people that
are no people, poor and despiseable in this world, but rich and honorable with
God unto whom the Kingdom is given, it is taken from you, for that ye have not
brought forth the fruits worthy of it, and it is given unto them, a Kingdom
which is righteousness, peace, and joy in the holy Ghost, and heavenly Kingdom,
that cannot be shaken, wherein these despiseable ones stand in the Lambs power,
and reign in victory, and dominion in the midst of their sufferings as Kings
and Princes unto God, over all the cruelty, and persecution of their opposers,
and now ye are joining issue with them against us, whom ye looked upon, and
dealt with them as your enemies, and called them the enemies of God, limbs of
Antichrist, Antichristian, ye have associated with them, become one body and
Church with them, plead for their Ministry and Worship, that at least if it be
not so good as ye would desire, yet its lawful, and better then to want all,
and ye go and hear such men up and down the Land, whom ye know to have dealt
perfidiously, and treacherously for their filthy lucres sake, and ye are
generally convinced that they are but time servers, wicked and bad, ye are now
openly and avowedly come to plead for a wicked ministry, that such who are
natural men, and wicked may be Ministers of Christ, and ought to be heard,
followed, and maintained, and such whom the Lord has sent forth to Minister, in
the power of his life, and spirit, ye call deluders Fanatics and the like, oh,
oh, remember the day, call to mind the time when your souls ^oathed such
Ministers, and ye would travel many miles from one remote corner of the nation
to another, to hear a man who could speak lively to your souls, in
demonstration of the spirit, and of power, then there was in you a measure of
pure discerning, whereby ye could favor the man of God, and distinguish the
formal, dry withered cold, and dead preacher, from the living, and all his
painted fine good words could not deceive you,) e had then a mouth, a sense
that could taste words, as meat, and such ye would follow and hear, who could
speak from and Minister of the power and spirit of life, the Ministers of the
Letter, the dead formal preacher, who could chant and talk the Scripture words,
and steal from other men's lines the good words made ready to their hand, ye
could not away with, they were loathsome and burdensome unto you, but
now-having lost the discerning, these ye can follow, and maintain them. And
such, who deny them ye call denyers of the Ministers of Christ, a standing
Ministry, and yet when it was better with you then it is now ye denied them,
and many a day cried in good earnest of your souls to God, that he would remove
them, and whip out of his house such buyers, and sellers, and purify, and
purge the sons of Lev, how cried ye out, and breathed to the Lord for, a
spiritual Ministry, a Gospel Ministry, a powerful Ministry, and now when its
come, and coming ye oppose it and bend your force to keep it down, oh foolish
people, and unthankful do ye thus requite the Lord, return, return, from whence
ye are fallen, repe^rand do you first works, turn to the Lord the fountain of
living waters, from whom ye have deeply revolted, cease, cease from the broken
Cisterns, ye have hewed out unto your selves, drink no more at the pudled
waters, the dead waters, which who so drinks off dye, they are dead because
not freshly issuing and springing from the fountain of life, if ye will return,
come, and walk in the light of the Lord with us, O house of Jacob, O ye lost
scattered sheep, who have been driven from the fold of rest, the sweet,
pleasant green pasture of your souls, the still running waters, the pure sweet
Christaline river of life, that issues fresh in living streams from the
fountain it self, Lo every one that thirsts come unto the waters and drink
wihout Money and price that your souls may live, for of a truth, the Lord God
his opened unto us the fountain, a vein of life, a wellspring of life a well of
living water has he revealed in us, who have believed in his light, and
hearkened to his voice, which cried in our hearts many a day, saying in us turn
ye, turn ye, why will ye die, turn ye at my reproof and behold I will pour ou^
my spirit upon you, this is the well of living water the gift of God, which who
so drinks off, will never any more drink or thirst to drink of these dead
waters, that is the good words, uttered from a dead killing spirit, the waters
of the Whore on which she sits, and holds forth this cup of fornications, unto
the inhabitants of the earth, whereby they are made drunk, bewitched, and
killed, for her lips drops as an honey comb, and her mouth is smoother then Oil,
but her end (the breath and spirit of her mouth, from which the words proceed,
and which accompanies them) is bitter as Wormw^od, and sharper then a two Prove.
5. 2. and 3.
edged Sword, to kill and destroy that of the Lords begetting, and starving of
it, but to the edifying, feeding and building up of the false birth, Babilons
brats, which are not to live, but to be starved and dye, and happy are they who
takes them and dasheth them against the stones. And now I say for your sake, O
ye, my ki^olk according to the flesh, my little Sister who has no breasts*
(...) scattered sheep who have no pasture for your souls, but that which
feeds death, and makes you live in the earthly corrupt principle, which is
the Serpents meat, that if by any means I may provoke some of you, and be
serviceable (as a mean in the Lords hand, who am nothing of my self) unto you
that ye may return unto the Bishop and Shepherd of your Souls, I am drawn in
the tender love of God to write unto you concerning this principle, to wit,
Jesus Christ revealed and revealing in man, God, and the things of his Kingdom,
even these veins and passages of li^, which runs through Paradise the City of
God, wh^ streams make glad every inhabitant thereof, who because of this can
sit and sing, God is our refuge, we will not fear, though the earth be removed
and cast into the midst of the Sea, God is known for a refuge in her palaces
she is beautiful for Situation, the joy of the whole earth is and shall be
Mount Sion, on the sides of the North, the City of the great King, (...) it
must be he alone even this great King, who must open an eye in you, by the
revelation of himself, where by ye can behold the glorious Mountain of his
Holiness, on which his City Jerusalem from above is built, where a feast of fat
things full of marrow, of wines on the Lees well refined is given to all who
enter thereinto the vultures eye, the eye of the natural understanding, that
eye which now sees, cannot see it, and the path thereunto is short from all
living, in the natural, earthly corrupt principle, and it must be the Light of
Christ that can only open the true eye, to see this blessed path of Life, which
if ever ye know, it must be known alone by Immediate Revelation and
manifestation of Christ in you.

And it were a great step in its p^ace for you to be convinced of this, that it
must be so, And for this cause this is written to the simple hearted, who are
willing to see, and loves to know the truth, that ye being convinced by sound
reason, and it being demonstrated to you that there is such a thing among the
Lords people, and must be; and that there is no other way to know God, or the
mysteries of his Kindom, but as this ^ey of knowledge (which your teachers take
from you) viz. Jesus Christ revealed in you, opens them up, then ye may be
brought to wait for this glorious dispensation, which many thousands can truly
witness is come, and I in my measure testify hereto, even the Kingdom come,
with power and great glory (and more abundantly coming, in the Revelation and
appearance of Jesus Christ the second time unto salvation, and we are made to
sing that song, Isay 25. 9. (...) this is our God, he is come, he is come, we
have waited for him, he is clothed with the gar^nts of Salvation, we will be
glad and r^yce in him. We will remember his love more then Wine, 1. Ca^* And
further the usefulness of this principle concerning Immediate Revelation, and
the spirit of Prophecy yet remaining, and to remain a standing, perpetual,
indispensible, necessary, ordinance of God i^ the true Church, being
demonstrated will appear, seeing it is the hinge and foundation of all the
other weighty differences, betwixt these of the national way and us, for this
principle being asserted and demonstrated to be of indispensible necessity, in
the church, and the grand and main ordinance, the foundation, ordinance of all
the other ordinances so much cried up in opposition to this, the foundation of
the true Church, Ministry, Worship, etc. Then will it appear, that these who
deny, and manifestly oppose this principle, and the assertors of it, whatever
be there pretenses, are no church of Christ, but Babylon, and their Ministers,
no true Ministers of Christ, but her Merchants, and their worship no true
worship but Idolatry, and consequently that our separating from their Church,
Ministry, and Worship, is justifiable, and we ought to separate therefrom as we
would escape the Plagues that are to be poured forth, on Babylon, and all who
seek to uphold her.

And now I proceed to the Arguments or reasons, tending to demonstrate what is
asserted, and though the earthly carnal mind, which ever accounted the way and
wisdom of God, foolishness, fancy, and madness; will account all that can be
said for it light, frivolous, and inconsequential, yet I am assured of it that
it shall have weight with them, who have any the true Nobility of understanding
and it shall reach the seed and principle of God in their consciences, and
hereto I shall be made manifest, and the arguments brought shall be of force,
for I have not fetched them from my own wisdom, neither has it taught me them,
but in the measure of the heavenly wisdom given me of God have I learned them,
and though I cite Scriptures, and make use of them in arguing this point, yet I
can truly say it I have not my knowledge therefrom, neither shall I dare to use
striving words any further, then the things by them declared in some measure
are opened in my understanding, and interpreted unto me from that spirit of
truth, which gave them forth, and this gives me aright to speak and make use of
them.

Argument. 1. There is no other way to God, but by the Revelation of his son,
he dwells in the light inaccessible, which the mortal or natural understanding
cannot approach unto clouds and darkness are round about him, he fills all
things, but is apprehended by nothing, but that which comes from himself, is
begotten of himself, and leads unto himself, the eye of flesh cannot see God,
neither can it see any thing which is beyond its sphere, the earthly can only
apprehend the earthly, nothing can reach further then its proper object,
wherewith it is bounded and limited.

Now God is not the object of the eye of flesh (I do not mean the bodily eye,
this is as incapable hereof as that) the carnal mind the natural man, the eye
and understanding in man, which can judge of things earthly, and pass a true
judgment upon them, and have a certain infallible knowledge of them in the
capacity it is placed in, and can be wi^e as to these things, and find out many
secret things in nature and demonstrate them sufficiently to a man's
understanding, yet this is blind in respect of God it cannot know him with the
true knowledge, when it stretches it self to know him; it is confounded and
dashed more then if the bodily eye would set it self to look upon the Sun, it
is blinded with his beams, and yet it will be meddling, and trying, and
searching into this mystery, but it cannot by searching find out God, he dwells
in any other principle then it can reach unto (and nothing can reach beyond its
principle) he dwells in the light, here is his habitation, and therefore in the
light he can only be known, that can only reveal him, and it is somewhat begot
of the light the child of light, which has its element, its habitation, its
principle in the light, which can see; and understand God and know him, this is
that which Christ taught himself in the days of his flesh and is recorded in
Scriptures, no man knows the Father save the Son, and he to whom the Son
reveals him, Matthew 11. 27. Now if any should object and say he means an
outward Revelation, a mediate not Immediate Revelation, this will be manifestly
confuted by what is said already, and is yet to be said, for that you call the
outward or mediate Revelation, write words spoken from without, though the best
of words uttered from Christ in the days of his flesh, or from any of the
Apostles, or Prophets, and yet recorded in the Scriptures, cannot reveal the
Father, nor the Son either, they point only at that which reveals, and were
spoken and write for that end, that people might come to the principle of true
knowledge in themselves, for first let us begin with Moses he was a man sent of
God, and of Christ, he was inspired with the holy spirit, Christ spoke in him
to the people of the Jews, and all these words could not reveal God, nor his
Son unto them the vail hung before Moses face, and remains upon their hearts to
this day in the reading of Moses words, and by this vail their minds are
blinded, then come down to the Prophets, who were sent of God, come to David,
to Isaiah the evangelical Prophet so called, who had very clear and glorious
discoveries of God, and his Son Jesus Christ, yet could their words reveal God
unto the people of the Jews, or can they at this day? no the vail remains, then
come to Jesus Christ himself who spoke to them in the days of his flesh face
to face, did his words reveal him, or his Father unto them, did they not
mistake him for all this, he stood in the midst of them, and they knew him not,
for their eyes were held, were blinded, and thorough their ignorance they
crucified him the Lord of glory, but could the Apostles words reveal him
either? nay, for they continued blind, and persecuted them unto death, as
deceivers and blasphemers, the god of this world have blinded that eye in them,
which could know the glorious appearance of him either in the days of his
flesh, or in his spiritual appearance in his people, So then it is clear
neither any of the Prophets or Apostles, though they were lights, yet they were
not that light, but were sent to bear witness of that light, which is the light
of the world, and lights every man that comes into it, that by believing in
the light he may know God, and be saved, for God wills all men to be saved,
and to come to the knowledge of the truth, and Christ said, it is expedient for
you that I go away, else the comforter will not come even the spirit of truth
whom I will send, and he will lead you into all truth, and bring things to your
remembrance, and give you wisdom and knowledge and power, that all your enemies
shall not be able to resist, and this spirit was to furnish and back them in
their Ministry, else they had never gained such ground upon the world, when I
am ascended said he, I will draw all men after me, and this spirit they
witnessed sent into their hearts, teaching them what and how to speak, and what
they declared unto the people inwards from the spirit of Life of Jesus Christ
revealed in them the same spirit, and answered and testified to the truth of
these things in their hearers, that was it which convinced the world, of sin,
righteousness, and judgment, that was it which made them manifest to be of God
made them manifest in the consciences of their hearers, thorough the
manifestation of the truth, Christ the truth the spirit of truth, they were
commended or approved to every man's conscience in the sight of God, and if they
or their Gospel was hid, it was to them whose minds were blinded who were past
feeling of the spirit of God which convinces, reproves, demonstrateth, and
makes manifest, and on such their words could get no ground, but they*
persecuted, and opposed them, as fools; and mad men, so by that, is said you
may understand, that word ^even the best, cannot give the knowledge of God, and
though Christ in the days of his flesh taught them many things, yet how were
they hid from them, they were even very ignorant of many weighty things, and
could not then receive them, or bear them, at have many things said he; that ye
cannot bear as yet, but when the spirit, the comforter shall come, he shall
teach you all things, and lead you into all truth, and be with you for ever,
and when this spirit was poured forth, then their narrow understandings were
opened and enlarged to know these things which formerly they could not bear,
nor receive, whereby it may appear sufficiently to any man or men of true
understanding, that the outward Revelation or discovery by words spoken from
without of Christ or any of his Disciples or Apostles cannot reveal the Father
nor the Son, for if it was i^ot sufficient to the Church his bodily presence,
his reaching them outwardly by word of month, face to face, but he said (...)
was exp^ that he should go away from them, and he would send another teacher
who would do greater things, and more manifestly, and glor^ously reveal unto
them God and the things of his Kingdom, if Christ's bodily presence in his flesh
was not sufficient of it self, to minister though he spoke as never man spoke,
lies I say if, this ministration was not sufficient, but a more glorious they
were to expect, and as they waited they witnessed, it fulfiled, and come unto
them, then far^less is the outward ministration of any other man, or men
whomsoever sufficient for that effect for if Christ be not any more to be known
after the flesh, much less any other man, nor is their knowledge they can
receive from any other man to be rested in, seeing the knowledge of Christ
after the flesh was not sufficient nor to be rested in, but they were to look
for a better, a more clear, and full manifestation in themselves, he appearing
in a spiritual glorious, heavenly, misterious way in their hearts, even such a
way as the world cannot know him, or receive him, which made Indas (not
Iscaeriot) to wonder and question him saying, how is it that thou will manifest
thy self unto us, and not unto the world.

And it will yet further appear how insufficient words, (even the best of
words, Scripture words, though there were as many books of Scripture as the
^hole world could contain) are to reveal or to give the knowledge of God unto
man, many, yea the most of things natural, and created cannot be understood of
or by words, words being but figures, emblems, signs and representations of
things, come always short of the things themselves, (unless they be lying
words, which go beyond the truth, and these come far shorter, and the knowledge
they can give is but false, and a lie) what words can give a man the true and
sufficient knowledge of the Sun, can the best Orator tell a blind man, what the
Sun is, what these pleasant and beautiful colors of his bearas are which makes
the Rainbow, thorough the refraction of a cloud dissolving into Rain, can they
describe to him the beauty of a Lilly in the field to which Solomon in all his
outward glory is not comparable. Do not these of the meanest capacity, and
understanding who have their eyes, and can look upon the Lilly have a better
and more satisfying knowledge thereof, then the blind man though quick of
understanding, though he had all the wittyest Orators and wisest men of the
world to describe it unto him, all their words comes far short of the other
man's sight, or can a deaf man know, what a musical harmony, and melody of the
vocie is, or can one who has lost the taste of his mouth know wine from water,
or sweet from bitter, now if the knowledge of these natural things cannot be
had sufficiently by any words, how much less can things spiritual, and God who
is a spirit be known by words, if words come short in the description or
manifestation of creatures, obvious to our bodily senses, how infinitely short
they fall in the manifestation of God, or the things of his Kingdom, As it is
written, 1 Cor. (...). 9. Eye has not seen, nor Ear heard, neither have entered
into the heart of man, the things which God has prepared for them, that love
him. But verse 10. God has revealed them unto us by his spirit, for the spirit
searches all things, yea the deep things of God. Lo how the Apostle shuts
forth all the knowledge, that can be had either, by the outward ear, or eye,
(when all words are excluded) from being sufficient to reveal the things of
God, but can man's imaginations, reasonings or conceptions, and thoughts of man
in his natural understanding do it either, nay says he, it has not entered
into the heart of man to conceive them, then all conceptions and thoughts of
man's heart in the fall, the old heart, old Adams heart, are also excluded from
giving the knowledge, how then are they known, God (says he) has revealed
them unto us by his spirit, not unto me only, said he, but unto us, unto you as
well as unto me, O ye Corinthians, and elsewhere writing unto them, he says,
God who commanded the light 2 Cor. 4. 6.
to shine out of darkness, has shined in our hearts to give the light of the
knowledge of the glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ, then it is the light
shining into the heart out of the darkness, which gives the knowledge of the
glory, and ver. 4, Such who believe not, the God of this wo^ld has blinded
their minds, least the light of the glorious Gospel of Christ, who is the Image
of God should shine unto them, then all who believe have this privilege (then
it is not only peculiar to the Apostles) the light of the glorious Gospel of
Christ shines in them, and the light reveals the Gospel, which is hid from
them who believe not, ver. 3. It discovers the glorious Gospel, or as it is in
the Greek, the Gospel of glory, it reveals a hid glory in the Gospel, which is
beyond all words, or expressions, or thoughts of man's heart, the glorious
Gospel of Christ is not the words, the best of Scripture words, writ or spoke
by the Prophets and Apostles, it is that which the words declare of but not the
words themselves, which may be read, heard* and known by the unbeliever, and he
may gather a stock, and treasury of knowledge from the words (which knowledge
is but a false, dead, empty, barren, formal knowledge, a form of knowledge.
Romans (...) 20. A shadow of knowledge, but not the true knowledge, which is
life, and life eternal, John 17. 3. But the Gospel he knows not, it is hid from
him, for the eye is blended that can see or know the glory of it, for it is the
power of God unto Salvation, it is the preaching the glad tidings of Salvation
unto poor lost man ^y Jesus Christ himself immediately in his heart, it is
Christ (...) (...) in man, by the powerful breath of his spirit, awake thou
that sleep and arise from the dead and I will give thee light, and be thy
salvation^. This is that which Christ said himself, the hour shall come, wh^
the den^shall hear the voice of the Son of God, and they that bear shall live,
so he is the great preacher of this great and glorious Gospel himself whose it
is, Isaiah 61. 1, 2, 3. compared with Luke 4. 18. The spirit of the Lord is
upon me beca^se he has a^ointed me to preach the Gospel to the Poor, he has
sent me to heal the broken hearted, (...) preach del^verance to the captives
and recovering of sight to the blind, etc. all other preachers whosoever among
men, they are but as forerunners (like John Baptist) and this is their message,
John 12. 15. Fear not daughter of Sion, behold thy King comes, etc. And how
beautiful upon the mountains are the feet of them who publish these glad
tydings-concerning the coming of the King himself, and all the most powerful
preachers that ever spoke among the sons of men must say with the same John,
behold their comes one after us, which is preferred before us, for he was
before us, he must increase but we must decrease, we are not that Prophet but
are sent to testify of him, whose shoes latchet we are not worthy to unloose,
he it is, who will baptize you with fire, and with the Holy Ghost, and teach
you to the satisfaction of your souls, and be with you for ever, when we are
gone and removed from you, and the Bride greatly rejoices because of the
Bridegroom his approach, and the hearing of his own voice, and this fulfills
the joy of the friends of the Bridegroom, even the voice of the Bridegroom to
the Bride, himself come, seen, heard, embraced, the Bride married to himself,
kissed with the ^isses of his mouth: and this also fulfils the joy of the
Bride, f^r it was her great desire, the presence of the Bridegroom himse^f, and
her desire accomplished, how sweet is it to her soul! Thus it is fully
demonstrated, how insufficient words, all words from without, even Scripture
words, are to give or learn man the knowledge of God as also how insufficient
man's conceptions, reasonings, thoughts, and imaginations, in the earthly,
carnal mind (which is darkness, Ephesians. 5. 8. and death, Romans 8. (...). concerning
Scripture words and the things recorded by them are to this effect; The Lord
knows the thoughts of man to be but vanity, and his wisdom foolishness, and
enmity against God, even all that wisdom, which the carnal mind can gather into
it self, whither from the words of Scripture, or from the works of creation,
and providence.

It is all enmity against God, and is so far from lead^ng man unto the
knowledge of him that it leads him from it, the world by wisdom knew not God,
1 Cor. 1. 21. The Jews who had the Scriptures and their Doctors and Rabbis,
who had gathered a great deal of wisdom and knowledge, not the true wisdom and
knowledge, but a form (as is said) did it further them to receive the knowledge
of Jesus Christ, in a more glorious manifestation? or rather was it not a loss
unto them, did it not blind their hearts, was not the preaching of the Gospel
foolishness unto them? and the Greeks or Gentiles, who ^udyed the creation, the
book of nature so called, and gathered a great deal of wisdom and knowledge
theirfrom, but it was man's wisdom which is from below, and is carnal, earthly,
and divilish, by this wisdom they knew not God, and the preaching of the
Gospel, was to them also foolishness, thus because both Jew and Gentile had
wandered after their own imaginations, and reasonings, (the former concerning
the Scriptu^es, and the latter concerning the works of creation) and departed
from the pure principle of God, the light of his Son Jesus Christ, who had
enlightened both one and the other, every man that comes into the world. John
1. 9. Which would have been unto them a key of knowledge, a key to the Jews to
open up and reveal the Scriptures unto them, a key to the Greeks or Gentiles to
open up and reveal the works of the pure creation of God, and given to both an
eye to read these prints and characters of the wisdom, power and goodness of
God engraven thereupon, and hereby they would have been led up (keeping chastely
to this principle the light of Jesus) to the knowledge of God after a more
excellent way and manner, then either words or works of creation could give,
even to know God in himself, and in his son, the express Image of the fathers
substance this is a glorious knowledge indeed, the knowledge of God in the Son,
who is his express Image, so like unto him, that he is one with him this
infinitely transcends, that other knowledge of God either in the declaration of
words, or works, for that they all come infinitely short of the noble Image,
Christ Jesus, the brightnes^ of the fathers glory, and such who sit down upon
such a knowledge as they may gather into their minds whither from words or
works, which proceeds from God and come not up to know him in his own image,
the light of his Son, they have not the true knowledge of God, and make void
the use and service both of Scriptures, and works of creation, which are given
forth from him self, as witnesses of his glory in the world, for the heavens
declare the glory of God, and the firmament shows his handwork, Psalm. 19. 1
2. And the natural day and night, the Sun, Moon, and Stars have a language, and
a declaration after their kind, the sum whereof is this, he has made us and
not we our selves, and the Scripture has its language, and does witness and
declare many things concerning God, not to be found in the book of creation,
and so though both the one and the other do testify of God, yet are neither
sufficient to give the the true knowledge of him, which is truth and life
everlasting all is as it were but a knowledge by hearsay, something declaring
or demonstrating, that there is a God, but not what he is, for only the Son can
thus reveal him, and give the knowledge of him by the seeing of the eye.

And now therefore all ye who deny the Revelation of the Son immediately by his
own immediate light (which can only make him manifest as the Sun can only be
made manifest and seen with its own beams, as said Plotinus a Gentile, who saw
further into this mystery then many called Christians) ye are yet ignorant of
God, neither can ye truly conceive of him, when ye think of him in your carnal
minds, the object of your thoughts is not the true God, but an Idol of your own
brain, a graven image an image of Gold and Silver, an idol god, which must be
famished, and broke into pieces, ere ever ye come to know the true God.

And ye who spend so much of your time in gathering wisdom and knowledge from
either the words or works of God, and the many books concerning both, while you
a^e not come to the true, and pure principle of God, the light o^i Son, no^
begot of that, nor renewed thereby in the spirit of your mi^ your wisdom is
foolishness, your knowledge i^ darknes^ (...) dead, barren, empty knowledge,
and it is enmity against G^ it is like water gathered into a stinking, filthy,
corrupt vessel which corrupt^, and the vessel becomes the more corrupt, and
this more and more eats as a canker, kills, stupifies and benums that which is
tender in a man's soul, and has any feeling of God, so that man becomes past
feeling of him, and this is the fruit of that knowledge, even the fruit of the
forbidden tree, which kills, and feeds death, so that such being shut up in
death and alienated from the life of God, and past feeling, give over
themselves to work all lasciviousness and uncleanness with greediness, Ephesians. 4.
19. And thus I have writ, and insisted something more largely, on this
particular, in tender love to the simple hearted, who are much betrayed by the
enemy in this thing, who are tempted to eat of the tree of knowledge, and
because it seems pleasant to the eye of the carnal mind, and seems good for
food, therefore they take and eat of it, that is to say (for I desire to use
plainness of speech) Satan beguils them suggesting into their hearts, that if
they will read many books, and be diligent in searching after knowledge that
way, and search and dive into the creation and to know the secrets and
mysteries of nature, they will be wise to know good and evil, and this will
accomplish and perfect them, and thoroughly furnish them in their employment and
calling, to whichsoever they apply themselves. And so one takes himself to read
commentars of Scripture, and this he thinks will furnish him with knowledge,
and ability to teach for the ministry, and another takes himself to read
Hypocrates and Gallen, and other writers concerning medicine, and so he thinks
to become hereby a Physician, etc. While in the mean time, their minds are out
from the light of Christ, their talent given them to profit withal, which
gives the true knowledge, and true ability to minister either to the soul or to
the body, and is the principal thing which if their minds were come to, and
begot into it, their reading or other exercises in the leadings of this, would
be useful and serviceable in their place, but as they are used, become and are
a loss (as is said) unto them.

And the enemy makes a prey of their souls, and fetters their feet in this
snare, of gathering knowledge from books, or any other way, to keep them from
the true knowledge, which is life and peace, and joy and fruitful in the works
of righteousness, for the devil cares not how much knowledge a man gather into
his vessel, providing it be not the true knowledge and wisdom which God
teaches, and comes from above, and is retained in the new bottle, the renewed
mind, this knowledge only hurts his kingdom, that other can do it no hurt but
advantage, and become a bulwark against the Kingdom of Jesus Christ in man's
heart, and if ever such come to the true knowledge and wisdom of God, they must
be emptied of all the former, and the vessel must be cleansed with the spirit
of Judgment, and of burning, and it must be learned by word of mouth from
wisdom's own lips, line upon line, and precept upon precept, now a little, and
then a little, as the vessel is able to receive, for the Lord gives wisdom,
out of his mouth comes understanding.

And now to sum up in a few words, all that is said in this Argument, the
knowledge of God being that which is indispensibly necessary to every believer
and true Christian, and seeing this comes only by the Revelation of the Son of
God immediately in the heart; and by the receiving it from the mouth of God
himself, and from the inspiration of his holy spirit (the inspiration of the
Almighty says Elihu gives understanding, as is fully demonstrated then it
follows by necessary consequence that the Revelation of Christ immediately, and
God his speaking to man Immediately, and the inspiration of the holy spirit
breathing into man's heart immediately the true and saving knowledge of God is
also of indispensible necessity, and therefore not ceased in the true Church,
though in the false, but remaining a standing and perpetual Ordinance therein,
for if Revelation be ceased then is also the knowledge of God ceased, but if
this remain so must that also.

Argument 2. God revealed in man made manifest in him by his Son, thorough his
eternal spirit, is man's blessedness, his habitation of rest, and peace and joy,
God being his portion, his possession, his habitation, fellowship with him in
the light, in the word, in the spirit, this was man's blessed estate in the
beginning when God created him, he created him after his own image, he put his
image, Christ the express image of himself in man, and he breathed in him the
breath or spirit of life, then did man live indeed, he was a living soul, he
lived in God, he lived an holy, heavenly, spiritual and divine life, and Christ
the light of men was his life lived in him, then the Lamb was not stain, Christ
the Lamb, the light, the life of man, and this was man's glory, he was made
capable of conversing with God, of having fellowship with him, God spoke in
him, revealed his glory in him, the glory of his eternal wisdom, power and
goodness, the glory of his eternal love, that hid glory that was in himself
before the world began, here man had full content and satisfaction, and peace,
and rest, he ruled as King in the creation, and God ruled King in him, and the
Law, whereby he ruled him, was not an outward Law, it was w^it in his heart,
spoke unto him by word of mouth from God himself, and man had access unto the
tree of life, (which is Jesus Christ) and it was his food, and he drank of the
pure river of the water of life, and he lived in paradise, and all the precious
things in it, all its pleasant fruits, he was allowed to eat of, only he was
forbidden to take of the tree of knowledge of good and evil, least he should
dye in that same day, and now man in this state he had a heavenly spiritual and
divine principle in him, wherein he had a pure and perfect descerning of God,
and his will, he had an eye to see God, an ear to hear his voice, which was
full of glory, sweetness, power and Majesty, and the other senses of smelling,
tasting, handling, feeling, and that which was smelled, tasted, and felt, was
heavenly power and virtue, which filled him with glory, joy and rejoicing, and
he was a fountain of continual praise unto his creator, and he loved him above
all things else, even with all his heart, soul, might, and strength, and God
delighted in his love, and he delighted in his and if man had not sinned by
eating the forbidden fruit, he had continued in this blessed state, and lived
eternally in the sweet embracements of his father, and creator, and God would
never have hid his face from him, nor ceased to speak to him face to face, now
when man sinned, and transgressed the holy Law of his God by his sin death came
upon him, he dyed the same day according to the word of the Lord, and was
driven out of Paradise, and had no more access to the tree of life, nor the
pleasant fruits of the Garden of God, nor to the river of the water of life,
that runs through it, he was driven from the face of his creator into the
earth, into the earthly principle, and therein he lived, but ceased any more
from living in the heavenly or divine principle, that which had the discerning
and feeling of God dyed in him, and remains shut up in death in all his
posterity to this day, and the pure eye which saw God in the light which came
from himself was ^ailed, a thick vail of darkness came over, which blinded him,
and the spiritual ear was stopped and all his other spiritual senses of smelling,
tasting, and feeling were stupefied and benumbed, and the lust awakened in him
in the earthly principle, a sharp and quick discerning in the things, that are
earthly and corrupt, and begot in him an unsatiable greedy divilish desire, and
love after them, thus man wandered from God, and he set up in his heart this
corruptible world in the place of God, and Satan the God of this world ruled
in him, and so the Lamb came to be slain in him from the foundation of the
world, that holy, meek, harmless nature, the Lambs nature was slain in him, and
beasts nature got up in him, the Serpents nature, and he bore the image of the
earthly, and became an earthly, beastly man, and he begot his children in his
image, and as he so they, became children of Wrath, alienated from the life of
God, thus he whom the Lord planted a noble Vine, wholly a right seed became a
degenerate plant of a strange Vine unto him, and he being the root, and stock
of mankind, the branches his posterity behoved to partake of the defiled nature
of the root, which is transmitted from father to son, and its the seed of the
serpent, of which the viper, the devils brat, the old Adam is conceived, and
brought forth, and till man put of this old Adam, till this birth of the
Serpent be killed in him, man cannot enter into the Kingdom of God, nor see the
face of God, for this is a vail of darkness, and separation betwixt God and the
soul, now the bowels of the Fathers love stirred in compassion to the work of
his hands, that of the pure creation in man, which though shut up in death, yet
it remained and perished not, as to its being, it did not become a nothing, but
remained a being, and this is the lost which God sent his son into the world to
seek and to save, not to seek or to save the old Adam, that birth of the
Serpents begetting, but to destroy it, for it is not capable of Gods Salvation,
but that which Christ came to save, is that of God which proceeded from him,
the seed of God in man, the seed of Abraham, whereof Abraham's old decayed body,
as good as dead, and Sarahs barren womb was a Type, to take hold of this, to
breath life in this, and by the powerful sound of his living voice to raise it
up out of the grave, out of the earth, and to make it fructify, and bring
forth Isaac, the heir of promise, the son of laughter, and joy, and so to
recover man to the blessed state of life he was created in, in the beginning,
to bring him to live again in the pure principle, of the life of the Lamb,
which dyed not, could not dye, as to its self, but man dyed from it, and it
ceased to live in him, but it ever lived in it self, being an eternal
incorruptible life, and this has ever striven with man in the fall to recover
him, and would gather man into it self, as a hen would gather her chickens, and
this is it which every man in a day by experience finds more or less moving in
his heart, making him restless, he can have no rest or content in the earthly
principle, there is somewhat of a more noble extraction in him, whose center is
not the earthly principle, but the heavenly and divine, and it seeks to be in
union with its center, its fountain, and the earthly corruptible principle, the
body of sin is a burden unto it, and blessed are they who come to feel somewhat
in themselves to which sin becomes a burden, there is some what there alive of
the begetting of God, for the dead have no sense or feeling, and that which
breaths life into the seed, is the life of man, Jesus Christ the light of man,
in him was life, and that life is the light of man, said John, and so the light
shines forth in the darkness to visit the seed shut up therein, and the light
breaths life into the seed, in such a measure and degree as its capable of in
that state, and it draws out of the darkness, out of the death, out of the
earth, out of the evil, into the light, into the good, into its self, and a
measure of power go along with the drawings to quicken the seed, and make it
able to follow that which draws, and as it is obeyed cherished, and followed,
not resisted and quenched it ministers daily more and more life and power, and
its drawings a^ felt more and more forcibly, and so the eye opens (which was
shut in Adam) to see God in the virtue and power of the light, which reveals
him, and the ear opens to hear his voice, and the tongue of the dumb is loosed,
to speak forth the praise of its Savior, and Redeemer and the Limb is made to
leap as an heart for joy, and Gods heavenly virtue and power is felt, tasted,
and handled, and the passage again into Paradise is opened by that new and
living way, and man gets access unto the tree of life, and the river of Gods
pleasure that runs through the Garden of God, and so man comes to live in
God, and God in his Son Jesus Christ lives in him, and rules King, and Lord in
him, and the law whereby he rules him is writ in his heart by the finger of his
spirit, and he reveals the whole counsel of his will unto him by the word of
his mouth, the light reveals the whole will of God unto him, and as he abides
in the light and waits in it, it will manifest clearly in him what he should
do, what he should shun, and he needs not go forth to seek a Law without him,
or a teacher without him, the word is near, in his heart, and in his mouth, and
this is the word of faith to which Moses pointed the Jews, and Paul the Romans,
thus it is manifestly demonstrated, wha^ was man's blessed state before his
fall, what is his woeful and miserable estate in the fall, how he is recovered
out of it by Jesus Christ, his Power effectually working in him for his
delivery, and how he is brought by him into the blessed condition, wherein Adam
was created in the beginning (ye and is into a state more safe and glorious
then ever it was) and this is generally acknowledged that it is so, and the
Scriptures testify fully to the truth of it, then it follows manifestly from
the premises, that every true Believer and Christian gets this blessed
privilege of knowing God by the hearing of his voice, and seeing of him in the
Revelation of his light immediately proceeding from himself for this was Adams
privilege, and his most glorious, and principal, if man were not restored to
this, he should come infinitely short of Adams blessedness, and now if any
should say, man is to be restored through Christ to this privilege, but not in
this Life, that is reserved for heaven, and the other Life, the Scripture
testify (...) fully, that it is attainable, and attained in some measure
before the laying down of this earthly tabernacle by every true believer, for
every true believer is a man born again, born from above not of the corruptible
seed, but the incorruptib^e, the word of God which lives and abides for ever,
and in this birth the spiritual eye is opened, so is the ear and all the other
senses, and then what hinders this birth from seeing of God, whereas it lives
in the incorruptible and divine principle did, not Moses see God, and endured
by faith, seeing him who is invisible? And did not Job see God, and did not
Isaiah see him, and do not all the pure in heart see him, and its promised to
them, blessed are the pure in heart for they shall see him

Now it is generally granted that the Patriarehs, Prophets, and Apostles saw
God, and heard his voice immediately but say they this was a special privilege
peculiar unto them, and not granted unto all believers, but from what is
already said this is manifestly confuted (and will yet more appear from what
follows) for Christ is not only the Savior of the Patriarchs, Prophets, and
Apostles, but of all that believe, it is a common Salvation unto them all, and
they are all baptized into that same spirit, and one life, and Christ is head
in all, the Sun in all, the glorious Sun of the soul, whose beams open the
blind eye, and gives to behold in the light thereof the glory of the Lord in
the face of Christ Jesus.

Argument. 3. Herein lies the main and principle difference betwixt the Law
and the Gospel, the old Covenant and the new, the ministration of the Law was
an outward ministration, and it had an outward Law, a Law w^it in tables of
stone, and this Law was ministered by the hand^ of the mediator Moses a tipe of
Christ, and God spoke unto Moses, and Moses unto the people, and so terrible
the voice was that it made the people sore affrighted, and Moses himself did
quake tremble, and the people said, let God speak no more unto us, least we
dye, but let Moses speak unto us, thus ye see how the Law, and old Covenant had
an outward and a mediate ministration, and a carnal or lit^eral Commandment,
and therefore it was weak and could not give Life, but was the ministration of
death, and therefore was to pass away, for it was added because of
transgression and given forth not as thereby man were to obtain li^e, or
salvation but to be a Schoolmaster, to lead unto Christ, to point at him, and
shadow him the substance, forth, wherefore it had an outward temple,
tabernacle, priesthood, sacrifice and stood all in outward, and according to
this dispensation or Covenant God spoke not to all whoever under it
immediately, but mediately he spoke to to the fathers in the Prophets, Heb. 1.
1. But now the Gospel ministration, the ministration of the new Covenant, is
the ministration of the spirit, which remains 2 Cor. from ver. 6. to 12, and
so is not ceased, and it is God speaking to us in the last days in his son or
by his son, Heb. 1. 1. That is more immediately, and this is the now Covenant
Ier. 31. Heb 8. I will put my Laws into their minds and write them in their
hearts, and they ^ail not each every man his neighbor and his brother, saying
know the Lord, for all shall know me from the least to the greatest, and this
is a more excellent covenant, whereof Christ the son and heir is mediator, and
he speaks it unto the people, not from Mount Sinay but Sion, and his voice,
is a calm sweet, still, pleasant life giving voice, and these under this
ministration say, let Christ the Lord of the house speak himself, let God speak
unto us in his son, that we may live, and it will not be enough for any man to
speak, except himself be heard, and the (...) learned as it is in Jesus, Ephesians.
4. 21. and again it is writ^. (...), 59* 21 As for me, this is my Covenant with
them says the (...)* (...) spirit that is upon thee and my words, which I
(...) (...) m^uth, shall not depart out of thy mouth, nor out of (...) of (...)
^eed, nor out of the mouth of thy seeds seed, says the (...) (...) f^rth and
for ever. See how God has appoint^t for his seed ^and every Believer is his
seed, according to (...). 3. 29.) as an everlasting ordinance his spirit upon
them, (...) his words put by himself into their mouth, and again, Joel (...)*
28. 29. And it shall come to pas^ that I will pour my spirit ap^ (...), and
your sons and your daughters shall Prophecy, etc. And (...) upon the servan^
and ^idens will I pour out my spi^. See further these Scriptures, Zach. 12. 8.
10. Isay 40. 5^ (...), 10. 11. Isay 41 17, 18. Isay 49. 6. Isay 51. 3, 4, 5.
Isay 55. and (...) 60. througout. Now I ask such who say Immediate (...) and
Gods speaking in men from his own mouth, and his pouring forth his spirit upon
them to prophecy is ceased, whither did these promises belong to the Law or to
the Gospel, to the old Covenant or to the new, that they belonged to the old
they cannot say it, with any color of reason, seeing these glorious things are
promised in these latter days, and were gloriously accomplished after Christ's
resurrection, and ascension, which put an end to the ministration of the Law,
and old Covenant, but and if they belonged to the new Covenant, and to the
Gospel (yea these things promised are the Covenant it self as is clear in the
above cited Scriptures) then how are they ceased, if the new Covenant, or
Gospel ministration be ceased, then is the pouring forth of the spirit, and
Gods putting words into the mouth of his seed ceased but if the new Covenant
and Gospel ministration be not ceased, then is not the pouring forth of the
spirit of Prophecy ceased either.

Argument. 4. This was a privilege common to every Believer in the days of
the Apostles, to whom they ministered as, they preached unto them the Lord
opened their hearts to believe, and the holy Ghost fell upon them who heard and
believed, see Acts 2. Acts 4. Acts 8. Acts 10. 44. Gal. 3. 23. 1 Cor. 3. 16.
and 1 Cor. 4 16. Every one of them had a spiritual gift, some a Psalm, some a
Doctrine, some a Revelation, some a tongue, some an interpretation, and verse
21. Ye may all Prophecy one by one, etc. Lo how a Revelation, and the pouring
forth of the spirit was not peculiar to the Apostles alone, but to believers
generally it was common, And they were enriched by him in all utterance, and in
all knowledge, 1 Cor. 1. 5. and if any man said Paul, Romans 8. have not the
spirit of Christ (...) is none of his, and he prayed for the, Ephesians. 1. chap. 17.
ver. That God would give unto them the spirit of wisdom and revelation in the
knowledge of himself, etc. and he said ver. 13. After that they believed they
were sealed with that holy spirit of promise, tho earnest of their inheritance.
And Jesus Christ promised this, to whom soever should believe in him, Joh. 7.
38. He that believes in me out of his belly shall flow rivers of living
waters, and verse 39. This sp^ he of the spirit, which they that believe on him
should receive, (...) the Holy Ghost was not given, for that Jesus was not yet
glorified, and now if the holy Ghost be not received by them who believe, and
if the pouring of it forth be ceased and then is that promise falsified and
broken but that is impossible, therefore is this also. And now seeing from what
is said, it is clear, that the pouring forth of the spirit of the Lord, the
spirit of wisdom and revelation in all knowledge, and utterance, was the common
privilege of believers in the day^ of the Apostles, and that by virtue of the
rue Covenant, and the promises their to belonging, it is also manifest, that
this glorious dispensation is the privilege of believers now, and in all ages
past or to come is so, being under the same covenant, and to whom belong the
some promises which they have a right to in their head Christ, for in him all
the promises are yea and Amen, and seeing the Scripture speaks so fully of that
abundance of glory that is to be revealed in the days of the Gospel belonging
to the new Covenant dispensation how then is it ceased and to cease for ever,
so as never any more to take place in the earth and wherein does the Gospel
dispensation, which brings life and immortality to light, transcend and surpass
the dispensation of the Law and old Covenant, if not herein, that the (...) is
done away in Christ and the substance revealed the Lord being the light of his
people, and their God, their glory, the light of the Moon becoming as the
light of the Sun, and the light of the Sun as the light of seven days, wherein
does the glory of the lat^er house transcend and excel the glory of the former,
but that the Lord whom his people seek shall suddenly come into his temple, and
that unto them who fear his name, the Son of righteousness shall arise with
healing under ^is wings, Mal. 3. and 4. And has not God appointed this as a
standing ordinance in his church the Son of righteousness to shine therein,
with his own immediate beams, as this visible Sun to shine in the world: take
away the revelation of Christ his Church, and then will she not be left in as
great in confusion, desolation, distress, as if the inhabitants of the earth
should be deprived of the natural sun, what a woeful night would come upon them,
is not the woman Christ's sp^ use clothed with the Sun, and as she went into
the wilderne^s fleeing from the Dragon thus clothed, is she not to return so
also, and such who cry down all Immediate Revelation, and prophesying, do they
not make the Gospel dispensation exceedingly inferior to the Law? for even in
that ministration there were some Prophets, some to whom the Word of the Lord
came from his own mouth, and if there be nothing such now at all, it is a very
poor Law, and despisable Dispensation; as truly it is so among you: Vision is
not, and therefore the people perish, but now is the Lord fulfilling these
glorious promises to the people of his pasture, whom for a small moment he had
forsaken, but with great mercies is he gathering them: Thy Watchmen shall lift
up the voice, with the voice together shall they sing: for they shall see eye
to eye, when the Lord shall bring again Zion, Isa. 52. 8. And ver. 6. Therefore
my people shall know my name: therefore in that day, they shall know, that I am
he that does speak, behold, it is I. And Isa. 33. v. 17. Thine eyes shall see
the King in his beauty: they shall behold the land that is very far off.

Argument. 5. The Kingdom of Jesus Christ is an Everlasting Kingdom, Dan. 2.
8. 44. and 4, and 4. and 3. and 7. and 14. And so never to cease; and this
kingdom of his, what is it? but the Revelation of his living and eternal arm in
his people, it is a Kingdom which is not of this world, it is a spiritual
Kingdom; it is a Kingdom within, and it comes with power and great glory, but
not with observation to the eye that looks abroad: the hearts of the children
of men, that is, the place where his Kingdom is set up, for there is it where
the powers of darkness reigns. And there it is where the battle is fought
betwixt Michael and the Dragon; there must the stronge^ man be cast out: and
the stronger Christ Jesus the Lion of the Tribe of Judah enter; his name is
called Wonderful, Counselor, the Mighty God, the Everlasting Father, the
Prince of Peace, the Emanuel, which being interpreted is God in Man; of the
increase of whose government and grace, there shall be no end upon the Throne
of David and upon his Kingdom, to order and to establish it with judgment and
justice for ever. Isa. 9. 19, 17. And as he is a King for ever, so is he a
Priest for ever, and a Prophet. A King to rule in his Saints by his immediate
arm: A Priest to make Intercession immediately betwixt God and Man, for there
is but one Mediator, who comes betwixt God and the Soul, he is the messenger of
the Lord of Hosts unto man, and he is Man's Advocate unto God, and there is no^
to intervene, or come betwixt God and the Soul; but Christ the alone Mediator
to whom God speaks in his Son, and the Soul speaks to God in the Son also, and
Prays and Worships, and gives thanks in the Son, through whom alone there is
access unto God; through him not at a distance, but near, where his living
drawings are felt, his eternal Power is felt making way for the Soul unto God,
breaking through all the powers of darkness, rending all the Vails that hinders
it from enjoying the countenance of the God of its life. Oh that this misery
were known! how hid is it from you, who talk so much of Christ the only
Mediator? and that there is none else but he, and yet ye deny his immediate
appearance and manifestation in Man: Let me tell you, every thing ye set up as
a midst betwixt him and you, ye make it a Mediator, and so ye rob him of his
glory, and are all gross Idolaters; as the Papists, who make the Virgin Mary,
and other Saints their Mediators, that by you are called your means and
Ordinances, ye set them up in Christ's stead, when ye come unto God, and do not
witness the immediate appearance of Jesus Christ in your Souls, drawing you in
his life; what, and how to speak, teaching you, in you; then ye come by
something else, ye do not come unto God by him, but by that you call your
Prayers, and Ordinances: O! that ye would lay it to heart, for I speak what I
certainly know, who has felt the indignation of the Lord upon me, for my rash
approach unto him; and my many prayers, which as I was taught by man, I thought
means to lead me unto God, whilst I remained ignorant of the appearance of
Jesus Christ to mediate in me, and make Intercession with sighs and groans
unutterable, which now in my measure, through the blessing of the Lord I am
come to witness, and I now know, that whatever mediates or comes betwixt Christ
and the Soul is a Vail, and wall of partition* for he is the life, the
strength, the power, of the begotten of God in Man, and without him it can do
nothing; it cannot pray, nor praise, nor speak, nor so much as call him Lord;
but with him it can do all, pray always, rejoice evermore; offer up the pure
incense of a continual sacrifice unto God, of Prayer and Thanksgiving from the
rising of the Sun to the going down of the same. And now the Scripture being so
full and frequent in its testimonies concerning this, viz. The appearance of
Jesus Christ in his Saints: (see but these three places passing others; Col.
27. Ephe. 3. and 17. 2 Cor. 13. and 5.) What a strange thing is it, that men
are so impudent to call it fancy delusion and blasphemy; and if Christ be in
his Saints, is he not King in them? does he not rule in them, and if he rule in
them by his outstretched arm in them, does he not rule immediately? And is not
the rule or law whereby he rules immediate? And is he not a Priest forever in
them, and a Prophet? Does he not speak in them, or is he altogether dump and
silent in them; and if he speak in them, speaks he not immediately; or can
any man, or thing which is without man speak so immediately to the Heart or
Soul, as Christ who made it; and is in it, and comes in for that end, to reveal
himself and his father therein, and so to fulfill that Prayer of his, John 17.
and 24. Father I will, that they whom thou have given me, be with me where I
am, that they may behold my glory which thou have given me: And is it not the
work of Christ in man, to open that eye which was blinded by man's Fall, which
in the Momentstate did see God, and his Son: And now the eye being opened, and
himself present, and the Vail that hinders, rent and taken off; according to
that is promised, Isa. 25. and 7. Does not then that eye which is opened see
him, and is not this an immediate Revelation; and is it not his work to open
the ear that was deaf, a spiritual ear in men, and why does he open it; but to
speak to that ear, and can that ear be satisfied unless it hear him, and is not
the word proceeding from himself, the proper object of this ear? And such who
have not this ear opened in them cannot hear Christ, and thinks such a thing
Delusion, measuring others by themselves: And further, Is it not his work to
awaken up, and beget a discerning a sense and feeling, and casting in them
whereby they may taste how good the Lord is, taste the good Word of the Lord,
and the Powers of the World to come, and handle the word of Life, and smell the
sweet savor of his Ointments, and feel after him according to these
Scriptures, 1 Pet. 2. 3. Psalm. 34. 8. Heb. 6. 5. 1 John 1. 1. Cant. 1. 3. Acts
17. 27.

Argument. 6. And now ye who deny God his speaking immediately in man, ye deny
all the work of God in man, and of his Son Jesus Christ, for by his Word, his
immediate Word, he does all things, he speaks and it is done; God made the
Heavens and the Earth, and this whole Fabric of the Creation by his Word, his
immediate Word; and he upholds all things thereby: God said, Let there be
Light, and there was Light. Let there be a Firmament, and there was a Firm
meant. Let the Waters be gathered together, and they were. Let the Earth bring
forth Grass, and it was so, etc. He spoke and it was done. And he said, Let us
make Man in our own Image, and it was so. Gen 1. He had no other means but the
word of his Mouth, the word of his eternal Power, which was in the beginning,
whereby all things were made, and without it was nothing made. And now does not
Man in his being Created again unto good Works, in his being formed again a new
Creature, depend upon the same immediate Word of Power, which first Created
him; by this is man begotten again by the Word of God, which lives and abides
for ever: and by this he lives, by every word that proceeds out of the mouth
of God; so you may see, its the Scriptures testimony, he does all things by his
immediate Word; the Word works in all things immediately which God ever made,
means are but ciphers without this, means opperate but mediately, but the Word
immediately; and this Word is Christ, by whom all things are made, and in whom
they are upheld; now here is the difference betwixt this noble piece of
Workmanship. Man Created a new in Christ Jesus the Word, and the other parts of
the visible Creation; the Word is in him, and opperates in them, but that Word
is not known, felt, tasted, apprehended, but God has given Man a knowledge
thereof, and herein is his glory beyond them; he can feel the spring of his
Life; he can taste the good Word of God; in which he lives, moves, and has
his being. And he that knows not this Word of Life and heavenly Power, and
virtue in him is dead; the corruptible earthly principle cannot apprehend it,
for it is spiritually discerned, and then what differs he from a beast that
perishes, but that he is the more miserable?

Argument. 7. And hereby it is, that man comes to the knowledge of Sin, and of
Wrath, and of the heavy displeasure of God because of it; somewhat in his mind
and conscience, which awakeneth him as out of a dead sleep, wherein possibly he
has so many years seen the sorrows of death, now begins to encompass him, and
the pangs of Hell takes hold on him, and he is cast into a bed of torment, and
finds great troubles and sorrow; the arrows of the Almighty stick fast in him,
and he is distracted with the terrors of the Lord: And the fearful sound of
Judgment continually affrights him; and what is it, which works all this in
man, but the Word of the Lord immediately proceeding from himself? God speaking
in his Wrath, and vexing him in his sare Displeasure: As it is Psalm. 21. And
revealing his Wrath from Heaven against all his ungodlines and unrighteousness,
Romans 1. 18. Is it not Christ to whom all Judgment is committed, who thus
judges him: Is it not his Spirit which convinces him of Sin, and of
Righteousness, and of Judgment; it is the Lord who brings to light (when he
comes to judge) the hidden things of darkness, and makes manifest the counsels
of the Heart, 1 Cor. 4. 5. And all things that are reproved are made manifest
by the light, and that judges them, and reproves the deeds of the evil doer,
John 3. 20. And works Condemnation in him: this condemned Cain, it condemned
Saul, it condemned Indas, Whereby their punishment was unsupportable for them;
and now were it not God himself who spoke in them, in his Wrath? were it not
his arm and finger that touched them, and lay heavy upon them? they could
easily bear it, they could be comforted against all their other troubles, and
anxieties; could they get rid of this, and fly from the fierce anger, and
wrathful countenance of God; but where ever they go his judgment follows them,
his witness in their consciences torments them; the fire kindles which never
goes out, and the Worm that never dies gnaweth upon them, this is the fiery
flaming Sword, which devoureth the adversary, and cutteth down the man of Sin,
a fiery Law goes out of the mouth of the Lord, and burns round about; and by
this Law is the knowledge of Sin, whereof Paul speaks, for before this Law came,
he was alive, and secure in Sins, his Legal righteousness touching the Law
blameless, it could not give him the knowledge of his Sin, but when this Law
came, that gave him the knowledge of it, and made it exceeding sinful, and
killed him.

Argument. 8. And as it is God who speaking in man, raises this storm in his
Conscience (he commands and raises the stormy wind as it is written) which
all the powers of Heaven and Earth could not do besides him: Man could remain
invincible, as a brazen Wall against all their assaults; could he be hid from
the fierce wrath of God revealed against him in his conscience; all the words
of Scripture, all the curses writ therein could not move him, he has often heard
them and made light of mem all. I say, as it is God alone who raises this
storm, and brings this trouble upon him: so it is he alone who can calm and
quiet it again; he must say to the Wind and raging Waves of the Sea be still,
and they obey him; and that which brings peace and calmness, true calmness and
stillness to a man's conscience when it is so vehemently troubled, demonstrates
it self to bear eternal Power, for nothing else can do it when God speaks peace
who can let it, as it is written, when he gives quietness, who can make
trouble, Job 34. and 29. And who can give it but he, the Lord speaks peace in
his People; he, and he alone binds up the broken Heart, and heals the
wounded in Spirit^ he sends his Word and heale^, the word that comes from
his own mouth which says in the Soul fear not, It is I, be not afraid, be of
good comfort thy Sins are forgiven thee, and faith in this word alone can only
stay, quiet and comfort the weary distressed Soul, faith comes by hearing, and
hearing by the word of God; the word which proceeds immediately from himself;
and faith laying hold on that Word, which is full of Power. All the words of
the Scripture cannot do it, when God ceases to speak himself to the Soul, it
refuses to be comforted; it may read, and search, and meditate upon the
Scriptures, but the wounded spirit remains; the doubtings, the tossings, the
terrors continue: I appeal to any, who ever knew any thing of the terror of
the Lord upon their Spirits, if it be not so, it would fain apply the promises,
it would fain suck comfort out of the Scripture words, but it cannot find it,
for the comfort is not in them, but the Life from which they came, and till it
speak them afresh, they are but as a sounding Brass and tinksing Cimbal, a
killing Letter, it is only the words that Christ himself speaks that are Spirit
and Life; and they who see life in the Letter, see the living among the dead,
for it declares of the Life, but it is not therein, but in him: and why is it,
that so many Souls continue dead, notwithstanding their hearing, reading
searching, and meditating upon the Letter; but because they come not to Christ
himself to get life, who will turn their Water into Wine unto them, the oldness
of the Letter into the newness of the Spirit, and all that they call their
applying their promises, is but the work of their own imagination, and sparks
of their own kindling, which will cause them to lie down in sorrow till they
come to know the great and precious Promises given unto them, spoken unto them,
Immediately from the mouth of Jesus Christ, In whom all the Promises are Yea,
and Amen.

Argument 9. And that there is somewhat in Man, where there is any true
renderness and simplicity, which can be satisfied with nothing else, but God
himself seen, heard, felt, tasted, and with a knowledge which comes from his
own Mouth, and the Spirit of Wisdom and Revelation; This manifestly
demonstrateth, there is such a thing to be attained, and might be attained were
not the poor Soul missed, and turned aside from the true path, where it is to
be found.

Oh, All ye simple tender hearted ones in whom there are any true breathings
toward God at any time; I appeal to that which breathes in you, and it will
answer me; (as for the dead form a withered Professor who is past feeling, I
have nothing to do with him here, and he will be apt to laugh at this
argument.) Do ye not find something in you which is not satisfied, with all the
knowledge ye have drank in from the Scriptures, or the hearing of Man Preach
upon them, are ye contented with all this* find ye rest herein, is your thirst
quenched with these Waters, is your hunger satisfied? or rather, is it not so
with you, as when a man in his sleep dreameth, that he eats and drinks and
when he awaketh, behold he is hungry and thirsty? deal impartially with your
selves, and then let that which is simple and tender and ingenuous answer me,
and it will acknowledge it is so* Is not there somewhat in you, that says in
your hearts, ye are yet ignorant of God? ye have not heard his Voice, nor seen
his shape at any time, ye have not heard and learned of the Father, and so ye
are not come unto Christ; feel ye not something in you which Laments after God,
and Mourns because of its distance from him, and can have no joy or content
because it wants the light of his Countenance. And all your Scripture, literal,
traditional knowledge and wisdom is a burden unto this in you; it can neither
satisfy its hunger, nor quench its thirst: one crumb of Comfort from God
himself, would be better to you than it all; a drop of living water out of the
Eountain, ye would prefer to it all; for one glimpse of the glory and beauty of
Jesus Christ ye would be content to count all your other knowledge loss and dung
for the excellency of the knowledge of him thus, in the immediate manifestation
of himself; this I am certain it is with many, and so was it with my self, and
with many others who have much literal knowledge, we have drunk in partly from
our own reading, and partly from men's speaking upon the Scriptures, but there
was somewhat that cried unto the Lord in our Souls, of his begetting for a
better knowledge, a knowledge that was Life and Peace, and fruitful in the works
of Righteousness, and that other knowledge became a burden to us, and was as
Death, for we found it empty, barren, and unfruitful in the works of
Righteousness, and as it increased; it increased our sorrow; and the Lord in
his great mercy heard that which cried and breathed in us, the living knowledge,
and opened the Ear to hear, and the Eye to see, and broke down the
partition wall, and rended the Vails which withheld from us the Light of his
Countenance, and the streamings forth of his Life in the light into our Souls;
and it was God that begot that desire in us, of a more immediate fellowship and
communion with him in the Light of his life, and he would never have begot it,
had the thing desired been impossible to be attained; and till we come to the
accomplishment and fulfilling of our desire, even the sweet fellowship of him
in the Revelation of his Light, we have not rest, peace, nor content, nor shall
any ever have it; whereby it appears, that the one is as necessary to a
Christian as the other, and he that believes, has entered into his rest.

Argument 10. Jesus Christ Revealed in Man, is the foundation of the true
Church, and of every Member thereof in particular; and therefore if the true
Church remain, this must remain also. This is that which Christ Jesus taught
himself, in the days of his Flesh. Mat. 16. 16, 17, 18. Asking Peter who he
was? To whom he answered, Thou art Christ, the Son of the living God, Then said
he, Blessed art thou Simon Barjons, for Flesh and Blood has not Ravealed it
unto thee, but my Father which is in Heaven. And I say also unto thee, that
thou art Peter, and upon this Rock I will build my Church, and the Gates of
Hell shall not prevail against it. Now this Rock, on which he said, he would
build his Church; is not the Man or vessel Peter himself, as the Papists
foolishly plead, But the Rock was himself. Isa. 28. 16. Behold, I lay in Sion
for a Foundation, a Stone, a tried Stone, a precious Corner Stone; a sure
Foundation. And said Paul, 1 Cor. 3. 11. Other Foundation can no man lay, than
that which is laid, which is Jesus Christ: See further those Scriptures, Dan.
2. 3, 4. Mat. 21. 42. 1 Pet. 2. 4. Ephesians. 2. 20. So from these Scriptures it is
manifest, That Christ himself is the Foundation; and not one, nor all the
Apostles; they are not the Foundation, they are but a part of the building: And
Christ is their Foundation, the Foundation of the Prophets and Apostles, as
it is Ephesians. 2. 20 He himself is the chief corner Stone: or, as it is in Beza's
Translation the undermost Cornerstone; He is the undermost Stone of all the
building, and he is the Cornerstone; that which knits every Stone, or part of
the building together; being the Foundation Stone in every Member, That is,
every Believer; they have all immediate access unto this Stone: To whom coming
says Peter, As unto a living Stone, 1 Pet. 2. 4. and Ephesians. 4. 15, 16. He is
the Head in all; From whom the whole body fitly joined together and compacted
by that which every joint supplieth according to the effectual working in the
measure of every part makes increase of the Body: You see how it is said, This
Head, this Foundation; This Cornerstone has an effectual Working in the
Measure of every part, for, it is a living Stone, a Stone which is Life and
Spirit, and so breathes Life in every part and member of the Body; Whereby
every Member also becomes a living Stone, 1 Pet. 2. 5. A Temple of the Holy
Ghost which is therein, 1 Cor. 6. 19. So the holy Spirit of Christ dwells in the
whole Body, and in every Member, and is not divided, but is one in all and in
every one: Now mark further, Christ is this Foundation as Peter confessed him;
Revealed not by Flesh and Blood, but, by his Father which is in Heaven: Christ
must be revealed by the Father, before he become a Foundation; this is that
which bu^eth, which edifieth the effectual working in every part, the
Revelation of the Arm of the Lord in man's heart: This is that which diggeth
deep beyond all the earth and sand, and that which is Corruptible, till it come
to the Incorruptible.

The Word of God which abides for ever; and is able to carry the Building, and
bear it up against all the storms that can affault it: Whosoever comes to me
(says Christ) and hears my sarings and does them, he is like a man that
built an house, and d^gged deep, and laid the Foundation on a Rock; and this is
himself. Lo^! now he says, He that builds on the true Foundation, on the Rock
he diggeth deep for it, and he hears Christ himself, and not only hears,
but does: So he must dig deep beyond all words, till he come to the Power,
wherein the Kingdom stands, 1 Cor. 4. 20. In Power and not in Words, he must
dig deep beyond all Words, till he come to the eternal Word, which Created the
Heavens and the Earth, and is the Foundation which upholds them; and hereupon,
must this new Crea^ion be builded, for nothing else can carry the weight of it*
and as is touched already, this Foundation must be revealed, not by Flesh and
Blood, but by God himself, or else it cannot be come into, and so cannot be
built upon: No man comes unto me (s^th Christ) unless the Father draw him, and
he who has heared and learned of the Father comes to him, John 9. 44. 45. See
how this agrees with that which Christ said to Peter, Flesh and Blood has not
revealed this unto thee. This Rock on which I will build my Church, but my
Father in Heaven; it must be the Revelation of the Father, which must give the
knowledge of it: The living knowledge, the knowledge which is life eternal; for
this Foundation being Life, its effectual working, is to quicken that which is
dead, that it may become a Member; and it draws to it self by the virtue and
power of its life, and by the drawings, a feeling of the life which draws is
begotten, and this feeling is the true knowledge; and hereby, man comes to know
infallibly, the true Foundation; he discerns it in the feeling, and so he can
distinguish it from that which is Corruptible, and is not able to bear up the
building: And therefore now ye who have not come to the revelation of the
Father, and of his Son, ye have not yet seen the Foundation, and how can ye
Build on it? If ye have not heard Christ's words from his own mouth, and do them
not, and if ye have not dug deep beyond all Words, yea, and thoughts, and
comprehensions of the carnal Mind, if ye have not dug so deep till ye come
to the Power, wherein the kingdom of God stands; your building is but on the
Sand, and that Church whatsoever, which is not builded on this Foundation:
Christ Jesus, immediately revealed both in the whole Body, and in every Member
thereof; is not the true Church but a Synagogue of Satan, a vile Harlot,
Mystery Babylon, the Mother of Fornicators; for the true Church is one in all
ages, past, present, and to come; and it has ever had one Foundation, which is
Jesus Christ the same yesterday, and to day and for ever; and there is one
Body, and one Spirit, one hope, one Lord, one Faith, one Baptism, Ephesians. 4. 4,
5. Now, what was this Foundation of the Church of God, before ever Scripture
was writ, before Moses, and the Prophets, and Apostles which came after, who
wrote the Scriptures? Was it not Jesus Christ the Word, which was in the
beginning, had it any other Foundation; and what gave them the knowledge of
this Foundation? and builded them upon it, when they had no Scripture; and
whereupon was their faith founded? by the hearing of what word did they come by
their Faith, seeing then the Scriptures was not writ; it was even the Word
which came from God himself, and taught them, immediately; and many of them
believed, when they had no man to speak unto them. The Word of the Lord came
unto Abraham when he was in his own country saying unto him, Get thee out from
among thy kindred, and from thy Fathers house, out of thy country, unto the
Land that I will show thee: and there was no man brought this message to him,
for, those among whom he lived were Idolaters, but God spoke to him by his own
immediate Word, and he heard and believed, and it was counted to him for
Righteousness. Thus ye may see how Abraham's Faith came by the hearing of the
Word of God, proceeding from his own mouth; Now every Believer is the Seed of
Abraham Gal. 3. 29. And this Faith, is the same Faith with his, (for there is
but one Faith) and it has the same Foundation, the Word of God proceeding
immediately from himself, for no other Word is able to beget it, but the same
Word of power which begot the Faith of Abraham, for Faith is the gift of God,
it is a Supernatural thing, and therefore it must have a supernatural Cause; it
must stand in the power of God, (the Word of Power which was in the Beginning)
1 Cor. 2. 5. For nothing else is able to bear the weight of (...); and so Isaac
and Jacob heard God and believed: And the Word of the Lord came unto Moses, and
he believed. And so many others we read of, who heard God himself; and now the
(...) being one in all, and having one foundation; it follows manifestly, That
every believer must hear the Word of the Lord, which proceeds out of his own
Mouth; on which alone, that one Faith is builded: And to this one Foundation
Moses and all the Prophets and Apostles, testified and b^ar witness; So did
Jesus Christ himself in the days of his Flesh. Let us begin with Moses after
he had fully declared unto the Jews (as he had received them from the Lord) all
the Laws pertaining to the first Covenant; and have writ them in a book, and
had given them to the People, which he caused the Levites to keep and lay up in
the side of the Ark, see Deuteronomy. 31. 24, 25, 26 He falls a declaring concerning
the New Covenant, Deuteronomy. 30. from 11 ver. to ver. 16. This Commandment says he,
which I Commanded thee this day, is not hidden from thee, neither is it far of;
It is not in Heaven that thou should say, Who shall go up for us into
Heaven, and bring it unto us, that we may hear it, and do it: Neither is it
beyond Sea, that thou should say, who shall go over the Sea for us, and
bring it unto us, that we may hear it and do it; But the Word is very nigh unto
thee, in my (...) and in thine Heart, that thou may do it. Now that Moses in
these Words, points at the New Covenant is manifest, because first he points
them to this Word and Commandment, not writ in tables of Stone, or in the book
of the Law: But to it in the heart: The Word is very nigh thee says he, in thy
Heart. This is that which more fully declared, Ierem. 31. 32. For then the
New Covenant dispensation came to be more manifestly revealed, but in Moses
time was more hid and obscure, for the Vail hung before his face.

Secondly. It Is maaifest also from Romans 10. 5, 6, 7, 8, 9. When Paul according
to the wisdom given him, makes a full and ample Interpretation upon Moses
Words, showing how that Moses described, both in the forecited place, the Old
Covenant and the New; Which Paul calls the Righteousness of the Law, and the
righteousness of Faith, ver. 5. for, says he, Moses descrybeth the
righteousness which is of the Law, that the Man which does these things shall
live by them, But the Righteousness which is of Faith (says he) speaks on
this wise, Say not in thy heart, who shall ascend into Heaven, that is, to
bring Christ down from above; or who shall descend into the Deep that is, to
bring up Christ again from the Dead: But what says it, the Word is ^gh thee,
in thy Mouth, and in thy Heart, that is the Word of Faith, (says he) which we
Preach, etc. In which word; it is clear he points at that spoken by Moses,
Deuteronomy. 30. 12, 13. etc: And he calls them the words of the Righteousness of
Faith, and that Word Moses poynted the Jews too in their heart, he calls it the
Word of Faith; and it is clear, he understands it of Christ, for he adds by
way of Interpretation to Moses words, speaking from the same Spirit, Say not in
thy heart who shall Ascend into Heaven, that is (says he) to bring Christ down
from above: and this is it, which Paul pleads so much for in the Epistles,
Romans Gal. showing, that there is no Justification by Moses's Law, to wit, that
writ in the book of the Law, and delivered to the Levites, nor that writ in the
Tables of Stone; which he calls the Righteousness of the Law, but by the
Righteousness of Faith; the word of Faith which is the New Covenant; Faith in
Jesus Christ, the word in the heart: And elsewhere he says, If there had been
a Law which could have given Life, then Righteousness had been thereby; but now
by this Word in the Heart, Life is given, and therefore is Righteousness
thereby, for it is ^he Word of Life living and Powerful etc. And Moses pointed
at the same Jesus Christ before, Deuteronomy. 18. 18. 19. where he calls him a
Prophet, etc. And the Jews, and People of Israel who lived in Moses's time, and
were saved, it was through Faith in this Word, in this Prophet, raised up in
them, in their hearts, not at a distance, but nigh; the Word is nigh in thy
Heart: And this is Christ in them the hope of Glory, the Mystery hid from eyes
and Generations, but was ever made manifest in his Saints, but in the latter
days more clearly: Christ in all that believe the hope of Glory; and so from
what is said, It is Manifest that Moses pointed at this Foundation, (which is
one in all ages) of the Church, which was not the Words writ in Tables of
Stone, or Books of the Law, but the Word of Faith, whereby comes the
Righteousness of Faith, and the believing Jews in Moses's time, made not a
Church different from that in the time of the Apostles, and down-wards, all are
one Church, and under one Covenant, and were saved by one Faith, in one Lord
and Redeemer, though the dispensations did differ in many Circumstances, and
these who succeeded had more full and large discoveries of the Mystery; yet, in
substance they all agreed, and were all one upon the matter.

This being so weighty, and it lying before me so clearly, and it being so
useful to demonstrate (so far as words may be serviceable therein) the matter
in hand, I have been driven to insist the more largely upon it, and now to
descend to David and the Prophets, and Apostles; whereas I might instance many
hundred places in the book of the Psalms: I shall only point at the 119 Psalm.
And desire the Reader in the fear of the Lord, to ponder and weigh what is
therein declared concerning this Foundation and fundamental Principle, to wit
the Word; and what word is it, he speaks so much, and so frequently of here and
else where, when he says ver. 11. Thy word have I hid in my Heart, and ver.
16. I will not forget thy Word. and ver. 25. Quicken thou me by (or according
to) thy Word, and ver. 28. Strengthen me according to thy Word. and ver. 42. I
trust in thy Word. and ver. 43. He calls it the Word of Truth. and ver. 50. Thy
Word has quickened me. and ver. 81, 82. I hope in thy Word, mine eyes fail for
thy Word, when will thou comfort me. and ver. 89. For ever O Lord, thy Word is
settled in Heaven. and ver. 105. Thy Word is a Lamp unto my Feet, and a Light
unto my Path. and ver. 123. Mine eyes fail for thy Salvation, and for the Word
of thy righteousness. and ver. 133. Order my Steps in thy Word. and ver. 140.
Thy word is very pure, therefore thy servant loves it. and ver. 160. Thy Word
is true from the Beginning, and ver. 162. I rejoice at thy Words as one that
finds great spoil. and ver. 169. Give me understanding according to thy Word.

Let that which is noble and ingenuous in any one answer me, what Word this is,
whether it be the Letter of the Scriptures writ in a Book, or that Word of
Faith Paul, and Moses long before spoke off; the Word in the heart: That it is
not the Letter of the Scripture, or any outward, Word or Words whatsoever, as
the national Teachers give poor people to believe; may be very clear to that in
any man, which ever had experience of any opperation of God on his Heart, any
Life, quickening or Comfort from the Lord; That which has found this, will
answer me, That it is the Word of Power, even that Eternal Word, which is
Sealed in Heaven, as it is ver. 89. and which Created the Heavens and Earth;
and no less Power can quicken a dead fainting Soul; or comfort a weary
distressed Mind. Alas, What can Scripture Words do, read of a Book, or spoken
from man's Mouth, when this Eternal Omnipotent Word breathes not in the Heart,
when it speaks not; can the Heart open to receive any Consolation: Oh how does
the Soul, that has once felt living touches, and breathings of this Word of
Life, faint for it; how does it wait all the day long till it come, how does it
watch more than for the Morning; And when it reads in the Words of Scripture,
concerning the sweet and lively opperation of this Word, what it has wrought in
others, and remembers what it has wrought in it self, and finds no moving or
streaming forth of its Virtue; how does it lament after the Lord, till he send
his Word a^rest, and heal and restore, and quicken, and comfort it, to its full
satisfaction; and then was this Word, even then present with it, in its
Languishing time, begetting in it desires after a more full Manifestation; and
that this Word is that I am pleading for, whereof David speaks so much, can be
the more easily demonstrated to such, who are the more insensible of this Word,
what it is, not being acquainted with its living virtue in themselves, and
therefore are apt to call it a fancy; for that David was a Prophet, a Man
inspired of God, to whom the Word of the Lord came immediately from his own
mouth, for this is generally acknowledged: Now was not this a rich dispensation
and a glorious? Would not David prefer this Immediate Word, to the Words writ
in a Book either from himself, or these before him, and in David's time, there
was but little of the Scriptures written, and if he would prefer this Word
immediately proceeding from the mouth of the Lord, (whereby he was Inspired,
and Prophesied, and Prayed, and sung Psalms) to the words writ in a book, which
were but the effect of that Word of Prophecy or Inspiration in the Heart: Then
is it not clear, that in these places above cited, he understands this Word,
and this was the Word in the beginning, the Word of Power, of Truth, of
Righteousness, of Faith, of Life in his Heart which taught him the Laws,
Judgments, Statutes, Commandments, Precepts, Testimonies, etc. He so much
mentions in that Psalm. This quenched him, this strengthened him, this
comforted him, this taught him, and made him wiser than his Teachers; this was
a Rule unto him, a Lamp unto his seet, and a light to his Paths, in this his
steps were ordered. ver. 133. In this he Worshipped, ^e Prayed, he sung Psalms,
and all his springs were in this; it was life in his heart, and sweet as honey
in his Mouth, and caused his lips drop as a honey Comb.

And Solomon David's Son, how much does he speak of this Word, but under an
other Name, for it has many names, because it has many virtues or properties,
some name pointing at one, some at another: he calls it Wisdom in his Books of
the Proverbs, and Eccles. and in the Song, he calls it Love, Beloved, and by
many other Names; So John Baptist calls it the Light, John the Apostle, the
Anointing, the Light, the L^mb, the Witness, and he is most frequently called
in the Wrightings of the Evangelists and Apostles, Jesus Christ, and by
whatever name or virtue signified, whereby he was known to be a Savior to all
that believed in him, whether Jew or Gentiles, who enlightens every man that
comes into the World. And to return to Solomon, how fully and mani^estly
points he at this Principle, and Foundation, under the name of Wisdom, and
wisdom it is, for Jesus Christ is the Wisdom and Power of God, how does he
bring it in, under the designation of a Woman, a Spouse, a Wife of youth, a
Mother, etc. So powerful, so earnestly, so convincingly pleading with man, and
even with all men, Prove. 1. 20. Wisdom cries without, she utters her voice
in the streets, she cries in the chief places of Concourse, in the openings of
the Gates in the City, she utters her words, or as it is in Iunius, and
Tremelius, Translation, more truly; In every Ci^y she speaks her words, (for
her sound is gone forth into all the Earth, and her words unto the end of the
World, Romans 10. 18) How long ye simple ones, will ye love simplicity, and
scorners delight in scorning, and Fools hate knowledge; ^urn you at my reproof,
behold, I will power out unto you my Spirit, and make known my words unto you,
ver. 22, 23, and Prove. 8, 3, 4. She cries at the Gates, at the entry of the
City, at the coming in at the doors; unto you O men, I call, and my voice is
to the Sons of Men; or as it is in the Translation aforesaid, I call upon you
the Vulgar, or the Commons of the Sons of Men, She calls upon all, many are
called, but few hearken and obey; and so it is, that few are chosen: And is not
her crying in this place, at the ^ates in every City (that is in every man) at
the coming in at the Doors, the same with Jesus Christ his standing at the door
(the door of the heart) saying, Behold, I stand at the door and knock, if any
man will open unto me (Revel. 3. 20) and hear my voice, I will come into him,
and Supp with him, etc. Now what does she promise to these that hearken to her
and receives her instructions, and lay hold thereon, Prove. 2. 2, 5. If thou
incline thine ear unto Wisdom, and apply thine heart to understanding, etc.
Then shall thou understand the fear of the Lord, and find the knowledge of God.
And Prove. 1. 33. Who so hearkneth unto me shall dwell safely, and shall be
quiet from fear of evil. and ver. 23. Turn you at my reproof, behold I will
pour out my spirit unto you, and Prove. 3. 13. Happy is the man that finds
wisdom etc. For her Merchandise is better than silver, and the gain thereof,
than fine Gold. She is more precious than Rubies, and all the things thou can
desire, are not to be compared unto her; length of days are in her right hand,
and in her left hand riches and honor, her ways are ways of pleasantness, and
all her paths are peace, she is a tree of Life to them that lay hold upon her,
and happy i^ every one that retains her. and Prove. 3. 23. Then shall thou
walk in thy way safely and thy foot shall not stumble; when thou lie down
thou shall not be afraid, yea, thou shall lie down and thy sleep shall be sweet
unto thee. and Prove. 4. 6. Forsake her not and she shall preserve thee, love
her and she shall keep thee; wisdom is the principal thing, exalt her and she
shall promote thee, she shall bring thee to honor when thou do embrace her,
etc. and Prove. 6. 22. (As it is in the Latin Translation) VVhithersoever thou
shall go she shall lead thee, when thou sleep, she shall keep thee, and when
thou awakest, she shall talk with thee, for the Commandment is a Lamp, and the
Law is Light, and reproofs of Instruction are the way of Life, to keep thee
from the evil ^man, etc. (That is the false deceitful whorish spirit, the
spirit of this world, which bewitches the whole Earth, and rules in the
children of Diobedience) and Prove. 8. 14. Counsel is mine, and sound Judgment,
or Wisdom. and ver. 28. I lead in the way of righteousness, in the midst of
the Paths of judgment, that I may cause those that love me, to inherit
substance, and I will fill their Treasures. and ver. 34. 35. Blessed is the man
that hears me, waiting daily at my Gates, waiting at the posts of my doors,
for who so finds me, finds Life, and shall obtain favor of the Lord. and
Prove. 9. 3. She has sent forth her Maidens, she cries upon the highest places
of the City, who so is simple let him turn in hither, as for every one that
wants understanding, she says to him, come eat of my Bread and drink of my
Wine which I have mingled, etc. Lo, How universal is her call, and how
particular to all, and to every one, and she not only sends forth her
Maidens, (that is her Ministers) to cry, but she cries her self; and how
sufficient is she (being the very fullness of God himself) to answer all Men's
necessities, and to be unto him above all that his heart can desire; wants he
Counsel, counsel is hers; needs he direction whithersoever he shall go, she
shall lead him; pants he for life, she is a Tree of Life; would he be at
substance somewhat beyond all shaddows, all temporals, all things that may be
seen or heard by the eye or ear of flesh; she causes to inherit substance,
that which is eternal beyond all words, thoughts, or comprehensions of man,
which the Moth nor the Rust cannot corrupt, nor the Thief break through and
steal; would he have long life, riches and honors, length of days are in her
right hand, riches and honor in her left; would he have the fear of the Lord,
and the knowledge of God? she gives it him: Is he hungry? she feeds him with
the bread of Life, which is heavenly Virtue and Power, the ^ood of Angels: Does
he thirst? she gives him of the Wine new in the Fathers Kingdom, even that
which grows in the Paradise of God: Would he have a rule to walk by? her
Commandments is a Lamp, and her Law a Light: Would he have peace, and
preservation, and pleasure? her ways are peace, and her paths pleasantness,
and who so hearkneth unto her shall dwell safely, etc. Or needs he company
when he goes, or sits, when he lies down, or rises up, when he walks in
the Field, or is shut up alone in a Prison, or desolate place, where none has
access unto him; then she talks with him, and she is more to him, than Ten
thousands of Companies, for sweet is her voice, and her countenance is comely;
she is like the loving Hind, and pleasant Roe, and her breasts satisfy him at
all times, and he is always ravished with her love, and now where is this
wisdom to be found? Oh! How are men bewitched from the true path, where it
appears; and how are we in a day bewitched with them, seeking her without us,
and following after these Idol Shepherds (who with destruction and Death has
heard the fame thereof with their ears, but never saw her, and so could not
tell us where to find her, but cried, Lo here, Lo there, in this sermon, that
fine book, this or that place of Scripture, this or the other Ordnance, while
as we were led out from watching at the posts of her Doors, waiting to hear her
voice in us, and her reproofs which were the way unto her, and her path was in
the light which shined in our Consciences, but our blind Watchmen told us,
that was not wisdoms voice, which reproved us in our hearts in secret for ous
sins, but the checks of a Natural Conscience, and the light which shined in our
dark hearts, and made manifest the hidden things of dishonesty in us (said
they) is not the path of wisdom, nor can it lead unto her, but a natural Light,
a light which is darkness, and blind as to the things of God, but we have found
them Iyars, for it has led us unto her, and that which reproved us, we have
found to be her voice, and we turning at her reproofs, we have found her
promise verified, even the powering forth her spirit upon us, Prove. 1. 23. And
she has revealed in us a measure of all these blessed things aforesaid, and
many a day read weof them in the Scriptures, and heard the same thereof with
our ears, but both she and they were hid from us, till our minds were turned to
her own voice, and light in our own hearts, and this gave us the knowledge of
her, and of these heavenly and spiritual blessings which accompany her, and we
assuredly know, that it is the Lord alone that gives her, immediately out of
his own mouth, Prove. 2. 6. She is hid from the eyes of all living, and kept
close from the Fowls of the air; etc. God understands the way thereof and
unto man he says, Behold the fear of the Lord, that is wisdom, and to depart
from evil is understanding. Job 28. 21. 23, 28, And blessed are the pure in
heart, for they shall see her. And thus I have largely pointed unto this
Principle, and Foundation from Solomon's Testimony; and now I shall descend to
Isaia's, and passing many places might be instanced, I shall cite but a few,
Isa. 2. 2, 3, 4, 5. And it shall come to pass in the last days that the
Mountain of the Lords House shall be established, in the top of the Mountains,
etc. And all Nations shall flow unto it, etc. For out of Zion shall go forth
the Law, and the Word of the Lord from Jerusalem, and he (the Word for that is
his Name, Rev. 19. 13.) shall judge among the Nations, and shall correct, or
reform many people, (as it is in the Latin Translation) And they shall beat
their Swords into Plow-shares, etc. O house of Jacob come ye, and let us walk
in the Light of the Lord. And Isa. 4. 25. In that day shall the branch of the
Lord be beautiful and glorious, and the form of the Earth shall be excellent,
etc. And the Lord will Create upon every dwelling place of Mount Sion, and upon
her assemblies a cloud and smoke by day, and the shining of a flaming Fire by
night, for upon all the glory shall be a defense; and there shall be a
Tabernacle for a shadow. And Isa. 42. 1. Behold my servant whom I uphold, mine
Elect in whom my Soul delights, I have put my spirit upon him, he shall bring
forth Judgment to the Gentiles etc. He shall not fall, nor be discouraged, till
he have set Judgment in the Earth, and the Isles shall wait for his Law, ver.
4. and Isa. 49. 6. I will also give thee for a Light to the Gentiles, that thou
may be my Salvation, unto the ends of the Earth. And ver. 8. I will preserve
thee, and give thee for a Covenant of the people to establish the Earth, to
cause to inherit the desolate heritages, etc. And Isa, 55. 4. Behold, I have
given him for a witness to the People, a Leader and Commander to the People.
And Jeremiah the Prophet says of him, Ierem. 23. 5, 6. Behold the days come
says the Lord, that I will raise unto David a righteous branch, and a King
shall Reign and prosper, and shall execute Judgment and Justice in the Earth,
in his days Judah shall be saved, and Israel shall dwell safely: And this is
his Name whereby he shall be called, THE LORD OUR RIGHTEOUSNESS. And he said of
him, Ierem. 20. 9. His Word was in mine heart as a burning Fire, shut up in my
bones, and I was weary with forbearing, I could not stay. And this was the Word
which come unto all the true Prophets and instructed them with their Messages,
from the Mouth of the Lord: Many other Passages might be brought, testifying to
this Principle, out of the other Prophets Ezekiel. D^. Hosea, and the rest, but I
forbear. And John the Baptist testified of him, saying, That he came being sent
of God, for a Witness of the Light, that all men there-through might believe,
he was not that Light, but was sent to bear Witness of that Light, that was the
true Light, which enlightens every Man that comes into the World, John 1. 6,
7, 8, 9. And Christ himself in the days of his Flesh testified of himself;
saying, I am the Light of the World, he that follows me, shall not walk in
Darkness, but shall have the Light of Life, John 8. 12. And this is the
Condemnation, that Light is come into the World, and Men love darkness rather
than light. John 3. 19. and John 14. 6. I am the way, the truth, and the life.
And John 11. 25. I am the Resurrection and the Life. And John 10. 9. I am the
Door, by me, if any man enter in, he shall be saved, and go in and out, and
find Pasture. And John 15. 1. I am the Vine, and my Father is the Husbandman,
etc. And all these glorious things both he in the days of his Flesh, and the
Prophets before that his appearance in that body of Flesh; declared, neither
only nor Principally, concerning his coming in the Flesh; namely, in that
Vessel, or Temple, which appeared at Iesalem, mainly and Principally,
concerning his spiritual appearance in his Saints, after his being Crucified,
Risen, and Ascended, for till then, the Son of Man was not glorified, Phil. 7.
39. And though he was bodily present with his Disciples, yet he told them, they
were to see greater things, Phil. 1. 50, And he said the Kingdom of God was at
hand: and he taught them to pray for it, and he said; There be standing some
among you, which shall not taste of death, till they see the Kingdom of God
come with great power and glory; whereby it is manifest, that these things
relate mainly to his coming again in spirit, when it should be powered out
according to these many Promises concerning the same, Recorded in the
Prophets, and as is said before, he told them, It was expedient he should go
away, that he might come again in a more glorious and comfortable appearance by
the Revelation of his glorious Power in their hearts, for his Kingdom was not
of this World, but an inward Kingdom, and he said, that it was within; and
pointed to this spiritual appearance, by his Light in their hearts, under many
Parables and Figures, which he calls the Kingdom of God, Mat. 13. 18, 19, etc.
He compares it to seed sown in several sorts of Ground; and he explaineth what
he means thereby, calling it the word of the Kingdom; That Kingdom which
stands not in Words, but in the Word Eternal, and this is the Word of the
Kingdom which is sown in all sorts of Ground, good and bad; that is, in every
man's heart, but the good only receives it, and brings forth Fruit therein.
ver. 3. He compares it to a grain of Mustard Seed, which being the least of
all seeds, yet grows up unto a Tree, and is the greatest among herbs; hereby
pointing at his appearance in Man's heart at first, which is very insensible;
but as he is believed in, becomes gradually greater and great, till the
Kingdom come with power and great Glory, which is also figured forth, by the
other Parable of Leven, which a Woman took and hid in three measures of Meal,
and it Leaveneth the whole. Again, ver. 44. He compares it unto a Treasure h^d
in the Field, the which, when a Man has found he hides, and for joy thereof,
goes and sells all that he has, and buyeth that Field; whereby he
understands his Light that shines in the darkness of Man's Heart, which
hides it from him; and Earth in man's Heart is that Field: Now though the
darkness does much to hide this noble Treasure, yet this noble Pearl shines
forth through the Darkness, and reaches to somewhat in Man, which being touched
by its Virtue and Power, is made sensible; and an eye opens in the sensible
part, which finds the Treasure, and selle^h all for it, (quitteth all the Light
discovers to he evil) that the Field may be redeemed, and the Treasure
possessed; and this Treasure, the Word of the Kingdom being full of Power,
works cut the Corruption out of the Field, (the fruitful Field becomes
barren) and then fatneth it, and makes it good ground, good Earth, (this is
the New-Earth) and the Treasures or seed sown therein takes Root, and becomes a
branch or plant, and it is the noble Plant of Renown, That i^, Christ formed in
the Soul, Gal. 4. 19. And so the barren Wilderness becomes a fruitful Field,
and the fruit of the Earth becomes excellent Isa. 4. 2. For it is the fruit
which springs out of the Earth, and the Heavens open and pours down
Righteousness, which waters this noble Plant, with its living streams. Again,
he compares it to a Merchant-man seeking goodly Pearls, who finding one Pearl
of great price, went and sold all and bought it; What is this Pearl, but the
Light, Revel. 21. 21. Compared with John 10. 9. The twelve Gates are twelve
Pearls, and yet but one; as the seven Spirits of God are one Spirit: Again,
ver. 47. He likeneth it unto a Net cast into the Sea, which gathers of every
kind good and bad, but the good are kept in the vessels, and the bad cast
away; hereby is signified, the Word of Gods Power, the Light of Christ taking
hold both of the good and the evil in men's hearts, it takes hold of the good
and brings it into Union with it self; it takes hold of the evil, not to unite
it self therewith, for that is unpossible; but to crush it, and make a
Conquest over it, and cast it into utter darkness lest it trouble the Creation.
And Luke 15. 8, 9. He compares it to a Woman, having lost her piece of Silver
in her House, and she lights a candle and sweepeth the house, and seeks
diligently till she find it; and when she finds it, she calls her friends
and makes merry with them, through joy that the lost piece of money is found,
and this House where the lost piece of money was lost, and is found is, man's
heart, it was lost by Adam's Fall, yet it remained still in the house, and in
the house in Man's heart its to be found, and the candle is lighted in this
house, and it must be swept to find it; by all which, Christ Jesus points at
this Principle, his Kingdom, or appearance by his Light in Man's heart, and the
scope of all these Parables is, to turn in Man's mind to the Kingdom, the Light
of Christ in the Heart, to find the Treasure, the Pearls, the lost piece of
money there, to find it where it was lost and is hid, for there it is to be
enjoyed and possessed: No man possesses more of God, or of Christ, but what is
revealed in himself; and to this Principle and Foundation the Apostles pointed
for Paul's Commission, was from God, to Preach into the Gentiles, turning them
from Darkness into the Light, and so he Preached up the Light much, 2 Cor. 4.
6. God (says he) who commanded the Light to shine out of Darkness, has shined
in our hers: here he Preaches not any outward Light, but a Light that shines
in the Heart, an inward Light; and he calls it ver. 7. The Treasure in the
Earthen Vessel; as Christ called it, The Treasure hid in the Field. And Ephesians.
5. 13. He says, all things that are reproved, are made manifest by the Light;
for what ever does make Manifest is light, wherefore he says, Awake thou that
sleep, and arise from the Dead, and Christ shall give thee Light: He does
not say, that he should give it, or his words either; but, that Christ should
give it: but by his words he points to him, and him not a far off, but near;
the Word is nigh, (Romans 10. 8.) even in thy heart, by which he understands
Christ, as is above demonstrated, and more plainly he declares this, Col. 1.
26. 27. calling it, The riches of the Glory of the Mystery in the Gentiles,
(for so it is in the Greek;) And this Mystery is Christ, the Mystery in them,
hid in them; the Treasure hid and till it be found, it is not the hope in them,
but in them in whom it is manifested, it is the hope of glory, Christ in you
the hope of Glory, ver. 27. And him he Preached to every man, ver. 28. warning
every man, and teaching every man, he Preached him to them, in them; and he
pointed them (...) him, in them; him Crucified in them, the Light shining in
the Darkness in them, the Treasure hid in the Field, in them; the piece of Money
lost in the House in them: And as Jesus Christ came to seek, and save the Lost,
so all his Ministers ever Preached people to this, the Lost in them; that it
might be found, that they may find a lost God, a lost Christ, whom they had
lost, and from whom they were separated by their Sins: This was the sum and
substance of their Doctrine, to turn them to God, and to his Son Jesus Christ
near them; That they might feel after him, in whom they had Living, Being, and
Motion, to turn them to the fountain of living Waters, from the broken Cisterns
to the Issues of Life which would spring forth in their hearts, were that which
letts removed; and therefore said Paul, 1 Cor. 2. 2. I determined not to know
any thing among you, (in you) save Jesus Christ, and him Cruified; He Preached
every where Christ Crucified, that he might be raised up in them, the Treasure
hid, that it might be found in them; and therefore he said, 2 Cor. 13. 5.
Examine your selves, whether ye be in the Faith, prove your own selves, know ye
not, that Christ Jesus is in you, except ye be reprobates; have ye not found
the Treasures that was hid in you, the piece of money lost, etc. And the other
Apostles pointed at this same Principle in the heart. James says (Iam. 5. 5,
6.) To the ungodly rich men of this world, who live in pleasure on the Earth,
and are wanton; Nourishing their heart, as in a day of feasting, ye have
Condemned, and killed the Just, and he does not resist you, Christ Jesus the
just and faithful witness in their heart, him they had Crucified in his
appearance in them; for as he is, and lives in himself, being one eternal
Incorruptible Life, he cannot be Crucified, but his appearance may be. See Rev.
11. 8. Compared with Rev. 13. 8. And he says to the brethren grudge not one
against another brethren, lest ye be Condemned; behold, the Judge stands
before the door; Christ he stands by at the door, if ye grudge, he will
hearken the least motion of that Nature, and Condemn it by his light which
shines in your Consciences; for that is it that Condemns, John 3. And he bids
them wait patiently for the coming of the Lord, Viz. In his glorious appearance
the second time unto Salvation, as the Husband man waits patiently for the
precious Fruit of the Earth, after the seed sown; Now Christ is both the
Seeds-man, and the Seed, and also the precious Fruit. And Peter in like manner
directs them to this, and for the pattern, waiting for his second appearance,
1 Pet. 1. 13. Be sober and hope to the end, for the grace that is to be brought
unto you, at the Revelation of Jesus Christ, when he shall appear in you
glorified, who before was Crucified in weakness, yet now raised in Power, and
living by the power of God, and raising you up together with him, and setting
you in heavenly places in him. And till that time, that the day dawn, and the
day Star arise thus in their hearts, he directs them unto a light that
shines in a dark place, which is the same Jesus Christ in his first
appearance; as the seed sown, a seed of Light sown, but not come forth to the
perfect day, and this he calls the most sure, or firm word of Prophecy; where
unto they do well to take he^d for the time; and this is the same Word Moses
pointed the Jews unto, as is above demonstrated And John points much to this
Principle, 1 John 1. 1. That which was from the beginning, which we have heard,
which we have seen with our eyes, which we have looked upon, and our hands have
handled of the word of life; declare we unto you, that ye also may have
fellowship with us, and truly our fellowship is with the Father, and with his
Son Jesus Christ: Lo, how he decla^eth, that his fellowship was with the Son
Jesus Christ. Though long before now, his appearance after the Flesh was
removed, yet he had fellowship with that Life which remained, and more
gloriously appeared after he was taken up; the Life which was in the beginning,
that he that heard saw, and handled, (not with that which is born of the Flesh,
but of the Spirit,) and was partaker off; even that Divine Nature, or Life, 2
Pet. 1. 4. And this Apostle John calls it by other names, such as the seed of
God, the Anointing, or Unction, the Truth, etc. And in Revel. He calls it the
Lamb, and the Word of God. And thus I have gone through Moses, Prophets, Christ
himself in the days of his Flesh, and his Apostles, their Testimony concerning
this Foundation, or fundamental Principle, which as they witnessed, a
Foundation and Fountain of Blessedness. Life, Joy, and peace in themselves; a
substance beyond all Shaddows, Words, Pleasures Representations,
Comprehensions, or Thoughts, so they pointed their Hearers hereto, and this was
the work of their Ministry, That people being brought to he^r, see, handle, and
pareake of this Life in themselves, they might have fellowship, with them
therein; and so let People try themselves, and the Churches they are Members
off, if they be built on this Foundation, the Word of Life which was in the
beginning, or if they have never come to know any other Foundation as yet, but
words from without, and from which they never knew, any other ground to believe
them, but here say, from man, and not hearing the voice of God himself, their
Foundation is but false, their Faith false, their Church, and Worship, and
their whole Religon is false and vain.

Argument, II. And this was it, to wit, the Revelation of J^us Christ, and the
hearing of his own Voice, by which these who heard the Ministers and Apostles
(sent by him) believed their words, and the things by them declared, for had it
not been this, they comeing forth declaring of such unheard of things, and so
unlike, so unprobable, so foolish to the wisdom of Flesh and Blood; they could
never have been received, nor gained such ground upon the World as they did:
This is somewhat touched before, but is somewhat more fully to be treated of
here, being so weighty. This was it, that gave to the people a proof of their
Ministracy, and Call, and message that it was of God, he who sent them; Christ
the Word which was in the beginning, and spoke in them to the people, the same
spoke and beas Testimony to the same words and things, declared by the words in
the Hearts and Consciences of the hearers; and this made them and their
Doctrine Manifest, they had no other proof so sufficient as this, and this
without any other was sufficient, and so necessary, that nothing else could
certainly persuade them, for many of the Prophets wrought no Miracles, nor did
they always tell of things to come, and how many were Converted to the Faith,
who never saw any outward Miracle wrought, and these who were past feeling or
discerning the witness of God in themselves, would not believe for all the
Miracles, or other outward appearance, they called them devilry, and the like;
for, their hearts were hardened, and the heart that is hardened, has the ear
that should hear stopped, and the eye blinded: so was it with Pharaoh and his
servants, yea and many times with the people of the Jews themselves, but they
who had the ear to hear, the inward ear in the sensible heart did hear; and
such a power often times went along with the Messengers of the Lord, that it rent
the hard Rockie heart, and broke it in pieces, and made i^ sensible, and
quickened the dead, and opened an ear to hear the word in themselves, and so the
Lords Messengers declaring in the power and Word of God that spoke in them;
they directed them to hear that Word in themselves: He that has an (...) to
^ear (said John) let him hear what the Spirit says to the Churches: And
Ie^miah said, If ye will not hear within in secret (as I have read it in a
Latin Translation) my Soul shall weep for you. Hear the word of the Lord said
they, this was their Authority, their Proof they had not a^ he and as this
cleared their Call, and the truth of their Message in themselves, so did it in
their hearers, and nothing else could do it, but that Word; the word of Truth,
the word of Faith, to which Moses pointed the Jews, and Paul the Romans in
their hearts; and this made them Manifest, and their Doctrine, and witnessed to
them, was a Seal of confirmation unto it; I have given him said the Lord, (as
it is writ, Isa. 55. 4.) For a witness to the People; and Revel. 1. 5. He is
called the faithful witness. See further, Mal. 3. 5. Mica. 1. 2. Clear
Testimonies for this, and he who believed, had the witness in himself, 1 John
5. 10. He that believes on the Son of God, has the witness, Christ the
witness in himself, and in the Testimony of this witness, which said Amen to
the words spoken through the Lords Messengers, stood there Faith, not in their
words, but in the word in themselves testifying thereto, and they believed not,
because they heard them, but because they heard himself; as did the Samaritans,
John 4. 42. And this is the Testimony of God, which is greater than the
Testimony of Man, for which, it is blessed; and so their Faith stands in that
which cannot be shaken, let men be shaken, and tossed, and driven to another
thing or testimony; yet the Foundation of the Lord stands sure, having this
Seal, this Witness in ones self: and the Faith that comes thus, stands in the
power of God, the word of Power which witnesses in them, God speaking himself
in them, and this is the (so called) formal object of Faith, Papists and
Protestants so contend for, both agreeing in this, That it is God speaking,
which is the formal object: But quoth the Papists, It is the speaking in the
Church of Rome; and so upon the matter, They make it her Tradition: No, quoth
the now Protestant, the degenerate Protestant, (for the pure primitive
Protestants owned the true Foundation with us, though their discovery of it was
but little,) God speaking in the Scriptures, is the object formal of our Faith,
or Foundation of it, viz. The chief moving cause or medium, ex part Objecti,
why the Scriptures are to be believed, which is in effect, to make the
Scriptures themselves it; for they deny, that God speaks in Man's heart, or
reveals immediately in man, by voice, or word of mouth from himself by way of
object: So that that which is heard, seen, or felt, is not any object
imrevealed from God himself, that word it self immediately speaking,
manifesting, or revealing as the Prophets and Apostles witnessed, but God
speaking from without, in the Scriptures, that is it; and that this may be
believed, they say, There is need of an Illumination, (they are a fraid to call
it a Revelation, as may be seen in their Consession of Faith, 1 Cap. 6 Art.
Where denying all new Revelations of the Spirit they add; nevertheless, we
acknowledge the inward Illuminations of the Spirit of God, to be necessary for
the saveing understanding of such things, as are revealed in the Scriptures,
for therein say they, the whole Counsel of God concerning all things is
revealed yet,) some are now calling it an inward Revelation, or an Immediate
Revelation; ex part subjecti, sive potentiae; but not ex part objecti sive
medii aut principii cogniti, quod prius cognitum in se ducit in cognitionem
alterius, and they call it, to wit, this Revelation, ex part subjecti sive
potentiae medium Incognitum assentiens, i. e. an unknown midst of assenting;
See for this Robert Barrones book concerning this part, against Jesuit Turnbul,
where the Reader will see: I faithfully relate his Doctrine, and this man
refutes (but so caused me Wonder,) them who affirm, that the Foundation, or
formal object of Faith, is the Internal Testimony of the Spirit, speaking or
manifesting in such a way as the Prophets, who were inspired, witnessed, having
(as he acknowledges) the objects presented unto their minds, from God himself
by species, or forms Supernatural as he calls them, and as they term them in
the Scools, and he illustrates this further, in what sense he owns Immediate
Revelation, and in what sense he denies it, by a pretty fit comparison, as
when a vail or cover is taken off a man's eye; that is says he, a Revelation
ex part subjecti sive potentiae, of the part of the subject, or faculty, or
sense, which perceives, and that which he denies is Revelation ex part
objecti, as when the eye having no vail upon it, or stop from seeing, but that
the object is hid, by a vail covering it, and this vail must be removed ere the
eye see; though never so quick of discerning in it self, and thus he concludes
that there needs the operation of the Spirit of God, to take the vail off the
eye, but not off the object, for that needs not the object of a man's Faith
is the doctrines of the Scriptures, which are most clear and evident therein;
only the Vail must be taken off the eye of the mind to see them in the
Scriptures: and this is the general Doctrine of the Priests, and Teachers in
the Natural Ministry, as I have discoursed with themselves both South and
North; and its the Doctrine generally of the Protestant Churches so called, as
they stand at this day; and now they say in their Pulpits and elsewhere, That
we do them great wrong, when we affirm, They deny immediate Revelation, and the
teachings of Gods Spirit, for they say, that we maintain, but in such a way,
and not in such a way, as is before declared; and I have asked some of them, If
they be for an inward Revelation, Testimony, or Teaching of the Spirit of God,
then whither is the inward of the Spirit, or the outward of the Letter the most
evident, certain, or persuasive to me? I have been answered, (though some has
said, That of the Letter, is the greatest, weightiest, most evident, etc.) They
are not two Revelations, the inward and the outward, but they are one and the
same Revelation, Testimony, or Teaching, caused by different Mediums, the
Scriptures by way of Object, the Illumination of the Spirit, and the Mind
concurring therewith, by way of Power or Faculty; as when I look upon a Lilly,
three things concur to make me see it, the Eye, the Light, and the Lilly; and
if one of the three be wanting, there will be no sight of the Lilly, yet the
Eye makes not one Vision, the Lilly another, but one and the same Vision is
made with both, and so the Revelation of the Spirit, is not to be compared with
the outward of the Letter say they: Whether is best or most certain, these
being not two but one, and each midst being Supreme, or greatest in its kind;
the one ex part subjecti, the other ex part objecti: and that ex part
subjecti, they call medium incognitum, assentiendi, that which gives the
knowledge of the object, but is not known itself Immediately, or first known or
perceived; and then giving the knowledge of the other, as the Eye is medium
incognitum videndi, it gives the sight, but is not seen it self; so the
forecited Robert Barron. And I have found it with men the more largely to hold
forth the Priests Doctrine in this thing, to undeceive such as are so gulled,
and cheated with them; who w^les would give the poor people to believe, they
are for Immediate Revelation, but it is well known they deny it, both in
Principle and Practice, and did they not deny it: Why persecute they such who
are for it; and were they for the immediate Teachings of Gods Spirit in man's
Heart: Why oppose they such who witnesses it, and are not better learned? and
when they say, They are taught, and called of God to Preach, as Peter and many
others, who had not book learning. O (they cry out) Fancy, Delusion, Revelation
Immediate is ceased: And they are very blind who see not, that upon this
Foundations of denying Immediate Revelation, or teaching of Gods Spirit,
depends their Church, Ministry, and the whole Clergy, and their so called
Theology, and Philosophy, Schools, and Colleges, for if once people were
persuaded and convinced, That God did Teach, and would teach them, who wait on
him; such and many more things, and in a more excellent way than are taught by
them, for such great Sums of Money then they would turn their backs upon them,
and their Colleges would become like the Abacies at this day (which lodged
that Profane Rabble of Papist Monks and Friars, who pretended to as great
Spirituality, as the National Priests do) an habitation for Owls and Ravencus
Beasts, and then down should all the Proud, Lording, lofty Clergy, with their
many degrees of Doctorships, Lordships, and Masterships pass; who being
strangers to the true knowledge, which is Life, Peace, Joy and Satisfaction in
full assurance to the Soul, are vainly puffed up in their fleshly minds, by the
form of knowledge in the Letter; as I was my self, whilst among them, and
thought all men Idiots, and unlearned, who were not sk^lled in that litteral
knowledge, but the Lord by his rich Grace brought me to see the vanity of all
that knowledge: And I was convinced, that I was yet ignorant of the true
knowledge of God, and I came to value one dram of the living knowledge; (from
God himself) so to speak, to ^all the Talents of that other, which I had
labored so much for, and had cost me so much both travel and money, and I saw,
it was all but loss and dung; and it lay upon me from the Lord, to depart from
these Teachers, who could not point me to the living knowledge of God, where I
could find it: And I came and heard Men and Women who were taught of God, who
pointed me to the true Principle; and though some of them could not read a
Letter, yet I find them wiser than all the Teachers, I ever formally had been
under, and now the Lord has brought me into a Measure of the same living
knowledge from his own mouth; and if people were convinced, that there is such
a blessed and glorious dispensation, and so freely attained, they would turn
their backs upon the old rotten Clergy, (for I cannot call it no better,) and
wait upon the Lord for knowledge; and these they would only hear who were
taught of God themselves: and the condition of their Disciples and Flocks, who
generally are more barbarous, wicked, and ungodly than the savage Indians, too
manifestly declares, they are not brought to the true knowledge and wisdom,
the principle whereof, is the fear of the Lord, which redeems the mind out of
all such practices they are found in. And now I shall lay open a little, this
d^eipt of theirs; who affirm Revelation is ceased exparte objesti, of the part
of the object; but it remains exparte subjecti, of the part of the subject,
faculty, or power, which knows, and gives the knowledge, but it self in it
self, is not known but by way of consequence; judging it to be the Spirit of
God, from such tokens and marks as they fancy in their dark minds. Now behold
the deceit of the Serpent, which lies always near to betray from the
knowledge, which is life, and comes from the Spirit of God; and to snare them
with a knowledge, which comes but from the Letter, and their dark minds,
together with his suggestions and inspirations thereinto, and so they come to
acknowledge which is the brat of the earthly Spirit; this hatches and brings it
forth, and the Devil begot it, and is the Father of it: and this wisdom is
called by James 3. 15. Earthly, Sensual, and Devilish, and is not from above;
so then ye may perceive, there is a wisdom and knowledge of the Scriptures,
that is devilish: such had the Priests, Pharisees, and Lawyers of the Jews,
much Scripture Letter knowledge, but it was devilish; for they killed Christ.
Now these who are endued with this knowledge, think far otherwise, they think
it is spiritual knowledge, and spiritual it is in that sense; as wickedness is
called Spiritual, but they are apt to think, it has come from the Spirit of
God, whereas it is from the Devil; and here the Devil who gives it them, covers
himself, so that he cannot be seen, and the knowledge cannot be known of what
nature it is, till the principle or spring, from whence it springs or flows,
be discovered, known, seen, felt, or perceived; and now he having so deceived
them, as to make them believe, this is not attainable; the spring or principle,
which gives the knowledge, is not immediately to be known: This was the
Prophets and Apostles privilege, who had a knowledge of the Principle in its
immediate Manifestation, which taught them, they could perceive the Fountain
clearly, from whence it flowed, it was Revealed to them Immediately, but this
is now ceased, and we must gather only the knowledge of the Principle that
indues us by consequence; (and what a poor uncertain blind knowledge, is this I
may afterward demonstrate when I come to examine that they call their
assurance) and thus they continue in the dark, though they have a knowledge;
yet they cannot certainly tell, who is the Father of it, who begot it, who
inspired it, they feel not the principle, nor sees, nor perceives it, its
medium incognitum assentiendi, that is, an unknown midst of assenting, and yet
they think all is well, and their knowledge is true and good enough; as a Man
that has the Jaundies, which sees the object, let it be never so White, he
judges it to be yellow, and thinks he see well enough, not seeing the yellow
vicious humor in his eye that beguiles him; but now if he could see his eye,
to compare it with another Man's eye, than he would be convinced, his sight was
not the right sight, for he would perceive, that the Principle is vitiated, and
that vitiates the sight; and so they not knowing the Principle clearly and
distinctly in it self, when any motion or operation comes in upon their minds;
let it be although concerning such or such things, some Scriptures brought to
their remembrance, or some thing bearing it self in, as duty; were it to pray,
or give alms, or read, or hear, or the like; and finding some inclination
begetting a bentness in them, and driving them by way of impulse to such or
such a thing: Now, they not knowing manifestly the ground or principle from
which these thoughts, suggestions, motions and inclinations arise; what a loss
are they at? and how great is the danger they are in? as if a man at midnight
were walking amongst Coal^ pits, he is as ready to fall in the pit, as keep the
right way, and much more, having no guide certainly to direct him in this thing;
and now these Motives, Thoughts, and Inclinations, and workings, arising from
the wrong Spirit and Principle, though they had never so great a show, to be
good and duty, yet they are not to be cherished, received, or obeyed, and he
who obeys them, serves the Devil, and not God. Again, a Motive or Inclination,
or opening, concerning such or such a thing, proceeding from the spirit of the
Lord, if it be not received, followed and obeyed; this becomes fin and grieves,
and provokes the holy Spirit of God; and so man in this state, not knowing
certainly and infallibly, the spring and principle that moves him, is equally
ready to serve the Devil as God, yea much more, for he being captivated in the
darkness, the Devil rules in him at his pleasure; for certain it is, what ever
is moved in Man's heart, it proceeds either from the Spirit of Satan, or from
the Spirit of God; now he who has the true eve opened in the sensible part in
him, perceives manifestly the Spring, whence the motions arise; if it be of
God, it feels it to be so, and is refreshed with the heavenly virtue and power
that moves him, and it fills his heart with joy and peace unspeakable, the
nature of which joy, is discerned to be pure in the Light which manifestes it.
Again, if the motion be of the Devil, the eye in the sensible part manifestly
discernes it in the Light, and feels the Spring or Principle from which it
arises, and he is burdened with it, and that of the Lords begetting in his
heart, has no union with it, nor can close with it; and power from God arises
and resistes it in the heart; and thus when the enemy would come in as a flood,
the Spirit of the Lord sets up a standard and bullwark against him: and O what
a sweet blessed and comfortable condition is this, to know every Motion that
moves in the Soul; to have Judgment so set up, the pure Judgment from the Lord
in the heart, which passes an infallible sentence upon every thought and
inclination, showing its Nature, and stamping as it were upon the face, a
Superscription showing whose it is. This is the spiritual Man which judges all
things, and is judged of no man; he is a Child of the day, and walks in the
Light where is no occasion of stumbling; and he knows whither he goes, and
whom he serves, and whose work he does; and this man does all in Faith, from a
full unshaken persuasion, that he is allowed and approved of God in what he
does, and so he serves God in all things, and glorifies him in his Body and in
his Spirit, which are the Lords; and till Man return to this state, which was
the pure state of his first Creation, he shall never have true Peace, or
Content, or Joy or Rest, but find Judgment from the Lord pursuing him, if he be
not past feeling; and this was my own condition in a day, O how did I lament
before the Lord because of the thick Darkness wherein I was so choked, that I
had no manifest or infallible feeling of that which is my life to day, the
blessed Spirit of God; and when many things moved in me, and thoughts come in
upon my mind, how was I ground as betwixt two Millstones with doubts on the one
hand lest they were of God, and fears on the other to the contrary, and I had
no certainty of either; and so what ever I did, I was Condemned, and full well
I knew the truth of that Scripture, He that doubts is Damned: and I never
came to the full and manifest Persuasion what Spirit or Principle moved in me,
till I came to a cessation of all my own works, in the self will, and then in
the stillness I learned the Judgment of God, concerning every thing in me; and
in that day I cried out and questioned in my heart saying, Is such a thing
possible at this day, (for I had no doubt, but the Prophets and Apostles, and
Saints of old have it) for me to know that Spirit that moves in me, to have a
feeling or sensation of it, which would put me out of doubt; as when I taste
Wine or Water or Vinegar, I discern each of them Manifestly, and has no doubt
concerning them; and by the Lords merciful Providence and his good hand that
led me, in a way I knew not; I met with a People who told me there was such a
blessed Dispensation, and they were brought into it in their measures, and they
said to me, God was to be known and his holy blessed Spirit, by a sensation or
feeling, which begot a ravishing unspeakable Joy, sweetness and delight in the
Soul, such as I never conceived of, neither could it enter into my heart, till
it were Revealed into the; and as I kept to that which judged me, gradually
it raised up a pure sense and discerning in me, and begot a birth of Life in
me, which could feel its Spring or Principle: And this is man's happiness, and
till he come hither, he is in Darkness, and walks he knows not whither, and
works, he knows not whose work it is, or whom he serves; for now these thoughts
motions, or inclinations of the mind being so secret, what can judge them? but
the Word of God alone; that Eternal Word of Power Jesus Christ, before whom,
all things are naked and bare, which is quick and powerful, and sharper than a
Two-edged-Sword, to devide betwixt the Soul and Spirit, and is a discerner of
the thoughts and intents of the heart; all Scripture words come short here,
infinitely short, for the Devil can, and often does, Transform himself into the
likeness of an Angel of Light, and puts on the sheeps clothing, the good
words, Scripture words he can suggest them, and teach man to spin out many
subtle notions and interpretations about them, which things also may be true
upon the matter being known and received from, and retained in the false
spirit, is but an Idol and not the Truth. Again, there are many things which a
man does, which themselves considered, may be done, or not done; and so they
being considered merely in themselves, are neither good or evil, and become
only so according to the Principle which moves in men's hearts thereto; good,
because from the Spirit of God Man is moved thereto; and evil, because from the
wrong Spirit Man is moved to do them: and so it comes often to pass, that two Men
doing the same things upon the matter, or speaking the ame words; suppose the
giving of alms, or speaking of some swords by way of exhortation, or prayer,
or the like; the one may be justified of God, doing the same from the movings
of his Spirit, the other Condemned, doing them from the wrong Spirit, or
Principle; and yet does so far go playing together as Scripture words can go
with them; and here the words fall short to judge them, both useing the words
or things in themselves, allowable by them; but now the one doing in the Faith,
which gives the feeling of the Principle of God which moves him, is accepted;
and the other doing but in the form and immitation, and from the wrong Spirit
and Principle is rejected, and his service abomination before God: And if one
would say, These inward secret Motions may be judged by their fruits, which
afterward outwardly appear? I answer, That is too late, and the enemy may
proceed so great a length, before the fruits outwardly appear, as to have
wholly captivated Man into his snares, so as he cannot get rid, and then he
will readily teach him to Justify the Fruit also: But though they were seen to
be evil it is too late; according to the wise saying of the Poet, Principiis
obsta sere Medicina paratur,
Cum mala per longas invaluere moras.
Resist all evils, how soon they begin,
When they have grown too late, comes Medicine.
Evil is to be resisted in its first appearance; (the Serpent is to be crushed
in the Egg,) And how shall it be resisted, if it be not manifestly known: And
hereby it may further appear, how absolutely necessary it is for man to know
the guidance of the Lord Immediately by the Revelation of his Light and Spirit
to order him in the stepps of his conversation, for it is not in man to direct
his stepps; and he is in all his ways to acknowledge the Lord, and to be found
in his will in all things, doing all in his name; that is, in his Power, in the
leadings of his holy Spirit, to walk after that in all things, else he cannot
do all in Faith, having in all he does, either the express Commandment of the
Lord thereanent, or at least his approbation; feeling in his Spirit, the Lord
giving him liberty: and how far short do the Scriptures fall, to tell a man,
what he is to do in all the circumstances and emergencies of Providence which
fall out in his life time, no rational man but sees; a World full of Books
could not contain, rules and directions to a man in all things, which yet are
all to be done in Faith, the Foundation whereof, is the Word of God, and his
Revealed Will; and if one should plead, that general rules of Scripture, and
examples may serve the turn, who see not, they cannot but fall short, there
being no rule immaginary so general concerning things in themselves
indifferent, but suffer thousands of exceptions and examples also; yea, and
many times these things which in the general look as duty; when the particular
comes to be weighed in the balance of Righteous Judgment, it is Sin; As for
instance, Parents are to be obeyed, but now, what if they command that which
God forbids, then they are to be denied therein, and many times the case is so
doubtful, whether the thing commanded be against or with the command of the
Lord: one says it is, and seeks to Justify it by Scriptures; another says it
is not, and condemns it from Scriptures, and what can be a touchstone in such
cases, but the Light of Christ which makes all Manifest, and many have seen
this, how general rules the best of them all, as they lie in words fail to
determine particulars, as in that and the like, Fus suum est cuique tribuendum,
every man is to have what is proper, or belonging to him; and yet this suffers
many exceptions, as if a Madman would demand his own knife from another that
has it, to cut his own Throat, it is to be denied; and often times the case in
the particular clothed with such and such circumstances is exceeding doubtful,
when the general is clear; and therefore they make a virtue, they call
Epieikeia in Greek, and to this, they give the Office of Modifying, and Judging
in such cases, how far the general rule of equity is to be kept to, or receded
from, in such cases as requires exception; as for instance, man's right must
yield to Gods right, and the right of particulars must yield to the right in
general; and this is the work of that virtue (...) as they term it, to define
the true midst or mi^di ^ity betwixt the two extremes, and the many
circumstances which falls in betwixt them, to touch the Center in ^is large
circumstance, and what can do this, but the very Wisdom of God, which would
lead man through all these intricacies, according to its promise, Prove. 6. 22.
above mentioned. And what a blessed Privilege do they cut themselves short of,
who ^enies such a thing can be expected, as the immediate leadings of the Lord,
teaching man, and giving him counsel in the weary affairs and circumstances
of his Life; and instructing him in the Will of his God, and calling him to
what ever place, calling, or employment he betakes himself too; as the Lord who
is his Judge, is Chastely waited upon; and we can set too our Seal to it, that
we have found it so: And without this, it is impossi^le to please God, and now
having showed the deceit of the enemy in this thing, whereby they are betrayed
into an opinion. That the Principle which moves in man, or gives him his
knowledge, cannot be known in its own immediate Manifestation: I proceed
further to demonstrate, that its to be known, and that the true ear or eye
which Gods spirit opens in man's Soul, as it is Spiritual, Heavenly, and of an
incorruptible Nature, so is its object; and therefore the objective Revelation
immediately from the Spirit of God is as necessary as the subjective: I am
constrained to use their terms, and find freedom so to do, for their sake; and
so whereas they say, there is no object to be revealed, but that which is
already revealed in Scripture, and is evident and clear enough in it self, and
requires only one opened ear or eye to discover, it is utterly false: we look
not says Paul on things that are seen, but at things which are not seen; for
the things which are seen are Temporal, but the things which are not seen are
Eternal, 2 Cor. 4. 18. Now observe what he makes the object of a Christians
sight, knowledge or discerning, not words, but things; and how far short words
fall of the things, is above manifested: next he makes this object, not things
temporal, things visible, that falls under the preception of the carnal eye, or
ear, or whatever is of this corruptible World; now though the things reported
of in Scripture, be eternal, yet the words of the Scripture as they can be
read, or heard with the eye or ear of flesh are not eternal, for nothing they
can perceive is such; now again, see how far the Apostle shuts forth words, or
the best of conceptions, or thoughts, or speculations of Man's heart, or
whatever can be perceived that way, from being the object of this eye or sense
of the Lords begetting in man, 1 Cor. 2. 9. Eye has not seen, nor Ear heard,
neither has it entered into the heart of man, the things which God has
prepared for them that love him. Now all the words of the Scripture, the eye
has seen, or may see; the ear hear, and they may enter into the heart of man
to conceive the words, and form many conceptions on them; but the things have
never entered, which the Scriptures report off into his heart, it is true, he
may form one image or likeness of them in his mind as if I should form a
likeness of such a Man or Country I never saw, but only heard off; this were
not the true representation, no more is that, its but an Idol, and Revelations
2. 17. To him that overcomes, will I give to eat of the hidden Manna, and will
give him a white Stone, and in the stone a new Name, written, which no man
knows, but he that receives it. Lo, here is the object of his knowledge that
overcomes, and none knew this object but he: The hidden Manna, the white
Stone, and the new name, and what is this object but the Son of the Fathers
Love Jesus Christ, himself, not only revealing, but revealed in the Soul; not
only causing a man to know, but being himself known. The eternal Life it self
manifested, He is this hidden Manna, this white Stone in which the Name is
written, and now is not a sight of him manifested, seen, heard, handled, more
than all words; is not this one object revealed, which only himself can
reveal: Oh, what an indignity do ye to Christ, and to that holy, pure, chaste,
birth of his begetting in man, who deny, that any more of the glory of Christ
is to be known; but what letters of Sylables, or sounds in the Air, can
contain, they give indeed a true report of him, and of his glory, but
infinitely falls the report short of a sight of himself; one glimpse of his
lovely Co^ntenance, one look of his eye, would swallow up all that knowledge of
him, drunk in by the report and fame of him, (which death and destruction can
have, but is eternally excluded from the sight) as the Light of the day at
noon, swallows up the Light of the Stars, and makes them all disappear, what
a vast difference was betwixt the report of Solomon, and of his glory, to the
Queen of Sheba, and her sight thereof, 1 Kin. 10. 4. And when the Queen of
Sheba, had seen all Solomon's Wisdom, and the House he had built, and the meat
of his Table, and the attendance of his Ministers, and their Apparel, etc.
ver. 6. She said to the King, it was a true report, that I heard in my own
Land, of the, Acts, and of thy Wisdom; howbeit, I believed not the words until
I came, and mine eyes had seen it, and behold the half was not told me, thy
wisdom and prosperity exceeds the same which I heard. And ver. 5. When she
sa^ the things themselves, there was no more Spirit in him, Now if Solomon's
glory and wealth, exceeded far the report or fame thereof; yea, of all that
could be written, or spoken in words, which truly did report of him; how
infinitely more does the glory of Christ, the true Solomon, and of his House
and Table, and the meat thereof, and his Servants, and the Appa^el, the
substance of all these things, whereof they were but a Figure, exceed the
report or sound thereof, if they come short in the description of the shadow,
how much more in the substance, and now Let any one who ever felt any true
experience of the Love of Christ shed abroad in the heart, answer me: does not
all words fall infinitely short of it, all that ever the eye saw, or ear heard,
or the heart or mind conceived, (till that it was revealed by the fountain it
self) was nothing to that which was felt, seen, tasted, of the love of Christ,
which passes knowledge, and it is past knowledge; it passes words, and the joy
unspeakable and full of glory, and the peace that passes understanding: do
they not infinitely exceed all the fame and report of them, in words they pass
the understanding, the knowledge, the thoughts of the heart, much more pass they
words: O how blind and insensible are they, who will deny this! and if they
pass words, all words that can be uttered to represent them, then what can
reveal them, but the spirit of God it self. Cor. 2, and 10. God says, he has
revealed them to us by his Spirit. and ver. 12. Now we have received not the
Spirit of this World, but the Spirit which is of God, that we might know the
things that are freely given to us of God. And what are the things the love of
God felt; O how it peirceth, how it ravisheth the pure mind; how sweet is it,
and more precious than the best Wine, is not this a glorious thing, and the
Peace of God, and the Joy of his Salvation, and the Spirit of Glory, and of
Power, which rests on all Gods faithful witnesses and followers, and the
bread of Life which comes down from heaven, a heavenly substance and virtue,
which is Angels food; and the water of Life which springs forth in full,
fresh, living streams from the Well, Spring, and Fountain, which is opened in
the heart of every true believer; what glorious things are these, and how
infinitely words, or all outward conceivable fall short in the description of
them, and if they exceed all that is writ, or reported in Scripture concerning
them, yet are known; then what is it but the Spirit that reveals them, and is
not this an immediate objective Revelation. If I should read a description of
Italy, make it never so exact or lively, and of the rich Buildings, the
pleasant Vineyards, and Orchards, the excellent Wines, and other Fruits that
grow there, and then come afterward to see the Land it self, and its
Buildings, and to eat of the Wine-Grapes, and taste of the Wine; have I not
then another manner of knowledge, and are they not new objects discovered to me,
the things themselves being now seen and known, whereas formerly, they were but
as reported of, and when the Soul is brought to see that Land afar off, and yet
nigh; the Land of P^omise, according to what is prom^sed; which Land is the
Kingd^m which is Ri^teousness, and Peace, and Joy in the Holy Chest, and the
Power of an endless Life, a Land flowing wi^h M^ss and Honey. continual Rivers
of Pleasures and Consola^n from the presence of the Lord; and is admitted to
drink of ^se Waters out of the Wells of Salvation: and to eat of t^ese Appies
that grow upon the Tree of Life, which bears Twelve manner of Fruit every
Month. Does i^ not discover and know new objects, infinitely excee^ing the
report of these things, for my self (and I know all who have tasted with me of
the heavenly gift will say, Amen, to my declaration.) I read the Scriptures all
over several times, I studied them, I meditated upon them, and dived into them,
and heard them weekly P^eached on, and I thought I had the Spiritual Eye, and
the Ear, and had the knowledge of the things of God in some Measure; and yet I
can truly say it, the Lord has opened that Eye in me now, whereby, I discern
Manifestly, that I then was very blind, and knew little more of these things,
but the report; and when it pleased the Lord to Reveal himself in me, and the
things of his Kingdom, Oh how did my Spirit fail, how was I stru^k with
Admiration of that glory which appeared; How did it ravish my heart, and daily
ravishes it, with its beauty and sweetness: and now I see, That all the
knowledge of these things at a distance, by report is exceedingly short of the
true substantial kno^ledg, and what I could apprehend of them by that Spirit,
which t^en bare rule in me, which was the Spirit of the World, was bu^ an Idol
and Image of the Beast which bewitched me; And ^lory to the Lord, who has given
me, with many others victory over th^s Beast, and his Name, and Image, and yet
there was that, even then which lay captive in me, under this Spirit that
thirsted for the true knowledge of God, as the Hare pants after the Wa^er
brooks, and could be satisfied with nothing else; and the Lord heard, and
relieved, and gave me the knowledge of himself, and has raised up a Birth of his
own begetting in me, and is daily more and more raising it up, which cannot
live but in the Light of his countenance, nor be satisfied with all the reports
of him, if himself be not heard, seen, and enjoyed; as 'twas said, Let me see
the Kings face, and if there be any iniquity in me, Let him kill me 2 Samuel, 14.
32. How much more does he that is born of God, desire his Fathers face, the
Kings face, the light of his Countenance; this made David, and so makes it all
the Children of God say, We have more joy and gladness in the light of our
Fathers Countenance, though it were shut up in a Dungeon with Bread and Water,
than they whose Corn, and Oil, and Wine does abound. Now, whereas it is said,
The Scriptures are plain, evident, and manifest in themselves; they have a
secret glory, Majesty and Purity in them, which man's writings in his own wisdom
have not, and this abundantly manifests them to the spiritual Eye; I grant it
is so, and certainly knows it to be so, which makes them so precious unto me,
but consider a little, what this Glory, Majesty, Plainness, Purity etc. is,
which makes them Manifest, and to whom it Manifests them: Such an Example will
somewhat figure it forth, having first known such a man of rare beauty,
comeliness, and majesty, which appears in his countenance; and afterward,
seeing his Portrait drawn so exactly as a Pensel could do; this Image or
Portrait has a pretty lively representation of him, and the Characters of his
Beauty, and the Majesty of his Countenance appear somewhat in the Portrait,
whereby I Manifestly know, That it is the representation of such a Man: Now
these Characters of Beauty and Majesty in the Image, come far short of the Man's
countenance, and it was the seeing of him first, made me know his Image to be
his; and so the glory and beauty of his Face may be called Primarie, but that
in the Portr^ Secondary, or Derivative; and the seeing himself, makes me
believe, that it is his Description, and it is Manifest enough so I reading in
the Scripture wherein there are as it were, rare and excellent draughts,
shaddowing forth Jesus Christ; and I then coming to know himself, the
Scriptures lie open and plain unto me, and they are very evident and manifest;
but to him that never saw the King of Glory himself, they are hid, and as a
sealed Book; and he who has heard God himself speak, will manifestly know the
words writ or declared by others, in whom he has also spoken, and he stands
near himself to testify and witness to the truth of these words which come
from himself: So Queen Sheba easily believed the report concerning Solomon and
his wealth when she saw it, and I reading the Description of such a Country I
have been in, and traveled through, it is easy for me to know, whether it be
true, or false; and I being so long a hearer of such a Man speaking from word
of mouth, and afterward reading a book containing his words, I know them to be
his, having heard him before; but the words as they lie in a book come far
short of these which proceeds from his own mouth, for these had much more
Life and Power with them: Then how much more do the words Immediately
proceeding out of the Mouth of God, excel a Declaration or writing of them,
though they be also precious, and excellent, but where the Word of the King
himself is, there is Power, and blessed are they who know this joyful sound of
the Voice of the living God in their hearts, and have thus learned the truth as
it is in Jesus; having so learned Christ, having heard himself, and so having
him, the Witness in themselves. Ephesians. 4. 21. 1 John 5. 10. They are built on a
sure Foundation, which gives them fullness of Assurance, That the Prophets, and
Apostles Doctrine is of God, having found himself Come, and seen him of whom
Moses and the Prophets wrote, John 1. 45. 46. And as it was the Spirit of Jesus
Christ Witnessing (in the hearts of them who believed) to the Truth of the
Doctrine of the Prophets and Apostles, by which they were made Manifest in
their Consciences, and their words were believed, which proceeded Immediately
from their own Mouths; and seeing that was necessary then, it must be also
necessary now, also much if not much more, seeing these Apostles and Prophets
are not alive themselves in the flesh to tell us, that they spoke or wrote so,
but that their writings are transmitted to us, through many generations from
hand to hand, and no question they have fallen into enemies hands, and how can
a man be so fully assured, as is sufficient for his Salvation; but that
Papists, Jews, and others, who had them before us, have wronged them, and both
added, and taken away, and altered; if the Spirit of the Lord persuade him not
to the contrary, seeing it is possible they might have done so, if the Lord had
permitted; and what a light Foundation have they to their Faith, which men of
corrupt minds, or Devils, or any powers whatsoever of this World, may brangle,
spoil, corrupt, add to, or take from, for as we know through the rich mercy,
and gracious Providence of God, the Lord has so wonderfully preserved the
Scriptures Testimony so far incorrupt and pure, as that they abundantly
testify the true foundation, and these things sufficient for Salvation; not
that they are sufficient themselves, but they abundantly testify to that which
is sufficient; and this we know by the Spirit of God that wrought them: but
what a tottering and Lubrick, and uncertain Foundation ye have made to your
selves, some of you affirming, and these men of great account with you, that
the points of the Hebrew Coppies in which Language, the old Testament was writ,
are but men's aditions, and the first writers used them not; and it is affirmed
by many of your selves, they are but a late invention: Now what a great
difference, and considerable the pointing makes any skilled in that Language
but a little, may know, (the points being the vowells) even so great, that the
points otherways set or added, may not only alter one or more words, but whole
sentances; and if so, what a loss are ye at in your Foundation: I found it only
to touch this a little, and refer the Reader to Samm^el Fishers Book, where he
treats of this at large; and John Owen Confesses the points or vowels to be so
weighty, that if they be invented or added since the writeing of the Scriptures
by fallible men, it mightily threatens the ruin of the Christian Faith, thus
he in words to the same purpose as may be seen in his book; and yet these men
who set forth the Biblia Polyglotta: and many others affirm, the points to be
added since, or that the contrary is not Certain, but they are happy whose
Faith depends not on man's saying or unsaying, but on that Word which was in the
beginning, and this only can certify us of the Scriptures.

Argument 12. And as by the Spirit of Jesus Christ his Revealing Immediately in
man's heart, and bearing testimony to the Scriptures, that they are of God, and
writ from his inspiring and moving of these holy Men of God who penned them.
Man can only be sufficiently persuaded to believe them, so this can only give
the understanding sense, true interpretation of them; Jesus Christ he himself
is the great Interpreter the one of a Thousand, J^. 33. 23. Even he who met the
two Disciples in (...) w^y going to Ema^s, and beginning at Moses and all the
(...), expounded into them in all the Scriptures, the things concerning
himself; and it is clear, that he spoke outwardly to them by word of Mouth, so
he spoke inwardly by his Spirit into their hearts, and therefore they said one
to another, Did not our hearts burn within us while he talked with us by the
way, and while he opened to us the Scriptures, Luke 24. 27, 32. Now what made
this burning of their hearts within them but the powerful appearance of his
Spirit which wrought in them as fire, which dispelled these clou^y mists of
Darkness, which covered as a veil the eye of their understandings, whereby
they could not perceive the things written of him; and it is said, concerning
the other Disciples and Apostles, ver. 45. Then opened he their understandings,
that they might understand the Scriptures. And that the words spoke from
without, could not do, this is clear from his own Testimony, John, 6. 63. It is
the Spirit which quickneth, the Flesh profits nothing, the Words that I speak
unto you, they are Spirit, and they are Life. and Job 32. 8. The Inspiration of
the Almighty gives understanding; This is that which opens the Scriptures else
they are a sealed book, and how weak and dark were the Disciples whilst Christ
abode with them, in his bodily appearance; how many things were shut up from
them, even although they had some knowledge, which Flesh and Blood had not
revealed to them, but his Father in Heaven: yet, the Spirit not being pouered
forth in such a measure of glorious Manifestation as afterward they received,
till then they were Ignorant of many things, See John 14. 9. John 16. 16. 17.
Compared with 25. Math. 16. 8. 9. Math. 16. 21. 22. John 11. 13. John 13. 28.
Luke 9. 44. Luke 9. 33. Math 17. 23. Acts 1. 6. And especially the mystery of
his Dying and Rising again, and the coming of his Kingdom was much hid from
them; therefore he said, John 16. 12, 13. I have yet many things to say unto
you, but ye cannot bear them now: Howbeit, when the Spirit of Truth is Come he
will guide you into all Truth; for he shall not speak of himself, but
whatsoever he shall hear, that shall he speak, etc. And so when the Spirit was
poured out, then their understandings were opened, and they called to
remembrance many things spoke by him, in the days of his Flesh, and then they
understood them. No Prophecy of the Scripture (says Peter) is of any private
Interpretation, 2 Pe^. 1. 20. But according to the Greek and Bezars
Translation, the words are more plain; No Prophecy of the Scripture is of a
Man's own Interpretation, Prophecy, Explications, the Man who spoke the
Scriptures from the Spirit of God was not to Interpret them of himself, nor in
his own will, so neither was any other to Interpret them, but that Spirit which
first gave them forth, was to Interpret them: For the things of God knows no
Man, save the Spirit of God, 1 Cor. 2. 11. And if it be so among Men, T^t the
Law maker is only admitted in point of Controversy, the expounder of the Law;
and if he who writes a Book amongst men, be accounted the fittest to Interpret
or give the sense or meaning of his words, how much more is it necessary that
the Spirit of the Lord which gave forth the Scriptures, be the expounder of
them; especially, seeing the Scriptures declare of such things that are so
Mysterious to the natural understanding of Man, or to his natural reason, that
they are quite above its comprehending or conceiving of them; I say, not
contrary to his Reason, to wit, that Spirit, Principle or faculty in Man,
which can judge truly or certainly of things Natural, and this is also of God;
but the Mysteries of Salvation whereof the Scriptures treat, though they be not
contrary as is said, yet they are above the reach of this Principle or Power,
of discerning; as the things of reason are above the things of the senses
bodily, so the things of Faith, are above the things of Reason; to wit, that
Reason, or Principle which can judge truly of things Natural, for I Like not to
contend about words, I acknowledge the Principle of Faith is, and may be fitly
called rational, and the believer is the most rational man in the World, and
the very wisdom of God is Reason, or Understanding, and that wisdom wherewith
he denies his servants from above is also reason, but it is not the Natural
reason; for before man was endued with the Heavenly Wisdom, he had the Natural
Reason or Understanding, but then he neither had, nor could have the knowledge
of the things of God, to wit, The Mysteries of Salvation; This is that which
the Apostle plainly declares, 1 Cor. 2. 14. But, the Natural Man receives not
the things of the Spirit of God, for they are foolishness unto him, neither can
he know them, because they are spiritually discerned, Lo how he makes them
impossible to be known to the Natural Man, or understanding, because the
knowledge of them stands in an other Principle, in that which is born of the
Spirit of God, the Seed of God, that can only know them; they are spiritually
discerned: And this further Consideration will yet make it more appear, That
man of himself without the Revelation and Inspiration of the Spirit of God
cannot understand the things of God, and so cannot Interpret the Scriptures,
declaring of them, because Man as he stands in the Fall, and not come to be
Regenerate, lives, and is quite sunkinto a Wisdom, Knowledge, and Understanding
that is altogether contrary to the wisdom of God, and the true knowledge of God;
it is true as is already said, there is somewhat in man, which Judges truly,
and pertinently of things Natural, and this of it self, is not contrary to the
wisdom of God, but a gift of God, and is of good use to Man, were it in its
right place, and by this, man properly is a Man, he has a rational Principle in
him, whereby, in this he excells the Beast of the Field; but now man in the
Fall, stands not in this Principle, it rules not in him, there is another birth
in man, which Lords it, and rules in him, and this birth is of the Devils
begetting, and hereby Man is a Child of the Devil: For this Seed whereof this
Birth is begotten, was sown into man's heart when he Fell, and it has ever
propagated and spread it self through Adams Posterity since, and this Seed and
Birth has a Wisdom, and Knowledge, which is Carnal, Earthly, and Devilish, and
is direct, opposite, and contrary to the wisdom of God, as every thing of this
birth, is contrary to every thing of the birth of the Spirit of God, Gal. 5.
17. And now the wisdom of this Fleshly, Devilish birth rules in every man, in
the natural state and subjects, and brings into slayery that other Principle in
him, which in it self, is apt to judge rightly of things within its own Sphere
to wit, things Natural, and this Devilish, Earthly, Carnal Wisdom makes it do
it service, and answer its Designs, and the more quick and discerning that a
man be in the Natural Spirit or understanding, this Devilish, Earthly, Carnal
Wisdom, which most usually is called in the Scriptures Acceptance, also
Natural, being a top of it, and ruleing therein; the more it makes a man
incapable of the true knowledge and wisdom, and sets up the stronger Bulwarks
in man, against the wisdom of God; And these are the strong holds which Paul
speaks of, which the Spiritual Weapons are mighty to pull down, the high
imaginations, according to the Greek it is reasonings; and every high thing
that exalts it self against the knowledge of God, 2 Cor. 10. and 5. So it is
clear, That the reasonings of man standing in this wisdom which is altogether
contrary to the true wisdom and knowledge of God; are so far from being a help
to him, to further him in the true knowledge, that it is a strong hold against
it, and therefore is to be cast down ere a man can come to the true knowledge
which proceeds from the meek and lowly Spirit of Jesus Christ, the beginning of
which wisdom, is the fear of God, and so the more that a man is endued with the
knowledge of Letters, and other parts, (which might be of use to him, were he
come to have his mind Redeemed into Gods fear, and so to have the wisdom of God
to rule in him) while he remains in the natural unregenerate State; the more
these things are a loss and snare unto him: and this is that wisdom the Apostle
speaks of, when he says The World by wisdom knew not God, and this Wisdom
being a Type in the learned Doctors, Rabbis, Scrybes, and Phtises, among the
Jews, led them from the knowledge of Jesus Christ, so that they not only did
mistake him, notwithstanding, of all the Scripture skill, but said, he had a
Devil, and prevailed with the Rulers to Crucify him, and Persecute all his
followers; and this wisdom in them, taught them to reason against Christ, from
the Scriptures, this Man cannot be of God say they, because he breaks the
Sabbath, and despises Moses Law; but now the eye of that wisdom being open in
them, which cannot but judge amiss of the things of God, they misunderstood the
Scriptures, and wrested them to their own Destruction; and although they were
learned in the Letter, and form of knowledge, yet they were unlearned and
Idiots, as to the true knowledge, and Christ called them blind leaders of the
blind, Math. 15. 14. So you may per^eive, what learning that is, Peter speaks
of, when he says, 2 Pet. 3. 16. These that are unlearned, wrest the Scriptures
to their own destruction, for the Jewish Doctors, Scribes, and Pharisees who
were very learned Men in that knowledge Letters could give them, and they had
Languages Hebrew, Greek, and Latin; and yet by Christ's testimony, they were
blind and so unlearned, and all their learning was so far from helping them to
understand the Scriptures, that the more they mis-understood them, and the poor
and simple and unlettered men, they understood the Scriptures and knew Christ
to be the Messiah, that Moses and the Prophets writ off, whereas they knew him
not, and for all their learning, were shut out from the knowledge of the
Scriptures, and the wrong eye being op^n in them, they read the Scriptures
backward, and could not but judge amiss of them. Now all this while I have not
denied, that there is any thing in man, who may be in a Natural State, that can
in any way, or manner know any thing of God; the Natural Man cannot indeed,
that is to say, that Principle which in man, makes him a man, and Distinguishes
him from a Beast; That of it self cannot know the things of Gods heavenly
Kingdom, because they are above its reach; and then far less can that Man or
Birth of the Devils begetting, called the old Man know them, for its wisdom is
contrary thereto; but now there is a Seed of God in Man, even in that State
which is shut up in Death, or Darkness, under this earthly Wisdom, which as a
veil blinds it, yet the Light of Christ shines so through the Vail in this
State, as that it reaches the Seed, and ministers some knowledge to Man in this
State, whereby he knows he ought to be righteous, and sober, and godly in a
Measure, and knows some things to be good, and some things to be vile; and were
man faithful to that which gives him this knowledge, it would redeem his mind
out of the false wisdom, and increase in him the true knowledge, but man
remaining Disobedient, the earthly wisdom gets dominion in him, and the more
it rules him, the more it blinds him, till he be altogether past feeling, and
then it is so with him, as with these, Isa. 6. 10. Now whereas it is commonly
said, that Scripture is the best Interpreter of Scriptures for what is obscure
in one place, is plain in another; and so the obscure is to be expounded by the
plain, and there is as much of the Scripture plain, as is necessary for any man
to know: to this I answer in the words of Prove. 8. 9. They are all plain to him
that understands, to him who is endued with a measure of the same Spirit that
gave them forth, which has revealed to him, the things by them declared; so a
man knowing the things, the words concerning them stand open and clear, and
plain to his understanding for they are plain and manifest to that eye and ear
which can read, hear, and understand them; but now the plainest Scripture in
the Bible treating of the things of Gods Kingdom, which are most necessary to
be known, is dark, and obscure, and mysterious to the Natural Man, and
foolishness to the fleshly wisdom, for that the things are not known by him,
and so he cannot understand the words concerning them; for the knowledge of the
things, is as it were, a key to open up the words, but the plainest words that
are, cannot give the knowledge of the things, which are only known by a
Spiritual discerning: Is not that a plain Scripture, Thou shall Love the Lord
thy God with all thy heart. But what learned man with all his Letter knowledge
understands it; not having that love by the Spirit of God shed abroad in his
heart: The man who cannot read a letter, and has a feeling of this Love,
abiding in him, a thousand fold more knows that Scripture, and can speak more
pertinently concerning it, from the feeling thereof, and what it has wrought in
him; than the other can do from his housefull of Books, and other helps of
Learning. Now I acknowledge, that some Scriptures are more plain and open than
others, and the spiritual man, the understanding man who has revealed a true
Judgment, and pure discerning from the Lord, he can know what Scripture is more
plain, and what more obscure; and so standing in the wisdom of God and in his
Counsel, he may compare Scripture with Scripture, and Spiritualls with
Spiritualls, and so he may open up, the obscure from the plain, and reason and
reduce consequents From the more plain to open up the more obscure, and this
which reasons, which co^p (...), which judges in him of Scriptures, and what
consequence may be drawn, must be that of the Spirit of the Lords begetting in
him, which cannot judge amiss, but it always judges righteous Judgment; and so
the opening up the Scripture more obscure from the more plain, will be of good
service, in its place, to the hearer, for the speaker opening Scripture in the
wisdom and Power of God reaches the seed in Man, and the plainest Scripture is
apt to reach; and the Lord stands near to testify to the words so
interpreted, and this witness in Man's Conscience answers to the truth, of what
is declared; and so I acknowledge, there is great use and service in the
interpreting of Scriptures, when the interpreter has his gift of God, and
keeps within his measure, and speaks according to the analogy or proportion of
Faith, according to what is revealed to him, the measure of the gift of Christ,
Ephesians. 4. 7. This is that, which Paul makes the rule of interpretation, See 2
Cor. 10. 13. We will not boast (said he) of things without our measure, but
according to the measure of the rule, which God has described unto us: see
further, Romans 15. 18. 19. 2 Cor. 4. 13. Romans 12. 3. compared with Phil. 6. 3,
15. 16. Lo how in this place he presses no man further to believe him, or be of
the same mind with him; then according to what God has revealed to him, if any
man be other ways minded, God shall reveal even this to him; nevertheless,
whereto we have already attained, let us walk by the same rule; see how he
makes the measure of attainment; The Rule; but now a man meddling with the
interpretation of Scripture in his own wisdom, out of the wisdom of God, how
can he but err, if he come to read and compare, Scripture with Scripture; and
so to open up one Scripture from another, with that eye which cannot but Judge
amiss; the Light of the Body is the Eye, if therefore the Eye be single, the
whole body is full of Light, but if the Light in him be Darkness, how great is
his Darkness; the Eye of that wisdom in him, which is contrary to the wisdom of
God, being Judge in him, it must of necessity Judge amiss, especially, seeing
that Scripture words in themselves (abstracting from the mind of the Spirit of
Christ, which such have not) are admittable of different Interpretations, not
only different readings, according to the Translations which differ, but the
same word being rightly Translated; may in themselves rightly considered, have
different meanings; how then shall the meaning of the Spirit be had without its
own reaching, what an impossible thing were it, to hit right upon the true
sense, or interpretation, without the Spirit of God, though there were nothing
in m^n that had a bias, or prejudice against the Truth; but now that Spirit
which is of this World, and is contrary to the Spirit of God, and his truth,
being Judge in him: this makes it far more impossible. So it is a thing of great
weight and concernment, for a man to know of what Spirit he is, what Spirit is
Judge in him, what Spirit leads him, what eye is open in him, for according to
this, so will be the interpretation of Scripture; for although they say, that
Scripture expounds Scripture, yet at best, it is but that, by which it is
expounded; but now that Spirit, or Principle, or Wisdom in man, which compares
Scripture with Scripture, which reasons and draws consequences, and judges of
them; that is the interpreter: So the result of all is, such is the Judgment,
and Interpretation according to the right or wrong Spirit, which rules in him,
and the wrong Spirit cannot but wrest, add to, and take from Scripture, and the
Curse is pronounced against it, and the right Spirit, the Spirit of God, and
the eye which it opens in man, cannot judge amiss, it passes always Righteous
Judgment. And O that men would consider this, so weighty a thing, who go on so
rashly to meddle with Scripture, and give meanings to it, what Spirit they are
of, what is that in them which gives the meaning of it, if it be not the
heavenly wisdom it cannot but wrest, and what is the reason that there are so
many different Religions in the World, and opinions, one contrary to another;
whereas, the Truth, and true Religion is but one, and so many hundred different
interpretations of Scripture, but that men's minds are gone from the Spirit of
truth, which would make them all of one mind, and open the like eye in all, and
then all would judge as unanimously of Scripture; as now the bodily eye judges
of things visible, men make no contest or jarring about what they see, looking
upon the same objects, through the same midst, with the like eye, which being
sound, makes all their judgments one, and till men come to the one Spirit,
which opens the like eye in all they can never be of one mind, and whereas
people so much, ask at us whom made ye judge of interpreting of Scripture, I
say, the measure of the gift in every one, the measure of the wisdom given of
God; and till Man come to this, and judges in it, or rather it in him; he steps
up into the place of Judgment, which belongs not to him, and he ought not to
Judge. And I may shut up all concerning this particular, with a word of advice
to such, who are so ready to meddle with Interpretation of Scriptures, giving
meanings on them, and are so confident they are right, and yet many of them are
not come to the fear of God, which is the beginning of that wisdom, which only
can judge aright of Scriptures: To such I say, Take heed to your Spirits, be
jealous over them, know what Spirit ye are of, for on this thing depends all;
if this be not known, if ye be in the doubt concerning this, ye know nothing
yet truly, for the Principle being doubtful, the foundation being uncertain, so
much of necessity be the whole superstructure.

Argument, 13. And now as I have demonstrated, how that by the Revelation of
the Spirit of Jesus Christ in Man, he only can know God and the things of his
Kingdom, and the Scriptures with their interpretation: so I am to show, that
hereby can man only know himself, and the state he stands in before God,
whether Justified, or Condemned; without this, he can have no true, nor
infallible assurance of Gods love and favor: That there is such a thing
attainable to every Believer, and necessary for him to know, as to his
comfortable walking with God, the Scriptures manifestly declare, and it is
generally acknowledged, it is to become to, and sought after, and therefore, I
shall not insist on the proveing of it being granted, only the way how it is
attained; that is it I plead for, That it is only by the Immediate Revelation
of the Spirit of Christ, Justifying the man in his heart; He is near that
Iustifyeth, says the Prophet, so near that he is in him, and justifies him in
his conscience, and without this, man can never have true assurance, till God
justifies him; man's justification, or words only spoke without, can do
nothing) Romans 8. 16. The Spirit it self bears witness with our Spirits, that
we are the children of God: Not the words of Scripture, or the words of the
Spirit spoke to, or in other men, what is that to me, but the Spirit it self
witnesses this; and he that believes, has this witness in himself,
witnessing in him. 1 Phil. 5. 10. And says Paul, 2 Cor. 1. 21. Now he which
stablisheth us with you is Christ, and has appointed us is God, who has also
sealed us, and given us the earnest of the Spirit in our hearts. Lo how he
makes it a common Privilege to him and them; and this is that which
stablisheth, setleth, confirms, stays the mind, and gives it peace, and
removes all doubtings, begeteth in it a full assurance of Faith, according to
Heb. 10. 22. and Heb. 6. 11. It Is called, The full assurance of hope. and Col.
2. 2. all riches of the full assurance of understanding. And this was the fruit
of Paul's preaching. 1 These. 1. 5. For our Gospel came not unto you in word
only, but also in power, and in the holy Ghost, and in much assurance: and
Ephesians. 1. 13. In whom, (viz. in Christ) when ye had believed (for it should be
so Translated) Ye were sealed with that holy Spirit of Promise; So blessed are
they who receave this Seal, and what are all Scripture words without this Seal,
but a blank; and this Seal is the Seal of the holy Spirit of Promise, sealing
in man's heart, that he is beloved, justified, and approved of God, and it can
make him cry with assurance, that it is so Abba Father: And this will yet
further appear, that its only by Revelation, that a man can be assured of his
state, by the immediate manifestation of his state to him in the Light of Jesus
Christ, by examining the other grounds, which men make for this assurance, when
they have shut out of doors that which can give it, and gives it, as is proved
by the Scriptures Testimony; a man say they, can be assured of his state before
God, if he be Justified by certain Signs, Characters, and Marks, for if he be
a true believer, that his Faith is the true Faith, the living Faith, and not
the false dead Faith; This say they, he can know by his Love to God, by his
meekness, his patience, his courage, his righteousness, his love to his
Neighbors; but now seeing there are semblances of all these, a counterfeit
love does to God and Man, meekness, patience, etc. For the Hippocrite who has
nothing of the true Love, Patience, Meekness, etc. Yet, he has a likeliness of
them, and will proceed as far in the outward actions of Devotion, Charity,
Equity, etc. As the other that is the true believer; yea, and even according to
their own confession, he may go beyond him; and so whereas they say, the Tree
is kno^n by its Fruits, and it is so, but by what are the Fruits known, two men
may be found doing the same outward work, which has the same outward
appearance, and yet the one a meet Hippocrite, the other a sincere Christian;
then by what can their works, or fruits be judged? It Is true, some works are so
manifestly evil, as Cursing, Swearing, Drunkenness, Lying, Stealing, Killing,
Whoreing, that they are readily known by all to be such; and that which makes
them known, is the Light of Christ in their hearts, but now these works, which
carry in them an appearance to be good, and yet are not good, but dead works,
empty, without Life, though they have a fair show, yet they are rottenness
within, as its reported of some Aples, that have a very pleasant color, but
are poison within; how shall man judge of these, now he who has Life in
himself, the birth begotten of God; he has a Spiritual sense, and discerning,
whereby he can savor, smell, and taste of the works, the fruits of the good
tree, for they have a good favor, a living spiritual savor, they smell, and
taste of the Tree of Life, on which they grow; hence they are called living
works, and these in the Light which reveals them, and makes all manifest, or
seen to be good: And the works have but the appearance, they are also seen and
discerned to be such, and being evil, they cast an evil favor, by which in the
Light, which begets the discerning, they are felt, and he can have no union
with them, nor with the tree, on which they grow; and this man discerns in
the manifestation of the Light, both his own, and his neighbors works, of what
nature they are, by the casting and smelling of the fruit, the Tree is known,
both in himself and his neighbor, and this is a great Mystery, and hard to be
received with such, who have not got that taste, and discerning, begot in them
of the Lord, which tastes words, and works, as the mouth tastes meat; but
hereto I give my testimony, that there is such a thing, and I do witness it in
my measure, and so I confess there are Signs, and Characters of a man's state,
the fruits infallibly manifest the tree, but the fruits cannot be certainly and
infallibly known, but in and by the Light, which reveals them, and begets a
taste to discern them, this is it which enters into the Kirnel, and pierces
through the outward appearance, and searches what is in the Center, and brings
to light the hidden things of Dishonesty, and discovers the ravening Wolf in
the Sheeps clothing; whether in a man's self, or his neighbor. And this
further makes it the more impossible; for a Man without Revelation to know his
state, especially, according to our Advessaries Principle; for, whereas Christ
said, Whereby shall ye know, that ye love me, if ye keep my Commandments. Now
they say, that is impossible, we must break them every day in thought, word,
and deed, and we must remain in a necessity of sinning while we remain in the
body; and this Principle, takes every wicked profane wretch to cover his
wickedness: O says he, the Children of God have their infirmities, David fell,
in Murder and Adultery, Noah into Darkness, Peter denied his Master, etc. and
the common Swearer, Drunkard, Whoremonger, Backbiter, Cheater, Worldling say,
This is my infirmity and the best have their infirmities: I have a good heart
and am sincere for all this, and I approve not my doings, and I may have true
faith for all this, and be in a Justified condition: Now passing this Decept of
theirs, which their Teachers have caused them to drink in, I shall only at this
time use it so far against them, as to demonstrate all their signs and marks,
come short to give them assurance; for now according to their own Confession,
their keeping the Commandments, cannot be a Sign to them, for they cannot come
up to keep them, and their evil works are many, and much more than their good;
how then shall the good Tree be found by its fruits, seeing the good Tree
cannot bring forth evil fruits, and how shall the good in this mixture be known
from the evil; and this yet increases the difficulty in the point of Trial,
that not the quantity, or the measure is to be looked into, of goodness, or
grace in Man; but the quantity, kind, or nature, and it is true that it is so:
Now where there is so much of the evil, and so little of the good, like a dust
of Gold, a little grain, in a dunghill of evil, whose nature is to hide the
good; how can it appear, or be infallibly known, but by the Revelation of the
Light of Christ, which searches ^ll the depths of Heaven and Hell, and indeed,
in the midest of Much of a contrary Nature in man, Much Filth, and Deceit, and
Corruption; yet the Light I say, will discover the little grain of sincerity,
the small mustard Seed, and without this, Man has no comfort, till that he
know, that there is somewhat that is sincere and honest in him; and this
breathes and cries to God for Deliverance, from that of a contrary Nature, That
he would slay it with the Sword of his mouth, and raise it up unto Dominion and
Victory over all; And it is only God who searches every thing in Man's heart
that can discover it to him, for he cannot himself, of himself know it, but the
Lord he searches the Heart and tries the Reins, and shows to man his
thoughts, and every motion of his mind, of what nature, quality, and principle
they are; and so it is manifest, that one uncertain, f^llible, and dubious way
this is, for a Man to know his State by Marks and Signs, when he is not come to
the immediate Manifestation and Revelation of the Light of Christ in his heart;
in this to read his evidences, and examine them: No more can they tell a Man
his State without this, than a Sun-Dyal can tell the hours of the day, when the
Sun shines not upon it with his beams; and this comparison, some of themselves
have made: and whatever that assurance be they can gather without Immediate
Revelation, it is not the assurance of Faith, and so at best it is but
conjecture; this will easily appear from their own very Principles, and some of
them has seen it and granted it, for were it no assurance of Faith, then it
should have the Revealed Word of God for its object, either by Scripture, or
Immediately spoken from the mouth of the Lord; This they grant, That Faith can
have no other formal object: Now according to their own way they affirm, this
assurance is but to be gathered by consequence, as in such an Argument or
Silogisme; Whosoever firmly and truly believeeth in Christ and loves him, etc.
is Justified; But I am such says he, therefore I am such. Now the Proposition
of this Argument being sound in Scripture, I grant it, and shall let it pass
for a true Foundation at this time; (though as is above demonstrated, the
Scripture Words in themselves be not a sufficient Foundation:) But what warrant
have they for the Faith of the Assumption? Vi^. I believe, I love Christ, no
Scripture in all the Bible speaks this particularly to any man, and they
acknowledge it; and that this assumption has not the Word of God for it is
object, but Dictamen Conscientie, The testimony of Man's own Heart and
Conscience, that he sincerely believes, and loves God; And now according to
that true Principle, and granted by themselves, the Conclusion always
follows the weaker premises, as one link in the Chain being weak, weakens the
whole Chain; it follows, That this Conclusion must follow the certainty of
the Assumption; and it being but the testimony of a Man's own Conscience, for
to this at last he must return, how many arguments soever he makes; and not the
Testimony of the Word, and Spirit of God in his Conscience, for this they have
shut out of Doors as is said; wherefore the Conclusion also, which is the
assurance a Man has of his State, (by the practical silogysm as is called by
them) is but the assurance of Faith not Divine, but Humane; That is an
Assurance leaning upon Man's own Testimony of himself, and not upon the
Testimony of God's Word, and so it is not the Assurance of Faith, the Scripture
speaks off; which has its object the Word of God: And this as is said, some of
themselves ingenuously have confessed and affirmed, That an assurance of Faith
is only attainable by special Revelation: And as for my self, I can truly say
it, I was put upon the Rack as it were, with the Doctrine of the Natural
Teachers, when I set about to examine my State; for the signs they gave me of
my State, was as obscure and dark to me as my State it self; and how then could
I by them know it: And thus I am sure it has been, and is with many others, and
what shall we render unto the Lord, who has spoken in our hearts, saying, Be of
good comfort, I am at peace with you, your sins are forgiven I am well pleased
with you in my beloved Son; and has caused his Light to shine forth in our
hearts, which Reveals our State unto us, and points unto us the infallible
Signs and Characters of it, and the love of God is Immediately felt; and this
knowledge of it, is beyond all Signs and Characters of it; and what a blessed
Privilege do they robe themselves of, which they might attain unto, who cry
out, All Revelation is Ceased; for if it be Ceased, then can Men neither know
God, Scripture, or Himself.

Argument, 14. And hereby only Man can also know the true Church in general,
and the Members and Ministers thereof, in particular, the true Church has
always been a Mystery un^o the World, the Men of this World, for it stands
in another Principle; The true Church is in God, 1 These. 1. 1. This is the
Principle it stands in, and every Member thereof, they are his hidden ones,
they are as dead Men unto the World, being Crucified to it, and it to them: for
(said Paul Coloss. 3. 3.) Ye are dead, and your life is hid with Christ in God:
And as Christ is, so are they in this World, being flesh of his flesh, and
Members of his body, being born from above, and begot into another Nature,
Life, Spirit, and Principle, and therefore the World knows it not, nor them
the Members thereof, for it knows its own and loves them; these who stand in
the same Ground, Spirit and Principle, with it self: but because they are no^
of World but of God, therefore it knows them not, but hates and persecuteth
them, John 1, 31. And so the People and Children of God in all ages have been
strangers, unto the World, and unknown to it; They have been for Signs and for
Wonders, their Doctrine, their Laws, their Conversations, has always been
accounted strange and ridiculous, and they have been reckoned Deceivers, and
Blasphemers; and the true Prophets and Servants of God have been killed, and
stoned, and put to many cruel Deaths; see that Cloud of Witnesses, Heb. 11.
throughout, and ver. 37. They were stoned, they were sawn asunder, were
tempted, were ^ayn by the sword, they wandered about in sheepskins, and
goat skins, being destitute, afflicted, tormented; of whom the World was not
worthy, etc. And so Jesus Christ himself being come in the flesh, they knew him
not, and Crucified him as a Blasphemer; and they Persecuted and killed his
Disciples, and followers, under the Name of Deceivers, and such as would turn
the World up-side down; as Deceivers and yet true; as unknown, and yet well
known: But now the Members of the true Church know one another, being Children
of the same Father and Mother, Members of the same Body; having one Mind, Soul,
Spirit, and Life in them all; They cannot but know one another in that, wherein
their Unity stands, and Fellowship, and Communion one with another; and this
Unity of the Spirit, is the Bond of Peace, Ephesians. 4. 3. And the Bond of Love,
whereby their hearts are knit together in Love, unto all riches of the full
assurance of understanding, for the Love is a discerning thing; He that Loves
God knows him, and he that Loves him that is begotten of God, knows him
also, for the true Love and the true Knowledge, goes always together, and the
one is the Ground and Foundation of the other; for that which I have no true
knowledge of, I cannot Love, and that which I Love, I cannot but Know in some
measure, and that which I certainly Know not, but doubtingly, that I cannot
perfectly Love; for perfect Love casts out fear, and there is no fear in
Love, and so no doubting in Love; for the fear comes from the doubting, and all
the Children of God, are Sealed in their Foreheads, They have their Fathers
Name written upon them, the Name of my God, and the Name of the City of my God,
Revel. (...). 1. 2. compared with Revel. 7. 3. Whereby they know one another to
be the Children of ^ome Father, the Citizens of one City, which is the New
Jerusalem, the Church of the Firstborn; and this is most necessary for them,
that they know not one another, and that not by conjecture, but certainly; for
they being all followers of the Lamb together, Warring the same Warfare, in the
same Cause and Testimony, which is also unknown, and hid to the World, if they
did not infallibly know one another, they could not have that Peace, and Unity,
and Concord one with another; how could they discern the true Friend, from the
Enemy, the secret Enemy, the Deceiver, which is the most dangerous Enemy; and
can come into all outward and appearances with Friends, can put on the Sheeps
clothing, and a form of Godliness, but deny the Power, and be an enemy to it;
a ravenous Wolf can speak fair, yea, and profess all the Words and Principles
of Truth, and come the whole length of all outward as is said, and yet be a
rotten Hypocrite, a lymn of Satan, a bra^ of Babylon, void of all fear of God:
So how shall he be discerned? See Mal. 3. 18. Where this is promised. Then
shall ye return, and discern between the Righteous and the Wicked, between him
that serves God, and him that serves him not; and if this Discerning were
not, it could not otherwise be, but that the one half of the Children of God,
should War and Contend against one another; and be as Babylons Builders, the
one half breaking down, and the other half building up, and confounding one
another; and hereby it may appear, that these many Churches, that have been set
up in the Apostasy, have not been true Churches; nor begot into the true
Nature, Spirit, and Principle of the Church, by reason of their Warring one
against another, hatred, variance, strife, emulation, killing, and putting to
death one another; and where ever any thing of this Spirit of strife, hatred,
envy, persecution enters, it eats as a Canker, and cuts off of the body, that
Member or Members, whereinto it gets entrance; and so going from the Unity, the
Peace, the Love, they become past feeling, dead, rotten Members, and are to be
cut off, and denied; and now it being demonstrated, that the Children of God
Infallibly know one another, and hereto I give my Testimony, That there is such
a thing among the Children of God, an Infallible knowledge of one another,
(which they have not of themselves, but is the free gift of God; and when he
pleases, he may shut them up, and counsel some person or persons, that they
may not be known for a time; so Saul or Paul was unknown for a time to the
brethren) it manifestly follows (besides what is already said) That this
knowledge can alone proceed from the Revelation of Jesus Christ, Immediately
Manifesting one and another among themselves, (whereby they are as Epistles
writ in one another hearts, known and read of all Men, all the Members of the
same Body, 2 Cor. 3. 2, 3. For being Children of the Light, in the Light, they
dwell and walk and have their fellowship; and this makes them Manifest, and
herein they behold the beauty one of another, and each Member envieth not, at
the beauty of its Neighbors Member, but rejoices there^, and they are
comforted and refreshed one in another, standing fast in one Spirit, and have a
fellow feeling with one another, in Joy and Tribulation, in Sufferings, and
Consolations, and bear one another Burdens; and so fulfill the Law of Christ.
And did not the Light, wherein is their habitation, Reveal and make them
Manifest? They could not know one another certainly at all, for it being above
proved, That without Revelation in the Light, a Man cannot know himself; then
it is Manifest, far less can he know his Neighbor: And seeing Babilons
Children, the Whores Brats, as is said, can come into all outward forms or
appearances, either of words or practices, then there is no way possible, how
the Children of the true Mother, can be known from the Children of the Whore;
or how the true Mother her self, can be known from the Whore; Mystery Babylon!
But by the Revelation of the Light and Life of Jesus Christ: And this Whore
Mystery Babylon, by her taking upon her, the True Mothers Clothing, wherein
she has appeared, but an Enemy to the Life, has bewiched the whole Earth with
the Cup of her Fornications, and so her Merchants has passed, for the Ministers
of Christ; but now the Children of the Light discerns both her and them, and
their Hypocritical garb cannot deceive them, for the Sheep of Christ hear his
voice, and they know it one in another, and hereby they know one another, and a
stranger they will not allow, for they know not the voice of strangers, they
own it not; and so the false Prophet that comes in the Sheeps clothing, and is
inwardly a ravening Wolf, that comes in the form of words, the form of
godliness, he cannot deliver them, the Elect cannot be deceived, they can
beware of him, and fly from him, John 10. 4. 5. Mat. 7. 15. And how could they
beware of him, if they could not discern him to be such; and these who say,
they are Ministers and are not, they can try their Spirits, it is more than
their words, the anointing teaches them, 1 John 4. 1. Compared with 5. and 6.
1 John 5. 27. And so can know, not the speech of them that are puffed up, but
the power wherein the Kingdom stands, 1 Cor. 4. 19. 20. And herein, and
hereby, were the true Ministers of Christ, Manifest to the Children of God. 1 Thessalonians. 1. 5. Our Gospel came not unto you in Word only, but also in Power, and
in the holy Ghost, and in much assurance, etc. And now a few words by way of
tender advice, to those who has been long seeking a pure Church, not a mined
confused Rabble of godless Atheifts, such as the members of the National
Churches generally are; but a Church in God, a Spiritual House, built up of
living Stones; a Spiritual Ministry, a Powerful Ministry, a Spiritual Worship;
this many have been seeking, but have not found it, neither such a Church
Ministry, or Worship, for not coming to the true Foundation; and that which
makes the true Church, Ministry, and Worship, to wit, Jesus Christ Revealed in
themselves, and Revealing God, and me Church, and the Ministry, and Worship to
them; I say, their not coming to this, but setting about the building of Church
Ministry, and Worship without it, they do and shall for ever in this way, fall
short of it; and what strife, and janglings, and debate they have made,
concerning the trial and qualifications of Church Members, and Ministers; and
how sore they have been put at, by them, who plead for a Church of the mixed
multitude of Believers, and Unbelievers, affirming, it is impossible they can
be Infallibly Discerned, and that the true believing Spiritual Minister, cannot
be Discerned, from the unbelieving Carnal, Formal Preacher of the Letter, and
so they have no rule or touchstone to try one or another, but that of Words,
Forms, or Appearances, (are not come to the Righteous Judgment;) and these
they acknowledge, are very Fallible: And now were they come to the teachings of
Gods Spirit, the Anointing in themselves, This would be an Infallible
touchstone, and rule of trial unto them, for one and all. And so there is no
Cure, nor Remedy for all these evils, and fore calumnies wherewith they are
encompassed; but the Light of Jesus Christ, which they so much despise and
contemn; this would heal all their diseases, remove all their doubts, and all
their Controversies, bind up all their Wounds and Breaches; this would fitly
frame the whole building together, and make i^ grow up an holy Temple unto the
Lord, in whom, they should be all builded together for one habitation of God,
through the Spirit, Ephesians. 2. 21. 22. And till then, They will never cease to
build Babylon.

Argument, 15. THIS has been the Main Point of Controversy all along the time
of the Apos^y, and the Reign of the Beast, Dragon, Whore, and false Prophet,
betwixt the remnant of the Woman's Seed, the followers of the Lamb, on the one
hand, and the Beast, Dragon, Where, etc. on the other; to wit, The Testimony of
Jesus Christ, (together with the keeping of the Commandments, of God) and what
this Testimony is, See Revel. 19. 10. For the Testimony of Jesus is the Spirit
of Prophecy. Revel. 12. 17. And the Dragon was wroth with the Woman, and went
to make War with the remnant of her Seed, which keep the Commandments of God,
and have the Testimony of Jesus Christ. This is the quarrel, The Testimony of
Jesus, which is the Spirit of Prophecy, and by this, the Woman's Seed, the
followers of the Lamb, sought against the Dragon and his followers, and by this
they overcame. Revel. 12. 11. And they overcame him by the blood of the Lamb,
and by the Word of their Testimony: These are their weapons, not any Carnal
weapon, (the Lambs followers have none such) but the Word of their Testimony,
the Sword of the Spirit, which is the Word of God; and by this, the Antichrist,
the Man of Sin, the Son of Perdition, that wicked one, is to be Revealed, and
Consumed. 2 Thessalonians. 2. 8. Whom the Lord shall consume with the Spirit of his
mouth, and shall Destroy with the brightness of his Coming: That is, his
Light, Life, Power, and Spirit, Revealed both in the particular, and general,
shall consume this Antichrist, That sits in the Temple of God, Man's Heart, and
rules as Lord there; and this Antichrist, is not a Person, or Persons
particular, but a Spirit, Ioh. 4. 2. and is the very Spirit of Satan, which
rules in the Children of Disobedience; The Heart, which was made to be a Temple
for God, a House of Prayer, but is become a Den for the Thief and Robber, and
here in this Temple, the Whore, Mystery Babylon sits as a Queen, in the
Particular, and in the General: Now it is the aforesaid word, which is as fire,
that is, to burn up this Whores Flesh, and Destroy her, and put her out of the
Temple of God, Men's Hearts which should be an habitation of his Spirit, See 1
Cor. 3. 16, 17. 1 Cor. 6. 19. 2 Cor. 6. 16. For this was Man's state, he was a
Temple for God, in the beginning, but by his sins, this Temple came to be
Defiled, and the Serpent entered, and dwelt in it; and for this end, Christ came
into the World to destroy the Devils work in Man's Heart, and to cast him out,
and to dwell in this Temple Man's Heart, as in the beginning; and this is the
Antichrist, who denies this Christ came in the Flesh, ^me in the body of his
Saints, which are his Temple; and so the Apostasy was from this, in the days
of the Apostles, Christ lived in his Saints, dwelt in them, spoke in them, was
King, Priest, and Prophet in them, and then came in the Apostasy; when people
departed from this holy living Power Revealed in them: Christ the Wisdom and
Power of God, and then Babylon prevailed, the Whorish Spirit which bewitched
People, and drew them into Whoredom with the Form, from this holy Power, to
which they ought to have keept chaste, and moved only in its leadings, Spoke,
Prayed, and Worshipped therein, and so as the departing from this, was the rise
and beginning of the Apostasy, so the returning into this, will be the end of
it, and its end is come in many; and is coming in many more, and this alone is
the true resormation out of the Apostasy, there is not another, but the
returning to this; and seeing its generally granted by all Protestants so
called, That there has been an Apostasy since the days of the Apostles, and
that the Church of Rome, (which has been the only visible Church that has
continued since then, till now, by a continual succession, in Bishops,
Ministry, Worship, Ordinances) so called, is that Apostate Church, and Mystery
Babylon; not the true Church, but a Synagogue of Satan; then how could they, I
mean the Protestants come up to a reformation, and recovery out of the
Apostasy, and be restored into the purity of Ministry, Worship, and Ordinances,
but by receiving them from the Lord himself Immediately; and who could call
their Ministers to Preach a Reformation out of the Apostasy, but the Lord
himself seeing they had no true Church, nor Ministry, preceding them to call
them, and supposing as it were not, I mean that had been a Mediate call from
man.)

I thought fit only to touch this a little here, having handled it more fully
elsewhere: and indeed, The purest Primitive Protestants, (whose Testimony I
own in its place, maintained Immediate Calls, and the Spirit of Prophecy, and
witnessed it; and in the History of the Reformation of Scotland, commonly
called, Knox Chronicle, it is to be seen, That both George Wishard, and John
Knox, were endued with the same, and Prophesied: And in Foxes book of Martyrs
its to be seen at large, how many of the Lords Witnesses who were raised up by
him, to testify against the corruptions of the Church of Rome, and her
Ministry did Prophecy, and their Prophecies are in the said book Recorded, as
they rose up one after another in each Generation, for the Lord never wanted
his Witnesses all along, though they were but few; and the said book shows, How
that John Husse a German Protestant, Prophesied of a New Ministry that should
come, and whence could this New Ministry arise; could the Romesh Whore, (which
as is said, was only that, which had the Form and Constitution of a Church,
Ministry, Ordinances, before the time of the Reformation bring forth this New
Ministry: Who can bring a clean thing out of an unclean? or rather, was it not
to come from Heaven, a Birth of the New Jerusalem which comes down from above;
who when the Dragon fought against her, did fly into a place prepared her of
God; and he prevailed over her visible appearing state, but she remained safe,
as to her being in the place appointed her of God, and her Man-child also,
which was caught up unto God in his Throne: And in the end of the Apostasy, She
and her Man-child Christ Jesus the Lamb, was to appear again in the Earth, and
take place therein; and overcome Antichrist, the Beast, Dragon, Whore, and
false Prophet, See Revel. 12. 5, 6, 14. Compared with Revel. 21. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5,
6. And these few Witnesses the Lord raised up all along, in the time of the
prevailing of the Apostasy, are by many of the Protestants themselves, reckoned
to be the two Witnesses, mentioned Revel. 11. from verse 3. to verse 13. Who
after they were killed did rise again. ver. 11. This they expounded to be other
persons, rising up to bear Testimony for the Lord, after these before them were
killed; and they themselves are said to rise again; because the same Spirit of
Life from God, which was in them, did also enter into these who succeideed
them, and so the Witnesses were the same, because it was one Spirit in them,
who went before and came after, and they had one Testimony, the Testimony of
Jesus Christ, which is the Spirit of Prophecy, for they Prophesied in
Sack-cloathes One thousand two hundred, and threescore days, That is all the
time of the Apostasy, as is by themseives acknowledged: See James Durhams book
on these places, and he is forced to confess, That these words Revel. 11. 12.
And they heard a great voice from Heaven, saying unto them, Come up hither,
etc. holds forth some extraordinary Call, or Impulse the reformers should have
from the Lord; and yet this same Man, for all this, pleads for a succession of
the Reformed Church and Ministry, Lawfully descended through the Church of
Rome; and denies that Immediate Revelation, is that, by which the Church is to
be Reformed and brought out of Babylon. But to say no more of him, It has been
his great weakness: And now from what is said in these fifteen Arguments,
concerning Immediate Revelation; Let that of God in the Reader Judge,
concerning it is being necessary to Continue.

The Objections having any seeeming weight against it, Answered.
Obj. IMmediate Revelation was a Privilege, especial and peculiar to the
Twelve Apostles, and is therefore now Ceased.

Answ. The contrary is above Demonstrated in many places, And Immediate
Revelation, and the Spirit of Prophecy, was before them, even from the
beginning, and continued after them; and Church History reports, it continued
till after the first Century, and was known in the Church; and it has always
been in the true Church, (though not in the false) and is a Privilege
belonging to every Saint, for that which makes one a true Christian and Saint,
is the Spirit of Christ, the anointing in him.

2. Obj. The working of Miracles, and the speaking with Tongues and strange
Languages is Ceafed, and therefore also is Immediate Revelation.

Answ. That working of Miracles, and the gift of Tongues, is altogether
Ceased, and never any more to be in the Earth, cannot be proved, and it is a
rash assertion; for, though these things be not to be found among the National
Christians (who have the name, but want the thing, the anointing, which
Christians, or makes the Christian, and not the sprinkling of water on a Child's
forehead) yet they may be found among the true; and we Witness the Power of
God, which wrought all these outward Miracles, working Miraculously in our
Hearts, opening the blind eye of the mind, and deaf ear, raising to life, the
dead Soul; causing the Lame, to leap as an Heart, and the Tongue of the Dumb to
speak, etc. And these are the greatest Miracles, and the outward, were but a
Figure of them; and were for the sake of the unbelievers, who believed not
except they saw, but now, though Miracles and gifts of Tongues were ceased
altogether, yet it follows not, That Revelation Immediate is Ceased: This being
more necessary, yea, altogether necessary, and belonging to the very substance
of the Covenant, and promises of the Gosel, as is above Demonstrated.

Obj. 3. Men may be mistaken, and take that for the Inspiration of God, which
is but the Inspiration of the Devil; and it is Impossible to know the one from
the other, but by the Scriptures, which ye deny to be a sufficient touchstone,
or rule of Trial of Spirits, and there has many formerly risen up, who has
pretended to be Inspired of God, and were but Deceivers; and this makes us
fustly suspect all others.

An. Men keeping their place; That is abiding in the fear of God, and obedience
to his Commands, are safe from being deceived, for such have a good
understanding, clear, a pure discerning in the Light, whereby to know the
Spirit of God, from the Spirit of Deceit, and this was known, before Scriptures
were written; and men are in no greater hazard of being deceived now, than
Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, Enoch, Noah, and other Saints were, before Scripture was
written; and if any should say, God spoke to them by a voice audible to the
fleshly ear, I answer, If it had been so, that sometimes he had, yet his
speaking inwardly by his Word, and the voice of his Spirit into their hearts
was more certain, satisfying, and sufficient, and that alone could not have
been sufficient, but he spoke to many by his Spirit inwardly, in their hearts
only, and this voice was audible, and heard to the Spiritual ear, and was
certain. And such who plead against Immediate Revelation, or Impiration from
the Spirit of God, as a thing impossible to be infallibly discerned from a
delusion of Satan, show the Atheism of their hearts, for if it be impossible,
then was not Enoch, Noah, Abraham, etc. Inspired, nor knew God by Revelation;
but if Revelation was possible then, it is possible now, for that which is once
possible, can never in it self become impossible; and what though some have
falsely pretended thereto, and from a pretense of the Spirit, have done
wickedly, will this prove man has not the thing in reality; there were
pretenders in Ieremiah's time to the Spirit of God, and did wickedly under that
pretense, Ierem. 23. 25, 30, 31. Ierem. 28. 1, 2, 3. 4. And so there were many
false Prophets in all ages; but this is no argument against the true Prophets,
nor against Immediate Revelation, but for it; for this only can discover the
Deceiver, and Spirit of deceit, both in Man himself, and in another: and many
has pretended to Mortification, Self-denial, etc. but never knew these things
in reality; none do therefore now know them in reality; and many has done
wickedly, under a pretense of Scripture, is therefore Scripture to be denied?

4. Obj. The Scripture is a Cannon or Rule filled up, against which who add
thereto, a Curse is pronounced, Revel. 22. 18. And this Rule is sufficient,
being able to make wise unto Salvation; and is profitable for Doctrine, for
Reproof, for Correction, for Instruction in Righteousness, that the Man of God
may be perfect thoroughly furnished unto all good Works, 2 Timothy 3. 15, 16, 17.
whereby it appears to be a sufficient rule of Faith and Manners, containing the
whole Counsel of God (as our Confession of Faith says,) and all things
necessary for his own Glory, Man's Salvation, Faith, and Life is either
expressly set down in Scripture, or by good and necessary consequence, may be
deduced from Scripture, unto which, nothing at any time is to be added by new
Revelations of the Spirit; and for this, they bring (in their Confession of
Faith) These Scriptures further: Prove. 22. 19. 20, 21. Luke 1, 3, 4. Romans 15.
4. Mat. 4. 4, 7, 10. Isa. 8. 19. 20. 2 Pet. 1. 19. Heb. 1. 1. 2. Luke 16. 29.
31. Ephesians. 2. 20. 2 Pet. 3. 15, 16. 17. Gal. 1. 8, 9. 2 These. 2. 2. And now all
these Scriptures being brought for proofs against any New Revelation of the
Spirit, and the Scriptures being a complete Cannon or Rule, to which, nothing
is to be added even by the Spirit of the Lord, I have set them all down not
passing one, and it is in my heart, to pass through them all, and show how they
are wrested and perverted, to prove that which the Spirit of the Lord, which
gave them forth, never intended; And though all these Scriptures we dearly own,
and the (...) of them, yet their abusing of them we cannot own at all, and let
that of God which is Just, Righteous; and Impartial in its Judgment, in the
Reader Judge; if they prove any such thing as is intended by these who brought
them for that effect, who call themselves, an Assembly of Divines, but in
effect are but Diviners and guessers, having so plainly denied that which makes
the Divine; to wit, The Mind and Spirit of Christ Revealing in Man; the things
of his Kingdom.

Ans. That the Cannon of the Scripture is so filled up, and Composed of such
Books as are to be found in the Bible, betwixt Genesis, and Revelations,
excluding all other Writings whatsoever, and Words, (either of old or late)
proceeding from the Inspiration of the Spirit of God, (or as having no such
Authority, Certainty, or Infallability, as these particular, writings or books
aforesaid, is an old Popish fancy, without any ground from the Scriptures own
Testimony, for it is altogether silent of the number of the books of Scripture,
how many they were, and (...) it is of their order; some Popish, Counsels
determined both the one and the other, and Scripture makes mention of several
other writings of the holy Men, Inspired of God, besides these, we have in our
Bibles, and some of them being found and felt to savor of the same Spirit,
which gave forth the other; yet, because of their Counsel acts, they are not
Received. But now to come to the Proofs, The first is, Revel. 12 18. 19. But
what says this, Concerning the number of the Books? or what says it, against
the Spirit of the Lord, his adding by New Revelations, for the words. If any
Man shall add, or take away the words of this book. Limits not the Spirit of
God from adding other Books of Writeings to the Scripture: Now at no ^e Man is
to add to Gods words, but what the Lord gives him to speak, he is not to go
beyond, nor to say, Thus says the Lord, to that which the Lord has not
spoken, nor is man to diminish there from (...) See this same Commanded, Deuteronomy.
4. 2. But do these words prove, there were no more Books or Words to proceed
from the Inspiration of the Spirit of God: how many Prophets came after Moses?
and how many Books of the Scripture were written after Deuteronomy. and Proverbs 30.
6. Add, though not unto his Words. This we see man limi^ed from adding, but not
the Spirit of God, for much Scripture was writ after Solomon, and so these
other Scriptures of the old Testament, they bring, Prove. 22. 19, 20, 21. And
Isa. 8. 19, 20. What do they prove, that no more Scripture was to be, writ
after them? whereas, they themselves acknowledge the most part of Scripture was
written afterward, and in the by, I would only have the Reader observe, how
like these men who talk of the Scripture Canon being filled up, so that the
Spirit of Prophecy is Ceased, are to the Jews who had such a fancy among them
concerning the Scriptures of the Old Testament, their being filled up, and
their becoming a Rule to them, so that when Christ and his Apostles came and
spoke from the same Spirit, the Scriptures were writ from, they would not hear
them, but cried up the Scriptures, We have the Scriptures and Moses Law, and
God spoke unto Moses and our Fathers, but this Man, we know not from whence he
is, Joh. 9. 28, 29. And as for Prove. 22. 19, 20, 21. There is wisdom ^ught in
speaking to Solomon, and making known her words and writeing unto him; but that
proves nothing, That the speaking of that wisdom or spirit in others, as in
Solomon is Ceased: Nor yet, Isa. 8. 19, 29. To the Law and to the Testimony, if
they speak not according to this word, etc. Now could this be a good Argument
for the Jews, against Christ and his Apostles, and their Writeings? No, nor is
not now against writeings, or words proceeding from the Inspiration of the same
Spirit; for that which was writ after, or is to be writ from the Spirit of God,
is not contrary to any thing writ before from the same Spirit, but according to
it, for all the words of truth accord, and agree together; and there was a Law
and Testimony writ in Men's Hearts, before a Line of Scripture was ever writ in
a Book; and they who spoke not according thereto, were but deceivers, and had
no morneing in them as the Hebrew carries it. And now I come to that Scripture
they lay so much weight upon, 2 Timothy 3. 15. 16, 17. But what? Does the Cannon
close here? is not the next Chapter writ from the Inspiration of the Spirit of
God, and the other following Books, if they were writ after this as they follow
after it? or if these words prove not, but that Paul and others both spoke and
wrote afterward from the Inspiration of the holy Ghost, how will it prove that
there is no such thing now? O say they all new Revelations are superstuous,
there needs no more Scripture; that which is writ is writ, is able to make wise
unto Salvation, from a Tim. 3. 15, 16, 17. But I say, Paul and others wrote
Scriptures afterward. But to come to that Scripture, It is to be considered,
there is a writeing by the Spirit of God upon Man's heart, See 1 Chronicles, 28. 12.
Compared with ver. 19. and with Ierem. 31. 33, and 2 Cor. 33. And so this is
Scripture or Writeing, (for both are one) by the inspiration of God; Scripture
or writeing with Pen and Ink upon paper, but with the Spirit of the living God,
upon the heart; and these holy writeings, are able to make (...) unto
Salvation: And Scripture given unto a Man by Inspiration of God is profitable,
(and the words should be thus Translated; All Scripture given by Inspiration of
God, or all Writting given by Inspiration of God, profitable for Doctrine, for
Reproofs, etc. That the Man of God may be perfect, for the word (is) is not in
the Greek, and it is false, that all writeing is by Inspiration of God, for much
has been writ from the Inspiration of the Devil; But I acknowledge these Books
set down in our Bible, to be writ from the Inspiration of God, and when any man
receives them by Inspiration, that they be given him by Inspiration, as to
these who wrote them, then they are profitable to him; but if he come not to
that Spirit which inspired the first Writers, and therewith to be Inspired,
they cannot of themselves profit; for the Letter kills, but the Spirit gives
life, and the Inspiration of the holy Spirit gives understanding, as says
Elihu; so who come not to this Inspiration, they come not to an Understanding
of the Scriptures; And our very Adversaries dare not plead from this Scripture,
that there is nothing more required but Scripture, to make wise unto Salvation;
for they acknowledge the inward Illumination of the Spirit to be necessary
thereto, and if they make one exception, why may not we make another, That
inward Revel^ations and Inspirations are necessary, as well, and, further it may
be said of the Scriptures of the Old Testament, all that is spoken here of the
use and ability of Scripture; yet does not this exclude the writeings of the
Evangelists and Apostles, and we acknowledge the Scriptures are profitable and
useful, but not sufficient of themselves, to make wise unto Salvation, without
the inspiration of the same Spirit that gave them forth, which can only give
the understanding of them: But why do they plead that Scripture is able to make
the Man of God perfect, seeing they deny Perfection; and cannot abide to hear,
that a man can be perfect? And that Scripture, Luke 1. 3, 4. Does it prove,
That no more Scripture is to be written, nor any after Luke spoke or wrote from
the inspiration of the Spirit of God? Was not much writ afterward? Or could
Luk's word? cause Theophilus to know the certainty of these things of
themselves: Nay, they were a Declaration of what he most surely believed
himself, and Theophilus reading it, having the Spirit of God, would find that
witnessing in him to the truth of these things, and this gives the certainty or
assurance, See 1 These. 1. 5: Their next Scripture is, Romans 15. 4. For
whatsoever things were written afore-time, were written for our learning, etc.
What then? is Revelation or the Spirit of Prophecy ceased for all this? yet
Paul himself had it, and he says, The Scriptures were wrote for his learning,
and he points here at a Scripture in the old Testamen^, but this proves not
there was no more Scriptures to be added thereto; and Paul says, not the
Scriptures were writ, that we should learn only by them, or stick to the Letter
learning, for he had a learning beyond them, even that of the Spirit; and in
this same Epistle, he points them to the newness of the Spirit, beyond the
oldners of the Letter, Romans 7. 6. which compare with 2 Cor. 3. 6. Their next
Scripture is Math. 4. 4, 7. as for ver. 4. It fights Manifestly against them,
Man shall not live by Bread alone, but by every word that proceeds out of the
mouth of God. Now say they, The word proceeding from Gods mouth is Ceased, he
speaks not from word of mouth now, as he did of old, but from the Scriptures,
but if God himself speak not, Man lives not; And what does this prove, that
Christ used the Scriptures Testimony against the Devil; is there not therefore
any Inspiration or Revelation; was not Christ inspired himself; and was not
Paul and the other Apostles Inspired, who used the Testimony of former
Scriptures writ before them against their adversaries; but yet they wrote
Scriptures themselves from the same Spirit; and why may not it be so now? Their
next proof is, 2 Pet. 1. 19. We have a more sure word of Prophecy, etc. Answ.
Supposing but not at all granting, hereby he meaned the Scriptures writ or
spoke from without; he points them to this, but till the day dawn, and the Day
star arise; Now some were come to the day, and were Children of the day, and
had the day star arisen in them, and then they needed not the Light of the
Moon, or night stars. But I have showed before this word of Prophecy, is the
word in the Heart, which was in the beginning, before Scriptures was; and is
that word that came to David, Isai, Jeremiah, and inspired them, from which the
Scripture came, and this Word in my heart makes me believe the Scriptures, and
is the more sure and Manifest Word; or the most sure, as its in Beza's
Translation, even surer than Scripture Words, which outward violence can rob me
off, or I may forget them; but this remains for ever: and here lies a great
deceit in them, where Scripture speaks of the Word, and it is Virtue, and
Excellency, and Sufficiency; O say they, This is Scripture, whereas I have
showed, though the Scriptures declare of that word, yet they are not it, but
came from it, and point to it again; for the word is Christ, which was in the
beginning. The next proof Heb. 1. 1, 2. This directly proves against them, as I
have showed before; God spoke to the Fathers in the Prophets, but to us in the
Son, that is more Immediately. The next proof Luke 16. 29. 31. This proves that
Moses and the Prophets Testimony is of greater weight then if any should arise
and testify from the dead, but it proves nothing, that we should stick only to
what is written by them, for much was writ after; nor does it prefer Moses and
the Prophets Testimony, to the Testimony of the Spirit of Christ; this is more
certain and satisfactory, and the end of their Testimony. Their next proof is,
Ephesians. 2. 20. Hereby they would prove, That the writeings of the Prophets and
Apostles were the foundation of the Church; but this Scripture says nothing of
that kind; for Jesus Christ is the Foundation of Prophets and Apostles, and the
chief or undermost Cornerstone; he is both Foundation-Stone, Cornerstone, and
Cop-Stone also, the First and the Last, and there is no other Foundation says
Paul himself, 1 Cor. 3. 11. and that Scripture is fully cleared above. Their
next proof 2 Pet. 3. 15. 16. 17. But of all the Scriptures they have brought,
this proves least for them, but much against them, for it mentions Paul's
Epistles, and Writings which we own, and their usefulness also in their place;
but it says nothing, that either his Writing or any other, are a complete
Cannon or Rule, or that Revelation is Ceased, but it says some things in them,
are hard to be understood, which the unlearned and unstable wrest, etc. Then I
say, there is the more need of Revelation to make a man Learned, and to open up
these hard things, seeing only the Spirit of Wisdom and Revelation, can
sufficiently do it, as is above Demonstrated. The next proof is Gal. 1. 8, 9.
If any man, or an Angel from Heaven Preach any other Gospel unto you, let him
be accursed. Answer, The Gospel was Preached unto Abraham, says the Scripture,
Gal. 3. 8. as well as unto us; and it was Preached unto Abel, Enoch, Noah, and
to all believers, who lived before Scripture was writ in a book; and it was
spoken into their Hearts, by the Spirit of Jesus Christ, and the Saints who
then lived, and were Inspired of God, preached the Gospel; and the Gospel is
the same in all Generations, for it is the everlasting Gospel, Rev. 4. 6. But
now the Declarations, Discoveries, and Manifestations of this one Gospel, has
been many and different, under the Law; more darkly, in the time of the
Prophets; more Manifestly, in the time of the Apostles yet more Manifestly, and
yet all one Gospel, and we Preach no other, but the same everlasting Gospel,
which is the Power of God unto Salvation. Romans 1. 16. The last proof is, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 2. Wherein Paul beseeches them not to be shaken in mind or troubled,
neither by Spirit, nor Word, nor Letter as from him, as that, that day of
Christ, were at hand; but this proves nothing against the Inspiration of the
Spirit of God, as if it were then ceased, or to cease; for it continued with
him, and many others long afterward, only it proves, they should not recite
any such Doctrine, a^ that, That day were suddenly to come he speaks of, though
some should (...) it, as proceeding from the Spirit, or from Paul's Words, or
Letters; and so that they might not be deceived by pretenders as is said,
because some has falsely pretended to the Spirit, it follows not, that none
have it in reality. And thus I have gone through all their Proofs, and showed,
that they prove no such thing as is intended by them, but are abused.

O j. 5. We much suspect this Doctrine of Immediate Revelation, and are feared
to receive it, lest people coming to this, slight the Scriptures, and a
Ministry, Worship, and Ordinances, for we find you so doing, who say, ye are
come to it; and what use has Scripture or Ministr^, if God teach Immediately,
by the Immediate Revelation of his Spirit?

Answ. This Doctrine ought not to be suspected by any-honest hearted Man or
Woman, for it will never teach any to slight the Scriptures, but on the
contrary; They will never know how to use, or esteem the Scriptures aright,
till they come to that Life and Spirit which gave them forth, and to which they
point; and these who were formerly Inspired of God, and were taught of him
Immediately used and esteemed the Scriptures, nor slighted any Ministry,
Worship, or Ordinances of Jesus Christ, as neither do we; and we acknowledge
the Ministry who are sent of God, is both useful and comfortable to us, and we
are bound to hear them, and acknowledge them; and at all times have we found
their Ministry, useful and refreshing unto us, having Ministered of the Life;
and their Gospel came unto us, not in Word only, but in Power, and in the holy
Ghost, and in much Assurance; as Paul's did unto them, 1 Thessalonians. 1. 5. And we
have also been refreshed with their Prayers in the heart, and found the fruit
of them, and now in our measures are brought to the same Life; and yet their
Ministry will always be dear and comfortable to us, but not absolutely
necessary; being come to a Teacher, even the Spirit of Jesus Christ, that
cannot be removed into a Corner from us, when all men may, and be separated
from us, and we from them as to bodily presence; but indeed, who come to the
Teachings and Ministry of the Spirit of Christ, in themselves; this will lead
them, as it has done us, from the Natural Ministry, Worship and Ordinances,
for that they neither Worship, nor Minister from the Spirit, nor have received
any ordinance therefrom, as is Manifest both from their Principles and
Practices.

The 7th. of the 4th. Month, 1668. G. K.

FINIS.
POSTSCRIPT.
RObert Barron his Book, Entitled Apodipis Catholica de formali objecto fidei,
coming to my hands after the finishing of what I had writ, concerning Immediate
Revelation, its remaining a standing Ordnance in the Church; I found it fit to
cite such particular places, (directing the Reader to his Words, where at large
he may see them;) Where he declares his Doctrine concerning Immediate, or
inward Revelation, Ex part Objecti, and ex part Subjecti, affirming, that ex
part Objecti to be Ceased, which con^th the Prophets, and Penmen of the
Scriptures to have had; and that only this Revelation Ex part Objecti, is
Revelation, properly simply, and according to the more usual way of speaking in
the Scripture so called, see Tract^. 9. Authors Duplic. Puncto. 2 Number. 13. 14.
15. Again a few leaves after puncto. bt^. number. 6. and number. 5. Immediately
preceding, he says, that which moves the Mind to give one assent to Truth,
objectively, or by way of Object, is Medium cognitum, a known Midst; it must be
known, and apprehended by the Mind, that it may move it to assent; but that
which moves effectively, upon the part of Subject or Power, which he calls
Revelation, Ex part Subjecti, is Medium incognitum, an unknown midst, because
(says he) these helps upon the part of the subject, may cooperate to produce
one assent of Faith, although they are not felt or known by us: Let the Reader
take a view of these places, where he shall see, that I have truly set down his
Doctrine, and his very words in that paper, concerning Immediate Revelation;
and Tract. 9. Quest. 8. Number. 5. He says, they falsely assert, that we believe
the authority of the Scriptures, for, (or because of) the inward testimony of
the Spirit; for we believe (says he) the Divine Authority of the Scripture,
not for another thing, but for the Scripture it self, because that act of
Faith, whereby the Authority of the Scripture is believed, leans upon the
Scripture it self, as it is principal Foundation: Some will say, (says he) some
Orthodox Theologues speak far otherwise, for they most frequently affirm the
Scripture authority to be believed, for, or because of the Inward Testimony of
the Spirit; ^o which he roundly answers; (and I desire the Reader to mark the
answer, whereby he may perceive, either their, or his Deceit, whereby they
give poor people to believe, that they deny not the Spirits Testimony, or
inward Teaching; but when it comes to the point, their false cover is taken
off, and they falsely deny it,) although (says he,) they speak otherways, yet
they think not otherwise, for that word, for, or because of, (Latin propter)
is ambiguous, and sometimes imports a respect to the effective cause of
assent but sometimes, yea, more often, to the objective cause or Foundation,
upon which, the assent of our mind leans, etc. This Robert Barron, after long
debate with the Jesuit Turnbull, contending against the Papists, That the
authority of the Church of Rome is not the formal Object, or Foundation of
Faith, or believing of the Scriptures, comes at last to refute their Doctrine
(which he calls Error, and says, that it is most easily refuted,) who
maintain the formal Object of Faith, (i. e. its Foundation) to be the inward
Revelation of the holy Spirit properly so called; and for the Revelation of
this Dectrine (which Number. 6. he most of all condemns) he brings five
Arguments, Number. 8. Punct. 6. Tract. 9. And I find it fit to set them down also
Word by Word, Translated into English out of the Latin, (in which his book is
writ) that the Reader in whom the true discerning in any Measure is opened, may
see the blindness of this man, in the things of God, notwithstanding, of all
his Letter knowledge; and what a woeful condition this poor Nation has been in
these many years, for all their high pretenses, to be the most glorious, and
most purely reformed Church in the Earth; and yet this Doctrine of Immediate
Revelation, wereby alone, God can be sufficiently and saveingly known, has
been by them, (and yet is by the present generation) accounted so ridiculous,
that by this Man R. B. (called Doctor of Divinity in Aberdeen, and of great
fame for his learning at home, and abroad) it is most of all condemned, even
more than the Popish Doctrine, of resolveing their Faith in the Authority of
the Church of Rome; so that Scripture is fulfilled upon them. Isa. 29. 13. 14.
His Arguments are as follows, To every one of which, as they ly in order; I
shall return a few words of answer, which I hope shall satisfy the discerning,
and indeed they are so weak, frivolous, and vain, that little or no answer is
required; were it not that fools some times are to be answered in their folly,
least they should seem wise in their own eyes, as Solomon speaks,

First, (says he) This way of knowing the Truth of the Doctrines of Faith,
(viz. By the internal Revelation of the holy Spirit, properly so called,) is
Extraordinary, and Prophetical; as is Manifest of the aforesaid, and
consequentially the truth of the Christian Doctrine formerly and commonly, is
not so made known unto the Faithful.

Answ. This way of Internal Revelation, Prophecy so called, has always been,
not only Extraordinary, but altogether, shut up from the unbelieving, and such
who stuck in the Letter; but it h^h always been common to the true Christians
and Saints in all ages, being the New Covenant Dispensatory which l^eth not for
ever, Isa. 59. 21. That it was Prophetical, i. e. Imparted to the Prophets is
granted, but it follows not, that therefore it is not the common privilege of
all Saints who were to have the like precious Faith with them; and though it
was rare in the days of old, yet God has poured cut according to his Promise,
Joel 2. 28, 29. Largely upon Sons and Daughters of his Spirit, whereby they
Prophecy.

Secondly, (says he) who embrace this Error, they confound the gift of Faith,
and the gift of Prophecy; for the most noble k^nd of prophetical Revelation, is
that which is by Intellectual speaking, or illumination as Thomas and Suarez
teach.

Answ. 1. Who embrace this supposed Err^ur, but indeed Truth; Do not confound
the gift of Faith, and the gift of Prophecy, the spirit of Faith, and the
spirit of Prophecy is one, but the opperations different, 1 Cor. 12. 4, 5, 6.
Now if by the gift of Prophecy he understand (as he seems to do) the inward
Manifestation or speaking of God Immediately to the mind, Faith is hereby
wrought, viz. God this speaking or Manifesting the truth Immediately in the
Mind, is the cause of Faith; and so as the cause and effect are different, so
the Prophetical Revelation and the Faith of what is Revealed are different
opperations; For because God Reveals in Man these he believes. But if he or
any other, would thus reason, then every one who have the gift of Faith, must
have the Prophetical Revelation; and so all believers are Prophers and do
Prophecy.

Answ. 2. All Saints have the same Spirit and Word of Prophecy in some measure
more or less, that the Prophets had, who ever directed people to the same
Spirit and Word in their hearts, from which they spoke, that they might in
themselves hear the same Word and Spirit, whereby the true Faith comes; and
such who turned in their minds to this Word and Spirit in them, (or rather, by
the drawings thereof, were turned by it) believed the Prophets Testimonies; and
all others did not believe, but rejected their Testimony as false and seigned.
I shall not need to cite Scriptures for this, or produce reasons, having done
both at large in the foregoing Treatise; but whereas they say, then all should
be Prophets and Prophecy, who believe.

Answ. 3. All the Saints must know the sheepherds voice in them, and witness
Christ Jesus the great Prophet Prophesying or speaking in them, and must carry
his Testimony which is the Spirit of Prophecy, Revel. 19. 10. compared with 12.
17. But we do not say, neither follows it from our Doctrine, That all are
called forth as Prophets to Prophecy, or Minister, or Teach, or have the gift
of utterance given them; only this we affirm, That none ought to Minister or
Teach, but who witness the Internal Call, and furnishing of the holy Spirit
given them what to speak Immediately from it self, and inwardly revealing the
truth of these things in them, whereof they declare, and they who Prophecy or
Preach of Faith, ought to believe themselves, and to have the same Spirit of
Faith according to that 1 Cor. 4. 13. We having the same Spirit of Faith
believe, therefore we speak, and so speaking, a Prophesying of the effect or
consequent of Faith, in all whom God calls thereunto.

Thirdly, (says he) This opinion too openly favors the Swendefieldians,
Anabaptists and others, vaunting of Internal Breathings, or Inspirations, and
enthusiasms; for says he, that Internal Revelation which is upon the part of
the object, and which is ever by Supernatural and disjoynedly Infused
representations, truly and properly is Enthusiasme.

Answ. Lo! how the fleshly denies the Inward Breathings, or Inspirations of
Gods Spirit, whereby alone the understanding is opened, and the true Wisdom and
Life received; but what says he here against it? but that the Swendefieldians,
and Annabaptists maintain this Doctrine, and vaunt themselves to be Inspired,
but this will not prove it false, though they had not been Inspired more, than
when the false Prophets in Ieremiah's days said, They were Inspyred by the
Spirit of God, that therefore Jeremiah was not.

Fourthly, (says he) Hence it follows, that the whole Church, that is, all
the faithful, are ruled by new Revelations.

Answ. What evil is this? or rather, is it not a blessed dispensation for all
who believe, to walk after the Spirit, and to Witness God, dwelling and walking
in them, as he has promised. It is observable, how both this man, and all his
brethren take it for granted, rather (it has passed all along among them as a
Principle) then that ever any of them could prove it, That there no Immediate
Revelation; and upon this sandy Foundation they have built their Church,
Ministry, Worship, and Ordinances which is now a falling, and great is, and
shall be the fall thereof; but this we say, and certainly know, (such who can
receive it let them) all true Christians have the daily, and hourly
Manifestations, Revelations, and Influences of the Life eternal fresh and new
from the Fountain, as the Israelites gathered the Manna, new from Heaven every
day, etc.

Fifthly, (says he) Internal, or Immediate Revelations cannot make us more
certain of the Divine Authority, than the outward Revelation, viz. the
Scriptures; therefore, if the outward is not to be believed for it self,
neither the inward, and so either an infinite progress, or vicious Circle must
be committed.

Answ. The Antecedent is Manifestly false, and therefore it concludes not
truly, for what man of the meanest discerning will not acknowledge, that God
Immediately Revealing, or speaking in Man, (whose voice is full of heavenly
virtue, sweetness, and holiness, which his Sheep by their heavenly nature,
hear, and discern from the voice of a stranger) makes him more certain, than
when he has but a report from another.

Writ in the time of my Imprisonment, in the Tolboo^h of Aberdeen, in Scotland
where I was shut up, ten Months, for no other cause but my Testimony to the
Truth

The 3d. of the 6th. Month, 1668. G. Keith.

Errata, or faults escaped in Printing.
PAge 10. Line 13. for annull read animal. p. 12. l. 27. for God, r. of God, p.
25. l. 33. for stuff, r. strife. p. 17. l. 15. for light, r. life. p. 52. l.
9. for misery, r. mercy. p. 88. l. 25. for swords, r. words. p. 92. l. 31. for
him. 1. her. p. 109. l. 15. for darkness, r. drunkenness. p. 137. l. 3. for
none, r. is there none. p. 121. l. 21. for Christians, r. Christians have. p.
126. l. for with, r. ^ot with.

THE END.

