George Keith's EXPLICATIONS OF Diverse Passages Contained IN HIS Former BOOKS,
AS ALSO His Free and Open Retractations of sundry other Passages contained in
the same.

Which may at present suffice for a Reply to the Late, as well as Former Books
of Tho. Elwood, and John Penington, Published against Me, in Respect of the
most material Things.

Every day they wrest my words, all their thoughts are against me for evil,
they gather themselves together, they hide themselves, etc. shall they escape
by iniquity, Psalm. 56. 5, 6, 7.

Will you speak wickedly for God, and talk deceitfully for him, Job 13. 7.

LONDON: Printed for B. Aylmer, at the Three Pigeons in Cornhill, and Rich.
Baldwin in Warwick Lane, and are to be Sold by (...) the Golden Ball in White
Chapel, 1697.

THE PREFACE to the Friendly Reader.
THE chief occasion I have of Writing this short Preface to the following
Treatise, is to excuse the delay of Publishing it until now, having declared my
purpose of doing such a thing in a Printed Treatise, called, The True Copy of a
Paper given into the Yearly Meeting, with a short List of some of the gross and
vile Errors of G. Whitehead, etc. which was Published above a Year ago, and to
Answer the Objection that some make, why I should expose the Errors of these
Men, before I did Correct my own? To both which I thus Answer briefly. To the
First I say, Upon an after Review of my Books, I then mentioned in that
Treatise, I found diverse more Passages that needed an Explanation, and some of
them a Correction, above what I had discovered when I published my said
purpose, and I thought it was more proper to do both at once, then to Publish
one Part before another. But indeed the Whole might have been much sooner
Published, had not the great Brags of my late Adversaries, telling what great
matters of Contradictions, and other Absurdities, they had found in my Books,
justly occasioned a longer delay, that I might see the Sum Total of what they
had to charge me with, which at last is come out against me in several late
Printed Books of my Adversaries, as of Thomas Elwood, John Penington, and
Edward Penington; but having diligently perused them all, I find nothing
material in them, justly chargeable, but what I had much more charged my self
with, and had Corrected before; beside that, most of the Things I have
Corrected and Retracted in my Books, they have so past them over, that they
have not put the least Censure on them. And the Contradictions and Absurdities
they would fasten on me, are nothing, for the far greatest part, but their own
blind Inferences, and perversions of my sound Words, proceeding from their
great Ignorance. What are otherwise, are my own Observations, and free
Acknowledgments, without any assistance I had from their insignificant and
self-contradictory Scriblings. And that they may demonstrate their Itch to
Scribble, they have filled a great many Sheets with repeating the same things
over, again, and again, with very little addition; and what is so, is almost
wholly either a manifest perversion of my Words, or a palpable bewraying their
Ignorance and Folly, which I may (if God permit) in diverse particulars
hereafter discover (it not being proper in this place) above the particular
Instances I have given in the following Treatise. And this I hope will suffice
to Apologize for this small delay, and will be a reasonable Excuse to impartial
Men, and may serve to stop the Mouths of my Adversaries also, who have taken as
much time, and perhaps more, to publish Answers to Books that they have said
they would Answer.

To the Second I Answer. First, My free Acknowledgment that there were things
in my Books that did need Correcting, and my declaring my purpose with the
first convenience to Correct them, might excuse me for my not beginning with my
own Books, until I had either brought them to give an equal Acknowledgment of
their need of Correcting their Books, or upon their stubborn and pertinacious
conceit of their Books being free of all Erros, I might the more justly expose
them, not only to be guilty of Errors, but that they hold them pertinaciously.
Secondly, As I said before in the Preface to my Printed Narrative, my Errors
being compared with theirs, were but as Motes to their Beams, which Motes I had
so far pulled out of my own Eyes, that I had made a general public
Acknowledgment of them in Print, and a particular Acknowledgment of as many of
them, as came under my Observation, to diverse particular Persons viva voce.
Thirdly, The particular occasion given to me by my Adversaries, did justly give
me cause to begin with detecting their Errors, for they did Excommunicate me
(as they did pretend) for breaking the Peace of the Church, which pretended
Breach was my opposition to the vile Errors and Heresies I had proved diverse of
the Preachers in Pensilvania guilty of. They who Excommunicated me here at
London, viz. the Yearly Meeting, where G. W. and W. Penn were the Ringleaders,
instead of blaming these Persons in Pensilvania, or censuring their vile
Errors, did justify these Men, and would take no notice of my effectual Proofs
against them, but did most abominably cloak them, and gave out a Bull of
Excommunication against me, (which together with my Answer to it I Printed soon
after) as if I had been the only Offender, and I did quickly perceive, what the
bottom was why they did so justify these Men, and cloak their Errors, even
because they were guilty of the same Errors themselves, and were the
Nursing-mothers, out of whose Breasts these in Pensilvania had sucked that
poisonous Milk; therefore it was necessary that they should in the first place
be discovered, to give warning to the many Thousands that were so greatly
deceived by them. I desire the Friendly Reader to excuse my Inserting in this
short Treatise, diverse perversions and misrepresentations of my Adversaries,
cast upon diverse Passages in my Books, with my Answers unto them, the nature of
the present Case so requiring it to be, without which my Explication of these
things had not been so clear, nor my just Defense so intelligible.

And Lastly, I desire them to take notice, As I have not here, or elsewhere
Retracted, nor renounced any one Assertion, contained in any of my former
Books, that ever was Judged by me an Article of Faith, so they will not find
(as I have not found) that my Adversaries have proved any Contradiction in my
latter Books, to any Article of Faith Asserted in my former Books.

George Keith's Explications, AND Retractations: CONTAINING An Impartial Review
of his former Printed books, relating chiefly to matters of Doctrine: Wherein
are given diverse Explanations, as also Emendations and Corrections of diverse
Passages in his said books, no wise derogating from, nor invalidating the
weight of his former Testimony, but greatly confirming it, with respect to the
great Truths of the Christian Faith and Doctrine.
SECTION I. Containing diverse Explanations and Emendations of Passages in my
Book called, Immediate Revelation not ceased; First Printed in the Year 1668.
and Reprinted with an Appendix in the Year 1676.
I. AS Concerning the Term Immediate Revelation, in the Title Page of that
Book, at which some are offended, and which some misconstrue to a wrong sense,
never intended by me, as if thereby I did signify such a Revelation, as did
give us the Doctrinal knowledge and Faith of Christian Religion, and Principles
thereof, without the Holy Scriptures, or other outward means of Instruction; to
obviate this offense and mistake I recommend to the Reader what I have said,
from page 38. to page 42. of that Book: Where I distinguish of means
Intermitting and Transmitting, and show that it is the Intermitting means that
hinder the Revelation to be Immediate, but not the Transmitting, and the same
distinction I use in my Book, called, Divine Immediate Revelation, Printed in
the Year 1684. But in other words, as discontinued and continued. Moreover, how
far I did own the Holy Scriptures to be a necessary means, to give us the true
Knowledge and Faith of Christian Doctrines and Principles. I refer the Reader
to my Book, Divine Immediate Revelation, p. (...) Where I say, And if we except
these Doctrines and Heads of General Religion common to us, with the Gentiles,
which are revealed both to them and us, without Scripture, of all which
notwithstanding the Scripture does abundantly testify, all other Doctrines and
Heads of the Christian Religion, (which is a special Religion, more perfect and
excellent than the General, and perfecting the said General Religion, in true
Christians) are made known to us, by the Scripture-means; the Holy Spirit
inwardly inlightning and inspiring us, that we may understand the Doctrines
declared in the Scripture, and may savingly apply them with true and sincere
Faith to the salvation of our Souls. And here Note, that in the words above
cited, I did distinguish twelve years ago betwixt Gentile Religion, and
Christian Religion, tho some call this a New Doctrine in me so to dislinguish.
And seeing the word Immediate Revelation is no Scripture Term, (tho Revelation
is) and that it is not well understood by many, I can freely consent, that the
word Immediate be not pressed, or imposed on any. But I do constantly assert,
(as I have formerly asserted) that the inward sensible Communications and
Enjoyments of God and Christ, that the Saints have frequent Experience of, are
not only beyond all Demonstration of words, but are often received without all
present use of words, in a deep inward silence of the Soul.

II. That I blame them who say, that the Scriptures are a filled up Canon, and
the only Rule of Faith and Obedience in all things, and no more Scriptures (or
Writings) to be given forth Pref. Imm. Rev.
from the Spirit of the Lord. And page 4. That I said, tho no NEW ESSENTIALS
ARE to be added, yet a New and fuller and clearer Testimony may be added,
concerning the same old essentials. Here Note, the words may be added, as
importing the possibility of such a thing. But whether God shall be pleased to
add to the Books of the Holy Scripture, other Books of the same Authority, in
any time to come before the End of the World, I Judge it is not safe for me to
determine, either in the Affirmative or Negative, but that it is possible he
may do it, ought not to be questioned of. But that any Men's Writings (beside
that of the Prophets and Apostles,) are of equal Authority with the Scriptures,
ought not to be granted, and that all Doctrines of Men, however so much
Illuminated, ought to be subjected to the Rule, test and touchstone of the Holy
Scripture, and tried by the same, I do assert, as formerly I have done, still
leaving Room to the Spirit, to give particular Guidance to the Souls of the
Faithful, with respect to their inward State, and directing them, in Particular
Cases and Affairs, as to things in themselves Lawful, and not forbidden, nor
Commanded in General by any positive Precept; and that I said no New Essentials
are to be added, is sufficient Proof, that I held the Scripture did contain all
the Essential Doctrines of Christianity.

III. As to my blaming them, who deny that there is Pres. Imm. Rev.
an infallible way, whereby to discern the true Ministers and Members of
Christ's Church from the false. To this I say, tho such a discerning of Spirits
was given at times to the Prophets and Apostles, and others extraordinarily
endued, whereby to know Men's inward States, without regard had to their Fruits;
yet the general way that Christ has given us, whereby to know Men, is by their
Fruits, of words and works, whether Good or Evil. And whatever inward sense, or
discerning any may pretend to have of another Man's Spirit being bad, yet we
find no warrant from Scripture to receive an Accusation against any, far less a
positive Judgment, without plain evidence of matter of Fact against them, by
credible Witnesses, 1 Timothy 5. 19. For if such a thing be given way to, in any
Society, that Men shall be Judged to be of a wrong Spirit, only by the
pretended discerning of Spirits, that some may claim without any real Proof or
Evidence of words or works, that are really evil, the most innocent Men may
happen to be Condemned, and the most guilty justified. And even to know Men by
their Fruits is a gift of the Spirit, and proceeds from a true Spiritual
discerning, that is given Universally in some measure to all the Faithful, tho
they have not always such due use of it, but they may be, and are at times
mistaken.

IV. This Seed grows up into a perfect substantial Page 12. lin. 2. 2d Edit,
Birth, which is Christ formed within, the Body of Christ his Flesh and Blood,
which comes down from Heaven, and gives Life unto Man which eats it, and
feeds upon it; and it is called the Body and Flesh, and Blood of Christ,
because his Eternal Life and Spirit dwells in it immediately. Here Note, by
this perfect substantial Birth, I did not mean (as I now do not) any substance
newly produced, even as in the Generation of natural things, as Plants and
Animals, no new substance is produced, but only a vital Union of substantial
Principles formerly existing; so by Christ formed within, I understood, (and do
still understand) that a measure of the pure Life of Christ comes to be United
to the Soul, and the Soul to it, after the Soul is duly purified and prepared
for such an Union, by which Union that Soul becomes a Member of Christ, even
as the Hand is a Member of a Man's Body, by its having the Life of the Body in
some measure united to it, and by Virtue of that Union actuating that Member,
and making it living and sensible. And whereas I did call that inward
substantial Birth, the Flesh and Blood of Christ, I did so call it only by a
Metaphor, or Allegory, for with such Metaphors, Allegories and Figurative
Speeches, the Scripture abounds in treating of the Spiritual and Divine
Refreshments, and Enjoyments of the Saints; as when they are called, Bread,
Wine, Milk, Honey, Marrow and Fatness; and a Feast of fat things. But this
Allegorical and Figurative sense of Christ's Flesh and Blood, ought not to
divert our minds, not take off our Faith, from Christ's Flesh without us, that
he gave to be broken for us, nor from his Blood that he gave to be shed for us,
without us, for the Remission of our Sins, nor was it ever so intended by me,
Now that to believe in Christ, as he gave his Body of Flesh outwardly to be
broken for us, and his Blood outwardly to be shed for the Remission of our
Sins, is the Eating of his Flesh, and drinking of his Blood, as well as the
inward Enjoyment of his Life in us, is clear from John 6. 29, 35, 40, 47, 48.
According to which Augustine said, concerning Eating Christ's Flesh, and drinking
his Blood, Quid paras dentem and ventrem, creed and Manducasti, i. e. Why
preparest thou Teeth and Belly, believe and thou have Eat Christ's Flesh, and
drunk his Blood.

V. Page 36. For we do freely acknowledge, that such is our State and
Condition, as we are capable to run out, and both think, speak, write, and do
things that are not only not infallible, but may be wrong and false. And page
37. So that this infallibility, as it relates unto the Seed, Birth, and Spirit
of God; is absolute; but as it relates to us, is limited and conditional, and
is rather a possibility of not being deceived, than an impossibility of being
deceived. Here Note, seeing I have plainly acknowledged that not only I, but
we, to wit, any of us all may err, why should I, or any of us be ashamed, or
unwilling to own and correct any unsound or unjustifiable words, that may have
dropped from our Mouths or Pens, by humane weakness, or inadvertency, or why
should any be upbraided and reviled, as Apostates and Changelings for so doing?
Also Note, that the Calumny of such is sufficiently repelled who have falsely
charged me, as holding my self, or others, of the People called Quakers to be
infallible, which I never did, tho I Praise God I am no Sceptick in Religion;
But do believe that both all sincere Christians and I, have an infallible Faith
and Persuasion, touching the Fundamental and Essential Doctrines of
Christianity, yet in other things of an Inferior Nature, I grant, I not only
may have erred, but that I have erred, and I desire to bless God that has
given me a Heart, willing both to see and Acknowledge my Errors, and to retract
and amend them.

VI. Page 54. And tho I cite Scriptures, and make use of them, in arguing this
Point, yet I can truly say, I have not my knowledge from them, Here Note, I say
from them, as being the efficient cause; but I did not deny, that I had my
knowledge by them, Instrumentally, to wit the Doctrinal Knowledge and Faith I
had of the Gospel Truths, and Principles of Christianity, for that is
abundantly acknowledged in many places of my Book of Immediate Revelation, as I
have above mentioned, therefore what I then held, I still hold, that I do own
and acknowledge the Doctrinal Knowledge, and Faith of the Principles of
Christianity, Principally to the Spirits inward Teachings, and to the Holy
Scriptures, and other outward means of Instruction Instrumentally.

VII. Page 57. Jesus Christ himself, who spoke to them in the days of his Flesh
Face to Face, did his words reveal him, or his Father unto them, etc. Here
Note, I show how there is need of Internal Revelation, to give the Knowledge of
Christ, as he came in the Flesh; and therefore it appears, I did then
believe, as well as now I do believe, that the Knowledge of Christ, as he came
in the Flesh, was needful to salvation, (even to all Men's salvation who ever
shall be saved, either express or implicit) else why should I plead, that it
was needful to be revealed by the Spirit.

VIII. Page 60. Seeing the Knowledge of Christ after the Flesh, was not
sufficient, not to be rested in, but they were to look for a better, etc. Here
Note, that (as it will appear from the foregoing and following words in that
Book) by the Knowledge of Christ after the Flesh, I did not mean the Knowledge
of him, as he came in the Flesh, but that knowledge that the Disciples and
Apostles had of him, by their outward sight and hearing of him, or by what they
could know of him, by the mere Actings of the mind, without Internal Divine
Illumination. But the true saving knowledge of him, is a Spiritual Knowledge of
him, as he came in the Flesh, and dyed for us, so as by the Inward Revelation
of the Spirit of God, the mystery of his Death, and Sufferings is opened to us,
and the end and intent thereof, with the great Blessings and Benefits we
receive by him.

IX. Page 63. The Glorious Gospel of Christ is not the words, the best of
Scripture words. Here Note, that whereas I say, the Glorious Gospel of Christ
is not the Words, even the best of Scripture Words: It appears sufficiently
from what I have at large discoursed on that Head, in that Book of Immediate
Revelation, from page 55. to 71. My sense was, that the words of Scripture, are
not Principally and chiefly the Gospel, are not the Principal thing, of the
Gospel, which I expressly mention, page 69. And I call the Light of Christ,
shining in the hearts of the Faithful, The Principal thing that gives the true
Knowledge of God, which if Men's minds were come to, and begot into it, their
Reading [in the Scriptures] and other Exercises in the leadings of this, would
be useful and serviceable in their place. But as the Scripture words, without
the inward Life, Spirit, Light and Grace, is not the Gospel, so nor is the
Spirit, and Light, barely and abstractly considered, without the Words and
Doctrine, the Gospel, In the full and adequate sense of the Word Gospel, which
signifies glad tidings, and cannot be conceived without some form of Words and
Propositions, that consist of words inwardly conceived, and cannot be outwardly
Preached, without some form of words outwardly expressed. And certainly when
Paul said, Romans 1. 16. That the Gospel was the Power of God unto salvation, To
every one that believes, he did not think that the Gospel was a form of words
without the Power of God inwardly revealed, for he said to the Thessalonians, 1
These. 1. 5. For our Gospel came not only unto you in word only, but in Power
and in the Holy Ghost, and in much assurance, and 1 Cor. 4. 20. For the Kingdom
of God is not in Word, but in Power. And that by the Kingdom of God is
sometimes understood in Scripture the Gospel, is clear from Math. 13. Mark 4.
Luke 8. Treating of the parable of the Sower, and is generally acknowledged by
Christian Writers. But when Men commonly call the words of Math, Mark, Luke and
John the Gospel, while they understand it not strictly and barely, nor
primarily, but figuratively, by way of Metonimy, we should not contend with
them, as neither in their calling the Scriptures, the word of God, providing
they call it not the only word of God, as in opposition to any internal word,
and teaching of God in Men's hearts. And certainly it has been not only an
unprofitable, but an hurtful and groundless Contention, that many called
Quakers have raised, in denying that the Scriptures should be called the word
of God, or so much as the written word, Clamouring unjustly, where do ye read
in Scripture of a Written word? and to call the Scripture words, which are
many, the word (say they) is a Lie or Nonsense. But in Answer we read
expressly, that a sentence out of one of the Psalms of David, recited by our
Savior, John 15. 25. They hated me without a cause, is called by him, (...).
The written word, nor is it a Lie to call many words the word, as it is not a
Lie to call many Letters the Letter; as the Scripture calls it, and so high
did this Groundless contention arise, betwixt some called Quakers, and other
professions; that they made this one of the Causes, why they did separate from
them, because they called the Scriptures the word of God, and Matthew, Mark,
Luke, and John, the Gospel; whereas themselves commonly call the Books of
Matthew, Mark, Luke, and John, the Acts, with the other following Books and
Epistles of the Apostles, the New Testament. For with such Figurative Speeches
the Scripture abounds, and to charge them to be a Lie, or Nonsense, is to
charge a Lie, or Nonsense upon Christ and the Holy Spirit. But in a late Book,
Styled, the Quakers cleared, etc. By B. Cool, given out by approbation of the
second days Meeting of them, called Quakers at Grace Church Street, they say,
as they, (viz. the Scriptures) declare the mind of God, with respect to us, and
are his Commands to us, they may in that respect be called the word or Command
of God, and so the Quakers own and esteem them; And so indeed do all other
Professions in Christendom, and not otherwise.

X. Page 64. We are not those Prophets. Here Note, it is a Typographical Error;
which should be Corrected thus, we are not that Prophet. And not only in this,
but in many or most of my former Books, diverse Typographical Errors are to be
found, which yet are obvious enough, to the judicious and unprejudiced Reader
to be such, as indeed are to be found in most Books; and it is very unfairly
done, by my late Adversaries, to charge me with such Typographical Errors, as
if they were mine, as on the other hand, to make that a Typographical Error in
some of their own Books, which is plainly obvious to be no such thing.

XI. Page 74. Now the Bowels of the Fathers love stirred in Compassion to the
work of his hands, that of the pure Creation in Man, which tho shut up in
Death, yet it remained, and perished not as to its being, it did not become a
nothing, but remained a being, and this is the lost which God sent his Son into
the World to seek and to save, not to seek and to save the Old Adam, that Birth
of the Serpents begetting, but to destroy it. For it is not capable of Gods
salvation. Here Note, that I said, that which Christ came to save, is the work
of Gods hands, that of the pure Creation in Man, to wit, the Soul of Man, that
is, a Created being; and that I called it, That of the pure Creation, I did not
mean, that it had not been defiled by Sin, but because of its great worth, in
respect of its Original and Primitive State, and its near capacity to be
Cleansed and Purified. And this is said, not only agreeable to mystic Writers,
that have distinguished betwixt the Soul of Man, and the impurity of the
Serpent, or Serpentine Seed, and spawn that became mingled with the Soul of Man
by Transgression, and have called the true Soul of Man the nucleus, i. e. The
kernel, but that of the Serpent, or of the Devil in Man, (since the entrance of
Sin) the Cortex and Putamen, i. e. the Shell and Husk, and the Impurity of
Belial, but also in agreement with the Holy Scripture, that plainly
distinguishes betwixt the Wheat and the Tares, the good and the bad Seed, good
and bad Fish, the Silver and the Dross, the Sheep, with other clean Animals;
that the Scripture calls clean, and Dogs, Swine, and other unclean Animals.
And as a Sheep, how much soever defiled with dirt, is called a clean Animal,
and a Dog or Swine, how much soever washed, is called an unclean Animal, so the
distinction holds good in a Mystical and Allegorial sense betwixt the true Soul
of Man; that may be said to be pure Comparatively (tho defiled) in respect of
the Serpent impurity that cleaves to it, the which when separated from it, the
Soul is simply and completely pure, and after this manner, the People of
Israel, in respect of the Heathen Nations, are called in Scripture the Holy
Seed, tho even then they had great defilements, also tho the Nations before
Christ's passion were called unclean, yet afterward by virtue of his Passion,
they are forbidden to be called common, or unclean, as the Lord said to Peter
in the Vision, Acts 11. What Gods has cleansed (Note cleansed) call not thou
common. This was only comparatively. And briefly, all Souls of Men that belong
to Gods Election, and shall be saved, are called in Scripture the Good Seed,
the Wheat, etc. But these that shall not be saved, are called the bad Seed,
the Chaff, Tares, Dross.

XII. Page 75. That which Christ came to save, is that of God, which proceeded
from him, The Seed of God in Man, the Seed of Abraham, whereof Abraham's old
decayed Body, and Sarahs Barren womb was a Type. Here Note, that I call the
elected Souls of Men, that shall be saved, and belong to Gods Election, the
Seed of God, is to be understood only in a secondary sense, according to
diverse places of Scripture, as Isaiah 53. 10. and 59. 21. and Romans 4. 16. and
9. 8. Mal. 2. 15. The Hebrew has it Seed of God. See the Margin; and that I
call it the Seed of Abraham, is only by an Allegorical Allusion, to the
Spiritual and Divine Birth in the Faithful, signified by Isaac, the Son of the
free Woman, which Allegorical Allusions is grounded on Gal. 4. 24. But this was
never intended by me to lessen, or obscure that great Truth of the Gospel, That
the Man-Christ is the promised Seed of Abraham, in the true literal sense, and
without all Allegory, as he was Born of the Blessed Virgin, In whom all Nations
of the Earth are Blessed, And that promised Seed of the Woman, that should
bruise the Head of the Serpent.

XIII. Page 87. Through him, (viz. Christ) not at a distance, but near. Here
Note, my sense was, not at a discontinued distance, but both near and far off,
both within us, and also without us in the Heavens; as where it is said, Acts
17. 27. That God is not far from every one of us; viz. at a discontinued
distance; for otherwise he is both a God a far off, and a God nigh at hand. And
page 88 While I remained Ignorant of the Appearance of Jesus Christ, to
meditate in me; it is a Typographical Error, read to mediate in one. Here Note,
That I did not intend, in the least, by asserting the Mediation, or
Intercession of the Mediatory Spirit of Christ in the Saints (according to Romans
8. 26.) to deny, or derogate from Christ's Mediation and Intercession without
us in Heaven.

XIV. Page 99 Jesus Christ revealed in Man is the Foundation of the True
Church. Here Note, That I did not mean by Christ Jesus, only and alone the
Light within; but my sense was, That the true Knowledge and Faith of Christ, as
he is both God and Man, and who, as Man, died for our sins, rose again, and
ascended into Heaven, and is our High Priest, Mediator and Advocate with the
Father in Heaven; is grounded upon him as inwardly revealed by his Spirit and
Light in our Hearts, which was my Design chiefly in this Treatise; and how
much, and how far I did then own the Man Christ Jesus without us in Heaven, as
our Head and Foundation, and Object of our Faith, I recommend to the Reader to
read what I have writ in this same book of Immed. Revel. from page 243, to page
247. where note that particular passage, page 245. where I say, The Man Christ
Jesus, who suffered in the Flesh at Jerusalem, above sixteen hundred years ago,
is the Spring out of which all the streams of Living Water flow into our
souls: And the Sun out of which, and from which all the Light we have shines
into our souls, in whom the fullness of the Godhead dwells, and through whom
God does communicate unto us every good and perfect Gift. And page 247. I say
-- All our Prayers, and Breathings, and Cries in the spirit and Life of Jesus in
us, do immediately reach unto the Man Jesus, ascended unto Glory, and he is
touched with them. -- And through the Man Jesus help does come down unto us
from the Father of Lights: And all our Refreshments, Quicknings, Consolations,
and Renewings of Life and strength come unto us from God through him, in whom
we have favor with God, in whom God is well pleased with us. -- And a few
Lines after I say, In whom we believe, as we do in God, as he himself has
taught us; Ye believe in God, (said he) believe also in me: In whom believing,
we also call upon him, even Jesus, who, as concerning the flesh, was crucified,
who is God over all blessed for ever. And lest any should surmise, That by
Christ Jesus, in all this large Citation, I did mean the Light within only, and
not the Man Christ Jesus without us, I expressly mention the Man Christ Jesus
without us, page 246. who is ascended into the Heavens, with whom we have
immediate Fellowship and Union, through the measure of the Life of Jesus, as
Man made manifest in us. Which is abundantly sufficient to discover the
Impudence of my late Adversaries, who by perverting my words, assert, That I
made the Light within the alone Object of Faith; which I never did; although I
grant, That with all True Christians I hold, That as God, who is Light, is
every where present; so in a special way of Presence, he is together with his
Word and Spirit in the Saints; and as so present is the Object of their Faith,
yet so as that Christ Jesus, as he is both God and Man, is also the Object
thereof.

XV. Page 123. and Luke 15. 8, 9. He compares it to a Woman having lost a
piece of money, etc. Here Note, This I freely confess is one of these places of
Scripture, that I have, through weakness of understanding, misunderstood, and
unduely applied to prove a truth, for whereas I have with others among the
People called Quakers, construed the lost Piece of Money mentioned in this
place to be the Light within, being too much swayed by their Authority; I am
sufficiently convinced by the lost piece of money in this Parable of our
Savior, he did not mean the Light within, but the lost Souls of Men, whom he
came to seek and to save, and I plainly now understand that by the lost Sheep,
the lost piece of Money, and the lost Son, is understood Men, or the lost Souls
of Men, who when they have sincerely repented, and are Converted unto God, are
said to be found; therefore that the Repenting Sinner is the lost piece of
Money, is clear from our Savior's Words, v. 10. Likewise I say unto you, there
is Joy in the presence of the Angels of God over one sinner that repents. But
they who expound the lost piece of money to be the Light within, will find
difficulty to show what the Nine Pieces are that were not lost. Whereas to
understand it of the Souls of Men, there is no difficulty in it; for as of
these many created Angelical, rational Spirits, many did not Sin, and so were
not lost, so the Souls of Men did Sin, and these are fully signified by the
lost piece of Money, yet although by the Light within is not to be understood
the lost piece of Money, but the Soul of Man, the Light within is very well
proved, from that part of the Parable which says, that the Woman Lighted her
Candle to seek the lost piece of Money; which plainly signifies, That the way
that the Lord uses to find the lost Soul is, by Lighting a Candle in it, and
Inwardly enlightening it to see its lost condition, and how it may return to God
by sincere Faith and Repentance. And tho it is not the intended sense of this
place of Scripture, that the Light within i^ the lost piece of Money, but the
Soul of Man is that lost piece, ye it may well be allowed to be a Truth, That
as God and Christ ^ad lost the Soul of Man, so that Soul had lost God and
Christ, and the loss was mutual, and the finding is also mutual; as soon as God
and Christ finds the lost Soul, that Soul formerly lost, finden God and
Christ, and greatly rejoices on that Account. I find the same mistake happened
to Origin, in his expounding this Parable of the lost piece of Money to
signify, The Kingdon of God within, the Image of the Heavenly King, Hom 13. in
Genesin. Again, whereas I said, page 125. So all his Ministers ever Preached
People to this, the lost in them, that it might be found, That they may find a
lost God, a lost Christ whom they had lost, and from whom they were separated
by their Sins. Tho. Hicks in one of his Dialogues, had imposed a perverse Gloss
upon them, by leaving out the latter part of them, Viz. Whom they had lost, and
from whom they were separated by their Sins, as if I had taught for Doctrine,
that Christ came to save God and Christ, that they were lost, or as that God or
Christ needed Salvation, whereas my following words plainly show my real sense,
Viz. That God had not lost himself, nor Christ had not lost Christ, but Men had
lost both by their Sins.

XVI. Page 126. And therefore, said Paul, 1 Cor. 2. 2. I determined not to know
any thing among you (in you) save Jesus Christ, and him Crucified, he Preached
every where, Christ Crucified that he might be Raised up in them. Here Note,
Tho the Greek words, (...) can be Grammatically Translated in you, yet they
will not always admit of that Translation, otherwise in many places, the sense
would be marred, as 1 Cor. 15. 12. How say some (...), It cannot be with good
sense Translated in you, but among you. And as to that place, 1 Cor. 2. 2. and
Coloss. 3. 1. Both these places are to be understood of Christ, as he was
outwardly Crucified; And but consequentially of his inward appearance, and the
true sense of Paul's words is this, that he determined not to show himself wise
or skillful among them, in any other Knowledge or Wisdom, but in the Knowledge
of the Crucified Jesus, how he is the gift of the Fathers Love to poor Sinners,
to save them from Sin and Wrath, and what the great Benefits and Blessings are
we have by him, and by his Death and Sufferings, Resurrection, Mediation, and
Intercession for us in heaven, which does include his inward appearance
consequentially, so that I freely Acknowledge my Weakness and Shortness in
understanding, in training these and some other places of Scripture, to prove
what they did not so directly and properly prove, the which und^^ application
of both these places, 1 Cor. 2. 2. and Gal. 3. 1. Both here and wherever they
may be found in any other of my Books, particularly, Universal Grace, p. 43. I
retract and correct as abovementioned. Yet I would not have any to think, that
I relinquish my Testimony, to Christ's Inward appearance, in the Souls of Men,
and Gods Inward Revelation and Teaching by his Spirit in Men, for I remain in
the same Testimony, as to the main, and I hope so to do, while I live in that,
and in all other parts of it, relating to essentials of Christianity and
Spiritual experiences, and all openings of Truth at any time given to me, of
the Lord, and delivered by me, in this, or any other of my Books, therefore let
none Judge amiss of my free and Christian Acknowledgement, in this, or any
other mistakes, that upon a further discovery, I am made free to acknowledge,
retract and correct.

XVII. Page 137. Then they would turn their Backs upon them, and their
Colleges would become like the Abbacies at this day. Here Note, The great
Rudeness, and Unmannerliness I saw in many of them called Collegians, and other
unchristian Behavior in our Meetings, and in other places, drew this passage
from me, yet let none from this conclude, that I either then was, or now am
against Schools of good I earning, either of Divine or Natural Things, but it
is the Abuse and Irregularity of them, that I then was, and now am against. And
I do not think that true Divinity can either be truly taught, or truly
learned without God's inward teachings and illumination; and that there are but
too few that are so taught, it is but too apparent; Yet that many called
University-men, have had, and may now have a good measure of true spiritual
Knowledge, I dare not be so uncharitable to deny. And I cannot omit to mention
the great benefit I had by reading the truly pious books of several pious
English Writers, and also of some of my Native Country, before I came among
the Quakers; not only John Wickliffe (who was an Oxford Scholar), but Luther,
and most of the first Reformers from Popish Darkness, Idolatry and Slavery,
were University-men, and the English Martyrs, Cranmer, Ridley, Latimer, etc.

XVIII. Page 230. The Historical Knowledge and Faith, viz. of Christ's outward
coming in the flesh, birth, life, death, etc. is not an essential part of true
Religion, but an integral. Here Note, That by the Historical Knowledge and
Faith, I did understand that Knowledge and Faith that respects the History of
Christ's Birth, Life, Miracles, Death, Resurrection, Ascension, etc. with all
the Circumstances of Times, Places and Names of Persons, as related by the four
Evangelists, which elsewhere I have called the express, or explicit Knowledge
and Faith, which many of the Faithful never had. But the Doctrine of Christ
simply considered, is one thing, and the History, or Historical Revelation of
the many Circumstances of times, places, and persons, etc. Relating to that
Doctrine, is another thing. The Knowledge and Faith of the first may be had,
and was had by many, without the second, and as the first I call express, or
explicit, with other Christian Writers, so the other may be called Implicit,
and is Employed in the other, the explicit I hold not to be Universally
necessary to Salvation; but to whom an opportunity is given, to have it made
known, but the Implicit I hold is Universally necessary to all that shall be
Eternally saved. And I know not any thing to be found in all my former
Writings, to the contrary, notwithstanding of the attempts of my ignorant
Adversaries who affirm it, and whom I have sufficiently Answered in diverse of
my Late Books, particularly that called, The Antichrists and Sadducees
detected. However, upon supposition, that any such thing can be found in my
Books, I retract and renounce it; And I had far rather contradict any unsound
assertion, ever held by me, than contradict the least truth, warranted by Holy
Scripture. Nor is it properly to be guilty of a Contradiction, for a Man to
correct his former Errors, but my Adversaries are guilty of foul
Contradictions, who both together affirm and deny the same things, as if two
Contradictories could be both true at once, which no Sober or sincere Men will
allow.

XIX. Page 20. And thus Christ, according to his spiritual birth, in the
Saints, is the Seed of the Woman; for that the Saints are the Woman, that bring
him forth after the spirit; and are his Mother, as Mary brought him forth after
the flesh and after the spirit also. Here Note, That I call Christ with respect
to his being formed in the Saints, according to Gal. 4. 19. The seed of the
Woman. It is plain from the whole Series of my discourse in that place, both
before and after, for some Pages, that I did understand it but Allegorically,
and by way of Allusion, and never intended it, that Christ was not the Seed of
the Woman, in the true and proper sense of the words, without all Allegory, as
he was made of a Woman, and was born of the Virgin called Mary, really and
truly, according to the flesh. And his Birth thus after the flesh, as he was
born of the Virgin at Bethlem in Judea, I did always believe, as I do at
present so believe was really intended and foretold in these words, Genesis 3. 15.
And as Mary was the immediate Mother of Christ, according to the flesh, so
Evah, who was the Mother of all Men, was his Mother remotely. But the
Allegorical sense of Christ's Birth or Formation in the Saints, is warranted
both by Scripture and Antiquity. By Scripture, as Mat 12. 50. Rev. 12. 2. 5.
And by Antiquity; for Augustine first, and long after him Erasmus said, If Mary
had not born Christ in her heart or soul, he could not have been her Savior,
tho she had born him in her flesh. But this Allegorical Allusion of Christ's
Birth in the Saints, I did not ground on Genesis 3. 15. but on Mat. 12. 50. and
Rev. 12. 1, 5. And how and in what sense I understand the Birth of Christ in
the Saints, I refer to the 4th Paragraph of this Section.

XX. Page 254. And this is as proper a Death, as when a man dies; for when a
man dies his soul dies, not in it self, but it dies unto that Fellowship it
had with the body, by reason of the Vital Union betwixt it, and the body being
broken. Here Note, I acknowledge this passage is not safely worded; therefore I
retract it. For tho I had very safely asserted, That the Life af Christ, viz.
The Principle of the Divine Life in men, never dies in it self, but only as to
men, when they commit great and heinous sins, whereby they are said to quench
the spirit, and crucify the Son of God afresh to themselves after they had
known a divine quickening, yet the Union betwixt the soul and body of a man
being broken, is more properly a Death; the other I take to be understood
rather figuratively than proper. For when the Vital Union betwixt Soul and Body
is broken, the Soul does wholly cease to act in that body while it is dead; But
Christ cease not often times to act in a dead soul, but does often act in it by
sharp Reproof and Conviction for its sin, and also by new and fresh Visitations
of his Life and Love, in order to quicken and renew it again. Moreover, the
Soul and Body of a Man are so united, that they make up one Person; but so are
not Christ and the Soul united, as to be one Person: for that would make every
Saint to be Christ, The Union betwixt the Soul and Body of a Man is a Personal
Union, whereby every Action of the body is chargable upon the Person, according
to that true Maxim Actiones sunt suppositorum; i. e. Actions are of Persons; as
what the hand does, the Man whose hand it is, is justly said to do it, whether
Good or Evil. But the Actions of Men's Souls, in whom Christ is, are not
chargeable upon Christ, for as Christ is no wise chargeable with the least Sin
that the Soul Acts, so when the Soul repents, and believes, and c. That is
not Christ that repents, and believes in that Soul. Christ indeed is the
Author and chief efficient cause of true Repentance, and Faith in believers,
but he is not the subject of reception. This excellent Union betwixt Christ and
true Believers, is compared in Scripture, to that Union betwixt the Head and
the Body, the Vine and the Branches, the Foundation, and the Building; but it
is better felt by the Faithful, than it can be defined by the best of words,
for it is unspeakable, and yet is incomparably short of that Union that is
betwixt the Godhead and Manhood of Christ, which is a Personal Union; So that
the Man Christ is God, yet so that the Manhood is not the Godhead: And the
Union betwixt Christ and Believers, is by their Faith in him and Love to him,
by which Faith and Love, as they are United to his Spirit, and Measure of his
Life and Grace in them, so thereby they are United to the Man Christ in Heaven,
and to that fullness of Grace that dwells in him, as every Member of the Body,
as it is United to the Life in that Member, so it is to the Head, and to the
Life that is in the Head; and as all the Members in the Natural Body are United
both to the head and to each other, so all the faithful are United to Christ
and to one another. The Reader that is willing to know my sense further, as to
these weighty matters abovementioned, relating to Christ's Birth or Formation
in the Saints, and their Union with him, may read, if they please, my Appendix
to the General History of the Quakers, by G. Croese, Printed at London this
present Year 1696.

SECT. II. Containg diverse Explanations and Emendations of Passages in my
Book, called, The Universal free Grace of the Gospel Asserted, Printed 1671.
TItle Page -- Proved by many infallible Arguments, in the evidence and
demonstration of the Spirit of Truth. Here Note, That I had the Evidence and
Demonstration of the Spirit of Truth on my side, in diverse of the Arguments I
have used in that Book, I still believe, but whereas on a further
consideration, and more mature Judgment. I find diverse Passages in that Book,
that need correction, therefore I Acknowledge my Weakness and Rashness, in
ascribing all the Arguments in that Book, and my whole way of Arguing on that
subject, to the Evidence and Demonstration of the Spirit of Truth, and I freely
and most willingly retract that clause, both here or any where else, in any of
my Books; where I have used it, so far (...) have ascribed any saying, or
Passage to the Spirit of (...) that is not according to the Testimony of the
Holy (...) the Spirit of Truth leads into all Truth, and into (...) but Truth,
therefore whoever ascribes (whether I or any Man else) any untruth or
Inpertinency, or undue Application of Scripture to the Spirit of Truth, however
unwittingly they so do (as what I did was unwittingly) they do greatly Err, and
Sin in so doing. And my sin, and error herein I freely confess, trusting in the
Mercy of God, (for Christ's sake,) for the pardon of that and all my other Sins.

I. Page 4. That God by an Eternal decree has wholly passed by the most part
of Men, and left them in Darkness, without any Light to shine in their
Darkness, that can possibly at any time Lead them out of it. Does not this
discourage People? Here Note, That it is this which I mainly opposed in my
Book, Viz. The decree of absolute reprobation, making salvation impossible to
the greatest part of Mankind. And on the other hand, I earnestly plead for the
Universality of the Light, Word, Grace and Spirit of God toward, and upon all,
In a day of Visitation for making salvation possible unto them, compared with
p. 110. And in this Testimony I remain against that absurd Doctrine of absolute
Reprobation, rendering salvation impossible either to the greatest part, or
indeed to any part of Mankind; and for the possibility of salvation, to all
Mankind, So that who shall not be saved are left without excuse. But this
possibility of salvation cannot be understood, without it be acknowledged that
God has made some Provision of means, whereby Men Universally are put under a
possibility of salvation, the means of salvation are both without Men, and
within Men, the means without are chiefly Christ's coming in the Flesh, and his
suffering Death for all Men, and offering up himself a Sacrifice for all, etc.
The means within, are the inward Visitations and Illuminations of God by his
Spirit, inwardly convincing Men of Sin, and moving them to Repentance, and
Conversion unto God and Christ. And tho I have plainly enough in this my Book
opposed that absurd Doctrine of absolute Reprobation, yet An Election even of
Persons, as well as of the Divine Seed, I have owned, and that God does visit
such elect Persons with his Mercy, that he never leaves them till he has
gained them to himself, which is a wonderful Discrimination of the free Love of
God, [Viz. To them above and beyond others who are not saved.] See page 107,
and in p. 108. allowing the common Translation of these words, Acts 13. 48. And
as many as were ordained to eternal Life believed. I say, we grant, that as
whoever believes are ordained to Eternal Life, so whoever are ordained to
Eternal Life, do believe. And page 109. I denied, that Faith foreseen, or
something in the Creature was the moving Cause of God's Decree of Election: And
that I said, Election was not without respect to Faith, my sense is obvious,
viz. That Election respects Faith, not as its Cause, but as its Effect, and as
the means unto salvation; so that whoever shall be eternally saved, God has
chosen them to eternal salvation. And in the same page 109. I own a more
special giving, according to John 6. 37. by Virtue whereof, all that are thus
given by the Father unto Christ, shall come unto him, and cannot but come to
him.

II. Page 5. The spirit of Life from God is entered into the two slain
Witnesses, and yet shall more abuudantly enter. Here Note, this is said only by
an Allegorical and Metaphorical Allusion. What my sense of Scripture* Allusions
is, see a little after 4.

III. Page 6. Forasmuch as they both deny, That the Universal Light that is
given unto all, is the Light Evangelical, or a Light for the Faith of the
Gospel to rest in; Therefore they (viz. Papists and Arminians, do not hold it
forth as the Immediate Object of the Christian Faith. 2dly, They deny the way
and manner of its Operation to be by Immediate Revelation. 3dly, They say, This
Light comes from Christ, but Christ himself is not in man. Here Note, That
diverse of my late Adversaries among that Sect of Quakers with whom I have had a
great Contest of late, concerning some of the great Fundamentals of Christian
Doctrine, have from this passage sought to infer my Agreement with them, so as
to hold, That the Light within was sufficient to salvation, without any thing
else; and thereby not only excluding all outward helps and means of salvation,
but even the Man Christ Jesus, and his Death and Sufferings, and Sacrifice of
himself, from being necessarily concerned in our salvation; as because I had
said, that this Light is Evangelical that is in every man, and is the Immediate
Object of the Christian Faith, and so that Christ is in every man. But all this
does not prove, that I ever did hold, that the Light within is sufficient to
salvation without any thing else; for I did always believe, that Christ is our
entire and complete Savior, in both respects, viz. both as he came outwardly
in the Flesh, and died for our sins, and became a Sacrifice of a sweet savor
unto God, to make a Reconciliation betwixt God and us, and also as he comes
into us, and is in us, as the Eternal Word; but I never held, that the Word
alone was our entire and Complete Savior, without his taking the true Nature
of Man upon him. And that I never did exclude him, but that still both in this
book, and all my other books, first and last, I did respect him both ways, viz.
both within us and without us, as our complete and entire Savior, and the
complete and entire Savior of all that shall be saved by him, I can
sufficiently prove; and that I have so considered him in this very book, I
shall bring sufficient Evidence; for thus I write, p. 120. of this book, That
the sufficiency of the Light and Grace of Christ within, does not make void the
use and benefit of his Outward Coming, Obedience, Death and Sufferings -- For
they are not to be set in Opposition to each other, as if the one did hinder
the sufficiency or usefulness of the other, both being sufficient, and useful,
and necessary in their own kind and way, consummating, and being consummated in
one another. And p. 10. I say, And as concerning the sufficiency of this Light
unto salvation, we do not understand it in Opposition to either the Necessity
or Usefulness of the Outward Coming of Christ, and his Sufferings and Death for
our sins, nor in Opposition to the service and use of any Teachings in the
Outward, that come from the spirit of God, or any Outward things to be done or
practiced, which his spirit leads unto. And p 11. I say, Neither do we
assert, That men that have received this Light and spirit of God, and have
given themselves up unto it to obey it, and so are become servants of
Righteousness, do receive at once a full and sufficient measure for the whole
course of their lives, but only sufficient for the present state, condition,
opportunity and case, to preserve, protect and defend them from all Evil; so
that the Creature must be continually exercised in a perpetual dependence and
waiting upon the Lord, to receive the renewed and fresh Influences of his
Divine Life and Light, according as its present state, condition and necessity
may require, there being no security of the soul out of this dependent,
waiting, receiving frame. And whereas my late Adversaries have much blamed my
distinguishing betwixt a first and second Ministration of the Spirit and Light
within, given to both Jews and Gentiles, calling the first Legal, and that of
the first Covenant, the second Evangelical, being that of the second Covenant,
and for my saying, That none were justified by the Law, or first ministration
of the spirit, or Light within, and their Obedience thereunto, but through Faith
in Christ. And they call this distinction New Doctrine, and say, therein I do
contradict what I have formerly delivered, in this book. But for the Reader's
satisfaction, I recommend to him, if he please to read, what I have writ in
that very book, from p. 8. to p. 10. where he will find that I have used that
very distinction, and largely insisted on it in several pages of that book; And
in p. 29. I say, [giving the sense of Paul 's words, By the works of the Law
shall no flesh be justified, Romans 3. 20] By Law there is understood the Law of
the first Covenant, which came by Moses; and it is true, no justification is by
that Law, whether it be understood of Moses his outward ministration; Or of the
same Ministration of Moses in the Spirit, where the Law is Writ, but in Tables
of Stone, till the Seed be raised, by which the Law is fulfilled, But in
diverse of the Gentiles the Seed was raised, which is that divine nature, or
birth, by which they did the things contained in the Law, and so were Justified
by him who gave them power to fulfill it. And whereas they strongly allege out
of this Book, and some other of my former Books, That I had formerly Asserted,
Men might be Justified and Saved, without all knowledge and faith of Christ
without us, as he was Crucified, etc. But upon a diligent search into my Books,
and an Impartial Examination of all the places cited by them to prove it, I can
find no such thing; and my so frequently cautioning the Matter all along
wherever I had occasion, That the express knowledge and faith of Christ's death
is not universally necessary to Men's Salvation (so that as I have noted in my
Book called, The Antichrists and Sadducees detected, some of my Adversaries,
ten several times at least, in the Words and Passages they have quoted out of
my Books, bring me in using the word Express still, saying, the express
knowledge and faith of Christ's death, is not universally necessary, etc.) is
sufficient to clear me with all intelligent and impartial Men, that I still
held some knowledge and faith of Christ, though not express, yet implicit, was
universally necessary to Men's Salvation.

IV. Page 9. And as he (viz. Christ) had his Flesh in the outward, which was a
Vail, so he has his Flesh in the inward, which is a Vail also, the Word became
Flesh, and dwelt in us, said John. Here Note, Though I deny not the Flesh of
Christ in the inward, in an Allegorical and Metaphorical Sense, as above
Explained, 4. Sect. 10. yet I freely acknowledge, I have unduly and improperly
applied that place, Joh. 1. 14. and 1 Timothy 3. 16. to the Flesh of Christ in the
inward, as likewise I have made the same undue Application of that place in my
Book called, The Way cast up, as in Page 133, 134. and possibly in diverse other
Places and Books, which undue Application, wherever it is in any of my Books, I
do Retract, judging it to be improper. And though I might possibly excuse it to
be only said by way of Allusion, yet even in that respect I Retract it, having
found by too great Experience, that too frequently Allusions do great hurt, and
are an occasion to ignorant People, to draw them from the true Sense of that
place of Scripture really intended by the Spirit of God, to which the Allusion
is made! And though I am not against Allegorical Expositions of some places of
Scripture, warranted by Scripture, or such as cannot be truly understood
without an Allegory, nor do I condemn universally Allusions to some places of
Scripture, yet for the sake of the Ignorant that may be hurt thereby, I judge
they had better be not used in many cases; and when used in any case, it should
be told that it is but an Allusion.

V. Page 9. Thus it is sown natural (viz. the Divine Seed) but is raised
Spiritual. Here Note, This is but an Allusion, and was no wise intended in
prejudice of the Resurrection of the Body; for in this san Book, Page 70. I
plainly Assert the Resurrection of the Body, as thing not yet attained by the
deceased Saints. But because, as is a ready said, Allusions in many cases are
not safe, I wish I had in used it in this case, and therefore let it be as
unsaid, and the rathe because to my certain knowledge, some great Preachers
among that sort of Quakers that are turned my Adversaries, do wholly apply all
that is said in 1 Cor. 15. of the Resurrection, to the inward rising of the
Soul or the Seed within. And I have more than once heard some Preachers among
the Quakers wholly Expound that place, 1 Cor. 15. 14. [If Christ be not risen,
then is our preaching vain, and your faith is also vain.] of the inward rising
of the Life in the Hearers when the Ministers speak. And one of their Ministers
did so strongly Assert it, that in a private Conference with him, I could not
by the best Reasons I could bring, persuade him that it was meant of a
Resurrection of the Body after death.

VI. Page 20. So that it is manifest by this Expression. That which may be
known of God, Romans 1. 19. And as it is in the Greek, (...), is understood the
Gospel. And a little after, I say, aggreeable unto this is that the same
Apostle writes unto the Colossians, 1. 23. That the Gospel has been preached
to every Creature which is under Heaven; but according to the Greek it is (...)
in every creature, i. e. in every man, as when Christ said to his Disciples,
Preach the Gospel to every creature. Here Note, that by the (...) Paul meant an
inward divine supernatural Principle in the Gentiles, who had not the Gospel
outwardly preached unto them, which, he says, was manifest in them, and which
God had showed unto them, and which he calls the Truth that many held in
unrighteousness, v. 18. I still hold, and that in a figurative way of
Synecdoche, it may be called Gospel, or as the word Gospel may be extended to a
more general signification than is commonly used in Scripture, I will not deny;
for taken at large, it may signify any Intimation of God's Love, Goodness and
Mercy to sinful men; and in this sense it may be said, that the Gospel has
been preached in every Creature, i. e. in every Man. And as the Divine
Principle, Word and Light within preaches in some sort, the Love, Goodness and
Mercy of God to sinful men, in order to their salvation, so every creature
without, or, so to speak, the whole Creation, both without Man and in Man
himself, does preach it, as it is said, Ps. 19. 1. The Heavens declare the
glory of God, etc. Not only the glory of his Power, Justice and Wisdom, but
also the glory of his Mercy, Love and Goodness toward men; Yet I must needs
acknowledge, that I am fully convinced, that it is not a due application to
apply this to the word Gospel, as it is generally used in Scripture, and
particularly by Paul in these places quoted by me, To. 1. 16. and Col. 1. 23.
and 1 T. 3. 16. therefore I do freely retract and correct my undue application
of these places of Scriptue to the inward Principle; as to what it did or does
discover and reveal universally in men, and particularly in such of the
Gentiles to whom the Gospel was not outwardly preached; for upon a more
diligent search into the holy Scripture, I find, that in all places in the New
Testament, where the word Gospel is used, it signifies the Doctrine of
salvation by the promised Messiah, that was outwardly to come, and did come in
the true Nature of Man, together with the spiritual blessings that men were to
receive by him, of which the inward principle of God's Grace, Light and Spirit
within, both in general to all, and in special to believers, in a more
excellent degree and manner of Operation and Influence, is but a part. Yet I
confine not the Gospel, even in this sense, to outward preaching, by the
Ministry of Men or Books; for it was preached to Adam and Eve after the Fall,
by God himself, and so was it to Abraham and Job, and so it is probable it has
been to diverse, even to some Gentiles, singularly favored without the Ministry
of Men, though in God's ordinary way it is preached by the Ministry of Men, God
himself by his Spirit and divine Influence inwardly accompanying the same, to
work the true Faith of it in the Hearers. Therefore whatever Doctrine Men
preach, or have at any time preached, the great Subject whereof is not the
promised Messiah, to wit, the Crucified Jesus, as the main Foundation of all
the Spiritual Blessings of Light, and Grace, and divine Influences of the
Spirit within, it is not the Gospel in the proper, full and adequate Sense and
Signification of it, as the Scripture uses it. And as concerning that place in
Colos. 1. 23. and other such places, as I have noted above, though the Greek
Particle (...) is often properly Translated in, yet not always, and there is no
cause so to Translate it here, but rather to, for the Apostle Paul in that
place means the Doctrine of Salvation by Christ Crucified, and the Grace and
gift of the Holy Spsrit given of God to Men through him, as it was preached by
him, and the other Apostles and Evangelists, in that clear and bright
Dispensation of it, that was then given. And though it was not at that time
actually preached to all Men, nor to all Nations, yet because it began then so
to be preached, and was certainly to be preached to all Nations, and will be so
preached before the end of the World, therefore after the Prophetical Phrase of
Scripture, That which was to be done, is said to be done:

VIII. Page 43. And that it has pleased the Lord to send his Son into the
world, both in the outward and inward, in a weak and low appearance, that he
might show forth the more abundant glory, in that which was so low and weak in
appearance, to prevail over the greatest power that stood in his way, for thus
does the Seed of the woman bruise the Serpents head.

Here Note, That I did not place our Salvation wholly upon Christ's inward
appearance, but upon God his sending him, both in the outward and inward, to
bruise the Serpents head. And that I did not understand, that the bringing Men
simply to the inward Principle, so as only to believe in the Light, Word, or
Spirit within, was the bringing them to the Christian Faith, but that it was a
proper means by way of preparation and introduction, in order to the gathering
of People into the true Faith of Christ, which is the whole aim and scope of my
fifth Argument in that Book, from P. 88. to 94. where note these words, p. 92.
And this will bring People naturally to own the Scriptures, and things therein
declared, to own Moses, and the Prophets, to own the Dispensation of God to the
Jews in that day, and to own Christ in the Flesh, his miraculous Birth, his
Doctrine, Miracles, Sufferings, Death, Resurrection, and Ascension, together
with the wonderful end and design of God therein, etc. And this Method I very
well approve of still; for as the knowledge of Christ, the Word Incarnate, or
made Flesh, presupposes some knowledge of God, and of his Word, so to preach
to People that are ignorant of God, and of his Divine Perfections, that there
is a God, and what his Divine Perfections are, is very proper and necessary,
that they may be brought into some true knowledge of him, which they cannot be
brought into, without some Divine Illumination of the inward Principle, the
Internal Word and Light. But all this is an introduction and preparation to
dispose the Souls and Hearts of Men to receive the Christian Faith and
Religion, and is not the Explicit Christian Faith it self (no more than the
Porch that leads into the House is the House, though it may be said to be a
part of it,) as in the definition of a Man, that he is a living Creature, or
Animal, is not his true definition, but the Genus of it, which is but a part at
most; but when the difference is superadded, that he is a Rational, or
Intellectual Living Creature, that is his true definition. And so the true
definition of a true Christian, and sincere Believer in Christ, is he who not
only believes that there is a God, and that in the beginning was the Word, and
the Word was with God, etc. but that the Word was made Flesh, and that the Son
of God by Eternal Generation became the Son of Man, by a miraculous Generation
in time, and so is both God and Man, and yet not two Sons of God, but one, not
two Christ's, but one. This is the true Christian Explicit Faith: like a Tree
spreading forth its boughs and branches (together with the other great Truths
of the Christian Doctrine, delivered in the Holy Scriptures) with rich and
precious Fruit, to which the implicit Faith, in some Virtuous Gentiles, may be
compared to that same Tree, when it was in the Seed, or but a little sprung up
into the Bud, or Blade, as Christ compared the Kingdom of God, to wit, the
Evangelical Dispensation, Mark 4. 26, 27, 28, 29. Compare this with what is
above quoted out of that Book p. 6.. 3. of this Section, and with what is said
p. 61 of that Book.

VIII. P 63. Which piece of silver betokens the divine principle, etc. Luke
15. 8. Here Note, This undue Application is Retracted and Corrected above, in
the first Sect.. 13. And in fine, although I firmly remain in my Faith and
Persuasion, of the Truth, of that great Principle of the Universal Love and
Grace of God, making Salvation possible to all Men, and that in order
thereunto, Christ has Enlightened every Man that comes into the World; which
universal Illumination, is an universal Benefit that all Men have by his dying
for them, as is largely urged by me, particularly from p. 31, to 34. in that
Book, and in diverse other places; and that it was my principal Aim and Design
in that Book to prove and demonstrate the Truth of that Principle, which I am
well satisfied, as to the main, I have truly done, by diverse effectual and
solid Arguments; and therefore I adhere to what I have delivered in that Book,
as to the main, yet I freely acknowledge, that diverse of the Arguments I have
used to prove the Truth of that Principle, are not so proper and demonstrative,
nor are several places of Scripture, from which I argued, so duly applied to
that effect, as Romans 10. 7, 8, 9, 10. and the several Parables brought in Arg.
10. from p. 60. to 65. Titus 2. 11, 12. 1 Cor. 12. 7. Therefore the undue
Application of these places of Scripture, or any others that can be found in my
Book to that effect, I freely Retract, which though they necessarily respect
the inward Principle of God's Grace, Word, Spirit, Light, etc. yet these places
are not to be understood only and alone of that, but respect that bright Gospel
Dispensation, that had then appeared in the World by the Apostles preaching,
which was accompanied with new superadded Illuminations, in the Souls and
Hearts of Believers (though all coming from one Fountain, one God, one Christ,
and one Spirit,) as much differing from, and as much excelling and surmounting
any inward Illumination given to all that part of Mankind, where the Apostles
Doctrine concerning Christ Crucified and Raised again did not come, as the
Light of the Sun after he is risen, excells that which shines in the Night
time, which is a Scripture Comparison, that compares the state that the
Gentiles generally were in, before God visited them, by the Preaching of the
Gospel in the Ministry of the Apostles, and their Successors, to the Night, but
the State of the Believing Gentiles, who had received the Holy Ghost by their
Ministry to the Day; which very Distinction I had noticed in the stating of the
Question, p. 8. of that Book. And that bright Dispensation of the Gospel, that
did visit the World, by means of the Apostles Ministry, and their true
Successors, was like the rising of the Sun, that may be said to be truly
Universal, and the Grace of God, that bringing Salvation did appear unto all,
as the Sun is truly said to rise unto all, and to bring day unto all, tho not
at one and the same time, and Christ's Prophecy, which then began to be
fulfilled, and was in great part fulfilled, in the very time of the Apostles,
must be fully and completely fulfilled, that the Gospel of the Kingdom shall be
Preached in all the World, which is to say, not the Inward Principle only and
alone, but the Doctrine of Christ's Birth, Death, Burial, Resurrection,
Ascension, etc. As is plain from his own words, wherever this Gospel of the
Kingdom shall be Preached, this also shall be told, what this VVom an has
done, for she has done it for my Burial. But that many were saved by Christ
through Faith in him, before that time, and before his coming in the Flesh, as
well among Gentiles as Jews, Inothing question, as I never did.

IX. Page 72. But let the Scriptures be searched throughout and it shall never
be found, that any are simply Condemned, or made Inexcuseable for Adam's Sin,
but for their own Sins in the first place, and for those of their Ancestors,
but consequentially, this is the Condemnation of the World, says Christ, that
Light is come into it, and they Love Darkness, etc. But no where it is said,
this is their Condemnation, simply that Adam Sinned.

Here Note, That whereas in my Book abovesaid, I did draw one of my Arguments,
from the Righteousness of God, to prove an inward Principle of Light given to
all Men, in order to salvation, let it be considered, that I did Argue from the
Righteousness of God not simply considered; but with respect to a New
Dispensation of God, toward Mankind since the Fall, for in the same p. 72. I
say, If God has De novo, or of a New, given unto all Men a sufficient
Principle of Light and Life to do his will, then he may say, as in Isaiah, and
now O Men of Judah, and Inhabitants of Jerusalem, what could have been done
more to my Vineyard, that I have not done in it? Viz. In point of
Righteousness, he has done all that was needful to clear his Justice, etc. In
my way of managing this Argument, tho effectual and solid, in the main, and as
to the substance of it, yet as with respect to diverse weighty Circumstances,
in Answering Objections against it; I am dissatisfied with the method, I there
used from page 67. to page 72. Therefore what is there generally said, by way
of Answer to some Objections there made, let it be as unsaid, for the Coments
of these 5 pages, in diverse things not being clear, I retract, yet still
adhering to the substance of the Argument there brought, and to the main Answer
that may suffice to all these Objections; I did give p. 72. Viz. That none are
simply Condemned, and sem to Hell, for Adams Sin, for I cannot agree to that
uncharitable opinion that any dying Infants Perish, or suffer the Fire of Hell
Fire, simply and only for Adams Sin, what God in strict Justice might do is one
thing, and what he will do is another. Moreover, as I have formerly in that
Book affirmed, p. 69. That there is a Seed of Sin Transmitted from Adam into
all his Posterity, in the Natural Birth which becomes the Original Sourse and
Spring, or Root of all Actual Transgressions, wherever it Springs up, in which
all Sin is Committed, I still affirm; But to Answer all these Objections and
Questions that are raised, about the manner of its Conveyance and being
Transmitted, as it pusled the worthy Ancients, Augustine and Hierome, and
others, to Answer Pelagius and his followers, who used to ask, Per quas rimas,
by what chinks, that Seed of Sin and Defilement entered Adams Posterity, and is
Transmitted through the most Holy Parents that ever Lived in some Degree to
their Children; so I confess, it pusseth me, especially upon the common
Principle, that the Soul of the Infant is instantly Created in the Mothers
Womb, (and that other Principle, that the Soul is by Carnal Generation is most
absurd). But what my reason cannot comprehend my Faith teaches me to believe,
and so I believe that their is a Principle, Seed, or Leaven of Sinful
Defilement, conveyed generally through all Adams Posterity in the Natural
Birth, because I find many places of Scripture that sufficiently prove it, by
means whereof Infants on the Breasts and in the Womb, are not clean, but
defiled, and therefore need the New Birth and washing of Regeneration, as
really as adult persons. And they do all need that God be merciful to them for
Christ's sake that died for all men, they being a part of mankind; and that the
virtue, efficacy and merit of Christ's Sacrifice of himself upon the Cross, be
applied unto them, which was figured by the Offering under the Law, that was to
be offered for every male child, and by circumcision of every male child, that
sufficed also for the Female, which was implied under the male.

SECTION III. Containing diverse Explanations and Emendations of Passages in my
Book called, The Rector Corrected: Printed at London, 1680. And in my Book
called, Truth Defended: Printed at London, 1682.
BY Christ his giving his Flesh for the Life of the World, we page 22.
understand, both the offering up of his Flesh, as his dying for us upon the
Cross, and also his giving us his Flesh to eat, and his Blood to drink: for
even as the Priests under the Law, were to eat of the Sacrifice, and to have
the Blood sprinkled upon them, so Believers under the Gospel, are to eat the
Flesh of Christ, and drink his Blood. And page 26. Although the Saints do not
eat the visible Flesh of Christ [to wit, by the Bodily Mouth] and drink his
visible Blood, yet they partake of the benefit and virtue of both his Flesh and
his Blood, and the substance of both does remain, which is his glorified Body
in Heaven, and the virtue of which does really extend unto the Saints both in
Heaven, and on Earth, by which they are spiritually refreshed and nourished, as
with Meat and Drink; and thus we do not divide Christ, etc.

Here note, that as by diverse other Quotations out of my Books it has been
proved, that I did not place all our Salvation upon the Light within, excluding
the Man Christ without, and his Flesh and Blood, that was outward and visible,
but that I did lay a great weight upon it; so the like appears by this present
quotation. And whereas, page 25. it is said, and indeed it is very plain by the
words of Christ, that by his Flesh and Blood, John 6. 50, 51. he means Only
Spirit and Life; The word (said he) that I speak unto you, are Spirit and Life;
it is the Spirit that quickneth, the Flesh profits nothing: Whether the Word
only being there is a Typographical Error, or was an oversight in me, for want
of due consideration, I hold it needful to retract and correct it, and
accordingly I so do: and that it was at most an oversight in me, for want of
due consideration, and that by it, I did not intend that the Faithful did not
partake of the unspeakable benefit of the Flesh of Christ, that was outwardly
Crucified, and of his Blood that was outwardly shed, and that the virtue of it
did not extend unto them, for that is above plainly affirmed, but my sense was,
they were not to eat it with the bodily Mouth, but by Faith, so as to have the
virtue of it conveyed unto them, by a living Faith in him, which virtue may be
said to be Spirit and Life, and the Words that he spoke, had a spiritual sense
and signification, and not such as the carnal Capernaumites did conceive.

Page 29. So we see he (viz Hilarious) finds fault with the word Humane, as
well as G. F.

Here Note, That my bringing the words of Hilarious to excuse G. F. was not that
I did not believe that Christ had the true nature of Man, consisting of a true
reasonable created Soul, and a true Body; for that I did always believe, and
that he did partake of Mary's Substance, for so did also Hilarious believe. But
seeing Christ had a miraculous Conception, and Birth, above all other Men;
therefore I did judge that G. F. and some others with him, meant only by
blaming the word humane, and humanity, humane Nature, as applicable to Christ,
that his Manhood Nature was more excellent, than that of other men: But I never
thought, that any of them denied him, as Man to be a Creature, or to have been
produced by Generation of and from the Properties of Man in Mary, as some of
them have. But of late diverse of the chief Teachers among the People called
Quakers, have used the terms Humanity, and Humane, with reference to Christ.
But what they understand by it, is not easy to determine; for if Christ's
Humanity be not a Creature, or created, what is it? seeing it cannot be the
Godhead: and T. Ellwood has argued in his late Book, That if Christ be a
Creature, he is not God. But all who have the sound Faith, believe that Christ,
as a Man, is a Creature, or created Being; but as he is the Eternal Word, he is
God, and not a Creature. But this they think a contradiction, not owning that
Christ has a twofold Nature essential to him, the one uncreated, as God, the
other created as Man, and yet but one Christ, therefore they have said, That
Man or outward Person that suffered [at Jerusalem,] is not properly the Son of
God: So W. Penn expressly faith, in his Serious Apology, page 146.

Page 37. Christ was once offered to bear the Sins of many, and unto them which
look for him, he shall appear the second time without Sin unto Salvation, Heb.
9. 28. Whether these Words may not very safely be understood, and are not
really meant of Christ's appearing in the Heart to destroy Sin, I desire the
Reader to consider.

Here Note. The occasion of my giving this Sense to these Words in Heb. 9. 28.
was in defense of G. Whitehead, who had before that given the same sense to
them, and which Thomas Wilson, (whom I answered) had blamed as a false
Interpretation. But at that time I knew not in the least, that G. Whitehead had
put that sense on that place, in prejudice to Christ's coming without us, to
judge the World in his glorified Body, and Person, as since I have found, for
not only did he deny this place to be meant of his Coming without us, to
Judgment, but any other places that his Opponents brought to prove his outward
coming to Judgment, he turned them all to his inward coming, as that in 1 These.
4. 15. and that in Matthew. 16. 27. and brought that in John 14. to prove that
Christ was not to come in Person, or in a Personal Existence to judge the
World, Yet a little while, and the World shall see me no more. This positive
unbelief of theirs, which I had but of late discovered by a more narrow search
into their Books, has awakened me, I confess better, to consider things, that
both I and they had formerly written; and upon better consideration, I declare
I am convinced, that the true sense of these words abovementioned, is of his
outward coming the second time, in his glorified Body to judge the World: and
it is called his Second Coming, as denoting his former coming, which was in his
state of Humilation; but his Second Coming shall be in a state of
Glorification. I shall not enlarge to give my Reasons at present, why I so
understand that place of his coming without us, nor to answer largely the
Reasons I gave in that Book, that it was to be understood of his inward coming,
for that would take up too much time, and be improper in this place, it
suffices at present, that I retract that sense formerly given, and that I
declare my sense of that place of Scripture to be, conconcerning his coming
without us to Judgment, which is, I think, the more general sense of Christian
Expositors. But let none from hence infer, that I deny the inward coming of
Christ in men's hearts, to destroy Sin, for that I own; but I say, it is not the
true sense of that place of Scripture; and whereas it is said in that place, He
will appear the Second time without Sin unto Salvation, does not infer, (being
understood of his coming without us to Judgment) that Sin remains in the
deceased Saints, until his coming: But that at his coming, he will not charge
Sin upon them, but will solemnly acquit and discharge them, of all their Sins,
however great they have been, who have sincerely repented of them, and believed
in him: whereas upon all others, he will charge their Sins upon them, as is
clear from Matthew. 25. And though the deceased Saints need no Salvation from
Sin, yet from some of the effects and consequences of it they do, until the
Resurrection, with respect to which Paul said, We are saved by Hope, and Hope
that is seen, is not Hope, etc. For seeing Death is the last enemy that is to
be destroyed, which is not destroyed but by the Resurrection from the Dead;
therefore the Resurrection from the Dead is that Salvation, which all the
Saints both living and deceased wait for, which will be at Christ's coming
without us. And that this was my Belief, when I did write that Book, as well as
formerly, I shall for proof recite two plain passages out of that Book, the
first is, page 42. where I say, We believe with all our Hearts, and in
believing the same, we rejoice with Joy unspeakable and full of Glory, in all
our Sufferings, Trials and Temptations, even that He whom we look for, will
come again at the Last Day, and raise us up to live with him for ever, in an
immortal and incorruptible Body: and then shall we be saved, as well from all
the consequences of Sin of all kinds, as now from Sin it self, in the being and
nature of it. For then, and not till then, fully and in all respects, shall
Death be swallowed up in Victory, and that full Salvation and enjoyment be
attained, which all true Christians do yet wait for. The second passage is,
page 45. And I hope it will satisfy any sober Reader that we acknowledge the
Coming of Christ in the Clouds, or in the Air in a Literal Sense.

Page 65. That Christ will come in the End of the World, we do faithfully
believe, according to that 1 Cor. 15. and other Scriptures. But that his
coming, mentioned, 1 Cor. 11. is that last coming of his, is not yet proved,
but is a mere begging of the Question.

Here Note, That this passage contains another plain proof, that I believed
that Christ would come in the End of the World in his Glorified Person, without
us, to judge the World; and I judged that the People called Quakers generally
so believed, until my late experience has given me sufficient ground to think
otherwise, and that from the Words of diverse among them, plainly denying, and
ridiculing any such thing, telling me, the End of the World is already come,
and there is no other coming of Christ to be expected, but his inward coming in
the Hearts of People, and into this foul Error the Printed Books of G. W. and
other Leading Men among their Teachers had led them; although now, he and some
others seem to own it, that Christ will outwardly come again. But if a Scrutiny
were made among them one by one, few among them in comparison, would be found
to own it, in respect of many that would deny it. But whereas in that passage
above-quoted, I had affirmed, That our Lord's coming, mentioned, 1 Cor. 11. 26.
is that last coming of his, is not yet proved, but is a mere begging of the
Question: This whole Passage, I fully and freely retract, with all the other
passages, either in this Book, or in my Book called Truth Defended, where I
have denied his coming, mentioned 1 Cor. 11. 26. to be his outward coming, or
in any other of my Books, where any such like passage is to be found, I fully
and freely Retract them all: And on the Contrary, I do freely, and with great
Satisfaction, declare, That I am sufficiently convinced and persuaded in my
Conscience, that the Coming of the Lord, mentioned 1 Cor. 11: is His Last
Coming, which is to be without us, which will be accompanied with his more
abundant inward coming and Revelation in us. As also, whatever is said in this
Book, called the Rector Corrected, concerning the Command that our Lord gave to
his Apostles, Matthew. 28. 19. That it was not Water Baptism there commanded, I
fully and freely Retract that also; and all the like passages, either in Truth
Defended, or in any of my other Books whatsoever, conconcerning the sense of
that place of Scripture, Matthew. 28. 19. And on the contrary, I do declare that
I am fully and clearly persuaded in my Conscience, that Water Baptism was there
commanded by Christ. And here I think fit to Transcribe what I have already
said in my late Book, called The Antichrists and Sadduces detected, etc. to
this effect, page 34, 35. I am not ashamed to own my general Mistakes I have
been under, concerning diverse places of Scripture, particularly relative to
Water Baptism and the Supper, as Matthew. 28. 19. and 1 Cor. 11. 26. -- And I am
so far from being ashamed to publish this Confession, that I have great Peace
and Joy in it. Amd I also declare, that I am justly ashamed that I have been so
long deceived and biased with such weak Arguments, as both they called Friends
and I have used (being too much influenced and biased by their pretended
Authority) to persuade and draw away the Minds of People from the true sense of
these places of Scripture, and the Arguments that we have used against these
two things, are so weak, that they have the some force against the Bible it
self, and all Books and outward Testimonies, and outward Acts of Worship, and
therefore are void in themselves; for seeing they have no force against the
latter, they have as little against the former. However, I continue in my
faithful Testimony against the abuse of these things, and the dead, empty and
formal may that too many practice them; and except the Lord be found to bless
and accompany them, who use them with his Power and Spirit, they are but as
empty Shadows and Shells; but who find the Lord to bless them with his
Presence, I judge them not. It is not proper for me in this place, to give any
large account of the Reasons, why I am otherwise minded, as to the Sense of
those two places of Scripture, Matthew. 28. 19. and 1 Cor. 11. 26. than I was
sometime formerly, only I think fit to give one Reason at present in particular
as to each, and another in general as to both. My reason why Water Baptism is
to be understood, Matthew. 28. 19. as a thing commanded of the Lord to be done by
the Apostles, and not the Baptism with the Holy Ghost, because we no where find
in all the Scripture such a phrase or manner of Speech that ever any Man (but
Christ alone who is both God and Man) did Baptize with the Holy Ghost, or had
power so to do, it is peculiarly attributed to Christ, (whose Work it was) and
still is, and to no other Man, or Men, as John declared, He that comes after
me, shall Baptize you (he did not say, They that come after me, but he) with
Fire and with the Holy Ghost. And as to that distinction formerly given by me,
and others, that though the Apostles neither could nor did baptize with the
Holy Ghost principally, yet instrumentally or ministerially, they might and
did. But in answer to this, I say, where the Scripture does not distinguish,
nor give any ground of such a distinction, we ought not to give it: But the
Scripture gives no such ground; and the Scripture phrase and manner of Speech
is strictly to be observed in all such cases, so that we ought not to put our
private glosses on Christ's Commandments: as it were a most absurd Distinction
to say, though God created the World principally, yet Angels did create it
instrumentally; or to say, Christ redeemed the World principally by his Death
and Sufferings, but the Martyrs redeemed the World, by their Deaths,
instrumentally; surely as these Distinctions are false and unwarrantable, so is
that other about Baptizing with the Spirit instrumentally and ministerially. My
reason why the comeing of the Lord mentioned, 1 Cor. 11. 26. is his outward
Comeing; because the outward practice of Breaking Bread, in the Supper, was
appointed as a commemoration (in a solemn way) of his Body that was broken for
us on the Cross, and of his Bodily Sufferings and Humiliation? for he did not
say, Take, eat this is my Spirit; but This is my Body, and it was the Man
Christ Jesus that said this; therefore, as the practice of Breaking the Bread,
with Prayer and Thanksgiving, and Eating it, and Pouring out Wine into the Cup,
and Drinking it, was a solemn Commemoration of his Body that was broken for us,
and his Blood that was shed for us; so the believers being enjoined to do it,
until his comeing again; that Comeing again must needs signify his Bodily
Comeing (for he was Spiritually come both then and in all Ages to the Faithful)
that the living and faithful Remembrance of his last coming might be preserved
by that solemn Practice, and also the unspeakable benefit that the Faithful
haveby his Sufferings; for as Preaching by Words does hold forth Christ
Crucified by audible Signs to the Ears of the Faithful; so do these outward
things duly practiced by visible and otherwise sensible Signs hold him forth to
their Eyes, Smelling, Taste, and Feeling, that so the Remembrance of him by
these so many doors, as it were may the more effectually enter into their
Hearts, and make the deeper Impression upon them; and it stands well with good
reason that, what is represented to Men's Hearts of our Lord's Sufferings, by
their Hearing, Sight, Smell, Tasting, and Feeling in the use of these signs
instituted by himself, will more effectually affect their Hearts and Souls than
what is done alone by the Hearing or Reading; as in other cases, for Men to see
a Tragedy of the real Sufferings of some noble Person acted before their Sight,
is more than to read it, or hear a Report of it, and on this account it was
that some ancient Writers called these outward Institutions verbum visibile, i.
e the visible Word. My reason in general for both is, that it has pleased. God
of late (since I have found the great opposition to this great fundamental
Truth of the Gospel, that many among the People called Quakers have made, viz.
the Faith in Christ crucified, and raised again etc. as a necessary thing to
our Christianity and Salvation, let them pretend and profess what they will to
the contrary) to give me a further and clearer sight, and a more deep inward
sense and consideration of the great benefit and advantage, the practice of
these outward things (when duly practiced) is to the preserving the Christian
Doctrine and Faith in the World, as well as to diverse other great uses and
ends, they being as proper and effectual means in their kind and manner in
conjunction with Preaching, to preserve the Doctrine and Faith of Christ in the
World as Preaching it self; and where these outward things are practiced, the
true Doctrine of them ought to be Preached; but the Doctrine of them is like to
be laid aside, when the Practice of them is not only discontinued, but opposed,
and reviled, under the Names of beggarly Elements, worldly Rudiments, and
carnal Ordinances. And I do boldly and freely, in the sincerity of my Heart,
further declare, that it has pleased God to give me to see, that the spring
and rise of thatgreat Opposition that has been, and is in many against these
outward Practices, has been and is a secret Prejudice against the Doctrine of
Christ crucified, and the mysterious working of an Antichristian and Diabolical
spirit, designing to draw men from Name and Thing of Christianity, to Paganism
and Deism, and at the next step to Idolatry, and Atheism. Howbeit, in many
there is not this knowledge and sight of this Mystery of Iniquity. But many
simple-hearted, and truly pious, and well-meaning Souls, have been led aside,
to disown, and speak against the use of these outward Practices, being stumbled
and greatly offended with the beholding the great abuse of them, and the undue
and irregular way and manner of many their practicing them, as it was said,
that the Sons of Ely caused the Sacrifices of the Lord to be abhorred. But as
the abuse of things, ought not to take away the due use of them, so where they
are not duly practiced, the simple want of them, (as neither the simple want of
preaching, where the Gospel is not outwardly preached) I judge will not be
imputed to them to be their Sin, it being generally acknowledged among sober
judicious Christians, that it is not the want of them, but the wilful neglect of
them, where they can be duly had, that is a man's Sin, and hindrance to his
Salvation. I adhere to the general rule of Christian Communion in this case,
generally received and owned by all true Christians, that we ought to join in
all external acts of Christian Religion and Worship, with all professed
Christians, holding the Fundamentals of the Christian Religion, and maintaining
nothing contrary thereunto, against whose sincerity we have nothing justly to
object. If so in our joining with them, in these external acts of Worship,
nothing be required of us to be done, that is sin in the sight of God, to wit,
that is any breach of any positive express command of God.

Page 71. citing my Book, called Help in time of Need, concerning the
Antichrist, mentioned 1 John 2. 18. this is Antichrist, who denis Christ the
Son, come in the Revelation of himself in the Heart, for that coming of Christ
in his Bodily Appearance at Jerusalem, Antichrist will not, does not deny,
seeing to confess him so come, will never harm his Kingdom, provided Christ's
Kingdom be not set up in the Heart.

Here Note, These foregoing Words, For that coming of Christ in his Bodily
Appearance at Jerusalem, Antichrist will not, does not deny, I Retract, as
unsafely worded; for though a sort of Antichrists may not deny, but confess, in
Hypocrisy, to Christ's outward coming; as also they may confess in Hypocrisy,
to his coming in Men's Hearts; yet I am satisfied the true meaning of these
words, 1 John 2. 18. compared with 1 John 4. 3. respects principally the coming
of Christ in the Flesh, as he outwardly suffered in that Body of Flesh, and
consequentially the spiritual Blessings and Benefits we have by that same,
among which is his Spiritual coming into our Hearts; and though a sort of
Antichrists, and men of an Antichristian Spirit, may confess in hypocrisy, to
Christ's outward coming, yet they neither do, nor can confess to him, as he did
outwardly come, in sincerity of Heart. And it is the sincere Confession from
the Heart to Christ, as he outwardly came in the Flesh, and to all the
spiritual Blessings that men receive by him, as of his Light, Spirit and Grace
in them, that is the Confession there meant; for every one that truly, viz.
with sincerity of heart so confesses him, come in the Flesh (whose Confession
flows from a Living Faith in him) is of God, and whosoever does not so
confess him, but deny him so come, is of Antichrist; and this denial of Christ
come in the Flesh, may be several ways, as 1st. to deny that he who did so
come, is the Christ; and thus the unbelieving Jews did, and do deny him. 2dly,
To deny that he who did so come, was, and is, both God and Man, and that as
such he is the Salvation of men, in whom they are to believe, and whom they are
to call upon, and worship with divine adoration; and thus the Mahumetans do
deny him, and many who go under the Name of Christians, who deny that the man
Christ is their Salvation, and the Object of Faith and adoration. 3dly. To deny
the virtue and efficacy of his being a Sacrifice, by his Death, for the
Remission of the sins of all Men, who ever shall be saved from the beginning of
the World, to the end of it. 4thly. To deny that all the Light, and Grace, and
divine Influence of the Spirit, that any Man have, or ever had, is by Jesus
Christ, who has purchased and procured it unto them, by his most holy and
perfect Obedience unto Death; and in these three respects my late Opposers
among the People called Quakers, are guilty of denying Christ come in the
Flesh, as I have sufficiently proved against them in diverse printed Books,
particularly in my Narrative of the Proceedings at Turners-Hall, the 11th. of
the 4th. Month, 1696. and in that called The Antichrists and Saddnces detected.
For whatever seeming Confessions they give to the Man Christ without them,
while they place Men's whole Salvation upon an inward Principle, and plead that
Men may be saved eternally without all Knowledge and Faith of Christ without
them, either express or implicit, [As they do, particularly in that
Antichristian and Abusive Book, containing many Antichristian Principles, and
false Accusations against me, called Keith against Keith, for which I purpose,
God willing, ere long, to call them to an Account. All their seeming
Confessions is but a Judas Kiss, and a plain betraying the Christian Cause,
into the hands of Infidels, Jews and Pagans.

Page 195. Nor does it follow, that because Confession in the adult, is
necessary to Salvation, that therefore Baptism with Water is, seeing confession
of the Truth may well consist without Water Baptism, namely in a Holy
Conversation, and profession of Christianity with the Mouth, as the Apostle
said, With the Mouth Confession is made to Salvation.

Here Note, 1. I still adhere to it with all charitable Christians, that
Baptism with Water is not of equal necessity with Faith and Confession, unto
Savation, for many of the Martyrs did nobly confess to Christ, who were put to
cruel Deaths, before they could be Baptized; and in that and in all other
cases, where Baptism cannot be duly had, the votum Baptismi, i. e. the desire
of Baptism is judged equivalent to Baptism by all charitable Christians. 2.
That I said Confession in the adult is necessary to Salvation, by this it does
appear, that it is no new Doctrine in me so to affirm, this Book of mine,
having been in Print for sixteen Years past, and which was approved by the
Second Days Meeting, though in contradiction, to what they then approved, they
have of late greatly blamed me, as guilty of broaching a new Doctrine, among
the People called Quakers, for my saying, It is a necessary Duty, that every
one among the Quakers, should give a Confession of their Faith, to Christ and
his doctrine in the fundamental and essential parts thereof, before they can be
owned to be Members of a Christian communion: This they extremely cry out
against, knowing that such a thing would discover the vile Errors, that are
lodged among them. But until they do this, whatever great and high pretenses
they make to be the Church of Christ, and the only gathered Church, they can
never be justly esteemed a Church of Christ.

In my Book called, Truth's Defense, etc. page 104, 105. and as for the Word
Immediate Revelation, seeing it is not any Scripture Phrase, no not in the case
of the Prophets and Apostles, so far as I can remember, if the thing it self
were granted, to wit, That God does inwardly reveal, and speak his Mind, or
show his Glory, and glorious Presence in his Children, as he did in and to his
Saints of Old; so that the Saints do hear, see and perceive, also taste and
savor, and feel after God himself, as he reveals himself in his Son by the
Holy Spirit, the Controversy about the Name or Phrase should soon be at an end.

Here Note, That sixteen Years ago I was for holding up no Controversies about
the name, or term, Immediate Revelation; though many among the People called
Quakers, have earnestly and fiercely contended for that term, and some of them
no doubt will much blame me, that I do not now contend for it: But why did they
not blame me then, for my not contending about it? are they become of late more
Eagle-sighted, to see this, and other things they judge, to be errors in my
Books, which they formerly did not see, or at least gave me no notice of? then
why do they blame me, that I have both of late seen, and noticed diverse Errors
in their Books, which formerly I had not seen, for want of due examination, nor
noticed?

Page 170, 171. Now if this were but received among those called Christians,
that nothing should be required by one sort from another, as an Article of
Faith, or Doctrine, or Principle of the Christian Religion, in common to be
believed, but what is expressly delivered in the Scriptures, in plain express
Scripture-terms, of how great an advantage might it be, to bring a
Reconcilement among them, and to beget true Christian Unity, Peace, Love, and
Concord.

Here Note, Some of my late Opponents have brought this place against me, to
prove me guilty of a contradiction, by my late practice of what they call my
Imposing on them Unscriptural Creeds and Terms, as when I told them, they must
believe in Christ without them for Salvation, as well as in Christ, or the
Spirit of Christ within them, they have blamed this as Unscriptural, and have
queried me, for express Scripture, to prove Christ without, and a Heaven
without, and a Resurrection without, and a Day of Judgment without? to whom I
have Answered them, by again querying them, Where do they find express
Scripture for an Earth without, or Sun, Moon, and Stars without us, or a Land
of Judea without, or a Moses or David without us? For though the Word without
is not expressed, yet it is so easily and universally understood, in all these
cases, as if it were expressed. And I still adhere to my former Advice, that
nothing be required by one sort from an other, as an Article of Faith or
Doctrine, in common to be believed, but what is expressly delivered in the
Scriptures, in plain express Scripture terms, yet not so as every Word must be
expressed, in so many Letters and Syllables, when there is no necessary occasion
for it, for it may suffice, if a truth be expressed in such plain and easy
terms, as are equivalent to Scripture terms, as when we say, Christ was born at
Bethlehem, we mean that Bethlehem was a place without us; and also that Christ
was born without us; and I confess, it had been as little needful to have
mentioned Christ without us, or Heaven without us, etc. as Judea without us, or
any other place, had not that wild Notion of many, who own no Christ without,
nor Heaven, nor Resurrection, nor Day of Judgment without, but only within,
occasioned it.

Page 191. The sacrifice of Christ's Death did truly extend for the Remission
of Sins past, from the beginning of the World, Hence ALL THE BELIEVERS that
lived under the Law, and Prophets, and BEFORE THE LAW, were saved by FAITH IN
CHRIST, and had their Sins pardoned, not by the Offering of the Blood of Bulls
and Rams, but by the Blood of Christ, who was to dye for them, and in whom they
believed, and dyed in Faith, as is clear out of many places of Scripture, and
especially the Epistle to the Hebrews; and by virtue of Christ's Death and
Offering once for all Men, all have had, or have, or shall have, a Day of
Visitation, and offer of Grace through Christ, even these who lived before
Christ came in the Flesh, in that prepared Body, as well as others; and
therefore all who finally perish, and are lost in whatever Age or Time of the
World they lived, they must be accountable to Christ, who is judge both of
quick and dead, and Lord of both, and they shall be punished with Fire of Hell,
for neglecting and despising the Salvation offered by him. And although this is
a great Mystery, and hard to be uttered, how this Gospel Invitation, and
Visitation comes unto all, and how all shall be accountable unto the Man
Christ Jesus, on the score or account of his dying for them, Acts 10. 42. Acts
17. 31. Yet seeing the Scripture is so plain and clear for it, it is better to
believe it, than curiously to dispute, how or after what manner it comes so to
be.

Here Note, 1. These foregoing Words, published by me in Print sixteen years
ago, prove that I did not place our whole Salvation upon an inward Principle,
excluding the Man Christ Jesus, from being jointly concerned with his Light,
Grace and Spirit in men, as many called Quakers now do. 2. That I then held,
that all who were saved in any Age of the World, were saved by Faith in Christ,
as well before he came in the Flesh, as since; and that by Faith in Christ, I
meant the Man Christ, [who is both God and Man] who in the fullness of time,
came in the Flesh, and shed his Blood for the Remission of their sins, is
obvious to any intelligent Reader; therefore my late Adversaries among a sort
of Quakers, are most injurious to me, and false Accusers of me, who call this a
new Doctrine of mine, to affirm that all who ever were saved, or shall be saved
with Eternal Salvation, were saved by Faith in the Man Christ, [either express
or implicit] even him that was in the Fullness of Time crucified for them. And
it is but a trifling and nonsensical Objection in them, to argue against it,
that they could not believe in Christ crucified, before he was crucified; for
it was one and the same Christ, that was to be crucified, and who was crucified
in the fullness of time, the same yesterday, to day, and forever, who is the
Lamb slain from the Foundation of the World, and a Priest forever, and who
therefore by virtue of the Sacrifice of himself, that was to be slain in the
fullness of time, made Peace betwixt Believers and God, as well before he came
and suffered for the Sins of men as since, and on whose Account they had
Remission of Sin, and the Holy Ghost to sanctify them, and none had the Holy
Ghost by union and indwelling, but such as had some degree of Faith in Christ,
either express or implicit, as not only this Book called Truth Defended, but
all my Books that treat on that subject plainly show; and particulary my Book
called, The Presbyterian and Independent visible Churches; all which I refer to
the Reader's serious consideration: And though my late Adversaries among the
Quakers find great fault, with diverse passages in the Book last mentioned,
especially for asserting the necessity of Faith in Christ crucified universally
either express or implicit, for Eternal Salvation, yet that Book before it was
printed in America, had the approbation of them called Friends in the Ministry
in Pensilvania, and was so well approved by the Quakers here at London, that
some caused it to be Reprinted, and it was publicly sold in a Quakers Shop in
George-Yard in Lumbard-street; nor did I ever hear any exceptions against it,
from any of them in England, until our late differences betwixt them and me
began: And whereas I had formerly said, none but such who have Faith in Christ
crucified, or who was to be crucified, had the Holy Ghost by union. To this
some of my late Adversaries have objected a Quotation, I made in some of my
former Books out of Plato and Plotimus, who did mention union with God, and a
certain divine contact; but it does not appear, that these Gentiles had Faith
in Christ, as above expressed. To this I Answer, That Plato who lived some
hundred of years before Christ's Incarnation, had no Faith in Christ, so much
as implicit, is more than they can prove; for there are diverse sayings in his
Books that make it probable he had. There is less ground to think that
Plotimus, who lived Two Hundred Years and more after CHRIST, and was
contemporary with Origin, had Faith in Christ, seeing he writ against the
Christians, therefore what things he said of Union with God, and the divine
contact, and other high Expressions of the like nature might possibly be, not
so much from his own experience, as from his Master Plato's Writings, or allow
he might have had some true experience of a divine contact and union, in some
transient way, like a glance or flash of Lightning; yet this proves not that
he, or any others, who never had any degree of Faith in Christ crucified, [or
that was to be crucified] had that permanent and lasting Union with the holy
spirit that the Saints and Believers recorded in the holy Scriptures had,
[which permanent and lasting Union, through the in ward residence and
indwelling of the lively Spirit in the Faithful, is that which most properly
deserves the name of Union with God] for it is most evident from the holy
Scriptures, that none but Believers in Christ, even the Man Christ Jesus, have
the holy Spirit by union, and inhabitation; for which see and well consider the
following places, Gal. 3. 2. 14. Ephesians. 1. 13. John 7. 39. Acts 10. 43, 44.
Acts 26. 18. And it is great Ignorance in my late Opposers, not to understand,
how though the spirit of God, who is holy, may and does work and operate, in
the Hearts of Gentiles and Unbelievers, yet he has no inward residence, or
abiding union in them, or communion with them, but such only who has Faith in
Christ.

Another trifling Objection they have made, that because I have said, That all
who had not the express knowledge of Christ before death, who are saved, had it
either at Death, or after Death. From this they infer, I hold a sort of
Purgatory, or transmigration. But behold these men's ignorance, does it imply
any Purgatory or Transmigration, to say, all that go to Christ in Heaven after
Death, must have an express knowledge of Christ in Heaven, for so I expressed
my sense in my Book, called The pretended Antidote, etc. page 115, 116. Can it
be supposed, that any Souls now in Heaven, can be without all express knowledge
of Christ; can they be with him, and yet not know him? Has not the least Saint
in Heaven, more clear knowledge of Christ, than any living on Earth? Suppose
the Souls of Plato, and Socrates be in Heaven (as far be it from me to judge
the contrary) are they still without all express knowledge of Christ. But if
indeed they think there be no man Christ in Heaven, having any Bodily
Existence, as some of my Opposers have affirmed, its no wonder they think that
the Saints in Heaven have no knowledge of him.

Having performed what I promised in my Book called, A short List of the vile
and gross Errors of G. W. etc. Printed in the Year 1695. concerning some
Explications and Emendations, of some Words and Passage in my four Books
abovementioned, viz. Immediate Revelation, Universal Grace, The Rector
Corrected, and Truth Defended: which four chiefly relate to matters of
Controversy, I think fit to publish some other few Explanations and
Emendations (such as I see needful) of some pages in my Book called, Help in
time of Need.

Help in time of Need: printed at London, 1665. page 46. But now the Light has
shined forth in such clearness, that we have seen to the bottom of all
Babylon's Treasures. And page 58. And we the Lord's People, called in derision
Quakers, do witness this day of God come and broke up among us, in pure perfect
brightness, to the fulfilling all these things aforesaid, every one in their
measure, and yet more abundantly to be fulfilled. Page 62. And we have seen the
Bride, the Lamb's Wife, adorned and trimmed, for the approach of her Husband,
and the New Jerusalem descending from above, the Holy Gity coming down from God
out of Heaven, having the glory of her God, and her Light is like unto a stone
most precious, like a Jasper clear as Crystal, and we have seen the frame and
proportion of this City, with the Walls and Gates of it (within which our Feet
have stood) whose Builder and Maker is God, and there is nothing of man's work
in it, but all purely of him. -- And now the Lord has made us Citizens of this
City, and stones of this Building, even living stones -- and the Builders are
wise Builders -- and the Ministry is spiritual, and so are the Ministers, men
taught by God, -- who speak because they believe, and are endued with Power
from on High, and filled with the Holy Ghost. Page 66. And as the Ministry and
Worship of the Church or House of God, among us, is spiritual, so is the Order,
Discipline, and Government among us, and we witness the Lord's presence with us
in our Assemblies, and the Head Christ in us (whether few or many) passing
sound, righteous, and infallible Judgment concerning the Particulars that come
before us. And page 74. And now what I have declared unto you, (and the
Manifestation of the Spirit of Truth will show much more, even the perfect
Pattern of the House of God in the Mount) concerning these things, which are
necessary and expedient, in order to a through, cleanly, and perfect
Reformation, we the People of the Lord, called Quakers, have fallen upon them,
being taught and directed by the Wisdom of God.

Here Note, All these passages, so far as I did understand them, to respect the
People called Quakers, as a visible Body of People, together with the
generality of their Ministry, and general way of Worship, and Discipline, etc.
I retract, and revoke, as being too large and ample a commendation of them,
generally considered, and all other passages of the like nature, respecting the
generality of that People and their Ministry, that may be found either in this
Book, or any other of my Books whatsoever: and I freely and willingly
acknowledge my weakness, and short-fightedness, in having so high and great an
esteem of them generally considered. My zeal and fervor, I freely consess did
carry me too far, even beyond the due Bounds, not only in the estimation I had
of that People in general, but also in the Judgment and Thoughts I had of my
own Seize, though I dare not disown it but I do to God's praise, declare
it, that I had great inward experience of the Lord's love and goodness at that
time when I wrote that Book, which was a time of great Suffering unto me, being
straightly confined in Prison, where I met with diverse Hardships and Severities
from Men, all which the Lord turned to my spiritual Advantage, and the
spiritual Comforts and Refreshments where withal the Lord was pleased to visit
my Soul, were exceeding precious unto me, as they are at this day, feeling at
this present time, these of the same kind and nature by the good Spirit of the
Lord, continued and renewed unto me, notwithstanding of the unjust and
uncharitable Judgment of my late Adversaries against me, as if I were become a
dry Tree, yet my Soul is alive to praise God, who has preserved me to this
instant, in the midst of many great and deep Exercises and Trials, both inward
and outward, one of the greatest of which has been, and is, the envy and rage
of such who have risen up in great enmity against me, for my telling them the
Truth, and my faithful opposing the Errors and Evils that I have found among
them; and my trust and Faith is in God through Christ Jesus, that he will
preserve me to the end, and disappoint and frustrate all their False
Prophecies, bitter Curses, and lying Divinations they have poured out against
me, and continue to utter both in print, and private Letters they send to me,
for which I desire and pray sincerely unto God, that he may give them
Repentance and Forgiveness. And being sensible, and truly convinced, that I had
too far exceeded in the thoughts of my spiritual Seize, not only then,
but since; therefore whatever passages are to be found either in this first
Book, or any other of my later Books, that are justy offensive, on the account
of my going beyond the due Bounds of my real growth and spiritual and inward
state in the Truth, or of thinking of my inward Seize and Calls,
Services, Labors and Testimonies, beyond what I ought to have thought, or
wherein either in this, or any other of my Books, I have seemed to my self, or
professed to others, to have been acted by a purely divine impulse and motion
to speak and write, I do freely and most willingly retract and revoke it, so
far as any thing of the least mixture of mistake or untruth is to be found
therein; as I confess I have found some mixture in this Book, and in other my
Books.

And as in other things, I acknowledge my Mistakes, as to the People called
Quakers in general, so in this, that was the general mistake among us, that
their chief Leaders led us generally into, that the People called Quakers was
the Church come out of the Wilderness. But for diverse Years past, I have seen
my Mistakes as to this, and the great Defects, Disorders, Confusions, and
Imperfections I have found among them, and especially the ignorance, and great
want of dne Qualifications in the generality of their Ministry, have given just
ground to judge far otherwise concerning them. But yet I do affirm, that I have
found diverse that go under that Name, that have to my understanding and
apprehension, made a good progress in spiritual Experiences, and other
spiritual Seize of Knowledge and Virtue. And I do still continue in my
real persuasion, and belief, that there was a good Work of God upon the Hearts
of many of that People, and his mighty Power did stir and operate in them, as I
hope it does in some continue to do unto this day. But greatly has the Power of
Darkness and Error prevailed with many, especially their Leaders in great part
to mislead them, and Presumption and Pride, earthly Lusts, and
uncharitableness, in so highly condemning others, are Sins that did and do
greatly prevail among them, and has brought a great Cloud of Darkness over
many of them, which I pray God to remove, and cause his blessed Light to shine
forth more among them, and all others, and that he would be pleased to knit and
unite the Hearts of all that sincerely love the Lord, to love one another, and
make them of one Heart and Soul, that they may worship the Lord together in
Spirit and in Truth; that as the Lord is one, all his People may be one, which
cannot otherwise be effected, but by the more powerful Coming and Appearance of
the Lord Jesus Christ into their Hearts and inward parts, to prepare them for
his last coming in Glory, without them, to receive them to his Heavenly
Kingdom: Even so, come Lord Jesus, come quickly; Amen.

But notwithstanding of the particular passages in that Book, which I have
retracted, I adhere to my Testimony I have given in the same, as in all my
other Books, as to Matter and Substance, of many weighty things there
delivered, and the good Advice I gave to my Countrymen in that Book, I wish
heartily they would duly regard.

Page 63. And this Prophet Jesus Christ is nigh unto us, yea, more nigh than
all the Men or Books upon the face of the Earth. And a little after. And the
Bride rejoices greatly, because of the Voice of the Bridegroom himself: And
now we need not-say, who will go down into the Grave, and bring up Christ to
us; or who will ascend to Heaven, to bring him down to us; or who will go over
the Seas, and bring us tidings of him from Jerusalem, when he suffered in the
Flesh, him (whose Name is the Word of God) we of a truth witness near us, even
in our Hearts, so that we need not either ascend, or descend, or go fouth, etc.

Here Note, That this abovementioned passage was brought by T. Ellwood, in one
of his late printed Books against me, to parallel that

Antichristian Doctrine of G. Whitehead, who said, in his Truth Defended,
Answer to W. Burnet, The Quakers see no need of directing to page 110, 111. the
Type for the Antitype, viz. neither to the outward Temple, nor yet to
Jerusalem, either to Jesus Christ or his Blood, knowing that neither the
Righteousness of Faith, nor the Word of it does so direct, Romans 10. And a
little after he says, And where do the Scriptures say, the Blood was there
shed for Justification, and that Men must be directed to Jerusalem to it? Light
and Life, page 59, 60. But who sees not, that my Words have no such tendency,
as his, but are of quite another importance, as intimating that after we are
brought to know God and Christ, by the inward Teaching of God and Christ in our
Hearts, that persuades us, that Christ suffered in the Flesh at Jerusalem, and
moves us to believe the outward Testimony of the Holy Scriptures, concerning
Christ's Death and Sufferings; we need not say, who will go over the Seas, and
bring us Tidings of him from Jerusalem, where he suffered in the Flesh, for all
sincere Christians are well satisfied, with the Faith they have already of
Christ, by the inward Testimony of his Spirit in their Hearts, that the
Scripture-record of him is ture. So that they neither need nor seek any other
ground of confirmation, to their Faith, either of an outward Voice from Heaven,
or from beyond the Sea, from Jerusalem, where he suffered; yea, a true
Christian, and sincere Believer, who sincerely believes that Christ suffered
for his sins at Jerusalem, and has the Faith of it wrought in his Heart by the
Spirit of Christ in him, the Scriptures Testimony having been Instrumental
thereunto, has not so great and absolute necessity, of the Scriptures outward
Testimony, as that his Faith must be lost, if the Letter of Scripture were
quite taken away from him; for though the Scripture be very useful and
comfortable to him, yet if persecuting Infidels should rob him of the Bible,
and all other Books, it follows not, that they can rob him of his Faith. And
that this is the importance and signification of my Words abovementioned, is
obvious to any intelligent unprejudiced Person. But the Question in debate
there, betwixt G. W. and W. Burnet, was not about the manner how the Saints are
taught, as whether more by an outward Teacher, or by Christ their inward
Teacher, how to believe in Christ, or whether the Spirits inward Testimony, or
the outward Testimony of the Letter of Scripture, or any outward testimony of
Men is the more necessary, and greater ground of Confirmation to our Faith, but
whether the Quakers see need to direct men, to Christ, as he suffered at
Jerusalem, or to his Blood, as it was there shed for Justification; and as G.
W. his Words further clear his sense, he says, Where do the Scriptures say,
the Blood was there shed for Justification, and that Men must be directed to
Jerusalem to it? I need not insist to show how unparalel altogether is the
quotation he takes out of my Book, to excuse the Antichristian Doctrine of G.
W. But suppose I had been in the same Error with him, does my Error excuse his
Error? But how impudent a wrester of my innocent Words is T. Ellwood, that to
make me an Apostate from my former Principles, he fains me, so far to
contradict my former Testimony, that I am now for sending to Jerusalem, to have
Tidings of Christ brought from thence. But to discover him to be a shameless
Forger, and false Accuser (which are plain signs of his Apostasy from common
Honesty, in this as in many other particulars) I tell him and all his Gang and
Fraternity of False Accusers, whose best Weapons to support their tottering
Kingdom, are Lies and Calumnies, I am now no more than ever, for sending to
Jerusalem to have Tidings of Christ brought from hence, for I seek no other
outward Testimony, not need any other, but that which began to be preached at
Jerusalem by the holy Apostles of our Lord, above sixteen hundred Years ago,
and from Jerusalem came to Britain, and many other parts of the World, and that
the said outward Testimony is true, I am fully persuaded by the inward
Testimony of Christ, the Living Word in my Heart, which praised be God my
preserver, I am not gone from, neither in Principle nor Practice, but own it
and embrace it with great joy and satisfaction (that is infinitely more to me
than all worldly treasure) as much as at any time formerly, and I hope shall so
be for ever. Therefore it is another absolute Forgery and Falsehood in T. E. to
charge me, as he does, saying, But now being gone from the Word in his Heart,
and turned against it, etc. But why does he think I am gone from it, and turned
against it, because I did blame G. W. his Antichristian Doctrine, in saying, It
was contrary to Romans 10. to direct Men to Jesus Christ, as he suffered there;
and to his Blood as it was shed there for Justification. Which is a gross abuse
put upon Romans 10. that does direct us to Christ the Object of our Faith, as he
rose from the dead, at Jerusalem, where he suffered Death, ver. 9 10. If thou
shall confess with thy Mouth the Lord Jesus Christ, and believe with thy Heart
that God raised him from the Dead, thou shall be saved. And as for T. E. his
poor evasion, in alleging it was a Typographical Error in G. W.'s Book, To for
For, having formerly showed the falseness of it, he having used the Particle
To, in diverse other places to the same effect; and supposing it were to be read
For, mends not the matter. I shall not any more insist on it here.

As touching diverse passages quoted by my late Adversaries, particularly Thomas
Ellwood and John Pennington, out of some other of my Books, as The Way to the
City of God: The Way cast up: Light of Truth, in Answer to R. Gordon; or any
others of the like nature and importance, which they have sought greatly to
pervert, and misconstructure, on purpose to abuse me, and make their credulous
followers think my late Principles contradictory to my former, touching
Articles of Faith: I see no present need nor cause, to recite them particularly
one by one, or to rescue and vindicate them by any large Answer, from their
perversions and wrestings, the passages themselves in great part, as quoted by
them (abstractly considered from their perverse glosses) sufficiently serve to
clear me, that I remain constant to my former Principles, with respect to these
great Doctrines of the Christian Faith, and will much more clear me, if they be
read and considered, as they stand in my own Books, so that I think it worth
mentioning, what an unprejudiced and judicious Person, that had read their
several late Books against me, and the Quotations they have brought out of my
Books, to prove me changed in my Principles, said both to some of themselves,
and also to me (He was not one called a Quaker, but of another Communion) that
instead of their thinking to do me a diskindness, so as to prove me changed
from my former Principles, from those several Quotations they have brought out
of my Books, (they have, (though contrary to their design) done me a great
Kindness, for these very Quotations prove, that I have been of the same
Principles formerly, that now they blame me for, and which they commonly call
Priests and Professors Principles. And seeing I have in diverse late Printed
Treatises, as in my Printed Letter to G. Croofe, at the end of his General
History of the Quakers, and in my late Book called, Antichrists and Saddnces
detected, given diverse plain Explications of most of these, and such like
Quotations brought by them against me, and shown the good Consistency of them
with my present Faith, it would be a superfluous labor, to Reprint another
Vindication of those Quotations, from their Perversions. And here in the close,
I acquaint the Friendly and Judicious Reader, that if any of my above-given
Explications seem to him in any degree strained beyond what the genuine sense
of the Words will (...) (though I know not any one such) I am freely willing
that what he (...) in any degree strained, he may take it, if not for a genuine
and proper Explication (if so be it is in the least inconsistent with the truth
of the Holy Scripture) to be my plain and free Retractation. For what I cannot
fairly defend by Explication, I am freely willing to correct and amend by
Retractation. As concerning the late abusive Books, published in Print against
me, as well as the former, by T. E. and J. P. and others, containing vile
Errors, in point of Doctrine, gross Perversions, base Slanders, trifling
Defenses in their own and others Vindication, I defer my larger Answer to them
to another occasion, which I hope may be e're very long, if it shall please God
to afford it unto me.

Having thus far proceeded to explain, amend and retract those particular
passages in my Books abovementioned, which I judged my Duty so to do, from
true Conviction, and out of real love to Truth, I conclude with my making a
general Retractation (which I do freely and humbly) of all passages, either in
my Books abovementioned, or in any others of my Books, not mentioned in this
Treatise, in so far, as they are not perfectly consistent with the holy
Scriptures, and the divine Doctrines and Testimonies delivered in them; and
likewise I submit all that I have at any time given forth in Word, Writ or
Print by way of Doctrine, in Religious matter to the Test, Touchstone, and
Rule of the holy Scriptures, as the greatest, the best, and most authentic
Rule, and Standard of Truth, compared with all Testimonies, Writings, and Books
of Men whatsoever, renouncing, revoking, retracting, disowning and denying
whatever is contained in any of my former, or latter Books, that does not
perfectly agree with the holy Scriptures. Which general Retractation I make for
this Reason, because it is possible that diverse other particulars in my Books,
which I have not observed, may need correction; therefore until I see other
particulars to need Correction, which how soon I see, I am ready to correct. I
hope this general Retractation will suffice. And if any shall inform me, or
show me either by Word or Writ, any particular passages, in any of my Books,
that may need further Correction and Amendment, they being enabled so to do by
a divine Illumination, I shall receive so most kindly, and as amost friendly
Office, and judge my self greatly obliged to be thankful unto them. But if any
presume or proffer, to make any seem Corrections in my Books, or pass Censures
on passages in them, without a right understanding, or from a spirit of
Prejudice, or a scossing, taunting, airy, Unchristian Spirit, as my late
Adversaries have done, whereby they have shown, and continue daily to show,
their great Ignorance and Perverseness of Spirit, they have their Reward, and
they will but still more and more expose their Folly and Enmity: for indeed so
blind with Ignorance and Prejudice my-late Adversaries have been, particularly
Tho. Ellwood, and John Pennington, and Caleb Pusey, that the soundest Passages
for most part in my Book in relation to Doctrine, they have blamed and
censured, though ge^^^^y such as most need Correction, they have past, without
the least censure. However, as my great Comfort is, that both they and I shall
stand e're long before the Supreme Judge of the whole Earth, to whom I have
committed my Righteous Cause; and I do still commit it, and make my humble
Appeal to him, acknowledging my many sinful defects and imperfections, for
which I humbly beg pardon of God, for Jesus Christ's sake, and for all my other
Sins, and hope for it, and have in measure the sense and Faith of it, being
fully persuaded in my Conscience, both by the divine Testimony of the Holy
Scriptures without me, and the divine Testimony of the Holy Spirit within me,
and also by the concurrent Testimony of all true Christians in all Ages, of the
truth of that doctrine God has raised me up to contend for, which three are as
a threefold Cord that cannot be broke, that whatever my Imperfections are in
managing this great Controversy, my Cause is Just, and my Heart is sincere
before him, so it is a great comfort to me, that many throughout these Nations,
far and near, have a good understanding of the present Case; and though my
Adversaries seek to overwhelm me with a thick Cloud of Infamy, grounded on
Falsehoods and Calumnies, yet the Truth and Integrity of my Testimony will
overcome it all, and will shine forth, and be manifest, and the Generation to
come of the Posterity of many of that People, who now account me their Enemy,
and pour out Curses and Lying Prophesies against me, will regard my Testimony,
and it will be a good savor unto them. This trust and hope I have in my
gracious God, whose I am, and whom I serve; and it is a considerable advantage
unto me, that some of my greatest Adversaries have acknowledged, they have
nothing against my Morals nor Doctrine; and it is come under the Observation of
many that hear them in their Meetings, how admirably they are changed of late,
to preach the very same Doctrines, which formerly they have so fiercely opposed
in all that were not of their way, and for which they have Excommunicated me;
but they cannot be judged sincere, until they plainly Retract their former
Errors.

And finally, with a free and willing mind, I make a general Retractation of
all the hard Names, and uncharitable Censures, I have at any time, either by
Word or Writ, past on any, differing from me in point of Judgment, that have
not deserved them, humbly desiring their Forgiveness, wherein I have in that
case justly offended them. And though I do (with deep regrat) acknowledge and
blame my too great rashness, in giving hard Names, and passing uncharitable
Censures on diverse, with whom I have differed in point of judgment, being
engaged in the heat of Controversy, and diverse times provoked by the hard
Names and uncharitable Censures, that some of my Opponents have given me; which
provocation I should not have given way to, but rather according to what the
Scripture requires, to have sought in meekness, to instruct them that opposed
themselves, if God peradventure would give them Repentance; yet I was never so
uncharitable, as to think or judge that few or none were truly Pious, or of a
true Christian Spirit, or that did belong to the true Church of Christ, but
such as were of the same outward Profession with me; for the Contrary I have
several times signified in Print, and as I have been charitable in my Judgment,
with respect to others with whom I have distered, in Controversal points, when
I did think they held the Head, and built on Christ the true Foundation, though
some part of what they built was but Hay, Wood and Stubble; so it is my
resolution, by divine assistance, to be yet more charitable in judgment
concerning others that differ from me in the lesser matters, when they agree
with me in the greater, and whose manner of Life and Conversation is suitable
to their Christian Profession. But as for such who deny the Lord that bought
them, and hold such Antichristian Principles, as oppugn the great Fundamentals
of the Christian Religion, as I have sufficiently proved my late Adversaries to
have done, the greatest and best Charity that I can extend unto them, is to
deal roundly and plainly with them, and give them and their vile Errors, such
sit and proper Names, as they deserve, and as the Scripture gives to such, who
were guilty of such vile Errors, in former times: But the nasty and unclean
Terms, and Words, worse than Billingsgate, that some called Teachers among the
Quakers, and some of which are my present Adversaries have given to their
Opponents. I account it my mercy, that I never had the faculty of them, and yet
so impudent have these my late Adversaries been, to accuse me for giving hard
Words to such, unto whom they have given an hundredfold much harder: and I have
this with other great advantages over them, that I have freely and willingly
Retracted them, as well as other things that I saw cause and occasion for,
which I find not that any of them in the least have done, and are not like to
do, until their Crown of Pride come down, and they see themselves to be
fallible men, having Infirmities and Defects like other Men, which I pray God,
they may see, and find Mercy to Repent of all their Errors and Evils, before it
be too late, and may have a. Heart given them of God, if not to follow me, as
an Example, yet to follow the Example of other great Penitents, and obey the
Command of God, that requires every Man both to confess and forsake his Sins;
for he that hides his Sins, will not prosper; but if we confess our Sins, he
is just and faithful to forgive us our Sins; and to cleanse us from all
Unrighteousness,

G. K.

THE END.

