A ROD for Trepidantium Malleus, OR A LETTER TO Sam. Reconcilable.

Clodius accusat Moechos. Simulata sanctitas duplex iniquitas. LONDON, Printed,
and sold by M. Fabian at Mercers Chapel in Cheapside. 1700

A ROD FOR Trepidantium Malleus, OR A LETTER TO Sam. Reconcilable.
SIR,
COMING not long since into a Coffee-house, I happened to seat my self at a
Table with three or four that were very eager in Discourse, and I soon found
you was the Subject. One that pretended to have read your Books, and had
enjoyed some of your Conversation, would not be persuaded but that the glimps
of Knavery was easily discoverable through your Fool's Dress, and that there
lay some bad Design lurking at the bottom; whilst another thought it was too
natural to be a Disguise, and that you had no occasion for a Mask to act that
part: a third, to reconcile the other two, would needs have you a Compound of
both. These Comments drew from me my Opinion, which was, That you had too much
Learning for a Fool, and too little Wit for a Knave, but was stark staring Mad,
had got off your Shackles, and deserted the College. And to this, upon mature
deliberation, they seemed to assent, and very affectionately began to pity your
Condition. What thanks I shall have for my pains, I know not, I doubt but
little; especially should you chance to be of the same mind with one not long
since tried for Murder, who when some of his Friends would have insinuated to
the Court, that he was non compos mentis, in order to save him, contradicted
it, and was very angry at the Reproach; he stood upon Rep -- and would rather
be hanged than be thought a Mad man (I Am sure had I been one of his Jury, I
should have found him so) and if you are in the same Case with that Gentleman,
(notwithstanding all your Invectives against the Party) you will be found a rank
Antinomian, for you will be out of the reach of the Law.

And now I Am mentioning the Antinomians, by the way I cannot but give you a
hint of your horrid Character of Dr. Crisp (whose Memory deserves respect for
his Piety) and your abominable ridicule of the Work of Conversion, Second New
Year's Gift, p. 14. and so on.
in Salem Ben Sholomoh the Jew, in such fulsom Language, that he that has the
largest extent of Charity, can hardly judge you to have undergone the Operation.

And indeed that Consideration takes off some of the surprise raised by your
scurrilous, 2d Friendly Epistle to G. Keith, p. 15. etc.
base and profane Reflections upon the Administration, and Administrators of an
Ordinance of God. If they are in the wrong, they ought to be used with Candor,
and Civility, and not to be burlesqu'd, and so scandalously reproached with ill
Language, 2d Friendly Epistle, p. 30.
and false Stories, especially by one who has expressed so great a Respect for
'em.

Ludere cum Sacris, was ever abhorred by all mere Moralists; and shall one of
the Ministerial Function be guilty of it? A Man that would be thought so
mightily gifted that way, that he takes the Liberty to find fault with, and run
down almost, all as parcel of Pulpit Quacks: One that will undertake to bring
up a Boy of twelve Years old to preach better than most of the Baptists about
the Town, etc. And say thou so Sam? Then thou art like some clumsy-heel'd
Dancing-masters, that can teach their Scholars to perform better than
themselves; for thou never did mount the Pulpit in thy Life yet, without
proving the truth of a saying that is often in thy Mouth, viz. That it is not
so easy a thing to Preach, as some people think it to be.

Perhaps you will not believe me, neither indeed can I reasonably expect you
should, when I consider the good Opinion you have of your self; but, Sir, tho
Self-conceit may have a very prevalent sway in the Concavity of your Cranium,
it is strange it should sprout out in such Self-applause as both your Books and
Discourses are continually larded with; 2d New Year's Gift to the Crispians, p.
13, 14. 2d Friendly Epistle to G. Keith, p. 19.
especially, that being one of the great Crimes laid upon Mr. Baxter by your
self, and for which you so severely lashed him. Pray read over that part of
your Book against Baxter which touches upon that Subject, and learn to chastize
your self through the sides of another.

I remember some time since, when Mr. Jacobs said, The Baptists went down into
the Water with the Women only to feel 'em, etc. your Spirit was very warm, and
you mighty zealous in upbraiding him for it, and could say, (nay, and print it
too) none but a Debauchee would have been guilty of such stuff: so that your
last Book calls you Debauchee to your Face, and we dare believe it in that, tho
not in many things else.

I could not have expected from a Man of your Years (and a Conjunction
Copulative too) such things as are charged upon you, had I not heard that your
Wife (and in that she is a happy Woman) must lie alone (and has done ever since
her Reign ended, and your Tyranny began) you having something to teach the
young Men in Bed.

Either Physicians are in the wrong, when they say it is unwholsom, or some
People don't do well to advise the young Men to lie upon their Backs, with
their hands by their Sides, whilst they read Lectures upon some of the outer
parts, and set the poor things a gog (by their negative Advice) after what they
might happily otherwise not think of; but I hope they have wit enough to
consider who they make their Confessor. How old? how many times? when last?
etc. are questions to be very cautiously answered, notwithstanding a promise
they will not tell.

In short, Sir, there are some things buz'd abroad concerning you that are
almost incredible, and hardly to be imagined should be done by such a one as
you would be thought, or indeed by any other that had not laid a Caustic to
his Conscience, or gotten the Flyflap of Formality to keep away the Flies from
stinging it. What Man but your self ever had the Face, or could be imagined
impudent enough to appear in the World against the pretended immodesty of an
Ordinance (as you have done) unless he could wipe himself clean from such
Reflections as have often and again been cast upon you Sir Flog-well, and still
stick close to you? Good Pedagogue, you can never pretend your Discipline (as
you call it) is for the Correction of your Scholars, but rather calculated for
the Meridian of your own Diversion; for what Punishment is there in the stroke
of a Feather, or why should you ring the Bells, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. upon the Boys
Bums? Prithee, why so many at once? one such Object is enough at a time; so
many, one would think, should distract your weak Optics, and make you as wild
in your Senses, as you are in your Understanding. And indeed, Sir, I cannot
forbear finding fault with your Method as well as your Manners, and censuring
your Prudence as well as your Modesty (I don't say Chastity) It Is highly
reasonable to think, that young Men of twenty or thirty years of Age, should
better be wrought upon by Persuasion, than Bum-brushing.

But remembering you are a mighty lover of Stories and Verses (which, as they
are surreptitiously scraped up here and there, are as odly jumbled together,
and profusely and blunderingly flung away, without Design, and to no end in
your Books) be pleased kindly to accept of such as may chance to drop from my
Pen.

A certain Apothecary sends his Man to administer a Clyster, that was
prescribed by a Physician, for a Gentleman his Patient, who was sorely
afflicted with the Headache; the man enters the Gentleman's Chamber, who demands
Who Is there? answer is made, the Apothecary. What has the Doctor ordered me? A
Clyster, A Clyster! quoth the Gentleman, you Villain, you Rascal, the Doctor's
a Fool to send a thing to put in my A -- to cure my Head, and so drove him out
of the Room. What Lines of Communication you have found out between the Head
and Tail of a Scholar, I know not; but it seems very preposterous to suppose,
that diminishing the podicical Covering, should increase the Understanding. I
doubt Birch-Clysters don't work kindly: A Patient's Fancy does very much assist
the Doctor's endeavors; and therefore I doubt you have but little success in
your Practice, because your Patients cannot be persuaded into a good Opinion of
their Physic, for they have a natural aversion to pain. I find you are one of
Co -- atch's followers, your Medicines are all Acids.

And now, Sir, having considered your Case, I find Distraction the best excuse
I can make to my self and others, for these enormous excursions of your
nonintellectuals; which makes me a little commiserate your Case, and heartily
advise you in your very next interval, to read Dr. Echard's Letter to the
Author of Hieragonisticon, and use his Prescriptions; they exactly hit your
Case; pray don't neglect it, delays being dangerous: He says you must avoid all
hot things, as Coffee and Tobacco (and I believe not without reason, for they
are apt to dry up the Brain, and when things are too dry they will crack) but
above all you must avoid writing Books, till you find the Distemper pretty well
asswag'd, and then too but moderately, for fear of a Relapse. But if you cannot
forbear till then, pray whatever you write in your fit (which is but all you
write) read over in an interval before it goes to the Press, and then I doubt
not they will all receive their fate as truly (tho not as duly) as if they were
burnt by the hands of the common Hangman.

Indeed some of those already published have answered the end proposed, 2d and
last New Years Gift to the Crispians, page 11.
and have proved good Physic. A Friend of mine lays 'em in a convenient Place,
where the reading one Leaf is a gentle Purge, and then it is sent after the
Operation; the fittest use they can be put to. And, Sir, was there no other
reason why they should suffer, but because they are too bold and saucy with
their Author, that was enough: for while they are Jesters to others, they make
a jest of him.

You seem in all your Writings to drive very hard for the Buskins; but, I must
tell you, they are too noble an Ornament to adorn your Farce; for what you
write is as much below that reproved Author, as a Bartholomewfair Droll is
below Seneca's Tragedies.

I must acknowledge you have hammered hard for a little Wit to divert the World,
and therefore the World's very ungrateful it will not accept the Will for the
Deed; and it is really very hard that you should print Books at your own Charge,
and be at the Expense both of Purse and Brain to please, and all in vain: yet
you have this comfortable Solace in the experience you have gained, you have
found out the best way of putting off your Books of any Man in England. I am
told, that when you was, not long since, chewing the Cud, without dividing the
Hoof, in Noah' s Ark (as you call it) you was telling a Story of a Man that
cried Pears, twelve, sixteen, twenty a Penny, and none would buy, till at last
he cried Pears for nothing, and then he soon emptied his Basket; so (said you)
is it with my Books. Why Sam! what an unhappy Fellow art thou to lay the Rod in
the way thus? For who, do you think, will not reply, the reason why the Pears
would not sell, was, because they were not good?

I remember a Passage I once met with in a Dramatick Poem called, The Folly of
Priest*craft. Father Politico (who bears the Character of a plotting,
intriguing Priest) orders his Man Manuel to read the Intelligences which he had
received out of the Country, what Men there were in the several Counties that
were fit Tools to work with, in building up the Catholic Cause; and among the
rest, There is a Fellow of a broad Face, and no Brains, the want of which is
supplied by a great stock of Impudence, which enables him to rail against
Popery in Billingsgate Language, without two grains of Sense or Reason -- He
gets a good quantity of Money in the Year, and preaches in a little Shed at the
end of his House. Then mark him down ( says Politico) and send an hundred
Pounds to make his Shed bigger; there are more converted to us by hearing bad
Sermons against Popery, than by hearing good ones for it. Whether this is
worthy the Consideration of your Antagonists, must be left to them, and how far
the Story reaches their Case. But I am very apt to think, should they be at
the Charge of printing all you write (rather than you should be silent) it
would prove for the good of the Cause you oppose; and one of your Books against
any Opinion, will make more Converts to it, than ten good Books writ for it.

I find, old Ishmael, you are resolved to keep us in uncertainty to what Party
you belong, and make us think you are a Man of no Religion, by your quarrelling
with all as wrong. I did believe you a Presbyterian (if any thing) till I met
with those scurrilous Sarcasms upon the two great Men of the Age of that
Persuasion, 2d New Years Gift for the Crispians, p. 35, 36.
Dr. B -- s and Mr. H -- w. It Is mean and pitiful to rake the Ashes of the
Dead, as you do of the Doctor, (you know the old saying, De mortuis nil nisi
bonum) but it is intolerable to stamp 'em with Falsities. I can find no truth in
what you would insinuate, tho I have often endeavored it, and can make no
shift to free it from the name of a Lie, but that it is too gross to deceive.
And I doubt not but you thought your self a fitter Man to speak to the King, in
the name of the Dissenters, than he that did it (whom the World knows to be a
learned Man, and needs no Encomium from any but his own Works) as you have
often implicitly seemed to assert. That would have been the ready way to have
revived the obsolete name of Fanatic, and to have given the King just cause to
reflect upon on the Liberty given to Madmen, as he must have judged them by
their Representative.

You needed not to have taken the trouble to acknowledge your self a Man of but
little Prudence, as you do in the thirty second page of your second
New-Years-Gift, for I never yet could meet with the Man thought you had any.

You tell us a Story, William Pen and the Quakers, either Impostors or
Apostates, p. 30.
that a Quaker Woman coming into a Church, and disturbing it by her speaking,
was asked by a Boy, Who sent her there that Day? she replied, God; No, said the
Boy, then you would not have spoken so many things contrary to the Scriptures;
neither can I imagine the Devil sent thee, for I thought he had more wit than
to send such a Fool about his Work: and the Quaker never disturbed 'em
afterward. Who sent you I cannot determine. but I wish the recital of your own
Story may have the same Effect upon you, and keep you from making any farther
disturbance by your foolish Scrible. Could you look a little into your own
Constitution, that would mightily help toward it, for there -- You Would find
Your Body made for Labor, not your Mind.


I fear, should it come to be known who is the Author of this Letter, by any of
the Judicious, I shall incur their Displeasure; most are apt to think that you
aim at nothing more than the honor of being thought worth answering, and would
be glad of having any thing writ against you, to introduce something more of
your incontinent Scrible into the World. Should it prove so in this, I heartily
beg their Pardon, and hope I shall never again be guilty of Midwifeing any of
your Brats, or be the Cause of provoking you to plague the World with more of
your Stuff. Indeed if you will be as good as your word, I need not much fear it in
this Cause, for you tell us, 2d Friendly Epistle to G. Keith, fol. 20, 34*
That you never intend to write one word more upon this Subject (that is, of
Baptism) unless a Reply by any worthy Divine or Scholar of theirs makes it
necessary. Can you think, or suppose, a worthy Divine, and a Scholar, to be
without any thing else to do, than to trouble his Head about you? and till then
you cannot expect any one should; besides, Man, such a one would as much scorn
to draw a Pen against thee, as a well bred Gentleman to draw his Sword upon a
naked Cit.

I understand you threaten very hard any that shall dare to appear in Print
against you, and yet you see it is done. In the name of him you shall happen to
pitch upon to rail at, as the Author of this Letter, I send you defiance in six
Lines of Sir Carr Scroop to my Lord Rochester, upon his Lordship's having
written something against him.

Rail on poor feeble Scribler, speak of me
In as bad terms as the World speaks of thee:
Sit swelling in thy Hole like a vexed Toad;
Thy Venom, and thy Malice spit abroad;
Thou can hurt no Man's Name by thy ill word,
Thy Pen is full as harmless as thy Sword.
Philosensus.

POSTSCRIPT.
PErhaps some who may chance to peruse this Letter, may cavil at, and find
fault with the Method I have taken, and the Style I have used in writing to the
Quakers Beetle (head). Those that do, I desire to accept of this for Answer; I
have endeavored, as much as I could, to imitate the Gentleman, and fight him
at his own Weapons, and therefore I have foisted in several Stories (and some
of them abruptly) that I might come as near I could to my Copy. And if I Am
accused for being so severe upon him, take his own Reason for the same thing,
in his Book called William Pen and the Quakers, either Impostors or Apostates,
etc. page 61.

Quacks and Juglers, and foolish pretenders to any thing, are not to be treated
as wise and sober Men; Answer, says the wisest of Men, a Fool according to his
Folly, lest he be wise in his own Conceit, Prove. 26.5. FINIS.

