THE ARRAIGNMENT OF Worldly Philosophy, OR, The False Wisdom: Its being a great
hinderance to the Christian Faith; And a great Enemy to the True Divine Wisdom.

By GEORGE KEITH.

1 COR. 1. 19, 20, 21. For it is written, I will destroy the wisdom of the
wise, and will bring to nothing the understanding of the prudent.

Where is the wise? where is the Scribe? where is the Disputer of this World?
Has not God made foolish the Wisdom of this World?

For after that, in the Wisdom of God, the World by Wisdom knew not God, it
pleased God by the foolishness of preaching, to save them that believe.

LONDON: Printed for R. Levis, MDCXCIV.

The Preface to the Reader.
Friendly Reader,
I Thought fit by this Prefaceto prevent thy Offense at the Title of this small
Treatise, which I call the Arraignment of Worldly Philosophy; as if thereby
thou might suppose I did intend any true and real knowledge of things either
Divine or Natural, that any of these called Ancient Philosophers had, or the
real and sincere study, enquiry and search into them, that any of the children
of men have had, whether in former Ages, from the beginning of the World, or
now have in this present Age, so as to condemn the same. But this is far from
my Intention; for on the contrary, I do judge, that the sincere study, enquiry
and search after Truth, and the true knowledge of God, and of his Creatures, is
most commendable and praise worthy: and they are the most Noble Souls, who in
all Ages of the world have given and applied themselves unto the same; for true
Knowledge is of more value than all worldly Treasure, being that which truly
adorns the Mind and Soul of Man, and is a perfection to it; yea, what eyes and
sight is to the Body, that true Knowledge is to the Soul; and as we cannot love
an outward and visible Object, unless we see it, or have some knowledge of it by
some of our outward senses, so we cannot love God our Creator, unless we have
the true knowledge of him; And tho the highest and most excellent degree of the
knowledge of God, is to know him in a nearor and more immediate way than by the
contemplation of the Creatures, yet God has set his Creatures, and the
glorious Fabric of the visible Creation before us, as a book in a large
Volume, whereby we may read and understand not only that God is, but also
whereby we may know in some sort his manifold divine perfections, even his
exceeding great Power, Wisdom, Goodness, Purity, Mercy and Justice. But as no
man can read a book that is blind, or if he have eyes, without light, so none
can truly and rightly read and understand the great book of God's Creation, but
as the eyes of his understanding are opened, and as his eyes when opened, are
enlightened with a divine Light that comes from God himself; for let it be
granted that men's rational faculties are as the eyes of their minds, yet they
can never see into the great wonders of the Creation of God, without he, the
great Creator, does enlighten them, as our natural and bodily eyes cannot see
bodily Objects without a natural and bodily light; for seeing God made all the
Creatures by his eternal Wisdom, nothing can give to man the true knowledge of
them, but the same Wisdom by which he made them; and this is man's dignity and
excellency above the Beasts of the field, that he is capable to receive of this
eternal divine Wisdom, and be taught by it; and as the Rivers that come from
the Sea lead to the Sea, so the Creatures, in a secondary and subordinate way,
lead the Mind and Soul of Man to God that made them, as the divine Light of the
eternal Wisdom that shines in his heart is eyed and regarded, that shows him
how, and after what manner this Current and Stream of the Creatures that come
from God, lead to him, that so man may rest in him, and not in them. But if a
man think by the bare search of his natural understanding, and mere human
Reason, to know either God or the Creation, without the divine Light, he
greatly erreth; and this has been the great Error of most of them called
Philosophers, that by the bare search of the natural understanding, and mere
human Reason, without the divine Light, they were busied, to make their search
into the wonderful works of God in his Creatures, which they not being able to
do, they fell into many Errors, which do contradict the true Christian Faith
and Doctrine delivered by the Prophets, and by Christ, and the Evangelists, and
Apostles, as the design of the following Treatise is to show; and therefore
this is to inform the Reader, in the entrance, it is not any good thing, or any
matter of Truth, or any true discovery of knowledge in things either divine or
natural, that this small Treatise points at, and blames, but the gross Errors
in those called Philosophers, which I have found too many at this to day be
deeply tinctured and leavened with; and these not only some that profess to be
Students of Philosophy, and Proficients in the same, but many other persons
either wholly, or in great part illiterate, and who neither esteem themselves,
nor are esteemed by others, studious in Philosophy, I have found deeply so
tinctured, and most tenariously adhering to these gross and pernicious Errors;
and when I have warned them of these Errors, telling them, that they were the
noted Errors of them called Heathen Philosophers, who did long ago, in Ages
past, oppugn and gainsay the True Christian Faith and Doctrine in many things,
and the Errors of the Jesuits Philosophy, and of some other Schoolmen in the
Church of Rome, stiffly maintained by them, to defend the false Antichristian
Doctrine that that Papal Society is guilty of; They have replied to me, They
know neither the Philosophy of the Old Heathens, nor of the late Schoolmen and
Jesuits, being simple unlettered men. But to this I have answered them, That
tho they know not that such Errors held by them, are the Errors of the Old
Heathens, and of the late Schoolmen, such as Jesuits and others, yet they are
these very Errors; for even as in another case, a man may have in his House
some things that he may not know to whom they do properly belong, so in this
case men may hold erroneous Opinions, invented by others long ago, and yet not
know the Authors of them; and they might have come by them without any curious
search, study or enquiry into the Writings or Books of the first Authors or
Inventers of them, either by having them occasionally mentioned to them, or
finding them by some accident in some one or other late Writer, that writ in
their Mothers Tongue; and the mind of man, while it is more swayed with
Darkness than Light, and with the spirit of Error than with the spirit of
Truth, beside the many disadvantages it has by wrong Education, and drinking
in bad Principles from his childish years, which are not easily drove out,
after they have once got entrance, will no doubt be more easily and readily
inclined to embrace Error than Truth, tho no man's mind or understanding
embraces any Error as Error, but under a notion, or supposition that it is
Truth, even as the Will embraces no evil as evil, but as having some seeming
appearance of good; beside that the mind of man, unless it be governed by the
divine principle of Truth, within it self, is but too fruitful to bring forth
the like Errors as others have formerly done, as the Earth it self, that is not
well and carefully cultivated bp the Husbandman, will be fruitful enough to
bring forth Briars and Thorns, and hurtful Weeds. And notwithstanding that some
have objected against me, That the Human Learning I received at the University
in Arts and Sciences, and Languages, and that called Philosophy, has enabled
me to dispute and contend for, and otherways to hold forth both by word of
mouth and by writing, certain principles of Christian Doctrine, as so believed
by me, and as if I gloried in my Abilities and furnishing, of human Learning,
of such Arts, Sciences, Languages, and that all d Philosophy, as I had acquired
in my younger years, and trusted greatly or chiefly to that, seeking to get a
Name, or Applause thereby among men, I can, and do with great freedom and
clearness of mind, declare, That such who so judge of me, do greatly judge
amiss; my Trust is in the Lord alone, and my dependence is wholly and only upon
him, and has been, to receive of his Divine Wisdom and Power from day to day,
to strengthen and enable me in that work and service he has called me unto,
even to bear Testimony to the great Truths of the Christian Faith and Doctrine;
and my knowledge and understanding I have in Christian Doctrine and Principles,
I have received from the spirit of Truth, that has opened my understanding, to
understand them, and not from Natural Arts and Sciences, and Languages, and
that called Philosophy, which since ever I knew the Truth, as it is in Jesus, I
never have magnified, or highly esteemed, nor valued my self upon that sort of
Learning; for I have abundantly seen to the Insufficiency of it, to qualify
any man to be a true Preacher or Teacher of Divine Things, or to be a true
Minister of Christ Jesus, whatever subservient use the True and Genuine part of
human Learning may have to a Minister of Christ, in subordination to the divine
grace and gift of God, the spurious and adulterate part of it having long since
been rejected by me, so far as it has beeh discovered unto me; And for such
who through a prejudice in them, against the many precious Things of the Truth
of Christ, that his divine light and spirit has opened unto me, and continues
still more and more to open unto me, and enable me to bring forth either by
word or writing, are realy in their Ignorance to say, (as some have said) These
things are but the effects and product of Arts and Sciences, human Learning and
Philosophy; They but too much manifest their want of a True savor and
spiritual discerning (whatever high pretenses they make of it) who thus
unjustly and unchristianly judge of me, and are of the Number of them (Isa. 5.)
that call light darkness, good evil, and sweet bitter; while they are but too
ready to call that which is darkness in themselves light, and evil good, and
bitter sweet, and so they have need to fear the woe that is pronounced against
such as so do; yet many have a better sense and savor of my Christian
Testimony. But to convince such, if there be any room left for their
conviction, That the manner of Doctrine and Principles held forth by me, is not
from, nor after the worldly Philosophy, which is but worldly Rudimentss and
human Traditions, but from and after Christ, as his holy spirit has taught me,
and enlightened me, and has opened the holy Scriptures unto me, is the design
of this small Treatise, whereby they may perceive that I am so far from
deriving my Ability from that called the Philosophy of either Platonists,
Stoics, or Peripateticks, or any others, Ancient or modern, of worldly minded
Professors and Students, that I have very plainly contradicted them, and
showed, wherein many of their great Principles and Conclusions in that called
their Philosophy, do contradict the holy Christian Faith and Doctrine; and upon
a due examination, they who seek to brand me with dangerous and hurtful
Opinions of Philosophy, will rather be found guilty themselves in that
particular.

THE Arraignment of Worldly Philosophy, etc.
Colos. 2. 8. Beware lest any man spoil you through Philosophy, and vain
deceit, after the Tradition of Men, after the Rudiments of the World, and not
after Christ.
IT is very evident out of these Words of the Apostle Paul, what that
Philosophy is that he cautioneth the Colossians against, to wit, that which is
after the Tradition of Men, after the Rudiments and Elements of the World, and
not after Christ, and which in the following words of this same Chapter, he
calls the Commandments and Doctrines of Men, and having a show of Wisdom in
will worship, and voluntary humility and worshipping of Angels, v. 18. 23. and
in v. 20. he calls it a dogmatising; the words in our English Translation,
why are ye subject to Ordinances, are more duly translated; why dogmatize ye,
or why are ye dogmatized? That is, subjected to men's Opinions and Doctrines,
that tend to overthrow and destroy your Faith; such as many of the Opinions and
Doctrines of them were that professed themselves to be Philosophers at that
time. Some of the particular Errors, and hurtful Doctrines of these
Philosophers he does particularly mention, as 1. the worshipping of Angels: 2.
a self-willed Humility: 3. the neglecting the body: 4. abstaining from meats,
so as neither to touch, taste nor handle them; for some of the Philosophers of
that time did forbid the use of certain meats, and particularly of flesh, as
being hurtful to the study of Philosophy. But the true Christian Faith and
Doctrine taught by Christ and the Apostles, allows the sober and moderate use
of all meats that are not in themselves unwholesome to the body, as some are.
Also he describes the Effects of this vain and hurtful Philosophy of the
Gentiles: 1. It made them intrude into things not seen: 2. It made them vain,
and puffed up the fleshly mind: 3. It led from the Head Christ, and from Faith
in him.

But as Paul here cautioneth, and gives warning against the worldly
Philosophy, or wisdom of the Gentile Philosophers, so he exalts and
commands the true Wisdom that is after Christ* and sets the one in
opposition to the other, the one being after the Traditions of Men, and
Rudiments or Elements of the World; the other being after Christ, in whom are
hid all the Treasures of Wisdom and Knowledge, v. 3. as if he had said to them,
Why should ye look after that which is rather falsely called Philosophy among
the Gentiles, than that which is true Philosophy or Wisdom; for granting that
they may have some scraps and Fragments of some true Knowledge, yet it being
mingled and mixed with many hurtful Errors, contrary to the Doctrine and Faith
of Christ, it is better to shun it than to look after it. But if ye desire or
love true Wisdom and Knowledge, seek after it in Christ, learn it of him; for in
him are hid all the Treasures of Wisdom and Knowledge; for who would go and eat
scraps of Food mixed with Poison, when they can have a plentiful Table, well
furnished with all variety of wholesome meats, without any mixture of any
hurtful thing?

It is convenient in this place to take notice, that it is only the hurtful and
false Opinions of these called Philosophers, that the Apostle Paul does chiefly
caution them against, and because what things of Truth, or true Knowledge they
had, or taught either by word of mouth, or by their books and writings, was so
greatly mixed with many hurtful Errors, it was more advisable for them that
were weak, to let the whole alone, because not only all things of Truth, or
true Knowledge, that the best of them had, were not only to be learned from
Christ, without them, but much more, even all that was requisite or conducing
to true happiness or satisfaction. And as things receive their Name and
Denomination from their greater part, so the Philosophy of the Gentiles
containing for the most part more Errors than Truth, might well be termed
hurtful and erroneous. Yet strictly speaking, it was not what they had of
Truth, or true Knowledge, either of things divine or natural that the Apostle
cautioned them against, as fit to be rejected or disowned; for whatever is of
Truth to be found in any men, is to be owned and acknowledged in its place, and
a good use and improvement may be made of it to convince them of the Errors
that they hold; for as all the parts of Truth are well coherent and consisting,
and stand in most excellent Harmony one with another, so Truth and Error are
very incoherent, and break the Harmony and beautiful consistency of things;
Therefore by what a man holds of Truth in some small measure, he may be
convinced of his Errors when it is showed to him in the clear light of divine
illumination, or even of the true Reason of Man, that what Opinions or
Persuasions he judges to be true, are inconsistent with the Truths he does
hold, that therefore they must needs be Errors, and false and unsound Notions.
And after this manner Paul dealt with these called Philosophers at Athens, Acts
17. citing a most true and excellent saying out of one of their own Authors,
That men, or mankind, is the Offspring of God; and from this he took occasion,
whereby to convince them of their Idolatry and Superstition, and such a method
did the Ancient Fathers, so called, and Primitive Teachers in the Church, after
the Apostles days, make use of in disputing against the Philosophers in these
times, who were commonly the greatest Enemies and Opposers of the Christian
Faith, by which they did mightily confound them, and put them to silence, and
gained upon diverse of them, so that they received the Christian Faith and
Doctrine.

And seeing it was not any thing of Truth, or true knowledge that Paul did
caution men against in them called Gentile Philosophers, whether they had it by
virtue of that common divine illumination given to all mankind, or by the use
of their true Reason, as men in subordination to that more excellent principle,
jointly working together, both which are the good gifts of God, and are not to
be disregarded, but duly esteemed and valued in their several places; the one,
to wit, the divine illumination, as the Master or Mistress; the other as the
Servant or Handmaid, to wit, the true Reason or reasonable understanding of
man: but it was chiefly or rather indeed only their gross Errors that did
oppose and impugn the true Christian Faith and Doctrine that these called
Philosophers did hold and which made them so great Enemies to the Christian
Faith, tha^ they neither did receive it themselves, while they retained these
Errors, nor suffered their Hearers and Followers, that believed them, to
receive it; therefore it was that Paul did so warmly and earnestly warn them to
whom he wrote this Epistle, against that called Philosophy that was then among
the Gentiles, with whom they conversed, and that he says beware; the Greek
Word is (...); that is, see, as if he had said, take nothing upon trust from
men, neither believe what they say upon their bare credit and authority; but
see with the Eyes of your understandings, that God has anointed and opened
with his heavenly and divine Eye Salve; and with these Eyes compare things with
thing; and by so doing ye will find that the Gentiles Philosophy teaches many
things contrary to the true Faith of Christ, and their wisdom is for the most
part contrary to the wisdom which Christ teaches. And that he says, beware,
or see lest any spoil you, or make a prey of you, or rob you, through
philosophy and vain deceit. The latter words are explanatory, as to say, the
Philosophy I caution you against, it is not the true Philosophy, or wisdom; but
vain deceit; and (...), as he calls it; a show or talk of wisdom; but not the
true divine wisdom.

And whereas the Apostle Paul does not enumerate all, nor most of their Errors
in this place, nor any where else, but only mentions a few in particular, and
gives them a warning against the Philosophy professed at that time among the
Gentiles in general, as being hurtful, and opposes the wisdom of the world to
the wisdom of God; as 1 Cor. 1. after that in the wisdom of God, the world by
wisdom knew not God, it pleased God by the foolishness of preaching, to save
them that believe; and so does James set in opposition the wisdom from above
and the wisdom from below, with the qualities and properties of each, calling
that from below, earthly, sensual and Devilish; as indeed the greatest part of
the Learning or Philophy of them called Greeks at that time, was no other. It
is not to be understood, that the Apostle did reject, or condemn the true
exercise, use and improvement of men's rational faculties, either in the
invention, or cultivation of such useful Arts and Sciences as were really
useful for the life of man, as the skill of Husbandry, Navigation, Arithmetic,
or the knowledge of Numbers, and use of them, in Accounting, Geometry,
Astronomy, and other the like useful Arts, which were for most part the result
and improvement of Man's Nature, Reason and Understanding, as a Man, however it
may be allowed, that in some cases and things God did teach some men these or
the like things by a divine illumination, working upon their rational
understandings, as men: For tho there is nothing that is supernatural in all
these Arts and Sciences commonly taught in Schools, or which surpasses the
common capacity of men's reason to understand them, yet the invention, or first
discovery of them might have had a more immediately divine original; as when
Christ opened the natural eyes of the blind to see, their seeing was natural,
after their eyes were opened; but the opening of them was supernatural and
miraculous. It being therefore the gross and hurtful Errors that did abound in
the Gentile Philosophy, that made Paul give such caution against it; And the
same Errors continuing among many called Christians at this day, that spoil
them, by hurting yea, destroying the Faith of some, and hindering the Faith of
others, which were among the Gentiles in that day, I have found a Zeal raised
in my heart, and a weighty concern upon me to point at diverse gross Errors held
professed, and taught in this day, by some called Christians, as Doctrines and
Principles of true Philosophy, most of which were the very Errors of the old
Heathen Philosophers; and they are such as follow, particularly the Platonists
and Stoics taught,

1. That the Body is no part of a Man, but a Prison and Grave to the Soul.
Hence they could not but deny the Resurrection of the Body after Death; for no
man after he is set free out of Prison, has any desire to return to it again;
and also from this Error, no doubt, came that neglecting of the Body that Paul
mentions, Col. 2. 23. which makes me the more think strange of some at this
day, who tho they plainly profess, they believe nothing of the Resurrection of
this body, or any part or parts of it, yet they are but overmuch addicted
highly to nourish and cloth it, and that in a very high degree, and have an
extraordinary love to it, and care of it, as if it were their only immortal
part. But such who are of this Opinion, that the Body is as a Prison and Grave
to the Soul, and consequently expects no Resurrection to it, more than to the
body of a beast, do not understand how the body, by sin, is changed, to be
liker to a Prison, or Grave, than to a Palace, such as it was before the Fall,
even as a most fair and stately Palace; and such it will become again at the
Resurrection of the Dead. Again, many of old taught, and now teach,

2. That Matter or Body has no life or perception, sense or feeling of pleasure
or pain, even when the Soul is in it, and united to it; but that the Soul or
Spirit of a man, is the alone subject of all sensation and perception; And
because some late Philosophers, so called, do not own Beasts, Fishes and Fowls
to have any principle in 'em, but mere body or matter, they deny that they have
any sense or perception; but say, they are moved by springs, and Mechanic
motions, like to Watches or Clocks: Hence such cannot but consequentially deny
the Resurrection of the body, for if the body be wholly without all sense or
perception, either of pleasure or pain, to what purpose should it be raised,
seeing its insensibility makes it incapable either of future felicity or
misery; or any capable subject of reward or punishment: But this is plain
contrary to Christ's Doctrine, who said, Fear not them that can kill the Body;
but fear him that can cast both Soul and Body into Hellfire. Where note these
2 things: 1. If the Body can be killed, that has a Life: 2. That it is capable
of future punishment as well as the Soul; and consequently the body of a Saint
is capable of a future reward, together with the Soul: and the Scripture
teaches us, that not only the Soul of a true believer, but the Body is for the
Lord, and the Lord for it; to wit, that it may be a Temple for the Lord to
dwell in, in the future state and world to come; and therefore he who raised up
Jesus from the dead, will also raise us up by Jesus, 1 Cor. 6. 13, 14. Romans 8.
11. And it is great ignorance in such, and a sinful excuse of their great error
and unbelief, who so frequently say, Let us not be concerned about the manner
of the Resurrection of the Body, since it is not discovered, nor told us in
Scripture what manner of body it shall be; but let us live well, and we need
not take thought about the Resurrection of the body; For the Scripture does
plainly tell us what manner of body it shall be when raised, as well as what
manner of body it is that is sown, or buried; It is sown natural, it is raised
spiritual, etc. 1 Cor. 15. 42, 43. And men cannot live well unless they have
the true Faith of the Resurrection of the body; for the unbelief of it leads us
to all looseness and Epicurism, by the plain testimony of the Scripture in the
forementioned Chap. 1 Cor. 15. 32. If the dead rise not (the Greek has it in
the Plural Number, if dead men rise not) let us eat and drink for to morrow we
die. And here the Apostle is not discoursing of the New Birth, or rising of the
soul out of the death of sin, as some most grossly and perversely think; but of
the Resurrection of the body: also the Apostle does most excellently argue,
That not to believe the Resurrection of the dead, is not to believe the
Resurrection of Christ; and not to believe the Resurrection of Christ, makes
faith vain, and preaching vain: and if faith be vain, they are yet in their
sins who profess faith; and therefore they cannot live well. Lo! how the
Apostle inseparably linketh all these things together; so that to break one
Link, is to break the whole Chain: See v. 13, 14.

3. Tho both Platonists and Stoics taught many true things of God, and some
did profess to own Gods inbeing in them, and his divine teachings, comforts and
refreshments, yet as they taught nothing of that great mystery of our
salvation; Viz. the Son of God, our Lord Jesus Christ, his coming in the flesh,
his dying for our sins to reconcile us unto God, being that great propitiatory
sacrifice for all mankind, so much of their Doctrine did contradict it. Hence
many of the ancient Philosophers, not understanding the spiritual signification
of the Jews Sacrifices, as they were Types of Christ, that was to be offered up
for the sins of the world in his body of flesh, upon the Tree of the Cross, as
accordingly was fulfilled, did deride the Jews for their Sacrifices, according
to that ancient Latin Distick of Cato:

Cum tu sis nocens, cur moritur Victima prote;
Stultitia est morte alterius sperare salutem.
When thou have sinned, why should for thee a Sacrifice be slain?
By another's Death, Life to expect, it foolish is, and vain.
And therefore it was that Paul said, That Christ crucified was foolishness to
the Greeks, that sought after wisdom; To wit, The Worldly Philosophy; as well
as a stumbling block to the Jews.

4. Both Platonists and Stoics placed all their happiness in an inward
principle lodged within themselves, which tho some owned to be God, yet they
greatly erred in not understanding, in acknowledging, That all divine
influences and communications flow from God into men through the Man Christ
Jesus, our alone Mediator: and therefore any Religion they had was mixed with
great ignorance and error, or not understanding the necessity of the One
Mediator, in whom God has placed all fullness of the divine influences and
communications of Grace and Truth, Light and Life, out of whom we are to
receive our several measures, as our Faith is exercised on him, and as our
dependence is upon him; even as the Members depend upon the Head, and the
Branches on the Root for life and nourishment. But they placing all within
themselves, even of what they did or could enjoy of God, were in a great error;
even as much as who should say, The Branch has all within it that makes it
fruitful; or the members of the body have all within them that makes them live
and move: so no dependence upon the Head, Christ, the Mediator betwixt God and
men: yea this error is so great that whoever holds it, as too many do at this
day (as well as formerly) they make themselves as God, or equal to him; for it
is the alone perfection and dignity of God to have all within himself, and
needing nothing without himself; for even the Man Christ had not all from
within himself; but has God to be his Head, as God has given him to be our
Head; as he taught concerning himself, My Father is greater than I: and as the
Father has Life in himself, so he has given to the Son to have Life in
himself, that he may quicken whomsoever he will; therefore we read that in his
prayer to the Father he lifted up his eyes to Heaven, Joh. 17. 1. expecting to
be heard from thence; yea in his comparing his Disciples to the Branches, and
himself to the Vine, and his Father to the Husbandman, this great mystery is
held forth, how as our dependence is on the Man Christ, so his dependence is on
the Father; for as the Vine gives sap and nourishment to the Branches, so the
Husbandman gives earth and soil to the Vine; it being a great part of the
Husbandmans work to put fat or good earth to the root of the Tree, as well as
to prune and dress the Branches of it: And he did receive of the Father these
Divine Gifts that he gave and still gives to his Church.

5. None of all the Philosophers taught remission of sin, and justificasion by
the blood of Christ, and Faith in it; or understood that Evangelical mystery,
how Christ was wounded for our Transgressions, and was bruised for our
Iniquities; and that by his stripes we are healed; and how he did bear our sins
in his body on the Tree, and made peace for us by the blood of his Cross. But
they placed their whole Acceptance upon their Virtues and good Works, tho
diverse of them professed (Platonists and Stoics as well as Peripateticks, and
particularly Aristotle in his Ethics) That what Virtues and good Works they
did bring forth, was from (...); some Divine Thing or Principle within them.
But that this was a great Error in them Paul does abundantly prove both out of
his Epistle to the Romans and Galatians, That as the Jews were not justified
before God by any Works of the Law, so neither were the Gentiles; but all were
guilty before God: For whatsoever the Law says, it says to them that are
under the Law; that every mouth may be stopped, and the whole world become guilty
before God. Now this that makes the whole world guilty, and stops every mouth
is the Law within, which is from the divine principle, seeing the greatest part
of the world have no Law without. And therefore he concludes, That no man is
justified by the works of the Law, but by the faith of Christ; All are
justified who have that Faith; which Faith is the gift of God, and is wrought
in every one that has it by the mighty power of God; which Faith is a Living
Faith, and is always accompanied with good works.

6. Tho many of the ancient Philosophers professed to believe the Immortality
of Souls, and future Rewards and Punishments to men's souls; yet they had no
belief of the Resurrection of the Body; as is clear not only no from their own
books, but also from the Testimony of the Holy Scripture; For when Paul
preached to them at Athens, Jesus and the Resurrection, certain Philosophers of
the Epicureans and Stoics mocked him, and called him Babbler. Now as this their
Denial of the Resurrection of the Dead, did proceed from the two aforementioned
Errors held by many both then and at this day; viz. that the body of man was no
part of him, but the soul's prison and grave; and that the body has no Life, or
perception, when united to the soul: so it did proceed from a 3d gross error,
as absurd as any of the 2 former; viz. That the substance, or first matter of
earthly bodies, differ in kind from heavenly bodies; and consequently that no
earthly body is convertible into an heavenly body, and no animal body is
convertible into a spiritual body: And from such a great Error the ignorance
and unbelier of those flows, that do not believe that Christ's Animal and
visible body, of flesh and blood, is converted and changed to be now in Heaven
a spiritual and heavenly body; And as they do not believe this change of
Christ's body (the substance remaining the same) so nor do they believe that
the bodies of the Saints shall be changed from animal to spiritual, and from
Terrestrial to Celestial and Heavenly, tho the Scripture-testimony is plain
and express for such a change, the substance of the body remaining the same;
For if the substance did not remain the same, the change would not be a
conversion or transmutation, but an exchange or permutation; as when one
changes Copper for Gold, by selling Copper for Gold; this is quite another
thing than when Copper is transmuted and converted into Gold.

7. The ancient Philosophers did not believe any general Day of Judgment, or
end of this world; but mostly they did conceit, That as it was from Eternity in
the manner and condition as it is now in, rouling and revolving in a continual
sphere of generation and corruption, even Vegetables and Animals, as well as
Men, so it would continue to Eternity in the like manner and condition as it is
now in, still running round in a continual sphere of generation and corruption,
and of Living and Dying, and Dying and Living again (but as to this they were
divided in Opinions, some holding, That the Souls of Men that were thoroughly
purged from all Sins and Vices, attained to a state of blessedness, joy and
rest with God, and did never return to live again in the body: Others holding,
That after some long Tracts of Time, Souls might decline from their state of
Felicity, in the Divine Fruition, and so descend into humane bodies again.) But
these Opinions are contrary to the holy Scriptures, which plainly inform us,
That this visible world had a beginning, and that mankind had a beginning in
Adam and Eve; and that the Years of the World, from Adam to Christ's coming in
the flesh, are about 4000 years, by Scripiure Chronology: And as this visible
world had a beginning, so it will have an end, as the Scripture does plainly
inform us. But it is not to be judged, That the end of this world will be an
anmhilation, or reducing of it to nothing, as some imagine, but only a change,
as the Scripture calls it. Nor can it be proved either from Scripture or
Reason, That this visible world had its beginning from nothing, or of nothing,
but since about 5000 years, and some odd hundreds; For it is evident from
Scripture, that this visible world did not take its rise or beginning from mere
nothing, but from that which Moses calls, Gen, 1. 2. tohu va bohu, which the
Septuagint Translation rendereth (...), that is Invisible; and the Epistle to
the Hebrews, c. 11. calls (...), that is things not appearing.

8. Diverse called ancient Philosophers, as well as some now, held the Soul or
Spirit of man to be a part of God's Essence, or that there were but one great
soul or spirit acting in the bodies of all men both good and bad. And of this
gross and vile Error some Ranters and vain Notionists are guilty, who yet
profess to own the Scriptures, but the Scripture is against them in this and
all their other gross Errors and Imaginations: For the Soul, or Spirit of Man,
is a created being or substance, according to Is. 57. 16. And it is a most
gross and false Opinion, contrary both to Scripture and all sound
understanding, to imagine, that the soul of man that sins, and is defiled
with sin, can be a part of God; For God is holy and perfect. Beside, it is not
proper to say, that God has any Parts, it being contrary to the Nature of his
infinite Perfection, to be compounded of parts, or divisible into parts;
wherefore when the Scripture speaks of his Face and back parts, that is to be
understood only by way of Allegory, in condescension to the weakness of humane
understanding. This gross and vile Error, viz. That the Soul is a part of God's
Essence, or that there is but one great Soul or Spirit acting in the bodies of
all men, both good and bad, takes away all distinction of Virtue and Vice, and
consequently all future Rewards and Punishments; it is lately much revived by
them called Hobbists and Deists.

9. As many, or most of those called Ancient Philosophers, held absurd and
false Principles and Doctrines both concerning the Body and Soul of Man, so
many of them did grossly err concerning the glorious Being and Attributes of
God; some holding him to be Corporeal, some denying his Omnipresence, and
limiting him to some remote place above the visible Heavens and Stars; Others
denying his Omniscience, and universal providence over all his creatures: All
which gross Errors being so generally condemned by all sound and sincere
Christians, and being so plainly contradicted by the Testimonies of holy
Scripture, I shall not at present be at pains to refute, it sufficing to my
present purpose to have named them, as sufficient instances to prove, That the
Worldly Philosophy is a great hindrance to the Christian Faith, and opposite to
the Doctrine of the holy Scriptures, that have proceeded from the divine Wisdom
and Spirit, to which the wisdom and spirit of this World is contrary.

10. Some of these called Ancient Philosophers, did conceit, that there were in
God passions of grief and anger, such as there are in men, upon emergent
occasions, and that God could change his mind, or will and purpose concerning
men and things, as some ignorant Persons do so conceive at this day, imagining,
that not only anger and grief is competible unto God, but repentance also, too
literally and carnally understanding that Place of Scripture, that it repented
God that he had made man; not well considering that the Scripture speaks
frequently of God, in condescension to our weakness, by Metaphors, Figures and
Allegories, as when we read of his Eyes, Ears, Mouth, Hands, etc. And the
Scripture says, God is not as man, that he can repent; and his gifts and
calling are without repentance: And seeing in God there is no variableness, nor
shadow of change, as both Scripture and good Reason teaches, how can it be
conceived, that there can be any change of his mind, will and purpose,
concerning either persons or things? And as for Anger and Grief, they may be
said to be in God effectively, but not subjectively; not as accidents inherent
in their subject; for no accidents can have place in God, who is an infinitely
perfect Being, God's Anger being his most holy and righteous will to pun^sh
transgressors, and his Grief being an utter aversion from sin, and hatred of it.

11 Some also have imagined, as the Manichees and Gnostics of Old, That God
could be wounded and bruised, or oppressed by men's sins, and that his Life or
Spirit could be killed, and slain in men, by their sins; misunderstanding and
perverting some places of Scripture, that if they be understood of God himself,
cannot be otherwise construed, but to be spoken figuratively, as when he is
said to have repented. But if by the Life and Spirit of God, be not meant God
himself, as often it is, but a life and spirit begotten or formed by the living
Power of God in the Saints, from a Divine Seed sown in them, called in
Scripture, the Seed of God, it ought to be granted, That this formed Life,
Birth or Plant, may, and does suffer in men by their sins, and the tender Seed
of God is burdened, grieved, and, so to speak, wounded in men by their sins.
But this Seed is not God himself, but somewhat that is emanated, and that
proceeded from him, and does belong to the Mediatory Spirit of Christ, and is a
measure thereof, the fullness of which dwells for ever in the Man Christ
Jesus, and out of whose fullness to every one of us is given grace, according
to the measure of the gift of Christ, as the Scripture declares.

12. The high and mysterious Doctrine of the Election and Predestination of the
Saints, by the way of grace and holiness, to bring them to glory and happiness
everlasting, and how God has chosen all the heirs of salvation in Christ
Jesus, their elect Head, Root and Foundation, both unto holiness, as the means,
and everlasting happiness and life, as the end; is a thing, that the wisest of
the World's Philosophers understood nothing of; for it is a great part of that
wisdom* that Paul said, he spoke among them that were perfect. Ephesians. 1. 4, 5, 6,
7, 8. and Ephesians. 3. 10, 11. And there is scarce any Doctrine of the Christian
Faith, that the carnal and fleshly wisdom of man does more contradict and
oppose, and argue and contend against, than this high and mysterious, and yet
most comfortable Doctrine of the Christian Faith, plainly and amply testified
of in the holy Scriptures.

13. And lastly, The worldly Philosophy and fleshly Wisdom has invented many
Words, Terms and Phrases that do rather darken and obscure the Truth, than tend
to discover it; so that what God said unto Joh, might well be said concerning
them called Philosophers both ancient and late; Who is this that darkneth
Counsel with words without knowledge? And multitudes of dark and obscure Words
has bred a multitude of dark, obscure and fallacious distinctions, and these
have be got endless disputes and controversies in that called Natural
Philosophy: and as that called the Natural Philosophy is greatly corrupted with
fallacious Terms, Phrases, Distinctions and Maxims or Axioms so called; so the
mixing or mingling that called Philosophy with Matters of Religion, which is
not for the most part true, but false, this has done great hurt, and has
occasioned a great corruption in the Doctrine relating to the Faith of Christ
and the Christian Religion, commonly called Divinity and Theology, especially
that taught in Universities commonly called School Divinity, being stuffed with
the Words, Terms, Phrases, vain and fallacious distinctions, definitions and
Maxims of the World's Philosophy, which has not a true Foundation in the truth
of things, but is only grounded on men's imaginations, and traditional glosses,
that have but guessed at things, that has led the minds of Men into a
Labyrinth and Wilderness of Confusion, and unprofitable jangling and disputing,
deservedly called by the Apostle Paul, the Opposition of Science falsely so
called; for well may that be Science falsely so called, that is only a
sophistical Art of wrangling, contending and opposing what another man says,
whatever it be, and so dispute things endlesly pro and contra, insomuch that
there is scarce any conclusion or assertion in that called Natural Philosophy,
but both the Affirmative and Negative, by point blank contradiction, is
defended, by multitudes of Authors; and what one builds, another destroys; what
one proves to be truth, another (as he thinks) proves to be error, and both
pretend to Reason and Philosophy. Beside, that the Worldly Philosophy for the
most part is rather a skill to talk of things with a multitude of words,
without any true knowledge, than a real solid knowledge of them. Hence it is that
Paul defines it to be the wisdom of words, and the enticing words of man's
wisdom; also the wisdom of man, which God will destroy, 1 Cor. 1, and 2
Chapters.

And as many of them called Old Philosophers, held many false and absurd
Opinions directly contrary to the Christian Faith, so do many of late
pretending greatly to Philosophy among those called Christians, especially the
Masters and Professors (so called) of Philosophy in Universities and public
Schools of Learning in the Church of Rome: tom whom too many Protestant
Professors have borrowed some of their corrupt Leaven of false Philosophy,
which they have mingled with that they call Divinity or Theology, but is not
pure Divinity or Theology, not being the Truth as it is in Jesus, which is free
from all mixtures of Error and Falsehood whatsoever. And of such Errors held by
Popish Professors of Philosophy, I shall first instance some concerning body or
bodily substance and matter.

I. One gross Error held by them is, That the quantity, and other accidents of
a Body, can subsist or remain without the substance. And on this absurd Error
in that called Philosophy, they build their false Faith, that after the words
of Consecration, the quantity of the Bread and Wine, and other accidents of
Color, Smell, Taste and Feeling, in that called the Eucharist, remain in the
consecrated Wafer or Cake, while the substance of the Bread and Wine is gone,
and cease any more to be.

II. A second gross Error in their Philosophy is, That there can be a
penetration of bodies and bodily parts? so that one whole body remaing a body
still, can be in the same place with another body of the same quantity,
occupying the same room and space at one and the same time, and consequently
that the whole substance of a man's body may occupy no more room or space than
the least grain or atome of bread; and on this absurd Error they build their
false Faith, That the same Body of Christ that was crucified, and raised again,
and ascended into Heaven, is in every grain or atome of the Eucharistical Bread.

III. A third gross error concerning bodies, they teach, is, That one and the
same body in all its parts, undivided one from another, can be in many places
at once. And on this absurd error they build their false faith, That the
visible Body of Christ is in many thousand places at once, to wit, not only in
every consecrated Cake or Wafer, but in every grain thereof.

IV. A fourth gross error they teach, is, That one body can be
transubstantiated into another body; which is to say, That the substance or
essence of the body is changed into another substance or essence. And on this
absurd error they build their absurd Doctrine of Transubstantiation, affirming,
That the substance of the Bread and Wine in the Eucharist, or Supper, after
Consecration, is transubstantiated; that is, changed into the substance of
Christ's Body. But as the Popish error of Transubstantiation is exceeding gross
and hurtful, so is the error of some no less gross, but rather much more both
gross and hurtful, who feign, That the glorified Body of Christ is Omnipresent,
so not only attributing to it above what a Body is capable of in its highest*
exaltation, but what is a proper and peculiar Attribute of God Almighty, and
essential to him. Into which gross error having fallen by their great
ignorance, they seek to defend it, by grossly pervetting that place of
Scripture, Ephesians. 4 10. He that descended, is the same also that ascended up far
above all heavens, that he might fill all things. But it is not said here, nor
any where else in Scripture, That his Body that was raised from the dead
fills all things; but it is expressly said, Acts 3. 21. That the heavens must
receive him, until the time of the restitution of all things: which must needs
be understood of his Body, or bodily presence; concerning which Christ said
himself, The poor you have always with you, but me ye have not always, viz.
bodily, though spiritually present. But I would not have any to think, that I
deny, that Christ's glorified Body can extend its Virtue to men here on earth,
as he pleases; for that I readily grant and believe, that both his Soul and
Body can extend their Virtue, as by Rays and Beams to the Saints upon Earth;
and no doubt but his Mediatory Spirit and Life does extend it self into our
souls. But this is no proof, that Christ's Body is every where where God is;
for so to affirm is a grosser error than that of the Popish Transubstantiation;
for the Popish Doctrine only teaches a Transubstantiation of one body into
another, viz. of the body and substance of bread into Christ's Body; but this
teaches the Transubstantiation of Christ's body into the Godhead; which is
most unreasonable, as well as most contrary to Scripture, and is a reviving of
the Old Eutychian Heresy, condemned, and that most justly, by ancient
Christians, many Hundred Years ago.

V. A 5th gross error held in common both by Papists and many called
Protestants, is, That in the daily generation and corruption of bodies, as when
flesh or wood is consumed with fire, the body of flesh or wood is substantially
changed, the former substantial form (so called by them) ceasing to be, that
was formerly in the flesh or wood, and a new substantial form in the Fire, or
smoke and ashes, being newly produced. And accordingly they most falsely teach,
That the elements of fire, air, water and earth, differ substantially in their
substantial and essential forms, and that a gross body cannot be changed into a
spiritual and subtle body, but that there must be a change of the substance.
Whence it is that Papists generally, and too many called Protestants, have such
gross and carnal conceptions of the Resurrection-bodies of the Saints that
shall be raised at the last day, imagining they must be raised with gross
flesh, blood and bones, as they now have, otherwise they should not be the same
bodies in substance as now they are. Whereas the plain truth is, that bodies
can undergo great changes, even the greatest that are possible, from gross to
be exceeding spiritual and subtle, without any substantial change, being only
changed in accidental forms and modes, but remaining the same in substance; as
when the Water was miraculously changed by Christ into Wine; here was no
Transubstantiation, or change of the bodily substance, but only a
Transformation, or change of the accidental forms and modes of the Water, into
new accidental forms and modes of Wine.

VI. A 6th gross error, common generally both to Papists and many called
Protestants, in that called by them Philosophy, is, that many things which are
real substances* they hold them to be but accidents, or accidental qualities,
as the light or influence of the Sun, or of common fire, they hold to be
nothing but accidental qualities; also the Emanations that commonly flow from
Stones, Minerals* Metals, Herbs and Animals, causing sympathy and antipathy,
some whereof are more manifest, that affect our gross senses of smelling,
tasting and feeling; others more hidden and occult, as that of the Loadstone,
that draws Iron to it: they hold them to be accidental qualities, having no
real substance. Whereas the more true and sincere Philosophy teaches, that
these things are real substances, being either the Emission or Outflowings
(commonly called effluvia) of the more subtle and spiritual parts of these
bodies, whence they come forth, and proceed from, or the Rays and Beams of some
Spirits that may be lodged in them. And on this error they build diverse absurd
errors in that called their Divinity, both in relation to the bodies and souls
of men; as first in relation to the body: The virtue that went forth from our
blessed Lord's Person, that healed the woman of her bloody Issue, they hold not
to be any substance, but only an accident or quality. And next in relation to
the souls of men, that divine virtue of grace, light and life that comes from
Christ into the souls of men, the Schoolmen commonly both among Papists and
Protestants (some excepted of Protestants, who are more understanding) hold,
That it is no substance, but an accident or quality, which otherways they call
Habit: and they commonly define the Grace of God in the souls of the Saints to
be no substance, but an infused supernatural habit: and the virtues and fruits
of the Spirit, as Faith, Hope, Love, etc. they call supernatural and infused
habits and qualities, that are in themselves of a perishing Nature; And the
seed of God in the Saints, they do not hold to be any substance, but a quality,
or infused habit. And the great occasion of this their Error, That Grace is no
substance, but an accident (viz. habit or quality, which Aristotle places
among the Predicaments of Accidents) proceeds from this, That whereas they
observe the Scripture distinguishes betwixt Christ and the Grace of Christ, as
also betwixt God and the Grace of God, and betwixt the Holy Ghost and that
Divine influence that comes from him into men's souls; from thence they infer,
That seeing that seed or influence of God's Grace, is not the Godhead, it must
be some accident, habit or quality infused in the soul by God, there being, as
they suppose, no middle being, of a middle Nature betwixt God and the souls of
men* but in this they are greatly mistaken for there is a middle being betwixt
the Godhead and the souls of men, which is that Mediatory Spirit, and Divine
Nature of Christ, as he was the Heavenly Man, Mediator, Head and High Priest
and Husband of his Church from the beginning of the World: the which Mediatory
Spirit of Christ dwells in all fullness in the Person of our blessed Lord, that
was born of the Virgin Mary, who suffered death for our sins, and rose again,
and is ascended into Heaven, and still dwells in him, and of his fullness we
all receive our several measures, as John has declared, John 1. and as Paul
likewise has said, Ephesians. 4. 7. To every one of us is given grace, according to
the measure of the gift of Christ. And tho the various measures of this
Mediatory Spirit of Christ are not dividable, nor separable one from another,
but most inseparably united, yet a real distinction may and ought to be
allowed, as betwixt the Rays and beams of the Sun, that are inseparably united
one with another, and all with the Body of the Sun, yet one Ray is not another,
but have a real distinction, so the particular measure of the Gift of Christ,
called by several Names and Denominations, as Grace, Truth, Light and Life,
etc. that is in one of the Saints is not the same particular and numerical
measure that is in another: And as we are taught not only by express words of
Scripture, but by the Saints experience, that there are greater and lesser,
higher and lower measures of this Divine Mediatory Spirit, Life and Nature, and
Divine Light, this does sufficiently prove, that it is not the Godhead, or
Supreme Infinite Being, called in Hebrew Ensoph; for there is nothing in the
Supreme Being that can be called greater or lesser, higher or lower, seeing
every thing in God is most infinitely and supreamly High and Great; and seeing
also, according to Scripture, the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost; are this
One only most High and Supreme Infinite Being, or Godhead: It must needs be
confessed, That this Divine Spirit in the Saints, that has its measures higher
and lower, is not the Godhead of either the Father* the Son or the Holy Spirit,
but the Mediatory Spirit of the Son, as abovementioned, in which the Father,
the Son, and the Holy Spirit dwells, as in a most glorious Temple, or place
of Habitation, called in Hebrew, Schechina, i. e. Tabernacle. And because the
Godhead of Christ, and the Holy Ghost dwells in the same, whose Godhead is
the same with the Godhead of the Father, most immediately, therefore it is that
it receives and bears frequently the Name of the Son, and also of Holy
Ghost, and is called the Spirit of the Father, and also the Spirit of the Son.
But it is not to be supposed, or thought, that this Middle Being is more
immediately near to us than the Godhead, as with respect to God's Essence or
Being, for that does most intimately, or immediately penetrate all things, and
is most immediately present in all things, but with respect of Manifestation
and Revelation, that infinite Being of the Godhead is such, that no created
understanding, or mind of Men or Angels can see, or behold his glory: therefore
He is said to be such in Scripture, whom no eye has seen or can see, and
dwelling in the Light which none can approach unto; for no man has seen God at
any time; to wit, as He is in Himself, but the only begotten Son of God* who
dwells in his bosom, has declared him, who is the Image of the invisible
God, the brightness of his glory, and the express Image or Character of his
Substance. And seeing both the Scriptures Testimony, and the Saints experience
does prove, that somewhat really divine, by way of influence and emanation,
does come into the Souls and Hearts of the Saints from above, even from the
glorified Man Christ Jesus, that is glorified in Heaven, called in Scripture,
Grace, Life, Light, Spirit, Power, Virtue, and is compared to Rain, Dew, Water,
Wine, Oil, Milk, Honey, and is called Metaphorically by these Names. It is
certain this Divine Being and Substance, that does so descend from Christ in
Heaven, into the souls of men here on earth, must needs be some Middle Nature
betwixt God and us, for the Godhead of Christ, and of the Holy Ghost, which is
one and the same Godhead with the Father, fills all places, and is in all
places, and so cannot ascend, or descend, or move from one place to another;
therefore that divine virtue and influence of Light, Life and Grace, that
descends and flows down from above, out of the fullness that dwells in
the glorified Man Christ Jesus, is not the Godhead, but some Middle Being,
called by some Vehiculum Dei, i. e. the Vehicle, or Chariot of God; that is a
real substance, and no accident or bare quality, seeing, according to the best
and truest Rules of Philosophy, Accidens non migrat de subjecto in subjectum,
Accidents do not move from one subject to another. And if Grace were a
spiritual Accident or Quality, it could not be taken from one and given to
another, as the slothful Servant's Talent was taken from him, and given to him
that had ten Talents.

VII. There is another great error held by many called Professors of
Philosophy, both among Papists and Protestants, viz. That the Souls of pious
and holy men, have no higher Faculties or Powers but such as are Rational, or
discursive, whereby the Reason, or rational Faculty of man's Soul draws
conclusions from certain Premises, the which Premises are either the
conclusions of other Premises, hanging together like the Links of a Chain, or
some Maxims or first Principles of the Humane Understanding. But many such
Maxims called first Principles, are false and unsound Notions, from which must
needs proceed false and unsound Conclusions, and with such that called Natural
Philosophy does abound. But some of the Ancient Philosophers, as the
Platonists, and particularly Plotinus, did hold, That there was in the soul of
man a power or faculty above that which is discursive, whereby being assisted
by the Divine Light, it could erect or elevate it self into God, and be joined
to him, he appearing to the Soul, having neither Form, nor any Idea or
similitude, as Porphirius relates of Plotinus, that so it happened frequently
to him, and once so to Porphirius himself: the which high attainment and
experience they declared came to be witnessed by the Souls passing through
certain degrees of purification, illumination, and abstraction from all worldly
things, and fleshly desires and affections, yea and by the Souls being raised
above all its natural powers and faculties of Imagination or Ratiocination, and
the actings thereof, to contemplate God alone, and be joined to him by this one
higher power of the Soul, which Plotinus, the Platonic Philosopher, does so
distinguish from Reason, that he calls it, (...), i. e. greater than Reason,
and before Reason, Ennead. 6. lib 9. cap. 10. The which divine enjoyment he
calls a silent touch of the Soul whereby it touches God, cap 9. and whereby
the Soul retiring it self from all multiplicity (as if a large circle did
contract its Rays and Circumference to a small Point or center) into unity,
becomes one, and joyneth Center to Center, viz. the Soul's Center to God, its
Center, and this he calls, the fleet, or flight, of the one to the one, cap.
11. By which it appears how much more dark and ignorant the late Schoolmen
and Professors of Philosophy are, than these ancient Plaronick Philosophers
were, who professed such a divine attainment, fruition and enjoyment of God,
not only without all Words, and external Objects, but even without all internal
Form, Idea or Image of any worldly thing: which so high attainment of divine
knowledge must needs be granted by all intelligent men to have proceeded from
some real degree of internal divine revelation and inspiration, a thing so much
generally now opposed, and by none more than by them that are reputed great
Scholars and Philosophers. But whether these above mentioned Platonic
Philosophers (who did soar more aloft in an High Profession of divine knowledge
than all other Sects of them called Philosophers, did really experience and
enjoy what they did profess, I think it not propor in this place much to
dispute; I shall only at present freely declare my Judgment, That I think it is
very probable, that at times, when it was best with them, they might have had
some divine touch, taste and relish of a real divine enjoyment. But it was not
permanent, nor abiding with them; for had it been so, it would no doubt have
brought them further than they arrived, and would have cleared and freed their
Minds of those gross errors that generally they were clouded and entangled
with, even the best of them; for the best of them held some gross errors, and
had very dark and Obscure Notions and Conceptions about God and Divine Things,
and spoke not very certainly and clearly of the Felicity of souls of Good Men
after Death, although they did generally profess to believe the souls immortality,
and future rewards and punishments* but not one of them believed the
Resurrection of the Body, as the Scriptures hold it forth; for they generally
believed the body was the soul's prison or grave, and so it would be no
Felicity to the soul to be reunited to it, not understanding how the body at
the Resurrection is so refined and dignified, yea, glorified, that it shall be
no Prison nor Grave to the Soul, but a most beautiful Palace and Throne, such
as it was to Adam's Soul, before he sinned, and which at the Resurrection shall
be enriched with greater Beauty and Glory than it then had. Also both Plotinus
and Porphirius were great Enemies to the Christians, and wrote against them
which plainly enough shows they were but dark men, and had at best at that time
but little acquaintance with the divine illumination in their experience,
notwithstanding their high profession of it, as it is with too many at this
day, who profess the divine Light, and talk much more of it than they walk in
it: for if either Plotinus or Porphirius had been faithful to that divine
illumination given to them in common with all mankind, it would have led them
to befriend, and not to oppose the Christians in that time, when Christianity
did flourish a great deal more in the Purity and true life and power of it,
than it did in after-ages.

And thus I have in 20 diverse instances, discovered the great hurt of the
Worldly Philosophy, its being a great hinderance to the Christian Faith, and a
great enemy to the Divine Wisdom and true divine Philosophy: by which Worldly
Philosophy I understand not only that taught by these called ancient
Philosophers, but even that lately and at present taught by many called
Christians, that contains more hurtful errors than any thing which may happen
to be taught by them of truth, do profit. So that to pass a free and impartial
Judgment upon all that called commonly Philosophy, both ancient and modern, of
all the sorts and sects of them called Philosophers, it consists of a great
mixture of error and falsehood, containing many dangerous and hurtful Opinions,
but mingled with some true Notions of things, that lie so obscure and veiled
under the clouds of their many great and dangerous errors, that until it be
better resined, reformed and purged from the great dross, filth and poison of
these many hurtful errors wherewithal it does abound, it seems to me as well
as to many more, that are impartial Judges in the case, that the study of it in
this state of so great mixture, is rather hurtful than really profitable: And
to spend time in turning over the many Volumes of that called Philosophy, to
find the pure Truth, either of Things Natural or Divine, is not only to lose
time, but to expose the mind to the great danger of being leavened and
corrupted with gross and hurtful errors tending to overthrow the Christian
Faith and to beget in the mind of him that is studious in it, a deep prejudice
and enmity against the True Divine Philosophy, and the Truth as it is in Jesus.
But the pious endeavor of some late Writers is greatly to be commended, who
have attempted to correct and reform the vulgar errors in that called
Philosophy, as the Author of the book called Enchiridion Physicae restitutae,
and the lately deceased, and worthily esteemed Esquire Boil, and others.

And here, before I come to a conclusion of my intended matter, I think to
answer 2 weighty questions, and that very briefly.

The first is, What is the chief cause or reason, that men generally professing
to seek after the True Philosophy, Wisdom or Knowledge of Things both Divine
and Natural, have so greatly missed it, and instead of the pure Truth, have
embraced Error, for the greatest part.

Ans. The chief cause or reason is, their too much relying upon their Humane
Understanding, and the bare exercise of Human Reason, which they generally made
the Rule and measuring Line to find out all Truth or True Knowledge in natural
things, even as Christians, so called, too generally do the same at this day;
and I wish they did not so do in the search of Divine Truth also, and in the
enquiry after the Knowledge of Divine Things. Hence it is that some derive the
Etymology of the word men's in Latin, that signifies the Mind in English, from
the Latin word metiri, to measure, as if the bare mind or humane understanding
of man, were the measure of all truth, at least in the knowledge of natural
things. And because they did either wholly, or for most part rely upon their
humane understanding, and bare exercise of humane Reason, thence it came to
pass, that the divine gift of God, even that divine principle of Light
wherewithal Christ the eternal word had enlightened them, was neglected, and
like the unfaithful and slothful servant, this divine Talent wherewithal they
ought to have occupied and traded, they buried in the earth; and thus
professing themselves wise, they became Fools: And tho what was to be known of
God, had been in some measure made manifest in them, God having showed it unto
them by the divine illumination of the eternal word; yet, as Paul declares,
when they knew God, they glorified him not as God; nor were they thankful: And
because they did not like to retain God in their knowledge, but held the Truth
in unrighteousness, therefore their foolish hearts were darkened and they were
given up to vile affections; and this was the more general state of them called
Heathen, or Gentile Philosophers; yet I will not judge so hardly or uncharitably
of them universally, because the more sober and humble minded Gentiles, did not
profess so much, but practiced more and better, and might be, and I believe
were in a better state and condition toward God: And tho I shall be far from
concluding, that they are perished, yet whoever of them are saved with eternal
salvation, it is not by any works of Righteousness which they had done, in
their mere Gentile state, or by any Obedience to any Law or Light whatsoever,
without Faith in Christ Jesus; but by Faith in Christ Jesus, all who ever have
been or shall be saved from the beginning of the world to the end of it, have
and shall obtain eternal Life and Salvation, as Paul has largely declared and
proved in his Epistles to the Romans and Galatians; and in his Epistle to the
Ephesians, he tells them, That by grace they were saved, through faith, and
not by any works they had performed before faith was given them, and wrought in
them. But how the true Faith of Christ was wrought in them, in those days, when
it was not outwardly preached to them by the Ministry of Men, nor by the holy
Scriptures, is best to leave among the secrets of God, till he be pleased
further to reveal it, seeing it is confessed generally on all hands, that the
Spirit of God was sufficient to work the true Faith in them, without an Outward
Ministry; who works when, where and how he pleases, who can and does (no
doubt) preach to them born deaf and dumb, whose ways are above our ways, and
his thoughts above ours, as the Heavens are above the Earth.

The 2d question is this, What is the true Divine Philosophy, how distinguished
from the Worldly Philosophy, which the Apostle Paul bid the believing
Colossians beware of, saying, Beware lest any spoil you through Philosophy and
vain Deceit, Col. 2.

Ans. The true Divine Philosophy is a measure of the Divine Wisdom and
Knowledge, whether of things Divine or Natural: which the Mind of Man receives
by Divine Illumination, Revelation and Inspiration, that comes from the Spirit
of Christ Jesus, the which Spirit of Christ Jesus, as it is a sanctifying
Spirit, sealing to Men their Adoption; and is therefore called the Spirit of
Adoption, all true and sincere believers receive from the Man Christ Jesus,
through true Faith in him, and from God the Father through Christ; and this was
that Spirit in the Prophets and Apostles, that taught them their knowledge of
God, and of things both Divine and Natural, and which not only revealed to
them, and in them the glorious Attributes and Perfections of the Great Creator,
and the great mysteries of his Divine Wisdom, Counsel and Will, but also showed
and taught them many things of the Creation, and opened unto them the book of
the Creatures, as is largely to be seen by such as are spiritually minded, in
the holy Scriptures, how excellently the Prophets, as Moses, David, Isaiah, and
many others were taught in the knowledge of the Creation, as well as of the
Creator, by his Divine Spirit and Light in them. And this Divine Philosophy and
Wisdom is distinguished from the worldly Philosophy, which Paul bid the
Colossians beware of, chiefly and principally in this, that the Divine
Philosophy is after Christ; that is to say, the Spirit of Christ does teach it
to all the sincere Lovers and Professors thereof. But the worldly Philosophy
(excepting some Fragments of Truth that some of these called Heathen
Philosophers had, from the common Divine Illumination which was in them, and in
all men, but which they little heeded or regarded) did proceed from the spirit
of the world, which is a spirit of error, and leads its followers into all
error, as the spirit of Truth leads into all Truth; and therefore the worldly
Philosophy or Wisdom, is called in Scripture, the fleshly Wisdom that is enmity
to God. And as Paul called the Doctrines of some false Teachers, that professed
Christianity in his Day, the Doctrines of Devils; so well may the false
Doctrines of them called Heathen Philosophers, be called the Doctrines of
Devils, being so directly opposite to the true Christian Doctrine and Faith
taught by Christ and the holy Prophets, Evangelists and Apostles, recorded in
the holy Scriptures; for indeed most, or rather all the Heresies, and gross
Errors of the false Teachers, pretending to Christianity, since the days of the
Apostles, had their Rise and Original from the Errors of the Heathen
Philosophers that went before them, as the Heresies of the Arians, Nestorians,
Eutychians, Sabellians, Macedonians, Pelagians, the Manichees and Gnostics,
and many others, as might be at large demonstrated, if it were necessary. And
as the Divine Philosophy or Wisdom, differs from the worldly Philosophy, in
their Rise and Original, as is above said, so in their greatly differing
effects; The Divine Wisdom and Philosophy teaches the pure Truth, without any
mixture of Error or Falsehood; the Worldly Philosophy or Wisdom, teaches
nothing but Error, Untruth and Falsehood; for what things were or are true that
are found in the Sayings or Writings of the Heathen Philosophers, do not
properly belong to the worldly Philosophy, but to that little Seed of Truth and
Light which did at times shine in them, but very obscurely or glimmeringly,
because of the great Darkness that did for most part prevail in them, the which
Truth they did generally hold in unrighteousness, as Paul has declared. Again,
the Divine Philosophy or Wisdom makes her Lovers pure, peaceable, meek and
humble, and full of good fruits; but the worldly Philosophy being of an
Opposite Nature, has the contrary effects, makes her followers impure,
wrathful, contentious and proud; and notwithstanding that many of the Heathen
Philosophers pretended to great humility and purity, and other Virtues; and I
cannot be so uncharitable, as to conclude universally; That none of them had
not some real Virtues, yet for most part, as the History of their Lives do
sufficiently prove, they had more a show of these Virtues than any real
possession of them, for such as their Wisdom was, such were their Virtues; but
their Wisdom, as Paul has defined it, was a show, or talk of Wisdom, (...),
Col. 2 23. and so were their Virtues for most part. And in their feigned
humility they would not call themselves (...), i. e. wise men, as some of their
Ancestors were called, but (...), i. e. Lovers of Wisdom; Pythagoras being the
first that so called himself, (...), a Philosopher, i. e. a Lover of Wisdom.
But the Apostle Paul being taught by the Divine Wisdom, tells us what their
Wisdom, and Profession of it, amounted unto, professing themselves to be wise,
they became fools, Romans 1. 22. and therefore in order to men's attaining the
true Wisdom, he taught, That men must first become fools; That is, to deny the
Wisdom of this World; even as Christ taught, That for Judgment he came into
this World, that they that see might be made blind, and they that are blind
might see.

And now for a Conclusion, I give this Warning and Caution, That as the Errors
of them called Philosophers, whether Ancient or Late, led men to oppugn the
True Faith of Christ; so have the ignorant, vain, false and foolish Reasonings
of some men, which they borrow from none of them called Philosophers; but
supposing Themselves to be able enough to find out Reasons to prove or disprove
things they either like or dislike, without any true Cause or Ground: They are
often bold to bring forth their crooked and perverse Reasonings, and make use of
them against the holy Doctrines and Principles of the Christian Faith and
Religion: And none I find more ready, by corrupt and false Reasons, to contend
against the Truth than such who in words cry out against Reason, like whorish
women that cry out against chaste women, and most unjustly charge them with the
Vice whereof they themselves are most guilty; Therefore let all be warned from
giving way to false and corrupt Reason, or from making use of it to fight
against any Doctrine or Principle of the Christian Faith, or from meddling to
interpret any part of holy Scripture by their bare carnal human Reason, as too
many presume to do, who instead of truly interpreting it, do pervert it, to
their own Destruction: But let their Human Reason be subjested unto the
Obedience of Faith, and let the spiritual Weapons be made use of, which are
mighty to pull down strong Holds, casting down Imaginations; the Greek has it,
(...), i. e. Reasonings; and every High Thing that exalts itself against the
knowledge of God, and brings into Captivity every Thought, to the Obedience of
Christ, 2 Cor. 10. 45.

THE END.

