CHRISTIANITY, A DOCTRINE OF THE CROSS: OR, Passive Obedience, UNDER ANY
Pretended Invasion of LEGAL RIGHTS and LIBERTIES.

LONDON: Printed for Jos. Hindmarsh, and Rob. Kettlewell, and are to be sold at
the Golden Ball in Cornhill. 1691.

TO THE READER.
IT is a sad Reflection to a true Christian Spirit, to see some of the noblest
Virtues of our Holy Religion, and Points of Good Practice, not only neglected
in the Lives, but endeavored to be driven out of the Reverence and Esteem of
Christians. Among these, I think none of late have bore more of the rude
Batteries of Noise and Violence, or fallen deeper under the Wanton Sport or
Malicious Strokes of Profane Wits, than the Doctrine of Passive Obedience.

I take it to be an unquestionable Gospel Truth, and Primitive Doctrine. And to
carry in it the most lively exercise and expression, of the two grand Virtues,
of Faith, and Patience. It is Faith, that under persecuting or oppressive
Governors, rather than save our selves by sinning against God or them, dare run
Ventures, and trust or rely on him, either to prevent those Persecutions and
outward Losses, that are ready to meet us in this stedfastness to our Duty, or
to support us under them, and abundantly Compensate and Reward us for them. And
it is Patience, that bears all the pressing Conflicts without Fainting, till
the Grace of God has brought us through them. And these two Virtues, raise us
so much above our selves, and this World; or above Human Weaknesses,
Affections, and Interests: that God has always dignified, them with especial
Marks, and Prerogatives of his Favor and Acceptance. And on the same account,
good Men have ever held them, as the brightest Glory of the Saints, and what
they were most ambitiously to aim at. As on the other Hand, for the same
Reason, they have ever been the greatest Terror and Stumbling Block, to Worldly
and Carnal Minds.

My design in the ensuing Papers, is to do what seasonable Service I am able,
to this great and noble instance, of Oppressed Truth and Righteousness. And
because, after all that has been so often, and so well said of late upon this
Subject by others, particularly in the Elaborate and much Celebrated
Discourses, of Jovian, and the Case of Resistance of the Supreme Powers Stated,
etc. The Adversaries of this Truth still insist with great Confidence and
Triumph, upon the Plea of Legal Rights for Authorizing Resistance; I have
singled out this Plea, and Discussed it in the ensuing Treatise. My aim is, not
so much to engage in particular and personal Disputes, as to speak to the
Argument; and to say so much, as among Minds willing to see it, may be
sufficient to Prove and Establish a Doctrine so necessary, as that whereof I
write, and to obviate the most Colorable Pretenses brought against it. Passive
Obedience, is a great, and Practical Truth: and I seek herein, by setting it
off with as much Strength and Clearness, and withal as briefly as I can, to
build up honestly disposed Readers in the Belief and Practice thereof,
notwithstanding any things, which, either in pretended Favor to Religion, or on
any fancied Authority from Civil Right, they shall find urged in opposition to
it.

I must advertise thee further, that this Treatise was sent away in Company of
another, Entitled, Of Christian Prudence, etc. And being both then prepared,
and designed for the Press, there is a Reference to it in Page 160. of that
Book. Which, not being observed by those, who had the care thereof, (the Author
himself being at a great distance from the Press,) that Book was Published
first, and this was left to follow it. And now it is come abroad, I beseech
Almighty God of his Infinite Mercy to vouchsafe it his Acceptance, and to
accompany it with his Grace, that it may not fail to do an Holy Religion some
Honor, a Noble, but decried and exploded Duty, some Credit, and thy Self and
his Church some Service.

THE CONTENTS.
CHAP. I.
NO Arming against Sovereign Powers, in Love for Religion.

Religion, an internal thing. So 1. Others Force, can never make us lose
Religion. But only the external things about Religion. Nor binder the force of
our Ministry. 2. When Religion suffers force from Persecuting Sovereigns, to
rise in Arms, is not a way for us to defend and Preserve Religion.

CHAP. II.
That the Subjects of the Empire had Legal Rights.

The Invasions upon Laws, in the days of Christ and his Apostles. Yet they
Preached up Submission and Non-Resistance. The Emperors were to Govern by Laws.
In what sense said to be loose from the Laws. The Romans had both their Laws
and Customs, and several Freedoms.

CHAP. III.
Of Invasion, etc. under the Persecuting Emperors.

The Persecuting Emperors invaded these Legal Rights. An account thereof in
several Particulars.

CHAP. IV.
The Christians Passive Obedience, under these Invaders of Legal Rights.

Many Emperors in Fact, and opportunities for Resistance. The Christians still
true to the Rightful Emperors, not resisting under invasions of Legal Rights.
The general Pleas for Resistance never more strong, than under those Emperors,
shown in Particulars.

CHAP. V.
Of Passive Obedience under Invasions of Legal Rights among the Jews.

Of Persecutions of Religion against Law, and of the illegality of Idolatry,
among the Jews. Of breach of Property against Law by their Kings. Under all
which no Liberty of Resistance. No evading these Scriptures, by saying their
Kings were personally nominated by God. Nor the Scriptures of the New
Testament, by the Answers given to them.

CHAP. VI.
Of the unlawfulness of Resistance on such Invasions of Rights, by our own Laws.

No pretense left for Resistance, by our Laws. Nor from the Subjects Share in
Legislation. No appealing in this Point from the Letter of our Laws, to the
equity thereof. Or to the Nature of our Constitution, and to the end of our
Frame.

CHAP. VII.
Of Passive Obedience under Invaders of Natural Rights, etc.

Natural Rights as Defensible by Arms, as Civil Rights are. Subjects must
defend both, by ways consistent with Subjection. No great difference, as to
Point of Resistance, when Religion is Persecuted, whether it stand on its own
Right, or on Civil Right. Nor betwixt our Case and that of the Primitive
Saints, on the Distinction of Absolute and Limited Governors.

CHAP. VIII.
No Resistance, on pretense that Acts against Law are inautoritative.

Non-Resistance due to a King, whilst the Regal Authority is not forfeited, but
resides in his Person. This it does for all his unautoritative and illegal
Actings, which is shown in several instances. No making War upon him for the
same, because they do not disauthorize his Person, or unking him. An Answer on
these Grounds, to several Questions about the Authority of Kings acting against
Laws.

CHAP. IX.
The Reasons of Non Resistance, etc.

On what Grounds, the Primitive Saints paid this Non-Resistance. Non-Resistance
on Invasion of Laws, does not make Arbitrary Government.

ERRATA.
PAge 2. Line 11. Read of our Holy. p. 4. l. 21. r. of this World. p. 11. l.
33. r. that it is but fit. p. 14. l. 17. r. this external Force. p. 23. l. 6.
in the Margin, r. cited. p. 3. p. 29. l. 15. in the Margin, r. Apol. p. 6. etc.
13. p. 38. l. 18. in the Margin, r. etc. l. 4. p. 39. l. 8. r. Romans. p. 43.
l. 29. r. to bear. p. 46. l. 16. r. which no Judge. and l. 25 in the Margin, r.
convenit eum. p. 51. l. 21. in the Margin, r. Vindemiam. p. 52. l. 11. r.
Persecutors. p. 65. l. 1: r. manner p. 66. l. 24. r. third. p. 67. l. 29. r.
Houses. p. 68. l. 17. r. not on. p. 71. l. 7. r. Salvo p. 79. l. 1. r. Sue for
it in.

CHRISTIANITY A DOCTRINE OF THE CROSS.
PAssive Obedience to Sovereign Powers, is keeping under their Obedience, when
we suffer wrongfully at their hands. If they command things against the Law of
God, or of the Land, we ought not; or if against the inviolable Liberties,
which Laws have secured against the Prerogative in their respective Kingdoms,
we need not ordinarily be Active, in doing what we are bidden. In other things,
a just and lawful Authority must have Active Obedience. But when they come to
punish against Laws, or for such things as with a safe Conscience their
Subjects could not act in; they are still to continue under their Obedience,
and in a state of Subjection. And this is by being Passive, or not rising up to
Resist, and Levy War against them. They may seek to guard off the unjust
Suffering, by Petitioning, by claiming the help of Law from Courts of Justice,
whilst there are any Provisions for help yet untryed therein, or by any other
fitting ways consistent with Subjection. But not by running to Arms when all
other ways fail, and by lifting Soldiers, (for no Man will stand in Arms by
himself against him,) to defend their own Rights against their lawful
Sovereign. Whilst a Prince is our lawful Sovereign, Obedience must be Due to
him; and whilst we are under his Obedience, we must be Passive, and have no
liberty in this sort to resist him.

This Doctrine of Passive Obedience, and Non-Resistance, seems both most
plainly prescribed by the Precepts, and most suitable to the Spirit and Genius
of Holy Religion.

The Fifth Commandment, under the name of Honor, injoyns both Reverence and
Support of Princes, as our Politic Fathers. But when Subjects make War upon
them, instead of paying Fear and Reverence, they are plainly in a state of
bidding Defiance: and when the Sword is unsheathed against them, that is
evidently not for their Support, but for the beating and pulling of them Down.

Put them in mind, says Tit. iii.1.
S. Paul, to obey Magistrates. But there is most visibly an end of Obedience,
when things are come to this pass; and Men under command cannot possibly do any
thing more contrary to showing Obedience, than to rise and fall upon their
Commanders.

Submit, 1 Pet. ii.13.
says S. Peter, to every ordinance of man. Yea, Let every soul be subject, Romans
xiii.1.
says S. Paul. But what becomes of submission, when they fall thus to
resisting? For every Man must needs be sensible, he does no longer submit to
another, when he stands up to resist and fight against him.

Christianity, is a Doctrine of the Cross, which is one of its Distinguishing
Marks; nothing, in account thereof, being more necessary, more proper, and
praiseworthy, than for Christians, to Mat. x.38. Luke ix.23. Mat. xvi.24. Luke
xiv.27.
take up, and bear Crosses. Whence came those Crosses, so much as from the
Persecuting Powers? And if the Crosses, which Christians profess to bear, are
such as Persecuting Sovereigns lay on: it is plain they profess not to Resist,
which is out of the way of bearing, but to show Passive Obedience under them.
For there is an end of taking up, and bearing Crosses, when, instead of taking
up and bearing, Men set themselves with all their might to shake them off, or
beat them back again.

These passages, and such like, do sufficiently bear out the Duty of
Non-Resistance, even to the most ordinary Understandings, if they will but
attend to them. Besides, that S. Paul has Romans xiii.2.
told us in express terms, that they who resist the Higher Powers, shall
receive to themselves damnation.

All this was true, say the Advocates of Resistance, at those times, and in
those Cases, for which these Rules were given. But those were, where the wills
of Governors were Laws, or where the Laws brought Crosses: not where the Laws,
as it is with us, are a Cover against them. Religion it self, say they, does
not authorize Resistance; but Civil Right does. And if Religion is by Law made
a Civil Right, we may Resist for it, as we may for other Civil Rights and
Properties. Not being bound by any of these Precepts, to bear Crosses which the
Law keeps off. Nor tied to submission, under invasion of Civil Rights, which
carry with them a power to rise in Defense thereof.

This Plea, is set up as the main strength of Inquiry into the measures of
submission to the Supreme Authority, Art. 9.12. Discourse about the Justice of
the Gentlemen's undertaking at York, Nov. 1688. p. 4, 5, 6, 7. and passim.
Julian the Apostate, c. 9. p. 74.92. And the Answer to Jovian, p. 160. And
several others.
those, that argue against the Doctrine of Passive Obedience. And my design is
particularly to Discuss it, and to inquire whether the Precepts and Obligations
to Passive Obedience, were given and kept, with an exception of these Invasions
of Civil Rights, or with a design to bind under them, and as a Rule to
Christians, whilst they suffered such Invasions.

This way of Warlike Resistance, is a very hazardous course, and thereby Men
extremely expose their own Persons. And that which tempts them thus to hazard
themselves, as the most serious are wont to profess, is their Affection for
Religion. Like as that, which is given out to justify them therein, is its
being made a Civil Right, or Legal Constitution. And I shall endeavor to show
them, that Religion gets no good by it: so they are mistaken in the way of
showing their Affection. And that its being a Civil Right, will not warrant
them therein: so they will miss also of their Justification. The former I shall
not pass over, without saying so much, as I think sufficient to undeceive the
honest and well meaning. But the clearing of the later, is what I principally
design.

CHAP. I. No Arming against Sovereign Powers, in love for Religion.
TO take off the pretense, and temptation to warlike Resistance against the
Sovereign Powers, for the sake of Religion, I shall show in the first place,
that this Rising in Arms, is no wise expression, of Men's care and kindness for
true Religion.

Religion, is an internal thing. It does not hang without us, as the things of
the world; but is inward, in the mind. It is lodged in our hearts, and is to
dwell upon our Spirits. The Kingdom of God is within you, says our Savior,
Luke xvii.2. It consists in a Jo. iii.3. and 2 Cor. ^ 17.
New Nature, and the Renewal of the mind, says S. Paul, Romans xii.2. It lies in
Faith and Obedience, which are Spiritual and internal things. Their Power, and
Excellence, take life from, and are seated in the inner Man: though they are
expressed and made visible, in the outward Conversation.

And depending thus purely upon our own Minds, it may equally subsist under all
the alterations of this World, whether Prosperity or Adversity, Peace or
Persecutions. To believe, and to do Right, which is the whole of Religion, is
alike practicable under all times, and in all Circumstances. And whether we
shall do thus or no, is not in the power of others, but, under God, only of our
own wills. This makes the rewardableness of Faith and Obedience, that they are
to be the Oblation of our own good will, and we are to choose them. It also
shows the Excellence thereof, that, depending on our own will, nothing else,
which can never force our wills, can rob us of them. These virtues, lodged in a
truly good heart, are like a Treasure laid up in Heaven, where no thief can
break through, or steal, Mat. vi.20. No Powers, that can force away from us any
outward things, are able to storm our Hearts, or force what is within us, viz.
a Good Conscience, or that Joy and Peace, which is the consequent thereof. Your
joy, says our Lord to his Disciples, no man takes from you, Jo. xvi.22.

And from this, I shall note two Points fit to be considered in this case.

First, Others force, can never make us lose Religion. For no force can reach
it, not being placed among things, that are liable to be forced away, but
lodged in the Heart. Any outward force upon us, must stop at the outside of us:
or, if it pierce further, it will force away our Lives, before it reach our
Hearts. Nay, when it comes there, it may force our Hearts out of our Bodies;
but it cannot force our Religion out of our Hearts, unless we please. Our
Hearts, where Religion reigns, are only in the hand of God, and of ourselves.

Indeed, Religion, whilst professed in this World, by the blessing of God, has
often much of the encouragements of this World. And these worldly advantages and
encouragements, are subject to the same force as all other worldly things, and
may be taken away by violence. And the losing of what is worldly about
Religion, in the eye of worldly Wisdom is the losing of Religion. It thinks
Religion is gone, when the worldly Recompenses and Inducements about it are:
and that to keep Religion in the Land, it must be sure to keep them here. And
accordingly, when Persecution comes, whose business is to force away these
worldly goods from Religion, it asks, What will become of Religion? But all
this while it considers not, that Religion is a spiritual thing, which can
subsist without these worldly encouragements: that it looks all at another
World, and so can continue the same it was, when bereft of all the good things
of this World: that, tho it may have things without in possession, yet is it
none of them; but lives it self and is lodged within, where no force can come,
but where it can keep whether outward Force will or no. What would these
worldly wise men have said, had they lived in the days of Christ and his
Apostles? For then they would have been called to embrace Religion, and at the
same time to leave this World; and have seen Religion thrive, when it had
nothing worldly about it: and all that Persecution can do at any time, is only
to bring it into this, which was its Primitive State. But Religion is not lost
then, but kept and upheld, and subsists as truly as it did the first day it
appeared, and all the time it was growing up, and making its way over all that
opposed it, in the unconverted World. This, in Christianity must pass for a
certain Maxim, that, Tho ill Arts, to keep off Persecution, may, and in Gods
just Judgment ordinarily do; yet Persecution it self never shall destroy the
Church. Our blessed Lord has given us his own word for this; The gates of Hell,
i.e. all the powers of Darkness, shall not prevail against the Church. Mat.
xvi.18. and Persecution is one of their main and strongest Batteries.

Yea, Persecution does not waste, but improve and increase Religion. It
destroys it, among worldly wise men, who are driven from any thing by worldly
Considerations. So that if any are religious only, or mainly from worldly
motives, they will quit and give it up for worldly losses: and worldly Wisdom,
rating who will keep, or who will forego it, only on worldly prospects; it
concludes Religion, if not quite lost, must needs be mightily brought down,
almost to nothing, by Persecutions.

But it is otherwise, in the eye of Spiritual Prudence. For that knows it, as I
say, to be seated in men's hearts, and free wills; and so to be without the
reach of outward force and devastations. And that its genuine and proper
supports, which it stands on there, are not the good things of this, but the
future hopes and expectations of another World, which no Persecutors can take
from us. So that when they have done their worst, and despoiled us of what is
most valuable in this World; yet all that is still left, which Jesus Christ the
Author thereof has offered to support it. Nay, that, instead of being abated,
is heightened, by what they take from us. Because, the more we suffer for our
Duty here, the more we are to hope, and expect to receive hereafter. The other
world, which is to make men religious, and to support Religion, is not only as
much, but a great deal more for us, when we are under Persecutions, than when
we are under none.

Indeed Persecution, leaving no external visible support, is the truest Trial
of Pretenders to Religion, and discovers, who follow it mainly for the sake of
what is not its own, viz. Present indemnity at least, if not recompense and
encouragement; and who, for the sake of what is, viz. future and unseen
Rewards. They are a Touchstone, to try Hearts and Tempers, that they who are
approved, as S. Paul says in case of Heresies and Schisms, may be made
manifest, 1 Cor. xi.19. Accordingly in the Scriptures, we read of Trials and
Temptations, meaning Persecutions, 1 Cor. x.13. Jam. i.2. and of the fiery
Trial, or Furnace of Affliction, that fines and purges the Gold from the Dross,
1 Pet. iv.12. In primis Deo digna, and, ut ita dixerim, necessaria, ad
Probationem scilicet Servorum ejus, sive reprobationem. Tertull. de fug. in
Perfec. c. 1.
Persecution is not only most worthy of God, but, as I may so say, necessary to
him, for the probation or reprobation of his Servants, says Tertul.

And making this discrimination, it will lessen the number of the external
Professors of Religion. It strikes off all the seed sown in thorny ground,
which can be choked by the cares of this World, Mat. xiii.7.22. And those on
the stony ground too, who have no sufficient Root of Religion, but too much of
this World, and whose Root, lying almost at the Surface, is soon scorched and
parched up when the heat of Persecution comes, ver. 5.6.21. It is the Fan, as
Pala illa quae and nunc Dominicam aream purgat, ecclesiam scilicet, confusum
acervum fidelium eventilans, frumentum Martyrum, and paleas Negatorum. ib.
Tertullian says, that purges the Lords floor, winnowing the Church, which till
then is a confused heap of Professors, and separating the Chaff and light Corn
from the good Wheat, the nominal from the real, the Christians of this World
from those of a better.

But it takes off no Right Christians, who are not Right, so long as any thing
can make them desert their Savior, or any Duty of his Religion, when they are
called by him to own and stick to them. If any man love Father or Mother, or
his own Life more than me, he is not worthy of me. Mat. x.37.39. Luc. xiv.26.
If he take not his Cross and follow me, he is not worthy of me. Mat. x.38. If
he does not bear his Cross and come after me, he cannot be my Disciple. Luke
xiv.27.

As for those who are right true Christians, Persecution perfects them. It
takes them off from fleshly delights, and cures their inordinate love and
complacence in, or hankerings after this World. It makes them sit loose to it,
and have a generous contempt thereof. It heightens their pious Resolutions,
instead of abating them; it does not stop their Carier in duty, but enliven it.
It begets in them a triumphant disdain of the Injuries or Reproaches, that are
thrown upon them for doing a good thing; and a complacence in the Cross,
instead of a displeasure with themselves, when it meets them in a good Cause.
For in these Sufferings, having the support of God's Promises, the comfort of
his Spirit, and the applause of a good Conscience; they are not only patient
under their Lot, but satisfied with it: they do not only bear their Burden, but
glory and rejoice therein. Blessed are ye, when men shall revile you and
persecute you for righteousness sake. Rejoice then and be exceeding glad, says
our Lord, Mat. v.10, 11, 12. Luc. vi.22, 23. Count it not strange, but rejoice,
in as much as ye are partakers of Christ's sufferings, that ye may be also of
his glory. Under such Sufferings, happy are ye, for the spirit of God rests
upon you, says S. Peter, 1 Pet. iv.12, 13, 14. Accordingly, says S. Paul, I
take pleasure in necessities, in persecutions, in distresses for Christ's sake,
2 Cor. xii.10. and the Hebrews took joyfully the spoiling of their goods,
knowing they had in Heaven, a better and more enduring substance. Heb. x.34. A
state of Persecution, is the most advantageous time for a Christian to appear
perfect in; and passive Virtues, are the best Ornament, and most complete
Dress, wherein he can show and recommend himself. He is never so good, so
glorious, and great, as when he is bravely and undauntedly doing his Duty, and
confessing under the Cross of Christ. Nay, put the worst that can come, that
such a religious man be cut off, and dye for his Religion: yet even then must
no man profanely ask, What is become of Religion? For that is then become
which should become of it, viz. to carry the Professors thereof to be
everlastingly happy in Heaven. And by their dying for it, which is more, no
hurt but good will come to Religion among those that survive.

For Persecution, as it perfects, so it spreads and propagates truly religious
men. If Religion thereby loses outside Professors, it gets sincere and
faithful Followers. The Church loses not so much by the Sufferings, as it gets
by the Examples of the holy and blessed Martyrs. For these strangely affect,
and strike upon the Spirits of men. Their Faith, and Patience, and other noble
Virtues, show men the power, and excite their curiosity, and mightily dispose
them to hearken, and inquire into the truth of what they suffer for. So that
Semen est sanguis Christianorum, the blood of the Martyrs was the seed of the
Church, as Apol. ^. ult. and Justin. Mart. ad Diognet. p. 498, 499 and Dial.
cum Tryph. p. 337. and Lact. l. 5. c. 13.
Tertullian says they found by experience in the Sufferings of the ancient
Church. These influenced, not only the weak, but the wisest persons, bringing
in such as Justin, that renowned Philosopher and Martyr, to see and receive the
Truth; the great occasion of his Conversion, as he Apol. 1. p. 50.
himself relates, being that Constancy and religious Bravery the Martyrs showed
in their Sufferings. There is a witness in the blood of Saints, that begets
Faith in Beholders: and therefore among the Three, that bear Witness to Christ
on Earth, S. John reckons the blood for one; the Spirit, the Water, and the
Blood, meaning thereby their Sufferings in his Cause. 1 Jo. v.8. And S. Paul,
noting the signs of an Apostle, who was to persuade and get belief in others,
tells the Corinthians, they were wrought among them in all patience. 2 Cor.
xii.12. Their Sufferings, were one proof of their being Gods Ministers. In all
things, says he, approving our selves as the Ministers of God, in much
patience, in afflictions, necessities, distresses, and Persecutions of every
sort, as well as by the word of truth, and by the gifts of Miracles or the
power of God, 2 Cor. vi.4, 5, 7. The Patterns and the Prayers, the passive
Graces and Sufferings of the primitive Saints and Martyrs, as well as their
Preaching and miraculous powers were a cause that spread Religion so strangely
under the primitive Persecutions: instead of cutting off, it was really a
Widener, and a true prolifick Principle and Seed of the Church.

Thus does God turn this great rule of worldly Wisdom into mere Folly. In this,
he absolutely confounds the wisdom of the Wise, and takes the fleshly Wise, as
the Scripture says, in their own craftiness, and demonstrates how the Wisdom of
this World is Foolishness with God. 1 Cor. iii.19, 20. When Persecutions go to
destroy the Religious, they do not pull down, but propagate and advance
Religion. When they destroy and cut off some, they drive in more, and Religion
gets new ones in their room. It loses none but outside or insincere
Professors, but increases in the number of hearty and upright Followers, who
are the true honor of Religion and ornament of the Church.

From this I observe, how we must not say with worldly wise men, that worldly
ease and immunities are best for Religion. Indeed, outward Peace and
Privileges, are things very valuable and acceptable to its Professors, as their
place of professing it is here in this World, and whilst they bear about them
fleshly Natures. But, as we must thankfully value, and improve it, when we have
it; so must we consider too, that Religion it self, and the Spirit, (tho the
Flesh be of another mind) may be bettered by the want thereof. And therefore,
that is but fit in this case, to leave God to take his own way, and choose for
us. And if at any time he is bringing Persecution on, it is not for us to step
out of his way to keep it off, and excuse our selves by saying, it is better
for Religion. For when was it ever better for the Church, than in the first
Ages, when they run through the most, and forest Persecutions? Is not that best
for the Church, which makes the most and the best good Christians? And when
were they more, or better, in the places where Christianity prevailed, than in
those first and persecuting Ages? Were not those times, a continual, and vast
increase, of fresh Converts? And were not those Converts of much better and
more Christian Lives, under this Discipline of Persecutions, than others use to
be in times of Peace and secular Advantages?

And on the other hand, to abate the advantage of worldly Peace and
Possessions, are not they too liable to carnalize and corrupt the Spirits of
men? Do not the worldly Possessions, which were designed to encourage men in
the way and ministry of Religion, too often steal their hearts away from it? and
then, when a Persecution comes for any necessary Truth or Duties sake, instead
of being a friend and support, are not they an Enemy within the Walls, to
betray and deliver it up? The sad experience of such general and shameful
Defections from religious Truths, to hold their worldly Possessions, made
Faustinus and Marcellinus in their Book of Prayers to the Emperors, to call
them Libell. Precum p. 8.
Perniciosissimas possessiones, most pernicious Possessions; yea Quas utinam
nunquam possedisset ecclesia, ut Apostolico more vivens fidem integram
inviolabiliter possideret. ib. p. 2. Ed. Ox.
to wish, that the Church had never been possessed of them, that living after
the manner of the Apostles, it might still have more inviolably possessed the
integrity of the Faith. I know there are many great and valuable Advantages by
worldly Possessions, for which the Church has great cause to be thankful to
God, and all its Benefactors: but these, in trying times, are advantages only
to wise men, who have raised Affections, and retain a true spirituality of
mind, and contempt of the World, in the midst of all secular enjoyments; being,
on such occasions, the greatest snare and bane to all others. So that the
advantage pleadable from these, is only to those who can let them go for
Religion, and love God and their Duty above them. And when God sends
Persecution, it is both the School wherein to show forth this raised temper of
mind, and wherein to improve and perfect it. It Is not for us therefore to say,
it is better for Religion, but only for Flesh and Blood whilst they profess
Religion, to be out of Persecution. For when God sees fit to send it upon his
Church, as he always does when they cannot shun it without Sin: he designs, and
will undoubtedly effect it, to purge and purify, to perfect and promote, true
and acceptable Religion and Godliness thereby. And all that loses, is only mixed
and mongrel Professors, and our own worldly and carnal selves.

Such, is the real importance of Persecution, to Religion and the Church. It
gets more thereby, than it loses. It is deprived of nominal, mixed Professors;
but augmented with better Christians. Tho it should show fewer Professors; yet
can it at such times produce more, and more perfect Saints, and Heirs of
eternal Happiness. It takes from its faithful Followers, worldly things, not
spiritual; present, not future. So that it destroys, or lessens it, only in the
opinion of worldly minds or fleshly prudence, who look only at what is kept or
lost of this Worlds goods and advantages: but advances, confirms, and
multiplies it in the Opinion of the spiritually minded, and according to the
estimate of true Christian Prudence.

Like to this, of others Force not making us lose Religion, is another
Observation, of others Force not hindering the effect of our Ministry. This is
wont to be one Plea at such times. For as the People are ready to say, they
take Arms against their persecuting Prince, that they may not be deprived of
the benefit of their Ministers: so among the Ministers themselves, are some
tempted to stretch and go greater lengths in compliance therewith, than they
think their duty allows, on pretense of serving God, and keeping in to do good
in their places. If we stick at this, say some, what will become of our
Ministry, and the exercise thereof? and what way can we have, to do God service
in our stations.

Now, If this has any force at all, it seems to be against Gods own ordering,
as if in this disposal of Providence, he had called us from a better way to a
worse, and in debarring and discharging us from our former Stations, (as he
does, when we can no longer hold them without sin,) had summoned us to a less
useful Post to serve him in. But a mind that truly and sincerely seeks to serve
God, and not, under an hypocritical pretense thereof, to serve its worldly
interests, will easily give him leave, when he sees fit, to change the scene of
our service, and to chalk out and call us, as he pleases, to the place where,
and the Station in which he will be served. And besides, the external force,
tho it drive us out of our Stations, will not take us away at such times, from
doing him service. For, besides what we have opportunity then to do for him, we
may serve him more by suffering in a good way, than we ever should be able to
do by keeping our Stations through a bad one. Nay, our sufferings for a good
Cause, may be like to be of more real use and influence, than all our Preaching
up the same Cause might be, without suffering. There is a Witness in the Blood,
as I observed, and a persuasiveness in the sufferings of Martyrs and
Confessors, which affects and convinces more, than any words or Sermons they
could use. Let us then, on such occasions, take care to suffer Christianly, and
leave it to Gods care to supply any want of us in our Stations, and to serve
himself by our sufferings, more than it were possible for us to serve him by
any other ways.

And as others Force, can never make us lose Religion: so neither

Secondly, When Force and Persecution comes upon Religion, especially from our
Governors, in the Eye of Spiritual Wisdom, is our armed Resistance, or
encountering Force by Force, a way to defend and preserve Religion.

If our Force be a way to preserve any thing at such times, it is the worldly
appendages of Religion: viz. our Secular Profits, Civil Liberties, Powers,
Honors, and other Advantages, which the Laws have conferred and settled in
favor of the Truth, and given the Professors thereof a Title to. What it can
have any pretense to, is to guard worldy things, possessed by Religious Men, as
they are Members of this World, as well as Professors of Religion. And if it
come in to guard worldly things, it is on the score of worldly Prudence, and is
made use of by the Religious, not as Religious, but as worldly wise. Tho, as to
Public Force for redress of Public Grievances, however to the aggrieved,
before they have tried, it may seem otherwise, I think it is a most unwise
course: and instead of preserving what part of those worldly things was
endangered, it brings all into much greater danger, and to secure one part,
throws away several. Adding only this for our Recompense, that instead of
losing and suffering a little, against the grain of our angry Passions; it
throws us into the suffering of a great deal more, but in the pleasure and
pursuit of them.

But as to Religion, it is not outward Force, but Faith and Patience, Prayer
and good Practice, which is the way to preserve it. This may seem a Riddle in
the Eye of worldly Wisdom, and pass not for the Prudence, but for the folly of
Religious Men. But this foolishness of God, as the Apostle speaks, is wiser
than men; and this seeming weakness of God, is stronger than any boasted force
of men, 1. Cor. i.25. And when their magnified ways, by Humane Confidences, and
an Arm of Flesh, instead of preserving, betray and undermine the Religion they
fight for, and these worldly-wise are not delivered by, as they promised
themselves, but taken in their own Crastiness: this despised way of Faith, and
Patience, and good Prayers, which builds on God and not upon our selves, and
which he counts wise, though they count foolish, is found not only to preserve,
but to promote it, and to make it glorious and triumphant. Thus it did in
greater Trials and Persecutions, than any God has proved his Church withal in
these later Ages. And it will still have the same effect, to those who dare
trust God with Religion and themselves, and allow his Providence and Promises,
to make up to them, what Humane appearances do to Carnal Politician. In your
Patience, possess ye your souls, or preserve ye them, the word (...) sometimes,
as Mat. x.9. noting not our Possessing, but acquiring. Per tolerantiam salvos
facietis vosmetipsos, as Adv. Marc. l. 4. c. 39.
Tertullian cites this place. That is, by your sufferance or patience, you
shall make your selves safe, says Christ to his Disciples, when that Patience,
seemed not the way to possess and preserve, but to expose them. Luke xxi.19. He
that will save his life shall lose it; and be that will lose his life for my
sake, the same shall save it, said he in those times, when Men's necessities,
would make them listen after all Human Arts and Devices, to save themselves.
Luke ix.24. In returning and rest, shall you be saved, in quietness and
confidence shall be your strength, your strength is to sit still, said God by
Isaiah to the Jews, when, in their distress, they were promising themselves
more relief from the unlawful aid of Egypt, and from tumultuary ways. Is.
xxx.7.15.

This is to be taken off, indeed, from Human strengths, and staid on
Providence. But that makes it only a greater trial of Faith, not a weaker
remedy and method of relief. For when all is done, the last and best security
is Providence. And the surest way to fix that in our favor, is this of Faith
and Patience. Thou will keep him in perfect peace, whose mind is stayed on
thee, because he trusts in thee, Is. xxvi.3. And the Lord knows how to
deliver the Godly out of temptations, who rely on him by keeping in his ways;
and ^o reserve the unjust unto the day of judgment to be punished: i.e. by just
judgment and ill event on their ill ways here, as well as hereafter; as it
happened, not long after this, with the Gnostics, whom in the next words he
describes, those most Carnal Politicians, and ungodly temporizers of that Age,
2 Pet. ii.9.

Certainly, Homil. 34. in Mat. in c.x.16. Be ye wise as Serpents, etc.
says S. Chrysostom, speaking of this Prescription of our Lord, which the
profane Spirits of this Age call a Mountebank Receipt, or of putting on the
Mansuetude of Sheep, and the Simplicity of Doves, when we are sent out in the
midst of Wolves: certainly, says he, as many of us, as show forth the
Mansuetude of Sheep, shall easily overcome our Enemies. Yea, though innumerable
Wolves compass us about on every side, we shall be preserved safe, and get the
better of them. But if, instead of continuing like Sheep among Wolves, we turn
Wolves our selves, and put on wolfish Natures; then are we like to be overcome,
as being left to our selves. For, then the Shepherd withdraws his help from us,
who feeds and watches over the Sheep only, not over the Wolves. When thou
turnest thy self into a Wolf, away he presently goes, and leaves thee, as one
that reliest no longer on his strength, but beginnest to trust to thy own, and
suffer not his Power to be made manifest in thee. For when, being vexed with
injuries, thou suffer all with a mild and equal mind, not standing up to
fight for thy self, but trusting to him to fight for thee: thou attributest to
him the whole triumph of the day. But if, instead of suffering like a Sheep,
thou shall stand up to tear and devour like a Wolf, and go out and fight
against the Enemy: by that thou hidest and darkenest the glory of his Victory.
-- Though this way of Simplicity and Patience, seem to Men the most unmeet to
Cure, or Guard against our Persecutors violence: yet, says he, God that knows
better, what is like be effective with Human Nature, than Men themselves do,
knows that boldness is not wont to be broken and extinguished by boldness, but
by mildness. And of this we see plain experience in the holy Apostles. Who, as
often as the people of the Jews rose against them, and sharpened their Teeth upon
them, imitated the Dove, as our Lord requires, and by answering them with a
becoming mildness and moderation, overcame their Anger, extinguished their
Fury, and retarded their hasty and violent motions. For when they said, have we
not charged you over and over, that you should not teach in this Name? Although
they could have wrought infinite Miracles, yet they neither spoke, nor acted
any thing harsh and provoking, but apologizing for themselves with all
mildness, said, whether it be just to hearken to you, rather than unto God,
judge ye.

Such, as that good Father truly observed, is the prosperous issue of this
course of Faith and Patience. And that when there is nothing promising in Human
appearances, but all rests on Faith in God, or reliance on Providence. When the
Sheep are to arm themselves, with nothing but Simplicity and Mansuetude in the
midst of Wolves, what consolation, Ibid.
says he, can there be for them? Only the power of him that sends them.
Therefore this he sets in the first place, lo! I send you -- He that could
have made them, that, as Lions, they should have struck terror into others;
thought fit rather to order, that they should come as Sheep among terrifying
Wolves: for that makes you more illustrious, and better declares my power and
strength.

This I have here said, to note the wisdom and successfulness of this way, of
trusting God for Relief, by keeping to his way of Faith and Patience, when his
Vicegerents Persecute us: and not stepping out thereof into any forbidden
ways, as warlike force, in trust to an Arm of Flesh, at the suggestion of
worldly Prudence. And though this is not wisdom, to those that look only at
Human Appearances: yet it will be found so, by those that mark events, and the
Ways and Rules of Providence. For God sets himself against this worldly wisdom,
and turns it into foolishness, to take Men off from trusting in an Arm of
Flesh. And speeds and prospers this other method of spiritual Wisdom, by
surprises of Success, and invisible interpositions, and turns and ways never
thought of till brought to pass; to call us all to rely on Providence, whilst,
by confining our selves to his ways, we place our Faith and Trust in himself,
as they who please may find more largely discoursed, in a Treatise of Christian
Prudence, Chapter 8.

Thus, is Religion to be preserved, by Faith, and Patience, and Spiritual
Methods; and not by Force: it cannot be taken by Force, and so needs not be
kept by it.

Nay, instead of being preserved by Force, it is impaired thereby, when it is
used in its behalf. They are much deceived, that fancy War will do good to
Religion. Instead of that, the force and fighting of Religious Men, are the
greatest violence to Religion. Tho it gets by the Force it suffers, it lofes
mightily by the Force it uses. When Force gets within it, and mixes with it,
whilst it seeks to preserve the Shell, it consumes the Kernel, and pretending
to Guard the Body, it eats out the very Heart of it.

For Religion it self, lies mightily in Love and Beneficence: He that loves
another, has fulfilled the law, Romans xiii.10. A new commandment I give unto
you, that ye love one another, Joh. xiii.34. And by this shall all men know
that ye are my Disciples, if ye have love one to another, verse. 35. But,
instead of Love and Benificence; Wars and Fightings lie all in angry passions,
and doing mischief. It, is shown in forgiving; that, in avenging Injuries. It,
in doing good for ill; that, in doing all the ill men can. It, in mourning,
with those that mourn; and rejoicing, with those that rejoice: that, in
mourning for the Mirth, and rejoicing over the Cries and Grief of others. It,
in loving our Neighbor, as our selves; yea, our Enemies that hate us, tho
without a cause; or, our Persecutors, that hate us for the best things: but
that, in hating and persecuting all as Enemies, having no regard to good or
ill, Relations or Strangers, Friends or Foes. That, is tender of all the Things
and Rights, both of God and Men: this of neither, sparing neither things sacred
nor profane, and counting all it can take its own, and Spoil and Rapine, Waste
and Devastation, no wrong. That, is for saving of Lives, in regard to community
of Natures, and reverence to Gods Image: this, for destroying them. By these,
and many more that might be added, it appears how Religion is calculated for a
state of Peace: so that whenever War bursts out, and is put in practice, the
greater part of its Duties are under suspension, and suffer Violence. I do not
say it forbids all Wars: in compliance with the state and necessities of this
World, on just and great Causes, it connives and gives way to them. But this it
does by no means, as a way to promote it self, or advance the observance of its
Rules, which are in so great measure no Rules at all, whilst War reigns. And
therefore what it does in this case, is only to tolerate it: it allows, but it
does not encourage, or persuade to it.

Besides, as the Liberties of War run counter to so great a body of its Rules;
so, in time of War, there is also the usual restraint taken off, and impunity
added to all Wickedness. They are, too often, then most in power, who are
better Soldiers, than Christians; and have the least sense of Religion and
Conscience. Then a shole of irreligious Tempers, as Pride, Insolence, Hatred,
Uncompassionateness, Anger, Revenge, Covetousness, Ambition, Neglect of the
things of God and Religion, or open profanation of them: in a word, all vicious
and corrupt Passions are superinduced upon the minds of men, which are a
revival of the old man, and most opposite to the very life and design of true
Religion. So that Religion it self, is not like to have any good, more than the
civil State is, by Wars. Its Professors, will in the end be worse by it, in
their Religion, as well as in their Fortunes. They will come out, more opposite
to God, and the Temper of Saints, and so be worse Christians.

Yea, not only as to its moral Practice; but even as to Orthodoxy of
Profession, and Purity of Worship, Religion, instead of being reformed and
amended, by the just Judgment of God, and the natural course of humane
Passions, is too often made a great deal worse, by warring against our Governors.
A spiritual defection many times accompanies a civil one; as the Israelites,
with Jeroboam, fell off from God to the Calves, when they had revolted from the
house of Solomon. And in our late long civil Wars, when they rebelled for
Religion, by Rebellion against the King, was a strange defection introduced
from Christianity; Vid. Edwards Gangraena part 1. Ep. Dedicat.
some throwing out the Articles of Faith; some, all the ten Commandments; some,
the holy Scriptures; some, the calling, and office of Ministers; some, their
Tithes and Maintenance; some, the Lords Supper; others, Baptism, and all
Ordinances. In a word, among one or other of the Sects, Religion, instead of
thriving and increasing, most lamentably suffering in its most important
Articles, in the very essential and constituent marks, and the visible face and
external appearance of Christ's holy Church.

Such, in reality, is the difference between our suffering others Force in
Persecutions, and our using Force our selves, by listing Armies for Religion
against our persecuting Rulers. We may practice all the parts of Religion,
whilst they are forcing us; several, that have no place in external peace and
quietness; and all, with more perfection and honor than at other times: so that
in suffering the force of Persecutors, Religion it self gets, whatever else
loses; and its Rules, have more true and tried, more perfect and triumphant
Observance, than they could have otherwise. But when we come to use force our
selves, to defend Religion against our persecuting Governors; in this time of
force, we lay aside the greater part of its Rules, and give a loose to all
degenerate and vicious Tempers, utterly opposite to its habits: so that,
whatever else gets, it loses.

And therefore in spiritual Wisdom, which wisely seeks the growth of religious
tempers on the minds of men, and the advancement of Faith and good Practice;
Religion is not to be defended, or preserved, by our taking Arms against its
and our Persecutors. It would live and thrive, be preserved and prosper'd, by
our suffering: but, when to preserve those mundane Privileges which are tacked
to it, we go to War, it is sure to be worsted by our fighting. Jesus Christ,
who prescribed it, is styled, not the Lord of Hosts, or God of Battles, but the
Prince of Peace: and the Gospel, which contains it, is the Gospel of Peace. So,
it is our keeping Quiet, not running to Arms, that best suits it, and must do it
good.

Of the Unlawfulness of taking Arms against the Supreme Power, in defense of
the Laws, and Legal Rights, and Liberties.

CHAP. II. That the Subjects of the Empire had legal Rights.
HAving said thus much, to show men how far their arming against their lawful
Sovereigns is from doing any good to Religion: I now proceed in the next place
to show, that Religion's being backed by Law, and made a civil Right, will by
no means justify them in so doing.

Their Plea is, That the Scripture Precepts, of Obedience, and Submission, and
not-resisting higher Powers, but bearing crosses under them; were not designed
for Sufferers in all cases, but only for Sufferers according to Laws. They
forbid all liberty of resisting, not absolutely, say See the Authors cited p. 2.
they, to every man: but to him only, that has the Laws against him; or, who
suffers under a Prince, whose Will is his Law, and without any Law to cover
him. But, where men suffer in their civil Rights; or, where Religion suffers,
that stands by Law, and is taken into the Subjects civil Properties; especially
where they suffer an invasion of most important Rights, or a breach upon the
Constitution it self: those Precepts, they say, forbid not Resistance in such
cases, nor were they given, or intended for any such Sufferers. And tho the
nature of Religion will not, yet the nature of civil Right, they think will
authorize men, notwithstanding those Gospel Injunctions, to arm in defense
thereof.

I take this to be a great, and most lamentable perversion of those Gospel
Precepts, which were given to men that had legal Rights, and suffered the most
illegal invasions of them. And to clear this point, I shall endeavor to show,
how under the most heinous and notorious Invasions, that oppressive Sovereigns
have made upon Laws and Rights; God has still called Subjects to this
Non-Resistance. And how such Invasions gave no exemptions therefrom, either to
the Christians, under the persecuting Emperors; nor to the Jews, under their
Kings; nor is allowed to exempt us, by our own Laws. Nay, if this plea, of
defensibleness of legal Rights, can exempt us: I think it will be found, that a
like defensibleness of natural Rights, would as well exempt all other Subjects,
and so leave no such duty in the World, as Passive Obedience. There being as
good Authority, to defend our natural Rights this way, against persecuting
Laws; as there is to defend any legal Rights, against illegal Persecutors.

First, I shall show this of the Christians, under the Roman Emperors. And this
I shall endeavor to do, with the more exactness; the Gospel Precepts, of
Submission and Non-Resistance, being, by our Lord and his Apostles, most
indispensably enjoined, and afterward, during all the ten Persecutions, most
carefully and strictly practiced, under their Invasions.

First, to clear this point I observe, that there was a great, and most
notorious Invasion of Rights and Liberties, when yet the Authority was owned,
and Non-resistance and Allegiance enjoined, by Christ and his Apostles.

The Imperial Power became a legal Constitution, and was settled by Law upon
Augustus, by the Senate and People themselves. His Country gave up the Care and
Authority of the whole Empire to him, that for his Life he should have the
power both of Peace and War, says Geog. l. 17. sub fin.
Strabo. This was, when in a set speech in free and open Senate, he offered to
restore and give up all the Power into their hands, both Arms, Laws, and
Provinces, as Lib. 53.
Dio reports. They had passed through a long series of civil Miseries and
Distractions, through the Factions and bloody Wars of the great men, that
appeared now plainly unavoidable under the popular form. And being made
sensible thereby, of the great inconveniency of their former popular State, and
of the Sweetness of that Ease and Quietness, which all experienced under his
Government: they all prayed him with many words, laying before him many
Arguments, as the same ib. l. 53.
Dio relates, that he would take the Empire, which he offered to restore back
to them, upon himself alone. And thus, adds he, was all the power of Senate and
People transferred upon Augustus, and confirmed to him by themselves. The
Emperors, as he farther notes to this purpose, received all the Power of the
whole Commonwealth, by means of those Names, of Consul, Proconsul, Imperator,
of the Pontifical, and Tribunitial Powers, etc. which were used in the popular
State, and which they now assume according to the Laws. -- taking the Names,
together with the Powers of the former Magistrates, upon themselves, that they
may not seem to hold them by Force, but by the Laws. Thus, according to this
noble Historian, did the Imperial Power become the legal Constitution and
Government of the Roman Empire. And this was by the Royal Law or Lex Regia, a
Law past, as Justinian Sed and quod principi placuit Legis habet vigorem: quum
Lege Regia quae de ejus imperio lata est, populus ei, and in eum, omne imperium
suum and potestatem concedat. Instit. l. 1. tit. 2.6.
declares, about the Authority of the Emperor, whereby the People conferred
upon him all their Power, and whence his Placita (as well as any Leges,
Plebiscita, Senatusconsulta, etc. in their Law Books,) should have the force of
Law. This Law gave him also the Prerogatives Faedusve cum quibus volet facere
liceat -- utique ei senatum habere, relationem facere, etc. Utique quaecunque
ex usu reipublicae, Majestate Divinarum, humanarum, publicarum, privatarumque
rerum esse censebit, ei agere facere jus potestasque sit, ita ut Divo Augusto,
Tiberio etc. fuit.
of calling and holding Senates, of making Leagues and Alliances, of acting
whatsoever he should think of use to the Commonwealth, or for the majesty of
humane and divine things, with other particular Powers mentioned in a Fragment
thereof upon its renewall to Vespasian, still extant in an Inscription on Apud
Jan. Gruterum Inscript. Antiqu. p. 242. and Inscript, de Caesar. Suetonio
Annexis Ed. Ox. sub Vespas. nu. 10.
a Brazen Table in the Lateran at Rome.

But after the erection of the Empire, and making it, as by the Lex Regia it
begun to be in Augustus, a legal Establishment; several Powers still remained
in the People and Senate. Public business, and the chief of his private also,
were treated of by the Senate. The Consuls, and the Praetors too, retained
their Figure. The lesser Magistrates likewise, exercised each their several
Powers; and the Laws, bating only in Questions of Treason, were in good use,
Annal. l. 4. p. 190, 191. Ed. Gryphii.
says Tacitus of the Empire, as it had stood ad eam diem, viz. till the ninth
year, or through all the best days of Tiberius. The Senators and the Magistrates,
had both their ancient Majesty, and Authority preserved to them. And before
them were brought, both the matter of Customs and Monopolies, of raising and
disbanding Soldiers, of continuing Commanders, or nominating them for
extraordinary Wars, and of answering the Letters and Ambassadors of Kings, In
Tiber. c. 30.
says Suetonius, of the way and administration of the Emperor, in the days of
that Prince. By the Dio l. 53.
Tribunitial Power, the Emperor, indeed, could interpose, and, when he saw fit,
with power of Negative stop any matters. Tho here also, c. 31. vid. etc. 32.
Suetonius notes the Temper and Moderation of Tiberius in his good years,
suffering, and that without complaint, some things to be carried in the Senate,
against his Mind and Suffrage. Albeit, in most things, either about Men or
Money, or whatever else, wherein they were to refer to the Senate, the
Emperors, having such height of power in themselves, found the Senators very
obsequious. But the Emperors, not content with this original Power, tho
Principem quem vos tanta ac tam Libera potestate instruxistis, Senatui servire
debere. c. 29.
mighty free and large indeed, as Tiberius tells the Senate who had conferred
it: still sought one after another, to stretch the Imperial Prerogative more
and more, till by degrees they had swallowed up most of that, which, by the
allowance of the Lex Regia, at first remained, of the Powers and Prerogatives
of the People and Senate.

Nay, not content thus to incroach, on all that seemed to carry any competition
in point of Power: when they had taken from them, almost all the Authority of
Governors, they would not permit them to rest safe in the Rights and Immunities
of Subjects, or keep in their Administration, to the known Laws and Justice of
the Empire. For they were very heinous and notorious Invaders, of the Lives and
Properties of the Roman Subjects, and those too of highest Dignity: as may
appear to any, that will read the Lives of Tiberias, Caligula, Claudius, Nero,
who swayed all in the days of Christ and his Apostles.

But what say the Prince, and the Preachers of the Gospel of Peace, to the
Subjects of the Empire, under these Invaders of Rights and Properties, or
Ravishers of Liberties, as the phrase of some now is? Render to Caesar the
things which are Caesar's, says our Savior to the Jews under Tiberius, toward
the end of his Reign, and in his worst times. Mat. xxii.21. Whoever resists,
resists the ordinance of God, and shall receive damnation. Wherefore ye must
needs be subject, not only for wrath, but also for conscience sake, says S.
Paul to those at Rome, Romans xiii.2.5. And submit for the Lords sake to every
ordinance of man, whether to the King as supreme, or to Governors, who are sent
by him, says S. Peter to the strangers or converted Jews, through Pontus, Galatia,
Cappadocia, Asia, and those parts. 1 Pet. ii.13, 14. And this charge he laid on
them, and was instant in it, when their Countrymen were busily meditating a
Revolt, which was abetted by those in the Provinces, as well as acted by those
in Judea, as L. 66.
Dio says: and that from under Nero, the worst of invading Tyrants, and monster
of men; this Epistle being writ, as Dr. Harm. of New Test. ad An. Ner. 11.
Christi 65.
Lightfoot conjectures, in the eleventh year of Nero, when the Jews had begun
those Commotions, the factious spirits had been so long driving on, it being
the Joseph. de Bell. l. 2. c. 24.
year before Cestius Gallus laid siege to Jerusalem, which a few years after
was taken and destroyed by Vespasian.

These were the Rules of Christian Subjection, under all the aforesaid
Emperors, whereby the Christians of that, and of the ensuing Ages, were to
govern themselves. And these, do not teach taking up Arms against invading
Princes; but passive Obedience or Non-resistance under them. And that at a
time, when the invasion of Rights, was most crying and notorious; and in the
tenderest points, both of Life, Power, and Fortunes. And when they had not
merely the nature of Right to plead, as implying a power, as some say now, of
forcible Defense even against the Prince himself, should he offer to infringe
it. But when also, P. II.
says the Pastoral Letter, (tho I think the Lex Regia and the erection of the
Empire, had taken the force of that off) they had the Lex Valeria or Valerian
Law to secure those Rights. That is, a Law of Valerius, from this, and other
such like Laws passed in his Consulship, surnamed Publicola, as Dec. 1. l. 2.
Livy says: who, upon the Expulsion of the Kings, and change of Government to a
popular state, Vid. Paulum Manut. de Leg. To. p. 37, 38.
enacted, That it should be lawful for any one to kill him, who took upon him
any Magistracy, without the Peoples order and consent.

And indeed, the meaning of all the Gospel Precepts, of taking up the Cross,
Patience, and Non-resistance, must needs be meant of Invaders of Rights,
whether natural or civil, matters not much, as I shall show afterward. For
where are the Crosses, what place for Patience, or what provocation to
Resistance, under the Maintainers of Rights or righteous Rulers? There is
difference between the Patience and Non-resistance of Criminals, and the
Patience and Non-resistance of Christians. That is, when they suffer according
to Right; this, when against Right: that, when they suffer for ill; this, when
for good and rewardable things. If, when ye suffer for your faults, ye take
that patiently, what glory is it to you? But, if when ye do well, and suffer
for it, ye take it patiently, that is acceptable with God. 1 Pet. ii.19, 20. So
that to pretend we are for Passive Obedience, and yet, not to be for suffering,
but resisting, when our Rights are invaded; seems as much as to say, we are
always for it, but when we are called to use it. Good Kings, will not punish,
but reward good men and well-doers; and that will afford, but very little trial
of their Passive Obedience.

Under the Successors of these Emperors, the Persecutions of the Christians,
were carried on still by the breach of Rights. Not only the Rights of God, and
Religion: as all their Persecutions, were a reverse of his Orders, and usurping
a Power to punish and torment his servants, for obeying him. But by a breach of
the Rights of the Empire too.

To clear this I observe, that though the Roman Emperor, had a very large and
extensive Power, much wider than is enjoyed by our Kings, and as absolute by
the Lex Regia, as could well consist with the Government of a Free People: yet
was this Imperial Power, to be administered by stated Laws, and to consist with
popular freedoms and immunities.

In several things, the Emperor was bound up to the consent of the Subject, not
having a plenary Power to act alone, without the concurrence of the Senate.
Such was the Consecrating of any new God; which, as Apol. p. 6. c. 13.
Tertullian notes, was not to be done, nisi a Senatu probatus, without the
approbation of the Senate. On which account, though on the credit of Letters he
received out of Palestine declaring his Divinity, Tiberius was for it; and
brought it into the Senate, as that Father observes, with the prerogative of
his Suffrage: yet, the Senate refusing, our Savior Christ was not admitted
into the List of the Roman Deities. To say nothing now, how, by the Original
Constitution, he was to bring before them several great matters of State, as
about raising Taxes, and Soldiers, and answering Ambassadors, and the like, as
I observed before. Such also was that Creation of Magistrates, reserved at
first Utique quos Magistratum, Potestatem, imperium, Curationemve cujus rei
petentes, Senatui populoque To. commendaverit, quibusque Suffragationem suam
dederit, promiserit, eorum Commitiis quibusque extra ordinem ratio habeatur.
Inscript. Tab Lateran.
by the Lex Regia to the Senate and People, (the Emperor, as Head of the
Senate, giving his Suffrage,) which Tiberius first Tum primum e campo comitia
ad Patres translata sunt. Nam ad c^m diem, ets^ potissima arbitrio Principis,
quaedam tamen studiis tribuum fiebant. Tacit. An. l. 1. p. 29. Ed. Gryph.
took away from the People in the Assembly of their Tribes, to restrain it to
the Senators, as is observed by Tacitus; and which Caligula was afterward for
restoring to them, as we are told by In Calig. c. 16.
Suetonius.

The Imperial Power was Established by Law in Augustus, on his Speech to
deliver it up to the Senate and People, as I showed before. And cannot be
thought to have been such a Power, as should set aside all their Laws, since in
that very Speech he exhorted them firmly to retain, and make no change in their
received Laws, as Dio Lib. 53.
says.

And after it was set up, to profess and bear out their Liberties as Free
Subjects, and their not coming thereby into a state of Servitude, or subjection
to mere Will and Discretion as the Emperors Slaves, the Romans would not give,
nor the Emperors, as Suet. in Aug. c. 53.
Augustus, Id. in Tib. c. 27.
Tiberius, etc. receive or admit the Title of Domini but of Principes, not be
styled Lords, but Princes. They had erected an Imperial Sovereignty, which
should proceed according to Roman Laws and Liberties: and so would not look
upon their Empire, as a Regality, which in their ordinary account spoke a
Government more absolute, and inconsistent with Popular Rights and immunities.
So in Caligula, who was for wearing the Regal Diadem, In Calig. c. 22.
Suetonius taxes it as an high enormity, that he was for changing the Fashion
of a Principality, into that of a Regaliy.

Nay, the Law it self declares the Imperial Power, to be a limited Power, and
tied to go by Laws, and with regard to Legal Liberties. Digna vox est Majestate
Regnantis, Legibus alligatum se Principem profiteri. Cod. l.1. Tit. 14. De
Legibus, etc. l.4.
It is a voice worthy of the Majesty of one that Reigns, to profess himself
tied to go by Laws, says the Roman Law. And again, Nihil tam proprium Imperii
est, quam Legibus vivere. Cod. lib. 6. Tit. 23. de Testam. l. 3.
Nothing is so much the Property of Empire, as to live and go by the Laws.
Agreeable to which, is the saying of Socrates, who, from his being an Advocate,
was styled Scholasticus: who says of Maxentius's illegal outrage, killing
without Process, and otherwise illegally oppressing the Romans by a Yoke of
Tyrannical Servitude; that it was treating them in the way of a Tyrant, (...).
Soc. Hist. Eccl. lib. 1. c. 2.
not of a Roman Emperor. And that also of Tertullian, well skilled likewise in
the Roman Laws, who tells the illegally oppressive Magistrates and Grandees of
Rome, Hoc imperium, cujus ministri estis, Civilis, non Tyrannica Dominato est.
Apol. c. 2.
This Empire, whereof you are the Ministers, is a Civil or Politic, viz. as
proceeding by Laws and Right: not a Tyranical Domination, wherein all is left
to the Lust of those that administer it.

The Power of the Emperor, was a Complex thing; integrated of the Consular, and
Proconsular, the Tribunitian, the Censorian, the Imperatorian, the Pontifical,
and other Branches, whereinto the Power and Polity was divided, under the
Democracy or Commonwealth. All these Powers, says (...), etc. Dio l. 53. p.
581, 582.
Dio, as they were by Law Established in the Democracy, do the Emperors take to
themselves, together with the names, that they may appear to have nothing, but
what is freely given to them; -- and to hold them, not by Force, but from the
Laws.

Now all these, were Legal Powers, and to be administered according to the
direction of the Standing Roman Laws. Ut Populo praesunt magistratus, ita
Magistratibus Leges. Cic. de Legib. lib. 3. initio.
As the Magistrates are to Rule the People, so are the Laws to Rule them, says
Cicero. Ipsi Legibus teneantur. id. Orat. 8. quae est in Verrem, l. 3. in fine.
They are bound to go by Laws, says he again, And the better to secure their
maintenance of Laws, they took an Oath to proceed by them, when instrusted with
the Execution thereof. The Judges must observe the Laws, being obliged by Law
to swear they will do so, before they can take their place in Court, as Judice,
qui ex Lege jurati judicatis, Legibus obcemperare Debetis. l. 1. De
Inventione.. 60. so called juratorum hominum Orat. 5. because jurare in Legem
judicaturi solebant, Gothofred Not. in loc.
he elsewhere observes. The Foundation of the Roman Liberties, says Haec sunt
fundamenta firmissima nostrae Libertatis, sui quemque juris, and retinendi, and
Dimittendi, esse Dominum. Orat. 35. pro Cornel. Balbo.
he, was laid on this, that they were Masters and Disposers of their own
Rights. And these Rights, they could not be deprived of by Will and Pleasure,
but by Judicial Process.

Hoc nobis esse a majoribus traditum, hoc esse denique proprium Liberae
civitatis, ut nihil de capite civis, aut de bonis, sine judicio senatus, aut
populi, aut eorum qui de quaque re constituti judices sint, de^rabi possit. Id.
Orat. 29. Pro Domo sua ad Pontif.
This we have received from our Ancestors, and this is the Property of a free
City, that nothing shall be diminished from the Lives or Goods of any Citizens,
without Judgment or Sentence first passed, either by the Senate, or People, or
others, who, in any matter, are the established Judges. Which Judges, in
passing those Sentences or Awards about them, were bound, as he has told us, to
proceed by the known and stated Laws.

And therefore when the Emperors received all these Powers, as Consular,
Proconsular, Tribunitial, etc. they received such Powers, as were under the
Regulation of Laws. And accordingly Dio, speaking of that Plenitude of Power
carried in the forementioned Titles, whereby they had Authority, as Lib. 53. p.
582.
he says, to raise men and money, to make Peace and War, etc. yea, to put to
death, even Knights and Senators themselves, and that within the Pomaerium or
Precincts of the City: notes, that this was now lawful for them, in like sort,
and under like Regulation only, as before it had been lawful for the former
Magistrates. They may by Law do all these things, Ibid.
says he, and all other things, which it was before lawful for the Consuls,
and other Magistrates, that had full power, to do.

They were Sacro-sanct, indeed, as he there says, and so without Process, could
stay any Man (...), as a Piacle or Devotum Caput, that hurt them either in word
or deed. But this was a privilege under the Regulation of Laws, not superseding
Process in ordinary course of Justice, but only in case of Violence to their
own persons; and had formerly appertained to the Tribunes, (as now from them it
must to the Emperors, since on them the Tribunitial Power was devolved,) whilst
the Lawsare allowed to have been in force, and the ordinary course of
Administration to have been according to them. It being stood upon by the
Commons, and per sacratam Legem, by the sacred Law established, as Dec. 1. l. 2.
Livy says, at the first creation of the Tribuni Plebis, that they should be
Sacrosancti Magistratus, a Sacrosanct Magistracy. That is, such as no man could
violate, but the Sacrata Lex did Sacrosanctum-sanctione poenae, cum caput ejus,
qui contra facit, consecratur. Cicero pro Cornel. Balbo Orat. 35.
sacrare caput cum bonis, as the same Livy Ibid. lib. 2.
says was decreed against the Affecters of Empire by the popular Law of
Valerius; viz. Vid. Macrob. Sat. l. 3 c. 7. p. 319, 320.
Cursed him to Hell as a Devoted man, so that it might be lawful for any one to
kill him.

They were also loose from the Laws. (...), ib. p. 582.
says Dio, and Princeps Legibus solutus est, says the Digest. lib. 1. tit. 3.
l. 31.
Law. That is* they were loosed from all such Laws of the popular State, as
were against Monarchy, and inconsistent with their Imperial Sovereignty: but
not from those Laws, which concerned it in all the parts thereof, and ordered
how each of them should be administered. So in one Clause of the Lex Regia it
self, as it is in the forecited Lateran Table, as on the one hand it is
decreed, that Utique quibus Legibus, Plebeive scitis scriptum fuit, ne Divus
Augustus etc. ten^rentur; iis Legibus, plebisque scitis, Imp. Caes. Vespasianus
solutus sit: Quaeque ex quaque Lege, Rogatione, Divum Augustum etc. facere
oportuit, ea omnia Imp. Caes. Vespasiano facere liceat.
From what Laws, and Plebiscita, it was ordained, that the Emperors Augustus,
Tiberius, and Claudius, should be loosed; from those Laws and Plebiscita, let
the Emperor Vespasian be loosed. So is it decreed on the other, that What
things soever, by what Law or Asking soever, the Emperors Augustus, Tiberius,
and Claudius [facere oportuit] was bound to do, let it be lawful [facere
liceat] for the Emperor Vespasian to do them all. It puts liceat in Vespasian's
Case, for oportuit in Augustus's, etc. for Deference and Respects sake; and to
note, that, tho equally bound as they; yet if he failed, he was not under
Coercion, or by any Superior compellable thereto.

Or, the Emperors were loose in respect of other Laws, from the Restraint
thereby as Subjects, in their private actions. To this, I think, that Rule, of
Princeps Legibus solutus est, refers. And therefore in that Law it is declared,
not only to be the Privilege of the Emperors, but to be communicable by them to
the Emperesses. Princeps Legibus solutus est. Augusta autem, licet legibus
soluta non est, Principes tamen eadem illi Privilegia tribu^nt, quae ipsi
habent. Lib. 1. Dig. Tit. 3. l. 31.
The Prince is loose from the Laws. But the Emperess, tho she is not loosed
from the Laws, yet the Princes give her the same Privileges which they have
themselves. Thus, as to place of Sepulture, when not allowed by Law -- Experiar
quid concedatur in illos Quorum Flaminia tegieux cinis atque Latina. Juv. Sat.
1.
within the City: yet, Imperatores, and Virgins Vestae, quia Legibus non
tenentur, in Civitate habebunt sepulchra; The Emperors, and Vestal Virgins,
being they are not bound by the Laws, shall have their Sepulchers in the City,
ad Aen. 11.
says Servius. Or, their looseness from Laws, was from the punishments of Laws,
or not being coercible by their Penalties. Thus Harmenopulus expounds it, by
(...), i.e. The Prince is loose from the Laws, because not punishable by any on
Earth when he breaks them. And so as Floriun Sparsio adjus Justin. p. 87.
Grotius observes, does S. Ambrose too, who had been a Judge of the Empire, in
his Apologia Davidis. Rex utique erat etc. i.e. He was a King, and so not bound
by the Laws, because Kings are free from the bond of their offenses. For they
cannot be called to punishment by any humane Laws, being secure by the
Authority of Empire.

But tho thus loosed, from the direct Authority and Restraint of Laws, in their
private Actions; yet were the Emperors tied to Laws, as well as others, and to
have only what the Law gave them, in any claims of Rights and Properties. Ex
imperfecto Testamento nec imperatorem haereditatem vindicare posse saepe
constitutum est. Cod. lib. 6. Tit 23. de Testam. l. 3.
If the Testament is imperfect, and not valid, the Emperor himself cannot claim
the Inheritance thereby, as has often been determined, says the Law. Tho loose
from all Coercion, and suffering punishment by them, as Subjects: yet were they
not loose from the tie, of administering by them, as Rulers; it being a voice
worthy of the Majesty of one that reigns, as to this matter, as I noted from
the Law before, to profess himself a Prince, not left to Rule at Will, but tied
to the Laws. The Emperors were to Rule, and administer Justice, not after their
own Will and arbitrary Pleasure, but ut Dominatio Civilis, as I observed from
Tertullian, or according to Laws, till they were taken off by regular Repeals.
And what possession they had of the Legislative, was to be Legislators to a
Free People. Tho altering in other matters, as might make most for the good of
their Subjects; yet having no Power to vacate those Laws, which were the Guard
of Roman Liberty and Property. They were not free by Law, to make the Freeborn
Romans, Slaves; or ordain any thing, but what was suitable to a People of Free
condition.

For the Roman Subjects, had both their Laws and Customs, their jus-scriptum
and non scriptum, written and unwritten Laws, as Instit. l. 1. Tit. 2.
Justinian calls them. They were not as the Emperors Slaves, who, as it is in
the l. 1. Tit. 16. and l.2. Tit. 9.
Institutes, have no head in Law, nor can acquire or receive any thing for
themselves, but all for their Masters. But, as Freemen, had their several
Properties, and were Masters of Estates, some vastly great, and others less,
according to their several Degrees and Qualities. Whereof they could dispose,
as Proprietors, by Sale or Gift, either in their Lives, or by their Testament
at their Deaths. They had their Rights and Freedoms, and distinct Steps and
Degrees, of Immunity and Privilege; some, having the Rights of Liberty; others,
of Citizens or of the City, which Suet. in Aug. c. 40.
Augustus was careful to keep in great price, and dispensed so very sparingly;
others, of Dignity. And in Dignities, the several Degrees had their
proportionable Privileges and Exemptions. And, indeed, since the Romans were
such unmeasurable Affecters of Liberty, and prided themselves above all the
World on the score of their Freedoms and Privileges: when, on Augustus's offer,
to restore the Power and Authority back into their hands, both Arms, Laws, and
Provinces, as l. 53. p. 570.
Dio says, they chose rather to erect the Imperial Power by the Lex Regia: no
man can imagine, that by this Law they would pass away, not only their former
Power as Rulers, but also their Freedoms and Immunities, as Subjects, and make
themselves and their Posterities, instead of priviledg'd and Freeborn Romans,
to be all thenceforward mere Slaves. The Freedoms of Romans, they still kept
on; and a great price was set upon these Freedoms, to those who needed to
purchase, and were not born to them, as well under the Emperors, as it had been
before their time. With a great sum of money, obtained I this Freedom, viz. of
being a Roman, says the Chief Captain; but I, says S. Paul, was Free born. Act
xxii.27, 28.

Among these Freedoms and Immunities of Roman Citizens, one was, that they
should not be put in Bonds. Another, that they should not be punished with
Stripes and Scourges. A third, that it was not lawful to fix any of them upon a
Cross, which were Servilia Supplicia, or Punishments appointed for their
Slaves. Facinus est vinciri civem Rom^num; scelus verberari; quid dicam in
crucem tollere? Cicero Orat. 10. quae est in Verrem l. 5.
It Is a great offense, to bind a Roman; a more heinous one to scourge him; and
what name can be hard enough for the Crucifixion of him? says Cicero. What
cause, Ob quam causam, Dii immortales? tametsi injuriam facio communi causae,
and juri civitatis. Quasi enim posset esse ulla causa, cur hoc cuiquam civi
Romano jure accidat. ib.
adds he, could Verres have, for treating any Citizen of Rome thus? Tho,
indeed, in asking for what cause, I do an injury to the Common Cause, and to
the Rights and Liberties of the City: as if there could be any cause, for which
the Magistrate might deal thus by Roman Citizens. O! Nomen Dulce Libertatis. O!
jus eximium nostrae civitatis! O! Lex Porcia, Legesque semproniae, etc. ib.
vid. and Orat. pro C. Rabirio.
This, says he again, is the sweet of Liberty, and the singular Right and
Privilege of our City, secured to us by the Lex Porcia and the Leges
Semproniae, which no Praetor, or other Person whomsoever, should impunely
transgress. Another of their Rights and Privileges, was not to be condemned
unheard, or suffer without a Trial: which was not only the Law of Rome, but of
all civilized Nations. Nocens, nisi accusatus fuerit, condemnari non potest.
Orat. 2. pro Sexto Roscio.
No Malefactor is to be condemned, till he has first been accused, and had his
Trial, says Cicero. And the Law of the twelve Tables, forbids interfici
indemnatum quemcunque hominem, any man to suffer before hearing and
Condemnation, as De Provid. l. 8. in fine.
Salvian notes. Not to mention the Lenity and Temper in other Respects, which
Pro Domo sua ad Pontif. Orat. 29.
Cicero observes of the Roman Law toward accused Persons.

These, were popular Rights and Immunities, not only under the Commonwealth,
but afterward under the Emperors. S. Paul pleads them under Nero, and tells
the Chief Captain he had infringed his Roman Privileges, and acted illegally by
him, both in binding, and scourging him being a Roman, and in inflicting all
this upon him unheard, and before Condemnation. Is it lawful for you, says he,
as they bound him with Thongs, to scourge a Man that is a Roman, and
uncondemn'd? And the Chief Captain was afraid, because he was a Roman, and
because he had bound him. Act. xxii.25.29. The like plea of Privilege he also
makes, and therewith put the Invaders thereof in fear, upon a like Violation of
these Rights of a Roman Subject, before the Magistrates of Philippi. Act.
xvi.37, 38.

Another Privilege, of the Free Subjects and Citizens of Rome, was that Persons
of Honor, as the Decurio's or Senators in any of the municipal Courts, but
especially the Chiefs of the City, as those of the Title of Egregii and
Perfectissimi, should not, unless in some special Cases, as of Treason, be
examined by Torture. As it was moreover, that a Man's Servant should not be put
to the Torture to confess against his Master. Both which, as well as Bonds, and
Stripes, and Crosses, toward Romans, Lactantius cries out of in Galerius, as
Violations of Roman Liberties, and De Mort. Persec. c. 21.23.
calls a treating of them by a Right of War as Captives; not as Roman Subjects,
but as Persian Slaves. And the like might be shown of others; but it would be
too tedious to recount particulars.

Thus, to insist on no more instances, which were very numerous, both to
Persons and Places, were the Subjects of the Empire under the Protection of
Laws, and in the legal and customary enjoyment of Freedoms and Privileges. The
Administration of the Emperor, was to be according to the Laws and Liberties of
the Empire. He owed his Power to the Law. Digna vox est Majestate regnantis
Legibus alligatum se Principem profiteri. Adeo de auctoritate juris nostra
pendet Auctoritas. Cod. l. 1. Tit. 14. de Legibus etc. 4.
On the Authority of Law hangs our Authority: So that it is a Voice worthy of
the Majesty of one that reigns, to profess himself tied to Laws, say the
Emperors Theodosius and Valentinian. And as he had his Power by Law; so had
they too their Rights and Privileges, in these, and many other instances. Yea,
these Rights, the Law would defend them in, against the Emperor himself. For,
by the Rule of the Roman State, and by the practice of it, not only all the
days of Augustus, but all the best days of the Reign of Tiberius, they had the
Protection of Law for their Rights and Properties, against their Prince, as
well as against their Fellow Subjects. If the Emperor [ Tiberius] Si quando cum
Privatis disceptaret, forum and jus. Tacit. An. l. 4. p. 191. Ed. Gryphii.
says Tacitus, and any private man had any Dispute, the Law and Courts were to
decide it. He was to have no more, than what the Law allowed him. Ex imperfecto
Testamento nec imperatorem haereditatem vindicare posse saepe constitutum est.
L. 3. de Testam. Cod. l. b. 6. Tit. 23.
If the Testament be illegal, the Prince cannot inherit by it, as has often
been decreed, says the Law. So that, although the Imperial Power was very large,
yet was it not without its Bounds, and by Law should comport, with popular
Rights and Immunities. And this Point, of the Romans, being Free Subjects, that
have Rights and Properties, under a Civil and Politic Power; not Slaves, which
have none, under a Despotick: made a wide distinction, betwixt the way of a
Roman Emperor, and a Persian Monarch; as Lactantius De Mort. Persec. c. 21.
notes against Galerius, who affected to Rule the Free born Roman, in way of
Servitude, like Eastern Kings.

And therefore, when the Emperors, after all the Powers of Senate and People,
had by Law been transferred on them, were styled absolute: that is, not as
being loose in their Administration, from all Laws, or popular Immunities. But
from that Dependence, wherein others for a limited time had held these Powers,
whilst they were parcell'd out among many Magistrates, in the Freedom of the
Roman State; and from all Sharers and Partnership, either of People or Senate,
in their Imperial Sovereignty and Government. Yet still so, as to be Governors
of Free born Subjects, not of Slaves. And to administer the several parts of
their Power, by the Laws of the Empire; as the other Magistrates, ere it was
taken out of their hands, had done before, Especially, whilst those Laws were
in force, and before they themselves, when possessed of the Legislative in such
sort as might consist with the Liberties of a Free People, had altered or
revoked any that were legally revocable, by Regular Repeals. Whilst any Laws
were in force, those Laws, as I noted from Cicero, were to model the Courts,
and guide the Sentences. And S. Ambrose afterward, who had himself been first
an Advocate, and then a Judge of the Empire in Civil Affairs, In Psalm. 118.
Octon. 20. p. 500. 1 Vol.
says, A good Judge does nothing of his own will or private choice; sed juxta
Leges and jura pronunciat. Sicut audit, ita judicat -- obsequitur Legibus, non
adversatur. i.e. but pronounces according to the Laws. As he hears, so he
judges -- he follows the Laws, never opposes them.

Yea, even the Persians themselves, whose Princes did so exceed in Prerogative;
yet in the height of their absolute Power, were not loose from inviolable Laws,
however few those Laws were, or free they were from being called to account,
for any Breaches of them. For the Scripture tells us, of the Laws of Medes and
Persians, which alter not. Esth. i.19. and Dan. vi.8.12.15. And when the
Princes had got one of these Laws, to destroy Daniel; we see, when his heart
was the most set upon it, it was not in the Power of the King himself to save
him. Dan. iii.14, 15, 16.

Thus were the Roman Emperors, not merely arbitrary, but limited Governors, who
were to Rule their People according to stated Laws. And the Roman Subjects,
were privileged Subjects, who lived under the Benefit and Protection of Legal
Rights, Freedoms, and Properties; for which they had as good Law, as the
Emperor had for his Prerogatives, and whereof they could not be despoiled,
without Violence to the Law and legal Constitution, whereupon the Emperor
himself stood. And this I have taken the more pains to clear, because one main
Foundation of the Advocates for Resistance, is, the supposed absolute Power of
these Emperors. They own the Scripture Prohibitions of Resistance, which no man
certainly can deny, till he has either lost all Modesty or Understanding. But
Discourse about the Justice of the Gent. undertaking at York. p. 6.
they say they are not to our purpose, nor suit our Case, because their Kings
and Emperors Wills were their Laws, and their People had no Magna Charta's or
Records of Liberties to show, as we have. So that the Frame of the Government
warranted all those Commands that had the Royal Pleasure, and the People could
plead no legal Injustice. Whereas, in truth, their Emperors, as I have shown,
were tied to Laws; and the Subjects had legal Rights, (yea and those not coming
from the Emperors Grants, but antecedent to them in virtue of their ancient
Laws, which were still reserved and kept on when his Imperial Power was first
given;) and so were capable to suffer illegal Injustice, as any other
privileged Subjects of legal and limited Governments, may do.

CHAP. III. Of Invasion of Legal Rights, under the persecuting Emperors.
HAving said thus much in the foregoing Chapter, to prove the Subjects of the
Empire had legal Rights; I now proceed in this to show what Invasions were made
upon them, to try their Passive Obedience under these Emperors.

Now the forementioned Rights and Immunities of the Christians, as they were
Roman Subjects, and the common benefit and favor of the standing Roman Laws,
were invaded in the primitive Persecutions. I do not mean, Laws for
Christianity; our holy Religion not being like to have any establishment of
Laws, whilst the Emperors were Heathens. But Laws for Liberty, and Property,
and common Justice, as Roman Subjects. Admit it was criminal by the
Constitutions of the Empire, and that the Christians, did not only want Laws
for Religion, but had Laws against it: yet had they just ground for this
Complaint, because, when indicted as Criminals, they were not permitted, as Cum
accusati ut nocentes, a vobis aliter tractamur, quam pares nostri, id est,
caeteri nocentes. Tert. Apol. c. 2.
Tertullian says, to suffer only according to Law, as other Criminals, or
vouchsafed the Justice of legal Trials. For the cruel Emperors, and their
Presidents, in persecuting the Martyrs and Confessors, infringed their civil
Rights, denying them the Justice of Laws, and Legal Claims, and treating them
contrary to all Forms of Justice, which were as much their Birthright, as any
of their Fellow Subjects.

1. To be tortured for Christianity, when they confessed it, was absolutely
against Law. For the legal use of Torture, was only as a means of Inquisition,
to force Confession. It was not the legal Punishment of the Fact, but only the
legal means of Discovery, and bringing it to light. By your Law, Torments are
not used for Punishment, but only for Inquisition, says Tormenta non pro poena
adhibentur, soli quaestioni temperantur. Apol. c. 2.
Tertullian. Their intent, was only to extort the Truth, and the Ministers of
Law, who made use thereof, were only Ib. and ad Nationes lib. 1. cap. 2.
Veritatis extorquendae Praesides, or Presidents that sat thereby to force out
the Truth. So that by Law, they were never to torture Confessors, but Denyers.
Vestram illis servate Legem, usque ad Confessionem. Hoc leges jubeni, hoc
Senatils Consulta, hoc Principum m^ndata definiunt. Apol. c. 2.
If you would keep to your own Laws, says he, to the Orders of Senate, or
Constitutions of Princes, you should torture no man longer, than till you have
made him confess. And therefore when the Christians confessed their Accusation,
as they frankly did when brought in question for the Faith of Christ, to
torment them on still, was most illegal. It was an utter perverting of Law. And
accordingly In Octav. p. 31.
Minutius, who was himself an Advocate and Pleader in their Courts, calls it
exercising perversam Quaestionem, a perverting the real design, and legal use
of Inquisition. And before him Tertullian, expert also in the Roman Laws, Ad
Nationes l. 1. c. 2.
tells them this course was, tormentorum officia mutare, to change the Office
and use of Tortures. It is such a perverseness, Ista Perversitas -- quae vos
adversus Formam, adversus Naturam judicandi, contra ipsas quoque Leges
ministret. Apol. cap. 2.
says he, as makes the very Ministers of Law and Justice, to minister against
both, to overthrow Laws, and the true nature and common form of Judicature.

But this most tyrannical and illegal Method, was the way they took with the
Primitive Confessors. When they professed themselves Christians, upon Judicial
Accusations, their Persecutors tortured them to make them deny it: and still,
the more bravely and resolutely they Confessed, the more barbarously were they
tortured. When, in the Case of all other Criminals, Ad Nationes l. 1. c. 2.
says Tertullian, you urge the Deniers by Torture to Confession: the
Christians, when they Confess of themselves, you press by Torture to deny their
Accusation. Crudelius soeviebamus, In Octavio, p. 31.
says Minutius, ut torqueremus Confitentes ad Negandum. Quite contrary to what
they did with others when accused, they put them to the Question for
Confessing: and the more they Confessed, the more barbarously the others raged,
and the more cruelly they Tortured them. Here then, the Praetors, and the
Presidents, in all the Cities and Provinces, who in the Persecutions sat to
Judge the Christians by Law, Tortured them against Law. And this breach of Law
and Privilege, was in a Point the most dear and tender, of all others. For
Life, and Member, are by far the most valuable Rights and Freeholds. And under
these illegal Tortures, many expired, being Murdered by these wrongful and
illegal Executioners. And if they survived the Torture, to Dye by a more formal
stroke, the illegal Torture was much worse, and more terrible to bear, than the
Death it self was. The Pains of Torture, were not less exquisite than the Pains
of Death, but much longer. And it was a greater, and more tedious trial of
Patience, the bear the Rackings, and Tearings, and Burnings of the Flesh, and
other most exquisite and studied Pains of the Tormentors: than, in the last and
Capital Punishment, to endure the sudden Stroke of the Sword, or the Teeth of
the Bears and Lions.

2. Again, in Judicial Trials, Not to be heard in their own Defense, and
permitted to speak for themselves, was absolutely against Law. Inauditos, and
indefensos, as Tertullian Apol. c. 2.
tells them, non licet omnino damnari. It is not the manner of the Romans, said
Festus to the Jews, to deliver any Man to die, before he which is accused, have
the Accusers Face to Face, and have License to answer for himself, concerning
the crime laid against him. Act. xxv.16. Nay, to deny them, not only the
liberty of speaking for themselves, but the benefit of Advocates to speak and
plead for them, was an illegal thing. This was a Provision and Allowance, which
Law, and the Custom of the Courts, had made for the greatest Criminals. We were
used to undertake the Patronage and Defense, of the Incestuoas, yea, of the
Sacrilegious, of Murderers and Parricides themselves, says Quodcunque Dicimur,
cum alii Dicuntur, and proprio ore, and mercenaria advocatione utuntur, ad
innocentiae suae commendationem respondendi, altercandi facultas patet; quando
nec licet indefensos and inauditos omnino Damnari. Tert. Apol. c. 2.
Minutius the Lawyer. In Octav. page 31.
Whatever ill is charged on us, (as the Heathens presumed the Christians
Guilty, of Impiety, Sacrilege, Treason, and incestuous mixtures, etc.) when the
same is judicially charged on others, they have liberty both to speak for
themselves, and to Fee Advocates to make out their Innocence: there is freedom
to answer, to plead and debate the matter: and all this, because it is by no
means lawful to condemn any, till he has been heard, and made his Defense, says
Tertullian. And such was the care of Law, and the course of Judicature, for all
accused persons; that the Cognizance, and Disquisition of Court, rested not in
the confession, or manifestation of General Names: but, before Sentence,
proceeded further, to discuss the Quality and Circumstance^ of Actions. Si de
aliquo nocente Cognoscitis, non statim confesso eo, nomen homicidae, vel
Sacrilegi vel incesti, vel publici hostis (ut de nostris elogiis loquar)
contenti sitis ad pronunciandum, nisi and consequentia exigatis, qualitatem
facti, locum, modum, tempus, conscios, Socios. Apol. cap. 2. and (...)
Nationes, l. 1. c. 2. etc. 6.
When you take Cognizanc^ of any Criminals Case, says Tertullian you d^ not
think it enough to proceed to Sentence on a bare confession of the name of
Homicide, Sacrilegious, Incestuous, Public Enemy, (to instance in the Titles
you give us:) but stay till you have discussed the Consequences, the quality of
the Fact, the place where, the time when, the manner how, the instruments
wherewith it was committed, who were Parties, and who were Privy to it.

But now, all these were carried contrary, in their Proceedings with the
Christians. They were used to condemn them, without giving them the justice of
a Hearing: not permitting them to plead their own Cause, nor admitting
Advocates to plead it for them. When all this liberty of Pleading, either for
themselves, or by their Council, is allowed by you to other Criminals: yet,
says Tertullian, Sed Christianis solis nihil permittitur loqui, quod causam
purget, quod veritatem defendat, quod judicem non faciat injustum. Apol. c. 2.
to the Christians alone there is no permission to say any thing, that may
purge the Crimes they are presumed Guilty of, or defend the Truth, or prevent
the Judges passing an unjust Sentence. You do not allow them time, says Neque
accusationi, neque recusationi, spacium commodetis. Ad Nation, l. 1. c. 2.
he again, to hear their Accusations, and to refute them. Tho we were ready to
be Advocates, for Sacrilegious, and Paricides; yet, as for these, Hos nec
audiendos in totum putabamus, p. 31.
says Minutius, we did not think fit to afford them any Hearing.

Or, if they did hear them at all, it was not Discutere de qualitate,
circumstantiis, and ordine admissi; i.e. to discuss and take cognizance, of the
quality, circumstances, and order wherein they perpetrated the Crimes alleged,
as was always done with other Criminals: but that only you look after, Apol. c.
2. and ad Nation. l. 1. c. 2. 6.
says Tertullian, which is necessary to expose us to the Public Hatred, the
confession of the Name [of Christian] not the examination of any of those
Crimes, which you groundlesly presume to be practiced by those, who profess
that Name. They presumed the Name, to carry with it a sufficient Conviction of
the most horrid Crimes. As of Tertull^ Apol. c. 7. Minut. Fol. p. 9.
Slaying of an Infant, and a Thyaestean Banquet, or Feasting upon it: of all
sorts of Lasciviousness, and Incestuous Mixtures at their Meetings, after the
Dogs tied to the Candlesticks, by leaping at a Crust cast before them for that
purpose, had thrown down, and put out the Lights: Of Traitorous Conspiracies
against the Emperor; and the like. But the Accusers never offered, nor did the
Judges stay, for any other Evidence of all this, than their mere owning
themselves Christians. They were always Praesumta, never Probata Crimina; mere
Presumptions without Proofs, as Apol. c. 2.
Tertullian says. Cum praesumatis de sceleribus nostris, ex nominis
confessione, says Ib.
he again: and Id. ad Nation. l. 1. c. 3.
ut inimicum nomen, sub praesumptione Criminum Puniatur. That is, your way is
to presume the Crimes, from the denomination of Christians; and to punish an
hated name, under a presumption of Crimes, which it knows nothing of. The
utmost, that ever was alleged in proof of these Crimes, was only uncertain
hearsay, as Apol. c. 7.
Tertullian notes, or common, but ungrounded Fame; which Judge, that pretends
to Justice, will ever Condemn a Man, or take away his Life upon. All which, was
most contrary to the Regular Course of Roman Justice, which went not by
uncertain hear-says, that can make no Evidence; but by Proofs, which could aver
the Crime to the Persons Face: Condemning no Man, as Festus said, till he had
confronted the Evidence, there to make his exceptions, and had his Accusers
Face to Face. Et ideo Praeses Provinciae id sequatur, quod convenit cum ex fide
eorum, quae probabuntur. Digest. lib. 1. tit. 17. l. 6.. veritas.
The President of the Province is to follow what is fit, proceeding by the
Faith of what is proved, says the Law.

Such, in these Points, was the illegal usage, of the Martyrs and Confessors:
and that, when they came upon their Trial, not only for their Estates; but also
for what is more to be valued, and what, when once injuriously taken away, is
never to be restored or compensated, their Lives too.

3. Moreover, in Judicature, not to have any regard to Law, but all to his own
will and pleasure, is not only illegal, but an utter overthrow of Laws. Making
them of no use to the Subject, which is the same for the time, as if there were
no such things; and, instead of public Laws, subjecting them to private
Discretion, Inclination, and Affections. Now, this was sometimes the Case, both
of the Christians, and other Subjects of the Empire, under some of the
persecuting Emperors. Galerius, one of the bloodiest of them, Dissolving all
the Laws, Licentia rerum omni^an solutis Legibus, assumpta, and judicibus data.
De Mort. Persec. c. 22.
says Lactantius, assumed and gave a License of all things to his Judges. Here
was a turning Laws out of Doors, and Acting all by Discretion. And lest the
Law, should make any part of those Judges Discretion; he sent out such into the
Judgment-Halls, as did not know Law, and removed thence such as were capable to
Plead, and lay it before them. Judices militares humanitatis Literarum rudes,
sine assessoribus in Provincias immissi. Causidici sublati, JureConsulti aut
relegati, aut necati. Ib.
He sent out Military Judges, adds he, that were ignorant of the Laws and
learned Studies, and that too without Assessors, whose part it would have been
to have given them direction therein, into the Provinces. He took away all
Pleaders or Advocates; and either killed, or banished the learned Lawyers.

4. Further yet, to be thrown off as Outlaws, and denied all benefit of Law
and Justice, is to suffer the highest Invasion of Claims and Properties, and to
be deprived of all Rights, and Laws which are the Guard thereof, at once. To
invade even one Law, that is of main importance, and a chief Security to the
Subjects, is thought by the Advocates for Liberty, a sufficient ground for
Resistance against a Prince. This invading of a Law, amounts to no more, than
denying us the benefit of that Law. And if it give such warranty, to be thus
unjustly denied the benefit of one Law, in some concerning Case: how much
stronger is the Argument, and greater the warranty for Arming themselves, when
they are unjustly denied the benefit of all Laws, and not allowed the
Protection or Claim of Law, in any Case? But under Dioclesian, this was the
miserable, the unrighted, and exposed State of the Christians. The Emperor
ordered, as Edictu^ quo cavebatur, ut adversus cos omnes actio caleret; ipsi
non de injuria, non de Adulterio, non de rebus ablatis agere possent. De Mort.
Persec. c. 13.
Lactantius relates, by an Edict, that against them all, any Man might bring an
Action: but as for them, they should be capable to bring none, neither on the
score of any injury, nor of Adultery, nor for any thing, that had been taken
from them.

5. Lastly, when a People suffer invasion of Rights, and groan under heavy
Oppressions and Persecutions: to be denied the Liberty of Petitioning their
Prince, or of Modestly setting out to him their sufferings, and humbly and
dutifully praying Redress; is against the Common Liberties of Humanity and
Nature, and the allowance of all just and equal Governments. Especially, to
make such Petitions Capitally Criminal, and animadvert upon the Petitioners, by
extreme barbarity, and unheard of ways; is monstrous illegality and injustice.
But in the Arian Persecution under Valens, when the Christians knew of no other
weapons against Persecutors, but Prayers and Tears, to use the Speech of 1.
Invect. p. 91.
Gregory a stout Assertor of the Orthodox Faith in that Persecution, this was
their Case. For no fewer, th^n eighty Clergymen, whereof Urban, Theodorus, and
Menedemus were the chief, being sent by their suffering Brethren, to Petition
the Emperor Valens (...) Nicomedia, and humbly to represent the Violences and
Miseries they suffered, from the Persecuting Arians. To prevent Tumult and
Sedition, as the Story is related by Hist. Eccl. l. 4. c. 16.
Socrates, and Hist. Eccl. l. 6. c. 14.
Sozomen, by openly murdering, against all Right and Reason, so many Pious Men,
who had done nothing am^ss; under pretense of Banishment, he ordered them all
to be put on Board a Ship, as if they were to be Transported. And then,
commanded the Mariners, when they had got them into the midst of the Sea, to
set the Ship on Fire, (making their own escape by their Boat;) that this way,
they might not only all die a miserable death, but when dead, be deprived of
Sepulture.

CHAP. IV. The Christians Passive Obedience, under these Invaders of Legal
Rights.
SUch, as we have seen, were the Civil Rights, and such was the invasion of
them, and violation of Laws, practiced upon the Primitive Christians, in the
first Persecutions. Which I have been thus large upon, in the preceding
Chapters, thinking nothing can serve more to clear up this Point, and show what
sort of Obedience and Non-Resistance that was, which the Apostles so strictly
enjoined, and the Christians so Conscientiously paid, to the Powers of the
Empire in the first Ages.

For what now said the Holy Bishops, and Fathers to their Flocks, in Point of
Passive Obedience or Non-Resistance, to these illegal Oppressors, and Invaders
of Civil Rights and Immunities? The forementioned Precepts of Christ and his
Apostles, they make their Rules, esteeming them, as all Christians ought to do,
for Catholic Precepts, given to guide Christians of every time and place, and
that ought to bind up their own hands, in those hard and trying Days; as, in
foregoing times, they had bound up the hands of their Predecessors. When
persecuted under one, so far were they, in hopes of ease or quietness thereby,
from setting up, or turning over to another, that, as Christianus non novit, de
novo Caesare optare. Apol. c. 35*
Tertullian declares, they did not swerve from him so much as by a secret
Prayer, or wish for a new Caesar.

Many had been the defections from the Emperors, and the aspiring spirits, who
had affected the Purple, and set up themselves against them in all parts of the
Empire, to try the Christians Loyalty and adherence to their Rightful Princes,
yea, to those, that either already had been, or afterward proved, their bloody
Persecutors. Such was L. Antonius, who, as In Pescen. Nig. page 218. 3. Part.
Hist. Aug. Script. vid. Suet. in Domit. c. 6.10.
Spartianus says, was declared Emperor by the Army against Domitian, who was
the Author of the Second Persecution: whom Parthenius, and Sigerius, and their
accomplices, afterward murdered; having first agreed with Nerva, as In Domitiano.
Dio Xyphilinus reports, to take the Empire upon him. Such also were those
many, whom the Emperor Marcus Antoninus In his Letter, ap. Vulcatium in Avid.
Cassio, page 120, 121, 123. 3. Part. Hist. Aug. Script.
speaks of, that had Rebelled, and set up against the Emperors, Trajan, and
Hadrian, and his Father Pius: under whom were the Third and Fourth
Persecutions. And likewise that against Marcus himself, under whom was the
Fifth Persecution of the Christians, by Avidius Cassius, on Vid. Vulcat.
Gallic. in Avid. Cass. p. 127.
pretense of Marcus's remisness, and neglect of the Public, and the
Luxuriousness and Repaciousness of his Ministers; all which, as Cassius
alleged, endangered the Commonwealth. Such also was the Affectation of
Empire, and setting up for Emperors in Fact, of Pescenninus Niger in Syria, and
of Clodius Albinus in Gaul, against the Emperor Severus, in whose time
Tertullian writ his Apologetick, upon the setting on the Sixth Persecution. And
afterward, that of Vid. Vopifc. in Bonoso, p. 721. pt. 3. Hist. Aug. Script
and in Probo ib p. 698.699.
Bonosus, as also of Proculus, and Saturninus, against the Emperor Probus. And
after that again, the Defections of Achilleus in Egypt, and of Carausius in
Britain, Lib. 9.
as Eutropius relates, who set up against Dioclesian before; as others did,
says Lib. 8. c. 6. Hist. Eccl.
Eusebius, some in Armenia, others in Syria, after his setting on of the Tenth
Persecution.

Yet, under all these attempts for Change, even when the Right Emperors were
most unjustly oppressive, and illegally hard upon them, as has been abundantly
shown; the Christians never run in among those that took up Arms, or swerved
from their Duty and Allegiance. They still adhered to the Right, even when they
suffered most by it; and never turned, in hopes of ease thereby, to the wrong
side. Which they did so constantly, in all places of the Empire, under all
these Insurrections, and Oppositions of Powers; that the Christian Advocates
and Apologists, could challenge all their industrious Enemies and Accusers, to
show wherein they had ever been Seditious, or sided with a Rebellious and Wrong
Power against the Right, in any instance.

Unde Cassii, and Nigri, and Albini? Unde qui inter duas Laurus obsident
Caesarem? De Romany (nisi fallor) id est De non Christianis. Apol. c. 35. --
Nunquam Albiniani, nec Nigriani, vel Cassiani, inveniri potuerunt Christiani:
ad Scap. c. 2.


Whence came they, says Tertullian, that in his Country Recess laid wait for
Caesar, viz. with Parthenius and Sigerius, who Conspired against Domitian?
Whence were the Adherents of Cassius, and Niger, and Albinus? Were they not all
from among your selves, Heathen Romans, but no Christians? These two last
Insurrections, under Niger, and Albinus, were fresh at the time of his Writing,
and a strict inquisition had been made after all the Partners, that abetted, or
adhered to them. Sed and qui nunc Scelestarum Partium Socii aut Plausores,
quotidie revelantur, post vindimiam Paricidarum racematio superstes. id Apol.
c. 35.
Even at this time, says he, there is still an inquisition going on to discover
them; like a Gleaning of Grapes, after the great clusters were gone. And yet,
so clear were the Christians from any share therein, that he challenges the
Heathen Priests, after all this search for those that followed and sided with
these Usurpers against their Lawful Prince, out of any of their Records, to
produce one Christian among them. After this, Origin (...). Contra Cellum, lib.
3. page 115.
tells Celsus, when he objected a Seditious Rise to the Christians, that
neither he, nor any of his Party, would ever be able to produce any Work of
Sedition, that had ever been acted by any Christians. Soon after this, S.
Cyprian in like manner tells Demetrian, how Passive they were under the most
bitter Persecutions, not standing up by Force to Right themselves, but
referring it to God, as a most just Judge, to Right their Cause. For thence it
is, Quos laesos [Persecutionibus] ultio divina defendit. Inde est- enim, quod
nemo nostrum, quando apprehenditur, reluctatur: nec se adversus injustam
violentiam vestram, quamvis nimius and copiosus noster sit populus, ulciscitur.
Ad Demet. p. 192. Ed. Oxon.
says he, that when we are apprehended, and suffer the most unjust Violence,
we make no armed Resistance, tho we have Numbers more than enough for that
purpose. The City of Christ, Neque tunc civitas Christi, quamvis adhuc
peregrinaretur in Terris, and haberet tam magnorum agmina Populorum, adversus
impios Persecutores, pro temporali salute pugnavit; sed potius, ut obtineret
aeternam non repugnavit. Ligabantur, includebantur, caedebantur, torquebantur,
urebantur, laniabantur, trucidabantur, and multiplicabantur. Non erat eis pro
salute pugnare, nisi salutem pro Salvatore contemnere. Aug. de Civit. Dei lib.
22. cap. 6.
says S. Austin, speaking of their numerous and costly Confessions, and how
they carried themselves under all the foregoing Persecutions) when as yet it
only sojourned in the Earth, and could have set out such Troops of great
Nations against the impious Persecutions, did not fight for their
Temporalities; but rather, that they might obtain eternal, they suffered all
without Resistance. They were bound, imprisoned, beaten, tortured, burnt, torn
in pieces, slain, and multiplied notwithstanding. But amidst all this, they
would not take Arms to defend themselves in these Temporals, but contemned
things temporal, in regard to their Savior, and to secure eternal. Nay,
lastly, even Julian himself, their most industrious and spiteful Accuser, gives
this Testimony to them, that instead of siding with any, that were going to
make Insurrection, they were for suppressing them. (...). Fragment. Epist. Jul.
Imp. operum p. 528.
If they see any mutinying, or moving Tumults against the King, they presently
punish him severely.

Such were the Principles of Patience and Non-resistance, which the Christian
Doctors taught, and the People practiced, during all the Primitive
Persecutions, when they suffered, as the most cruel and barbarous, so the most
illegal things. And therefore, upon the Conspiracy of Magne^tius, a Christian
General, against the Emperor Constans: Here first, alas! the Christian
Captains, Hic primum (prob dolor) dira perciti regnandi Libidine, Christiani
Duces in Christianum conspirant Imperatorem, cum olim ne Gregarius quidem Miles
(test Tertulliano) inveniri posset, qui adversiis Imperatores, licet ethnicos,
and Christianorum quoque Persecutores, a Partibus aliquando steterit
insurgentium Tyranno^um. Annal. Baron. ad. an. 350.
says Baronius, spurred on by a lust of Government, conspire against a Christian
Emperor, when in former times, not so much as a common Soldier, as Tertullian
testifies, could ever be found to side with any Upstarts or Usurpers against
the lawful Emperors, the they were Heathens, and cruel Persecutors of the
Christians.

Indeed, I think no Times have afforded better pleas for Resistance, than those
under the Primitive Persecutions. Which yet were so eminent for Passive
Obedience, or Faith and Patience, without taking Arms against their Governors
to defend themselves. For,

Under Dioclesian, and his Partner Maximian, but especially under Galerius,
there were the greatest Rapes committed upon Property, and the most
Insupportable Taxes raised by the most illegal ways; inquiring illegally by
Torture into Estates, for the heightning of Payments. Nay, putting Servants to
the Question against their Lords, contrary to the Law, which forbids Servants
to be tortured against their Masters. Yea, torturing even Children to confess
against their Parents, and Wives against their Husbands, as De More. Persec. c.
7.8.23.
Lactantius relates. Here was another sort of Invasion of Property, than that
so much insisted on in the great Rebellion, viz. of enforced Loans, Privy
Seals, and Ship Money. And if Invasion of Properties can discharge Allegiance,
the Christians were at Liberty, and might have taken Arms in those days.

There was also a Denial of Law, and of the course of Justice, unless they
would purchase it by unlawful Worship and Sacrifices. For Heathen Altars, as
the ib. c. 15.
same Author notes, were erected before tho Tribunals, that the Litigants might
first sacrifice, before they could bring on their Cause. An ib. c. 13.
Edict also had ordered, that against them, any one might bring an Action: but
that they, on any injury, should not be allowed to bring any, as I observed
before. This was a Denial of Protection. And if Subjects are under no
obligation to Allegiance, where they are denied Protection; yea, or even where
they miss of it against their Rulers Wills, through their incapacity for the
present to afford it; according to some present Casuists way of stating this
Question: Why might not the Christians, have thought themselves discharged,
from paying any thing to these Emperors?

There was nothing of Law, but arbitrariness in all their Courts, where
Galerius, as I noted above, ib. c. 22.
dissolving all the Laws, assumed and gave a License of all things to his
Judges. And if men, that have Laws and Birthrights, may rise up for their Laws
and Liberties, against Governors, who will invade both, and be arbitrary and
illegal in their Administrations: how could the Christians stand obliged, to be
quiet and passive, in this very case?

There was a murdering men for poverty, the same Galerius, in the illegal
course of raising his insupportable Tax, ib. c. 23.
commanding all the Beggars, who were unable to pay any thing toward it, to be
gathered together; and then, to deter any from pleading Poverty, being exported
in Ships, to be drowned in the Sea. This is not only against all Humane and
Divine Laws, but is such a degree of madness, as methinks, might much better
pass for a proof of one not mentis compos, or besides himself, than the K. of
Portugals bloody Acts and Barbarities, which of late have been made use of by
several in this Dispute. And if no Allegiance is due, in case of Frenzy, or
moral incapacity, appearing, not in the ordinary Crazedness and inconsistence
of a man's Carriage, but only by such Actions; and there too, from the
extravagance of unjust Cruelty, or furious Passion in those Acts, not from any
whimsical Silliness and Ridiculousness of the Reasons and Pretenses for them:
there would not, in my Opinion, have been much due to him. Nor to Valens, who,
like a frantic man, did the same, as I noted, to no less than eighty
Clergymen, who were sent by their suffering Brethren humbly to petition him.
Nor to Nero, who for his sport, and the more lively humoring of a Song, viz.
the taking of Troy, which, as In Ner. c. 38.
Suetonius relates, he joyfully sung over it in his scenical habit at that
time, set the City of Rome it self all in a flame.

There was a Subversion of the Roman Constitution, as I hinted before; Galerius
turning the State of Subjects, into that of Slaves or Captives, with whom he
might take any Liberties, and use what Violence he pleased. He altered, as the
Lact. ib. c. 21.
Romans complained, their Form, which was Potentia Civilis, as Tertullian says,
a Power legal and politic; into one that was Arbitrary and Despotick:
affecting to rule like the Persian Kings, who treated their Subjects, ib.
says Lactantius, tanquam familia, merely at Discretion, and in a despotick
way. Here, as some would have told them, was a legal Government laid aside, and
an illegal set up instead thereof. And if there is no Allegiance due to a
lawful Governor, when he lays aside the Laws, and breaks in upon the
Constitution it self, such an one being no longer the Governor their Law and
Constitution owns: the Christians might have been free in Conscience to look to
themselves, and to stand up with others for their common Defense, against all
his barbarous and illegal Usage.

I will add but one Plea more. There was a treating of the Romans, and other
Subjects of the Empire, more like Enemies than Subjects. Thus, Lactantius ib.
c. 23.
complains of Galerius, that he treated them after the same manner, as he would
have done to any others, by the Right of War: using these Freeborn Subjects,
as their Ancestors were wont to use their Captives. Yea, at his first coming to
the Empire, as c. 27.
he observes, he professed himself an Enemy of the Roman Name, and would have
changed the Title, so as to be styled, not the Roman, but the Dacian Emperor.
Thus also under Dioclesian, Eusebius (...). Euf Hist. l 8. c. 10. p. 304.
says that the Martyrs were oppugn'd, not by common may and form of Law, as
Subjects, but by Right of War, as if they had been public Enemies. License was
given, as Phileas the Martyr reports, ib. ap. Eusebius.
(...) his Epistle sent from Prison to his Church, to any one that would, to
abuse them; which some did beating them with Clubs, some with Rods, some with
Whips. The President telling them, to have no care or regard at all, what they
did to them, but to look upon them, and use them, as if they were not men. Thus
likewise Maxentius, upon a very light and small Pretense, as Hist. l.8. c. 14.
Eusebius tells us, set the Guards one day to fall upon the Roman People, to
cut them off, as they would an Enemy, in heat of Battle. And so slew an
innumerable multitude of Romans, not in fighting against foreign Foes, by the
Arms of Scythians and Barbarians, but by the hands of their own Citizens, and
in the midst of the City it self. Here, would some have been apt to suggest,
instead of an Head and Governor, did each of these bloody and persecuting
Emperors, put on the person of an Enemy of his people. As Nero also would have
been thought by them, when he designedly, and S^et. Ner. c. 38.
but too openly, as may be seen in Suetonius, set fire to the City, which was
as much, as the conquering Gauls did, or would have been done on the irruption
of any foreign Foe. And if no Allegiance is due to a Prince, when, not by open
Professions, but only by the mischievousness of his Counsels or Actions, he may
be interpreted to turn Enemy of his People: the Christians under these, and
many other Monsters of Blood and Cruelty, might in Conscience have been at much
more liberty, than ever they believed themselves to be.

Thus, had they lived in those days, might the modern Casuists and Advocates
for Resistance, have urged all the Pleas, of Invasion of Liberties and
Properties; of ceasing of Protection, from unjust Powers; of breach of Laws,
and alteration of very Forms and fundamental Constitutions; of Rulers ceasing
to be mentis compotes, or falling under mental or moral Incapacities, or their
turning public Enemies, and the like; against the now exploded Doctrine, of
Faith, and Patience, and Non-resistance, under the fiery trial of the primitive
Persecutions. But those blessed Martyrs and Confessors, had not so learned
Christ. These illegal Invaders of Rights, and bloody Persecutors of Religion,
they still owned and suffered, as Gods Vicegerents. And, as our Lord himself,
and his blessed Apostles taught, and practiced: so these their true Followers
took care, even in such Violators of Rights, never to resist the Ordinance of
God, which by S. Paul has Damnation annexed to it; but to submit to them, not
only for wrath, but also for Conscience sake. They stuck to the Faith, and Laws
of Christ, with Courage and Resoluteness; and bore, and broke all the unjust
violence of the persecuting Powers, with Patience; and never countenanced, or
joined, in any of the numerous Insurrections made against them, tho they had so
much Temptation to it for their own fleshly ease, as appears from Tertullian,
Origin, Cyprian, etc. in the forecited Testimonies. And the like will be done
by all others, who are for trusting their Souls with theirs, and think them
safer in those primitive and first taught ways, than in any of the so much
fancied and magnified new Inventions.

CHAP. V. Of passive Obedience under Invasions of Legal Rights among the Jews.
AGreeable to this belief and practice, of the Christians under the New
Testament; was that also of the Jews under the Old Testament, in this case.

This was seen in their Carriage toward those Kings, both in Judah and Israel,
who introduced and set up an Idolatrous Worship. To bring in, or to maintain
Idolatry, was an Invasion upon the Law of their Land, as well as upon the
Rights of God. Yea, and that in a point, which may seem the very ground and
bottom of their Law, and among the most fundamental, as many now to move Stirs
would have taught them, in the Jewish Constitution. For the Civil State of
Jury, was at first a Theocracy. The true God, was not only their God, whom they
were to observe in regard to another World: but their King too, under whom they
were incorporated, and to unite together as a Society of this World. As a
Polity of this World, they were Gods People, who modeled their Constitution,
and prescribed them their Laws, from whom, and in whose Name, was Legislation
and Judicature, and who, as their supreme Orderer and Director, was to be
consulted, for Peace and War. The Law of Moses, whom Longinus calls the (...)
p. 34.
Legislator of the Jews, was the Law of their Land. And this Law, was a
political Covenant betwixt them and the true God, all to be observed in keeping
under him, not in Defection from him. Hence, the going to serve other Gods, is
by way of eminence called working Wickedness in breaking or transgressing his
Covenant. Deuteronomy. 17.2, 3, etc. And accordingly, Moses, having the two Tables of
the Law in his hands, which he v. 9.11.
calls the Tables of Gods Covenant with the Jews; brake both the Tables before
their eyes, when he saw them fallen from the Worship of God, to the Golden
Calf. Thereby noting the Covenant to be broken by Idol Worship, and that these
Laws or Tables, were a Charter or Covenant, to incorporate them under the true
God, not under Idols. Deuteronomy. 9.17. And answerably, on any such defection, such
Inquisition and Procedure, both toward Seducers and Seduced, was appointed
thereby, without any Allowance of Misprision or c. 13.8.9.
Concealment even of the dearest person, as is proper for the highest State
Crime. c. 13. and c. 17. So that for any King, to go to set up other Gods in
Jury; was not only to act illegally, or break through Laws and Statutes among
them; but to undermine the very bottom of all their Laws, and break in upon the
main and most important things in the Jewish Law or Constitution.

Now Ahab, suppressed the Worship of the true God in Israel, which was the
legal and established Religion; banished and put to death the Prophets,
extirpated the Professors, in Appearance, so far, as that they seemed even
clean gone to 1 King. xix.14.
Elijah himself. And having pulled down the Worship of God, prescribed by Law;
set up the Worship of Baal, that was forbid by Law, and all by his own
Authority. Here, was mere Will and Power, overruling Laws; and illegal
Invasion and arbitrary Power, in the most tender and fundamental points: and
all this acted to the highest Extremities, and with greatest Outrage. But yet
all this would not authorize their levying War, and rising in Arms, against
this impious and illegal Invader of Religion and Laws. Even Elijah, whose
Spirit goes further in opposition and return of ill, than Luke ix.54, 55, 56.
Christ's does, calling down fire from Heaven to consume those that were sent to
take him: yet opposes all this, only by freedom of Confession, and saves
himself by flight, and enjoys his Soul in Patience, and seeks Redress by
Prayers and Trust in Providence. But never sollicits, nor seeks to stir up the
many Thousands in Israel, both Priests and People, who possibly might have some
Remains of Faith and Zeal for the Lord of Hosts, to defend their legal and
established Worship, and keep out Heathenism against their King, by
Insurrection and Rebellion. But wicked, idolatrous, and illegally administering
Ahab, and his House, were to hold his Crown, till God himself, who is the
rightful Judge of Princes, expressly deposed and disauthorized them, and, not by
mere course of Providence, but by 1 King. xix.16. and 2 King. ix.5, 6, 12, 13
particular Nomination, and the anointing of a Prophet, set Jehu upon his
Throne.

What more common among the Kings of Israel and Judah, than to persecute the
true Worship of God; and to set up, and impose a false one, in its stead. All
the Kings of Israel, were open and plain Idolaters. And so were several, of the
Kings of Judah. Particularly, 2 Chronicles. xxviii.2, 3, 24.
Ahaz shut up the doors of the House of the Lord, fell to the Abomination of
the Heathen, and made him Altars in every corner of Jerusalem. And 2 Chronicles.
xxxiii.
Manasseh, brought the Heathen Idols into the very Temple of Jerusalem:
excluding and banishing the true God, whole Worship was settled by Law, from his
own House; and setting up the Abomination of Idols, which the Law forbad, in
the most public places. Here, is legal Truth, arbitrarily turned out: and
illegal Error, as arbitrarily set up, even in the authorized and most public
places, the Churches and Temples of the Land. And this, against all Religion,
and National Laws; even those, that in the style of many now to stir up
Insurrection, would be called most essential to the Civil Constitution it self;
and which were not dependant on the King, either to make, or to repeal them.
But Elijah and Elisha, Micha and Isaiah, and all the other holy Prophets, who,
of all persons, were the fittest, as the Trump of God, to sound to Arms, and
call men to rise in Gods Cause: yet, when sent to cry out, against this
dishonor of God, and breach of Laws, they did it only as Confessors, not as
Ringleaders to Rebellion. They never attempted this course for redress, nor
stirred up the People, to defend God and the Laws against their Kings by armed
Resistance, or by Deposing of those impious and arbitrary Princes.

To descend now from Religion, when taken into the Law, and made a Civil Right,
to Property. Saul persecuted David, not in any way of Law and Justice, but of
mere wilful Fury and Cruelty, to shed his innocent Blood: as he had already
done, by the Blood of a 1 Samuel xxii.18.
Number of Priests, without any regard, either to the Innocence of the Men, or
the Sacredness of their Function. This sure was an Invasion of Rights, not only
the common Rights of Humanity, but of their Civil Rights, of the sixth
Commandment saying Thou shall not kill, which was not only the Law of God, but
the Law of their Land, or of Jury. Now whilst Saul was acting thus against Law,
and invading Rights; does David think he has lost all claim to his former
Submission, and may be looked on thenceforward, and opposed, as a mere
unauthorized person? No, but owns him for the Lords anointed at that very time;
and thereupon, that he could not do against him, what was unlawful against one,
of that Character and Denomination. How can I stretch forth my hand against
him, and be guiltless, seeing he is the Lords anointed. 1 Samuel xxvi.9. Like as
afterward, whilst Pilate was passing an unjust Sentence in a Case of Blood,
and that against his own Conscience and Confessions: our Lord still owns him as
one, that had Power over him from above. Jo. xix.11.

Such likewise was the breach of Property, when Ahab, against all Law and
Justice, seized Naboth's Vineyard, together with his Life, which was a much
more valuable Freehold. And when Jezabel filled all places, with illegal
Executions; keeping alive the Priests of Baal, whom the Law utterly and
inexorably destroyed; and destroying all the Prophets of the Lord she could
find, good Obadiah venturing his life, to hide and maintain an hundred of them
by Fifties in a Cave from her fury, all whom the Law protected. And when the
Kings and Princes, of Judah and Israel, were complained of by c. iii.14, 15.
Isaiah, for Exactions, and Oppressions, and perverting of Justice. As others
were by Jer. xxii.17.
Jeremy, Ezekiel. xxii.27.
Ezekiel, Hos. vi.9.
Hosea, Am. v.12
Amos, Mich. iii.1, 2, 3.9, 10, 11.
Micha, Zeph. iii.3.
Zephaniah, etc. for Grinding the Faces of their Subjects, shedding innocent
Blood, and turning aside the Poor in the Gate from their Right. But tho here
was breach of Laws, and legal Properties: yet was this never allowed, as a just
Pretense for the injured Subjects, by force of Arms to do themselves Right, and
rebel against such invading Princes. The holy Prophets talked of no Forfeitures
of Crowns, or Depositions of Kings, or discharge of Duty and Allegiance, on
these Accounts: but referred them to God, the Supreme Judge, to right them
against their invading Sovereigns. This in those days was their Maxim, as it is
in the Words of Rabbi Jeremiah; No creature may judge the King, but the holy
and blessed God alone.

See An Inquiry into the meas. of Submis. to the Sup. Au^. Art. 8.
Some, indeed, think to turn by the Scriptures of the Old Testament, forbidding
this Resistance among the Jews, as of no force with us, because they had Kings
immediately delegated by God, either in Answers from the Cloud of Glory, or
Unction by Prophets. And what was there forbid against such a King, they think
is only of force under others, who come in by like special prophetical
Delegation.

Now as to this, it solves not the Argument, from the Dueness of Non-resistance
to Jewish or Israelitish Kings: for that was as due to those that wanted, as to
those that had these immediate Nominations. It was as due to Ahab, and all
those other Kings of Israel, that were such Invaders of Laws and Rights, as I
observed, as to Jeroboam, or to Jehu. And yet, among the Kings of Israel,
Jeroboam, and Jehu alone, had this prophetical Nomination; all the rest coming
in by humane Titles, like the Kings of other Nations. And as due to Hezekiah,
and Josiah, and all the other Kings of Judah, that were Kings by descent; as to
Saul, or David, who were set up by immediate Message from God. And yet, after
David, and Solomon, the Crown in Judah, went by the course of Descent in the
Royal Blood, without any Interposition, so far as we can see in Scripture, of
Gods personal Nomination. Even in Joash's Case, who was set up against Athaliah
after six years possession, no such thing was pretended. Jehoiada the Priest,
who managed that Revolution, not pretending for young Joash, any Message of a
Prophet, or Answer from the Cloud of Glory, which, had that been their method
of setting up Kings in those days, he, as chief Priest, should have consulted;
but only his heritable Right according to the Constitution of Jury, or being of
2 Chronicles. xxiii.3.
the House of David.

Besides, Non-resistance, and other Duties to Sovereign Governors, do not
depend upon the method, or way of coming into Power; but only on that rightful
Power and Authority, they are come into. Honor thy Father, obey Magistrates,
submit to the King as supreme, be subject to the Higher Powers, and other like
Sayings of Scripture requiring these Duties, look only at the Authority. If a
Man is the true Father, the rightful Power, and the lawful King, they ask no
more to make all these due to him: making no difference, whether he comes to
have this Right, by an Humane Title, or by a Divine.

Now all that Gods personal Nomination does, is, as other personal Titles do,
to fix the Power in a certain person. It gives no enlargement of Power, or
greater extent of Prerogative. And not widening or enlarging the Authority, it
can make, or call for no more Duty. And accordingly, these Duties, were as much
the due of those Kings, that came in by humane Titles among the Jews; as of
those, who were personally named by God himself. And they are as due, to any
Kings of other Nations, as they were to Jewish Kings. For Government, is
instituted of God, for all Nations, as well as Jury. And Obedience to
Governors, is a natural Duty. So that Subjects of all Governments, are called
to pay these Duties, as much as the Jewish Subjects were. Now to bid men be
subject, and submissive, and obedient, and not to resist, and the like, are as
plain and full, as I noted at first, as the most ordinary Understandings need
to be taught, against all Resistance. What said God more than this against
Resistance, to the Jews, when he named any King himself? Nay, if we come to
make Comparisons, where are the Sayings against it, under any such Kings, so
numerous and express? And these are as plain, if Men are willing to understand
what God plainly tells them, when spoken in case of a Roman Emperor, who had a
humane Title* as they would have been, in case of Saul, who had a divine Title.

They are due to any persons, as having Gods Authority, and being his
Vicegerents. Thus Romans xiii.1, 2.4, 5.
S. Paul notes of all Duties of Subjects, and particularly of Non-resistance,
saying, They that resist shall receive Damnation, as resisting the Powers that
be of God, and the Ordinance of God, and requiring Subjection out of
Conscience, because they are Gods Ministers. So that as to matter of
Resistance, any other King has the conscionable Bar against it, as much as a
King of Gods own naming, if he be but Gods Minister and Ordinance. But now the
Power of Kings by humane Titles, is Gods Power, and God owns this way of coming
in, and empowers them as much, as those that come in by his own personal
Nomination: declaring, that their Power is his Power, and that they are his
Ministers and Ordinance. All which, S. Paul says as expressly of the Roman
Emperor, as he could have said of any Prince, immediately called out, and
commissioned by God himself.

The seditious Jews, I conceive were of this Opinion, that the Heathen Powers,
not set up by any Revelations, but left to humane Claims, were not Kings of
Gods making. And so were wont to despise, and speak slightfully of them:
Despising Dominion, and speaking evil of Dignities, as S. Jude says of the
Seditious Judaizers, v. 8. But S. Paul tells such Men, that these Powers, were
as truly of God, as any of their own Nation: and that Gods Command, for obeying
Powers, was as much for obeying these, as it had been for obeying them. There
is no power, says he, but of God. And he that resists the Power, resists the
Ordinance of God. (...), the Divine Precept, viz. the fifth Commandment, or
other Precepts, that oblige Subjects, and empower Princes, and give as much
Duty to these Heathen Powers, as they had done to any among the Jews, Romans
xiii.1, 2.

And like to this, of the different ways of their coming in, making no
difference in our Duties to them, we find in other instances. In point of
Property, we come into our Lands and Possessions, by an humane Law and
Allotment; but they came into theirs in Canaan, by a Numb. xxvi.53, 54, 55, 56.
and cap. xxxiv.13.17.29.
divine. But yet there is as much Stealing, and a breach of the eighth
Commandment, in taking away our things from us; as there was, in taking away
theirs from them. And in case of Servitude, the Primitive Masters came by their
Servants, either as their Captives, taken in War; or as their Purchase, bought
with money like their Cattle in the Markets: but we by Contract, all our
Servants voluntarily submitting themselves to us, and at their own choice. Yet,
for all this different Rise of Masters Powers, when once Servants are got under
them, the same Gospel Precepts, of Diligence, Fidelity, and not answering
again, etc. do equally oblige in both Cases. The Duties respecting either
Power, or Property, depend not on the particular manure of coming in: but only
on the Rightfulness, and Degrees, of that Power and Property, which any Persons
are come in to. More Power, I grant, there is in some Princes, and more
Liberties to some Subjects, than to others, according to the difference of
Civil Governments and Constitutions. But since the Power of the Jewish Kings,
was a Power limited by Laws, as ours is; an Invasion of Laws and Rights, can no
more justify Resistance in our Case, than it did in theirs. And to say they
did not come into this limited and Legal Power the same way, makes no
difference as to this business.

The Scriptures of the New Testament likewise, Ib. Art. ^
they endeavor to turn off, by saying, they only bind us not to resist, when
true Religion has Laws against it: but for all those Precepts, we may resist,
when it has a Law on its side. If we may do thus, when we have a Law for
Religion: then, since Law is as good in one Case, as in another, when we have a
Law for Liberty, or Property, or any thing else. But this, as I have shown, is
contrary to the sense of those Gospel Precepts, and to the Belief and Practice
of Gospel and Primitive Times. Which tied up the Hands of Christians, when they
suffered illegal things, and were treated by their Governors, in numerous and
most concerning Points, against the Laws.

Again, Ib. Art. 10.
they say those Precepts were directed against Jews, who were not for
submitting, or paying Allegiance, to Foreiners, or Heathens. Admit they had one
Eye against these: yet, at the same time, they had as much against any others,
that would have run into the same Jewish Practice, or have been for making
Warlike Resistance to those Powers, on any other pretenses. The thing those
Precepts are plainly for securing, is Non-Resistance to those Powers,
notwithstanding any thing, that could be alleged against them. And as the Jews
might pretend in those days, that they were Foreiners, and Heathens: so might
others, and with as much truth too, that they were Invaders of Laws, of Rights,
and Liberties. And yet for all these, or any other pretenses Seditious Spirits
should start, the Apostles peremptorily enjoin all good Christians, to own them
still as Gods Ordinance, and to forbear all warlike Resistance toward them,
not only for wrath, but for Conscience sake. And thus, in obedience to those
injunctions, they all practiced at that time: as their followers did, in the
succeeding Persecutions. And the Scriptures are written for a Rule of Christ's
Church, alike in all times: as much to us, as they were to former Ages. So that
these Precepts, both of Old and New Testament, are as binding upon us, as ever
they were, upon either the Jews, or the Primitive Christians. And whatever
pretenses were pleadable in their Case, whilst the Inspired Penmen told them
they were bound not to Resist: to be sure those same pretenses, can never
Cancel our Obligation more than it did theirs, or make it lawful for us do it.
We must follow them to Heaven, in the same way the Apostles taught, and they
took; or else we are not like to get thither at all.

CHAP. VI. Of the unlawfulness of Resistance, on such Invasions of Rights, by
our own Laws.
TO all this, which I have hitherto Discoursed, from the Obligations, both of
Jews, and Christians; I shall now Thirdly, In the Third Place, Note from our
own Laws, how little Ground there is with us in these Realms, to take up Arms
against our Sovereigns for any Rights, because of their being Legal; or for
Religion, because of its being taken into the Law of the Land. For those very
Laws, which establish our Religion, and particularly the Act of Uniformity,
forbid this way of Defense, and declare it unlawful on any Pretense whatsoever,
to take up Arms against the King.

This Declaration was made, upon occasion of the Great Rebellion begun in 41.
and for preventing any ones falling into the like again. And therefore, by any
Pretense whatsoever, it must more particularly include all those Pretenses,
which were given out for taking Arms at that time. And those Pretenses, as may
be seen from the Votes and Declararations of that Parliament, a brief Account
whereof is given in the View of the late Troubles, were, the Vid. p* 96, 97,
98, 99.
Preservation of Liberty and Property; of Religion and Laws; of the Privileges
of Parliament, who are the Conservators of all our Rights; and for P. 70,
71.88, 90.
keeping out of Foreign Forces, which the King was said to be endeavoring to
bring in, to inslave this Kingdom. Which Pretenses, are the best that can be
invented for Forcible Defense, and so, as often as they are bent on change, will
probably be made use of, by Men of like Minds in latter Ages.

Indeed, so far as Words and plain Declarations can do it, our Law seems to
have taken all the Care the Wit of Man can take before hand, to prevent all
Recourse to this way of Defense against our Lawful Sovereigns, by leaving none
in this way to be our Defenders, or capable to pretend a Power of making use
thereof. If any could list Armies against the King, not only in Defense of
private Rights, but of the Laws, or the very Constitution it self, when the
Kings chance to break in upon them: It would certainly be the two Houses of
Parliament. But the Act about the Militia 13. Car. 2. c. 6. and 14. Car. 2. c.
3. declares the Power of the Militia, so much contested by the Parliament in
King Charles the First's time; yea, and that on this very Pretense, that they
might therewith Defend the Laws and Liberties against him: to be solely in the
King. And that neither one, nor both the Houes of Parliament, can, or lawfully
may, Levy any War, either Offensive, or Defensive, against him. So that take
even the most Defensible Rights, which seem best to deserve a War; and put them
into their Hands, who have the best Claim to be their Defenders: and yet it is
plain by this Act, that they are not to defend them against the King, by
Levying War, or Listing Soldiers.

It Is true, our Parliaments are taken into the Government, and have a share in
the Highest Acts, as making Laws. Whence some have argued, that upon the
Princes Breaking in upon the Legislative Power, the Parliament may take Arms
against such an Invader, as one Sovereign may against another. This Inference,
is directly against the Act last mentioned, which declares they have no Power
against him, either for any Offensive, or Defensive War.

But to clear this Point, this Share of theirs in the Legislation, as I
conceive, is not a Sovereign's, but a Subject's Part. They are called in to
consult, and with Authority of Negative, upon all Laws to be imposed on them:
which is a great Security, indeed, of their being well-governed, and bound to
nothing but what is for their Benefit, no Law being to be made or repealed,
without their own Consent. But this Liberty of consulting, and Authority of
Negative, is still under the King the only Sovereign; nor on equal Terms with
him, as two Independent Sovereigns. Agreeably, we find the Style in the Acts so
often is, Be it enacted by the King our Sovereign Lord, with the Assent of the
Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and of the Commons in this present Parliament
Assembled, and by Authority of the same. As 37. H. 8. c. 4. and 25. H. 8. c.
11. and 19. H. 7. c. 18. and 23. and 3. Edw. 4. c. 4. and 7. Edw. 4 c. 3. and
passim. Or, our Lord the King, by the Advice and Assent of the said Lords
Spiritual and Temporal, and at the Request of the Commons in this Parliament
Assembled, and by Authority of the same, has Ordained and Established. etc.
12. Edw. 4. c. 8. Tho the King is not Absolute, without Rules in Governing; nor
alone, without Partners in Legislation: yet is theirs only a Subjects Part, not
a Coordinate Sovereigns; and he alone is Supreme, both in Legislation and
Execution.

For our Law, and Church too, fixes all the Sovereignty of the Realm solely in
the King. The Kings Majesty has the Chief Power in this Realm of England etc.
unto whom the chief Government of all Estates of this Realm whether they be
Ecclesiastical or Civil in all Causes does appertain; Art. 37.
Say the 39. Articles of Religion. He is the only Supreme Governor, of this,
and all other his Realms, in all Temporal things, as well as Spiritual, says
the Oath of Supremacy. His Realm recognizes no Superior under God, but only his
Grace, says Stat. 25. H. 8. c. 21. His Parliaments, when they meet, both sit,
and Act, only as his Subjects, not as his Compere Sovereigns, he not having
Parem in Regno suo, as l. 7. c. 8.
Bracton says. For by order of Law, they were to take the Oaths of Supremacy
and Allegiance; professing by those Solemnities of Religion, that he is the
sole Sovereign, and that they, whilst acting there, are only his Subjects.
When, during their Session, they make to him any Addresses, they Style
themselves his Majesty's most Loyal, and Dutiful Subjects. Yea, in Acts and
Statutes themselves, they have often used the same Style; calling, as him,
their Gracious Liege Lord and Sovereign; so themselves, his Humble, Loving and
Dutiful Subjects, in those Acts of Legislation. In all Humble manner show unto
your most excellent Majesty, your Majesty's most Dutiful and Loyal Subjects,
the Lords and Commons etc. says Stat. 12. Car. 2. c. 30. We your Majesty's most
Faithful and Loyal Subjects, the Lords and Commons etc. says Stat. 1. Jac. c.
1. We your Majesty's most Loving, Faithful, and Obedient Subjects, the Lords
Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons etc. representing the three Estates of this
Realm, (so bearing only the Part and Place of Subjects in that Representation,)
says Stat. 1. Eliz. c. 1. and the like may be seen in the Acts under Q. Mary,
as in Stat. 1. Mar. Sess. 2. c. 1. under King Edward 6. as Stat. 1. Edw. 6. c.
14. and K. Henry 8. as Stat. 37. H. 8. c. 4. etc. 17.

By all which, I conceive it plainly appears, that the two Houses sit with the
King in Parliament, and concur in making Laws, not as Coordinate Powers, that
are equal to him; but as Subordinate under him: not in Place of Sovereigns, but
of Subjects under him their sole Sovereign. So that if any Parliaments head
Insurrections against our Kings, they are Wars of Subjects still against their
Sovereigns, and such as they neither can, nor Lawfully may make, no not in
their own Defense, as the Statute says.

But Thoughts of a Private Person about the Justice of the Gentlemen's
undertaking at York. p. 9, 10.23.
some Appeal from the Letter of these Laws and Legal Declarations, to the
Equity of them; and think, tho the Letter of the Law condemns resisting
Subjects, that the Equity thereof will acquit and justify them.

This Plea of Equity, against the Letter of these Laws and Legal Declarations,
is for excepting some particular Cases, from being meant and comprehended in
the general Terms used therein: and that is by way of Presumption, that the
Makers of those Laws and Declarations would have excepted them, had the Cases
been foreseen, or particularly put to them. But there is no Place for
presumptions of a thing, against express Declarations to the contrary; or for
supposing such exceptions in Laws, that say themselves they do not except any
Cases. And this the foresaid Declarations do in this point of Resistance;
declaring it to be unlawful, to take up Arms against the King on any Pretense
whatsoever. Yea being made with a particular Eye against these Pretenses, of
Invasion of Laws, Religion etc. So that they must needs be understood to
comprehend, and not to except them, as I noted before.

Besides, Military Resistance of Sovereign Powers stands forbid, by the Letter,
not only of our Laws, but also of Nature and Scripture; the Fifth Commandment,
and other Scripture Precepts, calling indispensibly for Subjection and
Obedience, (which bars all such Resistance,) to Sovereign Princes, from all
Persons, and at all times. And there is no pleading Equity, to exempt any
Cases, from the Generality of their Expressions. For there is no urging Equity,
against Natural Duties. In mere Positives, or in things of mere Human
Obligation, it may have more Place. But in Matters of intrinsic Goodness, and
Natural Obligation, it has none. They are standing Rules, that admit of no
exception, and the Plea of Equity must always, and only be for the keeping, but
never for the breaking of them. No Man must ever pretend Equity, for leave to
commit Murder, or Adultery, or to Steal, or to Rebel, or to Transgress any
other Law of Nature. For the main care of Equity, is to make these Duties
inviolable; and so the Argument to be drawn from thence, is in every Case to
Act according to them, but in no Case to Act against them.

The Pretense for Equities exempting some Cases from the Prohibitions of
Resistance, is for the safety of Subjects, because say Id. p. 2.12. etc.
some, no Man can owe so much Duty to his Prince, as not to have a Salve for
his Safety especially for his Life. But what a Man owes, or is obliged to by
the Law of Nature, not only to his Prince, but to the meanest Fellow-Subject,
or to any of Mankind, is without any such Salvo, even for Life, and he may not
transgress such Natural Duty toward them, tho it were to save his Life. It not
being lawful to Steal, or Murder, or commit Adultery, or Transgress any other
Natural Duties against our Neighbors, no not when we are the most put upon it,
and tempted thereto to save our selves.

I add, whatever People spurred on by a desire of Revenge, may vainly fancy in
Favor of their own Passions, that Equity sets more by Submission in all Cases,
than by this desired Liberty of Resistance. Its first Precept about this Matter
is, whatever the Governor be, to have Government kept up; which is by holding
on Submission, that is always cast off by Resisting. And this, not only in
Regard to Gods Authority, whereto it calls for Justice and Submission, tho in
an evil Prince but also in Care of the Subjects own Good. Which amidst all the
hazards Men may think the Doctrine of Non-Resistance to be attended withal, is
much more, and much safer, in this Constancy of Submission and Non-Resistance;
than it would be in the contrary Liberty of Resisting and running to Arms, on
the foresaid Pretenses.

Lastly, that Equity does not exempt from this Non-Resistance is plain, because
it is a general Principle, and what exemption it gives would be General: under
all Governments, absolute as well as limited, and in all times and Places, one
having as much Claim to Natural Equity, as another has. And so, there would
have been Exemption thereby under the Roman Emperors, fancied (tho without
Ground) to have been absolute and arbitrary Governors; and in the Primitive
Scripture Times, as well as under our Kings, and in this present, or the
preceding Age. Whereas, our Blessed Savior, and his Holy Apostles and the
Primitive Saints, plainly admit of no exemption under those Emperors. Id. p.
15.22.
And the Managers of this Plea own there was none, nor allow any Liberty of
Resisting, under any absolute and arbitrary King.

They Id. p. 12, 23. And Inquiry into the Measures of Submission to Supreme
Authority. Art. 14.
appeal likewise, from these Declarations of our Laws, to the Nature of our
Constitution, and the end of our Frame: and think, it will justify that
Resistance, which these Sayings and Declarations of Law Condemn.

But as to our Constitution, thereby the Supremacy is fixed solely in the King;
and therein is an express denial of all Coercive Power over him; and a
Declaration or Maxim, that he can do no Wrong, what he does, being by
Ministers, and they only, and not he, being accountable in any Court here for
the same. All which, leaving neither Fault imputable to him to deserve it, nor
Authority in any others to Try and Judge him for the same, must needs bar all
Forfeitures of the Crown. The whole power of the Militia, or of Listing
Soldiers, the Law declares to be only in him. And loudly asserts the
unlawfulness, and Treasonableness, of all Levying War against him. Nay, that
even the Parliament themselves, as I noted, have no Power to make any War,
either Offensive or Defensive, against him. And in a Government of this Frame,
owning one irresistible Sovereign, and thus carefully excluding all taking Arms
against him, I do not see whence any should hope to fetch this Liberty of
Resisting.

And as for the end of that part of our Constitution, which lies in securing
our Liberties and Properties; that is plainly with limitation, and so far only,
as they can be secured to Subjects continuing Subjects, i.e. in Consistence
with Submission, which is thrown off by Military Resisting. They are to be
secured thereby to the Subjects of these Realms, so far as they can be secured,
under a Sovereign and irresistible Prince, (as our Constitution makes ours to
be,) and by Men keeping to their Duty and Obedience.

CHAP. VII. Of Passive Obedience under Invaders of Natural Rights. And these as
Defensable by Arms, as Civil Rights.
HAving hitherto shown, that the Invasion of Civil Rights and Laws, gives no
exemption from the Gospel Duties of Obedience and Non-Resistance, which I think
I have made pretty plain, both from the Case of Jews, and Gentiles, and from
our own Laws themselves: I now proceed to show, in the

Fourth and last place, that if this defensibleness of Legal Rights, would
exempt us; a like Defensibleness of Natural Rights, would as well have exempted
all other Subjects of Sovereign Powers. And so, contrary to what the Advocates
of Resistance themselves affirm, would have left no such Duty in the World, as
Passive Obedience. The true Christian, and Thank worthy Passiveness, as 1 Pet.
ii.19, 20.
S. Peter observes, not being that of Malefactors, who suffer for their real
Faults; but of Righteous Persons and Well-Doers, who cannot suffer, but by an
Invasion of Rights, or unrighteous usage.

All Oppressors, invade Men's Natural Rights; if they have no Civil Laws, to
make them Civil Rights. That Ruler, who has no Civil Laws to guide him, is yet
bound to guide himself, by the Law of Nature and Reason. Now Nature, makes
Right and Wrong, and appoints Laws for them. Else, by the mere Law of Nature,
there could be no such thing, as unrighteousness, or wronging of our Brethren.
Thou shall not Kill, and thou shall not Steal, are some of Natures Laws. And
all shedding of innocent Blood, all Theft, Lies, and breach of Faith, are by
Nature violations of Right, and so unrighteous Actions.

Now, Natural Rights, are as Defensible this way, as any Civil Rights are. I do
not only say, they are as Sacred, and Inviolable: yea, having God, and not man
for their Author; and a Divine Law, not an Human, for their Guard, they must
needs be more inviolabe. But also, that they are as Defensible by Force, as any
Civil Rights. Thus, Princes, and Sovereign States, take Arms against each
other, to defend their Natural Rights. And so may Private Persons, (under like
moderation of Christian Charity, as they are to show in quarrelling for any
other Rights,) when assaulted by Thieves, Murderers, or other unrighteous
Attempters, and have no leisure, or opportunity, to call in the Protection of
Government, and Guard of Civil Laws: one private Person, having Liberty to
fight another in these Cases, in defense of their Lives, Persons, Liberty, and
other things, which are Natural Rights. And this is the Liberty of
Self-Defence: which is a Liberty of defending these Natural, (or other) Rights,
by our own Natural Force; when, being out of the Cover of Laws, we are left, as
in a State of Nature, to defend our selves.

Indeed, mere Natural Rights, have no Civil Defense, till they are taken in to
be Civil Rights. That is, there is no Commencing an Action, and suing for them
in any Civil Courts, till they are backed and defended by Civil Laws. But this
way of Defending by force of Arms, is a Natural Defense, in which Laws give a
Man no help at all, but he is left purely to the strength of his own Natural
Powers. And for Natural Rights, a Man may make his Natural Defense, which is no
more than the liberty of Self-Defence.

Nay, when Men come to defend their Civil and Legal Rights this way, viz. by
running to Arms, they defend them not as Civil Rights. For what Defense any
thing gets, by having a Civil Law for it, and being a Civil Right, is a Legal
Defense, or Defense by Legal Process. It may be pleaded in a Law Court; and
whilst Courts have Authority, and Law can be heard in them, that will defend it.
But when Men leave contesting these Rights at Law, and fall to Arms, they
absolutely throw off this Civil Defense; there being no Cover or Defense from
Law, among drawn Swords, nor any use in War, of Witness, Judge, and Juries.
And, instead of that, they come back to Natural Defense, or by their own
Natural strength, which is to defend them as Natural Rights. So that Natural
Rights, must needs be as defensible by Arms, I conceive, as Civil Rights: since
Civil Rights, as Civil, are not at all defensible by Arms, but by Law Suits;
and to defend them this way, Men must bring them out of the State of Civil,
which lies in being under Government and in Courts, into the State of Natural
Rights. And when, in any Case, the Law justifies this Defense afterward, it is
not as needing a Civil Law, but under the Notion of a Natural Right, or as
being the Natural Liberty of Self-Defence.

But now, if Subjects might have recourse to this forcible Defense, and Levy
War against their Sovereigns, upon their violation of Natural Laws, and
Invasion of Natural Rights, which are as defensible this way, as any Civil
Rights: then there is no such thing as Passive Obedience, nor ever was any
Submission and Non-Resistance due, to ill and injust Kings. And so in reality,
there should have been none due, in those times, when God always required it,
both among Jews and Christians: whose Passive Obedience was never tried, but
when they suffered unrighteously, by an Invasion of their Natural and Divine
however, if not also of their Civil and Human Rights. So that this Plea, of the
Defensibleness of these Rights by Force, will afford no ease peculiar to us,
nor alter the Case of Non-Resistance with us, from what has been so long since
determined of it, in the Scriptures, and the Primitive Church. Had it been
true, it would have set the suffering Subjects loose in those days. And, as the
Inspired Men, and Holy Fathers, taught Non-Resistance, as a Truth then: they
would, were they now alive, tell us it is as true now, and bid us do the same
in ours.

This forcible defense of Civil Rights then, as well as a like forcible defense
of Natural Rights, must be limited to Private Persons. If Men were under no
Civil Governors, they would be left each to defend their own Rights. And when
they are under Government, they are still left to it against other Private
Persons, in Cases that will not stay for the defense of Laws, or for recourse
to Governors. But there is no liberty for Subjects, to defend their Rights thus
by joining in Arms, against their lawful Sovereigns. The Holy Scriptures, and
our own Laws, as I have shown, plainly forbidding this way of Defense, when
Subjects suffer Invasion of Rights. And the Pleaders for Resistance, allowing
they may not take it in defense of Natural and Divine Rights, no not in defense
of Religion it self, till it is taken in to stand by Civil Law; and Civil
Rights, are not more defensible by force of Arms, than Natural and Divine
Rights are.

To the Sovereign Power, the Command of God is, to be Subject. Then there is no
Resisting, since warlike Resistance throws off Subjection. So, Levying War in
Subjects, can be no way of defending Rights against their Sovereign. Nor can
they take any ways of Defense, but what are consistent with Subjection.
Therefore their Defense of Rights, must only be in those ways, which keep in
the Order of Government and Justice. If they are oppressed by a lower Power,
they may seek to a higher, and so rise, till in this way they have tried the
Sovereign himself, beyond whom, in Subordination of Government, there can be no
Appeal, but to God himself. So there is Human help this way, against all
Governors, but the Supreme. Yea, some Kings themselves, are but imperfect
Sovereigns. They have reserved Cases: and though they are Supreme, in all
others; yet in these they have Superiors, to take Cognizance of, and declare
their Failures, and discharge their Subjects from bearing them any more
Allegiance. And here is Human Redress, and that by force, even against the
King: not by breaking and casting off the Order of Government; but by keeping
under, and paying subjection to those, whom, in these Cases, the Laws have made
Superior unto him. This may seem the Case of Poland, where a Clause said to be
in the Coronation Oath, sounds to this purpose.

But, where a King is the Sole Supreme, both over all Persons and in all Causes
that can come under Judicial Cognizance: he can only have God above him. And
when he Invades the Rights, and stands in it; after we have sought to Courts,
and made Supplications, and used all ways for a Subjects Redress: there is no
way, but to be content with so much Right, as we can have by continuing under
his Government; and for the rest, to leave it to God, (who will be sure to do
it first or last,) either to redress, or avenge our Cause. But the way of
Subjects, by order of God, who requires them for all this to continue subject,
cannot be to resume the liberties of ungoverned Persons, and fall every one to
right themselves against him by force of Arms; which is to throw off the state
of Subjects, and set up to be their own Governors. Nay, this way of defending
Rights, would be the most unwise, and opposite to that securing of Rights they
aim at, as well as most offensive to Almighty God. For however, in their heat,
and uneasiness under Wrongs, Men are apt to think this a way of recovering, and
defending such Invaded Rights: in the end they will find, it is the way to
leave, both them and all their other Rights, defenseless, and under no Guard,
or Security at all. For Government, is the best safe Guard, of our Liberties
and Properties. And if once we go to pull it down, we go at the same time, when
we do not think it, to pull down our selves, and to set open our own Freedoms.
The Fence being broken down, the Enclosure becomes common, and our Rights lie
open to all Intruders.

From this Discourse I shall observe, that as to the Point of using Forcible
Defense, it seems no great difference, when Religion is Persecuted, whether it
stand upon its own Right, or be taken into the Law of the Land, and stand on
Civil Right. Every Man has a Right, to be truly Religious, and to serve God. He
has a Right, to seek Eternal Happiness; and to Truth in Religion, as the way to
it. And every Prince Invades this Right; yea, I add, and God's too, who denies
him this, and Persecutes him for it. If God has a Right to our Service, we must
needs have a Right, nay, be under Duty and Obligation, which I think is more
than a Right, to serve him. And this Right, is unalienable; no Prince, or Power
on Earth, who are all Authorized to Rule us under God, not to Rule over him,
can, or ought to set it aside, or deprive us thereof.

And as no Prince can, so can no Law do it. For whence must that Law have such
Authority? Is it from God? No sure, he cannot Authorize any Human Laws, to set
aside his own Laws, for that were to give Men Authority over himself. It is only
the Power of the Law Maker, that gives the Law its Power. And if the Human
Power that made the Law, cannot take away this Right; the Stream cannot rise
higher than the Spring, nor the Effect have what the Cause had not, so that the
Law made by him cannot do it. If a Law attempts to take away this Right, it is
as bad, as if a Prince does it. As he is an unrighteous Prince, so is it an
unrighteous Law; and we do not cease to have this Right for either, but suffer
equally an Invasion of an unalienable Right in both.

Now, since Religion, however Persecuted, whether with or without Law, is an
unalienable Right: how should its having, or wanting a Civil Law, either give
or take away this forceable Defense of it. For its own Natural and Divine
Right, is as defensable by Natural Force, as I have shown, as any Civil Right
the Law will add to it.

And what is it, that a Civil Law does, toward this way of its Defense? It
maks it, say Mr. Johnson's Remarks on Doctor Sherlock' s Case of Resistance
etc. p. 19, 20.
they, a Civil Right and Property: And a Persecuting Law against it, though, as
it is wicked, it cannot command our Obedience; yet, as it is a Law, it may
dispose of our Civil Rights. True, a Civil Law, will make or unmake a Civil
Right, which gives or takes away a Civil Defense, by Courts and Law Suits. When
it has a Civil Right, it will have Redress in Courts, and have Men punished for
invading of Civil Liberties. And when it has lost this, by a Law against it;
its Professors must not come to Sue for in Court, or hope to find any help
there.

But what is this Defense of Courts, by being a Civil Right, to Natural
Defense, or defending it by Force of Arms? Were the Doctrine of Resistance
true, as I have shown, it need not go to Civil Right, to have this Natural
Defense: or, if it did, Civil Right would send it back again to Natural Right;
Civil Rights, when they come to this way of Defense, throwing aside what they
have by being Civil, and coming into the State of Natural Rights. So that
whilst it remains a Natural, or Divine Right, it is Defensible by Arms, as if
it were a Civil Right. And such a Right, true Religion always is, and however
Persecuted, whether with Law, or without, or against it. It holds this Right
unalienably under the unrighteous Invasion of Laws, as much as under the
illegal Invasion of Rulers. And having the Right as fully, if it were
Defensible this way, it might Defend it as lawfully against their Invasions, as
against his. And then the Professors of True, but Persecuted Religion, might
fight for it against their Persecuting Sovereigns, not only for the Laws, but
for the Truths sake; and be as Free to make this Defense for it, when it is
driven out by the Law of the Land, as when it has that Law on its side. Which,
besides what is said thereto above, I note against those, who make an armed
Defense of Religion among us, different from a like Defense in the days of the
Apostles and Primitive Persecutions: on account, Religion than had the Laws
against it; but now, through the blessing of God, it has the Laws on its side.

What has been offered upon this last Point, is sufficient also, over and above
what has been said to that before, against those, who make our case different,
from that of the Primitive Saints, either Jews or Christians: because the
Non-Resistance they paid, was not, say they, to limited Rulers, as our Kings
are, being bound up by Laws; but to Absolute Governors. For, though some are
more Absolute, i.e. more left to Discretion, and have fewer Human Laws to
direct them, than others: yet, were no Governors ever perfectly so. There were,
both Laws, and Popular Freedoms and Immunities, under the Roman Emperors, as I
have showed. And Laws not to be altered, under the Medes and Persians. And a
body of Laws, (which God Deuteronomy. xvii.18, 19
commanded them to keep always by them, to be well studied and versed therein)
to rule the Administration of the Israelitish and Jewish Kings. And where
Monarchs were left most to themselves, Nobis Romulus ut libitum imperitaverat.
Tacit. Ann. l. 3. p. 152.
Governing ut libitum, as Tacitus says of Romulus; when Populus nullis Legibus
tenebatur: arbitria Principum pro Legibus erant. Just. lib. 1. cap. 1.
arbitria Principum pro Legibus erant, as Justin testifies of the first Ages;
and they did Hoc Priami Gestamen erat, cum jura Vocatis more dabat Populis.
Aeneid. 7
jura Dare, as Virgil says of Priamus and the ancient Kings: i.e. when they
ruled and judged their Subjects mostly, not by any written Laws, but by their
own Reason and Equity: yet even then, were the Laws of God and Nature, always
to be a Rule to them in their Administrations.

Besides, all the Power of People, and the Liberty of resuming their primitive
natural Rights, and standing up to right themselves when wronged by their
Governors: is grounded, by the Advocates for Resistance, on the Original
Contract, whereby, in the first Framing and Constitution of every Government,
when the People, as they say, parted each with their native Liberty, and set
Governors over them, they every where made these Reserves for themselves. This
Original Contract, is the last Ground, when things are run up to the top, of
all Peoples rising in Arms against unjust Powers; thus reassuming the Authority
they had formerly entrusted, when they see it misemployed, and deposing those
Kings who had abused their Trust.

Now this Original Contract, particularly as to our own Nation, will not be
pretended, I believe, to be any where extant upon public Record. And the
rather, for that in Magna Charta it self, the grand Record of our Liberties;
those Liberties are not fetched from the Peoples own Reserves, as if originally
we came by them that way: but from the Kings Grants and Donations. Proem: Magn.
Chart.
Of our free and mere Will, we have given and granted to our Bishops, etc. and
to all Free Men of our Realm, these Liberties following. Gaudet regno Trojanus
Acestes, indicitque forum, and Patribus dat jura vocatis. Aen. lib. 5.
c. 1.
to have and to hold, to them and their Heirs, of us, and our Heirs for ever,
says the Charter. And much less, I think are we to expect any Records of such
Reserves, under the first and most ancient Governments. For under them, the
People were so far from making, or recording, any such fancied Reserves of
Rights and Privileges: that they had not any Record of Laws but what were in
their Princes Breasts, not so much as stipulating for any Rules whereby they
would be governed, but trusting and submitting themselves, to the Justice and
Discretion of their Rulers, as I have noted of the first Kings.

But this Contract, is fetched from the common Reason and Nature of things:
there being no other way possible, as these Men say, whereby Civil Government
should take Rise. Now the Nature of things, is one and the same, to all Times
and Places. And common Reason, must be as common to East as West: to the
Persians and Romans under those more absolute Powers; as to the Goths, or
Germans, or other Northern Nations, who have provided better for popular
Liberties. And therefore, if common Reason and the Nature of things, will carry
such an Original Contract, the ground of Resistance, for us; it would have done
as much for them. And if it was not sufficient, to authorize Resistance in
their Case, as these men themselves affirm, asserting them to have been under a
tie of Conscience to Passive Obedience: it cannot suffice any more to do it in
ours. Common Reason, and Nature of Government, gives equal provision to all,
and as much Original Contract to the Subjects of absolute Emperors, as to those
of legal Monarchs: who, whatever Liberties and Provisions they have more, have
them not from common Reason, but the special limitations of their own Laws. So
that on this account, we must not take more liberty to our selves, or make our
Case, in point of Resistance, different from theirs.

CHAP. VIII. No Resistance, on Pretense that acts against Law are
inautoritative.
BUT when our Rulers invade us against Right, say Julian Ap. p. 84. Thoughts of
a Priv. Person about Justice of Gent. Undertak. at York, p. 11.14.16.
some, What Authority is there in their Invasions? Has any Man Authority to
invade our Rights? And if our Governors have no Authority for their Invasion:
since we are to be subject only to Authority, is there any Obligation on us for
Submission? And may we not make Resistance, against unautoritative Acts? A
Liberty for Resistance, needs not Superiority, but Parity; for we may defend
our selves against our Equals. And when Kings act illegally, and invade Rights:
in those Acts, say some, they have no Authority, and Acts done against Law,
which are the Rule of the Polity, are politically powerless. So that we may
resist them in such Case, as we may our Equals; they acting there without
Authority, which is the same, as private Persons.

No, say I, under those illegal Actings, they are still Kings and Sovereigns.
Tho there be no Authority derived into the Action, which, if it be against the
Laws of God and the Land, is condemned and vacated, not authorized and enforced
by either of them: yet the Authority abides still in the Person. And as to the
dueness of Non-resistance in such illegal Actings, the Question is not, whether
the illegal Act has any Authority; but whether the Sovereign that acts so,
retains his Authority. For Passive Obedience, is due to the Person in
Authority: and whatever liberty we might otherwise take, to oppose such an
Action; we must keep passive, under such a Person. If, for all his illegal Act,
he is still thy Father; the fifth Commandment says, Honor and obey him. If he
retains his Authority over us, and continues to be the (...) or Higher Power;
S. Paul tells us, that in Conscience toward God, we must needs be subject to
him. And whilst we are to be subject, we must not resist: for when once we fall
to warlike Resisting, there is an end of Subjection. So that it is not enough
to say, the Illegality does disauthorize the Action, or hinder it from being
binding; unless it also disauthorize the Person, and make a Forfeiture of his
Authority over us. For whilst his Authority lasts, we are bound to continue his
Subjects; and that ties us to be passive in such Cases.

Now, a King may keep his Authority, for all he does some inautoritative, and
illegal Actions. He does not lose Power, by abusing his Power, or stretching to
make it more: nor make away that real Authority which he has, by going beyond it
in an unautoritative Act, or pretending to some Authority which he has not.

What Authority have any Sovereign Powers, to make Laws against the true
Religion? If their Authority is from God, I am sure he has given them no
Commission, to forbid what he has commanded. They go quite against the Rule of
Legislation, when they employ it in making Laws against him. And those Laws,
carry no binding Force from God along with them, to oblige Subjects to their
Observance. So that if by inautoritative Acts, be meant Acts against the Rule
of Administration; or without any real Right, to warrant the King himself in
commanding, and to oblige others to obey them: all Laws are inautoritative
Acts, which are made against the true Religion. But yet, they that urge this
Objection, will not say, that any Kings forfeit their Crowns, or ease their
Subjects of the Duty of Passive Obedience, by making persecuting Laws. Nay,
Julian the Ap. p. 74, 75.92. and others.
they say there is a necessity of not resisting, but being passive under them,
because they have such Laws whereby to persecute them.

What is the real and intrinsic Authority, or Legality, of a Sentence grossly
unjust, and apparently contrary to Law? I mean not only contrary to Legal
Forms, as a Judgment would be without a Jury: but contrary to those particular
Laws in any Case, which the Judge, proceeding in Form, ought to pronounce by. A
Man comes to a Judge and Jury, to have Law, or the benefit of those particular
Laws, which he grounds his Claim upon. And the Judge, is to pass Sentence
according to these Laws, and to give what the Laws give him. And, I suppose,
those Laws do not authorize this Sentence, if it grossly and corruptly perverts,
what they say. In this Case, if they authorize what the Judge says, I think
they must no longer authorize what they say themselves, since his Saying is
directly contrary to theirs. And accordingly, instead of authorizing, they will
reverse it, so soon as they fall into the hands of a more upright Judge and
Jury, that will find and pronounce aright. So that here is a Sentence against
the Laws, that should have ruled it: which, not having the Laws concerned
therein, to autorize and bear it out, if Authority must come from Law, I think
will be an inautoritative Act. But I imagine these Objectors do not believe, he
ceases thereupon immediately to be a Judge, which would vacate all the
Sentences he passes afterward. Or, that the aggrieved Parties have Remedy any
other way, than by legal Appeals. Wherein, if they can find no Redress at last
from the Supreme Power it self, yet are they not thereby set loose from being
any longer his Subjects, nor have any Discharge, as I think is confessed on all
hands, from their Passive Obedience.

How many illegal, and unautoritative Acts, were done by Saul, and Ahab, Ahaz,
and Manasse, and other ill Kings among the Jews; which yet did not unking them?
And by the Roman Emperors, as I have shown, which yet did not disrobe them of
their Purple, or free the poor oppressed Christians, and other Subjects of the
Empire, from being subject to, and passive under them? Among these, are
instances enough, as may appear from what is said above, of illegal Acts, against
the Authority of all Laws, both of God, and of their own Realms. And yet of the
Sovereigns, who were the illegal Actors, still retaining their Sovereign
Authority, and holding the Sufferers in their former state of Subjects, and
under an obligation of Conscience to Passive Obedience. And this is a clear
proof, that God, tho he has given Rules to higher Powers, which are Duties of
Governors, and according to which, at the great Day, he will judge them
himself: Yet, has not made these Rules of exercising Power, Conditions of their
holding Power, or Grounds of Forfeiture. He himself, under the most enormous
Breaches of these Rules, having plainly declared, by the inspired Penmen, of
those Princes that broke them, that they were still in Authority, and that their
Subjects, as they would answer the contrary to him, were to keep in their
Obedience and Duty to them notwithstanding. So that wheresoever any Forfeiture
of Crowns comes in, it must be, by some special provisions in a Peoples own
Laws. And where Law makes a Forfeiture, it will make a Prince forfeit in a
legal way, by appointing some superior Power to try the Fact, and judicially to
declare the Forfeiture. But I do not conceive, how there can be any legal way
of forfeiting, where the Prince is declared by Law, to be the Sole Supreme.

Now, if unautoritative Acts do not disautorize the person, and make him sink
into a private Man; but for all them, a King continues still to be a King:
where is the Argument for Resistance from such inautoritative Acts? Yes,
Thoughts of a Priv. Pers. etc. p. 11.
say they, when unjust Acts have no Authority in virtue of Self-defence, we may
resist, and defend our selves against them. True, where there is no other
hindrance to resisting, and defending our selves by Arms, but what is to be
looked for in the Action. But Resistance, and warlike Defense, tho it be for an
Action, must be of some Person. And what if there is something, to bar such
Resistance, in the Person? As I think the Law appoints in the Persons of Father
and Mother, when it declares, he shall surely be put to death, that smites
them. Exodus xxi.15. And in the Persons of Higher Powers, when it calls us to
honor, to keep subject, and not to resist them. So there is something in his
person, to keep out all Resistance, and arming against our Sovereign. The
Argument for not resisting, or making a warlike Defense against him, is because
he is King. And then, what takes off this, and can be an Argument for
Resistance, must be something that does unking him. And since such
unautoritative Acts, are no Forfeitures of Crowns; it is plain, whatever other
Immunities they are a ground of, they are no ground of levying War, or armed
Resistance.

This, I take to be a very good, and sufficient Ground, and I think it is the
true Ground, of Submission and Passive Obedience, under illegal Violence and
Persecutions. The illegal Act, I conceive, has nothing in it self to bar
Self-defence; having no Authority to bear out and enforce it, as may seem,
either from God or Man. Not from God; for if his Law carries his Authority, (and
where does he display his Authority, if not in his Laws?) what is against his
Law, is against his Authority. Nor from Man, for the same Reason, of its being
against humane Laws, which carry their Authority. But the Authority of the
Person, is a Bar to this way of Defense against our Sovereign. And when the
Sovereign will do such illegal Acts, tho he has no Authority to justify himself
therein, nor to make his unrighteous or illegal Commands, really obligatory and
binding: yet, because he is a Person, under whose Authority and Obedience we all
are, this will be the effect of them. Seeing Subjects under Government, can
have no Remedy, but what keeps the order of Government, and must be content
with so much, as keeping to that Order allows: till God alter his mind, we can
have no present Redress. And being his Subjects, we cannot go to arm against
him, to defend or right our selves. And this is Passive Obedience. So that when
the irreligion or illegality of the Command, exempts us from any Obligation, to
active Performance: this Authority of his Person, does notwithstanding lay on us
an Obligation, of keeping under his Obedience, and making no warlike Resistance.

And on these Grounds it will be easy to give a rational, and plain Answer to
those Questions, which the Disputers for Resistance shall think most posing,
about the Authority of Kings, when they act against Laws.

If it be asked, What is a Kings Authority, when he does such illegal Acts? It Is
just the same it was before he did them; for as he does not get, so he does not
lose any rightful, and real Authority thereby.

But what does his Authority give, to the illegal Act, or Order? Does it
authorize the Subjects in an illegal thing? or make the Law, which forbids it,
cease to be a Rule to them? No, the Laws of God and Men, are to be the Rules of
conscionable acting. The Authority of the Law, is the Authority of a Rule. And
for a Rule, it is the best Authority. And an humane Law, is the best Humane
Authority. And where Kings, neither make, nor unmake and repeal Laws, alone; the
King commanding in the Laws, is of more Authority to rule the Subjects Actings,
than the King commanding against them.

And what does his Authority give him, as to that particular illegal Act? Not to
be questionable, or accountable for it among Men, or coercible by Force and
armed Opposition. And that, because for all that act, he is still our King, and
we owe him Subjection. Receiving such illegal Acts from our King, we must
receive them as Subjects. And the obligation of continuing Subjects, excludes
all Liberty of armed Resistance.

Whence, say they, in an illegal Act, has a Sovereign Prince this Authority?
From the Fifth Commandment, and from all those Commandments, that require
Submission, and Obedience, and being subject unto Princes. For the plain intent
of all those Precepts, as may sufficiently appear, I think, from what I have
said on this Argument; is to require these, to Princes that break, as well as
to those that keep Laws; to unjust, as well as to righteous Sovereigns. And if
God commands us to submit, and keep in Subjection to a Sovereign Prince, that
acts against Laws; he must forbid us to resist such: for men put off
Subjection, when they fall to Resisting.

It may be asked still, has he it from the Law of the Land? Yes. What, from the
Law he invades? Does the Law give him Authority to break it self? No, but by all
those Laws, that declare he incurs no Forfeiture by such Invasions. For all
those Laws, that own and declare such Invader to be still our King, determine
our Subjection to him, and forbid us to resist him. For Men are no longer in
the state and posture of Subjects, when they come to arm against their
Sovereigns.

If a Man suffers illegally, they will demand by what Law? By none surely, for
then there is an end of the Illegality. But to ask for a Law for his suffering,
is to ask for something to justify, or make it just in the eye of Law, that he
should suffer. But this is not pretended from the Kings Authority; and it is
supposed to be an unjust, and illegal Suffering. But if the King has no
Authority, to justify the illegal Suffering; has he any Authority, to bar the
illegal Sufferers resisting? Yes, the Regal Authority not being lost by that
illegal Act, but still abiding in him. For all he makes a Man suffer against
Law, he is still his King. And that is a Reason against Resisting. For by all
Law, both of God and Man, we must be subject to our King. And he ceases to be
subject, that draws his Sword against him.

CHAP. IX. The Reasons of Non resistance. And how it makes not Arbitrary
Government.
I Shall only add now, in the last place, concerning this Non-resistance, or
not arming against invading Princes, required of, and practiced by the first
and best Christians, what Regards they were guided by, and what Reasons they
looked at, for this Observance.

1. The first and chiefest, was in Reverence to God's Ordinance, insomuch as
those Rulers, were Gods Anointed, his Ministers, or his Vicegerents. How can I
stretch forth my hand against Saul, says David, and be guiltle, seeing he is
the Lords anointed. 1 Samuel xxvi.9. and c. xxiv.6. And he that resists, shall
receive Damnation, says S. Paul, as resisting the Ordinance of God, Romans
xiii.2. And he is the Minister of God, wherefore ye must needs be subject, not
only for wrath, but also for conscience sake, v. 4, 5. And like to these, are
the Sayings of the Primitive Fathers, for Submission to the persecuting
Emperors. Tertullian grounds the Duty of Allegiance we owe the Emperor, on
this, that he is deputed by God, Apol. c. 30.
and has his Power from the same, from whom he has his Spirit: that he is one,
ib. c. 33.
quem Deus eligit, -- qui a nostro Deo constitutus, i.e. whom God has
appointed: ib. c. 34.
a Dominus Dei vice, Gods Vicegerent, or a Lord over us in Gods place and
stead: whom ad Scap. c. 2.
knowing a Deo constitui, to be Gods Ordinance, every Christian ought of
necessity to love, reverence, and wish safe. This made the Sacredness, and
Authority of the Emperor, in their eyes, because, as Athenagoras Legate. pro
Christ. p. 17.
tells Marcus and his Son Commodus, (...), their Empire they had received from
God. The same, which Dionysius of Alexandria ap. Eus. Hist. Eccl. l. 7. c. 11.
said afterward of Valerianus and Gallienus, to Aemilian the Praesect. And
because, as Theophilus says in his Book to Autolycus under the Emperor
Commodus, tho the Emperor Ad Autolyc. l. 1. p. 76.
is not God, yet he is (...), a Man ordained of God, and under him, to do
Judgment and Justice. And this also is the ground of Subjects Duty and
Allegiance, in the Doctrine of our Church. All Subjects do owe of bounden Duty,
Obedience, Submission, and Subjection, to the Higher Powers, for as much as
they be Gods Lieutenants, Gods Praesidents, Gods Officers, etc. says the Homily
of Obedience Part 1. And again, all Subjects are bound to obey them, yea though
they be evil, and that for Conscience sake, as Gods Ministers. -- Though they
be wicked, and abuse their Power: yet therefore it is not lawful for their
Subjects to withstand them, because, even wicked Rulers, have their Power and
Authority from God. Homily of Obedience Part 2.

Now, all these are Reasons, not to Resist the worst, as well as the best
Kings: the infringers of Rights, as well as the maintainers of them. For all
Men rightfully invested with Power, are Gods Ministers, his Anointed, and his
Ordinance, however they employ their Power. The bad are, as well as the good;
at their worst, as well as at their best times. Saul is the Lords Anointed, as
well as David; Lam. iv.20.
Zedekiah, as well as Josiah; Nero, Domitian, Dioclesian, or other bloody
Persecuting Emperors, as well as the most just and godly Kings. The same that
gave the Power, De Civit Dei, lib 5. c. 21.
says S. Austin, to Marius, gave it also to C. Caesar; he that conferred it on
Augustus, gave it also to Nero; he that bestowed it on the Vespasians, Father
and Son, those most obliging Emperors, bestowed it also on Domitian so infamous
for his Cruelties. And not to particularize any further, he that set up
Constantine the Christian Emperor, set up Julian too who Apostatized from
Christ. In reading the Holy Scriptures, says our Church, Part 1.
in the Homily against willful Rebellion, we shall find in very many and almost
infinite Places, as well of the Old Testament as of the New, that Kings and
Princes, as well the evil as the good, do Reign by Gods Ordinance, etc. They
have their Power and Authority from God, says the Part 2.
Homily of Obedience, and are to be obeyed as Gods Ministers, although they be
evil -- although they abuse their Power -- although they be wicked and wrong
doers -- and it is not lawful for Inferiors and Subjects, in any Case to resist
and withstand them.

Whatever the rightful Sovereign be then, that bears hard upon any Man; let me
ask him who is most uneasy, if, for all his Personal unworthiness, and
oppressive Administration, he be not still the Lords anointed, and the
Ordinance of God. And so long, if he will be a Follower of the Holy Scriptures,
the Primitive Fathers, or our own Church, whose Testimonies have been alleged,
how can he lift up his hand against him.

2. A second Ground of their Non-Resistance, was in Patience and Submission to
Gods Providence. In such hard Cases, they were like to ease their Suffering by
Patience, and make it worse by Resistance. In your Patience, says our Savior,
possess ye your Souls. Luke xxi.19. When the Cross was brought upon them, they
were called to take it up, not to drive it away; to follow Christ in bearing it
themselves, not to follow the World in endeavoring to Force it upon others:
according to those Precepts of our Lord, for taking up, and bearing his Cross.
These Persecutions they looked on, as sent by God for trial of their Patience,
not of their fighting Valor in making Resistance: and were careful under them,
to show invincible Stoutness in Sufferings; not refuse to Suffer, and rather
fight in their own Defense. The Cup, which my Father has given me, shall I not
Drink it? Therefore put up thy Sword, said Christ. Joh. xviii.11. Lo here is
the Patience of the Saints, says S. John, noting what in their Persecutions
they sought to Signalize. Rev. xiv.12. And, Absit ut Divina Secta dol^at pati,
in quo probatur: God forbid this Divine Sect should be against Suffering, which
is only Gods way of Trial and Probation, Apol. c. 37.
says Tertullian, of their patient and unresisting Sufferings, when they had
strength enough to defend themselves.

3. In faith in God, and trust that he, as Rightful Judge, would sooner or
later, as he saw best, Right their Cause. Vengeance is mine, I will repay,
says God; and they were content to leave it to him. Confidimus majestati ejus,
qui tam contemptum sui, quam servoram injurias, possit ulcissi. -- Cum tam
nefanda perpetimur, Deo permittimus ultionem. Lact. l. 5. c. 20.
We confide in him, who is able to take Vengeance, both for his own, and his
Servants injuries. -- When we suffer such unspeakable things, we leave it to
God to Right us, says Lactantius. Laesos u tio Divina Defendit. Inde est quod
nemo nostrum reluctatur, etsi nimius and copiosus sit noster Populus Cyprian ad
Demet. p. 192. Ed. Ox.
Against all your injuries, the Judgment and Vengeance of God is our Defense.
And upon that account it is, that none of us makes any Resistance, though we
have Numbers more than enough, says S Cyprian. And lo, here is the Faith, and
Patience of the Saints, said S. John. Rev. xiii.10. They committed their Rights
to him, when despoiled of them by unjust Force, and never went about to make
Parties and Tumults, by Force to Right themselves; to show the Faith they had
in his Justice, his Providence, and Promises; and how far, and freely, even in
these dearest and most concerning Interests, they durst trust him.

Now both these also, are Reasons equally not to Resist, under any rightful
Sovereigns. The Cross is the same, under one, as under others. The same Trial
of Patience, and of Faith, when they fall under the same distresses: whether by
Christian or Heathen, Sober or Dissolute, by Princes that Invade, or that
observe Civil Laws and Legal Properties.

Now, to all this, that has been said on this Subject, it would be a very weak
and unjust exception, to say, this forbidding of Resistance on violation of
Laws, is setting up for illegal and arbitrary Government. For to Govern
Arbitrarily, is to Rule by Discretion, or to have no written Laws to Govern by.
And where there are Stated Laws, to regulate and direct Administrations; there
is all the Human care that can be, to prevent Arbitrariness in Sovereigns.

There are but two ways, to limit and lay Restraints, or keep any Governor
within compass. One is, Laws; which restrain him as a Rule, by fixing and
prescribing for him, his just Bounds. The other, is a Superior Power, that can
call him to account when he Deviates, and forceably compel him to return into a
Right Course; and these restrain him as his Rulers. Now, as for this later way,
of appointing Higher Powers, for their Supervisors and Correctors: it is
visible this can be no way of restraining Sovereigns; who can be no longer
Sovereigns, but Subjects, if they have any Superiors, He that is by Law
declared the Supreme, especial the only Supreme in any Realm, must needs be
above all, and no Man can be above him. Though the Laws of his Realm, are to be
his Rule; yet no Man in his Realm can be his Ruler, nor they, who all profess
themselves made subject to, pretend to set upon him.

Besides, if such Correctors were appointed, to secure the Laws: yet would that
be only a Dream of Security, which would vanish, as Experience made us awake
and come to our selves, and not secure them really, more than they are secured
already. For these Correctors, being subject to like Over-sights, Passions, and
Misgovernments, are as liable to Prevaricate and Violate the Laws, as those
whom they are set to Supervise. The Laws are safe enough, in the Hands of good
Kings; and as unsafe, in the Hands of ill Correctors, as of ill Kings; and such
Correctors, are every whit as liable, and like as often to be ill, and abuse the
Laws, as Kings themselves. And what redress for the Invasions and breach of
Laws, when they do amiss? So that this does not Cure, but only shift the
Disease, which is uncureable under any Sovereign or last Judge, be it King or
Parliament. Army or Mobile, through the Nature of this World, and the
inseparable uncertainties of Human Affairs.

As in the ^^ne of Human Subordinations then, some must be Sovereigns; and
these must be Men, subject to be drawn aside like our selves: so can these have
no Restraint, but Laws; nor any Judge but God, and so be unaccountable here on
Earth. The only possible restraint of Arbitrariness in them, is Laws. And the
best restraint these can lay, is, if Acts of State and Justice, are to be sped,
not only by the Sovereign himself in Person, but by his Ministers. And if,
though the Sovereign himself is not, yet his Ministers are accountable, and
tryable for Breach of Laws, as well as others. Which, I think, is as much
security under a Sovereign, as Sovereignty allows. And this Human Security, we
have in this Realm, to Guard our Laws: although we may not resist our
Sovereign, and fight for those Laws against him by force of Arms; which is a
throwing off his Sovereignty over us, and setting up for our Selves.

But though this Doctrine of Non-Resistance, yea, even in Defense of Laws, does
not make Arbitrary Power: yet, on the other Hand I would have it considered,
whether the Liberty of Resistance, is not like to bring in Arbitrary
Subjection. They may cast off Obedience, say some, for Public Good, i.e. when
they see it Expedient, for they must judge of it. Is not this to set Subjects
loose, when they see Cause. And if they are Arbitrary Governors, who in Ruling
are left to Discretion: are not they also, as Arbitrary Subjects, who in
Obeying are left to Discretion? Now, to Cure Arbitrary Power, by Arbitrary
Obedience; is to Cure Tyrannical Government, by no Government, which is as bad,
nay, abundantly worse. The very worst of Tyrants, are the Ministers of God for
good, in comparison of no Government. One Tyrant's Lust, cannot Rifle all
Virgins; nor his Avarice, devour all Estates; nor his Revenge, reach all
Persons; nor his Cruelty, cut off the Common Wealth. But under no Government,
the Rabble will Govern all. And that will be branched out into many thousand
Tyrants, who Persecute without Pity, as well as Justice; and pull down and
spoil, without any Relentings; and have no Generosity to spare, or greatness of
Soul to neglect or leave any thing; but think the meanest Plunder a desirable
Prey, and sweep all before them. A Poor Man, that oppresses the Poor, is like
a sweeping Rain, says Solomon. Prove. xxviii.3. And I think the Experience we
have had of late, in these three Realms, of the Rabbles Ruling is enough to
convince all Considerate Men, that a few months of their Expedition, is much
more full of illegal Violence, Injustice, and Inhumanity, and a great deal more
formidable, than a Tyrants whole Reign.

FINIS.

