Good News FOR ENGLAND: OR, A PREDICTION, OF THE Happy Success that will attend
Their Majesty's Protestant Army now in Ireland; and the Miserable Fate of the
French and Irish Papists there in Arms and open Rebellion against Their
Majesty's.

SHOWING, How that by the Policy and Power of the Great Duke Schomberg, and the
rest of those worthy Gentlemen and Soldiers there under his Command, the late
King James and all his Adherents (that do not timely lay hold on Their most
Gracious Majesty's Act of Indemnity) will be totally brought unto Ruin and
Desolation; for Ireland must and will certainly be made subject to King William
and Queen Mary.

By W. K. Astrologer.

Licensed

October. 2. 1689. J. F.



LONDON, Printed for Randal Tailor near Stationers' Hall, 1689.

Good News FOR ENGLAND.
THE Noble Science of Astrology is an Honest, True and Lawful Art and Study,
though by two sorts of Men now adays slighted, vilified and condemned, (to wit)
the Envious and the Ignorant, both which have been sufficiently corrected and
refuted by the Learned Champions and Propagators of that sublime Knowledge.

But to come to our intended Business, an Honorable, Worthy and Loyal
Protestant Gentleman, with much Earnestness and Affection, desired me to erect
a Scheme, and give him my Judgment on the Affairs now depending in Ireland, and
according to his desire, I took the exact time of his propounding the Question,
and found the Heavens in the following Posture: And because it is so remarkable
and pertinent a Position, I was earnestly solicited to make it public, which I
have here done for the Reasons urged unto me.

Now that a Man may lawfully seek a Resolution on any lawful Enterprise, is
plain from that Example of David, who being in Keilah, and hearing that Saul
was advancing toward him, in order to besiege that City, was desirous to know
whether he would yea or no; and if so, then whether the Men of Keilah would be
true unto him, and not betray him into the Hands of Saul?

The SCHEME.
Sept. 21. 1689. at 6 h. P. M.
diagram for astrological prognostication

Judgment on it.
IN this Figure the strength or weakness of each Planet is as follows, viz.
Saturn is here found strong by eight Testimonies; Jupiter is weak by five
Testimonies; Mars is weak by three Testimonies; the Sun is weak by nine
Testimonies; Venus is equal in Fortitude, and Debilities; Mercury is strong by
sixteen Testimonies; and the Moon is strong by eighteen Testimonies; and thus
they stand according to their Position, omitting the Aspects either good or
evil, which shall be considered in the Sequel.

By the Strength of the envious Planet Saturn in the Seventh, the House
representing our Enemy, and the Square of Venus, Lady of the Seventh, unto the
part of Fortune, and her Opposition to Jupiter Lord of the Ninth, in the
Twelfth Retrograde, with the Opposition of Saturn to Mars Lord of the
Ascendant, may we plainly see the Miseries, Calamities, Afflictions and Sorrows
that have been inflicted upon the poor Protestants in the Kingdom of Ireland by
their implacable Enemies; and what unusual and unnatural Barbarity would be
further committed on all that either oppose them, or dissent from them in
either Principles or Practice, should but their Antichristian Arms prevail
against them.

By the Weakness of Jupiter in the Twelfth, we may behold what would be the
Fate of Religion, or at least the true Professors thereof, should our Enemies
prevail over us, viz. The True Religion it self would be contemned, cast by,
and trampled on by those Romish Idolators, and the true Professors and
Propagators of true Piety cast into Prison, harrassed and condemned to Death;
and others to perpetual Slavery.

By the Weakness of Mars, Lord of the Ascendant, and his Affliction by Saturn
Lord of the Tenth in the Seventh, may we be informed what Kindness the People
of England may expect from a Popish King and Governor, should they again have
such an Egyptian Plague or Task-Master.

But now let us see whether such a thing shall be yea or no, or whether the
Protestant or Popish Army shall become Lord and Master of Ireland?

Never could there have been a Figure erected (had the time been elected) more
pertinent to the matter in hand, or intent of the Querent, than this very Face
of Heaven is, wherein we have the Sign Aries Ascending, which Sign is truly
accounted the Horoscope of England, and Mars Lord thereof not long entered
Taurus, the Sign owning Ireland, thereby signifying the English Army now
Invading that Kingdom.

Saturn and Mars are mutually applying to an Opposition from the First and
Seventh House, which imports a Resolution in both Parties to meet, and that an
obstinate and Dreadful Fight may be expected between them. Saturn is (indeed at
present) much stronger than Mars, and there are more Planets relating to the
Seventh House, than there are to the First, which signifies the Enemy to be
more numerous than we; and the Lady of the Seventh House being with Cor Leonis,
puffs them up with Pride and Haughtiness, and with an expectation of Success:
But Oh! the miserable disappointment that they will certainly meet with, for
these Reasons in Art.

First, The Lady of the Seventh, is in the Sixth, in Opposition unto Jupiter
Lord of the Eighth, in the Twelfth, which imports the miserable Havoc that
will be made of them by Wounds, Sickness, Imprisonment, and Death.

Secondly, The Sun is in the Sixth with the Dragon's Tail, which signifies
Infamy and Disgrace, if not Imprisonment and Destruction to a Great Don amongst
them.

Thirdly, The Moon, Lady of the Fourth in the First in her Exaltation, is a
sure Argument that the Country of Ireland will surely fall into our Hands, and
wholly at the Protestant Disposal and Use.

Fourthly, That because Mars disposes of Saturn, and Luna strong in the
Ascendant, and applying to the Square of Venus, as she is Lady of the Seventh,
there is no doubt but the Enemy will be routed, stand they never so obstinate.

Fifthly, The Trine of Jupitur and Mercury signifies a Beneficial, Wise, and
Successful Conclusion of this great Affair unto England, and the Protestant
Army; for Mercury is very potent in the Figure, and is Lord of the Second
House, and Jupiter is exalted in the Fourth.

Sixthly, Mars is exalted in the Tenth, but Saturn has his Fall in the
Ascendant; Mars is Rising, but Saturn is Setting; Mars by his Retrograde Motion
returns in Aries his own House, and there becomes Direct; Venus, Lady of the
Seventh, is trooping into Virgo her Fall; and Saturn continues under the
Dispose of Mars Lord of the Ascendant; and the Head of the Dragon is in
England's Horoscope; from all which may thus much be said truly, That the
Vanity of the Papists, Jacobites, or Grumbletonians is far beyond Laughter, for
to think, or rather dream of a Victory, or that ever the Late King James should
regain his Abdicated Crown and Dignity, notwithstanding the Assistance of his
most Christian Majesty. No, the British Imperial Crowns are seated on the
Sacred Heads of such as know well how to keep them, to the Terror and
Perplexity of their Enemies, but the due Praise and Glory of God.

Vivant Rex Guilielmus, and Regina Maria.
POSTSCRIPT.
LEt not any Astrological Reader wonder that I should be so large and
peremptory on a Horary Question; for I assure him, that I do not reckon it the
least part of the Art; tho I really esteem of every part thereof: But for to
back the Truth of what I have said on the preceding Figure (with other parts of
Astrology) let the Geneathliacal Astrologer consider, That soon after an
Eclipse of the Sun upon the place of the Sun, in the late Kings Nativity, and
the Conjunction of the two Malevolent Planets, on the same place he Abdicated
his Throne, and has ever since strugled under those Influences, and with
French and Irish Forces has been fumbling for it again: But now in August
there happened an Opposition of those very Planets, Saturn then on the very
place aforesaid; soon after which the Valiant, Politic, and Successful General
Schomberg with their Majesty's Forces entered that Kingdom; and now about the
22d day of this Instant September, those Planets make a second Opposition, and
Saturn still near the same place, and also Mars in Taurus, Ireland's Horoscope;
all which, according to Geneathliacal and Mundane Astrology, does signify no
other than what we have said on this Horary Question; and that the Duke will
purchase to himself and his Army a Lasting Name and Fame, by routing the Popish
Hornets out of the Protestant Hive in Ireland. And thus much are we encouraged
by the Stars, which are Gods Instruments: Now let us consider some more Divine
Encouragement which should animate our Protestant Souls and Soldiers to the
highest pitch of Valor and Prowess: For, dear Hearts of Gold, you Fight the
Lord of Hosts his Battle; but your Enemy Fights the Battle of their Lord God
the Pope; for so their great Cardinal Bellarmine, and other Belweathers of Rome
have called him; you fight for the Liberty of the Glorious Gospel of Jesus
Christ: Your Adversaries Fight for that bundle of Trumpery, the Mass Book: You
Fight for a Protestant King and Queen, that will maintain you and yours in
their Just Rights and Privileges: The Enemy Fights to enslave you and your
Posterity's Souls, Bodies, and Purses, and devour you by French and Irish
Canibals: Therefore, although the Enemy (with the Haughty Sennacherib) boast
themselves in their Multitude, and humane (I had almost said inhumane)
Strength; yet you know that you go forth to Battle in the Strength of the Lord
your God, who can with a small Number, and without Bow or Arrow, Spear or
Shield, with a few Lappers of Water, destroy the Midianites and Amalekites,
although as numerous as Grasshoppers; and I assure you (that as in Deborah and
Barach's time, so now) the Stars in their Course Fight, and will Fight against
the Romish Jabin and Sisera; and you have a Mighty Man of Valor and Conduct
for your Leader; therefore make good use of the Sword of the Lord and of
Gideon, and the work will be done, to the shame of such as Live in a flavish
Fear, or Treasonable Hope of the late Kings Return.

FINIS.

