DEATH MADE Comfortable: OR The Way to Dye Well: Consisting of Directions for
an Holy and an Happy Death.

Together with An Office for the Sick: and for certain kinds of bodily illness:

And for dying Persons.

And proper Prayers upon the Death of Friends.

By JOHN KETTLEWELL, a Presbyter of the Church of England.

LONDON, Printed for Robert Kettlewell:

And are to be sold by Sam. Keble, at the Turks. head over against Fetter-Lane
in Fleet Street. MDCXCV.

THE PREFACE.
EVery Person, who comes into this World under the Guilt of Sin, is a Debtor to
Death. And this Debt sooner or later all must pay; even they, who fence
themselves about with the strongest Armies, or heap up Riches as if they were
always to possess them, or whose daily Business it is to drown all Thoughts of
Death in the Noise of Mirth and Pleasures. In the midst of all their Care and
Labor to avoid him, Death will surely meet them, and spoil all their Glory and
Iollity; and that commonly when they least expect him. And then he makes them
see their own Vanity, and the Vanity of all earthly things, which nothing else
could teach them to consider of. For he shows us the Shame of our Bodies, and
makes the Pride of Human Greatness to become an easy Conquest and inglorious
Prey for Worms, and brings all earthly Hopes and Projects to end and hide
themselves in Dust.

This is a thing, which all Men know, and all Men fear. And they who study
most, to keep the Thoughts of Death far from them, do yet certainly know that
it will come. And happy then is he, whose Mind is so well prepared and
^ortified, that it can neither fright nor hurt him; who has disarmed this Job.
18. 14.
King of Terrors, and made this great Enemy of Nature to become a Friend.

All this, Religion will do, if we will make a right use of it. For 1 Cor. 15.
56.
the sting of death is sin, and true Repentance takes that out. And if we take
care, that our Life contain nothing terrifying, our Death need not. And the
compleatest Victory over Death is Eternal Life, and the same Repentance secures
us thereof. And Trust in God fortifies us against Fear, and Patience makes our
Pains lighter. So that whilst by true Devotion we are spending our selves in
these Exercises, we are dressing our Souls in Armor, which will not only
sustain the Shock of Death, but conquer it with all its Strength and Terror.

And the business of these Papers, is to furnish out thoughts for all those who
are willing and d^sirous to use the same, whereby all this may be done. And
whereby we may receive Sickness, and meet. Death, so as at the same time to
have enough under them to support and comfort us, and in the end to be made
better by both.

And all this I treat of, not as a man who is preaching to men at ease, who
must be diverted and entertained with nice inquiries, and fine discourses and
speculations about Death. But as one who is called to sick and dying Persons,
who desire to be helped and directed in things of use, and told those matters
which are fit, to support and ease their weary Souls, and to dress them in such
habits, as are the best defense both against the sting and terror of their
approaching Enemy.

I have first, according to the best of my skill, given them directions what to
do, and wherein to spend their care, through, all the steps and progress of their
sickness, from its first seizure to their departure. I show them what will
render their sickbed carriage rewardable, and its Sorrows ^olerable and
comfortable. How they are like to be most easy to themselves, and may most
profitably choose or improve the Company, and employ and receive the services,
and kind Offices of others. What they are to do, that they may dye well, and be
happy and full of Comfort in their Death and after it; and how it is fit for
them to part with all men, and take a decent and a Christian leave of this
World.

And in regard Devotion is the chief work, and the best support of sick and
dying Persons, to these directions, I have added Offices of Devotion.

In these, I have made collections of select and proper Scriptures, upon the
several duties and necessities of sick or dying Persons, which I have ranged
and put in order the best I can, for their comfort and instruction. And these
they may resort to, as a Storehouse of Divine Sentences, fit to direct their
practice in the virtues, and to cheer and revive their Spirits under all the
sorrows of their Affliction. How forceable are right words, says Job under the
bitterness of his sorrows. Job 6. 25. And heaviness in the heart of man makes
it stoop: but a good word makes it glad, says Solomon Prove. 12. 25. But the
good words which God himself speaks to us, do leave a much stronger impression,
and give more ease, and do more revive and make glad the Heart, than any others.

And after these collections of Scriptures, I have furnished them with variety
of fit and proper Prayers, upon their several Duties, or Needs, in that
condition. And as I was able, I have stored those Prayers with such proper
thoughts and considerations, as may serve at once, both to express and put up
to God the several bounden duties and tempers required of us, and also to
ingenerate and increase the same in our own minds.

And to these for sick and dying Persons, I have annexed like Devotional helps,
for Women with Child, or in Child Birth, and for some other cases of Bodily
distempers and Calamities. And to conclude all, I have added Devotions on the
Death of Friends, and made particular Prayers for those cases which usually are
most affecting, and provided them with such considerations, as seem to me to be
most proper and of greatest force to support and comfort us, under such
mortifying and afflictive losses.

And in all these Prayers, I have taken care to be as instructive as I can, in
the several States and Cases they refer to, that we may see what our work and
wants are under them, and know what we have to mind and do therein, better than
we knew before. And so likewise in the several duties, which the Prayers are
made upon. For I have endeavored therein, especially in the Prayers about
Trust in God, and about Patience (which are the virtues most tried on
sick-beds, and indeed of most general use through the whole course of our lives)
to set off the several Acts, wherein we are to exercise and show forth those
Graces; and the most proper and important helps and considerations, whereby we
are like to be most quickened, and best assisted in our performance of them.
And therefore when any are desirous to increase knowledge, and improve their
understandings therein, they may read the Prayers, or have them read to them,
tho not in way of Devotion, but as Discourses upon them.

And these Offices for sick or dying Persons, should not be neglected or thrown
aside by men in Health, as if they were a Study and Employment only for
sick-beds. For living men must think of Death, and prepare for it, as well as
dying: and if whilst health and strength lasts, we throw these Thoughts and
Preparations by, when it comes it will be like to find us unready. And then we
can neither dye comfortably, nor safely.

For when once the Bridegroom is come, as our Savior tells us Mat. 25.
in the Parable of the wise and foolish Virgins, ver. 1.
they that are ready go in with him to the Marriage. And if any want ver. 8. 1^.
Oil in their Lamps, and need to seek it, when they should go out to meet him,
he will enter without them, and then the door is shut, and will not be opened
again for them. If they are ready with Oil in their Lamps, when ver. 7. (...)
the Cry of the Bridegroom comes they may fall to trim them: but they must not
have their Oil to seek, or the virtues of a deathbed to learn, when they are
called forth to show and take comfort in them.

Besides, Repentance, and Reconciliation, and satisfaction for injuries, and
settling ones worldly affairs, are a work most fit and proper for the best days
of life. And resignation, and trust in God, and patience, and thankfulness,
(the great virtues and employment of sick-beds) are all Duties as necessary and
acceptable in Health, as they are in sickness. Death it self, is but the last
Act, and end of Life. And those spiritual exercises, which make us at last to
dye well and happyly, are but the last Acts of those Duties, which had made us
live well and Holily before.

Defer not therefore, as the wise Son of Syrach says, until Death to be
justified. But humble thy self before thou be sick, and in the time of sins
show Repentance. Before Judgment examine thy self, and in the day of visitation
thou shall find mercy. Ecclus. 18, 20, 21, 22.

But when we come to be sick, then are we most especially to make such Offices
our Employment, and to seek to them as our chiefest comfort. And each one may
pick out Prayers for himself on one Head or another, according as those wants
shall require, which at that time are most pressing upon his body or his
spirit, or which in the present temper of his Soul he is best disposed for. And
he may use sometimes more of them, and sometimes fewer, according as he finds
his strength and time will bear. And these, when he is in strength and
circumstances fit for it, he may read himself; but at other times, they may be
read to him for his spirit to repeat and send up to God, by some religious
Friend who attends about him. Or they may be read to him, as a Chapter of
seasonable and needful Doctrine and Direction, which will lay such
considerations before him, as are fit to guide and comfort him in that
condition, when he is less able to bear the Fatigue and expensive pains of
Devotion.

As for some distempers, they are slow and chronical, and carry us off by
lingering degrees. And in these, men have time enough to employ, if they have
but the Will and Heart to employ it, in these or such like Offices, which teach
them both how to sustain sickness, and how to prepare for Death.

Other Distempers, indeed, are more violent and acute, which both carry us off
suddenly, and whilst we are struggling with them, leave us little mental vigor
or ability. And under these, there is less to be done in this way. But
something may be done, tho more short and broken: and with more application and
liveliness, when it pleases God they have intervals of ease, or any recruit of
spirits. And they have great need to make the best of these opportunities, and
to do as much as they can in their condition, and spend as many thoughts in
such Devotions as they have leisure and strength for. And as for the great
defectiveness in exercising these Deathbed Graces, which will unavoidably
attend this case, it will be best provided for, by their making these thoughts
their great business, and familiarizing the same to their minds in time of
Health.

In these matters, tho many and the most important things, are common to all
sick or dying Persons; yet some are particular to each, and all have not the
same wants or complaints. And therefore whilst a Prayer descends to
particulars, to suit and serve one persons case; it may contain some clauses or
expressions, which are not suitable to another. But in this, the Readers
themselves are to have and use a discretion, and must omit such passages as do
not belong to them, making use only of the rest which do. And think, that although
these passges are not for their use, yet hitting the case of others who are
touched and afflicted in those particulars, they may be received and used by
them with great thankfulness.

This Treatise I had begun, and had made some considerable progress in it; but
had laid it aside again, by reason of some hindrances. But afterward being
brought my self into a state of more uncertain Health and Life, by the most
wise and good ordering of Almighty God, I resumed it, and made such haste, as
the needful attendacne of my health would allow, to finish it. For I was
desirous, to have some benefit, and help thereby my self, whilst I live; as
well as to leave it to be some way helpful unto others, and come in by this
means to hear some part of their Burdens, if it please God (at whose wise and
good choice I am and desire to be) that I dye of this illness. And if any
devout Readers receive any comfort or spiritual improvement, from this Poor
Heb. ^. 10.
Labor of Love, to my Blessed Master, and to them, as they have the offer of
my pains, I hope they will vouchsafe me the benefit of their Prayers, and that
God will have the Glory of all.

From my House in London, August 17. 1694.
DIRECTIONS FOR AN Holy and Happy Death, In very Particular, but Brief
instructions, how to order and carry our Selves, under Sickness and the Several
Trials and Accidents thereof, and at the Approach of Death.
CHAP. I.
Of the Sick man's thoughts of leaving the World, and setting his Affairs in
Order: and of the care of his Body.
WHen God arrests us with Sickness, it is time to think of leaving this World.
Not that every Man who falls Sick, must presently give himself up for Dead: but
because Sickness puts Life in hazard, and brings a Man to Resign himself into
the Hands of God, whether he shall dye thereof or no.

To think of leaving the World, is not only profitable, but needful at all
times. For the Great Business we have to do here, is to prepare for an happy
Departure. And if we do not think of it, we are like to be very ill prepared
for it. In our days of Health and Pleasure, we must call these thoughts to us;
but when Sickness comes, it calls us to them, and Naturally imprints the same.
And it is our truest wisdom, to entertain them in our Sickness. For if we dye,
we shall all judge it was the best way we had to employ our thoughts; and that
of all things, Death should not be met unthought of. And they render us fitter
to Live, if God spare us. They make Death Safer, but do not hasten or bring it
sooner; and are no hindrance to our Living longer, but a great help if we
recover to our Living better.

In this Preparation to leave the World, the Sick Persons first care, is to
separate himself from worldly cares and encumbrances of Business. Let him look
upon himself, as one called off from the conduct of these matters, to the
giving a strict account of ^^^m. And who has work enough cut out for his
thoughts and prepare to take a decent leave of this World, and to Mat. 25. 7.
trim up his Lamp and (...) his Soul for a better. His business now is, how to
meet Death with most safety and comfort to himself, if he dies, as for ought he
knows he may dye of this Sickness; and to commit no Errors therein, because he
is to dye, but once, and cannot afterward amend them. The work and worldly
Cares of Life, are to be left to those who think of living; but how to dye is
the Business that lies before him.

To cast off these worldly Cares, it is fit he first settle them. And that is by
setting his House in order, and making his ^ill.

This, methinks, should be done with great consideration, and Men are wanting
in that Prudence and Care, which they usually show in their affairs through all
their Lives, if this is left to be clapped up in haste at their Deaths. When they
dispose of a little parcel of Land, or of a moderate sum of money, they
consider well of it before they part with it. And if they are thus considerate,
when they dispose of any single Branch of their Estate, must that be left to be
the only hasty and unconsidered act, when they are to dispose of all?

When a Person has his Worldly Estate to give away, it will take much thought
to do it like a wise Man, and a good Christian. To consider, what Portions are
fit to be given to Dependants, as Recompense of Diligence and good Services.
What to Benefactors, as respectful tokens of Gratitude, for Favors and
obligations. What to particular Friends and acquaintance, as Memorials of Love
and Dearness. What among Kindred, in Declaration of natural Affection, for
their nearness, their deserts, or their wants. And what to himself, for so I
more especially call that which is given to Religious or Pious uses, since
these works follow him, and these layings out go along with him, to be
recompensed and repaid in a better place. Such as are, all gifts of
Restitution, when he had wronged or defrauded any Persons; of equitable
compensation, where he has taken too great advantage of other Peoples wants or
weakness, and been too hard upon them, and made too great advantage of them, in
Bargaining or Dealing; of Charity or Piety, in Gifts or Settlements on the Poor
and Needy, or for the encouragement and promotion of piety. To settle Accounts
in Dealing, what he ows, or what is owing unto him; what he has in his hands in
trust for others, and what he has left in their hands, or in trust with them.

For this disposal, he must remember, is the Farewell he takes of all the World.
And when he is parting, with Kindred and Relations, Friends and Benefactors,
Servants and Dependants, Chapmen and Customers, Poor and Rich, Sacred and
Secular Persons; a Wise and Good Man, who has carried it well toward them all
his Life, should think of continuing to do the same, and supplying of former
Defects, at his Death, and study to take a fair, and Friendly, and decent leave
of all. Especially to carry it as becomes him toward God, and in this great
disposal of all his Goods, to look at him the Sovereign Donor of them.

And to do all this with discretion, and to a Man's satisfaction, will require
consideration. And therefore is like to be best dispatched, whilst the Person
has both Ability and Leisure for it. And accordingly is always most
providently, and is like to be most perfectly settled, in time of Health:
However in the beginnings of Sickness, e're Nature is weak, and Time is short,
or a Disease is come to Extremities.

When all his Worldly cares and concerns are thus settled and laid aside,
having taken this leave of the World, he may give himself up to the Will and
good Pleasure of Almighty God, to dispose of him either in Life or Death, and
make his Sickness end either in Health or Heaven, as he sees will make most for
the Sickmans good and for his own Glory.

If the Physicians are called in to take care of his Body, it is fit he receive
their advice with meekness and thankfulness, and willingly follow and submit
himself to their wholesome and Reasonable Directions. A Prudent and
Compassionate Physician, will be tenderly and conscientiously careful of his
ease, so far as that is consistent with the Care of his Health. Especially he
will consider well, how he proposes, and much more how he presses any Medicine,
which the Patient has an Antipathy against, and which is found greatly to
disorder him, though it generally relieve others. And when he sends for him, he
must put his Body into his Hands under God, and willingly take such Medicines,
and submit to such Rules and Restraints, as he Judges needful for his Safety,
or for the Recovery of his Health: and not order and tell his Physician what he
shall prescribe to him, nor weary him out with importunities to let him have
what he himself fancies, though the other thinks it would be to his prejudice.

And these prescriptions of the Physician he must use, with looking up to God
in the first place, for the good effect of all Medicines; and without
fretfulness and accusations of the means and methods, if, by the pleasure of
God, the Disease increase and grow more troublesome in spite of all Remedies;
and without being too eagerly desirous of Life or ease, unless God please;
thanking his Physician for the ease which he studies, but at the same time
submitting to God for the Pains which he sends.

And let him still remember, to make fervent Prayers one ingredient in all his
Medicines, considering, that since it is God who works cures, Prayers are as
necessary thereto as any thing else. He must not like Asa, 2 Cron. 16. 12.
set God a side when he seeks to the Physicians; but expect all the Cure from
Gods blessing, and when it comes, give him the chief Honor and Praise for the
same, and acknowledge that the Prayers of pious Friends have been among the
powerfullest of his Medicines.

If it be thought needful or profitable for the body some times at intervals,
especially in slow and languishing diseases, to divert his spirits, let it not
be by reading Plays or Romances, or foolish and undue Ideas of Love and Honor,
which feed or revive vain thoughts; nor by Play or other things, fit to excite
Passion, or exercise Covetousness: but in pastimes of least lightness, and
fewest temptations, and used with moderation, remembering that on a sickbed,
when a man's time is almost spent, it is not for him to cast about how to pass
away his time, but how to redeem and improve it.

Let the reading which is read to him, and the conversation which is held with
him, be suitable to one in his condition. Not light, to lessen his seriousness;
nor in any thing vicious, uttering things either against Modesty, or against
Piety, or against Justice, or against Charity: All which may either leave ill
impressions upon him, by giving his spirit a tincture of the same; or bring him
into a snare, by thinking that he has been wanting in reproof thereof, out of
too little respect to God, and too much to the speakers; by either of which, he
is the worse for them.

But let all that passes be fit, to suit the seriousness, and preserve the
innocence, and help on some virtues, but hinder none, that are befitting a
Person in his condition: Whereof I shall say more in the ensuing directions.

CHAP. II.
Of settling his Accounts, and securing his Peace with God, by Repentance,
Faith, and Continuance in the Unity of the Church.
BUT whilst this care is taken for the Body, the chief thing which he has to
employ himself in on his Sickbed after the settlement of his Worldly Estate,
is to take care of his Soul. This must exercise his own thoughts, when he is by
himself. And for this, he must call in the assistance of the guides of Souls,
^am. 5. 14.
Sending for the Elders of the Church that they may Pray over him, and assist
and Comfort him by words spoken in their due Season, and Administer to him the
Word, and the benefit of Absolution, and the Holy Communion, resolving and
assisting him in all things, that may be needful for the finishing of his
Repentance, the support of his Spirit, or the Peace of his Conscience.

And in this Care of his Soul, these things are chiefly to employ his own
thoughts, or his Guides assistance.

1. To settle his Account, and secure his Peace with Almighty God. And in care
of this, let his work be,

1. To finish his Repentance. And in order thereto, let him carefully review
all his past life, and the present frame and habit of his Mind. And let him
diligently observe what is good in either, and with all Humility thank God for
it, and take comfort in it; and what is amiss in both, and work himself up into
true contrition for the same, affectionately bewailing his extreme folly and
unworthiness therein.

And let him fix, holy, deliberate, and unreserved purposes against all his
former Offenses.

And make all due and reasonable satisfaction, for all Wrongs done by him to
any Persons, by any ways.

And take care of the payment of all his just Debts.

And seek Reconciliation where he has given any just Offense.

And forgive those who have injured or disobliged him.

And Dan. 4. 27.
break off his Iniquity by Righteousness, or by being more abundant in
Alms-Deeds; and consummate and finish any good designs, which he had piously
laid in his Health, and would not lose the reward thereof, by having them dropped
at his Death.

And in these ways of expiating Sins, let him earnestly beg God's Pardon, and
comfortably hope for the same, through the Merits of Jesus Christ.

And in the care of paying his Debts, and making Restitution, or giving
Charitable or Pious Gifts, if he can, let him settle and finish them himself
before his own Death; and not refer all to a Will, and leave the accomplishment
and recompense of so rewardable purposes, to the contingencies of time, and the
Fidelity, Kindness, or care of Executors. Sometimes, indeed, the Surprise of
Dying Persons is so great, that they must leave these things to others. And
sometimes the Persons entrusted, are fit to serve the Dying Persons ends, and
really do serve them, to advantage. But this is not ordinarily to be trusted
to, if he can help it. For why should he think they will make more dispatch, or
find fewer delays and put offs in doing these things for him, than he did in
doing them for himself? He has a quicker sense of his own burdens, and of his
own desires and longings, than another ordinarily can, or will have: and if for
all that, he shall delay to disburden his own Soul, and consummate his own
desires and purposes when he may, why may not they do so too?

And on this point let him often say,

Ps. 5^. 2, ^, 17.
A broken and a contrite Heart, Lord, thou will not despise.

I acknowledge my transgressions, and my Sins are ever before me.

Wash me thoroughly from mine iniquities, and cleanse me from my Sins, Amen.

Luke 18. 13
Lord, be merciful to me a Sinner, Amen.

Oh let 1. Jo. 1. 7.
the Blood of Jesus, cleanse me from all my Sins, Amen.

Lord, ^uke, 15. 18. 19.
I have Sinned against Heaven, and before thee, and am no more worthy to be
called thy Son; make me as one of thy hired Servants, Amen.

Mat. 6. 12.
Forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive them that Trespass against us, Amen.

2. To show forth his Faith, which he may do by often repeating his Creed.

I believe in thee, O God! the Father Almighty, and that thou art the maker of
Heaven and Earth.

And I believe in thee, O Jesu Christ! that thou art Gods only Son, and our
Lord. I believe that thou wast conceived by the Holy Ghost, and born of the
Virgin mary. That thou did Suffer under Pontius Pilate, wast Crucified, Dead
and Buried, and descendest into Hell. That thou did rise again the third day
from the Dead. That thou did ascend into Heaven and there now sit at the
Right Hand of God. And that from thence, thou shall come again to Judge both
the Quick and the Dead.

I believe in thee, also, O! Holy Ghost.

I likewise believe, that my Blessed Savior had, and has, and whilst the
World lasts ever will have on Earth, an Holy Catholic Church. And that in this
Church, there is to be a Communion of Saints. I believe also, that therein is
to be had Remission of Sins. And after Death, I believe there shall be a
Resurrection of the Body both for good and bad, and a Life Everlasting for the
Righteous, Amen.

And let him often say,

Man. ^ 24.
Lord, I Believe, Help thou mine unbelief, Amen.

Luke 17. 5.
Lord, increase my Faith, Amen.

All this, O! Lord, I stedfasty believe, Oh! keep me from having my (...)
Portion among unbelievers, Amen.

Lord, I thank thee, that I have been instructed in this Belief, and Professed
it in my Life, Amen.

Lord, keep me from wavering, or any ways doubting of the same in my weakness,
Amen.

Lord, give me the comfort of this belief at my death, and make me find the
Blessing of it after death Amen.

And if the Adversary shall suggest doubts and suspicions to him in his
weakness, about any of the Articles of his Faith, or points of Religion; so far
as the doubt comes with any offer of Argument or Reason with it, it should have
a Rational Satisfaction.

But, if formerly they have been persons of sincere Consciences, in that State,
their doubts of these things are much oftener an irresoluteness owing to their
present bodily weakness and Satan's Suggestions, than an unsettlement of Belief
owing to Arguments. And then, these new doubts and suspicions are to be looked
on by the Sick Man, rather as Temptations, and an advantage taken of his
present feebleness and lowness of Spirit, which may raise or increase
Melancholy that is naturally apt to make one mistrustful and irresolute, and
he will guard better against them by Devotion, than by Disputation. And
therefore in this case, let him not debate them, but reject them, and pray
against them. And think it reasonable to abide by his former persuasions about
these matters, which he took up in time of Health and Strength, when he had
both ability, and leisure to examine them; and not exchange them for Sickbed
Fancys, when he has neither.

3. To Profess his Continuance in the Unity of the Church, and that as he has
lived, so now by Gods Grace he is preparing himself to Dye, in the Communion
thereof.

And let him often say,

Lord, as I have endeavored to live, so now I profess to Dye in the Communion
of Saints, and in the Ephesians. 4. 3, 4.
one Body, whereof thou art the Plessed Head, keeping therein to the last, the
Unity of the Spirit, and the Bond of Peace, Amen.

For I profess thy true Faith, O! my God, and present unto thee Holy Prayers,
and a Pure Worship, in the Unity and Communion of thy Holy Church.

Particularly, O! Lord, I profess this Faith, and present this Worship, in due
adherence, and subjection and obedience, to those Ordox Pastors, whom thou have
set over me in this Church, where I live.

And I profess and present the same, in Hearty concurrence and Communion, with
all other Faithful Christians and Communicating Members of this Body, in all
other Times, and Places; and with Brotherly Affection, Concern, and
Intercession with thee for them wheresoever placed or dispersed, as well as for
my self.

I am most ready to receive and join with them in these professions, and in
this worship, whenever thy Providence shall bring us together. To seek their
Communion, passing through all places. And to own them as my Brethren, coming
from all Countries. And to be heartily affected with what befalls them, either
Particular Persons, or whole Churches, and rejoice in their Prosperity and
Peace, as 1 Cor. 12. 26.
one member should in the joy of another, Amen.

And as for those, who are broken off from this true Faith and Worship, or from
the Unity and Peace of thy Church, Lord, I look upon them with the Bowels of a
Brother, not with the Insults and Triumphs of an Enemy.

I pity all Heretics, and pray that they may return to be sound in the Faith.

I pity all Schismatics, and pray that they may return to the Unity, and
Communion of thy Church.

And, O! Blessed Lord, do thou give unto them, humble and teachable minds, that
so they may either all see the way of thy truth, or at least that numbers among
those who do not, may be pitiable and excusable before thee, under their Error
and mistake of it, Amen.

And as for all the divisions, which have rent thy Church into pieces, O!
Blessed Jesu, I do most heartily lament, and bewail them.

My Heart, O! Prince of Peace, is with them, who love to see those Truths that
make for Peace, and who long and labor to heal thy Churches Breaches.

I utterly disclaim all bitter Zeal, and cruel and Unchristian violence,
against Persons of different Parties from me.

I am ready, both willingly to see and joyfully to own, all that is good, and
all that is thine, O! my dear Lord, in any of their Persons, or Actings: And am
Religiously careful, not to make any of them worse than they really are, by my
evil Surmizes; but to hope and surmize the best of them, which their case and
carriage can reasonably bear.

And I am, and through thy Grace, O! Merciful Savior, ever will be ready, to
show them all Offices of Justice, and Humanity, and of common Charity,
notwithstanding their Communion is different from mine, Amen.

And after these things are done, to procure God's Peace, for the quieting and
comforting his Conscience with the lively hopes thereof, he may receive the
benefit of Absolution. And also the Holy Communion, which he must not omit if
he can have it, looking on it, both as God's own sure Seal of Remission of his
Sins; and also as his own The Great Council of Nice calls it (...) the most
necessary Viaiticum of Dying Men. ^an. 13.
Viaticum or Provision by the way, to strengthen and support his Spirit, and
keep him from faintness, or failures through all the remainder of his difficult
and wearisome passage to the Regions of Rest and Peace.

And for more particular Directions, how to make trial and discovery of the
Safety of his Spiritual Estate before he puts it upon the final Issue, if he is
desirous thereof, I refer him to the Trial or Judgment of the Soul, in the
Companion for the Penitent, where I have given him an account and Prospect of
this, as full, and yet as short, as I could; and which it would be too long
here to insert. And there also he may meet with variety of fitting forms, to
instruct him in all the parts of his Repentance, and to serve him in making a
Religious and devout Profession thereof to Almighty God.

CHAP. III.
Of his Carriage and Demeanor under his Sickness, and the Virtues thereof,
viz. Trust in God, Resignation, Thankfullness.
AFter the Sick Person has taken this first and chief care for his Soul, to
make its peace for past or present Offenses; his next care for it must be, to
keep it from falling into any new Diseases, or that under the burden of a Sick
Body, his Soul do not fall Sick too. As it will do, if it grows secure and
careless of Duty, or regardless of Mercies, or is greedy of Life, and finds no
relish in Prayers, or in discourses of another World, and falls into
impatience, and is fretted with fleshly cares, and worldly desires: all which,
and the like, show his Spirit to be more distempered, and more dangerously ill,
than his Body is.

To prevent this, his next care for his Soul, must be to order his Carriage
well under his Sickness, or to bear the pains and weakness of his Sick bed,
with Trust in God, with Resignation to his will, with Thankfulness, and with
Patience to the end. Which Duties, though they are all necessary under the former
Head, viz. of making of his Peace; yet I shall now consider and treat of them,
as they are necessary and of greatest use, to support his Spirit, and recommend
his Carriage.

First, he must set himself to bear them, with Trust in God. The accidents and
uneasiness of his Sickness, will still alarm his fears, and try his Faith; and
it must be his care, to show no anxious or distracted thoughts under them. But
as often as any accidents or prospects terrify him, let him remember, that
they are all in God's Hands, and shall have such end only as he pleases. That
he who sends them, will take care they go no further than it is fit they should,
and will turn them to the best at last. That he is Safer and better in God's
keeping and ordering, than he could be in his own; and therefore may lay aside
all painful and mistrustful cares for himself, as knowing under all that
happens how sure he is to be taken care of.

Devout Thoughts, about trusting God in Sickness.
1. About trusting him with ones self.
AND when he feels much Sorrow and many Difficulties, and may fear and foresee
worse, let him often say,

Lord, I meekly receive all my Sorrows and dangers, because thou sendest them.

And they shall not terrify me, because thou governest them.

And I am sure thou considerest all that lies upon me, and wilt turn it unto
good.

That thou considerest how much I can bear, and wilt in tender mercy take off
the rest.

That thou considerest what strength I have to bear, and wilt graciously supply
me with what is wanting.

That thou considerest how long I can bear, and wilt give me ease at the
fittest Season.

And since thou will ease me in thy due time, and support me till thou easest
me, I will not Heb. 12. 3.
grow weary, O! my Dear Lord, or faint in my mind, but wait with patience till
my ease comes, Amen.

Though I walk through the Valley of the shadow of Death, I will fear no evil,
for thou art with me, and thy Rod and thy Staff they comfort me, Ps. 23. 4.

Yea, Joh. 13. 15.
though thou killest me, yet will I trust in thee, and have hope even in my
Death to find everlasting Rest and Joy after Death, Amen.

Because I live, ye shall live also. Joh. 14. 19.

I know that my Redeemer lives, and that he shall stand at the later day upon
the Earth.

And though after my Skin, Worms destroy this Body, yet in my flesh shall I see
God.

Whom I shall see for myself, and mine Eyes shall behold and not another. Job.
19. 25, 26, 27.

2. About trusting him, with ones nearest Relations, or Dear Children, Friends,
or Dependants.
IF it troubles him to leave his Friends or Family, perhaps meanly provided
for, (or any good designs unfinished which his heart has been much set upon,)
let him consider, that God sees this, as well as he, and yet he thinks fit to
call him away from them. And this may make it plain to him, that God himself,
who is more wisely careful for them than he can be, has a mind to be trusted
with them. And therefore let him reckon to set them all safe, by recommending
them to him. John 17.
As our departing Lord provided for his disconsolate and destitute Disciples,
by recommending them to his Heavenly Father, and praying to him for them.

And let him remember also, that this is truly to leave all to come to God, if
we can find in our Heart to go forth readily, when all these call upon us to
stay.

And let him often say,

I Trust thee, O! God, as with my self, so with my nearest Relations, my Wife
and Family [or Children] and with my Friends, and with all that depend on me.

I trust them with thee, O! Lord, for they are more thine, than they are mine.

I trust them with thee in full assurance, that there is no way to make them
happy and safe, like putting them into thy Hands.

I trust them to thee, because thou art the Husband of the Widow, and the
Father of the Fatherless, and have promised to take care of them.

I have always trusted them with thee whilst I was with them, and have ever
found thy tender love and care of them. So that my own experience, as well as
thy sure promises, may engage me to trust and commit them to thee, now I may
seem to be going from them.

And though I know not what they will do, or how they will be cared for when I
am gone, yet I know thou do, and wilt order all things kindly both for me
and them.

I leave them not destitute, for thou art with them; and thy care, O! my Dear
God, is the best Guardian, and thy Blessing is the Richest Portion.

And thou will have infinitely a more watchful care of them, and can do
infinitely more for them, than I can.

Lord, take care of them, for I commit them to thy care.

Yea, even 1 Pet. 5. 7.
all my cares for them, I cast on thee.

Oh! let them always have the special care and Providence, which thou take of
the Widows and Orphans.

Let them have the Blessing, which by thine abundant mercy follows the Children
of those that truly fear thee.

Lord, be with them, as thou have been with me, to their lives end. And keep
them always most thankful, and Obedient unto thee. And let them all have the
Blessing of thy tender care at present, and of thy Peace at the last, Amen.

When my Father and Mother forsake me, then the Lord takes me up. Ps. 27. 10.

Leave thy Fatherless Children, I will preserve them alive, and let thy Widows
trust in me. Jer. 49. 11.

In God the Fatherless finds mercy, Hos. 14. 3.

The Generation of the upright shall be Blessed, Amen. Psalm. 112. 2.

Secondly, he must set himself to bear them, with Resignation of himself to the
Will of God. And this will be easy after the former. For there is no difficulty
in giving up our selves to God, if we dare trust him. And we shall not only be
contented, but desirous to quit our own Wills for his, if we are persuaded that
his is better for us, and that our true Interest and happiness is safelier
lodged, and may be infinitely better trusted, with him, than with our selves.
And if we have no will to be under what he orders, it is a plain sign that we do
not apprehend our selves safe in his, but think we should be better in our own
Hands.

Let the Sick man therefore amidst all his pains and perils, freely give up
himself into Gods Hands, and be glad and thankful that he can lodge himself
there. And let him often say,

Lord, I know I am in thy Hands, and that I cannot be in better, nor do I
desire to be in any other. Especially not in my own, nor to be the carver of my
own condition. Luke 22. 42.
Not my will, O! God, but thine be done, Amen.

And do thou allot for me, Life or Death, Health or Sickness, removeal or
continuance of my Sorrows, as thou see would really be fittest for me and f^r
thy Glory, not as my mistaken fancy may think to be so, Amen.

Thy Will be done, O! my God, for it is always a most Blessed and Beneficial
Will, to those that fear thee. It sends Mercies at the fittest time, and sends
troubles when they have most need of them, and takes them off again when it is
fittest to remove them.

If it causes present Sorrow and Smart, it is to do them good; and if they do
not see how it should turn to their good, yet thou do, and wilt make them
see it too in the end.

Our Wills, O! Father, are too often guided by Folly; but thine is always, and
altogether wise, and has ever been most gracious and full of mercy toward me.

Thou know best, O! Lord, when it was fit for me to come into this World,
and when it is fit for me to leave it, and what part is fittest for me to bear
whilst I stay therein. O! do thou appoint me, how, or in what condition I shall
live, and how long: but withal help me to do thy work whilst I live.

Choose thou my condition, and let my Lot be what may please thee: but then give
me Grace, faithfully and wisely to discharge the duties of that condition, and
let my carriage under it be such as may please thee too, Amen.

Lord, I am not only contented, but glad to be at thy choice. I pray thee, that
I may always be what thou please, and that I my self may always be pleased
with it.

I desire also, O! Father, what seems good and pleasing unto me. Yea, when my
pains and Distresses are extreme, I desire it earnestly. But when I desire it,
I do not prescribe unto thee, but beg that thou would order therein, not what
my weakness wishes, unless thy wisdom also sees it fitting. And I know, O!
Lord, that thou art ready to grant my desires, if they be really for my good,
and thy Glory, and agree with the wise ends of thy Providence: and I press them
no longer, if thou see they are otherwise, Amen.

It is the Lord, let him do what seems him good. 1 Samuel 3. 18.

If it be possible let this Cup pass from me, nevertheless not as I will, but
as thou will.

And if it may not pass from me, except I drink it, thy will be done. Mat. 26.
39, 42.

Even in inflicting evil upon me, thou art kind still, and art doing me good
against my will, Amen.

Thirdly, he must set himself to bear his sick bed Sorrows, with Thankfulness.
We must not think it strange, or that things are strained too high, when we are
called upon to be thankful under Sickness, or other Afflictions. For the
difference, between thankful, and unthankful or complaining Natures, lies more
in their Spirits, than in their outward circumstances. A thanful, Spirit, will
find enough to give God thanks for, on a Sickbed or in any affliction. And an
unthankful Spirit, will never want matter enough to complain of, in a better
condition. And if any afflicted or Sick persons, are unthankful, it is not
because they want Mercy's good store, which deserve their thanks, but because
they overlook them.

This Virtue of thankfulness to God, as it is one of the most necessary Duty's,
so is it one of the liveliest Beauties, and brightest ornaments of a Sickbed.
For it speaks true Humility, when we show, as we do thereby, that the least
Mercy's deserve our thanks, and that the worst States, which God puts us into,
are too good for us. And it expresses entire good will and Love to God, when we
can love and praise him even whilst he corrects and smites us, and take notice
of all his Kindnesses in the midst of our afflictions, and place an Implicit
belief and confidence in his Love, that by all these Sorrows he is doing us
good, and deserves our thanks, though in our weak reason we are not able to see
the good which is to accrue to us thereby.

And to preserve in himself this excellent virtue of thankfulness to God, let
the Sick person set himself through all the course and contingencies of his
Sickness, Diligently to mark and seek out, what may deserve his thanks, and
not, as is too often done, what may minister to complaints. Let him pick out of
every thing, and out of every accident that befalls him, what he may speak well
of God for; and let those be the things, which he reflects on within himself,
and discourses of to others. And under any pain or weakness, let him often say.

Lord, under all my Sorrows, I have nothing to accuse, but much to give thee
thanks for.

I suffer less, yea, infinitely less, than I deserve; Blessed be thy mercy for
spareing me. Amen.

My Sufferings. O! Lord, are not only Justly deserved, but they are needful
also to do me good, and such as thou will turn to good; Blessed by thy name,
for seeking and compassing my benefit thereby. Amen.

And when my Ailments come, they want many aggravations, which would make them
a great deal worse to be born. And are attended with many seasonable helps and
comforts, to ease and strengthen my Spirit under them.

My evils are tolerable evils; Blessed be thy Pity and Tenderness, for
considering, not what I should Suffer, but what I can bear to suffer. Amen.

Sometimes, O! Lord, by thy Grace I have ease, and relish worldly comforts.

Sometimes I take sweet sleep, and rest from my Pains and Labors, and awake
with great refreshment.

And under all my pains and weakness, by thy mercy I have some to Help me, and
more to Pity and Pray for me. I find support, and thou still seasonably
refreshest my Spirit, from within or from without. Blessed be thy name, for
these Helps and Comforts under my Distress. Amen.

Thou often Moderatest and mitigatest my pains; and then, though they are a long
trouble, they are a tolerable one.

Or, if one Symptom rages, that is sometimes made a step, to the ease, or to
the Prevention of a worse.

Or, if it is smart, it is not lasting, but in waiting a little longer for
thee, I still have ease in thy due Time.

Blessed be thy Goodness, O Father, which is pleased thus to Ps. 41. 3.
make my Bed in my Sickness. Amen.

And however, if I have less ease, and more sorrows now at present, yet, O! my
God, I have the Blessed Hopes of Rest and Joy to come. And I can never Bless
thee enough for the Comforts of Hope, that after a Patient and Short endurance
of my Portion of Evil things here, I shall be taken to the everlasting
Happiness of thy Heavenly Kingdom. Amen.

Moreover, O! Lord, I receive my Bodily Sorrows, as Medicines to my Soul, to
cure my Spirit, and call me back to thee when I have gone astray.

I Bless thee, for all the lowly thoughts they give me of my self, and for all
the discovery which I make of my own Errors thereby. Amen.

And for all the Prostration both of mind and body, which they put me upon
showing toward thee, and for all the dependence which I learn thence to place
on thy mercy. Amen.

And for their taking off my Fondness, from all earthly delights, and making me
Cease to be in love with Vanity. Amen.

And for their lifting up my Heart to Heavenly things, and to all the ways of
preparing my Soul for thine everlasting mercy. Amen.

And if I want Health, and the Relish of worldly comforts now, I owe thee
infinite thanks, O! Lord, for all the time I enjoyed them formerly, though all
that time I had deserved to lose them.

If I am deprived of some mercies, yet many, and most Thankworthy, are those
which I still enjoy.

If I would declare and speak of thy mercies to me, they are more than can be
numbered. Ps. 40. 5.

The Lord gave, and the Lord has taken away, Blessed be the name of the Lord.
Job 1. 21.

And let the Sick Person Persevere, in this trust and confidence in God, and in
this Resignation and thankfulness of Spirit, amidst all his Sorrows. Let him
keep his Soul always set out in these dresses, and express them on all
occasions, to God and to his Friends. For they are the liveliest ingredients,
and the Clearest Beauty and Grace,

4ly. Of the Fourth Virtue wherewith he is to bear his Sorrows, viz. Patience,
which he is to exercise through the whole course of his Sickness, and which is
next to be treated of.

CHAP. IV.
Of Patience under Sickness. With other Directions to the Sick Person, for
spending his Sickbed Ho^^s, and to his Friends for their Ministering to him.
THE whole course of a Sickbed, is a trial of Patience. And when it is tried
thereon, we must give good proof thereof, or else we can never act our Part
tolerably, nor approve our Selves.

And if we have the forementioned virtues, we shall have Patience. For if we
dare trust God, our Fears of Pain, or other evil accidents, will not make us
unquiet. If our wills are resigned to his, we shall not be unwilling to bear
what he sends, but meet our Sorrows with humble and contented Submission,
instead of angry and uneasy Repining. If we are thankful to him under our
Sickness, we shall bless him for what we have, and not discontentedly complain
for what we want; and thank him because he once gave, instead of accusing him,
because now he has taken away.

And therefore when God calls any Person to be Sick, let him look on Patience,
as the Proper virtue of his State, and make it his care at every turn to arm
his Soul with it.

Let him set himself to Bear his Pains and weakness, with gravity and
Composedness, keeping back from all Passionate, and from all light and vain
words.

And to bear all, out of Submission and Resignation to the Will of God, quietly
Suffering because he sends them.

And let him remember always, to humble himself under the hand that Smites him,
and own it is just.

And to kiss the Rod, and confess it is for his good.

And to receive the Strokes with quietness, and suffer without striving, and
bear them without uneasy complaints of them, and wait on God without fainting,
and not sink under his Load, but support and stay himself upon God, till his
time comes to send ease.

He must not show anger and uneasiness with his Disease or with his Medicines,
with his food, or with his Attendance.

Nor fall to feign reasons of taking things ill, where really there are none;
nor aggravate them, where there are; nor be hasty in his Suspicions or
Censures, of things made for him, or of persons concerned with him, and thereby
grow anxious, and Angry, and troublesome to himself and others.

Nor Expose himself, or Scandalize the Bystanders, by making Burdens, which
are not too heavy to be born at present, intolerable to himself, by
Pusilanimous Despondency, or Anxious fears and mistrusts, of what they will be
in a little time.

Indeed, his Bodily weakness and uneasiness, may many times excuse his
forgetfulness and Surprises in these Points, both to God and men, if afterward
he shows himself sensible of them, and Sorry for them, and does not indulge
them. But he must not give way, or lay himself open to them, and much less
justify them, or hope to remove the Gui^t and Blame of these Sins from off his
Soul, and lay them upon the Distemper of his Body.

And instead of blaming and aggravating, the Heaviness of his Disease, or the
Negligence of his attendance, or Gods Orderings, let him fall to blame his own
impatience, and to tax his own folly, which had not learnt before to expect
such crosses as now Disquiet him, and prepared to bear them.

As for Restlessness of Body, and frequent changes of Place or Posture, and
turning from side to side, and Sighs, and Groans, and other unquietness of
Body, without any Disturbance of Spirit, they are not to be accounted I
conceive for Acts of impatience, and if they can divert the Pains of sick
Persons, or give ease to their Bodies, I think they need be no matter of
Scruple to their minds.

This Trial of Patience, indeed, is an hard Trial, and therefore requires a
constant and a watchful care. And it may be a great help to him therein, if
among those, who are pleased to express their kindness, and do him Comfort, by
their presence and Friendly attendance, he can choose a Discreet and Pious
Supervisor of his carriage, both toward God and all about him, under his
Sickness, and desire him to be his Admonisher, where Excess of Pain and
weariness makes him forget himself, and receive his Brotherly Admonitions with
willingness and Thankfulness.

And under all the uneasiness of his Sickness, and Temptations to impatience,
let him often say one or other of these short Prayers.

Mat. 6. 10.
Thy will be done in Earth, as it is in Heaven, Amen.

Lam. 3. 39.
Shall a Living man complain, a man for the Punishment of his Sin?

Is^. 45. 9.
Woe be to him that striveth with his Maker; shall the Clay say unto him that
fashioneth it, what make thou?

Lord, I will be Ps. 39. 9.
Dumb, and not open my mouth against it, because it is thy doing.

And thou orderest mine infirmities, as Wisd. 11. 20.
thou Orderest all things else, in Number, weight, and Measure.

So that I know they shall not be too many, nor too Heavy, nor continue more
days or Hours, than thou see Suitable to thy Goodness, and my weakness.

If ease is long delayed, and his Spirit is almost wearied, let him ever and
anon, put up such short Petitions as these.

Ps. 130. 5.
I wait for the Lord, my Soul does wait, and in his word do I hope, Amen.

Ps. 71. 14.
I will hope continually, and will yet Praise thee more and more, Amen.

Ps. 27. ult.
O! Tarry thou the Lords Leisure, O my Soul. 2 Timothy 1. 12.
I know whom I have Believed, and in Gal. 6. 9.
Due Season I shall reap if I faint not.

Job 13. 1^.
Tho he kill me, yet will I trust in him, Amen.

Remember, O! Lord, whereof I am made, and have compassion on mine infirmities,
and lay not more upon me than I can bear.

Let 2 Cor. 12. 9.
thy Grace be sufficient for me, Amen.

Lord increase my Patience, or abate my Pains, Amen.

If he is ready to think or say, he can bear no longer, let him remember, that
God knows that better than he.

And that when he can bear no longer, God will inflict no longer.

And who can say, how much, or how long, God's Grace shall enable a man to bear?

And the same Grace, that did enable him to bear it yesterday, is as powerful
and as ready now, to enable him to bear as much again to day.

Yea, and till we are tried, we none of us know, what, or how long we can bear.

And Resolution, by God's Crace; can bear much, a great deal more, and a great
deal longer, than we thought of. But if we are irresolute, any thing of trouble
is difficult. And any Difficulty will conquer those, who come prepared, not to
bear and strive with it, but to yield.

If his thoughts are disturbed, and his Devotions faint and broken, by reason
of his weakness or pain; let him have Patience with himself, and believe that
God will have Patience with him too, and exact no more of him, whilst he is in
that condition. And let him frequently say,

Under Romans 8. 26, 27.
our infirmity's, the Spirit helps us, by holy and affectionate, though
unuttered groans: and he who Searches the Heart, hears them.

Lord, I will Honor thee, by submitting my will to thine, and being content
with my Sickness. And when thou make me sick, I will present thee with a sick
man's offering, and Pray to thee the best I can with my sickly Faculties.

And from a sickly and feeble man, Good Lord accept a sickly and Feeble
Supplication. Amen.

Lord, thou Ps. 51. 17.
rejectest not the broken Spirit, despise not the brokenness of my Devotions,
Amen.

Out of the Mouths of Babes and Sucklings, Mat. 21. 16.
thou have Perfected Praise. Refuse it not out of my mouth then, O! God, which
in the midst of all my weakness, is not more weak than theirs, Amen.

Let him also be constantly mindful, to show Patience and thankfulness toward
those, who kindly attend about him. And not be fretful, and show uneasieness,
on every little slowness or forgetfulness, or when things are not done for him,
just when, and as he would have them.

And let him often say to himself, under any Temptations to uneasiness with his
Attendants.

Lord, if they Err, even their Errors are governed and directed by thy hand
which Errs not, and thou have some wise and kind end to serve by it, either for
my Soul or Body. Thou bring about thy gracious purposes concerning me, by
their Errors and oversights, as well as by their Care and Kindness.

And therefore instead of being angry at them, I humbly submit to thee, and
look to have it turned to good, because it is thy doing, Amen.

Lord, enable me to receive all the Pains, which thou sendest upon me, with
Patience; but all the kind Services which they seek to do me, with
Thankfulness, Amen.

Remember, Lord, for them, all their charitable Services; but remember not
against me, my fretfulness or uneasiness in the acceptance thereof, Amen.

Lord, enable them to consider my weakness, and to Pity and bear with it; and
enable me to watch against it, and not to fall any more into it, Amen.

And let him think it is now his work and Task, to show an example, of
Humility, Patience, Quiet Resignation to the Hand that smites him, and of
comfortable Hope and trust in God, and a thankful Sense of all his past and
present mercies, to all visitants.

And to arm him yet more thoroly with all this Patience, which is the virtue
most particularly required and marked out, and yet most difficult to be
exercised and preserved in his Case:

Let him set before his Eyes, the far greater Trials and Sufferings, of the
ever Blessed Son of God Jesus Christ.

Let him think within himself, and let it often be suggested to him by others,
that it is not for us to accuse God, for suffering our patience to be tried,
when he could thus suffer his Patience to be tried.

That we are not to think much, at suffering Trials deservedly, and for our
selves; when he refused not to suffer infinitely Greater, without having
deserved to suffer any thing himself, but merely in Pity and kindness for
others, yea for his Enemies.

Let him be reminded, that God has made Pain the way to pleasure, and that
Jesus bore pains before he was fixed in ease.

That if the present pains are sad, Eternal pains are infinitely sadder, and
that we need these here, to prevent our falling under those hereafter. And
instead of repineing, that we are left still to suffer the pains of this world;
let him rejoice and give God thanks, that we are delivered by his Mercy, and
our Blessed Savior's merits, from the endless and insupportable Anguish of the
next World.

Instead of Repineing therefore, let him often say.

Thy will be done, O! my God, give me my evil things here, that I may have
Everlasting Rest and joy with thee hereafter, Amen.

I am content to be a member of an afflicted Savior, and to suffer with him,
in Hopes at last through thy mercy to rejoice and Reign with him, Amen.

Mat. 10. 25.
It Is enough, yea too much, O! Lord, for the Servant to be as his Master. Since
he bore Sorrows, I will not refuse them, but meekly bear them after him whilst
thou please, and Patiently wait to be eased thereof at thy time, Amen.

Lord, thou art just in my Sorrows, thou art kind in them. I justify thee, yea
I thank thee for what I feel. I disclaim my own will, either about the bringing
or removing of my Pains, and submit my Self wholly to take up with thine, Amen.

And during all the progress of the Sickness, Devotions and Pious Thoughts, and
set Prayers or short Ejaculations, are to be the Sick man's vital Breath, and
should constantly be sent up to God, whilst he has Spirit left to offer them.

Let him be frequently enjoying the Prayers of the Church, from the Minister,
or others.

And any of the Prayers hereafter following, for particular Graces, or for any
of his Particular needs or desires; not burdening himself with too many
Prayers, or too long ones at once, but taking them as his Strength or Time
Serves; or as employing his thoughts thereupon, to exercise not to burden them.

And when he is kept from reading, and using them himself; let such of them, as
he likes or desires, be read to him by his Friends, for him to follow, and put
up to God with Holy desires.

And when he wants leisure, or Strength for longer, let him distinguish
minutes, or the small Portions of his time, with shorter Petitions and
Ejaculations.

He may be often affectionately repeating the Lords Prayer. Or any Particular
Petitions thereof, as thy Kingdom come; thy will be done in Earth as it is in
Heaven; Forgive us our Trespasses, as we forgive them that Trespass against us;
Lead us not into Temptation, but deliver us from evil; or the like, as best
Suits with his present needs, or desires. Or any of the forementioned short
Petitions and Ejaculations, which he may be often repeating, and devoutly
offering up, from his own Memory, or the Reading of his friends; or any others,
which his own mind, or their Discourses, shall supply him with.

And let the sweet name of Jesus, be often in his mouth, but oftener in his
Heart: and let him think that the Blessed name of a Savior, cannot be to much
upon the Soul, or too deep in the desire of a lost Sinner.

Let him therefore say, Jesu have mercy on me.

Jesu! Thou art the Rock of my Hope, Thou art my Love, and my Life, and the
Chief object of my desire.

Lord Jesu, thou alone art my Savior.

And that he may still be stored with matter for such devout thoughts and
Ejaculations, when he is not fit to read himself, let them read to him, either
some of the Scriptures, Hymns, or Prayers, hereafter discribed for the use of
Sick Persons: or some conveuient Portion out of the Penitential Psalms; or
something about the Sufferings of our Savior; or some part of any profitable
Discourse, concerning Repentance, or Patience, or Trust in God, or
Thankfulness, or concerning Death, and Judgment, Heaven, or Hell.

Let their Discourses also be Savory, and minister thoughts fit for the
Seriousness, or for the Comfort or Service of men, who look upon themselves, as
taking leave of this World, and going to meet their Lord.

Let them seek to Spiritualize accidents, and take occasion from all that
happens, to raise up the Sick man's thoughts to devout and Profitable
Reflections, So that he may not want the offer of a good thought, as often as he
is free and ready for it.

If he awakes more easy, let them Bless God for the ease, and observe how
Tenderly he proportions Trials to our weakness, considering what we can bear,
as a Tender Father does. How seasonably he sends Relief, and how sweetly we
relish it after sharp Sorrows, and how from their Experience of the
Seasonableness of his Succor in this case, they should learn to trust him, if
he sends upon them more Agonies, and quietly to wait for him, hoping he will
not stay then, more then he has done now, past the due Time.

Or if he awakes under more pain and disturbance, let them fuggest to him, that
if it is great, it is like to be the shorter; that God knows best, how much, and
how long we can bear; that he is in good and merciful hands, whilst he is in
his, and should be quiet under them; that he must wait on God, who loves to be
waited on, and Loves to try Faith and Trust, before he recompense it with the
desired Blessing.

On all occasions, of any Benefits received, either by Food, or by Physic, or
by Sleep; and likewise on any want of them; or on any occurrence or discourse
that comes before them, they will be acceptable and useful Friends indeed, if
they can show dexterity in raising up the Devout Sick man's mind to some Pious
thoughts, or virtuous Resentments or desires about the same, to make him
reflect on the Power, the Patience, the Mercifulness, or the Faithfulness of
God; or upon the Wickedness, and Folly of men; the vanity of worldly things;
the Serviceableness of Religion, and Holy affections; the Happy end of Trust in
God; the Temptations and Dangers of health and ease, the advantage of Sickness,
the Blessed fruits of Patience, and the Recompenses that shall crown it at the
last.

And if at any time he Receives not their Discourses, or their other Services,
with that Willingness, and Easiness, which they would expect from him; let them
wait another opportunity, and not slacken their good Offices, but only Study
how to time them better, or make them more agreeable to him on the next
occasion; not taking things ill from him in this condition, but pitying what
would provoke them at another time.

Or if he seems troubled, as ingenuous and kind Natures are apt to be, that his
Disease makes him so troublesome as he is to his Friends; let them suggest to
him, that Friends are born for Adversity, and to bear a part of each others
troubles. And that the same wise orderer, who sends him the trouble of his
Pains and Sickness, sends them also the Trouble of their Attendance, and does
equally expect a willing and cheerful Reception of their Respecttive Troubles
from both.

And in the Visits they pay the Sick, let not the Desire they have of seeing
him, make them any ways incommodious, or uneasy to him. Sometimes Sick Persons
can ill bear noise; or would be troubled, not relieved, by the Presence of
others; or when their Spirits are a little freer, and more refreshed, having
but little time, or free thoughts left, they would have them to themselves, and
can ill Complement them away to please others. And it is not for wise and kind
Friends to break in upon them, when they would be alone; but only when their
company would be acceptable, or may be Helpful to them.

And besides all the Prayers, and devout Thoughts, which he puts up thus for
himself, let him also desire the Prayers of others. Let him send to desire the
Prayers of the public Congregation. And if he send Alms at the same time,
good prayers will be more like to prevail for him. And when he takes his leave
of any Friendly Visitants, let him desire them to remember him in theirs;
showing thus on all occasions, that his Eye is unto God in all his sickness,
and that he looks to reap most benefit from good prayers.

And by such ways and thoughts as these, may the sick person set himself to
this second part of his Task, viz. The bearing of his Pains and Weakness with
Patience, Resignation of himself, Thankfulness and Trust in God, and such
Resentment of things, and Reflections on them, as are fitting for a sick Bed.

CHAP. V.
Of his Carriage in his last Extremities, and under the near Approach of Death.
AND when sickness goes on to Extremities, and Death approaches, that calls
louder to him to Matt. 25. 6, 7.
Trim up his Lamp, and dress his Soul to meet the Bridegroom; but it is only
with the same Habits, whereof I have been hitherto speaking. A Dying Man is not
distinguished from a sick Man, by the difference of his Habits, but only by a
greater care and exactness in putting of them on. The same Thoughts and Desires
befit him; but when he is expiring, he would be glad, if his strength will
serve, to send them up in a brighter and a hotter flame. So that when he comes
to die, he must hold on the same Exercise, of Repentance, Patience, Faith,
Thankfulness, Devotion, and the like; but only seek to put forth more Zeal and
Fervor in them, if he has bodily strength enough so to do, or else be content
and rest satisfied to do it as his strength will serve him.

And let him welcome Death when God sends it, and say.

Lord, my times are in thy hand, and thou know best when it is fit for me to
depart this World.

And thy time shall be mine, and I am now willing to come to thee, since thou
see fit to call me. Amen.

I willingly receive my Death, and think it is time for me to die, if thou
do, because Life now is grown very uneasy to me, and every day brings much
more evil than good, and is more my Burden than my Blessing.

I receive it from thee, O! Lord, as my passage to a better Life, and am not
only willing, but thankful, to change Weariness for Rest, and Earthly Sorrows
for Heavenly and Everlasting Joys. Amen.

If the Dying persons have lived ill and loosly, they have Reason indeed, if
God please, to desire to live longer, that they may learn to live better, and
may be more perfect before they Die. Yea, and even good persons do many times
desire the same, since the best may mend, and still grow better.

But let such good Souls think with themselves, that if they should live
longer, yet living on in the same frail Natures, peradventure more days would
still heap up more Frailties and Infirmities to make them still more afraid of
Death; and they would be more imperfect, and less fit to die then, than they
are now. So that it is best to let God choose for them, and be willing to Die
when he pleases.

If he would not leave the ordering and Expenses of his Funeral, to the
Discretion of his Friends, but is minded to give Directions about the ^^me
himself, let him declare where he desires they should lay his Body, and who
should be desired to accompany it, and who to bear it to his Grave; and what
Tokens of kind Remembrance shall be given to any of them. And if he see fit, he
may order some of the smaller Gifts and Memorials of kindness, which I
mention^d before at the making of his Will, to be given at that time.

In proportioning the Expenses thereof, he should have regard to the Estate
which he has to leave, and to his Rank and Station in the World. And in laying
cut the same, he will most comfort and benefit himself, by such ways of expense
as best Honor God and profit others, such as satisfying the Hungry with Doles,
and clothing the Needy with Garments, and sending Gifts in Money (more or less
as he pleases, and as suits with his Worldly Circumstances) to his own, or
other adjacent Parishes, to be distributed among the ^oor thereof; or in such
other Acts of Piety and Beneficence, as are fit to attend the Body of one, who
both living in the World, and leaving it, was studious to be found doing good.

And when he is near about to leave the World, he may take a pious and solemn
leave of it.

Let him call in his Parents, if he has any, to ask their pardon for any
offense he ever gave them, and to beg their Blessing, and give them his Thanks
for all their Love and Care of him. And also his Children to give them his
Blessing, and charge them to keep upright and constant in Gods Fear, and in
loving and helping one another. And likewise his Friends, and Family, and
Dependants, to receive his last Farewell.

Let him profess the great need he has of God's Mercy, and the good hopes he
has through the Merits of Christ, and through his alone, to find it.

Let him profess also, that he Dies in the Faith of Christ, and repeat the
Creed.

And that he hopes for the acceptance of his Faith and Repent^nce, in the Unity
and Communion of Christ's Church, in which he Dies; and particularly, as a
steadfast and sincere, though unworthy Member, of the Church Here men^i^n his
(...) Church.
etc. whose declared Belief he professes, whose way of Worship he heartily
receives, and in whose Peace and Communion he has hitherto lived, and now dies.

Then let him profess, that he takes leave of the World in peace. And forgives
all, both present and absent, as he desires himself God would forgive him. And
that if any have ever taken any thing ill of him, he desires they would forgive
him.

After which, let him send Messages to any absent Friends, whose Reformation he
desires, whose Peace he seeks, or whose Love, or Favors, he would express
either a just thankfulness, or a friendly sense of.

And as for themselves, let him thank them all, for all their good Wishes, and
good Services, in his Life, and at his Death; and pray God to remember the same
for their Benefit. And let him heartily beg their pardon, for all the
Unreasonable, or passionate, or unequal usage, which he had ever been guilty of
toward any of them in his Health; for all the unnecessary trouble, which he
has given to any of them by his weakness; but especially for all the
provocation and offense, which he has given to any of them by his fretfulness
and impatience, during the time of his sickness.

And then let him charge all about him, to keep constant in the Faith, and firm
in the Unity of the Church, and endeavor to confirm them in the ways of Piety,
Sobriety, Justice, and Charity, and to warn them against falling from any of
them for any Intrests or Enjoyments of this World, or if at any time they do,
against delaying Repentance, or growing hardened and secure under their Fall.

Then let him exhort them all to keep Peace among themselves, especially those
who are concerned in the Division of his Estate; And desire all their prayers
to assist him in his Agonies. And so recommend them all to God's Mercy, praying
that he will keep them all steadfast in his fear, and safe under his care,
whilst they live; and give them all comfort, when they come into his condition;
and bring them all at last, to meet together again in his Heavenly Kingdom.

After this, he may tell those Friends, who attend more about him, that in his
departure, he desires he may have no disturbance to lengthen out his Pains, and
molest his Passage. And therefore if any of them think they cannot contain
themselves, and govern their Grief, nor see him Die without bursting into
passionate Outcrys and noisie disturbance, to call back his retiring Spirit,
let him beg them to withdraw when his Death approaches, and pray for him and
vent their own grief by themselves. But if any of them can stand by, and
accompany him in silence, if they happen then to be about him, he may desire
that they would stay to assist him with their Prayers in his last Agonies, and
recommend his departing Soul to God at his last Breath.

After he has taken such Religious, and solemn leave of all his Friends; he
has nothing left to do, but whilst his strength serves, to employ his Spirit in
Holy Thoughts and Desires as he did before, and devoutly and willingly wait
God's time for his change.

And under this expectation, let him often say.

My Flesh and my Heart fails, but thou art the strength of my Heart, and my
Portion for ever, Ps. 73 26.

Lord, strengthen me in my last Agonies, and guard me from all Frights and
Molestations of the Enemy. Amen.

I have a good Master, for Jesus that most Blessed of all Names, is my Master,
and I will neither be afraid, nor unwilling to go to him.

For whom have I in Heaven, Lord, but thee? And there is none upon earth that I
desire besides thee, Ps. 73. 25.

I desire to be Dissolved, and to be with Christ, Phil. 1. 23.

Sweet Jesu, come quickly, Amen. Rev. 22. 20.

Yea, as the Heart pants after the Waterbrooks, so pants my Soul after
thee, O! God.

My Soul thirsts for God, for the living God, when shall I come and appear
before God? Ps. 42. 1, 2.

Lord I come to thee, receive me out of thine abundant Mercy.

I come to thee, and him who comes unto thee, thou will in no wise cast out.
Jo. 6. 37.

Lord Jesu, receive my Spirit. Amen. Acts 7. 59.

Receive me according to thy word, and I shall live, and shall not be
disappointed of my hope.

Because I live, ye shall live also. Amen. Jo. 14. 19.

Blessed is that Servant, whom his Lord when he comes shall find watching. Luc
12. 37.

All the days of my appointed time, will I wait, till my change come. Job 14.
14.

O! Father, pity me Ps. 103. 13.
as a Father Pityeth his Children, and receive me Jor. 4. 10.
for whom thou have labored, and have made me what I am.

O! Jesu, Savior of Sinners, save me whom thou have Redeemed with thy Blood,
which is too dear a price to be thrown away in a lost Purchase.

O! Holy Ghost, the Sanctifier and Comforter, now finish in me thine own work,
and comfort up my fainting Spirit.

O! Holy, Blessed, and Glorious Trinity, I have humbly served and feared thee,
though in much Frailty, [ or in
all] my Life; receive and comfort me now at my Death. Amen.

CHAP. VI.
Of Care, and Treatment of the Dead.
AS soon as the Dying Person has breathed his last, his surviving Friends,
especially they whom he has entrusted with the care and Disposal of his Body,
must be very careful to Dress, and treat it Decently, till it be Decently
interred.

Let it not lie too open to the Inquiries of the Curious, nor let any thing of
it be exposed, which the Person if alive would blush at.

If he gave Orders for his own Funeral, those Orders are a Trust, which are
Religiously to be observed. But if he has left it to them, they must Order the
same, with as Prudent a Regard to his circumstances and worldly Estate, and
with as much Decency, and wise expression of Love and Respect to him, as they
can. And lay out what is fit, in Dressing out the Body, and interring it; in
showing Respect and Kindness, where he bore them, or where he ought them; and
in Doles and Deeds of Charity, to the Poor and Needy.

In these layings out, they should not spend more than is meet, nor lavish any
thing away, vainly, or imprudently.

And on the other Hand, they need not Scruple, some well chosen instances of
expense, which are rather Honorary than useful, if there be Estate enough to
bear them, and good Reason for them, and Moderation and Discretion shown in
them. For though this cost does the Poor no Good, as Judas Mat. 26. 8, 9. and Jo.
12. 4, 5.
once objected; yet it expresses their Love, and Respect to the Dead: and such
expressions of esteem and kindness to them, who have Greatly deserved it, and
can now make no more Returns of it, are Religious and well approved of both by
God and Men. Our Blessed Lord himself very kindly receiving Mat. 26. 7, 10, 11,
12, 13. and Jo. 11. 2.
the cost of the Rich Ointment, which Mary Lazarurus's Sister poured upon his
Head, because she did it for his Burial.

At the Funeral, when a Refection is brought, according to the Custom of the
Place, to the Friendly Attendants of the Body before it is carried forth, to
relieve their waiting, or their weariness; let it be Dealt among them with
Great Moderation. Remembering, that these Guests come not, to gratify and
please their Palates; but to bear their Part in a Scene of Grief, and attend as
Mourners.

And let all who meet there, Remember, that they are come, to To. 12. 15.
mourn with those that mourn, and bear a part with the afflicted; and be
careful, to show themselves sensibly, and seriously affected, with their own or
the surviving Relations Loss, according as there is just cause; however, with
the loud Warning and Alarm to themselves, which is in these Providence.

Let them not talk lightly, or Pleasantly, nor fall into Discourses of News, or
Markettings, or of other Worldly business.

For these neither suit with the Friendly Sadness, nor with the Religious
Seriousness of that occasion, and show them to be little touched, either with
their Friends Death, or with Thoughts and Expectations of their own.

But instead thereof, let them study each to employ themselves, and entertain
their Company, with Thoughts and Discourses, about the Vanity, and uncertainty
of all earthly Things; about the Sorrows, and benefits of Sickness; about the
Troublesomeness, and Shortness of Life, the certainty that we shall all Dye,
and the uncertainty of the Time when, and the Suddenness many Times of these
Changes, and the Great need we all have constantly to expect, and prepare for
them; and about the Hopes and Blessedness there is in Dying well, and the
Happiness of that State where we shall Dye no more, nor ever have the Loss of
any Dear Friends to Mourn for.

They may also Discourse of their Deceased Friends, especially when they have
things to say of them to their Advantage: As how their Patience was tried, and
approved in their Sickness; how good God was to them, and how Submissive, and
Devout they were toward him, what Good words they said, or Good works they
did, or Comfort and Support they found; or any thing else belonging to them,
either Living or Dying, for which they are fit to live in our Memory, and be
examples for our instruction or imitation.

And when they come thus, to take up Good and Heavenly Thoughts, and to infuse
them into one another, they will do Great Good to themselves, as well as Honor
to their Friend, by paying him this last Office, and all return better than
they came from the House of Mourning.

When the Relations and Friends mourn and show Decent sorrow for the Deceased,
as it is fit they should, to show they expect to find a want of them, or to
express their Love, and value for them, as Jo. 11. 35* 36.
Jesus wept at Lazarus's Grave, to show how he loved him; they must be careful,
to Do it moderately, and Christianly. And Grieve for him like men, who know
that God has taken him; and who have hope and comfort in Death, and after it;
and believe, when a Pious Friend Dies, that the living only have lost, but that
the Deceased has got by Dying. But they must not repine against God, who has
taken their Friend away; nor mistrust his Care to provide for them, now their
Friend is gone; nor grow out of Humor, or unthankful for all his other
Mercies, because they are deprived of this; nor let their Grief be excessive or
obstinate, and refuse to be comforted, 1 These. 4. 13.
as they who have no Hope.

Particularly, let them not refrain going to Church, for such a certain space
of Time, or number of Weeks, after a Dear Wife or Husbands Death, as the manner
of some is; which I think is a very ill chosen expression of Grief, or Ceremony
of Mourning. For this looks, as if we were out of Humor with God, because he
has taken our Friend from us; and is very unsuitable, to that Patience, and
Thankfulness, which we ought to express; and to that Devotion, which we not
only ought, but need to use, on such occasions. For these Changes, should not
make us less Religious, but more; and call us to God, and his House and
Service, instead of Driving us from them. The House of God, is the House of
comfort; and in our affliction, we have the more need to run to it, to be eased
of our Sorrows, as well as to show our entire Submission and Service to that
most Wise and good Hand, which has now Disposed of our Friend, and in his Due
time will Dispose of us too to his own mercy.

And as for the Mourning of the Surviver, when God has this way parted dear
Pairs, the Memory of the Deceased should not easily wear off, but stick fast
and long with the Living, as is very fit, both in Respect to the Dead, and in
Decency and due Regard to the censure of the Wise and Sober part of the World.
And unless the Circumstances or needs of Families, are very extraordinary and
Pressing for them to change their condition sooner, they should at least wait
the Time, which Custom and good Report have fixed in mourning for the Dead,
before they forget their Sorrows, or hearken to any motions of exchanging them
for new Joys.

Lastly, the Executors and nearest Relations may still further show their
kindness and careful Respect, and Deserve well of their Deceased Friends, by
being very studious to keep Peace among themselves; and, if any Clauses of the
will are not clearly worded, or any matters about the Estate are left liable to
Dispute, by Composing them amicably among themselves without fuits, that the
contentions of the Living may not spoil or disparage the Kindness, nor ever be
laid by God, or men, to the Neglect, or carelessness of the Dead.

By fulfilling their Wills punctually, and giving to every one at their Time,
with Good Will, and without unnecessary trouble, or Delays, what is really
intended for them, and Due to them thereby.

Yea, by having Regard, to what was fit for them to Order, though they forgot to
Order it: Or, what they needed to Order, but could not, as Payment of Debts
which they left not Estate enough to pay.

The Law, indeed, will not compel them to pay beyond Assets, or what the
Deceased has left them to pay out of. But Natural Affection, and the Virtue of
Gratitude, in near and dear Kindred, especially in Children toward their
Parents, may call for more than any humane Law does.

For Children have received abundance from their Parents, and if ever they see
them brought to want, they ought to look upon themselves as much in their Debt,
and greatly obliged in Gratitude 1 Timothy 5. 4.
to requite them if they are able, which St. Paul calls showing Piety at home.
Especially to show this Piety in doing such things for them, as they would most
Desire to be done for themselves. And if these Deceased Relations had Liberty
to speak their own minds to us, I belive we should hear, that nothing lies
nearer to their Hearts, or would be more for their Ease or Comfort, than doing
Justice for them where they owe it, or paying their just Debts is. And
therefore to take these up, according to our Ability and Circumstances, and
reasonably to content and satisfy their Creditors, is a Great and Noble part
of Religious Piety toward them, and a most Rewardable instance of Gratitude
and Nat^ral kindness. Which is of the more account, as being shown toward
those, who though heretofore they have done much more for us, yet now can do
nothing, either for us, or for themselves; and as being thereby an Office full
of Humanity and Generosity, as well as of Gratitude and Piety.

Thus much I thought fit to premise, for a Brief Direction, to Sick or Dying
Persons, how to manage and employ themselves when called by God to these
Conditions; and also to the surviving Relations, how to discharge their Parts
well upon the Death of Friends.

But for a more full Assistance, and Direction of their Practice or Devotions,
I have laid together some choice Scriptures, and Composed particular Prayers,
fit to Guide their Practice, and express their Devotion, on the several Duties
and Exigencies, of the State of Sick or Dying men, or of the surviving Kindred,
when their Friends are taking from them. And these are contained in the Pages
following.

Prayers and Devotions FOR The State of Sickness.
Scriptures, for the Duties, and Needs of Sick Persons.
Psalm. 39. and 130. Job 7. Matt 25. to v. 14. 2 Cor. 5. to v. 12. Psalm. 77. and
Psalm. 6. Isa. 38. Heb. 12.
I. Sickness and Afflictions are sent and ordered by Almighty God, and come on
Errands of Mercy.
AFfliction comes not forth of the dust, neither does trouble spring out of
the ground.

For God makes sor^, and binds up: he wounds, and his hands make whole*
Job 5. 6. 18.

I kill, 1 Samuel 2. 6.
and I make alive; I wound, and I heal: neither is there any that can deliver
out of my hand. Deuteronomy, 32. 39.

As many as I love, I rebuke and chasten. Rev. 3. 19.

Even as the Father does the Son, in whom he delights. Prove. 3. 12.

For what Son is he, whom the Father Chastneth not?

So that if ye endure chastning, God deals with you as with Sons.

But if ye be without chastizement, whereof all are partakers, then are ye
Bastards, and not Sons. Hebr. 12. 7, 8.

You only have I known, of all the Families of the Earth; therefore I will
punish you for all your Iniquities. Amos 3. 2.

Behold then, Jam. 1. 12.
happy is the Man whom God corrects. Job 5. 17.

For when we are judged, we are chastned of the Lord, that we should not be
condemned with the World. 1 Cor. 11. 32.

And it is good for me, that I have been afflicted, that I might learn thy
Statutes. Psalm. 119. 71.

Our Earthly Fathers, indeed, chastned us after their own pleasure; but he for
our profit, that we might be partakers of his Holiness. Heb. 12. 10.

So that I know, O! Lord, thy Judgments are Right, and that thou in
faithfulness have afflicted me. Psalm. 119. 75.

Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Ghost.

As it was in the beginning, is now, and ever shall be, World without end. Amen.

And this Glory be to the Father, etc. may be added at the end of all the
following Collections of Scripture, when they are used Devotionally.

II. How they are to be received.
I. With Repentance of their Sins.
BY sin came death, and death has passed upon all men, because all have
sinned. Romans 5. 12.

I will make thee sick in smiteing thee, because of thy sins. Mich. 6. 13.

I will visit their offenses with the Rod, and their sin with Scourges. Ps. 89.
32.

And when he slew them, they sought him, and returned and inquired early after
God. Ps. 78. 34.

In their affliction, they will seek me early, Hos. 5. 15.

And this such a Repentance, as expresses it self.

1. In amendment of their sins.
When I bring them through the fire, it is to refine them like a silver is
refined, Zech. 13. 9.

And by this [smiteing] shall the iniquity of Jacob be purged; and this is all
the fruit, to take away his sin. Isaiah 27. 7, 9.

For when they be holden in cords of Affliction, then he shows them their
work, and their transgressions that they have exceeded.

He opens also their ear to Discipline, and commands that they return from
iniquity. Job 36. 8, 9, 10.

And surely it is meet to be said unto God, I have born chastizement, I will
not offered any more.

That which I see not, teach thou me; and if I have done iniquity, I will do no
more. Job 34. 31, 32.

2. In reconciling themselves to those whom they have offended, and making
satisfaction for injuries.
If ye forgive men their Trespasses, your Heavenly Father will also forgive you.

But if ye forgive not men their trespasses, neither will your Father forgive
your trespasses. Mat. 6. 14, 15.

And if thou bring thy gift to the Altar, and there remembrest that thy Brother
has ought against thee; go thy way, first be reconciled to thy Brother, and
then come and offer thy Gift. Matt. 5. 23, 24.

Oppress not any, restore the Debtor his pledge, and spoil none by violence,
but withdraw thy hand from iniquity, and deal truly, and thou shall surely
live. Ezekiel. 18. 7, 8, 9.

Loose the bands of wickedness, and undo the heavy burdens, and let the
oppressed go free.

And then shall thou call, and the Lord shall answer thee; thy Righteousness
shall go before thee, and his Glory* shall be thy reward. Isa. 58. 6, 8, 9.

But without such Reparations of Wrongs done, He that does wrong shall receive
for the wrong which he has done, and there is no respect of persons, Col. 3.
25.

And keep not wrongful gettings, to leave thine Heir rich: For better is a
little with Righteousness, than great Revenues without Right. Prove. 16. 8.

Nor think of appeasing God by giving Alms, till thou have first done Justice:
For I the Lord love judgment, I hate Robbery for Burnt-Offering, Is. 61. 8.

3. In Alms Deeds.
Break off thy sins by Righteousness, and thine ^niquities by showing mercy to
the poor. Dan. 4. 27.

For by mercy and truth iniquity is purged. Prove. 16. 6.

Water will quench a flaming fire, and Alms makes an attontment for sin.
Ecclus. 3. 30.

Sell that ye have therefore, and give Alms: Provide your selves Bags which wax
not old, a treasure in the Heavens that saileth not, where no Thief
approaches, neither Moth corrupts. Luke 12. 33.

And make to your selves friends of the Mammon of Unrighteousness, that when ye
fail they may receive you into everlasting habitations. Luke 16. 9.

And charge them that are rich in this World, that they be rich in good works,
ready to distribute, willing to Communicate.

Laying up in store for themselves a good foundation against the time to come,
that they may lay hold on Eternal Life, 1 Timothy 6. 18, 19.

Deal thy bread to the hungry, and bring the poor that is cast out to thine
house. When thou see the naked cover him, and hide not thy self from thine
own Flesh.

Then shall thou call, and the Lord shall answer thee; thine health shall
spring forth speedily, and thy Righteousness shall go before thee, and the
Glory of the Lord shall be thy reward. Isa. 58. 7, 8, 9, etc.

Because that Alms do deliver from death, and suffers not to come into
darkness. Tob. 4. 10. and c. 12. 9.

It shall deliver thee from all affliction, when it is shut up in thy
Storehouses.

It shall fight for thee against thine Enemies, better than a mighty shield,
and a strong spear. Ecclus. 29. 12, 13.

Blessed therefore is he that considers the poor, for the Lord will deliver
him in time of trouble. Ps. 41. 1.

4. In Penitential Confessions, and earnest Prayers for God's Pardon of our
Sins.
There is no soundness in my flesh, because of thine Anger; neither is there
any rest in my bones, because of my sin.

For mine Iniquities are gone over my head; as an heavy burden, they are too
heavy for me.

I will declare mine iniquity, I will be sorry for my sin. Ps. 38. 3, 4, 18.

I have sinned, what shall I do unto thee, O! Thou preserver of men? Job 7. 20.

Lord, be merciful unto me, heal my Soul, for I have sinned against thee, Ps.
41. 4.

O! Remember not against me former iniquities; let thy tender mercy speedily
prevent me, for I am brought very low. Ps. 79. 8.

Remember not the sins of my youth, nor my transgressions: according to thy
mercy, remember thou me for thy goodness sake. Ps. 25. 7.

According to the multitude of thy mercies, do away mine offenses.

Wash me thoroughly from mine iniquity, and cleanse me from my sin. Ps. 51. 1, 2.

Thou have chastized me, and I was chastized, as a Bullock unaccustomed to the
Yoke: Turn thou me, and I shall be turned, for thou art the Lord my God.

Surely, after that I was turned, I repented; and after that I was instructed,
I smote upon my Thigh: I was ashamed, yea, even confounded, because I did bear
the reproach of my youth. Jer. 31. 18, 19.

Glory be to the Father, etc.

II. With Trust in God.
1. Trusting him with themselves.
TRust in the Lord at all times, ye People, for God is a refuge for us. Ps. 62.
8.

The Lord is a refuge in times of trouble. Ps. 9. 9.

Why art thou disquieted within me, O! My Soul? Hope in God. Ps. 43. 5.

For he shall be kept in perfect peace, O! God, whose mind is stayed on thee.
Isa. 26. 3.

And therefore what time I am afraid, I will trust in thee. Ps. 56. 3.

I will trust, and not be afraid. Isa. 12. 2.

I will hope, and also quietly wait for the Salvation of the Lord. Lam. 3 26.

For he that believes, will not make have. Isa. 28. 16.

Therefore when I look unto the Lord, I will wait for the God of my Salvation.
Mich. 7. 7.

I will not be afraid of evil tidings, for my heart is fixed trusting in the
Lord. Ps. 112. 7.

And tho I walk through the valley of the shadow of Death, I will fear no evil:
For thou art with me, and thy rod and thy staff, they comfort me. Ps. 23. 4.

Yea, tho he slay me, yet will I trust in him. Job 13. 15.

2. Trusting him with their Friends and Families.
And all my cares for my Wife, and Family, and Friends, I cast on thee, for
thou carest for us. 1 Pet. 5. 7. Psalm. 55. 22.

For in thee, O! Lord, the Fatherless finds mercy. Hos. 14. 3.

And tho^ have said, Leave thy Fatherless Children, I will preserve them alive,
and let thy Widows trust in me. Jer. 49. 11.

And I never saw the Righteous forsaken, but his seed is blessed. Ps. 37. 25,
26.

The Generation of the upright shall be blessed.

Riches shall be in his house, and his Righteousness endures for ever.

Surely he shall not be moved for ever, but shall be in everlasting
remembrance. Ps. 112. 2, 3, 6.

For when their Father and Mother forsake them, then do thou take them up.
Ps. 27. 10.

Even thou, who art the Father of the Fatherless, and the Judge of the Widows,
Ps. 68. 5.

And as a Mighty Redeemer wilt plead their cause. Prove. 23. 10, 11.

3. The Benefit of both.
And he who thus trusts in the Lord, mercy shall compass him about. Ps. 32.
10.

Because thou have made the Lord which is my refuge, even the Most High, thy
Habitation:

There shall no evil befall thee, neither shall any plague come nigh thy
Dwelling.

For he shall give his Angels charge over thee, to keep thee in all thy ways.
Ps. 91. 9, 10, 11.

Behold, the Eye of the Lord is upon them that fear him; upon them that hope in
his Mercy.

To deliver their Soul from Death, and to keep them alive in Famine. Ps. 33.
18, 19.

And the Lord is a strong hold in the day of trouble, and he knows them that
trust in him. Nah. 1. 7.

He Redeemeth the Soul of his Servants, and none of them that trust in him
shall be desolate. Ps. 34. 22.

And they who know thy Name will put their trust in thee, for thou, Lord, have
not forsaken them that seek thee. Psalm. 9, 10.

And Trust him,

1. To Temper the Sickness and Sorrows, to our Infirmities.
I will not leave thee altogether unpunished, but I will correct thee in
measure, and will not make a full end of thee. Jer. 30. 11. and c. 46. 28.

And when Epaphroditus was sick, nigh unto Death, God had mercy on him; and not
on him only, but on me also, lest I should have sorrow upon sorrow. Phil. 2. 27.

In his wrath he will remember mercy. Habak. 3. 2.

And to the Upright, there arises light in the darkness. Ps. 112. 4.

For he will not always chide, neither will he keep his anger for ever. Psalm.
103. 9.

His Anger endures but a moment, and in his favor is life: Weeping may endure
for a night, but joy comes in the morning. Ps. 30. 5.

He knows our frame, and remembers that we are dust, and pitieth us like as a
Father pityeth his Children, Ps. 103. 13, 14.

He remembers that we are but flesh, a wind that passes away, and comes not
again; and does not stir up all his wrath. Ps. 78. 38, 39.

And he is faithful, and will not suffer us to be tempted above what we are
able. 1 Cor. 10. 13.

2. To support us under them, and help us to bear them.
The Salvation of the Righteous is of the Lord, he is their strength in time of
trouble.

And the Lord shall help them, because they trust in him, Ps. 37. 39, 40.

The Lord will strengthen him upon the bed of languishing; he will make all his
bed in his sickness. Ps. 41. 3.

And we have not an High Priest, which cannot be touched with the feeling of
our infirmities; but was in all points tempted like as we are, yet without sin.

Let us therefore come boldly unto the Throne of Grace, that we may obtain
mercy, and find Grace to help in time of need. Heb. 4. 15, 16.

For in that he himself has suffered being tempted, he is able to succor them
that are tempted. Heb. 2. 18.

And my Grace is sufficient for thee, my strength is made perfect in weakness,
2 Cor. 12. 9.

I said, indeed, in mine haste, I am cut off from before thine Eyes;
nevertheless thou heardest the voice of my supplications, when I cried unto
thee. Psalm. 31. 22.

Even when my Soul fainted within me, I remembered thee, and my Prayer came in
unto thee. Jon. 2. 7.

Wait thou on the Lord then, be of good courage, and he shall strengthen thine
heart. Ps 27. 14.

For he has said, I will never leave thee, nor forsake thee.

So that we may boldly say, I will not fear, for the Lord is my helper. Heb.
13. 5, 6.

Yea, tho I walk through the valley of the shadow of Death, I will fear no evil:
For thou art with me, thy rod and thy staff, they comfort me. Ps. 23. 4.

3. To Deliver us from them, or make us Gainers by them.
Call upon me in the day of trouble, See more afterward in Scriptures for
Deliverance, and Recovery. p. 115. etc.
and I will deliver thee, and thou shall glorify me. Ps. 50. 15.

Behold the Eye of the Lord is upon them that fear him, upon them that hope in
his mercy.

To deliver their soul from Death. Ps. 33. 18, 19.

He is their strength in the time of trouble.

And he shall help them, and deliver them: He shall deliver them, because they
trust in him. Ps. 37. 39, 40.

We know that all things work together for good, to them that love God, Romans 8.
28.

And though many are the afflictions of the Righteous, yet the Lord delivers
him out of them all. Ps. 34. 19.

For the Lord he kills, and he makes alive; he wounds, and he heals. Deuteronomy. 32.
39.

He brings down to the Grave, and brings up. 1 Samuel 2. 6.

And that, when we have the Sentence of Death in our selves, that we should not
trust in our selves, but in God who raises the Dead. 2 Cor. 1. 9.

Glory be to the Father, etc.

III. They are to be received with Faith in Gods Precious Promises.
THIS is a Faithful saying, and worthy of all acceptance, that Jesus Christ
came into the World to save Sinners, 1 Timothy 1. 15.

If any man Sin, we have an Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the
Righteous, and he is the Propitiation for our Sins, 1 Jo. 2. 1, 2.

O! Death, where is thy Sting? O! Grave, where is thy Victory?

The Sting of Death is Sin, and the Strength of Sin is the Law.

But thanks be to God, which gives us the Victory through our Lord Jesus Christ,
1 Cor. 15. 55, 56, 57.

Who shall lay any thing then, to the charge of Gods Elect? it is God that
Justifies. Who is he that condemns? it is Christ that Dyed, yea rather that
is risen again, who is even at the Right hand of God, who also makes
intercession for us, Romans 8. 33, 34.

And he has promised, I will never leave thee nor forsake thee, Heb. 13. 5.

He will give the Holy Spirit to those that ask him, Luke 11. 13.

He will not suffer you to be tempted above that ye are able, but will with the
Temptation also make a way to escape, that ye may be able to bear it, 1 Cor.
10. 13.

And this is the Promise that he has promised us, even Eternal life, 1 John 2.
25.

He has said, Repent, and be converted, and your Sins shall be Blotted out,
Acts 3. 19.

For if we confess our Sins, he is faithful and just to forgive us our Sins,
and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness, 1 John 1. 9.

And whosoe confesses, and forsakes his Sins, shall find mercy, Prove: 28. 13.

And if ye forgive Men their Trespasses, your Heavenly Father will also forgive
you your Trespasses. Matt. 6. 14.

And break off thine iniquities by giving to the Poor. Dan. 4. 27. For by mercy
and truth iniquity is purged, Prove. 16. 6. And Mercy rejoices against
Judgment. James 2. 13.

And having these Promises, let us cleanse our selves from all filthiness of
flesh and spirit, perfecting holiness in the fear of God, 2 Cor. 7. 1.

Above all, taking the shield of faith, whereby ye shall be able to quench all
the fiery darts of the wicked. Ephesians. 6. 16.

Putting on the breast plate of Faith and Love, and for an helmet the Hope of
Salvation. 1 Thessalonians. 5. 8.

And trust in the Lord, and he shall save thee.

And know, that the Lord thy God, he is God, the faithful God, which keeps
Covenant and Mercy with them that love him, and keep his Commandments, to a
thousand Generations. Deuteronomy. 7. 9.

His promises, are all yea, and Amen. 2 Cor. 1. 20.

His word is tried, and he is a Buckler to all them that trust in him. 2 Samuel
22. 31.

Glory be to the Father, etc.

IV. With Thankfulness.
SHall we receive good at the Hand of God, and shall we not receive evil? Job
2. 10.

The Lord gave, and the Lord has taken away; blessed be the Name of the Lord.
Job 1. 21.

It is the Lord's mercy, that we are not suddenly consumed. Lam. 3. 22.

Yea, and it is good for me that I have been afflicted, that I might learn thy
Law. Ps. 119. 71.

And thou out of very faithfulness, has caused me to be troubled. Ps. 119. 75.

For because the wicked have no changes, therefore they fear not God. Ps. 55.
19.

Blessed therefore is the man whom thou chastenest, O! Lord, and teach him
out of thy Law.

That thou may give him rest in the Days of Adversity. Ps. 94. 12, 13.

Glory be to the Father, etc.

V. With Patience.
1. Patience toward God, in Submission and Resignation of our Selves to his
Holy Will.
WOE be to the man that has lost Patience, for what will he do when the Lord
shall visit him? Ecclus. 2. 15.

Humble your selves under the mighty hand of God, that he may exalt you in due
time. 1 Pet. 5. 6.

For our Fathers after the flesh corrected us, and we gave them Reverence; and
shall we not much rather be in subjection to the Father of Spirits? Heb. 12. 9.

Thy Will be done in Earth, as it is in Heaven. Mat. 6. 10.

Father, if it be possible, let this Cup pass from me; nevertheless, not as I
will, but as thou will. Mat. 26. 39.

Shall we receive good at the hand of God, and shall we not receive evil? Job
2. 10.

It is the Lord, let him do what seems him good. 1 Samuel 3. 18.

And if he thus say, I have no delight in thee: Behold! Here am I, let him do
to me as seems good to him. 2 Samuel 15. 26.

And in maintaining this Patience and Resignedness, opposite,

1. To Striving and Reluctance, and Rising up against God.
Why do thou strive against him, for he gives no account of his matters? Job
33. 13.

Woe unto him that striveth with his Maker: Let the Potsherd strive with the
Potsherds of the Earth: Shall the clay say unto him that fashioneth it, what
make thou? Is. 45. 9.

Submit your selves therefore to God.

And humble your selves in his sight, and he shall lift you up. Jam. 4. 7. 10.

For if their uncircumcised hearts be humbled, and they accept of the
punishment of their iniquity;

Then will I remember my Covenant. Lev. 26. 41, 42.

2. To Unquietness, and Tumultuousness and Disturbedness of Spirit.
Why art thou disquieted within me, O! my Soul? Ps. 42. 11.

It is good, that a man should quietly wait for the Salvation of the Lord. Lam.
3. 26.

In your Patience therefore possess ye your Souls. Luke 21. 19.

And whatsoever is brought upon thee, take cheerfully, and be patient when thou
art changed to a low Estate.

For Gold is tried in the fire, and acceptable men in the furnace of adversity.
Ecclus. 2. 4, 5.

3. To Weariness, and Faintness and Dejection.
Thou have born, and had patience, and have labored, and not fainted. Rev. 2.
3.

And my Son, despise not the chastening of the Lord, neither be weary of his
correction. Prove. 3. 11.

If thou faint in the day of adversity, thy strength is small. Prove. 24. 10.

And consider Jesus, who endured such contradiction of sinners against himself,
lest ye be wearied and faint in your minds. Heb. 12. 3.

For in due season, we shall reap if we faint not. Gal. 6. 9.

Ye that fear the Lord therefore, believe him, and your reward shall not fail.

Believe in him, and he will help thee.

But woe be to fearful hearts, and faint hands, and the sinner that goes two
ways.

Woe unto him that is faint-hearted, for he believes not, therefore shall he
not be defended. Ecclus. 2. 6, 7, 12, 13.

Why art thou cast down then, O! my Soul? Hope thou in God, for I shall yet
praise him, who is the health of my countenance, and my God. Ps. 42. 11.

When I am weak, then am I strong, 2 Cor. 12. 1^.

And tho the outward man perish, yet the inner man is renewed day by day.

Whilst we look not at the things which are seen, but at the things which are
not seen: For the things which are seen, are Temporal; but the things which are
not seen, are Eternal. 2 Cor. 4. 16. 18.

Let thy mercy, O! Lord, be upon me, according as I hope in thee. Psalm. 33. 22.

4. Opposite to Hastiness, as it notes Perseverance in waiting.
We give thanks, remembering your Patience of hope. 1 Thessalonians. 1, 2, 3.

And I wait for the Lord, my Soul does wait, and in his word do I hope, Ps.
130. 5.

On thee do I wait all the day.

Mine eyes are ever toward the Lord, Ps. 25. 5. 15.

I will hope continually, and will yet praise thee more and more. Ps. 71. 14.

Ye have need of Patience, and the just shall live by faith. Heb. 10. 36. 38.

Set your heart aright, and constantly endure, and make not haste in time of
trouble. Ecclus. 2. 2.

And he that believes, will not make haste, Isa. 28. 16.

O! therefore tarry thou the Lord's leisure, be strong, and he shall comfort
thine heart, and put thou thy trust in the Lord, Ps. 26. 14.

For he will not always chide, neither will he keep his anger for ever.

He knows our frame, and remembers that we are but dust.

And like as a Father pityeth his own Children, so the Lord pityeth them that
fear him, Ps. 103. 9, 13, 14.

He has not forsaken them that seek him, Ps. 9. 10.

He takes pleasure in them, who hope in his mercy, Ps. 147. 11.

He is a very present help in trouble, Ps. 46. 1.

And behold! we account them happy which endure. Ye have heard of the patience
of Job, and have seen the end of the Lord; that the Lord is very pityful, and
of tender mercy, Jam. 5. 11.

They shall not be ashamed, who wait for me, Isa. 49. 23.

And my soul wait thou only upon God, for my expectation is from him, Ps. 62. 5.

Wait for his mercy, but go not aside lest ye fall.

Cleave unto him, and depart not away, that thou may be increased at thy last
end. Ecclus. 2. 3, 7.

5. To Querulousness and accusing God.
It is good for a man, that he bear the yoke in his youth.

He sits alone, and keeps silence, because he has born it upon him.

He puts his mouth in the dust, if so be there may be hope.

Wherefore does a living man complain? A man for the punishment of his sins?
Lam. 3. 27, 28, 29, 39.

I was dumb, I opened not my mouth, because thou did it, Ps. 39. 9.

I was as a man that hears not, and in whose mouth are no reproofs, Ps. 38.
14.

For shall he that contendeth with the Almighty instruct him? He that reproves
God let him answer it.

But behold I am vile, what shall I answer thee? I will lay my hand upon my
mouth, Job 40. 2, 4.

He was afflicted, yet he opened not his mouth: He is brought as a Lamb to the
slaughter, and as a Sheep before her Shearers is dumb, so he opens not his
mouth, Isa. 53. 7.

Motives to Patience.
Shall we receive good at the hands of God, and shall we not receive evil? Job
2. 10.

The Lord gave, and the Lord has taken away, blessed be the Name of the Lord,
Job 1. 21.

Shall the clay say unto him that fashioned it, what make thou? Is. 45. 9.

And why does a living man complain, yea, a man for the punishment of his sin?
Lam. 3. 39.

I will bear the indignation of the Lord, because I have sinned against him,
Mich. 7. 9.

And the Lord does not afflict willingly, nor grieve the children of men, v. 33.

If need be we are in heaviness, 1 Pet. 1. 6.

And because all need, all are partakers of chastisements, Heb. 12. 8.

Even Jesus, tho he were a Son, yet learned he obedience by the things which he
suffered, Heb. 5. 8.

So that it is out of very faithfulness, that he afflicts us, Ps. 119. 15.

And whom be loves he corrects, even as a Father the Son, in whom he
delights, Prove. 3. 11.

For when we are judged, we are chastned of the Lord, that we should not be
condemned with the world, 1 Cor. 11. 32.

He chasteneth us for our profit, that we may be partakers of his holiness,
Heb. 12. 10.

As Gold in the Furnace has he tried them, and received them as a
burnt-offering.

He proved them, and found them worthy of himself; and having been a little
chastized, they shall be greatly rewarded. Wisd. 3. 5, 6.

And these light afflictions, which are but for a moment, work for us a far
more exceeding, and eternal weight of glory, 2 Cor. 4. 17.

Glory be to the Father, etc.

2. With Patience toward our Friends and Attendants.
Be patient toward all men, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 14.

With all lowliness and meekness, with long-suffering, forbearing one another
in love, Ephesians. 4. 2.

Be gentle, showing all meekness to all men, Tit. 3. 2.

And be not hasty in thy spirit to be angry, Ecclus. 7. 9.

For he that is hasty of spirit, exalts folly, Prove. 14. 29.

And a man that has friends, must show himself friendly, Prove. 18. 24.

3. With patience with our selves, and with the heaviness and brokenness of our
own Spirit under Sickness.
It Is wrong said, that God is hard, reaping where he has not sown, and
gathering where he has not strow'd, Matt. 25. 24.

For it is only where much is given, that much shall be required, Luke 12. 48.

He remembers that we are but flesh, Ps. 78. 39.

He himself bore our sickness, Matt. 8. 17.

And had the feeling of our infirmities.

And it behoved him to have so in all things, that he might be a merciful
High Priest, Heb. 2. 17. and c. 4. 15.

He attends unto our cry, when we are brought very low, Ps. 142. 6.

And will not forsake us, because our strength fails, Ps. 71. 9.

Dying, as well as living, we are the Lords, Romans 14. 8.

And fall asleep in him, 1 Thessalonians. 4. 14.

Glory be to the Father, etc.

VI. Of Improvements thereof to Spiritual Advantages.
THat I should not be exalted above measure, there was given me a thorn in the
flesh, 2 Cor. 12. 7.

She did not know, that I gave her Corn, and Wine, and Oil.

Therefore will I return, and take away my Corn in the time thereof, and my
Wine in the season thereof, Hos. 2. 8, 9.

And I will go, and return to my place, till they acknowledge their offenses,
and seek my face: in their affliction they will seek me early, Hos. 5. 15.

When my Heart is overwhelmed, lead me to the Rock that is higher than I, Ps.
61. 2.

So that although for the Time, no affl^ction seems joyous, but Grievous: yet
afterward it yields the Peaceable Fruits of Righteousness, to those that are
exercised thereby, Heb. 12. 11.

For he chastises us for our profit, that we may be partakers of his Holiness,
Heb. 12. 10.

Glory be to the Father, etc.

3. Scriptures for the Bodily needs and desires of Sick Persons.
I. For Ease and Strength.
1. To pour out their Grief and Complaints.
BEhold! all Flesh is Grass, and all the goodliness thereof is as the Flower of
the Field.

The Grass withers, the Flower fades, because the Spirit of the Lord blows
upon it; but the word of our God shall stand for ever, Is. 40. 6, 7, 8.

When thou, Lord, with Rebukes do correct man for iniquity, thou make his
Beauty to consume away like a Moth: Surely every man is Vanity, Ps. 39. 11.

Thou have weakened my strength in the way, and shortened my days, Ps. 102. 23.

Thine Arrows, O Lord, stick fast in me, and thy hand Presses me sore.

There is no soundness in my Flesh, beca^se of thine Anger, neither is there
any Rest in my bones, because of my Sin.

I am troubled, I am bowed down greatly, I go mourning all the day long.

I am feeble and sore broken; I have roared by reason of the Disquietness of my
Heart.

My Heart pants, my Strength fails me: as for the Light of mine Eyes, it
also is gone from me.

My Lovers and my Friends stand aloof from m^ sore: Ps. 88. 4. 6, 7, 8. and Ps.
69. 1, 2, 3.
and my Kinsmen stand afar off, Ps. 38. 2, 3, 6, 8, 10, 11.

My Spirit is overwhelmed within me, and my Heart within me is Desolate, Ps.
143. 4.

My Soul also is sore troubled; but, Lord, how long will thou Punish me? Ps. 6.
3.

2. To Pray for ease and mitigation thereof.
And now Lord, what wait I^for? truly my Hope is even in thee, Ps. 39. 7.

My Flesh and my Heart fails: but thou art the Strength of my Heart, and my
Portion for ever, Ps. 73. 26.

I Stretch out my hands unto thee, my Soul Thirsts after thee as a Thirsty
Land, Ps. 43. 6.

All my Desire is before thee, and my Groaning is not hid from thee, Ps. 38. 9.

Hide not then thy Face from me, and forget not my misery and Trouble, Ps. 44.
24.

Cast me not off, nor forsake me when my Strength fails, Ps. 71. 9.

And rebuke me not, O! Lord, in thine Anger, neither chasten me in thy heavy
Displeasure, Ps. 6. 1.

But remove thy Stroke away from me, for I am consumed by the blow of thine
hand, Ps. 39. 10.

Will thou break a leaf driven to and fro? and will thou pursue the dry
Stubble? Job 13. 25.

Oh! Spare me a little, that I may recover my Strength, before I go hence and
be no more, Ps. 39. 13.

Be not wroth ver^y sore, O! Lord, neither remember iniquity for ever, Is. 64.
9.

But turn from me that I may rest till I accomplish as an hireling my day, Job
14. 6. and Chapter 10. 20. 21.

Hear my Prayer, O! Lord, and give ear unto my cry; hold not thy Peace at my
Tears, Ps. 39. 12.

Be merciful unto me, O! Lord, for I cry unto thee Daily.

And thou art good, and plenteous in mercy, to all them that call upon thee.

Rejoice the Soul of thy Servant; for unto thee O! Lord, do I lift up my Soul,
Ps. 86. 3, 4, 5.

And hear me Ps. 7 9. 8.
speedily, O! Lord, for my Spirit fails, Ps. 143. 7.

And mine Eyes fail for thy word, saying, when will thou comfort me? Ps. 119.
82.

And make me hear of joy and gladness, that the bones which thou have broken
may rejoice, Ps. 51. 8.

Glory be to the Father, etc.

II. For Deliverance and Recovery from the same.
I.
IN thee, O! Lord, do I put my Trust, let me never be ashamed, deliver me in
thy Righteousness, Ps. 31. 1.

Unto thee have I cried, O! Lord, and in the morning shall my Prayer, prevent
thee, Ps. 88. 13.

Hear my Prayer, O! Lord, and hide not thy Self from my Petition.

Take heed unto me and hear me, how I mourn in my Prayer, and am vexed, Ps. 55.
1, 2.

Lord how long will thou be angry with thy Servant that prays? Ps. 86. 3, 4,
5.
Ps. 8. 4.

Save me for thy Names sake, and deliver me in thy Strength, Ps. 54. 1.

Make thy Face to shine upon thy Servant, and save me for thy Mercies sake, Ps.
31. 16.

O! Let it be thy Pleasure to deliver me, make have, O! Lord, to help me, Ps.
40. 13.

And send out thy Light and thy Truth, and let them lead me, and bring me unto
thy Holy Hill, and to thy Tabernacles, Ps. 43. 3.

II.
What profit is there in my Blood if I go down unto the Pit? shall the dust
praise thee? Shall it declare thy Truth? Ps. 30. 9.

Shall thy loving kindness be declared in the Grave? or thy Faithfulness in
Destruction?

Shall thy wonders be known in the Dark? and thy Righteousness in the Land of
Forgetfulness? Ps. 88. 11, 12.

The Living, the Living, he shall Praise thee; the Father to the Children shall
make known thy Truth, Isa. 38. 19.

Thou have been my Succor, leave me not, neither forsake me, O! God of my
Salvation, Ps. 27. 9.

Thou art he that tookest me out of my Mothers Womb, thou wast my hope when I
hanged yet upon my Mothers Breasts.

I have been left unto thee ever since I was born, thou art my God even from my
Mothers Womb.

Our Fathers also hoped in thee, they trusted in thee, and thou did deliver
them.

They called upon thee, and were helped; they put their trust in thee, and were
not confounded, Ps. 22. 4, 5, 9, 10.

And the Poor shall not always be forgotten, and the Patient abiding of the
meek shall not perish for ever, Ps. 9. 18.

O! Then deliver me, and let me not be confounded, for I have put my Trust in
thee, Ps. 25. 19.

And men shall know, that this is thy hand, and that thou Lord have done it,
Ps. 109. 26.

Glory be to the Father, etc.

On Receipt of Ease, or any Abatement of Pain or Sickness.
BEhold! God is my Salvation: I will trust, and not be afraid; for the Lord
Jehovah is my Strength and my Song, he also is become my Salvation.

Thou wast angry with me, O! Lord, thine Anger is turned away, and thou
Comfortedst me, Isa. 12. 1, 2.

He has chastned me sore, but he has not given me over unto Death, Ps. 118.
18.

He knows our Frame, he remembers that we are Dust.

And like as a Father Pityeth his Children, so the Lord Pitieth those that fear
him, Ps. 103. 13, 14.

Glory be to the Father, etc.

IV. Under the Accidents of Sickness.
I. Want of Sleep.
ALL the night make I my Bed to swim, I water my Couch with my Tears, Ps. 6. 6.

For thou hold mine Eyes waking, I am so feeble that I cannot speak.

My sore ran in the night, and ceased not; My Soul refused to be comforted.

I call to Remembrance my Song in the night: I Ps. 4. 4.
commune with mine own Heart, and my Spirit makes diligent search.

Will the Lord cast off for ever, and will he be favorable no more?

Is his mercy clean gone for ever? does his Promise fail for evermore?

Has God forgotten to be Gracious? has he in Anger shut up his tender Mercies?

And I said this is my infirmity: but I will remember the works of the Lord,
surely I will remember thy wonders of old, Ps. 77. 2, 4, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11.

Lord I remember thee upon my bed, and meditate on thee in the night watches,
Ps. 63. 6.

I have remembered thy name, O! Lord, in the night, and have kept thy Law, Ps.
119. 55.

Glory be to the Father, etc.

2. On Excess of pain and weariness.
Lord, thou have set me, as a mark against thee, so that I am a Burden to my
self.

Ps. 22. 2.
In the day time I cry and cease not, and wearisome nights are appointed to me.

When I lie down, I say when shall I arise, and the night be gone? and I am
full of Tossings to and fro unto the dawning of the day, Job 7. 3, 4, 20.

Thou will not suffer me to take my Breath, but fillest me with bitterness, Job
9. 18.

O! turn thee unto me, and have mercy upon me, give thy strength unto thy
Servant, and save the Son of thine Handmaid, Ps. 86. 16.

Are not my days few? cease then, Lord, and let me alone that I may take
comfort a little, Job 10 20.

O! spare me a little, that I may recover my strength, Ps. 39. 13.

And lay not more upon me, than I am able to bear, 1 Cor. 10. 13.

My Grace, say thou, is sufficient for thee, and my strength shall be made
perfect in weakness, 2 Cor. 12. 9.

And in the multitude of my Thoughts within me, thy comforts, Lord, delight my
Soul, Ps. 94. 19.

Glory be to the Father, etc.

3. On taking Physic.
Man lives not by Bread alone, but by every word that proceeds out of the
mouth of God, Mat. 4. 4.

And it was neither Herb, nor mollifying Plaster that restored them to health;
but thy word, O! Lord, which heals all things.

For thou have power of Life and Death; thou leadest to the Gates of Hell, and
bring up again, Wisd. 16. 12, 13.

He that is our God, is the God of Salvation; and unto God the Lord belong the
issues from Death, Ps. 68. 20.

The Lord has created Medicines out of the Earth, and he that is wise will not
abhor them.

And with such does he heal men, and takes away their Pains.

For of the most High comes healing, and he has given men Skill, that he
might be honored in his marve? lous works, Ecclus. 38. 2, 4, 6, 7.

My time is in thy hand, therefore I trust in thee, O Lord, Ps. 31. 14, 15.

Oh! Send thy word and heal me, and deliver me from my Destruction, Ps. 107. 20.

Glory be to the Father, etc.

V. For Attendants about Sick Persons.
I.
HE that is ready to slip with his feet, is as a Lamp despised in the thought
of him that is at ease, Job 12. 5.

But to him that is afflicted, pity should be showed from his Friends, Job 6.
14.

For a Friend loves at all times, and a Brother is born for adversity, Prove.
17. 17.

And if your Soul were in my Souls stead, I would strengthen you with my mouth,
and the moving of my lips should assuage your grief, Job 16. 4, 5.

But my Brethren have dealt deceitfully as a brook, and as the stream of brooks
they pass away.

As Brooks that are blackish with Ice, wherein Snow is hid.

What time they wax warm, they vanish; when it is hot, they are consumed out of
their place.

Now ye are nothing, you see my casting down, and are afraid.

Yea, you dig a pit for your friend, Job 6. 15, 16, 17, 21, 27.

II.
Whether one member suffer, all the members suffer with it; or one member
rejoice, all the members rejoice with it, 1 Cor. 12. 26.

Distribute then to the necessity of Saints, and weep with those that weep,
Romans 12. 13, 15.

And he that shows mercy, let him do it with cheerfulness, v. 8.

For God is not unrighteous to forget your work and labor of love, which ye
have showed toward his Name, in that ye have ministered to the Saints, and do
Minister, Heb. 6. 10.

I was sick, and ye visited me.

In as much, as ye have done it to the least of these my Brethren, ye did it
unto me, Mat. 25. 36, 40.

And this is pure and undefiled Religion, to visit the Fatherless and Widows in
their affliction, Jam. 1. 27.

And the heart of the wise is in the house of mourning; for by the sadness of
the Countenance the Heart is made better.

That is the end of all men, and the living will lay it to his heart, Eccles.
7. 2, 3, 4.

Glory be to the Father, etc.

VI. An Hymn of Thanksgiving for Recovery from Sickness.
IN my wrath I smote thee, but in my favor have I had mercy on thee, Is. 60.
10.

The Lord has chastned me sore, but he has not given me over unto death, Ps.
118. 18.

In love to my soul, Psalm. 103. 3, 4.
he has delivered it from the pit of corruption, for he has cast all my sins
behind his back, Is. 38. 17.

O! Lord my God, thou have considered my trouble, thou have known my soul in
adversities, Ps. 31. 7.

Thou healest the broken in heart, and bindest up their wounds, Psalm. 147. 3.

And I cried unto thee, and thou have healed me.

And have turned for me my mourning into dancing, thou have put off my
Sackcloth, and girded me with gladness.

To the end that my Glory may sing praise to thee, and not be silent: O! Lord
my God, I will give thanks unto thee for ever, Ps. 30. 2, 11, 12.

My Mouth shall show forth thy Righteousness, and thy Salvation all the day:
For I know not the numbers thereof.

And my Lips shall greatly rejoice when I sing unto thee, and my Soul which
thou have redeemed, Psalm. 71. 15. 23.

O! Sing unto the Lord, ye Saints of his, and give thanks at the Remembrance of
his Holiness, Ps. 30. 4.

And ye that fear the Lord, trust in the Lord, he is their help and their
shield, Ps. 115. 11.

To the upright he makes light to arise in the darkness, Ps. 112. 4.

For his Anger endures but a moment, in his Favor is Life: Weeping may endure
for a Night, but Joy comes in the Morning, Psalm. 30. 5.

I will offer the Sacrifice of Thanksgiving, and will call upon the Name of the
Lord, Ps. 116. 17.

And I will pay thee my Vows, O! God, which my Lips have uttered, and my Mouth
has spoken when I was in trouble, Psalm. 66. 13, 14.

I will not hide thy Righteousness within my Heart, I will declare thy
Faithfulness and thy Salvation: I will not conceal thy Loving Kindness and thy
Truth from the great Congregation, Psalm. 40. 10.

I will pay my Vows unto the Lord, now in the presence of all his People.

In the Courts of the Lord's House, in the midst of thee, O! Jerusalem. Praise
ye the Lord, Psalm. 116. 18, 19.

Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Ghost.

As it was in the beginning, is now, and ever shall, be World without end. Amen.

PRAYERS FOR THE Duties, and Needs OF SICK PERSONS.
I. A General Prayer for things needful under Sickness.
O! Almighty and most Righteous Lord, who Jo^ 5. 18.
make sore and bindest up, and in Ps. 68. 20.
whose Hands are the Issues of life and death: Give me Grace to look upon this
my Sickness as of thy sending, and to own both the justice and the mercifulness
of thy Visitation and of my suffering therein, and to look up to thee for
strength to bear, and for Grace to profit by the same.

It comes, O! My God, as thy scourge for my sins, which is to make me see them,
and avoid them. And as thy Medicine, to cure my Spiritual Diseases, and repair
in me the Decays of thy Grace. And as thy Fiery Trial, which is to prove my
Virtues, and to purge away my Dross.

And, Lord! Let it not miss of serving, and effecting in me all these Gracious
purposes. And make all my thoughts under the same, to be only thoughts of Love
and Thankfulness, of Holy Resignation and Obedience unto thee, and of humble
hope in thy Mercy. And suffer me not to fall into impatience, or mistrust of
thy Love and Gracious promises, or into any evil and indecent carriage, which
will add to my guilt if I die, or to my remorse and shame if I live.

Temper my Sorrows also, O! Father, to my weakness, and support me under them
by thy Comforts. And direct and recompense the labors and kindness of those,
who charitably attend about me in my sickness. Keep me always submissive and
devout toward thee, and thankful and easy unto them. And let thy Blessing go
along with all their Means and Medicines; and in thy due time, assuage, and end
my pains; and either restore me to my strength, and send me health and ease,
and the mercies of a longer and a better life; or else a blessed, and a
comf^rtable death, for our Lord Jesus Christ^s sake. Amen.

Out of the Office of Visitation of the Sick.
O! Lord look down from Heaven, ^ehold, visit and relieve me thy Servant. Look
upon me with the eyes of thy mercy, give me comfort and sure confidence in
thee, defend me from the danger of the enemy, and keep me in perpetual peace
and safety, through Jesus Christ my Lord. Amen.

Our Father which art in Heaven; Hallowed be thy Name. Thy Kingdom come. Thy
will be done in Earth, as it is in Heaven. Give us this day our daily bread.
And forgive us our Trespasses, as we forgive them that trespass against us. And
lead us not into Temptation; But deliver us from evil: For thine is the
Kingdom, and the Power and the Glory, for ever and ever. Amen.

And he may still conclude with the Lord's Prayer on all occasions, when he has
used as many of these Prayers as he thinks fit for that time.

Particular Prayers, for the Duties and Needs of Sick Persons.
Prayers for Repentance in Sickness.
I.
RIghteous art thou, O! God, in all these pains and sorrows, which punish my
sins and try my patience, and I have none to accuse or complain of for the
same, but my self. I receive my sickness, as the Chastisement of a Sinner; and
am willing to bear Chastisement for my sins, that I may be thereby reclaimed
from them. Correct me, O! Lord, that thou may not condemn me* and let me be
judged by thee for my sins, and judge my self for them here, that I may have
nothing but mercy without judgment to receive at thine hands hereafter.

But judge me, O! My God, with Mercy, and not in thine Anger. Judge me not
according as my sins have deserved, but according as my weakness can bear, and
according as thy Compassions are wont to mitigate thy Judgments. And let my
sickness work my true Repentance, and prove an happy means in the hand of thy
mercy, to expiate my Guilts, not to increase them; and to reclaim me perfectly
from all the Evils which I have committed formerly, not to occasion my
committing more; and to confer that rest and peace upon my Soul, which is
denied to my Body, for our dear Lord and Savior Jesus Christ's sake. Amen.

2.
Thou smitest me, O! Gracious Lord, that thou may cure me, and punishest my
sin, that thou may thereby amend and reclaim my person. And I am weary of my
sins, which have brought upon me all these Sorrows, and which I know assuredly
will bring infinitely worse, unless I prevent the same by my timely and true
Repentance of them.

Help me therefore to search them out, O! God, and to discover every accursed
thing. And when I see them, let me not stop at any one, but set my self
entirely to renounce and amend all. Let thy love, make me h^te every evil way.
And make my purposes against them, strong and resolute; and my care in
fulfilling the same, vigilant and patient; and all the remainder of my days, to
be one continued defacement of my former Errors, and Devotion of my self to thy
Service.

Lord! Cure my Folly by my Misery, and teach me by the loss of my bodily ease,
to purchase the Blessing of true Repentance, and the comfortable hopes of thy
merciful acceptance thereof, through the Merits of our dear Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ. Amen.

To make his Confessions, and other Acts of Repentance, with greater sureness
and satisfaction to himself, the Sick man must first make a discovery of his
Sins, by examining himself, and trying his ways upon the several Heads and
Branches of God's Commandments. And thereby inquire into the state of his Soul,
to see whether he is already safe within the terms of pardon, or what he wants
to make him so. This is a work, for all men, at all times, who would live with
safety, or die with peace. But especially for sick and dying persons, who are
more sensible their case admits of no delays; and who not only ought, but also
more commonly are wont to make it their earnest desire and care. And in their
performance of this most important Task, with security and comfort, I have
assisted them as well as I can, in the Trial or Judgment of the Soul, etc. in a
small Treatise entitled, A Companion for the Penitent, to which I refer them.

3. A Confession of Sins, taken out of the Office for the Penitent, or those
who mourn for sin, p. 39. etc.
O! Almighty and most Righteous Lord, I do hear with grief of heart, and with
shame and deep humility confess unto thy Dreadful Majesty, that my sins are
exceeding many and great, and have been frequently repeated.

I have oft-times transgressed out of Ignorance: O! that I could not say
careless Ignorance, under Opportunities of Knowledge; yea, or affected
Ignorance, espoused for Earthly ends against Light and clear Evidence, which
was enough to shame and silence me, though not to gain and convince me. But I
have transgressed oftener out of Negligence, Worldly Fear, or Desire; yea, alas*
too often, out of presumptuous Wilfulness, condemning the Evil, whilst I was a
doing it, and offending wittingly, and with Checks and Convictions to the
contrary Especially, etc. here mention Particulars*
.

And these Sins I have been drawn to, against all the Endearments of thy
Mercies, and all the Alarms and louder Warnings of thy Punishments; against all
the Rebukes and Strivings of thy Grace, and of my own Conscience, and of other
faithful and seasonable Admonishers. And against all mine own Purposes and
Engagements, Deliberately made, and solemnly professed, and frequently
repeated, that I would offend therein no more.

Lord be merciful to me, a Great and Wretched Sinner.

2.
BUT thou, O! Blessed Jesus, by making thy self a Sin-Offering for us, art come
to take away the Sins of all, who truly Repent thereof. And, O! Merciful Lord,
though my Sins are many and grievous, yet I do not desire to overlook them, but
would gladly see and discover them all, that I may penitently bewail and
forsake them. And Oh! That no corrupt Passions, nor love of Worldly or Carnal
Interests, may ever bias me, or blind my Eyes from seeing the same, whilst
there is space left me to repent of them. And as for those sins, which I do
know my self to be guilty of, I do not cover, but with shame confess them. I do
not justify nor excuse, but condemn my self for the same.

I stand thereby guilty, O! Lord, of highest Disobedience, against the
strictest Obligations; of wretched Disingenuity and Unthankfulness, against the
most endearing Mercies; and of most stupid Folly, against my own clearest,
highest, and most lasting Interests, throwing away thy favor and future Joys,
for empty shows and shadows, and a blessed Eternity for moments of Vanity.

I reflect on all this, O! Merciful God, with bitterness, and with a Spirit
wearied with mine own ways. I see and lament my own folly, and abhor mine own
vileness on account thereof. I wish with all my Soul, that those Sins had never
been done, and would take any way to undo them, and most earnestly desire, and
fnlly purpose by thy Grace, that I may do so no more.

God be merciful to me, a self-condemning and repenting Sinner.

3.
LOrd, I am burdened and heavy laden with my Sins, Oh! Do thou, who Matthew. ^^.
28.
call out to the heavy laden, to seek refreshment at thine Hands, give me
ease. I confess them, and desire above all things else, that I may utterly
forsake them: Let me according to my Promise Prove. 28. 13.
find Mercy. From mine Heart I forgive all Persons who have offended me, even
my bitterest Enemies, and most earnestly entreat thee, that thou would
forgive them: Oh! Do thou, who Matthew. 6. 14, 15.
offerest forgiveness to those who are ready to grant it, for Jesus Christ's
sake forgive me. I repent unfeignedly of all my Sins, and am ready to make all
just amends, at least as far as I am able, to any whom I have ever injured,
whether they be of low or of high Degree, or even the highest of all. O! God of
all Grace, perfect my Repentance and accept it, and blot out all my misdeeds,
as thou Acts 3. 19.
engagest to do unto all those who sincerely repent of the same.

I know, O! Blessed Jesus, that Acts 4. 12.
there is no Name but thine, whereby I can obtain Pardon. And I trust only to
the fullness of thy Merits, and to the faithfulness of thy gracious Promises,
and to the abundance of my Heavenly Father's Mercy and Loving Kindness, to me a
great and miserable, but an Humble, Contrite, Penitent Sinner. Forgive them
all, O! Blessed Father, Remembering not my Deservings, but the pityableness of
my Weakness, and thy Dear Sons infinite Merits, and thine own boundless Mercies
and most precious Promises. Let me here have thy Peace, and be admitted
hereafter to stand for ever in thy ^resence, for our Lord Jesus Christ's sake,
Amen.

Our Father, etc.

For carrying on this duty of Repentance, the sick person may likewise make use
of the Prayer for Profession of Godly Sorrow for Sins, and of Resolutions of
New Obedience; and of the Profession of the Fruits of Repentance, and the
Conditions of Forgiveness; and of the Prayer for Pardon of sins, in the Office
for Penitents. And for comforting and quieting his Conscience, against Fears
and Scruples, he may be supplied with Hymns and Prayers in the Office for
Persons troubled in mind; all which are in the Companion to the Penitent.

II. Prayers for an Heart to be Liberal in Alms-Deeds, when any Persons are
about to make their Will; or to accompany Repentance at any time, leaving out
the Passages within the Hooks, [] which particularly refer to their last Wills.
I.
O! Almighty Father, thou gave me all my worldly Estate, that I should employ
it for the convenient support of my self and of my Family, and of the ^oor and
Needy. And when I come to thee, I can have nothing to carry along with me, but
a strict account how I have laid it out.

Give me Grace therefore, I earnestly entreat thee, after I have made a wise
provision for my Family out of it, with a free and glad heart, to give good
Portions thereof to the poor, who are thy Receivers, or to Religious and Pious
uses, that when I can no longer possess my Estate, I may come with joy to give
up my account of it; and that when my worldly Goods can no longer profit me, my
good disposal thereof may, through the Merits of my only Lord and Savior, Jesus
Christ. Amen.

2.
AND whatsoever I give to the Poor, or to pious uses for thy sake, give me the
Heart, O! Lord, to do it with a good Will, and with a Liberal Hand.

For thou, O! My God, have freely given the whole of this Estate to me; and
therefore it is not for me to be narrow and niggardly, in these Returns of a
small part thereof, which I make to thee. [And these Pious and Charitable
Gifts, alas! Have been far too few, and too poor and slender, all my life; and
therefore I need to supply that Defect, by being more liberal therein at my
Death.] And what I thus give out of it, O! Blessed Jesu, is to thy poor
Members, who are all my near Kindred, and Brethren in the Spirit.

Yea, Lord, Prove. 16. 6.
by such Acts of Mercy, I know that iniquity is purged. And by this use Luke
16. 9.
of the Mammon of unrighteousness, I may make my self Friends in thy Presence.
And the Poors Prayers and Thanksgivings, for any relief or comfort which they
have received by my means, may heap Blessings on my head whilst I live, and
help much to recommend me to thy mercy and gracious Acceptance when I die.

So that these Gifts to them, O! Blessed Lord, are the truest way I have of
giving to my self, and are much more for my own relief, than for theirs. And I
do, and will look upon them, as a Mat. 6. 20.
laying up Treasure for my self in Heaven, and making a Return of my wealth for
my own use and behoof in another Life. And reckon, that what I wisely give in
this kind, I take and carry away with me, to stand me in stead in the most
needful time of thy mercy, through Jesus Christ my Lord, and only Savior, Amen.

^. A Prayer, at the Oblation, or giving of our Alms; or on alloting any sums,
to charitable, or Pious uses.
O! Blessed Lord, I humbly entreat thee Graciously to accept of this poor
return of the worldly Substance, which thou have committed unto me. I offer it
to thee, for the use of thy poor Members, whom I look upon as my poor Brethren.
I offer it with an Heart, that is truly sorrowful for all my Sins, and thankful
for all thy Mercies; that seeks acceptance for it, only for the sake of thy
Sons merits, and from thy mere Grace and Favor; and that is ashamed for its
having made the offering no sooner, and now for offering no more.

And all my Alms and Repentance, I present and put into thy Hands, O! Holy
Jesu, in the Communion of Saints, and in the Unity of thy Holy Church, which is
Col. 1. 18.
thy Body, and 2 Cor. 11. 2. and Ephesians. c. 23, 24, 25, 32.
Spouse, and whereto thou have given the precious Promises, of Grace, and
Pardon, and eternal Life.

O! Father, in the Unity of this Body, let me find mercy. And accept mine Alms
as an Oblation of a sweet Savor, and supply and perfect all my Wants, and
purge away all my Sins, through the merits of my only Savior and Redeemer, Jesus
Christ, Amen.

Our Father which art, etc.

III. Prayers for Trust in God in Sickness.
I.
O! Almighty Lord, under all my weakness and pains of Body, and uncertain
Prospects for my self, and for my Family, I trust [intirely] to thee, who have
Goodness enough to Pity us, and Power enough to help and deliver us.

I trust in thee, O! my dear God, who have been my Refuge and Defense in many
troubles, and art still ready to be so in more; who invitest us most Lovingly,
to 1 Pet. 5. 7.
cast all our Cares upon thee, and have promised to take care of us; who love
to be trusted, and Ps. 9. 10, and 34, 22.
never failest them who trust in thee. I trust to thy Wisdom, to choose for me
better than I can choose for my Self. I trust to thy Power, to help and support
me, where I am weak, and without strength to help and support my Self. And I
trust to thy Love and Fatherly care, to deal out all my Sorrows with
tenderness, and to turn them all to my good and greater Comfort in the End.

For I believe and know, O! Gracious Lord, that Jer. 30. 11.
thou will correct me in measure, and consider, not what my Sins do deserve,
but what my Weakness can bear. I believe, that Hab. 3. 2.
thou will remember Mercy in my Corrections, and still Ps. 112. 4.
make light to arise up up to me out of Darkness, and daily relieve my Sorrows,
with thy manifold and most seasonable Favors. I believe, that Ps. 103. 9.
thou will not keep Anger for ever, but in due time wilt abate my Pains and
Troubles; or, if that be good for me, and for thy Glory, perfectly remove them;
however, in the End, that thou will change them all into everlasting Rest and
Joy with thee, through Jesus Christ my Lord, Amen.

2. For Trust, against the Torment, and distraction of Fears.
AND since, under all my Sorrows and uncertainties, thou art my stay and
confidence, Lord keep me easy, and quiet within my Self. I have cast all my
cares npon thee, and therefore they should not any longer be troublesome, or
distracting unto me. I have put my self into thy hands, and thou have promised
to take care of me; and therefore I ought to rest assured, that all is
certainly for my good, and is most wisely and kindly Ordered, which befalls me.

Oh! then, that I be not disq^ieted with fear of Evil, since none can happen
unto me without thy leave. That I be not troubled, at the Helplessness of those
I am to leave behind me, because I leave thee to take care of them. Nor
frighted with the approach of Pains, because thou art to set bounds to them.
Nor with any evil Tidings, or Alarm of Dangers, because thou art to govern
them. Yea, that I be not terrified, Ps. 23. 4.
though I walk through the shadow of Death, because Life and Death are both in thy
hands. Nor even in Death it self, because thou will most Graciously support me
in my Death, and make it the Gate to everlasting Life, through Jesus Christ my
Lord, Amen.

3. For Trust, against dejection of Spirit, and Despondency.
AND since I rest upon thee as my Rock and stay, and have thy strength to Trust
to, let me not sink under my Burden, O! Lord, by Dejection, and Faintness of
Spirit. For no Burden is so heavy upon me, but thou can, and wilt support me
under it, and in thy due time, which is always my best time, deliver me from it.

Thou have Promised, O! my God, 1 Cor. 10. 1^.
not to lay more upon me, than thou will enable me to bear. And thou, Holy
Jesu, Heb. 4. 15.
art touched with the Sense of our infirmities, and wilt inflict no more, than
thou know is proportionable to my weakness. Thou have bore them in thy self,
and wilt tenderly consider them in thy Members. Thou will not continue my
Smart, till I have quite lost my Patience. Nor send me Pains and Sorrows,
without supports and succors. And thou do send, and wilt send, no evil upon
me, but what I need, or what is for my Good, and what thou will take off, when
it has wrought thy gracious Purposes, and served my Necessities.

And therefore when my Pains or Distresses are hardest upon me, let me not
think, or say, that I cannot endure them. For thou, Lord, know better what I
can endure, than I do. And when I come to it, by thy help I shall find my self
able to endure more, than I thought I could. And if thou had not known me
strong enough through thy Grace to endure them, thou would not have put me to
endure them. And even now, thou will either remove, or mitigate the same, when
I can abide no more.

Instead of concluding then, that I can bear them no longer, give me Grace, O!
Father, to set my self resolutely to bear them the best I can. And firmly to
believe, that thou mercifully considerest what I can bear, and wilt show thy
Grace is strong where my flesh is weak, and wilt be sure to support me at
present, and to ease and deliver me at last, through the Merits of my dearest
Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, Amen.

4. For Trust, against Suspiciousness, and finding Fault.
SInce I wholly commit and trust my Self to thee, O! my God, let me constantly
think well of all that thou do for me, and sendest upon me. Let me not think
ill of it, because I cannot think ill of thee: nor fall to Tax it, either with
unfitness, or unkindness, or once suspect any therein, because it is ordered by
thee, who can not order amiss, and who in all these things have not less Love
and Goodness, but only more wisdom to allot and order for me, than I have to
order for my self. Yea, where things are hardest to be accounted for, make me
still think well of them, and believe firmly that thou se^st good and kind
Reasons for the same, though my short-sighted, and shallow understanding can see
none.

And therefore, O! Father, when things are hardest upon me in my Condition, my
Reverence and Confidence in thee, shall be stronger than my mistrust of them,
and by thy Grace I will answer all my own Objections against them, by
considering they are of thy choosing. And whether any evils are sent upon me, or
any comforts are delayed, and withheld from me, I will believe still that all
is as it should be, and will turn to good in the end, because all is done by
thee, who love me, and have promised to keep me under thy tender care at
present, and to receive me to thy Blessed self at last, through the Merits of my
dearest Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, Amen.

5. For Trust, for Deliverance out of Sickness or Afflictions.
LOrd, I trust to thee, who sendest all these Sorrows upon me, to take them off
again. I trust to thee to take them off, because thou Lam. 3. 33.
take no delight in the Pain of thy Servants; yea, because thou art of great
Pity, and art Heb. 4. 15.
touched with a Sense of our sufferings; because Ps. 22. 4.
our Fathers trusted in thee, and were helped; because I my self have [always
hitherto] trusted in thee, and thou have still delivered me; and because thou
have promised Ps. 50. 15.
in the day of Trouble, to deliver those that call upon thee, that they may
Glorify thee.

And now, O! my God, let thy word be verified unto thy Servant, and Ps. 119.
116.
let me not be ashamed, or Disappointed of my Hope. I trust and depend on thee,
do not thou fail, or forsake me. Leave me not under my Troubles, but relieve
and Ps. 90. 15.
comfort me, according to the days wherein thou have afflicted me; and turn my
Mourning into Joy, that they who love thee may see it, and learn thereby to
Praise thy mercy, and to put their trust in the same, through Jesus Christ our
Lord, Amen.

6. Prayers of Sick, or dying Persons, for trusting God with their Friends or
Kindred.
I.
LOrd, if thou see fit to call me home to thy self by this Sickness* when I
am taken from my Wife and Children, and from those who under thee depend on me,
give them Grace, I earnestly entreat thee, to betake themselves to thee.

I commit them to thee, O! God of mercy and truth, for they are thine; and Hos.
14. 3.
with thee the Fatherless find mercy. Yea, Ps 68. 5.
thou art the Father of the Fatherless, and the judge of the Widows, and will
show thy self Prove. 23. 10, 11.
might to plead their cause. And my Heart is at ease, to have them lodged in
thy care, where they are infinitely safer, and will be infinitely happier and
better provided for, than ever they could be in mine, or in any others without
thine. I freely commit them to it, O! Blessed Lord, having my self always found
the ^lessing of being under it, and of trusting to it. And I beg no greater
Blessing for them, than that they may ever have thy good Providence for their
Inheritance in this world, and thy Peace for their Portion in the world to
come, for Jesus Christ's sake, Amen.

2.
[When I am gone] O! my dear God, This Prayer may be used by the Widows and
Orphans themselves, omitting the words within the hooks [] and putting we for
they, ours for theirs, us for them, our for their, are for am, etc.
they are thrown upon thee, who art the Husband of the Widow, and the Father of
the Fatherless. And, Lord, as thou art their Father, provide against all their
wants, and Protect them from all wrongs. Supply to them by thy kind Providence,
what they want in outward helps. And although they have none to Counsel them,
where they are unskilful and unexperienced; nor to right them, where they are
injured; nor to furnish and supply them, where they are unprovided: yet will
thy Spirit be the best Guide, and thy Care, and thy Blessing will abundantly
make up all.

[ Now thou have taken away ou^, ^ c. Nameing the Relative.
At my Departure,] O! Father, they are bereft of their earthly stay. But thou
art better, than Friend, or Husband, or Father, or Mother: Yea, than allot her
supports put together. Oh! then, do not thou leave them, but when They, when
the (...) ws, etc. use t^is Prayer.
[I] am gone, stay thou still with them. And be thou to them, whatsoever I
would be, and more than I could be, if I were still employed by thee to take
care of them.

And enable them evermore to place their love and delight in thee, and to fix
their Trust and Confidence in thy mercy. Oh! that the Will and Honor may
always be their care, that so their needs and welfare may always be thine. And
keep them from polluting themselves with any things, which may forfeit thy
Fatherly Care and Providence, and Cry louder against them, than their destitute
Circumstances do for them. Train them up, good Lord, steadfastly in thy Fear,
and preserve them from all the Evils and Temptations of this world, and bring
them safe at last to the Joys and Blessedness of that to come, for Jesus
Christ's fake, Amen.

3. Another Prayer for the Widows and Orphans, etc. for Trusting God with
themselves.
O! Blessed Lord, the more we are bereaved of other supports, When ^his Prayer
is used by one al^ne, put I for we, me for us, am for are, my for ou^, etc.
the more do thou strengthen our Faith and Confidence in thy self. Make us
know, that we can never be destitute, whilst we have thee to take care of us;
and that no earthly Provision, is, or can be so good to us, as being entitled
to thy good Providence.

For it is thy Goodness, O! dear God, that supplys and supports us by any
earthly Friends. They are only means of thy Providence, and Instruments whereby
thou take care of us. And thy good Providence, which sends us Comforts, or
supplies by them, when it removes them, can and will find out other ways, and
do the same without them. So that we are never without Friends and faithful
helpers, whilst we have thee to stand by us.

And thou, Holy Father, still remainest, and thy Mercy is still the same; although
Here they may name the Relative.
this most dear and desired means of conveying the Blessed Effects thereof upon
us, is withdrawn. Yea, thou art nearer to us, and more concerned to help and
provide for us, now Or He, or She.
they are gone. Oh! then, that we may look up unto thee, more than unto them;
and rest our Hearts more on thy staying with us, than on theirs. And that being
taken off from earthly Dependances, we may now depend more entirely upon they
Promises, and place our chiefest Security and Comfort in thy Love, thro^ Jesus
Christ our Lord, Amen.

Our Father, etc.

IV. Prayers for Faith in Gods Promises, under Sickness.
I.
O! Almighty Lord, who relievvest our weakness by the belief and hope of thy
Promises, under all my weariness I take Comfort, and amidst all my Temptations
I rest my Soul upon thy word.

For under the load and guilt of my Sins, I trust to the Blood of Jesus, and to
thy sure Promises of Forgiveness upon our true Repentance. And under the Sense
of their strength, and of my own weakness, I trust to the Promises of thy
Spirit and Grace. And amidst all the Decays and Miseries of this mortal Body, I
trust to thy sure Promises of ^mmortality.

I trust to thy Promises, O! Father, to be with me in all my Sicknesses and
Sorrows, to temper my afflictions to my infirmities, and to give me strength in
Proportion to my Needs, to ease and rid me of my Pains, or to support me under
them whilst I live, and to turn them all to my advantage in the end, and to
receive me to thy self when I die, for my dearest Lord and Savior* Jesus
Christ's sake, Amen.

2.
AND, Lord, let not the Adversary shake my Faith of these Gracious Promises,
nor let my own weakness ever betray me once to doubt of them. For thou art
true, and can not deceive us. Thou art Deuteronomy. 7^. 9.
the faithful God, who keep covenant and mercy for ever. Thy 2 Cor. 1. 20.
Promises are all yea, and Amen. And 2 Samuel 20. 31.
thy word is tried, and is a sure Buckler to all who trust to it. Even when we
think thee far off, thou art near at hand to us; and remembrest our Sorrows,
and thine own Promises, when we fancy thou have forgot them.

Oh! then, that I may trust to thy word, which shall surely be verified in its
time. And keep steadfastly in the Expectation, that all these Mercies shall be
made good unto thy Servant, and Patient in waiting till thou graciously and
plentifully fulfillest the same, for Jesus Christ's sake, Amen.

Our Father, etc.

V. Prayers for Resignation to the Will of God under Sickness.
I.
O! Almighty and most merciful God, my Sorrows are great, and my Flesh is weak
and sore wearied; but I am willing to bear them, because they are of thy
sending. Since thou think them fit for me, O! my God, I will think them so
too, and will find no fault therewith, nor think another State were better for
me. I humbly yield to thy Wisdom, and prefer thy Will before mine own. I am
content to bear what thou please, and to be eased of my Burden when thou
please^t. And desire, not only silently to suffer thy Will, but in my Will and
Heart to be truly reconciled and consenting to it, and to see thy Love and my
own Benefit in my Chastisement, which is sent for my Good, and will work good
for me in the end, through Jesus Christ my Lord, Amen.

2.
AND therefore in all, that does, or shall befall me in this Sickness, thy
Will, O! Blessed Lord, be done. Thy Will be done, because it is thine; and
because thou art my Father, and nothing can come to me from thee, but what is
very agreeable with a Fathers Tenderness and Affection.

Thy will be done, because thou know best what to chu^e for me; and because
I am well assured, that to refer all my matters to thy Choice, is the best care
I can take for my self. For in thy Choice, thou have not less kindness, but
only more knowledge, Care, and Providence, than I can have in choosing for my
self.

For as for me, O! my God, I know that I am ignorant, and whilst I live in this
world, shall be ignorant, what things thereof, or what States and Conditions
therein, are most desirable for my Self, or for my Friends. I am foolish in my
wishes, too often opposing that, which is most safe for me, and which is fit, or
it may be needful to do me good: and as often coveting that, which is full of
Danger, and like to do me hurt. And therefore I renounce my own Will, which is
blind and foolish, and which if I could have it, would too often be to my
sorrow and prejudice.

And instead of that, I refer my self wholly to be guided and disposed of by
thine, which never errs, and is always for my real welfare and advantage. And
my desire is, not that my foolish wishes, but that thy unerring Wisdom, may at
all times prescribe me and mine our Portion. I trust to thine All-seeing eye,
to direct what is best; and to thy Fatherly love and care, to allot it for us.
And where I do not see how any Orderings of thine, should work for mine, or for
my Families, or Friends good; yet, Lord, I will believe that thou do, and
that all is both wisely, and kindly appointed for us, because it is thy doing,
who 2 Cor. 4. 6. Ps 112. 4.
bring light out of darkness, and Comforts out of Crosses, and make Romans
8. 28.
all things work together for good to those that love thee, through Jesus Christ
our Lord, Amen.

3.
SEnd then, O! Father, what thou please upon me, for thou will send nothing,
but what is most fit for me. I heartily submit my self to thy Pleasure, for it
is always a good Pleasure. I wait thy Time, for it is always the best time. I
know not what things to desire in this case for my self, nor when to desire
them. But my safety is, that I am in thy hands, and that there I desire to be,
and to have thy Love and Wisdom choose for me. And that I am willing to receive
my Mercies and Comforts from thee, not when I fancy, but when thou see they
will most serve and glorify thee, and benefit me, through Jesus Christ my Lord,
Amen.

4.
UNder my weakness, O! merciful God, I pour out my Complaints before thee; and
when I am most pressed by my Pains and Sorrows, I am most earnest and
importunate in my desires of ease. And thou, who know our Frame, and pitiest
our infirmities, allowest me to be so. But amidst all these Cravings and
Importunities to have my own Will, O! Gracious Father, I desire above all
things still to be entirely resigned to thine.

For when my Heart desires ease, or deliverance, it is with Submission. When I
ask the same, according to to my desire; I leave thee, O! my dear God, to Order
for me, and to Answer me according to thy most wise and good Pleasure. Yea,
where my Pains and Sorrows are most pressing, and I am most earnest and
importunate in asking and desiring; yet even there would I by no means
prescribe to thy Wisdom, nor seem to doubt of thy Love.

For I trust assuredly, O! Father, to thy indulgent Care and sure Promises, of
tempering my troubles to my weakness, and of giving me all needful Supports
under them, and of turning all to my Comfort and Advantage in thy due time. And
I leave thee still to do me good, by such ways, not as I fancy, but as thou
see best for me, and most fit to make me sure of thine everlasting Mercy,
through Jesus Christ my Blessed Lord and Savior, Amen.

Our Father, etc.

VI. Prayers for Thankfulness under Sickness.
I.
O! Almighty and most merciful God, though I am compassed about with Weaknesses
and Sorrows, yet I have no cause at all to complain of thee, but have still
enough to thank thee for, and to speak well of thy Name. And by thy Grace I
will not overlook the endearing Mercies which I have, out of Discontentedness
for others which I have not; nor quarrel with those which are still left me,
because others are taken away. For the least of those I have, O! Lord, is
abundantly better than I deserve. And instead of being ungratefully angry for
those which I have now lost, I most humbly and heartily thank thee, that I was
allowed to have them, and enjoy them at all, and that I lost them no sooner.

Yea, and even as for my Sorrows themselves, O! my dear God, I do not only own
thy Justice, but reverence thy Wisdom, and acknowledge thy Goodness to me
therein. I receive my Chastisements as thy Favors, and as Tokens of thy love,
and means of my own Happiness, which come to do me good against my Will, and to
lead me through the Valley of tears, to the happy Regions of everlasting Rest and
Bliss. And though affliction it self Heb. 12. 11.
is not joyous, yet the Sense of thy Love and of my Benefit are joyous, and to
be received, not with Complaints, but with Thanksgivings.

Lord, Mat. 26. 41.
my Spirit is willing, but my Flesh is weak. But let thy Grace be the support
of my weakness, and the Finisher of my willingness. And let the sense of thy
Love, and the hopes of thy Promises, drown the sense of my Sorrows, and fill my
heart and tongue with Thanks and Praise to thee, through Jesus Christ my Lord.
Amen.

2.
I Bless thee, O! Father, for all the manifold and great Mercies, vouchsafed to
me under my Sickness. For my affliction, is infinitely less than I have
deserved. And thou do not send it upon me, till I need it. And when thou
sendest it, it is all to do me good.

And in doing me good this way, O! Lord, thou do in great mercy Pity my
weakness, and provide for it. For it is thy mercy, that lays not too much upon
me. It Is thy mercy, that I am brought down by degrees, and am Lam. 3. 22.
not consumed suddenly. It Is thy mercy, that thou wast not soon, nor wilt be
long angry with me. It Is thy mercy, that Ps. 41. 3.
makes my Bed in my Sickness; that considers my weakness, and supporteth me;
and considers my Pains, and shortneth them, and always in due time gives me
ease, or intermission from them. It Is thy mercy, O! dear God, that orders
Comforts for me continually, to sweeten my Distresses to me; and that makes
thee still to be most near unto me at those times, when I stand most in need of
thee.

So that although I am Sick, O! my God, yet I am not forsaken. For Blessed be thy
Name, my Griefs are not beyond measure, and my Burden is not without help, nor
my Sufferings without hope and comfort, wherewith in thine abundant Mercy thou
daily temperest them, and sustainest me, through Jesus Christ my Lord, Amen.

3.
I Bless thee, O! most gracious Lord, for sending this Sickness upon me, which
thou sendest to show thy Love and Care of me, and to do me good. For if my Body
were not sick, thou see my Soul would be sick. Yea, alas! it has been [very]
Sick, and this Sickness of my Body comes to cure it.

For in thus Correcting me when I had gone astray, thou art putting an end, O!
God, to my wandering. Thou sendest these Sorrows, Job 36. 10.
to open my ears to discipline when Mercies would not open them, and to reclaim
me and set me in the way of Pardon. So that this dealing shows, that thou have
not rejected me, as an outcast or Alien; but still look upon me with
thoughts of Mercy, and Heb. 12. 7.
treatest me as a Son.

And Blessed be thy Mercy, O! Father of Mercies, which by these Pains and
Sorrows of my Body, have given my Spirit rest, from the wearisome importunity
and Solicitations, of Lust and Envy. Blessed by thou, who have thereby dull^d
the edge of my covetous Desires, and laid asleep my worldly Cares, and brought
down my ambitious and aspiring thoughts, and humbled Self-conceit, by showing
me that I am but sin and folly, dust and misery. Blessed be thou, who have
thereby called me off from incumbring my self Luke 10. 41, 42.
with many things, which now I see cannot profit me, to mind the one thing
necessary; and from minding worldly Vanities, to spend my thoughts upon thy
Laws and Promises; and from placeing my confidence in my Self, to place it only
and wholly in thee.

And since my Sickness, does thus show me thy Love, and cure my Spirit, and set
on my Felicity, it shall please me, O! God, when it pains me. And I will
confess to the Glory of thy Truth and Goodness, that Ps. 119. 75.
thou out of very Faithfulness, have caused me to be troubled, even because I
need it, and because by thy Grace I shall receive much benefit by it, through my
Blessed Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, Amen.

4.
I Bless thee, O! Lord, for all the innumerable Mercies which I have received
from thee most bountifully and seasonably, in all States and Conditions of my
Life, and through all the days and years of it. And for that I have long received
good at thy hands, before I am brought now to receive Evil. I owe thee infinite
thanks for a Life of health, before this Confinement to my Bed of Sickness: and
for the long and sweet relish I have had of worldly Comforts, before my Disease
has rendered them unsavory.

And my present Pains and Sorrows, O my God, do not make me forget thy past or
present Mercies, nor go about to lessen them nor shall they by thy Grace, ever
make me out of humor with thee, or unthankful for them. Yea, instead of giving
thee less thanks for them, by reason of this change of my Condition, I wll give
thee more, because my present want of them has taught me better how to prize
and value them. And I do Bless, and I will Job 1. 21.
Bless the Lord that gave, and Bless him still after he has taken away. I Bless
thee, for that I still enjoy much Good; and cannot in the least blame thee,
that I have some evil; but thank thee abundantly that I have no more. And above
all, that under all my present Misery, I am comforted with the Sense of thy
Love, and with the Blessed hopes of everlasting Peace and Joy, through Jesus
Christ my Lord, Amen.

VII. Prayers for Patience under Sickness.
I. A General Prayer for Patience.
O! Merci^ul Lord, now I am called to the State of Sickness, which is a Trial
of Patience, give me Grace to show Patience under the same, that is not to be
wearied, and cannot be reproved.

Enable me, O! Father, to show a quiet and composed Patience, that is without
tumult of troubled Thoughts, and discontented Passions. A submissive and
resigned Patience, that is without reluctance to thy Will, or Rebellious
murmurings. A Patience of hope, that does not s^^k under my Burdens, nor is
driven by ^he smart of my Pains, to (...) Love, or Care, or (...). And a
Thankful (...) sensible of my Comforts and Supports, as well as of my
Sicknesses; and that owns all my present Sufferings to be far below my deserts,
and all my past and present Mercies to be infinitely above them.

And make me perfect, O! my God, in this Patience. Let me tarry thy leisure,
and not be hasty. Let me wait on thee, and not grow weary. But bear all, whilst
I have any thing to bear, in comfortable hopes of thy Strength to support my
present Weakness, and of thy Mercy to ease and deliver me at last, either by a
more healthful Life, or by an happy Death, through the Merits of Jesus Christ my
Lord, Amen.

2. For Patience without reluctance, or Disquietness.
LOrd, I humble my Self under thy mighty hand, and submit to thy Visitation. I
submit my Self willingly, and will not strive, or make resistance. I kiss the
Rod, instead of Quarrelling with it, and Lev. 26. 41.
accept of it quietly, as of the punishment of mine iniquities; Yea,
thankfully, as of the Restorer of mine innocence.

And in this Patience, O! Holy Father, do thou still continue and preserve my
Spirit, composed and quiet, and easy to my Self. Since it is thy Will thus to
afflict me, bow my Will to thine, and make me willing to bear it. And bearing
it willingly, let it not anger or discontent me. Yea, O! my God, I trust to
thee, to lay no more upon me than I can bear; Oh! let that Trust keep me,
without Fears and Distractions under my Burdens. I bear only what I most justly
deserve, Oh! let that stop me from complaining. Nay, I bear infinitely less
than I have deserved, and still enjoy abundance of Mercies after I have
deserved to lose all; Oh! then let me not fall to accuse thee for thine
inflictions, but rather to accuse my self for my evil Deserts, and to thank
thee for my most undeserved Comforts.

Set a watch upon my Tongue therefore, O! righteous Lord, and suffer it not to
vent it self in any fretful or froward Speeches; nor to make my Sufferings seem
bigger, or my Comforts and Supports seem fewer, or thy most tender and
undeserved Mercies to me in my Distress, seem less than they really are. But if
the painful agitation of my Spirits must issue out in Cries, Lord, let my Cries
be, not at all to accuse, but only to justify thy Visitations, and to express
my own Sorrows, and implore thy Mercy and seek help from thy Grace, through our
Lord Jesus Christ, Amen.

3. For Patience without Dejection of Spirit, and without Hastiness for ease.
AND help me, O! Almighty God, to bear my Load without being cast down. For
whatever my Burden be, I have thee for my support, and therefore should not
faint, or sink under it. Thy sure Promises are my Confidence, and thy Almighty
power is my defense; O! then let not any Greatness of my Trials, or Sense of my
own weakness, make me afraid.

And give me long Patience in bearing and waiting, O! my God, if my relief from
thee does not come suddenly. And let me not foolishly prescribe to thee, by
what means, or Medicines thou shall ease me under my Maladies, or deliver me
from them, or at what time thou shall do it. For it is more than enough for me,
if I may be allowed to have these Mercies at all, though by any means, or at any
time: and it is always best for me, to have them in thy way, and at thy time.
Thou know best how to succor and save me, and when it will most sensibly
affect me, and serve thee.

Oh! then, that I may six no times of ease to my self, but expect them from
thee. That I may tarry thy leisure, and not think thee long. That I may
Patiently abide, if thou delayest, and not mistrust thee. Yea, Patiently abide
always, and not grow weary; but still think with my self, yet a little while,
and he will show forth his Mercies, and fulfill his Promises, and I shall find
the ease and deliverance which my wearied Flesh desires, in the exchange of my
Sickness, either for the Comforts of health, or for the rest and joys of
Paradise, thro^ my dearest Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, Amen.

4. For Patience with Friends, and Attendants.
I.
AND together with this Patience toward thee, give me Patience, O! merciful
Lord, toward all those, who friendly, or charitably minister to me, and attend
about me.

Keep me from being humorsome, and showing Crossness to their good Counsels; or
from being causelessly angry, and Exceptious, against their kind Services. And
if any evil Accidents, or Indiscretions happen, let me not fall unquietly to
aggravate them, or burst out into any passionate or opprobrious words thereupon.

But enable me always, O! Father, to show my self pleased, and obliged, with
the least kindness, which they do for me, or about me; and to ^nterpret all
mis-chances favorably; and to pass over things with Ease and Gentleness, which
are not done for me to my desire. And on all occasions, to make it my study, to
give them no more trouble than needs to help me, nor any cause to repent of
their officious care, or to grudge at what they do for me: which, as I receive
with Thankfulness, so I humbly beseech thee in thy goodness, most mercifully to
repay to them and theirs, for Jesus Christ's sake, Amen.

2.
AND, Lord let me ever bethink my self, that my own Pains and and Weaknesses
will keep me troublesome to my self; and that whil^t I am so, I am in no good
Disposition to be pleased with others, although what they do for me be really fit
to please me, were I in a ^emper to be pleased with it as I ought to be. And
that it is very hard, even for a discreet and kind Care, to do all things
acceptably to a pained and sickly Body. And therefore, that I ought to take all
well, and not to quarrel with what they do for me, which is always well meant
and done kindly; yea, and it may be wisely too, though it happens not to hit with
my diseased Fancy.

Oh! then, Holy Father, that I may consider upon every occasion of offense with
them, that at the best I am very troublesome to them. And that all they do for
me, is out of kindness, which should be kindly taken. That much of it is pure
Charity, which in this Estate I cannot recompense to them, by taking their
troubles upon me, as they do mine upon them. And that it is a small thing, to
return Good Will and hearty thanks, where I have nothing better to repay: And
to be pleased with their love and kindness, though I am not eased by their
Performance: And to study to please them with my kind acceptance, who have no
other aim, than to oblige and ease me by their friendly and charitable Offices,
and when they can do no more for me themselves, to seek to thee for the rest,
and recommend me by their Prayers to thy help and mercy, through Jesus Christ our
Lord, Amen.

5. For Patience with ones self, and with the Heaviness and Brokenness of their
own Spirit under Sickness.
I.
O! most Gracious God, when I am most burdened with my heavy Load of Pains and
Weaknesses, give me Grace, I humbly entreat thee, to gather up what thoughts
and powers I have left, and to employ them all to bear it Patiently. And when I
am a little more at ease, let me be sure to praise thee for the ease I find,
and to improve my ease and return thee Thanks, in a tribute of Godly Prayers,
and of holy thoughts and Meditations.

Make me look upon my Prayers, O! Lord, as my surest support, and as my best
Employment. And enaable me always, to be glad of any helps in them, and of any
ease and leisure for them, and to be sincerely careful then to put them up the
best I can.

But when I do this the best I can, let me not fear that it will offend thee,
or endanger me, because in this State of Pain and Sickness I can do it no
better. For my Bodily indispositions, and my troubled Fancy, and broken
Thoughts, O! my God, are part of my Disease, wherewith thou tryest my Patience.
And as thou expectest from me, that I should bear with them, as with an
affliction of thy sending, so thou will Graciously bear with them too, for our
Blessed Lord and Savior Jesus Christ's sake, Amen.

2.
FOR thou, O! merciful God, considerest our State, and make all just and
reasonable allowances for the weakness of it. And therefore thou will not exact
of me to seek to thee, with the Vigor and strength of healthy Faculties, or
with such uninterrupted continuance and attendance as requires the same, after
thou have taken my health and strength away.

But thou do, and wilt accept, O! Gracious Lord, of a feeble Prayer, from a
faint and feeble Spirit: and of a short one, from a mind of broken thoughts,
which is soon spent and wearied, and cannot attend to any thing long. Nay, thou
Graciously acceptest, even of a Sigh, or a Groan, or a devout Wish, or of a
sudden Breathing, and short Act, of holy Love, or of humble Resignation, of
Faith, or of Patience, when the decays and Drowsiness of a Spirit almost spent
and ready to faint, will suffer us to put up nothing else.

Oh! then that I may bear with my self, and with the feebleness and faintness
of my own Spirit, in my religious Services under my Sickness. And when I am the
most languid and liveless in any spiritual Acts, make me remember, that it is
thy Blessed Will, to send this State of weakness upon me. And that all the
while I am bearing thy Will patiently, I am pleasing thee: and that every
moments Resignation of my Will thereto, is an holy Offering. Let me consider,
that I recommend my self to thee, by the patience of hope, and by meek
Suffering, when I have no strength left to do it by Labor and Action. Nay,
that in the hight of my Disability, even my weakness, and Bodily indispositions
are vocal for me, and move thy Pity, which in thy due time will give me ease
and Deliverance from them, and Graciously allow for my Faintness and accept of
my poor Services under the same, through the Merits of our most Blessed Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ, Amen.

6. A Prayer for the helps to Patience.
O! Blessed Lord, under all my Grief and Misery, help me, I humbly and
earnestly beseech thee, to all those good Dispositions, and wise Thoughts and
Considerations, which may make it easy to me.

Keep me humble, O! God, and I shall quietly stoop to my Burden, and not
complain. Teach me to deny my self, and my own desires, and I shall contentedly
bear my Cross. Let me have hope in thee as an Anchor of rest, and keep me from
doubting of thy Love, and from mistrusting thy Grace and sure Promises, and I
shall bear up under my Load, yea, bear up with Comfort, and in thy due time see
an happy end thereof. Give me Peace in my own mind, and I shall be the stronger
to endure the troubles of this World; and thy Comforts in my Soul, shall
support and defend me, against all the Storms and Tumults that are raised in my
Body.

And, Lord, let me not stand to reckon up my Sorrows after they are past, and
to renew them to my Self by calling them over again in a painful Remembrance.
Especially, let me not aggravate them to my Self, by envious Reflections, and
discontented Comparisons with the easier state of others. Nor let me anticipate
them by frightful Imaginations before they come, and when by thy Grace they may
very likely never come: or any other ways create Sorrows to my self, where
really thou do not send them. But keep me from all such Reflection on them, as
serves not to reform me, but only to afflict me; and as tends not to enable me
to bear my Pains, but only to give Strength and quickness to them, and
Feebleness and Trouble to my self.

And Grant, O! Holy Father, that forgetting still what is past, I may every
moment set my self with all my might, to bear what lies upon me at present. And
that under the same, my thoughts may all busy themselves, in justifying thy
Goodness, and Arraigning mine own wickedness; and in casting about, how I may
bear my Affliction patiently and devoutly, and learn Obedience thereby, and how
I may be comforted under it at present, and turn it to my everlasting ease and
joy in the end, through Jesus Christ my Lord, Amen.

7. Prayers containing Motives to Patience.
I.
LOrd, make me Patient under all I suffer, because it is thy doing, and my
Deserving. Make me look upon my Afflictions, as Tokens of thy Love and Care of
me, which are not sent upon me, till they are needful for my good and for thy
Glory, and which though they are troublesome are yet exceeding wholesome. For they
come, to keep my Soul from being corrupted, and lost by Ease and Pleasures; and
to cure me of my Errors and earthly Afflictions, and of my Forgetfulness of
better things; and to raise my Heart to thee, on whom it should always fix, and
from whom it should never stray.

And keep me sensible, O! Almighty God, that impatience does only double my
Disease. That it makes me troublesome to others, but most of all unto my self.
And that it provokes thy wrath, instead of diverting it, and makes more
severity necessary to break my Spirit, when less will not suffice to bend it to
thy Yoke.

Whereas humble Submission to thy Will, O! Lord, is the readiest way to have
mine own; and my bearing thy Rod with Faith and Patience, and harkening to the
voice thereof, is the readiest way I can take of hastening on my own
Deliverance. For when there is no hindrance thereto from other wise ends of thy
Providence, thou art wont to grow weary of using the Rod, after it has showed
us our Errors; and art inclined to spare us, when we submit our selves: Not
smiting us, for any pleasure and delight thou take in the Pains of thy
Servants; but to bring down our Spirits, and to purge away our Sins, that we
may be fit and duly qualified for thy Love, and for our own everlasting
Happiness, through the Merits of our dear Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, Amen.

2.
AND though my Pain and Sickness is hard to be born, O! Gracious God, yet keep me
ever mindful, that there is need of much heat Ecclus. 2. 5.
in the Furnace, to fine the gold, and to purge away the Dross. That I need to
bear some Hardships to prevent worse, and cannot be torn from my Sins, and from
thy Wrath, without some violence. Yea, Lord, that it is a Favor to me, and
very desirable, to be visited with these short Pains, which thy Grace and my
Patience will turn at last into durable Joys; rather than to be let alone in my
Sins, to lie down without ease or remedy in everlasting Torments.

And whilst I am bearing my hard Lot, make me know, O! Father, that all thy
Promises of Grace and help in time of need, are sure and steadfast. That thou
tenderly considerest my weakness, both in sending of my Sorrows, and in
proportioning of my Succors. That thou hear all my Groans, and pitiest
them, and wilt find a cure or put and end to them in thy due Time. And that
thou art most ready to accept of my humble Repentance to appease thy wrath,
making such allowances for my frailty and Forgetfulness, as our needs do
require, and as thine infinite Mercy and Goodness, and thy Gospel Promises do
bid us comfortably hope for, through the Merits and Mediation of our only Savior
and Redeemer Jesus Christ, Amen.

3.
AND whatever my Hardships and Sorrows be, O! God of Patience and of all
Consolations, make me consider, that this World is the place of Sorrow and
Trouble, whereof all must expect to bear their share. That we need these
Embitterments of Life, to reconcile us to the thoughts of Death, and to awaken
our Preparation for it. That Patience is one of the principal Virtues, which we
have to learn and exercise whilst we Live. And that if the exercise of it is
hard, it will answerably be exceeding happy, and most highly rewarded.

And let me remember moreover, O! Lord, that the more Trial we have here of our
own Patience, the more Proof we have withal of thy Grace and Faithfulness, and
the greater is our hope of a more abundant joy and Blessed recompense. And that
a little waiting and endurance usually lets us see, how good and Gracious thou
art, in removing what lies hard upon us: However, that the Rest and Comforts of
the next World, will abundantly satisfy and make amends for all.

Yea, and even here, O! Lord, let me consider, that Patience under my Burdens
makes them lighter, and my Condition better; giving me present ease in this
Life, as well as more abundant hopes in the Life to come, That it is best for
thy Will, to take place of mine, and to choose for me, both whether, and when,
and how I shall be eased of them. And that if I struggle against thy Will, I
cannot resist it. But by bearing it patiently, I do not only submit to
necessity, but show an Act of Obedience and Duty, which will please thee, and
in the end will far more profit me than my Pains do at present afflict me,
through my Blessed Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, Amen.

4.
AND Grant me Grace, O! Lord, always to bear in mind, that I am here but as 1
Pet. 2. 11.
a Stranger, and that these Decays will carry me home. That whilst I am here 2
Cor 5. 6, 8.
in the Body, I am absent from the Lord, and still as I am leaving my Body, I
am hastening to him. And that my poor Soul is now a clogg^d and a close Prisoner
in Flesh, and these Pains and Weaknesses are come to set it free.

And let me remember, O! Father, that these Sorrows, which I endure in my
passage to Rest and Peace, are common to men. Nay, they are the Lot of good
men, who are often exercised with a greater measure thereof, because here is
all the Place Luke 16. 25.
of their evil things. They are not only incident to us, but Profitable for us,
and the best have need of them. For even the Blessed Jesus himself, Heb. 5. 8.
tho he were a Son, yet learned he Obedience by the things which he suffered.
He bore the Cross, before he wore the Crown: and we are first 2 Timothy 2. 12.
to suffer, that we may also Reign with him.

And I willingly submit to follow, where my Blessed Lord has lead the way, and
to take Pain and Sorrow in my passage to everlasting Life and Joy, as he has
done before me. Only, O! my God, be thou with me, as thou wast with him; and
let me have thee for my Support and Comfort under all my Sorrows whilst I live,
and for my Blessed Portion when I die, through Jesus Christ my Lord, Amen.

VIII. Prayers for Spiritual Improvements by Sickness.
I.
O! Most Gracious and Merciful God, I receive this sickness as thy Monitor, to
put me upon considering and amending the Errors of my Life, and on making
preparation for my Death.

And let no flattering hopes of life, O! Lord, delay or slacken my Repentance,
or keep me from setting my Soul in order. But give me Grace to make use
thereof, as if I were sure it would be, what for ought I know it may be, a
Sickness unto Death. And therefore let me now begin, to repent of all my sins
with that exactness, as he should do who thinks this is like to be the last
time. And to order all my Actions with that uprightness and holy care, as
befits him who is going to give an account of them. And to be so perfect in
putting on all the Dresses of a Religious Spirit, as he who expects to have no
place afterward for filling up any Omissions.

And on my Sickbed, Holy Father, let Holy Prayers be my Employment and
Delight. And make me look on showing Patience, and exercising Faith, and
perfecting Repentance, to be my business, for those remaining moments, which I
have still to spend on earth. Oh! Let me have as little to do with Vanity, and
as much intercourse with thee my God, and exercise of all Heavenly Thoughts and
Virtues, as I can; that being used to that blessed Employment of Beatified
Spirits, I may be fit for their Society, and prepared everlastingly to enjoy
thee in Glory, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

2.
AND, Lord, do thou, whose Glory it is to bring good out of evil, and Light out
of Darkness, turn my sickness, which comes as the punishment of my sins, into
the means of my obedience. Make it the instrument of thy Grace to bring me to
my self, and to call me off from Sin and Folly, which have been the Parents of
all our pain and misery. Let it bring Innocence and Watchfulness to my Spirit,
and peace and comfort therein; and then my Afflictions shall pass for Favors,
and I will give thee thanks and praise for my Correction.

When it wastes and brings down my Spirits, O! Father, cause it also to tame and
bring down my Passions, and all violent Motions. In my low Estate, make me meek
and lowly. And let the sense of my wants and weakness, cure me of all
Self-Confidence, and carry me out wholly to depend on thee. Under the Terrors
of thy Power, possess me with holy awe and fear. And whilst my pains make me
forgetful of other things, let me not remember the wrongs I have received, nor
be high in resentments of them

Let the dullness also of my Senses, O God, mortify all Carnal Appetites, and
the unsavoryness of all worldly Vanities, cure me of all inordinate fondness
for them. Oh! Make my love of Earthly things, and all my sinful Lusts and
Self-esteem to die before me, and let my Sickness kill them, and save my Soul
alive.

And grant, O! Lord, that the trouble which I find there is in wanting thy
Mercies, may keep me duly sensible of them, and thankful for them, whilst I
enjoy them. And let the feeling of these Sorrows in my self, touch me with Pity
and Compassion for the Sufferings of others, whenever I see them exercised
therewith.

And make me ever think, O! Holy Father, that I get more in being thus made
better and wiser by my Afflictions, than in being delivered from them: And
count nothing so good for me, as to be brought thus to know my self, and to
know and serve thee, and to be put in the sure way of obtaining thine
everlasting Mercy, through my most Blessed Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. Amen.

3.
AND if as 2 Cor. 4. 16.
my outward man decays, my inward man be thus renewed, I will bless thy Name,
O! Merciful God, for the kindness of these hard Providence, and acknowledge to
thy praise, that Ps. ^19. 75.
thou in very Faithfulness have caused me to be troubled. For thou give^t me
better things, than thou take away. The bringing down my Body, is for the
inrichment of my Soul, which is my better part. And this smiting and wounding
of my Flesh, is for the healing and binding up my Spirit, which is the truest
way to do me good.

Oh! then, that instead of dreading thy Visitation as my Scourge, I may receive
it as my Medicine. That I may not repine at its making me weak in Body, but
rather rejoice that it makes me strong in Spirit. And give thee thanks, for thy
kindness, and my comfort in thy Corrections, which are to make me good, that
thou may make me happy, and give me everlasting Rest and Bliss with thee,
through Jesus Christ my Lord. Amen.

IX. Prayers for the Bodily Needs and Desires of Sick Persons.
1. For Ease, when Sickness grows very painful or troublesome.
1.
LORD, look upon mine Adversity and Misery, which call aloud to thee for ease.
These Expressions within the Hooks [] the sick Person must use or omit as he
finds they do or do not suit with his own case.
For [ Ps. 102. 4, 5.
I am withered like grass, and my Bones will scarce cleave to my skin. Ps. 38.
3. 10.
My heart pants, and my strength fails me, and mine eyes are grown dim.
And] there is no soundness in my flesh, because of thine anger, nor rest in my
bones because of my sin. [Yea, Ps. 102. 3.
my bones are burnt as an Hearth, and] I Ps. 28. 6.
go mourning all the day long, and Job 7. 3, 4.
wearisom nights are appointed to me, and I am full of tossing to and fro unto
the dawning of the day.

This thou know, O! My God, for Ps. 38. 9.
my groaning is not hid from thee. Oh! Is. 64. 9.
Be not wroth very sore, nor remember iniquity for ever. Ps. 71. 9.
Cast me not off, when I need most to seek to thee, nor forsake me when my
strength fails me* But hear me, and ease me, O! Lord, for thou delightest in
Mercy. Hear me, for I cry unto thee, yea I cry unto thee all the day. Hear me
Ps. 79. 8.
speedily, for I am brought very low; and make no long tarrying, for Ps. 119.
82.
mine eyes long sore for thy word, saying, when will thou comfort me? And
though my flesh, and my heart fail me, yet let not thy Mercy, and thy Word fail
me. For I still resign, and trust my self to them; and in my greatest weakness
and extremity, thou, O! Father, art my strength and my portion for ever, through
Jesus Christ my Lord. Amen.

2.
O! Most Gracious God, my pains are extreme, and too heavy for me, have pity
upon me, and lighten them. Jer. 30. 11.
Correct me in measure, and consider that I am but a feeble and frail Creature.
In Hab. 3. 2.
thine anger remember mercy, for I humbly submit my self, and return to thee.
And Oh! Give me that tractableness and ingenuity of Spirit, that will be
checked with a word, and easily called off from evil, and will not need any
long or sharp methods of correction to reclaim me.

I have waited for thy Relief, O! Father, give me the comforts of it. Yea, Ps.
119. 82. 123.
Mine eyes long sore for thy word, and are even wasted away with looking for
thy saving health; let them see it, and be satisfied therewith. Oh! show me thy
mercy, and that soon, for my need thereof is great. And think upon me as
concerning thy word, for I trust to it to lay no more upon me than I can bear,
and to send me seasonable help and ease at present, and everlasting Rest with
thee in the end, through Jesus Christ my Lord. Amen.

A short Prayer on receipt of Ease, or abatement of Pain, or Sickness.
BLessed be thy Mercy, O! my God, which pitieth me in my Misery. Ps. 103. 13.
As a Father pitieth his Children, when they cry out in the extremity of their
pain, so have thou pityed me. Ps. 118. 18.
Thou have chastned me sore, but thou have not given me over unto death; Is.
12. 1.
thine anger is turned away, and thou have eased and comforted me.

Lord, my Soul shall love thee, and sing of thy Mercy. And in my Distress I
will always trust thee, and not be afraid. For thou art our strength whilst we
suffer, and our most merciful Deliverer when we are able to bear no more, for
our Blessed Lord and Savior Jesus Christ's sake. Amen.

2. A Prayer for Strength under the same.
GIVE me strength, O! Lord, to strive with my Disease, and to bear the weakness
of Nature. And strengthen my Spirit, to withstand all its Temptations; as well
as my Body, to bear its Diseases. O! Enable me to resist the Devil, and to
suppress all stirrings of sin and folly. To beat back all motions of corrupt
Passion, and not to lose the due Government of my self through excess of pain; but
to show my self mighty through thee to bear all patiently, and to fortify my
weakness by a firm Faith and unshaken Trust in thy Grace and sure Promises.

Lord, if I have no strength but my own, every weight will bear me down. But if
thou will support me, nothing will be too heavy for me, because nothing is too
hard for thee. But 2 Cor. 12. 9.
thy strength will be made perfect in my weakness, and thy Grace is sure to
overcome my Corruptions, and thy Comforts to give me Ease, through my most
Blessed Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. Amen.

3. A Prayer for Deliverance from them.
DEliver me, O! my God, for I seek unto thee to help me; yea, I seek unto thee
early, and continue seeking all the day long. Thou delightest in Mercy, deliver
me for thy Mercies sake. Thou have Heb. 13. 5, 6.
promised to be with us, and help us in trouble, Ps. 31. 1.
Deliver me for thy Righteousness. Thou art Glorious in might to help our
weaknesses, Ps. 54. 1.
Deliver me in thy strength. Thou have formerly been my succor, Oh! be so
still. And Ps. 22. 4.
our Fathers hoped in thee, and were delivered; let not my hope in thee perish,
or be put to shame, more than theirs was. Save me, O! Almighty Lord, and make
have to my help: And Ps. 109. 26.
m^n shall know that it is thy hand, and that thou have done it, and learn
thereby both to give thee Praise, and to make thee their strength and
confidence, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

4. Prayers for longer Respite, and Recovery from Sickness.
1.
O! Almighty Lord, in whose Hands are the Issues of Life and Death, look in
Mercy upon these Decays of Nature which my Diseases has made, and repair them,
and Ps. 39. 13.
spare me a little, that I may recover my Health and Strength again.

I do not desire Health, O! my God, to consume it in Idleness. Nor out of
Fondness for the gay Pleasures and Pomps of this World, that I may be strong to
pursue them. For I believe and know them all, to be Vanity, and Vexation of
Spirit. I lift my Heart above them, and do by no means desire to have this
Earth for my home, or to take up with them for my Portion. For I love thee and
thy ways, O! Dear Lord, above them and their Delights; and will harbor no love
of them, but what is ready to submit them all to thee, when thou art pleased to
take them away, and which will never sin against thy Laws to secure them to my
self, nor use and enjoy them as the Treasures of my home, but only as the helps
of my Pilgrimage.

But I desire it, if it may seem fit to thee, O! God, that I may be fitter for
thy Work, and more able to labor in thy Service. And that I may be more perfect
in my obedience, before I am called to give up my Accounts. This clause within
the Hooks, [] may be used or omitted, as best suits with the petitioner's own
case.
[And because I am still willing, if it may please thee, to be an instrument of
thy care and good Providence toward those, who by Nature, or Friendship are
committed unto me.] And the gift thereof I shall thankfully ascribe unto thee,
and praise thy Power and Mercy for the benefits of my Recovery, through my
Blessed Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. Amen.

2.
I know, O! Lord, that thou can soon restore me when thou please, and that
if Luke 7* 7.
thou do but say the word I shall be whole. And I believe that thou will
restore me, if it is best for thy Glory, and for my good, and for the wise ends
of thy Providence in this World. And therefore though I do heartily desire it,
yet I humbly submit the same to thee. For I am no where so safe as in thy
choice, and therefore I leave thee to determine still, whether thou shall be
honored and my poor Soul benefitted, by my Life or by my Death; whether by me
in a state of Health, or in a state of Sickness.

But when thou have chosen and fixed my condition for me, then, Lord, I beg of
thee, and I beg it earnestly, that I may receive it willingly and thankfully;
and that I may have Grace wisely and faithfully to discharge all those Duties
which thou requirest from us under the same. And that I may always find, both
my Trial tempered to my weakness, and my self still comforted and supported
under it by thy Grace, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

5. Prayers on taking Physic.
1.
O! Gracious Lord, [direct the Counsels of those who prescribe to me, and]
prosper the Medicines which are to give me ease, or strength. But let not my
confidence in them, take off any thing of my eye or dependence upon thee. Mat.
4. 4.
For Man lives not by bread, nor recovers by Physic alone, but by every word
out of the mouth of God, to give a Blessing unto both. And if thou biddest
them, the things or Accidents which I do not think of, or set least by, shall
recover me.

Oh! therefore, as their part is the care, so let thine, O God, be the
Blessing, and mine the Comfort: And as I shall love them as thy instruments, so
I shall own thee for the Author of my Mercies, and to thee shall I give Thanks,
and pay my Vows and Services, through my dear Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. Amen.

2.
LORD, let not my desires of Health, ever make me yield to seek Remedy from
Charms or suspected means, or apply my self to Dealers with Familiar Spirits.
Let me not resort to thy utter Enemy, who sets up this way against thee; nor
fall again to seek him after I have solemnly renounced him in my Baptism; nor
fondly flatter my self with hopes of receiving good, from the Grand Author and
Plotter of all evil, who then only seems to cure when he ceases to kill, and
does* not cease to torment a Body but when he hopes thereby to ensnare or
destroy a Soul. But give me patience to wait for Life and Health in thy ways,
that I may always owe the same to thee, and wholly devote them to thy Service,
through Jesus Christ my Lord. Amen.

6. Prayers on want of Sleep.
1.
O! Righteous Lord, Ps. 77. 4.
thou hold mine eyes waking, and in the Night Season I take no rest. I seek
sweet Sleep to ease my pains, and to recruit my Spirits: I seek it earnestly,
but I can not find it; and if I seem to have it fast, Dan. 2. 1.
it suddenly breaks from me.

But, O! Merciful God, let it not always flee away, but let my wearied eyes at
length lay hold of it, and make Jer. 31. 26.
my sleep sweet unto me. Consider my weariness, which calls aloud for rest; and
my weakness, which greatly needs refreshment. And give my laboring Spirits
ease, that restless agitations, or incessant pains, may not always keep me
awake.

Or if my Spirits must not be allured by ease into sound sleep, or at least
into soft Slumbers; let them however be born down into it by the weight of my
Sorrows and their own weariness, that I may a little forget my Troubles, and
recover strength to bear any new returns thereof, till thy Blessed time shall
come of sending me deliverance from the same, either by the Blessing of Health,
or the infinitely greater Blessing of Heaven, through Jesus Christ my Lord. Amen.

2.
AND whilst thou keep mine eyes awake, O! Lord, keep my Heart watchful, and
make me seek both to divert my Sorrows, and to ease and comfort my self, by
employing my Thoughts well.

Oh! That I may fall Ps. 63. 6.
to remember thee on my Bed, and meditate on thy ways and Promises in the night
Watches. That I may Ps. 77. 6.
Commune with mine own Heart, and diligently search out my own Spirit. That I
may remember thy tender Mercies, and Gracious Dealings toward; and call to
mind the Blessed end of Patience, and how careful thou art sometimes to give
us ease whilst thou denyest us sleep, at others to send us sleep too when we
are not fit any longer to subsist without it. Yea, that in thy due time, thou will bring us to that Blessed State, where they sleep away no happy Minutes,
but wake continually to enjoy the same, as Angels do, and where their Eyes
never take sleep, nor ever need or desire it.

And let these Thoughts comfort me, till thy Grace and Mercy sees fit to give
sleep to my Eyes, and deliverance from my Sorrows, through my dearest Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ. Amen.

7. A Prayer of Friends for the sick under excess of Sleep, and when they
apprehend danger by it.
O! Merciful God, let not this deep Sleep, which is fallen upon thy Servant,
prove the Sleep of Death. Make it the Sleep of a recovering Person, to relieve
and revive or her.
him, not to carry him off, and awake him out of it in thy due time, to offer
thee praise, and to labor still among us in doing thee Honor and Service.

But if thou have ordered thereby to take him to thy self, Lord, remember and
accept of all his former Prayers, and Repentance, Faith, and Patience. Look not
upon his sins, but to pardon them; nor on his weaknesses, but to pity them. And
when he awakes in the next World, let him find himself surrounded with Light
and Bliss instead of his Sickbed Sorrows, and awake to Eternal Life, with thee
in Glory.

Lord, hear us, for this thy weak Servant in Distress. Hear our Prayers for
him, who seems not able now to offer up any Prayers to thee for himself. And
accept both him and us, to the Blessed enjoyment of thy Love, and hopes of thy
Mercies, through! Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

8. A Prayer of Friends for the Sick, when they are Lightheaded, or apprehend
danger thereof.
LORD, in this extremity of pain and sickness, keep thy Servant in or her.
his Senses, and let him not want the use of Reason when he stands most in need
of its Succors.

Let not his Disease transport him, into vane, or violent Ravings. And much
less let the Enemy abuse his Fancy, when he himself has lost all good use
thereof, and possess it with any frightful or ungodly Thoughts and Illusions.

But whatever he says or does, amiss, or indecent, under such Disturbance and
alienation of mind, impute not the same to him as his sins, O! Lord, whilst his
Reason can neither understand nor refuse them; and whilst that, which takes
away the use of his Reason from him, is only his Disease which is of thy
sending. But impute them to the busy working of the Adversary, upon an
ungoverned imagination: And give thy Servant his Senses again, that he [ This
Clause within the Hooks may be left out when he has said nothing amiss under
the want of his Senses.
may disclaim all the evil which he said or did whilst he knew it not; and that
he] may watch against the Enemy, and may see his own wants, and earnestly
implore thy Grace and Mercy for the supply thereof, through Jesus Christ our
Lord and Savior. Amen.

X. PRAYERS for certain kinds of Sickness.
I. For Women with Child.
Scriptures for Women with Child.
1. Before their Travail.
UNTO the Woman God said, I will greatly multiply thy Sorrow and thy
Conception; in Sorrow shall thou bring forth Children, Genesis 3. 16.

For the Woman being deceived, was first in the Transgression.

Notwithstanding she shall be saved in Childbearing, if she continue in Faith,
and Charity, and Holiness with Sobriety, 1 Timothy 2. 14, 15.

And when she is in Travail, she has Sorrow, because her hour is come: But as
soon as she is delivered, she remembers no more the anguish, for joy that a
man is born into the World, Jo 16. 21.

2. In Travail.
LORD, my heart is sore pained within me, and the Terrors of Death are fal^'n
upon me.

Fearfulness and trembling are come upon me, and horror has overwhelmed me,
Ps. 55. 4, 5.

But* what time I am afraid, I put my trust in thee, Ps. 56. 3.

Lord I beseech thee, deliver my soul, Ps. 116. 4.

Oh! Be not thou far from me, nor seem as if thou heardest not.

Show some token upon me for good, and make haste to help me, O! Lord, Ps. 38.
21. 22. and 88. 17.

3. After Delivery, she may express her Devotion in one of the Hymns in the
Office for Churching of Women, or in this following.
I Love the Lord, because he has heard my voice and my supplicacations.

Because he has inclined his ear unto me, therefore will I call upon him as
long as I live.

The sorrows of death compassed me, and the pains of hell got hold upon me; I
found trouble and sorrow.

Then called I upon the Name of the Lord, 116. 1, 2, 3, 4.

And in the day when I cried, he answered me, and strengthened me with strength
in my soul, Ps. 138. 3.

When I sought him, he heard me, and delivered me from all my fears, Ps. 34. 4.

Oh! Sing unto the Lord, all ye Saints of his, and give thanks at the
remembrance of his Holiness, Psalm. 30. 4.

Ye that fear the Lord, praise him. For he has not despised, nor abhorred the
affliction of the afflicted; neither has he hid his face from me, but when I
cried unto him he heard me.

And my praise shall be of him in the great Congregation; I will pay my Vows
before them that fear him, Psalm. 22. 23, 24, 25.

Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Ghost.

As it was in the beginning, is now, and ever shall be, World without end. Amen.

Prayers for Women with Child.
1. A Prayer for a breeding Woman, and against Miscarriage, to be used at any
time before Travel.
O! Almighty Lord, who in thy Mercy have given me an hopeful Conception, carry
it on I humbly entreat thee, to an happy Deliverance in thy due time.

Oh! let not my Child fare the worse for mine Offenses, nor deal with it
according to my Deserts, but according to thy own tender Mercies. Give it its
due shapes, and full growth: and preserve me from all Frights, or evil
Accidents which may cause me to miscarry, and in great Love and Pity both to it
and me, bring it into the World at its full Maturity.

And Bless it in mind, O God, as well as in Body. Endow it with an
understanding capable to know thee, and with an Heart well disposed and
strongly bent to fear thee. Sanctify it from the Womb, and receive and reckon
it for thy Child as soon as it is mine, lent to me for my Comfort, but ever
reserved and employed by thee for thy Service and Glory.

And, Lord, if it may please thee, make it easy to me in the breeding, and in
the bearing and bringing forth also, when the time shall come. And grant that
in both, I may always bear my Burden with Patience, and look up to thee with
Faith, and receive thy Mercies with all Humility and Thankfulness, through Jesus
Christ my Lord, Amen.

2. A Prayer, when the time of Travel draws near.
GIve me Grace, O! merciful God, to look for the pangs and throws of Travel,
which now draw near unto me, with holy Fear, and humble Confidence in thee.

Let me not come to meet them, O! Almighty Father, in a stupid, or careless
Security, as one insensible how much the smart, and peril of this State, do
need thy help and mercy. For nothing is fitter to show us our weakness, nor
calls more for the Succors of thy strength. And therefore I disclaim all
Confidence in my Self, or other humane means: and humbly seek to thee, and give
my Self and my poor Babe up for lost, unless thou art pleased to stand by me.

But when I see how much I need thee, let me not mistrust thee, O! my God. For
thou art prone to show Pity, and my pangs will be strong to move it. And the
Preservation of my sweet Babe, which has done nothing against thee, will call
aloud to thy mercy to deliver me. Thou art ready to hear us, and to help us, O!
Lord, because of thy Promise. And my Trust is, that thy Power and Goodness will
not be wanting to support and deliver me in this Case, because I see thou daily
do extend the same to support and deliver others; [and because thou have
several times heretofore done the same to my Self.]

And therefore, O! Father, I cheerfully commit my self into thy hands. And look
to find mercy from thee, as one who absolutely needs thee, and humbly trusts to
thee. For mine eyes are unto thee, O! God, and to thee alone, to give me
convenient Courage to meet my pangs, and strength to bear them, and to give me
Patience to wait on thee, and a safe Deliverance at thy due time, for our Lord
Jesus Christ's sake, Amen.

III. Prayers in time of Travel, one or other whereof may still be recited by
her Self, or read to her by her Friends, as often as she pleases.
1.
LOrd, now my Sorrows have got hold upon me, let thy strength come in to
support me. Oh! let not my Burdens come faster upon me, than thy Succors do.
But give me Patience to bear my Pains, and quietly to wait thy time of easing
them. Give me Faith to rely upon thy Mercy and Promises, and to believe that
they will be shown toward me, and fulfilled upon me in their Season. Give me
Comfort under my pangs, and after them. And as thou have enabled me to conceive
a Child, and to bear it hitherto in my Womb; so now to Crown those Blessings,
give me strength to bring it forth at its full time, and, if it may please
thee, neither let my Pains be too sharp, nor too long, before I am happily
delivered of the same, for my dearest Lord and Savior Jesus Christ's sake, Amen.

2.
O! Almighty God, do thou direct the Counsels, and Endeavors of those, who
charitably Minister about me. Guide them to ways, that are most for mine and my
Child's safety and ease; and of quickest dispatch. Oh! let thy Counsel, and thy
hand, go along with theirs, for they can do nothing without thee. Let me now be
thy Care, for thou art my Confidence. And save and deliver me, for now is the
hour of my extreme need, and of thy showing Pity and Mercy on me, through the
Merits and Mediation of my dearest Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, Amen.

3.
LOrd, I receive these Pangs, as the Sorrows which thou have justly laid upon
our Sex, for being first in Disobedience. I Lev. 26. 41.
accept them as the punishment of mine iniquity; Oh! let that appease, and
pacify thee. I resist not, but submit my self to them meekly; Oh! then smite
not too sore, nor lay too much upon me. But proportion both their Degrees, and
continuance, not according to my Sins, but according to my weakness, and as may
best suit with thy tender Mercies, through Jesus Christ my Lord, Amen.

4.
SUpport me, O! dear God, for I am weak. Support me, for I am one that fears
thee. Support thou me, for I trust my Self unto thee, and wait on thee, and
long sore for thy Mercy and my safe Delivery, for Jesus Christ's sake, Amen.

5.
MAke have to help me, O! Lord, and deliver me speedily, for my Spirit waxes
faint. This speedy ease my Flesh earnestly desires, if thou see it fit for
me. But yet I humbly submit the same to thee. For be it quicker, or ^lower, thy
time I acknowledge is always best. Oh! then deliver me when thou please, and
give me Patience to wait for my Delivery. And delay it no longer, O! my dear
God, than suits best with my weakness, and with thy Goodness, for my Blessed
Lord and Savior Jesus Christ's sake, Amen.

Short Ejaculations, which she may use in time of her Travel.
LOrd, Ps. 38. 9.
my Groans are not hid from thee, let not thy mercy be hid from me.

Thy Terrors come about me, and threaten me on every side: but Ps. 56. 3.
what time I am afraid, I will still put my trust in thee.

Consider, O! my God, that I am made of Flesh, very sensible of Pains, and
short in Patience; Oh! lay not too much upon me.

Help me, Lord, for thou art my hope.

Make have to my help, for my Spirit waxes faint.

Oh! Jesu, who wast thy self born of a Woman, help this tender Babe struggling
for Birth. Amen.

IV. Prayers after Delivery.
The Collect in the Office of Churching of Women, which may be said by some
Friend there present.
O! Almighty God, we give thee humble Thanks, for that thou have vouchsafed to
deliver this Woman thy Servant, from the great Pain and Peril of Childbirth.
Grant, we beseech, thee most merciful Father, that she through thy help, may both
faithfully live, and walk according to thy Will in this Life present, and also
may be partaker of everlasting Glory in the Life to come, through Jesus Christ
our Lord, Amen.

Other Prayers, which may be read to her, for her devoutly to offer up to God,
her Friends heartily concurring, and saying Amen with her.

1. A Thanksgiving for safe Deliverance.
O! Father of Mercies, what Thanks can I worthily give unto thee, for thine
unspeakable Goodness to my helpless Babe and me, and for the wondrous things,
which thou have now done for my Soul? For the Pangs and Terrors of Death got
hold of me, and the mouth of the Pit was opened, and ready to shut it self upon
me. But thou have Graciously assuaged those Pains, and wrought Deliverance, and
turned my Sorrows into Joys.

Lord, I will ever adore, and magnify thy Mercy, which has dealt so lovingly
with me; and praise thy Truth and Faithfulness, which have not suffered thy
Promises, or my Hopes to fail. I will never forget; how mindful thou have been
of me in my low Estate, and how thou have been a present help in the time of my
greatest need.

For I have felt thy Power, O! my God, in my greatest weakness, and have been
enabled thereby above my strength. I have tasted thy Goodness, in the midst of
all my piercing Pangs and Sorrows: for thou did comfort, and support me under
them; and did measure them out to me, according as I could bear them; and in
tender Pity did send ease, yea, have turned those Sorrows into Joys, when I
could bear no more.

And oh! that all thy Saints may praise thee, for the Glories of thy Power and
Mercy. That they may be encouraged to fear and trust thee, for the wonders
which thou host wrought for me. And that I may never grow weary of waiting on
thee, remembering how gracious thou art still in the end to me; nor despair of
thy most seasonable help and merciful Deliverance in my greatest Streights and
Difficulties, through my Blessed Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, Amen.

2. A Prayer for Grace and Assistance, under the remaining Sorrows and Trials
of Childbed.
PErfect, Good Lord, that Deliverance, both to my child and me, which thou have
most graciously begun, and let us not be ^ost after the Wonders which thou have
already done for us, for want of thy doing a little more.

Continue my Patience, O! Father, and my Humble dependence and comfortable hope
in thee, under any further pains and Accidents of my Childbed. Support my
Spirit under them, and, if thou please, bring me safely through the same, and
raise me up again in thy due time. Thy Mercy and Power are still the same, and
will be the same for ever. Oh! Let them still be shown for my Recovery, as they
have already been for my Delivery. Let them be shown upon me, that I may still
more and more praise thee; and because I place my safety in thy love and care,
and put my hope and trust in thee.

But if in thy Paternal Providence, whereto I willingly commit my self, thou
have determined otherwise concerning me, thy Blessed Will, O! my God, be done.
Dispose of me, either to Life or Death, as thou please; only in both to thy
Mercy. And whether living, or dying, let me still please thee, and be thou my
Portion. Oh! Perfect my Repentance, and purge away all my sins. And give me
Patience whilst I live, and Peace when I die, and after that the happiness to
see thy Face in a Blessed Eternity, which thou have prepared and promised to
all that truly fear thee, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

3. A Prayer for her Child.
PReserve my tender Child, O! Father, and let its own weakness, and my Cries,
commend it to thy Blessed Care. Preserve it to be regenerated and born again by
Baptism, and thereby made thine own Child by Adoption; which is infinitely a
greater Blessing, both to it and me, than thy making of it mine.

Keep it also afterward in Health and Safety. And as it increases in Years and
Stature, let it increase withal in Wisdom and in thy Fear. I beg not for it
Wealth, or Greatness, but Wisdom to know and serve thee. For, O! Lord, I do not
desire Life, either for my self or it, but that we may live to thee, and grow
daily in Love and Thankfulness for all thy Mercies, and in Faith, and Patience,
and all holy Obedience, which may fit us both for ever to enjoy thee, through
Jesus Christ our only Savior and Redeemer. Amen.

Afterward, when she comes to be Churched, besides the accustomed* Offering to
the Minister, she may add a Gift of Alms to the Poor, as a proper and
acceptable Tribute of Thanks and Praise, Alms being as fit to attend and
recommend our Thanksgivings, as they are to enforce our Prayers.

And let her not forget the Rubric at the end of the Office for Churching of
Women.
Churches Admonition, to complete her giving Thanks by Receiving the Holy
Sacrament if there be a Communion that day, or so soon as there shall be one.

II. Devotions on the Loss of Eyesight, to be read to them by some Friends, for
them to Meditate upon, or to join in.
Scriptures.
I.
WHO has made the Seeing and the Blind? Have not I the Lord? Ex. 4. 11.

And the Lord opens the eyes of the Blind, Ps. 146. 8.

He has anointed me to preach the Gospel to the Poor, and recovering of Sight
to the Blind, Luke 4. 18.

Lord, I grope for the wall, and stumble at Noonday as in the Night.

I wait for Light, but behold obscurity; for brightness, but I walk in
darkness, Is. 59. 9, 10.

Lord, I beseech thee, that I may recover my sight.

Receive thy sight, thy faith has saved thee, Luke 18. 41, 42.

But if I must not receive it in my Body, however open the Eyes of Ephesians. 1. 18.
my Soul, that I may behold wondrous things out of thy Law, Ps. 119. 18.

2.
The Light of the Eyes, indeed, rejoices the Heart, Prove. 15. 30.

For truly the Light is sweet, and a pleasant thing it is for the Eyes to
behold the Sun, Eccl. 11. 7.

But the Eye is not satisfied with seeing, Eccl. 1. 8.

For as Hell and Destruction are never full, so the Eyes of Man are never
satisfied, Prove. 27. 20.

And the Lust of the Eyes is not of the Father, but of the World, 1 Jo. 2. 16.

So that we need to make a Covenant with our Eyes, Job 31. 1.

And if thine Eye offend thee, pluck it out, and cast it from thee: It is
better for the to enter into Life without Eyes, rather than having Eyes to be
cast into Hellfire, Mat. 18. 9.

Besides, in seeing much, we see much evil; and it may be thou shall be mad for
the Sight of thine Eyes which thou shall see, Deuteronomy. 28. 34.

And just Lot in seeing vexed his Righteous Soul from day to day, with the
unlawful deeds of the wicked, 2 Pet. 2. 7, 8.

3.
Moreover, though the Body be dark, yet the Eyes of our understanding may be
enlightened, Ephesians. 1. 18.

For the Spirit of Man is the Candle of the Lord, searching all the inward
parts of the belly, Prove. 20. 27.

And we walk by Faith, and not by Sight, 2 Cor. 5. 7.

And tho it is pleasant to see the Sun, yet it is pleasanter to see those things,
which the Angels desire to look into, 1 Pet. 1. 12.

And to supply our want of Bodily Eyes, our Friends and Neighbors, may be to
us instead of eyes, Number. 10. 31.

For I was Eyes to the Blind, and Feet to the Lame, Job 29. 15.

And cursed be he, that makes the Blind to wander out of the way, Deuteronomy. 27. 18.

Or puts a Stumbling Block before him, Lev. 19. 14.

Glory be to the Father, etc.

PRAYERS.
I. For Recovery of Sight.
LORD, pity me, who have my Eyes always closed, and all my Days turned into
Night. I cannot see, what I eat or what I drink, and Is. 59. 10.
I grope for the wall, and stumble in the Light as in the Dark. For the Light,
which makes all things manifest about us, and reviveth and makes glad both
Man and Beast, is no Light to me, but I am Dark at Noonday.

Oh! Support and comfort me in this my Adversity, and restore my Sight to me
again, if it may seem fit to thee. Consider, Lord, how greatly it serves, for
my comfort and safety. And restore it to me, for I seek to thee, and thou art
prone to pity me, and thou only who gave it can restore it. Yea, do thou
restore it, O! my God, that I may again behold the marvelous Greatness, and the
rich and various Beauty of thy Creatures; and devoutly admire and praise the
Glories, of thy Wisdom, Power, and Goodness, which they set forth daily before
our eyes. And above all, that I may return to read thy Holy Word, to instruct
and comfort me, and to make me perfect in the way of my Duty, and of obtaining
thine everlasting Mercy, through Jesus Christ my Lord, Amen.

II. For Patience under the want of it.
1.
AND in this state of Bodily Blindness, O! Righteous Lord, I do not in the
least complain of thee for laying it upon me. For thou have continued the use
of my Eyes much longer unto me, than I have been careful to use and employ them
for thee. And because I would not take care to govern them virt^ously and
wisely, nor shut them up or restrain them my self, thou have shut them up in
Darkness.

For they had taken me off, O! Holy Father, from minding thee, to mind Worldly
Pomp and show, and to fix themselves in Clay. They were grown greedy and
unsatisfied in beholding Vanity. They had often Mat. 18* 9.
made me to offend. And it is better to want Eyes, than to be made to offend by
them; and to enter into Life being Blind, rather than having Eyes without
Innocence to be cast into Hell fire.

So that I humbly submit to this Blindness, O! my God, and meekly accept of it,
both as the punishment of mine iniquities, and as a means to cure and prevent
them. And if it be thy Pleasure to have me rest under it, or whilst it is so,
thy Blessed Will be done. And I will not only submit to thee, but will still
thankfully adore and praise thy Name, through Jesus Christ my Lord. Amen.

2.
AND I will consider, O! Gracious Lord, that if my Blindness makes my Soul to
have less pleasure in this World, it makes it also to have less danger from it.
For in this World, I should see more, that is fit to ensnare, than to benefit
my Mind; and my Eyes would let in more Trials than true Enjoyments, and meet
with more to afflict than to delight me.

And I will thankfully remember, O! Father, that by thy Mercy I was not born
Blind, but had long enjoyed the use of my Eyes before I lost them, yea, and
after I had most justly deserved to lose them. Thou wast graciously pleased to
lend them to me, till I had been conversant in thy Holy Word, to direct and
comfort me. And till I had seen much of what was to be seen in this World, and
till more Days would have brought little but the same Sights over again. And by
thy Grace I This within the Hooks, or other Passages, the Persons must use or
omit, as suits with their own case.
[had first dispatched such Business and Affairs, as are of most importance and
concern to me in this Life, and] was come to have much less need of my Eyes
before they were taken from me, and I was called from beholding Vanity, to mind
thee and make sure the one thing necessary, through my Blessed Lord and Savior
Jesus Christ. Amen.

3.
YEA, and still through thy Mercy, O! Dear God, I have my Hearing perfect, to
supply the want of my Eyesight. And although I have now no use of my own Eyes,
yet I have of others, and can still see any thing with theirs. [And what I once
learn from them, I now remember much better by thy help than I used to do,
whilst I had my own Eyes to trust to, and am in less need of any Eyes to see it
for me over again.]

And therefore instead of repining that I have lost my Eyes, I will adore and
thank thy Goodness, O! Blessed Lord, which has so well provided me for this
loss, and does now so comfortably make it up to me otherways. But above all,
which gives me an Heart, that can still look up to thee, and take comfort in
thy Promises, when my Eyes can no longer look upon this World, or delight in
its Gayeties. And which supports me in my dark estate, with the Blessed Hope of
receiving Eyes at the Resurrection of the Just, which always see clear and
never grow dim; and which can bear the brightness of thy Presence, and shall
always Feast themselves in beholding thee, and all Heavenly Glories, through
Jesus Christ my only Savior and Redeemer. Amen.

3. For Good use of their Blindness, and proper Helps under it.
AND whilst thou take from me the use of my Eyes, O! Merciful Lord, take from
me also the Lust of my Eyes. And let me by no means dote any more on Riches, or
on Beauty, or on the Pomp and Gayety of any Earthly things, since now I can no
longer Feast my Eyes therewith. But instead of coveting and greedily harkening
after the same, make me as a Dead Man to them. For Death has already invaded my
Earthly Tabernacle, and is come up at the Windows. And I have outlived my
Eyes, which as they had commonly been the first inlets of sin: so now thy
justice has made them the first inlets of Death too.

And since my Eyes are kept from looking abroad, keep my mind from looking
abroad too. Let my thoughts busy themselves at home, in searching out and
setting straight mine own ways, and in meditating on thy Laws and Promises. I
cannot say, as others may, that I am still called off from this good Employment
of them, by the sight of outward Objects, or by the Cares of men of Business.
Oh! then, that I may be more intent therein, as wanting much of other Persons
hindrances and excuses.

And make me remember, O! my God, that thus to know and behold thee, is to see
with Angels eyes. And that although Flesh and Blood cannot see God, yet Faith
does. And that whilst thou art pleased to clear up my Faith which is the eye of
my Soul, and to make it strong and lively to discern what will please thee, and
what will save and comfort me in the next World; it matters less though I remain
dark, to what is apt to ensnare and afflict me in this World.

And whilst I want my Eyes to inform me at every turn what passes, Lord,
quicken my Attention, that I may give the more heed when I am told of the same;
and strengthen my Memory, that I may not need still to be told of it again. And
now my own Eyes are no longer serviceable to me, give me faithful Friends and
Servants about me, that I may safely trust to theirs. And let thy Care and good
Providence be to me instead of my Eyes, and of all other Comforts and
Conveniences which my Blindness deprives me of, through Jesus Christ my only Lord
and Savior, Amen.

Our Father, etc.

III. Devotions on the loss of Hearing.
Scriptures.
WHO has made man's mouth, or who makes the Dumb or Deaf? have not I the Lord,
Exodus 4. 11.

The hearing Ear, and the seeing Eye, the Lord has made even both of them,
Prove. 20. 12.

In that day, the Ears of the deaf shall be unstopped, Isa. 35. 5.

And the deaf shall hear the words of the Book, Isa. 29. 18.

He said be opened, and straightway his Ears were opened, Mark 7. 34, 35.

But above all, O! Lord, give thy (...) Heart, 1 King. 3. 9.

And that is better whilst the Ears of my Body are shut, than to have Ears, and
not to Hear, Ezekiel. 12. 2.

Or Hearing to hear, but not to understand, Act. 28. 26.

And when the Ears of the Body are open, the Ear is not filled with hearing,
nor the Eye satisfied with seeing.

And the thing which has been heard or seen, it is that which shall be heard or
seen again; and that which is done, is that which shall be done; and there is
no new thing under the Sun, Eccl. 1. 8, 9.

Yea, and in hearing much evil, is much trouble, and just Lot in hearing, vexed
his righteous Soul from day to day, with the unl^wful Deeds, and filthy
Conversation of the wicked, 2 Pet. 2. 7, 8.

Thou shall not curse the Deaf, nor put Deuteronomy. 27. 18.
a stumbling block before the Blind, but fear the Lord, Lev. 19. 14.

Glory be to the Father, etc.

Prayers.
I. For Recovery of Hearing.
O! Righteous Lord, mine Ears have been too much inclined, and delighted to
hear things, which dishonor thee, and corrupt me. And where they were less
bent upon evil, yet however they were t^o easy and complying with it. And
therefore thou art just in stopping them, because I have misused them; and I
must clear and glorify thee in taking away my Hearing from me, both in
deserved Punishment of my having provoked thee, and in careful Prevention of my
further corruption of my self thereby.

But, Lord, in thy just Displeasure, remember Mercy, and open mine Ears again
if it may seem good to thee. For I acknowledge my former Errors, and am
resolved by thy Grace, to keep them always open to good words, and averse to
evil. Do thou open them, good Lord, for to thee alone do I look for the same,
and I know it is as easy for thee to open them, as it was to shut them. And
consider no longer my Sins, which deserve to be punished, but mine affliction
which calls to be pityed.

For by this Deafness, O! my God, I am deprived very much of the Comforts of
Conversation, and of the chief means of Instruction. For Discourse teaches
Wisdom and understanding. And Romans 10. 17.
Faith it self comes and grows up by Hearing. And in the midst of Discourse,
I am in great measure as if all kept silence, and the World is as if all were
dumb to me, because I am deaf to them, and can seldom let in any Voice, that
might bring Counsel or Comfort, to my Soul or to my Body.

Oh! therefore, Holy Father, do thou once more restore me to the benefit and
comfort of Company, and give me an Ear that can distinguish good from ill, and
that will be both fit and glad to hear, whatsoever may Honor thee, or any ways
edify or advantage me, through Jesus Christ my Lord, Amen.

II. For Patience under the Want of Hearing.
1.
AND whilst thou see fit to continue me under this Deafness, O! Almighty
Lord, Give me Patience Contentedly to want the Conversation of others. I know,
alas! and do lament, that I am hereby Debarred from Hearing Good Words. But I
will reckon it some Compensation to me, that it keeps me from Hearing Evil too;
and in this naughty world, there is much more Evil spoke than Good.

For if my Ears were open, O! God, I should Daily hear much more than I Desire
to hear, or than I ought to bear Silently: And should hear Evil more often,
than I should find the Heart and Courage to Reprove it; or than I should be
able to Cure, or perhaps to check or any ways hinder it by my Reproof. And
where I can neither prevent, nor Cure Evil Speeches, I will account it as a
piece of Favor to me to be deaf to them.

And therefore thy Will be Done, O! Holy Father. I receive my Deafness
Patiently and thankfully, as being sent by thee, and as Daily keeping out much,
that would either Corrupt, or trouble and afflict me. And am Content whilst
thou please, to be Deaf to the voice of Sinners, till thou shall either
restore that Sense to me again here on Earth, or take me hence to hear the
Heavenly Halleluiahs and charming voices of Angels and Beatifyed Spirits in thy
Presence, for the sake of my Blessed Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, Amen.

2.
ANd Blessed be thy Mercy, O! Lord, that I was not born Deaf, but had mine Ears
Open, till Faith was ingender'd in me by Hearing. For I enjoyed my Sense of
Hearing, till I had learnt to know thee, and the way of my own Salvation: Yea,
and till I had learnt to know much of this World too, enough to teach me that I
must keep always on my Guard against the Snares, and constantly expect to meet,
and stand prepared to bear the troubles of it.

And Grant, O! Father, that Having lived to hear much before, I may now set my
self, to meditate on what I have heard formerly, and to live by memory, and
still have Recourse to past instructions, to Guide and Comfort me.

And make me Consider, Lord, that if mine ears were still opened, since Eccl.
1. 9.
there is little new under the Sun, I should daily hear much of the same, both
Good and Evil over again. And that I may profit my self abundantly by thy
Grace, in fixing those things upon my mind, which I have heard already: yea,
that I may likely profit more, in recollecting and meditateing thus upon old
instructions, than by having an ear never filled with Hearing, but daily
harkening after new ones. And that without such Reflection on the knowledge
which has already come by Hearing, to make my self Master thereof, I shall be
almost as if I wanted it, even whilst I have it, and shall be loseing it daily
more or less.

And besides this, O! Gracious God, thou art still pleased most mercyfully to
continue to me the use of my Eyes, to supply the want of mine Ears; and I can
read whatsoever is fit for me to know, in Relation to this Life or the next,
tho I can no longer hear it.

And, Lord, make me sensible, that this way I can converse with the best
Company, and in their best and most Studied thoughts and Discourses. And
moreover, that I can come to them when I need, and leave them when I please.
For at any time, without tedious waiting or troublesome Caeremony, I may have
their Wisdom to Counsel and Comfort me, in any Exigence either of my Soul or
Body. And without upbraiding me with my Dullness or my Troublesomeness, or
growing impatient thereat, they stand always ready to tell me as often as I
need or Desire, what way I may be most easy to my self, or useful to my
Friends, or acceptable unto thee, through Jesus Christ my Lord, Amen.

3. For Good Use of Deafness.
ANd whilst I remain Deaf to the Conversation of others, O! Blessed Father,
give me Grace to converse more with thee and with my self, in calling thy Laws,
and mine own ways to Remembrance.

And although the Ears of my Body are shut to others, yet, Lord, let those of my
Spirit be always open to thy voice. Give me 1 King. 3. 9.
an Hearing Heart, that is never Deaf to thy call: and if thy Spirit do but
whisper to me, let mine instantly perceive and embrace the same, and carefully
and obediently attend to thy suggestion. And deliver me from having any Portion
among them, who have lost their Hearing toward thee, tho they still keep it to
the world, and who Mat. 13. 15.
having Ears hear not with them.

And under my Bodily Deafness, O! Gracious God, Preserve me from being jealous
and mistrustful of those who are Discoursing in my Company, as if they were
Discoursing against me, or made themselves sport with mine infirmity. And
whilst their Discourses can do me no good, let not my own evil surmises and
suspicions, do either my self or them any Hurt. But keep me always easy toward
them, and truly Patient and thankful toward thee, through Jesus Christ my
Blessed Lord and Savior. Amen.

Our Father which art in Heaven, etc.

A Thanksgiveing on Recovery from Blindness, or from Deafness.
BLessed be thy mercy, O! Gracious Lord, for Restoreing to me the use of my [
Or Ears.
Eyes.] Thou have given me them anew, for the Comfort and Convenience of my
Life, and for the carrying on of thy Service.

And oh! that they may never more be used, for Vice, or Vanity: nor ever
willingly open to let in ill, much less stay upon it, and Delight in it. But
keep me allways mindful, that to misuse them is the way to lose them again.
That Jo. 5. 14.
being made whole once, it nearly concerns me to sin noe more, lest I fall
under something worse. And that as I have now received them again from thee, I
ought above all things to Devote them to thee; and that whilst they are in the
way of pleasing thee, they are surely in the best way of Benefitting and
Comforting me.

And, Lord, have Pity upon others, who are uncomfortable Or Deaf.
[blinde,] as I was. Hear their Cries, and Or open their Ears.
[Lighten their Darkness] as thou have Done mine. Oh! that seeing what thou
have now done for me, they may hold fast their hope and trust in thee. And that
all thy Servants may Praise and Magnifye thy Goodness, which gives [ Or hearing
to the Deaf.
Sight to the Blind] and raises the Poor out of Misery, to be a Liveing
monument of thy mercy, and to Give thanks and Praise to thee, through our Blessed
Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. Amen.

Our Father, etc.

IV. Prayers for a Sick Child.
1. Out of the Office of Visitation of the Sick.
O! Allmighty God, and most Mercyful Father, to whom alone belong the issues of
Life and Death; look Down from Heaven, we humbly beseech thee, with the Eyes of
Mercy, upon this Child now lyeing upon the Bed of Sickness. Visit him, O! Lord,
with thy Salvation; Deliver him in thy good appointed time from his Bodily
Pain, and save his Soul for thy Mercyes Sake. That if it shall be thy good
Pleasure to prolong his Days here on Earth, he may live to thee, and be an
instrument of thy Glory, by Serveing thee Faithfully, and Doing Good in his
Generation: or else Receive him into those Heavenly Habitations, where the
Souls of them that Sleep in the Lord Jesus, enjoy Perpetual Rest and Felicity.
Grant this, O! Lord, for thy mercyes sake, in the same thy Son our Lord Jesus
Christ, who lives and reigns with thee and the Holy Ghost, ever one God,
world without end. Amen.

2. Another Prayer for the same.
LOrd, Pity the troubles and weakness of this Poor Child, and Pity our Sorrows
who are afflicted with it and for it. Ease it of its Pains, and strengthen it
when it lies struggling for Life: and raise it up again if it may please thee,
to grow in years and stature, and in Wisdom and thy Fear, and thereby to
comfort us, and Glorifye thee.

We believe, O! Allmighty Father, that thou know best what is fit both for
it and us, and wi^t Do what is best for both. And therefore we leave it to
thee, to dispose of as thou please. But whether it be to Life or Death, let
it be thine in both, and either preserve it to be thy true and Faithful
Servant here on Earth, or take it to the Blessedness of thy Children in the
Kingdom of Heaven, through our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. Amen.

Our Father, etc.

A Thanksgiving for its Recovery.
BLessed be thy Name, O! Father of mercyes, for that thou have heard us
concerning this Child, and raised him up for thy Service and our Comfort.

And, Lord, fill Or her*
his Heart with Grace, as thou have done ours with joy. Let Wisdom and Goodness
still grow up with him, and as fast as he grows capable thereof, make him
willing and careful to Honor and obey thee. Let not Company corrupt him, nor
youthful Lusts as they come on prevail against his Soul. But as now thou art
the Preserver of his Life, be ever henceforward the Keeper of his Innocence;
that whenever thou shall call him again in thy Due time to meet Death, he may
have Comfort in the Remembrance of a Godly and well spent Life, and sweetly
fall asleep in thy Peace, through the merits of Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

Our Father which art, etc.

V. Prayers in times of common Infection.
Scriptures.
THe Lord kills, and he makes alive; he brings Down to the Grave, and he
brings up, 1 Samuel 2. 6.

And is there any Lam. 3. 38.
Evil in the City, and the Lord has not done it? Amos 3. 6.

But in his Wrath, he remembers mercy, Hab. 3. 2.

Oh! then, let us come, and return unto the Lord: for he has torn, and he will
heal as; he has smitten, and he will bind us up. Hos. 6. 1.

And make thy Dwelling in the secret Place of the most High, and thou shall
abide under the Shadow of the Almighty.

He shall cover thee with his Feathers, and his Truth shall be thy Shield and
Buckler.

And then, thou shall not be afraid for the Terror by night, nor for the Arrow
that flies by Day.

Nor for the Pestilence that walks in Darkness; nor for the Destruction that
wastes at Noon Day.

A thousand shall fall at thy side, and ten thousand at thy Right Hand; but it
shall not come nigh thee.

There shall noe Evil befall thee, nor shall any Plague come nigh thy Dwelling.

For he shall give his Angels charge over thee, to keep thee in all thy ways.

And that because thou have made the Lord, which is my Refuge, even the most
High, thy Habitation. Ps. 91. 1, 4, 5, 6, 7, 9, 10, 11.

Glory be to the Father, etc.

Prayers.
I.
O! Almighty God, just art thou in visiting us of this place with this
infectious Disease, which takes away not only the enjoyments of Health, but
also the sweetest earthly Comforts and Supports of Sickness, and Deprives us
whilst we Live of the Help and Company of our Friends. We justifye thee, and
thy judgments; and confess that our miseryes are still far less than our Sins.

But whilst it comes to chastize our wickedness, let it cure it too, O! Lord.
Take from us the Plague of an Hard Heart, and make us tremble at thy word. And
purge away all our Sins, for I fear them more, and am more Desirous of their
Cure, than of the Cure of any Bodily Maladyes. And they are truly our Plague,
which has infected our whole Nature, and wherewith we Daily infect one another.
And when they have showd us our wickedness, let thy judgments cease from us,
and be entreated from this miserable Or Place.
Land, for thy Dear Son our Savior Jesus Christ's sake. Amen.

2.
O! Righteous Lord, thou have showed thy People terrible things, and Ps. 60. 3.
Given them a Drink of Deadly Wine. Thou terrifyest us with Ps. 91. 5, 6.
thine Arrows, which wound secretly and Walk in Darkness; And with a
Destruction, which wastes at Noon Day*

But this deadly infection, tho it be very spreading, can invade none, O! God,
without thy Commission. Nor kill those whom it does invade, till thou biddest
it. So that our Life and Health, is not left at the mercy of raging infection,
but is still bound up in thy Hand. And they who have thee for their Sanctuarye
in the most Contagious time, may Dwell in Safety. For Ps. 91: 11.
thou give thy Angels charge over them, that noe infection can touch, or
Destroy them.

And under thy wings, O! Lord, do I seek for shelter, for my self, [and for my
Family.] We have noe Preservation against these Dangers, but thy Good
Providence. And the Chief Antidotes whereon we rely, are our Prayers to thee,
and our Faith in thy Mercy.

Holy Father, I seek to thee, let thy Care surround me. I Ps. 91. 9.
make thee my habitation, let me find it a safe one. I Trust thee with my self,
and with my Friends, to Order what is most Desirable for us, and best agrees
with the wise Ends of thy Good Providence. And tho I do not absolutely promise
my self, to be exempt from a Common Calamity: yet, Lord, being in thy Hands
where I desire to be, I know that I shall be exempt, if it is fit I should be
so; and if not, that thou will turn even my falling sick of it to my Good. So
that under thy Wings, O! my God, my Hope is allways to have a kind, and most
thankworthy Ordering; and to receive from thee, either a Continuance of Health,
or a beneficial and thankworthy Sickness; either the Blessing of a longer Life,
or the Greater Blessing of an Happy Death, through Jesus Christ my Lord. Amen.

Our Father, etc.

VI. A Prayer to be said by Friends, for Natural Fools or Madmen.
SHall not I spare them, who can not discern between their Right Hand and their
Left? Jon. 4. 11.

I was found of them, that sought me not. Is. 65. 1.

I was Eyes to the blind, and Feet to the lame. Job. 29. 15.

Bear ye one another Burdens, and so fulfill the Law of Christ. Gal. 6. 2.

O! Allmighty and most merciful Father, Pity this thy Poor Creature, who knows
not Or her
his own wants, nor how to ask for thy Mercyes. But as he is not capable of
Doing things to please thee, so let nothing which he does offend thee. He is
still as an infant, O! God, not arrived to the use of Reason; Oh! Deal with
him, as thou do with them, and as Mark 10. 14, 15. Mat. 19. 14.
such admit him into the Kingdom of Heaven. [ Omit this Clause in case of
Madmen, who have been mad since they came to the use of Reason.
He has been received for thy Child in Baptism, and has done nothing since to
forfeit the Claims of Mercy and Bliss made over to him therein, and belonging
to that Relation; Oh! let them be fullfill'd and made good to him in their
time.]

And as his want of understanding unfits him to do any thing for thee, so
does it likewise to Do any thing for himself. And therefore he needs to have
the more done for him by thee, and by the Good instruments of thy Providence.
And let thy Care, O! Lord, supply the want of his. Give thy Holy Angels charge
to look to him, as they Do to Helpless Children. Give thy Saints, and those
who are any ways Concerned with him, the Heart to be Understanding, and Job.
29. 15.
Eyes, and Feet and Hands to him, as to one who is as if he had nothing of
these of his own, but wants to have them all supplied out of thy Provision. And
do thou in thy Wisdom prevent those Evils, which he can not foresee; and put
those by, which he wants understanding to Remove.

Especially, O! Lord, keep him from Doing any thing that is mischeivous, either
to others, or to himself.

Oh! thou, Is. 65. 1.
who art found of them who seek thee not, show mercy to this thy Servant, who
extremely needs thee tho he can not seek to thee. Thou know his wants, O!
Lord, tho he is insensible and ignorant of them. And tho he can not speak for
himself, yet his wants speak and Cry aloud for him. Oh! Hear their Cry, which
calls to thee for Pity. And hear us for him, who is not able to ask for
himself. And grant him thy special Care at present, and thy Peace at the last,
through the merits and mediation of thy Dear Son, our only Savior, Jesus Christ.
Amen.

Our Father, etc.

VII. A Prayer for those who attend about the Sick.
O! Blessed Lord, who call us to minister and attend about this thy pained
and afflicted Servant, make us truly compassionate and tenderly Sensible of* Or
her
his Sorrows, and studious how to ease them. Keep us Gentle and Officious
toward him, and willing and Diligent to minister to him, and above all things
to make and continue thee his Friend.

Oh! that it may be our Care, Friendly to admonish him of his Duty, and to call
upon him to look up unto thee. To strenthen his Soul, and assuage his Sorrows,
by Comfortable words; to read to him, and Pray for him, and study in all things
to make his sick bed as Profitable to his Precious Soul, and as easy and
tolerable to his pained and wearyed Body, as we can.

And let us not show unwillingness, O! God, in any Services, nor be provoked by
his impatience, or ill reception of our well meant Offices. But let us Pity the
Disorders of his Spirit under his Anguish; and bear the same, with that
Gentleness, and Continued Care to minister Comfort or Relief, which his Sorrows
call for, and which we all Desire may be showed toward us, when we come, as we
must expect to come, to be tried with the like weaknesses and Troubles our
selves.

And Grant, O! Father, that the Sight of his sickness, may be a warning to us
to prepare for our own. Make our Hearts Eccles. 7. 2.
wiser and better, by Conversing in the House of Mourning; and let it teach us
the end of all men, and the vanity of all earthly things, and put us upon Zele
and Diligence in all the ways of qualifying and Dressing of our Souls for a
more blessed and everlasting Life, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

Our Father, etc.

XIII. A Thanksgiving for Recovery from Sickness.
I.
BLessed be thy Name, O! God of all Power and Mercy, for that Ps. 31. 7.
thou have Considered my Trouble, and known my Soul in my Adversity. Thou
sentest me all those Helps whereby I was supported, and all the intervals of
ease wherewith I was releived under my Sickness. And now thou have brought me
up again from the Grave, and Delivered me of my pains and weakness, and art
become my Health and my Salvation.

Yea, thy Mercy, O! Blessed Lord, has rectifyed my Spirit, and done it Good by
my Sorrows, which is more to be valued than easing my Body of the^* For Ps.
119. 67.
before I was troubled I went wrong, but thy Corrections have taught me to see
my Folly, and this worlds vanity. And my Pains, which have been my Monitors Day
and Night. Ps. 51. 6.
have Caused me to understand Wisdom secretly.

And for these, and all other thy most endearing Mercies, Ps. 30. 12.
I will sing Praise to thee, O! Lord my God, and Give thee Thanks for ever. Ps.
40. 10.
I will not Conceal thy Faithfullness and thy Salvation, but Declare and speak
of them, that others allsoe may praise thy Name; [yea, Ps. 116. 18.
in the Presence of all thy People, When they had desired the Prayers of the
Congregation in their Sickness, they must not forget to Desire them also to
return thanks for them on their Recovery.
that they may give thee Thanks in the Great Congregation.] And oh! that I may
never forget thy Mercyes, nor my own Promises of amendment and Holy obedience:
but cheerfully and Faithfully Ps. 66. 13, 14.
pay thee my vows, and Perform all the Promises and Good Purposes, Which I made
whilst I was in Trouble.

And Pity the Pains, Good Lord, and hear the Cries of those, who are feeble and
sore smitten, as I was. Help them, to Patience, Comfort, and sure Trust in
thee. Be thou their Physician, both of Soul and Body; and in thy Due time, ease
them of their Pains, and restore them to Health and Strength, as in thine
abundant Mercy thou have restored me; and Give us all Hearts therewith
Thankfully to adore, and Faithfully to serve thee, through Jesus Christ our Lord.
Amen.

2.
BUt although by thy Grace, I am now recovered, O! Almighty Lord, from this
Sickness; yet I know that at thy time, I must expect to be sick again, and
shall surely Dye, and I know not how soon that time may come. And I have found
how much need there is under the Terrors of Death, to be conscious to our
selves of having lead a truly Religious and upright Life, and how unfit we are
to begin it under the Weaknesses of that State. Oh! then that my chief Care may
allways be to live with such Good Conscience, as I should be willing to Dye
with; and to do all those things in the time of my Health and Strength, which
I shall surely wish I had Done when my last weakness and sickness comes.

And therefore, O! my Dear God, I humbly and earnestly Pray thee, that I may
never fall to admire, or grow fond of any of the things of this world, by
coming again to relish and enjoy them. Let me never envy the Wealth of the
Covetous, nor the Honors and High Places of the ambitious, nor the Sensual
Pleasures of Licentious men. For these things, O! Lord, can not profit me in
the Days of Evil. They are vane Things, that pass off in the useing, and leave
nothing but remorse and and Guilt behind them. And the Remembrance of them at
the Approach of Death, instead of affording ease and Comfort, will be the
greatest wound and weakening to my Spirit, and increase my pains and Terrors,
instead of any ways asswaging them.

Nor suffer me, O! God, to trifle away this time of Respite in things of noe
benefit, which do thee noe Honor, and my poor Soul noe Good. For either to
hide my Talents, or to misemploy them, will inflame the reckoning of my Sins:
And that will turn this great Blessing, of lengthning out my Days, into a
Curse; and make my latter end worse, than my beginning was.

But give me Grace, O! Father, to Redeem those Precious Hours, which I have
formerly thrown away on vice or vanities, by employing all this small Remainder
of my time, in seeking thy Glory, and in carefully preparing for my change, and
Religiously and Reverently waiting for it, hopeing thereby to have entrance for
ever into Ps. 16. 11.
thy Presence where is fullness of joy, through the merits and mediation of my
Blessed Lord and Savior, Jesus Christ. Amen.

Prayers and Devotions, on the Apprehension or Approach of Death.
Scriptures.
Ps. 49. and Ps. 90. to v. 13. Job. 14. 1 These. 4. from v. 13. to c. 5. v. 7. 1
Cor. 15. Ps. 88. Jo. 5. v. 21. to v. 30. Rev. 21.
1. On the Prospect of our own Death Drawing near.
IT is appointed unto men once to Dye, and after this the judgment, Heb. 9. 27.

For out of the ground wast thou taken, Dust thou art, and unto Dust shall thou
return, Genesis 3. 19.

We are Strangers here, and our Days on the Earth are as a shadow, and there is
none abideing, 1 Chronicles. 29. 15.

As Pilgrims, we sojourn: and have here no continuing City, but seek one to
come. 1 Pet. 2. 11. Heb. 13. 14.

Yea, the Days of man upon Earth, are like the Days of an hireling, to serve
his appointed time.

And when his time is up, a Servant Earnestly Desires the Refreshment of the
Shade, and the hireling looks for the Reward of his Work, Job. 7. 1. 2.

And as for me, I know that thou will bring me to Death, and to the House
appointed for all Liveing, Job 30. 23.

For few and Evil have my Days been. And now behold! I seem as one who am going
the way of all the Earth, Gen, 47. 9. and Josh. 23. 14.

And as I came forth of my Mothers Womb, so naked shall I return to go as I
came, and shall take nothing of my Labor away in my Hand with me, Eccl. 5. 15.

I shall Rest from my Labors, and nothing but my works follow me, Rev. 14. 13.

And I must work the Works of God, while it is Day; the night comes when noe
man can work, Jo. 9. 4.

Blessed are those Servants, whom the Lord when he comes shall ^ind watching.
Luke 12. 37.

Behold! I come as a Thief. B^essed is he that watches, and keeps his
garments, Rev. 16. 15.

Watch therefore, for ye know neither the Day nor the Hour, when the Son of man
Comes.

For at midnight there shall be a Cry made, behold the Bridegroom comes, go
ye out to meet him.

And they who are ready with their Lamps trimmd, and Oil in them, go in with
him; but after that the Door is shut, and to those that knock he will Say I
know you not, Mat. 25. 6, 7, 10, 12, 13.

And who is that Faithful and wise Steward, whom his Lord shall make Ruler
over his Household, to give them their Portion of meat in due Season?

Blessed is that Servant, whom his Lord when he comes shall find so doing

Of a tr^th I say unto you, that he will make him Ruler over all that he has,
Luc. 12. 42, 43, 44.

2. On Willingness to die.
O! Death, how bitter is the Remembrance of thee to a man, that lives at Rest
in his Possessions, and that has nothing to vex him, and that has Prosperity
in all things.

And how acceptable is it, unto the needy* and to him whose strength fails,
that is now in the last Age, and is vexed with all things, and to him that
Despaireth, and has lost Patience. Ecclus. 41. 1* 2.

And wherefore is Light given to him that is in misery, and Life unto the
bitter in Soul?

Which long for Death, but it comes not, and Dig for it more than for hid
Treasures?

Which rejoice exceedingly, and are glad when they can find the Grave? Job 3.
20, 21, 22.

Besides, whilst we are at home in the Body* we are absent from the Lord.

And we are confident, and Willing rather to be absent from the Body, and
Present with the Lord.

For if our earthly house of this tabernacle be dissolved, we know that we have
a Building of God, an House not made with hands, eternal in the Heavens.

And in this being burdened, we Groan Earnestly, Desireing to be Clothed upon
with our House which is from Heaven, 2 Cor. 5. 1, 2, 4, 6, 8.

For to me to Dye is gain. And therefore I have a Desire to Depart, and to be
with Christ, which is far better, Phil. 1. 21, 23.

The Day of Death, is really better than the Day of ones Birth, Eccl. 7. 1.

For the Spirit shall return to God who gave it.

The Dust, indeed, shall return to the Earth, as it was, Eccl. 12. 7.

But there the wicked cease from troubling, and there the weary be at Rest, and
they hear not the voice of the Oppressor, Job 3. 17, 18.

Yea, I will ransom them from the Power of the Grave, says the Lord, I will
redeem them from Death: O! Death, I will be thy Plague; O! Grave, I will be thy
Destruction. Hos. 13. 14.

For he shall change this Vile Body and fashion it like unto his own Glorious
Body. Phil. 3. 21.

And this corruptible shall put on incorruption; and this mortal shall put on
immortality. 1 Cor. 15. 53.

And the Lord God will wipe away tears from off all Faces, and there shall be
noe more Sorrow, nor Crying, nor Pain, but Death shall be swallowed up in
Victory, Is. 25. 8. Rev. 21. 4. 1 Cor. 15. 54.

3. Against Fear of Death.
FEar not the sentence of Death, remember them that have been before thee, and
that come after, for this is the Sentence of the Lord over all Flesh, Ecclus.
41. 3.

It is but a 2. Sam. 7. 12.
going to Rest, Our Friend Lazarus sleeps. Jo. 11. 11.

And tho therein I leave Dear Friends, yet I go to my Fathers. Genesis 15. 15.

And am gathered to my People. Genesis 49. 33.

And the Righteous has Hope in his Death. Prove. 14. 32.

For God has begotten us again to a lively Hope through the Resurrection of Jesus
Christ from the Dead. 1 Pet. 1. 3.

And by his Death, he has destroyed him who had the Power of Death; and
Delivered them, who all their Life Time were in Bondage to the Fear of Death.
Heb. 2. 14, 15.

S^e that now, whether we Live or Dye, we are the Lords. Romans 14. 8.

For he died for us, that whether we wake or sleep, we should live together
with him. 1. These. 5. 10.

The Sting of Death is Sin. 1 Cor* 15. 56.

But he is exalted to be a Prince and a Savior, to give Repentance and
Forgiveness of Sins. Act. 5. 31.

And we have such an High Priest, as will have Compassion on our infirmities.

He can mercifully Consider and be touched with them in us, having in all
points, Sin only excepted, been tempted like as we are himself. Heb. 4. 15. and
c. 2. 17, 18.

And therefore Thanks be to God, who gives us the Victory of Death, through
our Lord Jesus Christ. 1 Cor. 15. 57.

And Blessed are the Dead from henceforth, which Dye in the Lord: Yea says the
Spirit, for they rest from their Labors, and their Works follow them. Rev. 14.
13.

4. Against Presumption.
LEt him that thinks he stands, take heed lest he fall. 1 Cor. 10. 12.

Thou stand by Faith: be not high-minded, but Fear. Rom 11. 20.

Happy is the man that fears always; but he that hardneth his Heart against
Fear, shall fall into mischief. Prove. 28. 14.

Work out therefore your own Salvation, with Fear and Trembling:

For it is God that works in you of his Good Pleasure, Phil. 2. 12, 13.

Likewise, since you must stand before him, who without Respect of Persons
judges according to every man's work, pass the time of your Sojourning here in
Fear, 1 Pet. 1. 17.

Tho I know nothing by my self, yet am I not hereby justified, 1 Cor. 4. 4.

The Heavens are not clean in his sight, Job* 15. 15.

He put noe trust in his Servants; and his Angels he charged with folly. Job 4.
18.

When I consider, I am afraid of him. Job 23. 15.

I trust in the mercy of God for ever and ever, Psalm. 52. 8.

But will keep withal an humble Spirit, that trembles at his word, Is. 66. 2.

And serve him with Reverence and Godly Fear. Heb. 12. 28.

5. In the last Agonies.
LOrd, now let thy Servant Depart in^ Peace. Luc. 2. 29.

Say unto my Soul, I am thy Salvation. Psalm. 35. 3.

This Day shall thou be with me in Paradise. Luc. 23. 43.

Lord Jesu receive my Spirit. Act 7. 59.

Into thine Hand I commit it, for thou have redeemed me, O! Lord God of Truth.
Psalm. 31. 5.

Be with me, and Conduct me, through the Valley of the shadow of Death. Psalm. 23.
4.

Send thy Holy Angels, to Carry me into Abraham's Bosom. Luke 16. 22.

And into the inheritance of the Saints in light. Col. 1. 12.

I have fought a good Fight, I have finished my Course, I have kept the Faith.

Henceforth there is laid up for me a Crown of Righteousness, which the Lord
the Righteous Judge shall give me at that Day, 2 Timothy 4. 7, 8.

For if we believe that Jesus Dyed, and rose again, even so them allsoe which
sleep in Jesus, will God bring with him* 1 Thessalonians. 4. 14.

And I know whom I have Believed, and I am persuaded that he is able to keep
that which I have Committed to him, against that Day. 2 Timothy 1. 12.

Prayers.
1. Prayers on the Prospect of ones own Death Drawing near.
1.
Grant, O! Lord, that I may end my Life in thy Fear and Favor; and that I may
Receive my Death, which now threatens me, not as my Curse, but as my
Deliverance. Let me find it a Rest from my Labors, and an Entrance upon a Life
without Trouble and without Sin. And Blessed be thy Mercy, which tho it has
seen fit and needful to Discipline me with Sorrows, yet has not made my
Sorrows Endless, but all to be laid down with this mortal Life; and even in my
Death has given me hopes of joys without end in a better Life, through my
Dearest Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. Amen

2.
O! Blessed Lord, now I am hasting on to the End of my Life, Remember not
against me the Great and manifold errors thereof, but let them all be wholly
done away, by thy Mercyes, and my Blessed Saviors merits, and my own true
Repentance. Let me come to my Change without Guilt, and foresee its near
approach without Fear or impatience.

And Oh! that I may allways stand ready, to give a Good account of my Life unto
thee. And that I may fight out the Good Fight of Faith with Constancy and
Perseverance, and finish my Course with joy, and never Sleep in Sin, nor lie
Down in misery and Sorrow.

And since my Soul is now summoned to meet the Bridegroom, Dress it, O! Lord,
in a Wedding Garment, fit to appear in his train. Give me Mat. 25 4, 7, 10.
Oil in my Lamp, and Grace to trim, and light it, and keep it allways burning,
sending up a pure and holy Flame, that when the Door opens I may be ready to
Enter in with him. And enable it to strip it self of all Fleshly affections
before it leaves my Body; and to be of like mind and Disposition with the Holy
Angels and Beatifyed Spirits, before it goes to keep them Company.

And, O! my God, let me never forge^, that this is like to be the last Trial,
which thou will afford me, of renouncing mine own will, and resigning my self
up to thine; and of showing forth Devotion of Spirit, and all Holy Obedience
and Patience, and Faith, and humble Confidence in thee. And therefore make me
watch for all opportunityes of exerciseing the same, and Do them diligently,
as my last Labors for immortality, and for secureing thy everlasting Mercy through
Jesus Christ my Lord. Amen.

II. Prayers for Willingness to Dye.
I.
O! Most Gracious and Merciful Father, Give me Grace to be allways fit for thy
Mercy, that I may not be slow or unwilling to Come to thee, now thou call
for me.

Forgive me all my Sins, O! God, which are 1 Cor. 15. 56.
the Sting of Death, that I may look on it as an harmless thing which cannot
hurt me. And make me sensible, how I am thereby eased of all those weaknesses
and Sorrows, which render my Life a burden to me.

Help me to consider it, O! Lord, as what comes to give me rest from all my
Labors. And to take up therewith, as with a Shelter against all Injuries and
ill usage. To look upon it, as a Cure of all my Bodily Pains, and Sicknesses;
and as a Remedy of all my Sins and Temptations, Sorrows and misfortunes. For
after once I shall have got to thee, O! Blessed Father, I shall be out of their
Reach, and never Come under their Power any more.

I know, O! Gracious God, that Heaven is my Country, and that I have still more
cause to rejoice, and less to repine, the nearer I am drawing home. That this
Death, is but the beginning of a better Life, and a most Desirable exchange, of
Travail and Misery for Rest and Joy, and of a few Days for Eternity. And let me
not be afraid of that, O! my God, which is to set me safe in thy Kingdom, and
to bring me to enjoy thee in Everlasting Bliss and Glory, through Jesus Christ my
Blessed Savior and Redeemer. Amen.

2.
LOrd, now thy messengers are come to Summon me, make me reckon that thy Time
is best for my Departure, and let me not seek about for Excuses and Pretenses,
of Staying longer here. Since this Summons is of thy Sending, let not me
receive it with reluctance. Since thou sendest it for my Good, let me not be
afraid of it as if it would do me hurt. Since thou Call me thereby to come
to thee, let me not come unwillingly, or seem forced away.

Let not my Heart, O! God, be tied fast to any Earthly Things, and then it will
be easy to me to be taken from them. Raise it above this world, and make it fit
and free to trust thee for the next: And then, O! Jesu, Come when thou
please, and I shall receive thy Call with joy.

And Grant, O! Lord, that I may take noe Pretense for my unwillingness, because
I shall thereby leave some Good Things unfinished, which I have in hand for my
Brethrens needs, or for thy Service. But remember and Consider with my Self,
that so must all they, who make it their Care at all times, to be Designing
and Doing Good. And that it is fittest for thee to Determine, wherein, or how
long thou will be served by me, in any things which my poor Soul is any ways
Capable through thy Grace to design or Do for thee. That if it seem Good in thy
Eyes, thy Providence will raise up instruments, and supply what I am Designing,
by other, and it may be far better ways. And that I have noe Reason to be slow,
but much, infinitely much to be hasty in Coming to thee, if from Mat. 20. 12.
bearing the Heat of the Day, and a task of Labor and toil in thy Service, thou
shall be Graciously pleased to call me, to Everlasting Rest and Joy in thy
Presence, through Jesus Christ my Lord. Amen.

3.
LOrd! in this State I am sore 2 Cor. 5. 2.
Burdened, and Groan Earnestly; Phil. 1. 23.
Desiring rather if thou please, to Depart, and be with Christ, which is far
better for me.

But let me not be weary of my work and station, O! my God, before thy Time,
nor hasty in Desires of Death, whilst thou see fit to try me in the Labors
and Patience of Life. Keep me Contented to bear my Sorrows whilst thou
please, and to leave it to thee to Order when it is fittest for me to lay them
Down, and to exchange them for E^se and Pleasures in thy Heavenly Kingdom,
where 1 Cor. 15. 54.
Death at last shall be swallowed up in Victory, and this Mortal shall put on
immortality, through the merits of thy Son our Savior Jesus Christ. Amen.

III. Prayers against Fear of Death.
1.
CLeanse me, O! Gracious God, from Guilt and Sin, which are the Sting of Death,
and then let nothing else make me afraid of it.

Let me not Dread the stroke thereof, as a thing that is hard for me to bear.
But Consider, that it is an hardship Common to me, with every mortal Nature.
That if it is hard, it Cures all other Sores and hardships, and is it self soon
over. And that hard and painful as it is, the weakest have born it, and can
pass through it. Yea, and that very frequently the pains of Sickness are much
worse than the pains of Death, and men ordinarily endure more sorrow before
they come to Dye, than they feel or show at last in Death it self. Nay, that as
they fall asleep insensibly, so they often seem to dye so too.

And whatever pains it would otherwise make to me, O! Lord, it will be made
easy by a clear Conscience, and a Comfortable Hope of thy Mercy. And let it arm
my Spirit against Fear, to think that I am coming thereby to a good Master,
whom as I have ever found most Gracious and Merciful all my Life, I shall now
much more find so at my Death, through the merits and mediation of Jesus Christ
my Lord, Amen.

2.
NOr let my Spirit, O! God, be broken with Fear, out of an apprehension of
Dying under the load of thy Heavy Displeasure. For thou take Delight in
Pardoning those, whose sincere Desire and Care has been to please thee; and in
making all fair abatements, and reasonable allowances, to their forgetfullness
and infirmityes.

I am very sensible, alas, that I am too Defective in my Duty and Service. But
make me remember, O! Blessed Lord, that thou can and do bear with some
Defects. For the best are not free, from Faults and Defects enough to humble
them; and yet they are surely within the terms of thy Pardon.

Yea, thou will bear with many Defects, in truly Loveing and Dutyfull minds,
and have not limited thy Forbearance to narrow and scanty Bounds. For among
those whom thou savest, there are many, and very Distant Degrees of Virtue and
Obedience, and the greater measures thereof which are attained by some, are
still wanting in others of them.

And these Defects of mine, O! God, great and many as they are, are to be
judged of by a merciful Savior, who knows our Natural Frailtyes and
infirmityes, and is ready to allow all that Pity and Favor to them, which can
be Desired in Reason. For he does not require such exactness of us, as is a
task fit, not for men, but for Angels. But takes up with such, as the Natural
and Pityable Weakness of our state, and of a frail and forgetful Creature in
the midst of a tempting World, can bear.

Oh! then, that I may consider thy Mercy, to fortifye my mind against Fear.
And fix my Soul upon the tenderness and Clemency of my judge and Savior, which
will embolden me to stand before him without Horror. And upon the
Condescentions of thy Gospel, and the needful Deductions and Forbearance which
it promises to our weaknesses, that in this Hour of my necessity I may be
guarded against all the suspicions of my own melancholy, or mistrusts of thy
mercy, and may be strenthend with a comfortable Hope in thee, through Jesus Christ
my Lord. Amen.

3.
BUt if after all, my Fears shall by times return upon me, and prove troublesome
to me: let it however Comfort me, O! Lord, to think, that thou art wont to
make better of Humble Souls, than they are wont to make of themselves; and wilt
judge me, not according to my Fears, but according to thy mercyes. A truly
Contrite Heart. O! God, is Safe in thine Eyes, even when it gives it self up
for lost in its own.

And as my Fears will be noe Prejudice to my safety, so Grant, Good Lord, that
they may be an Help to my Duty, and may quicken and increase my Care and
Endeavors to obey thee. Make them the Guards of my innocence, and a constant
Spur to thy Service. And then, O! Holy Father, tho they trouble and Discomfit
me at Present, Yet they will happily Con^ute themselves and recompense me in
the end; and my sincere Obedience shall make sure thy Gracious acceptance, tho
I my self dare not believe it till I come to find and hear it from thee in the
other World, through the merits of my only Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. Amen

IV. A Prayer against Presumption
LEt not my Heart Deceive me, O! Blessed Lord, in judgeing of my self: but keep
me from Pride and vain Confidence, in setting too little by thy Grace, and
thinking too well of mine own ways.

Oh! that I may never flatter my self into an Evil Security, and an
insensibleness of the Great need I have of thy Mercy. For thou, O! Lord, Jam.
4. 6.
resistest the Proud, but give Grace unto the Humble. Thou rejectest Luke 18.
11. 14.
the Proud Pharisee, who justifyes himself, and sees not his own nakedness and
Poverty.

But the very best of us all Do absolutely need repentance, and have but too
many Sins to humble us. We must Vae etiam laudabili vitae hominum si remota
misericordia discutias eam. Aug. Conf. l. 9. c. 13.
throw our Selves upon thy Mercy, and Ps. 130. 3.
can not stand in thy judgment should thou be Rigorous in exacting what we
have Done amiss, nor Ps. 7 6. 7.
appear before thee when thou art angry. Thy justice is terrible to the
Greatest Saints; yea, and before thee even the Angels themselves do cover
their Faces.

And as we can not come off clear in thy judgment, but merely through Mercy; So
neither Can Romans 11. 20.
we stand in Obedience to qualifye us for it, but only through Faith* It Is thy
Help, O! Lord, that must support and keep us in thy ways. And if it were not
for thy Grace, and our own Caution and holy jealousy over our Selves, we are as
liable to fall as others. Oh! then that I may Ib.
not be high minded, and place my Confidence in my self; but learn to Fear, and
show Care, and humble Dependence upon thee, and with Godly Reverence look for
thy Promises of Grace and Mercy, through Jesus Christ my Lord and only Savior.
Amen.

V. Prayers in the last Agonies.
Ejaculations.
DVst thou art, and to Dust shall thou return. Genesis 3. 19.

Lord Jesus! have mercy upon me.

O thou Lamb of God, Jo. 1. 29
that take away the Sins of the World;

Be merciful to me a Sinner. Luke 18. 13.

Tho I often offend thee, yet, Lord, thou know I sincerely Love thee, and
hate my self for having displeased thee. And can any who sincerely Loves thee
Perish Eternally?

Lord receive me, for I am hasting apace to thee.

I stretch forth my Hands unto thee, my Soul thirsts after thee as a thirsty
Land. Ps. 143. 6.

Luke 23. 42.
Lord, remember me when thou Come in thy Kingdom. Do with this frail and
wearied Body, what thou please. Only receive my Spirit to thy Mercy in Death;
and raise up this Corruptible to incorruption after Death.

And forsake me not, O! God, now my strength fails me. Ps. 71. 9.

Besides which, the Dying Persons may use the Scriptures Collected for this
Case, p. 127.

Prayers.
1.
LOrd, Wash my Soul in thy Blood, that it may be presented without Spot unto
thee. And let me Dye in thy Favor, and rest in Peace, and rise again in Glory.
Amen.

2.
STrenthen me, O! my God in my Agonies. As my strength fails, let my pains wear
off. But when my Strenth fails, let not my Faith fail. Even in Death let me
trust in thee. And the nearer I am drawing to thee, the more Do thou manifest
thy mercy unto me, through Jesus Christ my Lord. Amen.

3.
DEliver me, O! Lord, from Fear of Death, and from all violent Disorders of a
troubled Fancy, or painful Delusions of my Ghostly Enemy. Oh! let not him be
able now to disturb and terrifye me, or any way to prevail against me, but
Guard thou thy Servant comeing unto thee. Amen.

4.
HAve me in thy Custody, O! holy Father, for Jo. 10. 29.
nothing can can take me out of thy Hands. And Give thy Holy Angels Charge to
stand about me, to guard and receive my poor Soul at my Departure, and to
Conduct and Carry it to the Blessed Receptacles of Rest and Peace. Amen.

5.
COme, Rev. 22. 20.
Lord Jesu, Come quickly. Phil. 1. 23.
I Desire, and Groan earnestly, to be dissolved, and to be with thee Ps. 31. 5.
Into thy Hands I Commend my Spirit, and lay Down my wearyed Flesh to Rest in
Hope of a Blessed Resurrection to eternal Peace and joy at the last Day. Amen.

6.
LOrd, if it be thy Gracious will, make my Pains short, and my Death Easy, at
least not extremely tedious, or Grievous to me. But if thou have otherwise
ordered, thy Blessed will be done. Only Give me Patience to bear them, and
Spiritual Comforts under them, and at thine own time make my Death my Passage
to a Blessed and Eternal Life, through Jesus Christ my Lord. Amen.

Out of the Office for Burial.
ANd, O! Lord most Holy, O! God most mighty, O! Holy and Merciful Savior,
thou most worthy Judge Eternal, Suffer me not at my last Hour, for any pains of
Death to fall from thee. Amen.

And these Prayers may be said for the Dying Person as occasion requires by his
Friends who are about him, only altering the Persons, we for I, him for me, our
for my, etc. as is requisite upon the change of Persons.

Likewise they may use for him, the recommendatory Prayer for one at the Point
of Departure, in the Churches Office for Visitation of the Sick.

O! Almighty God, with whom do live the Spirits of just Men made perfect after
they are Deliverd from their Earthly Prisons: We humbly commend the Soul of
this thy Servant, our dear Brother, into thy Hands, as into the Hands of a
faithful Creator, and most merciful Savior; most humbly beseeching thee that
it may be precious in thy sight. Wash it, we pray thee, in the Blood of that
immaculate Lamb that was slain to take away the sins of the World; that
whatsoever defilements it may have contracted in the midst of this miserable
and naughty world, through the lusts of the flesh, or the wiles of Satan, being
purged and done away, it may be presented pure and without spot before thee.
And teach us who survive, in this and other like da^ly Spectacles of mortality,
to see how frail and uncertain our own condition is, and so to number our days,
that we may seriously apply our Hearts to that holy and heavenly wisdom, whilst
we live here, which may in the end bring us to life everlasting, through the
merits of Jesus Christ thine only Son our Lord. Amen.

6. A Prayer against sudden death.
LOrd, they who have lead the best lives, are Desirous of some time to prepare
for their Death. But my Life has abounded in Sins and Frailtyes, which make me
stand in much greater need thereof. Snatch me not away therefore to give up my
accounts, by the surprise of a sudden Death, but Deliver me from an unprepared
Heart, and an unexpected End.

As I Sin Daily, O! God, let me repent Daily; and stand allways upon my watch,
that I may be ready for thee whenever thou call me: But give me time and
leisure, if it may please thee, to put my Spirit in the best order I can, for
leaving this world, and appearing before thee, and taking my Leave of all
decently; that so with more satisfaction to my Friends, and with more
settlement of mind and comfort to my self, I may yield it up into the Hands of
thy mercy, through Jesus Christ my only Lord and Savior. Amen.

Prayers and Devotions upon the Death of Friends.
Scriptures.
1. When a Friend dies.
IT is better to go to the House of mourning, than to go to the House of
^easting: for that is the end of all men, and the living will lay it to his
Heart.

Sorrow is better than Laughter, for by the Sadness of the Countenance the
Heart is made better, Eccl. 7. 2, 3.

But sorrow not, Brethren, for them which are asleep, even as others which have
no hope.

For if we Believe that Jesus Dyed, and Rose again, even so them also which
sleep in Jesus, will God bring with him. 1 Thessalonians. 4. 13, 14.

Precious in the Sight of the Lord, is the Death of his Saints. Ps. 116. 13.

And Blessed are the Dead which Dye in the Lord, for they rest from their
Labors, and their works follow them. Rev. 14, 13.

In the sight of the unwise they seemed to Dye, and their Departure is taken
for misery.

But they are in Peace, and their Hope is full of immortality. Wisd. 3. 2, 3, 4.

And here the Righteous shall be had in everlasti^g Remembrance, and the memory
of the just is Blessed. Ps. 112. 6. and Prove. 10. 7.

Besides, when the Righteous Dies, i^ is often to take him from the evil to
come. Is. 57. 1.

And now he is Dead, wherefore should I fast and weep? Can I bring him back
again? I shall go to him, but he shall not return to me. 2 Samuel 12. 23.

Forget it not, for there is no turning again: thou shall not do him good, but
hurt thy self.

And think thou hear him say, Remember my judgment, or the sentence upon
me, for thine also shall be so: Yesterday for me, and to day for thee.

Therefore take no Heaviness to heart, but Drive it away, and remember the last
end.

And when the Dead is at Rest, let his remembrance Rest, and be Comforted for
him when his Spirit is Departed from him, Ecclus. 38. 20, 21, 22, 23.

2. When a Friend is taken away early.
THo the Righteous be prevented with Death, yet shall he be in Rest.

He was taken away speedily, lest that wickedness should alter his
understanding, or Deceit beguile his Soul.

He pleased God, and was beloved of him; so that living among sinners he was
translated.

Yea, therefore the Lord hasted to take him away from the wicked.

Moreover, he being made Perfect in a short time, fullfill'd a long Time.

For Honorable Age is not that which Stands in Length of time, nor that is
measured by number of years.

But wisdom is the Gray hair unto men, and an unspotted Life is old Age. Wisd.
4. 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 13, 14.

And why art thou against the Pleasure of the most High? there is noe
inquisition in the Grave, whether thou have lived ten, or an hundred, or a
thousand years. Ecclus. 41. 4.

3. When one is Childless.
Trust not thou in the Life of Children, neither Respect their multitude: For
one that is just is better than a thousand; and better it is to Dye without
Children, than to have them that are ungodly. Ecclus. 16. 3.

Better it is to have noe Children, and to have Virtue.

For the Memorial thereof is immortal, because it is known with God, and with
Men.

When it is present, men take example at it; and when it is gone, they desire
it: it wears a Crown, and Triumphs for ever, having got the Victory,
striveing for undefiled Rewards. Wisd. 4. 1, 2.

Prayers.
I. Prayers when a Friend Dies.
1.
O! Allmighty Lord, who have [now] taken from us our Dear [ Or (...)*
Brother] here Departed; at thy word we are sent into the Labor of Life, and at
the same word we return again into the Rest and Sleep of Death. And thy
Counsels, O! God, are Secret, and far above out of our sight. But they are
allways just, and leave noe Ground for our Complaints. Yea, they are allways
wise and Good, and will appear to have been most Honorable for thee, and most
fit and Proper for us, in the end.

Oh! then, that Put we for I, and make such other changes of Number, as are
requisite, when several put up this Prayer together.
I may humbly and dutifully Reverence thy Orderings when I can not Comprehend
them; and bring my will, into a quiet submission unto thine; and receive my
Loss meekly and without murmuring, because it is of thy sending.

Teach me thereby, O! Lord, to stand in awe of thy justice, and to show a
devout Sense of the desert of Sin whose Romans 6. 23.
wages is Death, and a Decent Sorrow for my own Loss. But let my Sorrow be
without fixing Faults on what thou have orderd; and without refusing to be
Comforted as 1 Thessalonians. 4. 13.
others who have noe Hope; or growing Rebellious or unthankful unto thee, and
troublesome to those about me, because thou have called my dear Friend away,
and deprived me of his Company.

[Yea, Lord, instead hereof, keep me thankful unto thee, that I was allowed to
have and enjoy this Comfort, before I am called now to part with it. For I have
great cause to Bless thee, that I enjoyed him at all, [especially so long as I
did;] and have noe Cause now to be angry, that I can enjoy him no longer. Nay,
I should render my self utterly unworthy of any Gift from thee, should I fall
to claim thy Free Favors as my due, because thou have long continued them to
me; and to think thou do me wrong, if at any time thou hold back thine
own, and for wise and Good Ends stoppest some stream of thy Free Bounty toward
me.]

And let this uncertainty, O! God, of the dearest Worldly Comforts, teach me to
fix my Heart on joys, which will never fade or perish. To take more Comfort in
thy self, and to look for less in all Earthly things. Oh! be thou my Desire,
and my Hearts Delight; and let a Good Conscience be my Treasure, and integrity
my joy. And these will stick to me till Death, and follow me beyond it, and
Give me Rest in thy Presence and Pleasures for evermore, through my Dearest Lord
and Savior Jesus Christ. Amen.

2.
LEt not my Grief excede, O! Lord, or be obstinate against Thoughts or Words of
Comfort, because 2 Samuel 12. 23.
I cannot bring him Or her, or it, when a Child.
back again, and because it can not benefit him, but will much hurt me.

And make me Consider, [which alas! I ought thoroly to have Considered
sooner,] that although he was a very Dear and Great, yet he was only a mortal
Comfort, whose Life would be sure to fail, tho his Friendship should not. I
know my Tenure was only to hold him as thy Gi^t, and to part with him again at
thy Pleasure. And that as we have the Comfort of enjoying Dear Friends or
Relations here, so we must be content too to have the trouble and sorrow of
parting with them.

And now, Lord, when thou have taken him, I know that he is more thine than he
is mine, and that thou have the best Claim to him. And when thou tookest him
from me, thou tookest him to thy self. [ The expressions of Hope, of the happy
Estate of the deceased Person, in this and the following Prayers, must be left
to the Discretion of those who are to use them, according as their Friends Life
and Death was.
And I trust thy taking him, is to his unspeakable joy, tho it be to my sorrow;
and that with thee he is now infinitely better, than he was, or could be here.
Yea, that thou have taken him to that Place, where by thy Mercy I also hope to
come, and whither in my Order thou will likewise take me in thy Due time: So
that thy Grace, O! Dear God, and a little Patience, will bring us together
again.]

And Oh! that thou would be pleased to put an End to all our Sins and
Sorrows, and to hasten thy Kingdom, and to accomplish the Number of thine
Elect. And mercifuilly to Grant, that all we, and all others, who either have
Departed, or shall Depart this Life in thy true Faith and Fear, may have our
Perfect Consummation and Bliss in thy Heavenly and Eternal Kingdom, through Jesus
Christ our only Lord and Savior. Amen.

3.
LEt not my Grief for my Deceased Friend excede, This Prayer is to be used on
the Death of a P^ous Friend.
O! most Gracious God, for I hope thou have taken him for his own Good: And
that thou have Comforted his Soul by his exchange, and have only smitten ours;
leaving us to mourn for our Sins, and for our Loss, whilst he by thy Mercy is
hereby set out of the Reach of Sin and Misery.

For as he is now removed, O! Father, from all worldly satisfactions, so is he
allsoe from all worldly Temptations. And our Comfort is to Hope, that he is now
at Rest from Labor, and has Ceased from Sin and Shame. That He is now eased of
Pains, and is above Misfortunes, and has found a Cure for all his Sorrows,
having Grief and Care for ever banishd from his Heart, and Rev. 21. 4.
all Tears wiped away from his Eyes. And that he is gone from the Vale of
Misery, to the Regions of joy, and from Conversing with us, to live with thee
and the Blessed Jesus, and to be a Companion of Saints and Angels.

Let not self Love then, O! Lord, and the sense of my own Loss, make me repine
at that change, which I take to be his Happiness. Let not that which I hope
does highly please him, displease me; nor let me refuse Comfort, because I
trust he is taken for ever to be filled with it. His Death, I humbly hope, is
the joy of Saints and Angels, and the Envy and Grief of Evil Spirits, who see
him taken up to a State where they can not tempt, and to an Happiness which is
for ever Denied to themselves. Oh! then that I may not join with his utter
Enemies and mine, in their Envy, but with those Blessed Spirits in their
Charity; and instead of greiving immoderately, or being angry with thee, that I
may heartily Bless thy Name, for turning Death thus into a Blessing, and as I
trust, for accomplishing his Hopes thereby, and making of him happy.

And let thy Providence, O! Father, be a Storehouse of Supplies, to make up to
me, and to all his Friends and Dependants, all those Supports and Blessings,
which we receive from thee by his means. Especially let his change, put us all
upon prepareing Diligently and Carefully for our own. Make it raise us up from
the Death of Sin to a Life of Righteousness; and take us off from all undue
esire or Care of Earthly things, to mind the one thing necessary, which is the
Great and most Comfortable Business of Life, and which alone will stand us in
stead and make us Happy after Death, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

4. A Prayer, when any Persons Feed impatience, and fix themselves in Grief, by
Surmizing that God is angry at them when he takes away their Friends.
O! Blessed Lord, let not me make it a Pretense for my impatience, that this
Loss comes as thy Visitation for my Sins; or greive obstinately, as fancying
that thou take away my Friend here Departed, out of Anger and displeasure
against me.

For thou, O! God, have many other Ends to look at, besides what Concerns me,
in these matters. And these Providence touch our Friends themselves Directly
and Principally, and reach us only by the by. And when in mere Love and
Kindness unto them, thou would call them to thy self, that must unavoidably
take them away from us.

But if in this change thou do show Displeasure against me for my Sins, Lord
teach me, that it is my Part humbly to submit my self to thee, and not to be
angry or impatient under thy Correction of me, but to Lev. 26. 41.
accept my Loss with quietness as the punishment of mine iniquities. And that
whilst thou art removeing my Blessings, because of my Great Ununworthyness and
unthankfullness under them; I have the more need to show my self Thankful for
any that are still continued to me, and to give up my will in all things to
thine, to serve and please thee, through our Dear Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.
Amen.

5. A Prayer, when these Losses come close one upon another.
ANd although these affecting Losses come thick upon me, O! Father, yet I know all
this is for a Greater Trial of my Patience. And I am sensible that I have
enough, and abundantly too much in me, that needs to be punished thereby. And
that thou have wise and kind Reasons ^now, thus to Heap upon me these Sorrows,
tho it were not to punish, but only to improve my Spirit.

And oh! that this succession of my Losses, may serve, to perfect me in
Patience, and to wean me more thoroly from all earthly Supports. Oh! that it
may temper my worldly Complacencyes, and guard me against all excess therein.
And call me to take Delight, and seek Comfort in thee, instead of seeking it in
them; and to look more at the joys of thy Kingdom, where our Comforts shall
succeed one another infinitely faster than our Sorrows do here, and where we
shall for ever enjoy thee, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

For supplying the want they have of their departed Friend, by other ways of
Gods good Providence, they may use the two Prayers for the Widow and Orphans,
etc. p. 158, 156 and 157.

6. A Prayer for Learning by these Losses to sit more loose to the World, and
to fix our Hearts more on the Love of God.
THou have sent me this 2 Cor. 12. 7.
Thorn in the flesh, O! Blessed Lord, to cure my inordinate Fondness for
fleshly Delights, and to keep me from being too much exalted with them. For I
pleased my self too much with worldly Comforts; and to take my Heart off from
them, thou have now embitter'd them to me with these Sorrows.

And Oh! do thou teach me thereby, to Delight more in thy self, and less in
Earthly things. Enable me to make a Good Conscience, and a comfortable sense of
thy Love, and Hope of thy Promises and of Heavenly joys, my most beloved
pleasures.

And, Lord, let me never call my self unhappy, whilst I can enjoy thee. But
make me account the Loss of all things else to be made up to me in thy Love,
and never repine or complain of other wants whilst thou art left me, and I can
comfortably look up to thee, as my Bosom Friend, and my tender Father, as my
Life and my Health, my Rest and my joy, through Jesus Christ my Lord. Amen.

^. A Prayer when a Friend is taken away in his Prime.
THou art pleased to Cut off my Here mention the Relation, as Husband, Wife,
etc.
Dear Friend, O! most Righteous Lord, in the midst of his Days, before he had
passed through the several stages of Life, and accomplished the Number of his
Years.

But I will remember, O! my God, that it is not the Lenth of Life, but the
Goodness of it, which thou look at. And that he has lived long enough, who
has lived to be fit for thee, and to Dispose his Soul for thy Mercy. The
blessed Mansions above, are infinitely the best place to prolong and enjoy Life
in. And therefore if thou, O! Father, art graciously pleased [as I hope thou
art] for the Merits of our Dear Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, to accept of the
innocence and obedience of his Life, neither he nor we have any cause to
complain of the shortness of it. And if we who are left behind him, may have
the Grace first to live holily, we will thankfully think, and own to thee, that
we have lived long enough, whenever thou see it Time we should Dye.

And as my Dear Friend is taken away in the Prime of his Strength, so I must
Consider, O! Lord, that he is taken away withal in the Hight of his Toyls, and
out of the greatest Hurry of his Busyness and Temptations. Thou have thereby
kept him from trying, how strong he could be to bear Sorrows and Vexations, and
from lamenting to find his Strength too often turned into weakness.

And oh! that we, who survive him, may at lenth attain by thy Grace, to have
all our temptations end in a perpetual security and undisturbedness, to have
all our Sorrows turned into joys, and our Days of Labor happily exchanged for
Days of Rest and Peace, for the Merits and Mediation of our Blessed Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ. Amen.

3. Prayers, when a Friend is taken away, by a violent untimely Death.
I. A Prayer whilst the Person yet lives, to be said either by himself, or by
his Friends for him.
O! Allmighty Lord, thou art pleased by a violent and hasty Stroke, to hurry
Put this thy unworthy Servant for me, and likewise him for me, his for my, he
for I, etc. when his Friends say this Prayer over him.
me thy unworthy Servant out of this World. For thou did Deliver me Up to the
accident that smote me, when he falls by an accident.
[into the Hands of him that Smote me; and how unjustly soever my Death comes
from him, yet it is most just from thee. I fully justify thee, and freely
forgive him; and oh! that he may truly repent thereof in Time, that thou
may freely forgive him too.]

But as I am like to be snatched away thereby from hence in have, O! my Dear
God, Give me Great strength of Grace, to do much toward finishing my Peace
with thee in a little Time. If thou art pleased to show it, thy Grace can
perfect my Repentance, in few hours, yea, in a few minutes as well as in many.
It wrought it in Luke 23. 40, etc.
the Thief upon the Cross, in his last Agonies. And some who had tarryed till
Mat. 20. 6, 9.
the last hour of the Day, are made acceptable thereby in thy Service. Oh! let
it be mighty toward me in this my necessity, as it was toward them in theirs;
and take me not hence till it has made me a Penitent fit for thee to accept of.

Oh! Remember not my great and manifold Sins, in Wrath; but only to send Grace
sufficient to Cure them, and to show Mercy on me for the same. And as I am
hereby 1 Cor. 11. 32.
Chastned for their Cause, Lord, let it be that I may not be Condemned with the
World. Let all my Punishment, or Portion of Pains be here, but Give me Peace
and Favor with thee hereafter.

And Spare me a little, Good Lord, Spare me, if it may seem Good to thee, that
I may recover some Strength, and Dress my Lamp; and supply the Great
Defectiveness of my Duty toward thee, before I (...). But if thou have
otherwise* Decreed, and I must Dye suddenly, then magnifye thy mercy, O! my
God, in^escueing me from the near approac^ of Eternal misery, and let thy
Displeasure end in my Death, but after that receive me among the meanest of thy
Servants to Everlasting Life, through the merits of my Blessed Savior and
Redeemer, Jesus Christ: Amen.

2. A Prayer of his Friends after his Death.
O! Blessed Father, it has seemed Good to thy wise Providence, to tear this
Dear Friend from us by violence, and to send him untimely to his Grave. [
Change the Number, putting we for I, etc. when several join together in this
Prayer.
I] own thy Justice herein, and Desire to show Reverence, instead of murmuring,
because it is thy Doing.

And my Hope is, O! Lord, that thou do and wilt remember the Pious Study and
bent of his former Life in mercy; and graciously accept him as one Dying in thy
Fear. And whilst I have this Hope to Comfort me, I will not Complain of any
violence or Accidents, which hurryed him away from us to enjoy thee.

When it has been the business of a man's Life, and his daily Study and Care, O!
God, to serve thee, tho Death comes on the sudden, yet it will not come too
soon for him.

And I will consider allsoe, that if thou surprizest him with the suddenness of
his Death, thou suffer him not to be tormented with any long Fears thereof.
And that the suddenner the stroke was, the less he was like to feel it. Or
should he have felt it more, yet he might not have felt a painful Disease
less, had it been his Executioner. For although that would have been more slow, it
might not have proved less Cruel; nor have smarted lighter, but only lasted
longer. And if my Dear and Deceased Friends Pain was more violent, O! Lord, it
was short, and through thy mercy I hope it is the last he had to endure.

And far be it from us, O! God, to repine, that he was thrown hastily and
Headlong into Death: especially having a Comfortable Hope, that the effect
thereof is, to pass with less Pain and more Dispatch into a better Life, and
more easily and speedily to take possession of immortality, through Jesus Christ
our Lord. Amen.

4. Prayers on the Death of Friends who had lead ill lives, and Gave noe
Comfortable Proofs of Repentance at their Deaths.
^N this Case, we may put the surviveing Friends in mind, of the many other
Things which they have to take Comfort in, and this I think is all the Ground
we have here of speaking Comfort unto them. But we can not fetch Considerations
of Comfort, from their Deceased Friends. For such Sinners, as would have
nothing to do with the Fear and Service of God, have noe Reason of Comfort in
themselves, nor can afford any good Reason of it to their well-wishers. And
with Relation to them, we must not pretend to Preach Comfort, I conceive, but
Submission.

To help them meekly and patiently to submit themselves to God in these sad
Cases, the surviving Friends may use Prayer 1. When a Friend Dies; especially
if they leave out the Paragraph within the Hooks. p. 307.

They may allsoe use this Prayer following, to Comfort them.
ANd Blessed be thy Mercy, O! most Gracious God, which in this sad Case does
not leave me comfortless. For if this Deceased Friends Case suggests things
full of Grief, I have many other Friends who give me great Cause of joy. And to
Compensate my Trouble in Pity for others, by thy Grace I have something to
Satisfye and Please me in reflecting on my self.

For I can look with Comfort on my own Soul, and hope through the merits of my
Blessed Savior, to find Mercy for it, and take Comfort in it, both Living and
Dying. I have thee* O! Lord, for my Portion: and nothing Can make my Case
Comfortless, whilst I am thin^, and thou art mine, and whilst I have thy Power
to trust to, and thy Love to rejoice in. And under all this Sorrow at present,
I am sustained by the Blessed Hope of being received at last into thy Presence*
where all Remembrance of former Troubles shall be quite effaced, by the
abundance of my Present Bliss; where I shall have noe Sorrow from the
miscarriage of Friends, but unspeakable Satisfaction in their well-being, and
well-doing; and where I shall ever Delight^in thee, and in the Continual
Emanations of thy surpassing Mercy* through Jesus Christ my Lord and only Savior.
Amen.

5* A Prayer on the Death of a Child.
O Almighty Father, thou art pleased now to turn my joys into S^rrows* and to
take away from (...) that sweet Babe, which thou lately gave me for my
Delight and Comfort. But I humbly Bow my will to thine, and submit my Self to
(...), and without murmuring (...) it is thy Doing.

Thou have sent this poor Child into the World, O! Lord, to See, and to ^ast
Life, but have not allowed it to Stay till it Could rightly understand the end
and busyness, or relish the Comforts and Satisfactions thereof.

But I will Consider, O! my God, that thou will not require from it any
Services of Life, whilst it was not Capable to understand them. And that if it
Stayed not here to enjoy Pleasure; so neither did it Stay to be pined away
with Sorrow and Care. It lived not long enough to be versed in all the
Vexations of our State, nor to run through that Great variety of miseryes and
misfortunes, which are incident here to our Nature. But went off before it had
time to try how much Evil is to be Endured in this Life; yea, before it was
come, to aggravate any afflictions by imagination, or to anticipate the same by
Fear, or to reflect in bitterness of Spirit and lay to heart what it did endure.

And as it Dyed young, O! Lord, So I have the Comfort to think and hope, that
therefore it Dyed innocent. For it is taken back to thee, before it knew Good
or Evil, or had done any thing to offend thee. It has left the World, ere it
was made the worse by it, or had Contracted any of the Wickedness thereof, to
follow it and fright it at thy Judgment. By thy Mercy, O! Father, it Stayed
till it was received for thine own Child by Baptism, and was therein assured by
thee of remission of Sin, and made an Heir of thy Kingdom. And by the same
Mercy it is now Called away, ere it had done any thing to fall from that
Relation, or to forfeit that Blessing.

So: that in this taking it away from me, thou have translated it, O! Father
of Me^^yes, from the miseryes of this World to the joys of Paradise. it is
taken from me to be at thy Provision, and to be kept for ever safe and Happy in
those Blessed mansions, which thou have Provided for thy Children.

And therefore if I have lost the Comfort, of having a Child to train up in
thy Service in this World; it is for the far greater Comfort, O! my God, of
having sent one, to live with thee, and attend for ever about thy Throne in
Heaven. And there I my self allsoe hope through thy mercy, to be received in thy
due Time, not only to see and enjoy it, but what is infinitely above all, for
ever to see and enjoy thee, through Jesus Christ my Lord. Amen.

6. A Prayer when one is made Childless, or is like to Dye without Children.
O! Blessed Lord, thou art pleased in thy Wisdom to (...) me (...) never had
any.
[beleave me of my Children] and to leave me (...) appearance of issue, to
Sweeten the Cares of Life, and to keep up my Memory to Posterity. I am content
therewith. O! my God, because it pleases thee; and comeing from thy Wisdom and
Care of me, I will not only own it to be just, but Esteem it to be most wise
and fit for me.

And if, by having noe Children I have fewer Delights, I will remember
withal, O! Father, that I have lighter Cares, and fewer Sorrows. I have not
the Torment of seeing them take ill ways, nor of Fearing continually lest they
should fall to take them: nor shall have the Pains and Trouble of parting with
them, which Commonly is quicker and more affecting than the Pleasure of having
them. And I may now fix my Love and Care more intrely upon thee, having no
Cares for them to call me off. And I have less Temptation to Descend to mean or
ungodly Shifts, if ever I come to be pinched with Persecution, or adversity: or
to Comply, with any things unworthy and misbecoming my Self, or Displeasing
unto thee.

And when I can leave noe Children to support my Name and Memory, let me have
Good Deeds, O! Dear God, and a Life of unblemished integrity and Honor, to do
the same for me. Oh! that I may be remembered after I am Dead, for acts of true
Piety and Charity, which give the truest and most lasting fragrancy. However,
let me leave behind me the memory, of a truly Religious, humble, and Virtuous
Carriage, for the imitation of all that knew me.

Especially, O! Holy Father, let a Constant course of Obedience and Godlyness,
recommend me through the Blood of thy Son, to thy Approbation. And tho among Men I
am quite forgotten, yet let me be Graciously remembered, and received by thee
when thou reckonest up and call over the Number of thy Children, for my Dear
Lord and Savior Jesus Christ's sake. Amen.

Trinuni Deo Gloria.
THE CONTENTS.
THe Preface.
Directions for an Holy and an Happy Death.
Chap. 1. OF Settling Worldly Affairs, and Care of the Body in Sickness. p. 1.
Chap. 2. Of Securing Peace with God in Sickness p. 10. By Profession of
Repentance p. 11. and of Faith p. 14. and of Continuance in the Unity of the
Church. p. 17. Chap. 3. Of Carriage under Sickness p. 22. and Particularly of
Trust in God, p. 23. Of Resignation p. 29. and I of Thankfulness. p. 32. Chap.
4. Of Patience under Sickness, p. 39. and Spending Sick. Bed Hours ^p. 51. and
ministering to Sick Persons. p. 53. Chap. 5. Of Carriage at the Approach of
Death, and in the last Extremiti^s. p. 58. Chap. 6. Of Care, and Treatment of
the Dead, p. 68.
Devotions for the State of Sickness.
I. A General Prayer for the Duties and Needs of Sick Persons p. 129. and one
out of the Office of Visitation p. 131. and Scriptures about the merciful ends
of Sickness. p. 79. II. Prayers and Scriptures for their particular needs and
duties. I. For Repentance in Sickness, and the several expressions of it:
Scriptures, p. 82, etc. and Prayers, p. 133, etc. II. For an Heart to give
Alms, and at the time of giving them: Scriptures, p. 85. and Prayers, p. 143,
etc. III. For Trust in God, and on the chief a^ts and Branches of it, and
motives to it in Sickness: Scriptures, p. 88, etc. and Prayers, p. 147, etc.
IV. For Faith in Gods Promises, under Sickness: Scriptures, p. 96, etc. and
Prayers, p. 160, etc. V. For Resignation under Sickness: Scriptures, p. 100.
and Prayers, p. 162, etc. VI. For Thankfullness under Sickness: Scriptures, p.
99. and Prayers, p. 168, etc. VII. For Patience under Sickness, both, 1. The
chief Acts and expressions of it: Scriptures, p. 100, etc. Prayers, p. 176,
etc. 2. the Helps to it, p. 186. etc. 3. the motives to it: Scriptures p. 107.
Prayers, p. 189, etc. And this 1. Toward God, p. 175, etc. 2. Toward Friends
and Attendants: Scriptures, p. 108. and Prayers p. 180, etc. 3. Toward our
selves under the Heaviness and Brokenness of our own Spirits: Scriptures, p.
109. and Prayers, p. 183, etc. VIII, For Spiritual improvements by Sickness:
Scriptures, p. 110. and Prayers, p. 196, etc. IX, For the Bodily needs and
Desires of Sick Persons; viz 1. For ease under Pains: Scriptures, p. 111, etc.
and p. 119. Prayers, p. 201, etc. and on Receipt thereof, p. 117 and 204. 2.
For strength under the same, p. 205. 3. For Deliverance from them: Scriptures,
p. 115, etc. Prayers, p. 206. 4. For longer Respite and Recovery, p. 207, etc.
5. On Taking Physic: Scriptures, p. 120. Prayers, p. 210, etc. 6. On want of
sleep: Scriptures, p. 118. Prayers, p. 212, etc. 7. On excess of sleep, p. 214.
8. On their being Lightheaded, p. 216. X. For Certain kinds of Sickness, viz.
I. For Women with Child, both Scriptures and Prayers. 1. Before Travel, p. 218
and p. 222, etc. 2. In Travel, p. 219 and p. 225, etc. 3. After Delivery, p.
220 and 229, etc. with a Prayer for her Child, p. 233. II. On the Loss of
Eyesight: both Scriptures, p. 235, etc. and Prayers. 1. For Recovery of Sight,
p 238. 2. For Patience under the want of Eye sight, p. 239, etc. 3. For Good
use of Blindness, p. 243. III. Under the Loss of Hearing: both Scriptures, p.
245, etc. and Prayers: 1. For Recovery of Hearing, p. 247, etc. 2. For Patience
under the want of Hearing, p. 249, etc. 3. For Good use of Deafness, p. 253. 4.
A Thanksgiveing on Recovery from Blindness or Deafness, p. 254. IV. For a Sick
Child, p. 256, etc. V. In Times of Common Infection: Scriptures, p. 259, etc.
Prayers, p. 260, etc. VI. In Behalf of Natural Fools, and Madmen, p. 264, etc.
VII. For Attendants about the Sick: Scriptures, p. 122, etc. and a Prayer, p.
267. XI. A Thanksgiveing for Recovery from Sickness: Scriptures, p. 124, etc.
and Prayers, p. 269, etc.
Devotions on the Apprehension, or Approach of Death.
I. ON the Prospect of ones own Death Drawing near: Scriptures, p. 274, etc.
Prayers, p. 283, etc. II. On willingness to Dye: Scriptures, p. 276, etc. and
Prayers, p. 285, etc. III. Against Fear of Death: Scriptures, p. 279. Prayers,
p. 289, etc. IV. Against Presumption: Scriptures, p. 280. A Prayer, p. 293. V.
In the last Agonyes: Scriptures, p. 281. and Ejaculations and Prayers p. 295,
296, etc. with a Prayer against Sudden Death, p. 300.
Devotions upon the Death of Friends.
I. WHen a Friend Dies: Scriptures p. 302, etc. and Prayers, p. 305, etc. A
Prayer when they think God is angry at them when he takes away their Friends,
p. 312. When these Losses come close after one another, p. 314. For Learning
thereby to ^it loose to the World, and be more fixed in the Love of God, p.
315. II. When a Friend is taken away in his Prime: Scriptures, p. 304. Prayers,
p. 316. III. When he is taken away by a violent untimely Death, p. 318, etc.
IV. On the Death of Friends who had lead ill Lives, and gave noe Comfortable
Proofs of Repentance at their Deaths. p. 322, etc. V. On the Death of a Child.
p. 325, etc. VI. When one is made Childless, or is like to Dye without
Children: Scriptures p. 305. A Prayer, p. 328, etc. Books
ERRATA.
PAge 14: line 24. read descendedst. p. 20 marg. r. (...). p. 21. the word
Peace is set after l. 4. which should make the live before it. p. ^^. l.
pennlt. for; put, after Sufferings. p. 35. l. 3. r. b^. p. 44. l. 8. after
sickness add Amen. p. 63. l. 15. r. sense of to the last. p. 78. l. 4. r.
taken. p. 99. l. ^3. r. have. p. 140. l. 12. for my read thy. p. 155. l. 16. r.
wilt, and ib. l. 18. r. mighty. p. 159. l. 23. r. thy. p* 174. l. 4. put; after
them. p. 193. l. 21. a. after come. p. 207. l. 7. r. Disease. p. 211. l. 8. r.
seek to him. p. 228. l. r. longer. and 241. l. 3. r. to. p. 251. l. 13. r.
open. and 255^ l. 9. uncomfortably. and 259. l. 14. us for as. p. 261. l. 19.
for for, from. p. 262. l. 18. r. preservative. and 269. l. 1. r. XI. and 291.
l. 11. r. wilt. p. 310. l. 5. this for his. and 316. l. 12. r. 11. A Prayer.
With others, which the Readers themselves may be pleased to correct.

Books lately Printed for Robert Kettlewell.
1. A Journey into Greece by Sir George Wheeler, in company of Dr. Spon of
Lions, in six Books. With Variety of Sculptures, in Folio, Price bound 15s.

2. Two hundred Queries moderately propounded, concerning the Doctrine of the
Revolution of Humane Souls, and its conformity to the Truths of Christianity.
In Octavo, price bound 1s. 6d.

3. A Dissertation concerning the Pre* existency of Souls: Being Originally
written in the Latin Tongue. In Twelves. Price 1s.

4. The Paradoxical Discourses of F. M. Van Helmont, concerning the Macrocosm
and Microcosm or the Greater and Lesser World, and their Union. Price bound 3s.
6d.

5. A Spelling Book for Children. In Twenty fours, Price bound 6d.

6. Animadversions on Dr. Burnet's History of the Rights of Princes in the
Disposing of Ecclesiastical benefices and Church Lands. In a (...) to a Friend.
In (...)

7. A Discourse on Persecution, or Suffering for Christ's sake. Clearing the
Notion of it; and making a Discrimination of Just from (...) Pr^t^nsions to it.
And passionately recommending True Christian* Suffering to all those who shall
be (...) thereto. By J. Howel M. A. Rector of New Radnor in Radnorshire.

8. An Answer to the Bishop of Condom, (now of Meaux) his Exposition of the
Catholic Faith, etc. Wherein the Doctrine of the Church of Rome is detected,
and that of the Church of England expressed, from the public Acts of both
Churches. To which are added, Reflections on his Pastoral Letter.

9. A Vindication of the Primitive Christians, in point of Obedience to their
Prince, against the Calumnies of a Book, entitled, the Life of Julian, written
by Ecebolius the Sophist. As also, the Doctrine o^ Passive Obedience cleared,
in defense of Dr. Hicks; together with an Appendix, being a more full and
distinct Answer to Mr. Thomas Hunts Preface and Postscript. Unto all which is
added, the Life of Julian, enlarged. In Octavo, price bound 2s. 6d.

10. A Sermon Preached at the Worcester-Feast, by George Walls Master of Arts,
and Student of Christ-Church, Oxon. Quarto, price bound 6d.

The Treasures of the Sea, a Sermon preached to the Mariners, by William
Thompson. In Quarto, pric^ stitcht 6d.

12. A Sermon Preached at the Church of St. Bridget, on Easter-Tuesday, being
the first of April 1694 Before the Right Honorable Sir Henry Tulfe Mayor of
London. By Georg^ Hicks D. D. Dean of Worcester, and Chaplain in ordinary to
his Majesty. In Quarto, price stitcht 6d.

13. A Good Subject: Or, the right Test of Religion and Loyalty. In a Sermon,
Preached July the 17th at the last Summer-Assizes held at Buckingham, for the
County of Buckingham. Before the Lord Chief Baron Mountague, and Sir Richard
Holloway, Knight, John Culling Esquire, High Sheriff. By Lewis Atterbury, D. D.

14. The History of Isuf Bassa Captain General of the Ottoman Army at the
Invasion of Candia. In Octavo, price bound 1s. ^d.

All these following Books, Writ by the Reverend Mr. J. Kettlewell.
Quarto.
1 THE Measures of Christian Obedience: Or, a Discourse, showing what obedience
is indispensably necessary to a Regenerate State, and what defects are
consistent with it, for promotion of Piety, and the Peace of Troubled
Consciences. The Second Edition. Price 8.

2. A Discourse explaining the Nature of Edification, both of particular
persons in private Graces, and of the Church in Unity and Peace. And showing
that we must not break unity and public Peace, for supposed means of better
edifying in private Virtues. Price Sticht 6d.

3. The Religious Loyalist: Or, a good Christian taught how to be a faithful
Servant both to God and the King. Price Sticht 6d.

4. A Funeral Sermon for the Right Honorable the Lady Frances Digby. Price 6d.

5. A Sermon, on occasion of the death of the Right Honorable Simon Lord
Digby, Price 6d.

6. Christianity a Doctrine of the Cross, or Passive Obedience, under any
pretended Invas^on of Legal Rights and Liberties, Price sticht 1s.

Octavo.
7* THE Practical Believer: Or, the Articles of the Apostles Creed, drawn out
to form a true Christians Heart and Practice. In two Parts, Price Bound 4s.

Twelves.
8. AN help and exhortation to Worthy Communicating: Or a Treatise describing
the meaning, Worthy reception, Duty, and Benefits of the Holy Sacrament. And
answering the doubts of Conscience, and other reasons, which most generally
detain men from it. Together with suitable Devotions added. The Second Edition.
Price bound 2s.

9. A Companion for the Persecuted: or, an Office for those who suffer for
Righteousness, Containing particular Prayers and Devotions, for particular
Graces, and for their private and public wants and occasions. Price bound 1s
6d.

10. A Companion for the Penitent: and for persons troubled in mind.
Consisting, of an Office for the Penitent to carry on their Reconciliation with
God. And a Trial or Judgment of the Soul for discovering the safety of their
Spiritual Estate. And an Office for Persons troubled in mind, to settle them
in peace and Comfort. Price bound 1s.

11. Death made Comfortable: Or the Way to Dye well: Consisting of Directions
for an Holy and an Happy Death. Together with an Office for the Sick, and for
certain kinds of bodily illness: And for dying Persons. And proper Prayers upon
the Death of Friends.

All these Printed for R. K^ttlewell.

Besides These.
Christian Prudence: Or, Religious Wisdom; not degenerateing into irreligious
Craftiness in Trying Times, in Octavo. And two others in Quarto.

FINIS.

