AN APPENDIX TO THE Unlearned Alchimist, Wherein is contained the true Receipt
of that Excellent Diaphoretick and Diuretic PILL, purging by Sweat and Urine;
commonly known by the name of Matthew's PILL.

With the Exact manner of preparing and making of it, and the particular nature
and virtue of the several Ingredients, as also of the PILL.

By G. Kendall, M. A. Oxon.

Licensed and Entered according to the Act for Printing.

LONDON, Printed for Joseph Leigh, and are to be sold by him at his shop in
Bazing-hall-street. And are to be sold by the Author; as also the Pill,
Antidote, and Oil of Amber, at the Green Dragon in Ave-Mary Lane.

Friendly Reader.
I Being something concerned in the following Thetis, as being one with whom
Mr. Richard Matthews left this Receipt of his Pill, and also did leave an
injunction upon me with some others to see it made public if he did not live
to do it himself; and seeing it is here truly and faithfully brought to the
Light, according to his desire, I am willing therefore by way of owning the
truth thereof, to give this short and plain account, both how I came by it, and
why it was not made public before this time. Mr. Richard Matthews of known
integrity, after he found the public use and benefit of this Pill, was often
taking care how to preserve it in it is purity after his decease, sometimes
expressing his mind as follows, That he would choose out six persons that he
could entrust therewith, and leave it with them, and Authorize them after the
decease of any one of them, the Rest to choose one in his Room, and so to be
kept by such a number, to the end it might not be ingrost in the hands of any
particular person, expressing several times his fears, that if his Pill should
only rest at home, his folks would spoil his Pill, which he was careful to
prevent, but his thoughts of the leaving of it were not effected, but about 57
or 58, he several times spoke to me, and also to Ahasuerus Fromanteel to come
to him together, and he would Leave the Receipt with us, using words to this
purpose, that he was but Crasie and weak, and did not know how it might please
God to deal with him, therefore pressed us several times to this thing before we
went to him.

So when he was at little Chelsy, at one Mr. Mandy his house, we took an
opportunity to give this our old friend a visit; at which time we put him in
mind of what he had formerly pressed us to, which he willingly at that time
performd, and gave us this in charge with it that we should not take any Copy
of it during his life, but read it as often as we would over, and when we had
so done, then to seal it up with both our seals, and let it rest in one of our
hands, till God should please to dispose of him, or to this effect, then it to
be our own; So it was sealed up with my seal, and kept by Mr. Fromanteel until
the time: And after this about some two Months before his death, he gave to Mr.
George Kendal another receipt, with his addition, at which time he did refer,
the one to the other to make it complete: yet the makers of the dunghill blush
not to affirm that he gave out no other Receipt after 59.

But when this Receipt was given, it was not that we should make it public, for
we heard n^^ thing at all then of his intent as to that thing, Only that it
might not be ingrost, in the hands of any particular person.

But a little before his death, Mr. Kendal and Mr. Fromanteel meeting by
accident at his house, being come there to visit him, he then spoke to them his
mind about the publishing his Pill, and gave them some order about it, if he
should not live to do it himself. On the next day, I not knowing any thing what
was past the day before about this business; I went to visit my sick Friend, at
which time he told me, that it was well that I was come; for says he here was
Mr. Kendal, and Mr. Fromanteel, yesterday, and I gave them order to publish the
Receipt, therefore if I should not live to do it my self, do you with them see
that it be done, or words to this effect be used, but set us no time in which
we should do it: so that we were wholly at liberty as to time.

Now it cannot well be imagined, but if we were to make it public, we might
also make use of it our selves, and thereby gain knowledge also of what we did
in making it public.

But in our debates about the publishing of it, we found by good testimony,
that there was an engagement laid upon our friend Richard Matthew, that he
should not make it known to its enemies; therefore we at that time concluded
rather to make it known only to its friends, and such as did make much use of
it, that so we might answer our engagement to him, and not violate his: in
order to which we gave out several Copies, and imparted the whole thing to
them, that is, both the first Receipt, and the addition, and that freely, and
refused it to none that we knew to be friends either to it or him: Which I
suppose the widow and her agent were aware of, and therefore did cast up that
dunghill in the beginning of their book, bespattering of us, to forestall us in
our work, and to keep people from working by our Receipt, or paper directions
as they call it, to blind the eyes of the people, and to make the pearl in our
hand as invallid as they could, and yet they themselves were fain to be
beholding to our receipt when they went to make it known, which I am very apt
to believe they would not have done, only they saw it was too public before
for their profit: I know not what else should make them clamor so against the
innocent, only the publickness of the Pill, and yet their cry is we break our
trust in not making it public; and thus they fill the ears of the Readers with
flatteries, and insinuations, and prejudice against them that have endeavored
both public good, and the preservation of the Pill in its purity: It is very
opposite to me to be in contension, or to meddle with such dirty spirits, only
I am with others provoked to give this plain and brief accout, by that
advantage they take at our silence, to say reproachfully, that we may with
shame sit down, having nothing in truth to say for our selves in this matter;
whereas I do solemnly profess to all to whom this may come, that the account
that I have here given, does not vary one word from the very truth of the
business; and what I have here said, I have said it in the words of truth, and
soberness, and so desiring the Reader if he please, but to compare their own
sayings, the one with the other, and it may easily be discovered where the
snake lies.

Mr. Fromanteel that is equally concerned with me in this business, is at
present at a distance from London, but I am very confident he will freely
subscribe to the truth of what I have here asserted.

But I will not detain you from the ensuing discourse, where you will find the
pearl taken out of the dunghill, and faithfully presented to your view; as it
was communicated both in the first Receipt, and the addition also. Thus having
given you a brief but true account of our thus bespattered actions, in all
plainness and honesty, I shall leave them to be considered of by the impartial
Reader, because truth seeks no corners, and shall subscribe my self.

Yours to my poor ability, and ready to serve any one, Jonathan Loddington.

An Appendix to the unlearned Alchymist, etc.
MEeting with a precious Pearl unhandsomly dealt with, and exposed to the view
of the world in a Dunghill, I could do no less, (the true owner making no have
to challenge it) then take it out from amongst the rubbish, and set it forth in
its native luster and purity, as well as my skill, who am but a young
practitioner, would enable me.

The Pearl is a receipt of an excellent Diaphoretical and Diuretical Pill,
committed to the custody of Mr. Richard Mathews, in the year 1655. by Mr. George
Starkey the first that found it out. What use Mr. Mathews made of it for the
public good and benefit of mankind, his Book entiruled, The unlearned
Alchymist, does in some measure manifest, and what emolument and profit he
reaped by it, the poor and necessitous in his life tasted, and his widow since
his death reapes the benefit of; though she has carried her self very unworthy
of that provision her husband made for her by means thereof, by abusing her
husbands friends to whom in love he comunicated the knowledge of it, wounding
the credit and reputation of the deceased, in seeking to cast dirt upon them:
but it is a needless thing to spend time in wiping away that dirt: there is
none that knows her and them, can give credit to those false and frivolous
aspersions that she bespatters them withal; neither is there any that had
knowledge of her deceased husband, that can be persuaded to believe, that he
would deal so unfaithfully with his friends, as to give them a counterfeit in
stead of a true receipt.

Mr Mathews having a crazy and weak body, was solicited by diverse (that had
much experience of the virtue of the pill,) not to suffer it to dye with him,
supposing him to be the first author of it (as he was generally reputed to be.)
In the year, therefore 1659, two of his intimate friends, viz. Ahasuerus
Fromanteel, and Jonathan Loddington coming to visit him, he gave them the
receipt, wishing them to read it over, and then to seal it up, and keep it:
requiring no other condition of them, then not to open it whilst he lived,
which take as it follows.

Take Equal parts of India, Salt Peter, and the best White Rhenish Tartar, and
pound them, and drive them through a hair sive, and in a yellow Pipkin, or new
Chamberpot of Earth set upon Charcole, put it in by Spoonfulls till all be
burned White: this is called the Salt of Tartar: note, if it will not fire,
touch it with a live Cole, and if it fire while this is warm, pound it to gross
powder, and put it in a well glased Dish, or which is better, a glass body, and
let it stand covered with the Oil of Turpentine two fingers high above the
Tartar, stir it with a wooden Spatul^, supply it with Oil that it be always
covered for six months, till it be open, and come to soap, and be of a body the
thickness of grease, or an Electuary: This is the true corrector of Opium, and
all vegetative Poisons, and the greatest Treasure in the world, for which we
bless God.

Take of this Corrector two pound, of Opium one pound, of white Hellebore in
powder one pound, of English Liquorish one pound let all be sufficiently
incorporated at several times by a strong arm in an iron mortar, be sure the
corrector have thorough ingresse, and have a care to choose Opium wrapped in
the leaf, else it may be sophisticated, and then it will loose it is operation.
This is in faithfulness the true Pil, whereof my bills and book speak, and you
have proved until December, 1659, R. M.

And whereas now it is affirmed, that Mr. Mathews made some addition to this
Pill after the giving forth this receipt, I shall give you that also, In
November 1661, which was the Month before that wherein he died, he gave this
also written with his own hand:

Take of the Corrector 3 pound.
Of Opium. 1 pound
Of white Hellebore, 1 pound.
Of black Hellebore, 1 pound.
Of Liquorish, 1 pound.
Incorporate them, etc. as in the former, and now to use Mrs Mathews own words:
There is no man that knew her husbands faithfulness, or had intimate
acquaintance with him, but will believe him against any contradiction
whatsoever. And therefore as she acknowledges the first to be a true receipt
according to his practice, until December 1659. which wrought most of the
eminent cures mentioned in his Book. So this must be tru^ for the last two
years of his practice, except she will say her Husband was at the last grown
false and unfaithful in what he declared to his friends with affirmations of
much candor and sincerity. Neither did he as he affirmed make this known, till
he had made sufficient provision for his wise to live upon without it, which
being done, it was his resolution had he lived, to have published it to the
world, saying often he would not leave it in a particular hand, for his people
were so careless, he knew they would spoil it.

Here you have the Pearl faithfully as he left it, and that it might not be
disesteemed in regard of the paucity of the ingredients, or feared by reason of
the dangerousness of them, there being much malignity in some of them, and
therefore cried down by the Doctors, to whose gain this is, and has been very
prejudicial. I shall briefly give a touch upon the particulars thereof, and
first for the corrector which is in the Receipt affirmed to be the greatest
treasure in the world, and doubtless it is a treasure of excellent value if
rightly prepared.

It consists of a fixed Salt, and an essential oil brought by a due
fermentation into a Tertium Neutrum, distinct from either of them.

The Salt in the Receipt is called the Salt of Tartar, for the powerfulness
whereof, in regard the Pill has much credit upon Mr. Mathews account, I shall
produce his testimony. In the latter end of his book entitled, The Unlearned
Alchymis^, he gives you a Receipt, the like whereof he confidently affirms never
saw the Light for the good of mankind, and in the midst of his high encomium's
of it, he has this expression, If thou (as blind as bayard) cry out of the
strong poison of the subjects, viz. Poppy and black Hellebore, thou snarling
fool cease, and first learn the power of Salt of Tartar, and do not bewray thy
folly and ignorance, till thou have proved it is power, lest thou give occasion
of perpetual laughter unto those whom experience has taught and informed. Sal
sapit Omnia, Salt makes all things savoury. Every one knows it is virtue in
preserving things from putrefaction: and amongst all fixed Salts there is none
so powerful as that of Tartar, which Van Helmont calls, Sua inter alcalia
respublica: Diascorides affirms it to be cleansing, heating, binding, eating
and drying, It purifieth the blood, and purges the body (says Mullerus) in
the most deplorable diseases. It makes Medicines of it self of excellent
virtues according to the several ways of preparing of it, and mixed with
other ingredients it corrects the venom, and exceedingly exalts the virtue of
the simples to which it is joined. It is of singular use in the extracting the
tincture and essence of Vegetables. Neither is the Salt Peter (though it be
here chiefly used for the burning of the Tartar,) without singular virtue, as
may be abundantly seen in the writings of several who have treated of it. It
resists putrefactions, quenches thirst, incideth the Tartareous humors in the
body, resolves coagulated blood, and eases pain, and therefore is frequently
used in Fevers; (and those the most malignant) the Collect, Plurisie,
peripneumony, stone of the Reins and Bladder, and obstruction of the Liver, and
mesereum, for these and other distempers it is variously prepared.

The Lapis Prunellae, the mineral Saccharat Crystal, the Corallate Niter,
sweet Salt, Panacaea Duplicata, or Duplicate, Arcanum of Minsicht, the Spirit
of Niter, the flowers and tincture, with other excellent medicines highly cried
up by many authors, have this for their Basis.

But all salts per se are of a sharp and corrosive nature, which is taken a
way by the addition of, and fermentation with essential Oils, til they be
saciated with them, and become one body, and so they may be made an excellent
Balsome.

Now among all essential Oils there is not any in the vegetable family does
excel the Oil or Spirit of Terebinth, or Turpentine which is admirably
Diuretic, and Abstersive, healing both outwardly and inwardly, as it is very
well known to experienced Physicians and Surgeons. It is hot, emollient,
discutient, opening and purging. Beguinus says it helps the Cough and
ptysick, it resists pestilent Poison, purges the Stomach, provokes Urine,
expels the Stone, helps the Strangury, and Ulcers of the Bladder, it opens
and strengthens the Nervous-parts, dissolveth coagulated blood, and helps
the Matrix. Large are the encomiums that by many are given of it, and it is
plentifully to be had without danger of being adulterated.

With this Oil the Salts are to be so long digested, till being fully opened
they drink up thrice their quantity in weight, which you shall in the operation
see them after some time greedily as it were thirsting for; with which they are
to be supplied till they are fully satisfied; neither as yet is there a firm
union, for after this the Salt will cast forth all the Oil again and betake it
self to the bottom, and then become obdurate like a coy Lover, that has taken
offense, seeming hard to be reconciled: yet after this with many solicitations
and much patience, it will yield to entertain, and embrace the Oil again, and to
have the Gordian knot knit which cannot be losed. This is a six-months work at
least, yea I have by experience found it in some above a twelvemonth before it
has been brought to perfection, and if some may have a more speedy way, and
can facilitate their work, yet knowing the proverb, difficilia quae pulchra, I
shall with the poet say,

Accipe tu facilem, Da miht Dificilem. This is the corrector of all Vegetables;
yea the most truculent and virulent stripping them of all their Poisonous and
hurt full qualities, and making them safe, and excellently medicinable: This
does ripen the crudities, separate the Gummousnes, correct the venom, and
exalt the virtue of all simples, and makes them truly diffusive of their virtue
through all the parts of the body: where as if they be taken crude, or
according to the Galenical way of preparation, they only disturb the stomach,
irritate the Archeus of nature, which being enraged may cast forth what is in
the stomach and bowels, and so that which is bad being cast out with the good,
some benefit may by accident be obtained by them, yet not without prejudice to
the patient, the Faeces of the drugs remaning behind, which after leave
dangerous consequences.

Let him that prepares this be sure there be an entire union between the Oil
and the Salt, and a transmutation of the Oily Sulphur into a saline nature;
which may be known by this as by a sure sign viz. if they will dissolve in any
liquor without separating any Oylynes swiming on the top, and then is it made
truly volatile, and may by an experienced hand be dissolved, and distilled, and
of it a Spirit made of far more excellent virtue.

The vegetables of which this Pill is composed come next in place to be treated
of, whose properties are in every Herbal set forth, yet in regard every one
that shall desire to make use of this Pill, may not be furnished with those
Books: I conceive it will be of use to give you a brief account of what Authors
have writ of them.

The Opium and the two Hellebores: have admirable virtues in them, though in
regard of a venomous quality, connatural to them, they have Nol^me tangere writ
upon them without a due correction, but when that virulency is by a due
correction extinguished, they prove admirably efficacious for releife in, and
the cure of many, not only ordinary distempers, but astonishing and desperate
diseases.

And first for the Opium, it is a great Narcotick, and therefore cried down as
a Stupefactive Lethal ingredient by many physicians, and yet it is a chief
ingredient in many of their principal Antidotes; witness Mitridate,
Diascordium, Venice and London treacle, Philonium, Laudanum, and other
medicines, of which he that peruses their Dispensatoryes, may furnish himself
with a catalogue: what they correct the malignity of the Opium with in those
medicines, let the makers of them seriously consider, I am confident there is
no way proposed in those Dispensatoryes that is sufficient to do it; except the
multiplicity of ingredients do drown in part their virulency, together with
part of their virtue: The Stupefactive venom of Opium consists in the
Sulphurous part of it, which by often made factions with this correctour and
drying again is exhaled, and then it becomes amicable to nature, and does
powerfully put forth the following virtues.

1. There is an anodinous virtue eminently appearing in the operation of it,
whereby it quietly asswages pain in a pleasing and almost insensible way,
driving out what is offensive. It is that Nepenthe Homer speaks of.

-- (...) -- It frees from Choler, and trouble, and obliterates all evils.
Delenefica vi (...) moderatur et expultricem facultatem, iratumque archeum
placat, Circea quasi virga tactum. It moderates the sensitive and expulsive
faculty, and pacifies the enraged Archeus, as it were with a charm, and this
not by stupefying the senses, or laying (as some frequently affirm by this
Pill,) the distemper asleep, as some of the following virtues will make more
manifest.

2. Upon this depends a somniferous virtue (...) asswaging pain it does usually
bring to a quiet sleep; not stupefying and hurtful when duly corrected, but
most pleasing and refreshing to the senses, making the spirits more fresh and
lively after it.

3 It is excellent for the staying of all fluxes bloody, and dysenterial as
well as others. It dryes up Rheumes and Cattarhes that destil and drop upon the
Lungs, it stays a looseness, and corrects the immoderate working of any purging
medicament.

4. It has a singular virtue in the repressing, and mitigating the violent
fits of Agues and Fevers, and in curing of them. Trallianus in his 12th Book,
Chap. 8. commends for singular antidotes in the cure of Fevers, those which
have Opium in their composition: and Galen himself in his book of the way of
curing Fevers, does affirm that (...) w^ch is our Venice treacle (known to
most to have Opium for one of the principal ingredients) to be of great
efficacy for the removing of Fevers.

5 It is eminently sudorifique, purging the body by sweat more effectually then
any other Vegetable whatsoever, and this not in a troublesome offensive way, but
in a sweet pleasing manner, composing the spirits without desire of moving, or
tumbling from place to place, (as is usual in other sweating) whereby it
purges the superflous and offensive humors from all the parts of the body. And
how effectual and safe such diaphoreticks, are even in deplorable diseases, few
are ignorant of. Now that the sweat proceeds from the taking of Opiate
medicines is principally caused by the Opium, take Diascorides his testimony
(...) The very smell of the Opium is spread through the whole body. The sweat
procured by that means oftentimes having the very sent of the Opium.

6 It is also Diuretic, purging by Urine, which is not so evident in the
quantity, as the quality of it, being more high colored, bringing away slimy
stuff often like rags, and frequently causing both Gravel and stone to be
voided.

7 It has also a purgative faculty, where there is need of it. Frequent
experience (says a learned doctor) has taught us, that two or three grains of
the Opiate Laudanum being given at night, has purged both upwards and
downwards in the morning, which quality proceeds from the bitterness of it:
Opium says Quercetanus is bittter by reason of the Salt, which being separated
from its Oil, or Narcotick Sulphur, is no less purging than all other bittter
things, as Gentian, Centory, and the like: and Van Helmont makes mention of an
Opiate medicine he gave in the evening, which caused a vomit the next morning,
took away the (...) and by spitting purged away the phlegm

8 It is very powerful for the expulsion of wind, and that to admiration. It
asswages the torments, and gripings of the Stomach, and bowels, and drives out
the wind, both (...) upwards and downwards. The true cause of all gripings
(says my author) is a preter-naturall acidity, which is hostile wherever it is
found. Now acidity has the Spleen for its seat, and is the ferment of the
stomach, by which the digestion is performed, but if this acidity be
overexalted there, it causes torments, and wringing gripings, usually called,
Orexis Stomach^, and if the least acidity descend into the bowels, Meseraickes
or messenteriall vessels, not fully transmuted into a Saline nature, it there
also causes torments, and pain with ventosity, and flatulent winds. To these
Opium is specifically accomodated, (when corrected) both giving ease in the
tormenting griping pains, and extinguishing the malignant acidity, which is the
cause of them.


These are the virtues that by authors of good esteem are attributed to Opium,
and if any of them seem to be opposite to, or contradicting of others, be not
too hasty in rejecting all, and passing a rash sentence on the discourse,
several parts of the same simple are found by the experienced to have
different effects, the Sulphurous part may work one way, and the Saline a
quite contrary way, and the same thing may have different effects, according to
the subject they work upon differing in their temperatures; what binds one man,
has by experience been found to loosen another. Quicquid recipitur agit ad
modum recipiertis. And this noble Vegetable being duly corrected, is made so
friendly to nature, that it becomes wholly serviceable to it, assisting it in
the performing of that service the patient that makes use of it stands most in
need of.

The other simples in this composition that are powerful in operation, are the
two Hellebores, of which also a large catalogue of virtues are in herballs
described, the principal whereof I shall briefly lay down. They are both said
to be dry and hot in the third degree, and the black hotter than the White;
this cleanses the stomach by vomit, the other the bowels by stool, and both
purge away superfluous humors. They were anciently esteemed as the appropriate
medicine to purge away melancholy distempers, and cure Madness that proceeded
from them, as appears by Martial.

Dauda est Hellebori multo pars Maxima avaris;
Nescio an Anticyram ratio illis destinet omnem
I know not (says he) whether the whole sland Anticyra be not by reason
appointed ^o bring forth Hellebore to cure the mad^ess of covetous persons: And
certainly ^here are none more mad than those who ^ake Gold their God, and Gain
their God^^ness; that prefer Earth before Heaven, and ^azard the perpetual loss
of their souls, for ^he obtaining a little wealth to look upon ^nly, for to
make use of it they have not ^earts. Such mad men are they, that for a ^ade in
the world have sold their liberties, ^^d brought themselves into bondage: and
(...) mad are they that will part with Truth and ^ighteousness, wherein the
Image of Christ ^^nsists, to scrape together a little pelf, which ^^ey neither
stand in need of, or can expect ^^ng to enjoy. I wish her that challenges the
^^le propriety in this Pill, to be made sen^^le of the indirect means she has
used, by ^^nting lies and slanders to defame others, ^^d other underhand
dealings, that she ^ight thereby ingross all into her own ^^nds; and being
convinced of her own ^^stemper, I shall advise her to use a right way of
recovery, not Hellebore which the Poet points unto, but what the great
Physician prescribes to the Rich man, Luke 18.22. or the course that Zacheus
took, Luke 19. But to return to the matter in hand, the Hellebores are not
only a medicine for the phrenzy, but commended also for the opening the Liver,
and healing the imperfections thereof, purging the Head, and curing the
Meagrim* Parkinson tells us of a Helleborisme much commended by Mathiolus, and
Faber gives a high commendation of his Arcanum purga^^ radicis Hellebori, which
in an admirable manner purges the head and stomach, which are the principal
fountain and seat of the giddiness and meagrim, and that without trouble or
fear of any convulsion, for the Hellebore in its dissolution loses whatsoever
venom it had naturally in it, and is wonderfully altered. And these Pills,
says a learned Writer do alone cure the Meagrim safely, speedily and
pleasantly. The same Author tells us (...) a Pill which he calls, Extractum seu
Chylism^ catholicum and holagogum, which brings awa^ promiscuously all peccant
humors, that hat^ both the Hellebores for part of their ingredients. Being well
corrected and rightly prepared they are exalted in their virtues for the cure
not only of the diseases mentioned a^ready, but many others also, which by the
^xperienced in physic they are reckoned ap^ropriated unto; as Colds and Coughs
^^ough of long continuance: Cramps, Con^ulsions, Sciatica, Gout, shrinking of
the Si^ews, Toothache, Dropsy, Epilepsie or Fal^^ng Sickness, the Jaundice
black and yellow, ^^eprosie, pains in the belly, Ruptures and ^orms: the weight
of a twopence of the ^owder (says an approved Author) cures ^n Ague. But
thus much briefly of the two ^ellebores, which I have joined together as ^eing
efficacious for the cure of the same dis^ases.

The last of the ingredients is the Liquo^ice, which (as Galen says) is sweet,
having (...) little astriction joined with it, making it ^emperate in heat and
astriction, that is the ^earest to our temper, but because the safety and
goodness of it is very well known: And because an inconsiderate quantity
thereof is taken in a Pill, not likely to have any emi^ent operation distinct
from the other ^pecies, and was added by Mr. Mathews (as ^e has told me)
chiefly to make up the bulk, shall therefore say no more of it.

The powerful ingredients of this Pill (you ^^e) are few, and thereby it is
rendered more ^^fficacious, for where multitudes are put into a composition,
they prove usually but as (...) clog to each other to hinder their proper
operations.

You have here the Pil anatomised, and (...) description of the several parts
whereof (...) consists, with their power and virtue, and (...) singly by
themselves, they are of such efficacy as you have-here set down: Vis unita
fort^ or. What will they not do when united, and not barely united, but
corrected of their venomous qualityes, and enobled with s^ powerful a Balfome,
as exalts their virtue to the utmost, making them truly freindly to our
natures.

And surely though they do not attain to be a universal medicine, yet they are
of a very large extent, witness the catalogue of cures performed by them, put
out by Mr. Mathews* Neither are the Pills made by others according to the
directions which are here laid down destitute of testimony of their success in
the cure of the most of the diseases mentioned in the bills given forth with
them, diverse have brought me relations of singular benefit they have reaped by
them they had from me of my preparing: some have been freed from Agues and
Fevers by them, others cured of Colds and Coughs, some that had pains in their
Limbs that they could not without great difficulty walk a coits cast or ^wo, by
the taking 2 or 3 Pills, have been able with ease to walk a mile or two, others
that ^ave had stones brought from them to admi^^ation: An ancient woman lately
brought ^hree stones to show me, that by the taking ^ or 3 of my Pills she had
come from her. A ^ilkman who is very ancient was troubled with making of bloody
water, in such a man^er that he could not walk a bow shot but ^e was afflicted
with it in a very painful man^er, was by my Pills perfectly cured of that
distemper, though he was hardly persuaded ^o take them, or continue the use of
them, ^aving been told by some expert in Physic, that his grief was incurable:
the same person was lately troubled with a fit of the Stone, that he lay
roaring for pain, and then taking (...) Pill, he was brought to a gentle sweat
and ^est, and in his sleep had a stone came from ^im insensibly, of the bigness
of a small bean with the raking whereof he was so sore afterward, that for 2
or 3 days he could not ^old his water, and by the taking of a Pill or ^wo more
he was cured of that also. The wife of the same man a very ancient woman,
^aving been long troubled with an Asthma, ^f which she could get no cure, was
by this ^ill she had from me set at liberty.

They which sell of my Pills can tell you of many examples. One that sells my
Pills in London, had lately a gallant came to him, who affirmed that by a
quarter of an ounce of Pills of my making, he was cured of an Ague when the
Doctors had done their utmost endeavors to remove it; and at last had given
him the Jesuits Powder, their Ultimum refugium in such cases, but all proved
fruitless. I call it their Ultimum refugium, because a Neighbor of mine, a
Gentleman, of a full purse, lately sick of an Ague, had for a long space the
Doctors come every day to visit him, first one single, and after a while a
couple, till at length his wife seeing them to spin out the time for their own
gain, begun to grow something impatient, and then they prescribed this powder,
under the title of Pulvis Peruvianus. The same person had a Gentleman told him
in brief, I could tell you of wonders wrought by the Pills, I had of you (which
were of my preparing.) A poor man lately came to his shop for some Pills, and
told that he had spent what he had upon the Physicians without help, and now he
was advised by a learned Doctor to get of those Pills, for if they would not
cure him nothing would.

So high an opinion had this learned man of the Pill, that he preferred it
before any other medicine the Apothecaryes shop could afford.

This causes me to remember another relation I had from an honest Minister who
has had many Pills from me, whom being recovered from a desperate distemper by
the use of the Pill, a doctor of his acquaintance came to visit, he related to
the Doctor in what condition he had been, with the means of his recovery; the
other who at other times has been very lavish in exclaiming against this Pill,
gave him this serious counsel. Let me advise you as a friend (says he) to make
use of this Pill never but in cases of extremity; which is in effect thus. In
small and ordinary distempers make use of our prescriptions, but being you are
my friend, let me advise you when your life lies at the stake, and comes to be
hazarded, trust not to them, but make use of this as a more powerful medicine.

I might multiply examples of several cures wrought by them in persons of all
ages and sexes, women with child and some in childbed, who by their midwives
and friends and Physicians also have been esteemed past recovery, yet by this
means principally God has been pleased to raise them up. I could tell you
their names and places of habitation if it were requisite. I might also present
you with the relations I have had from persons that have made use of my Pills
in several counties, as Lincolnshire, Dorsetshire, Devonshire,
Northamtonnsheire, etc. Where a blessing has gone along with Pills of my
preparing in the doing of many eminent cures. But I forbear to set down
particulars, as affecting brevity: These may serve to make it evident to all
persons that are not incurably possessed with prejudice, that we have the true
Receipt of the Pil, with the manner of preparing it, whatever is or may be
asserted to the contrary; and we have been directed and assisted by Mr.
Andrews, a man of known integrity; who made the Pill for Mr. Mathews, before
ever he made it himself, and was for some time his sole operator, when he began
to be in credit for the Pill. Yea Mr. Starkey who was the first inventor of the
Pill, has not been wanting in declaring to us, not only the Manual operation,
but also the Nature of it, and ways to improve it, and alter it as need
requires

I could give a particular answer to those scandalous personal reflections,
that Mrs. Mathews bills, advertisement, and book swarms with, and show the
falsehood and invalidity of them, but this may prove nauseous to unconcerned
persons, and therefore I shall be silent in it, and only declare that out of a
love to peace and truth, there has been by my self, and the others she
exclaims against, a hearing desired, with a promise, that if it could be made
appear; to the judgment of any indifferent rational man, that we had either
injured her or dealt any ways unfaithfully, that we would acknowledge the
wrong, and make such satisfaction, as by such persons should be judged
expedient; but this has been always refused.

I shall now briefly speak something to the manner of taking of this Pill, with
the way of it is working. The Pill is ordinarily to be taken at night when going
to bed, with a cup of Sack, White Wind, Ale or Beer drank after it, to carry it
down, the Veh^cle is to be appropriate to the disease, if it be for an Ague a
cup of Sack, or some cordial liquor is best; if for a Fever without an Ague a
cup of White Wind is more proper; if for purging the Reins and Bladder of Stone
or Gravel, White wine is the best, being the more Diuretic: here discretion is
to be made use of, as also in the quantity of the dose, which must be according
to the age, temperature, and strength of the patient. Reason will teach you to
give a very small quantitity of it to a child, whereas 10, 12 or 14 grains is
an ordinary dose for a man or woman, yea 20 grains (if it be well prepared, and
the virulency of the simples, by frequent made-factions, and exsiccations be
extinguished) will not disturb or afflict the Patient with troublesome
symptoms; neither then is it the less efficacious, as some practitioners
fondly conclude who suppose that medicine to be best, which does with a small
quantity disturb nature, and manifest its violent operation; for the virtue of
a medicine consists not in the Vomative, laxative, or deleteriall qualities
thereof which disturb nature, and enrage the Ancheus, causing tumults and
perturbations: but their excellency consists in their amicable and pleasing
serviceableness to nature; whereby at the same time they refresh, and recreat
the Vital Spirits, and dissolve all preternaturall excrements, and
coagulations.

It is the commendation of a good medicine, to cure not only tuto and cito,
safely and speedily, but also pleasantly; and then does the medicine do it is
work the best when it is so prepared, that a large dose of it may be taken with
the least Perturbation of the head and stomach, which make some rash ignorant
persons to dislike it and lay it aside as void of virtue, to such I shall invert
the order of the Poets choice.

Da Mihi tu Facilem, accipe difficilem. It is not necessary to tie the patient
to any rules of diet in the time of using this Pill; only let the food be
nutritive, and the drink cordial, both used with moderation.

The operation of this Pill is generally by sweat, where there are many peccant
humors to be purged out, which in some persons are more insensibly transmitted
through the pores than in others. It is the opinion of some able doctors, that
thin lean bodies that sweat least by an insensible transpiration, send sorth
more in vapors then gross and corpulent bodies that sweat most violently, and
this they affirm they have found true by infallible demonstration, having at
several times taken the weight of such persons, with the weight of their food
and excrements. If therefore there be not such violent sweating wrought by it
in thee as in others, do not presently conclude it to be of no efficacy, but
have a little patience in the use of it, and probably thou may have a cure
wrought in a more insensible way.

And here I cannot but admire at the impatience and folly of many persons, who
because they have not a perfect cure wrought by the taking of 2 or 3 Pills,
sometimes by one, will lay it aside as altogether inefficacious; when as if a
Doctor prescribes a course of Physic to them, they will be punctual in
observing his rules many weeks, yea months, and not reap much sensible benefit
by it. All the Doctors art and skill is grounded on his own or other men's
experience, whose works and writings he gives credit to, upon a bare
affirmation; yea the knowledge of the virtue and efficacy of all simples, as
also compound medicaments, has it not experience for the Original? and shall
not those experiences that are evident before our eyes, and which we have
certain testimony of prevail as much with us, as the bare affirmations of
others, who it may be (and often is so) speak not from any ground at all, but
their own imaginations?

It is cause of mourning to behold both Doctors and the generallity of people
deluded by them, to continue so heathenish as to give more credit to Galen and
Hypocrates for the welfare of their bodies, than the word of God himself for
the good of both soul and body. But there is a vail which is not yet taken
away, that blinds the eyes of men both in this and other things.

I do not go about to persuade any to make use of it so long without visible
success as to have it come to the charge of an Apothecarys bill, or as a
Doctors visit. I never yet knew any that had patience, to take so much as comes
to the ordinary price of a single potion, but have thought their Money well
bestowed.

My first acquaintance with this Pill arose upon my being visited with the
gout, my pain was very great, and my lameness such that I could not walk in my
chamber without crutches. The first Pil I took wrought some mitigation of the
pain, but I continued it a good space before I had a perfect cure. I first cast
away one crutch, and after a while the other, neither left I the use of the
Pill, but as often as I either felt or feared the fit approaching, I made use
of the Pill again; and so with the diligent use of it, my disease is totally
eradicated, and blessed be God, I have not had a fit of it, for some years past.

My wife also being sorely afflicted with the Meagrim and extreme pain in her
head, seeing the benefit I had reaped by it, was persuaded to the use of it,
and though at first or second Pill, she found little amendment, yet at 7 or 8
times taking of it she had a full cure.

And whereas it is the fear of some, that the frequent use of them will beget
such a habit in the body, that they cannot live healthfully without them, (as
it is with those that accustomed themselves to Tobacco,) my own experience can
evince the contrary, for I may safely say, that neither I or my wife take the
quantity of a quarter of an ounce in a year, such is the goodness of God to us,
that we enjoy far more health then we have done for a long time formerly, and
never have recourse to these, except when some cold or other distemper ceases
upon us.

The great objection against this Pill, is, that it generally binds the body,
though some are loosened by it: for your satisfaction in that particular, I
refer you to Mr. Mathewes Book, in the 76 and 77 sections or Paragraph.

This by the variation of some of the ingredients, (as by a skilful hand may be
done) may be amended.

If more particular directions for the use of this Pil be desired, I refer you
to the rules and examples laid down by Mr. Mathews in his Book, to which in
what I write, I desire to be serviceable, not destructive; it being his request
to us in his sickness, that we should publish this Receipt with his Book.

This therefore may be adjoined to it as an Appendix, and will do more service
to the public than the Dunghill there intruded, which being according to its
name, it is high time, the Scavenger should carry it out from amongst the
habitations of civil people.

And now as a cloze I shall give you the copy of the Receipt, as it was given
to me by the first author of it, Mr. George Starkey.

Rec. The best Tartar, and Saltpeter equally balanced, Pulverised, and mixed,
of each a pound, or at pleasure, put the ingredients in an iron kettle that is
clean; fire them with a coal, and they will burn with an impetuous noise, after
the flushing is over stir the Mass with an iron rod diligently till the redness
cease, and the Mass will become a very white Salt, of the nature both of the
Tartar, and Salt Niter, which is a noble Salt, and gives a very efficacious
Alkali.

Or if you rather desire the Alkali of Tartar alone, take of it what quantity
you please, and send it either to the Glass-house; or Pot-house to calcine, and
it will become a white cake of Salt.

But in my Pyrotechny asserted, I gave reason why Tartar calcined with
Saltpeter is no less inferior to (in some cases excelling) the Salt of Tartar
(Per^se) by bare concremation

To make which the more effectual as to its Alkalisate strength, take of this
Tartar so calcined by Niter, and in a strong crusible let it flow in a wind
Furnace, pour it out when it is fully melted, and you shall have an Alkalisate
mass, of a bluish color like potash, easily melting in the air; of a most
excellent Alkalisate sharpness, which Salt so prepared, is recommended to the
studious Artist.

This, or the Calcinate of bare Tartar, let the Artist take (as he pleases)
and dissolve in boiling water, which after agitation (twice or thrice) being
settled and decanted clear, let it be boiled up to a dryness, which is the fixed
Salt, or Alkali of Tartar purified.

To make it clear and white as Crystal: Having dissoived the Lixivium from the
Alkali of either the Salt of Tartar single, or as was taught with Salt Niter,
by Concremation and Fusion: Let then an infusion of quicklime be made, of
which being settled, let equal part in respect to the Lixivium be added, and
the mixture let stand about ten or fourteen days covered with a cloth from
dust, then decant all the liquor, which will be clear like to running water,
and the Salt when dry being boiled in a clean vessel (from which it shall take
no tincture) will be white as the purest Cristal.

Of this Salt (made very dry) take a pound, or what quantity you please, of Oil
of Tererebinth, or any other distilled Oil three pound, put the Salt into a
vessel that is firm and broad, pour on so much Oil as will cover the Salt from
the air, let it stand, and with a pestle stir the mass daily twice or thrice,
so will the the Oil gradually be drunk up of the Salt, which must again be
renewed and daily stirred and ground together till the whole three pound in
respect to one of Salt be imbibed; the whole will become a white Cream by the
union of the Salt and Oil together. This is at least six months work.

In this union of the Oil and Salt the Alkalisate corrosiveness of the one is
allaied by the unctuosity of the other, and both made temperate, to the
correcting of the malignity and venom of the most truculent vegetables.

Your Cream or Corrector made as before is taught, and having stood its time
till it will dissolve in any liquor, without separating the least oyliness at
the top, which is a sure sign of an entire union of both, and a transmutation
of the oily Sulphur into a Saline nature. Take of your best Opium (if very
pure) if not dissolved, filtred and by evaporation drawn to the consistency of
a Rob, one pound or what you please of white Hellebore pondered and finely
searc'd, two parts to one of the Opium, of the Cream as much as will serve to
bring it to the consistency of a Pill, beat them well together and dry them in
a dish covered from dust; cut if you will the mass into thin slices, and so
moisten it again, beating it up still, and repeating this till the mass when
dried weigh double in respect to the Species: then with oil of Turpentine alone
beat it up to the consistency of a Pill, and keep it about three weeks ere you
use it, and it is fit for use. Only the older it is, the better it will be.

Comparing this and the former receipt, we shall not stand in need of a judge
endued with the wisdom of Solomon to decide who is the true Father of the
child, one of a meaner capacity may determine the controversy; and if any
shall still doubt, I shall desire them to read seriously Mr. Starkey's
Pyrotechny-asserted, and he shall there though in more obscure terms see the
foundation and ground of it.

It will be needless to say any thing for the explaining this Receipt, having
spoken already to all the ingredients. But here you may see some variety in the
Alkali. The way prescribed to purisie the Salt is worth your serious
consideration. The Tartar cannot be brought to so pure a Salt by burning, but
you shall have some feculency adhering to it, which by this means is taken away.

The Art and manner of the composition is of singular concernment. The Opium
(whereof that which comes from the Streights is best) cannot be cleansed
without dissolution, in the doing whereof not any of the virtue is diminished:
and if it be done with spirit of wine it rather helps to the correcting of it.

The several moistenings and dryings of the Pill is of excellent use; by this
means the Sulphurous part of the Opium, in which the malignity consists, is
exceedingly wasted, and totally subdued.

And now whosoever thou art that shall undertake the making of this Pill, see
that thou be very cautious. Thou dealest with dangerous subjects. It is not
a work for a raw or careless youth.

Two or three things are much feared in the publishing this Receipt. The one,
lest that the making of this Pill be adventured on by indiscreet persons that
want judgment, or careless and rash persons that shall without due caution and
circumspection mix these things together, and they not being brought to
maturity, may retain their noxious qualityes, and so have dangerous
consequences. I have several times heard Mr. Mathews say, that he durst not
trust bis people in this, for if his eye was not on them, they were very
subject to do amiss, an evident experience of whose carelessness was seen in the
last preparation for the Pills he made before his death; but let such persons
consider that this Receipt is not made authentic by being inserted in the
dispensatories, and therefore if any miscary by it through want of due
preparation, they must not expect to have their fault buried in the Grave,
without being questioned, as is too usual in those miscariages that are by
authorized Physicians.

The second thing feared is lest this falling into the hands of mercenary men
(who mind their own gain, more then other men's good) this medicine may be
spoiled, and rendered inefficatious; and that either by making use of decayed
drugs, which have lost their virtue, or such as are adulterated, as much of the
Opium which is brought from the Jndies is; if credit be to be given to that
excellent Herbarist, Mr. John Parkinson. Or it may be spoiled with additionall
mixtures, that are either of little value, or of a contrary nature, either of
which may so clog the due ingredients, that they shall not be able to put forth
their true virtue. This has been the lot of many excellent medicaments which
have been reported to be of admirable efficacy in their first Original and
rise, but now they are become contemptible, and destitute of that power and
virtue they at first appeared endued withal. The Epithites of Sophisticate,
and adulterated, are not more commonly, than truly given to many medicines that
are usually sold. I will instance only in the Oil of Amber, a thing of
singular virtues, if rightly prepared from the pure and simple amber, many
authors have written very highly of the praise thereof, and my own experience,
with the relations I have had from several persons, who have had of this from
me, has confirmed the truth of their writings. For farther satisfaction, you
may read what Mr. Mathews affirms of it in several places of his book,
principally in that part, which gives directions how to draw it. But this Oil
of Amber that is commonly sold by the Druggists, and Apothecaryes, is by some
of them that are more candid, and ingenuous than others, acknowledged to be a
great part of it Oil of Turpentine, or at the best Oil of Spike, only the
Amber over ruling, in giving it the sent and tincture; for (say they) were it
pure and simple without mixture, it could not be afforded at that low price it
is sold at: How weak and inconsiderate are those persons, that having occasion
to make use of that Oil, or other the like things, will to save a little in the
price, buy trash to put into their bodies, or for outward applications, which is
likely to afford them little or no releif; and how Sordid are those
practitioners, that will obtrude it upon their patients, or direct them to the
use of such debilitated and invallid medicaments.

The third thing feared is, lest the very names of the Opium and Hellebores do
so affright weak and timorous persons, that they shall not dare to make use of
it: and truly this is the bugbear that doctors do labor to deter people from
the use of it by, Take heed (say they) what you do, there is Opium in it, and
Opium will be Opium when all is done to it that can be done, whereas this Opium
is a principal ingredient, in many of their prime medicines, as I have
formerly showed, and to use Mr. Parkinson's own words, It is an ingredient of
much respect in those great compositions of Therica, Mithridaetum etc. the like
may be said of the Hellebores.

But let such persons consider, that as the only wise God placed Cherubims
with a flaming sword to keep the way of the Tree of Life; so he has fenced and
armed those simples which have most virtue in them for the recovery of man's
lost health with some venom that must by wisdom and diligence be destroyed by
them that would enjoy the benefit of them. The bush that bears the fragrant
Rose has its sharp prickles, and the Be that affords the sweetest honey is
armed with a sting, which he that will gather the honey must take heed of. And
if it be lawful to compare temporal things with spiritual, I may say, true
Chemical preparations do somewhat resemble the work of the All-powerful God in
the mystery of Regeneration, wherein he makes choice of the worst of men many
times to make of them the most active instruments for the propagating his Truth
and glory. Saul the greatest of sinners is made by him the chiefest of the
Apostles, and one that labored more abundantly than all the rest in the work
of the Ministry: where true mortification and renovation passes upon such as
have been the most deadly enemies to the Church and cause of Christ, they
become the most glorious instruments for the advancing his kingdom. Yea such
is that inbred corruption that is adhaerent to the best of natures, that as
Christ says, except a man be born again, he cannot see the Kingdom of God.
This is a received truth in the Theory, but how a verse are we generally from
embracing it in the practical part of it. Paul tells us Gal. 2.20. that he is
crucified with Christ, and that he lives not but Christ lives in him, he was
taken off from the activity of his own natural principles, and now solely
carried forth, and acted by the Spirit of Christ: do not our actions declare the
contrary of us? there is none I suppose so void of reason, as to affirm that
their earthly sensual earnall actings are the product of that pure, and
imaculate Spirit of the Lord Jesus. On that all that challenge the name of
Christian, would seriously confider this; he is a true Christian indeed, that
can say with Paul: the world is crucified unto me, and I unto the world: I am
no more enamoured with, or have my affections set upon the world, or the things
of it, than they would be upon a dead carcass, yea such a contemptible carcass,
as has been executed on a Cross or Gallows: and I am crucified to the world:
A man that is dead can feel no injury that is done to him, strip him, cut him,
mangle him, dispose of his body at your pleasure he is not sensible of it. This
is the happy condition of a true Christian, his delight is not in the things of
this world, and makes it not his business to scrape them together, and grow
great here, neither is he affected with the affronts, and injuries that are
inflicted by the world, he is above the rage and malice thereof, and he is made
thus free by true mortification. It is a hard thing to be brief in this
subject, I hope it will not be taken amiss being (I conceive) a seasonable
word.

In the like though far inferior manner is it with medicinal simples, the most
truculent of them, when once there is true mortification and destruction of
their virulency, are made not only safe, but admirably efficacious; yea the
best of them, have their crudities, and noxious qualities, which by decoctions,
digestions, or some other previous preparations, are to be destroyed before
they can be made wholly safe and Salutiferous. This work is fully done in this
Pill by them that rightly prepare it. The rose is gathered to your hand, the
sting is taken from the Be, and you may suck the honey without danger.

And now at the last I desire you to remember that I said this is not an
universal medicin, some diseases are so fixed and radicated, that they require
that which is more powerful, of which sort are some medicaments prepared from
mineral Sulphurs, of which the author of this Pil is seldom unfurnished. But
though it be not universal, yet it is of a very large extent, and he that shall
with a patient waiting for a blessing upon it, continue the use of it, will not
have need to seek for other, in the diseases to which the particular
ingredients are appropriated, or that arise from the distempers, that they are
powerful in the removing of: And now for the help of weak memories, I shall
adjoin at the end the copy of a Bill given ordinarily out with them, wherein you
have a catalogue of diseases, not at an adventure heaped together, but such as
by certain experience this Pill has been found helpful in.

POSTSCRIPT.
Courteous friend, and friendly Reader,
HAving now for a years time complete been acquainted with Mr. George Kendall,
the Author of this foregoing Treatise, and being informed by him of the
instructions he received from the Unlearned Alchymist as to the preparing of
that Diaphoretick and Diuretic Pill, I had occasion to acquaint my self with
his preparation as to the Encheiretical part, and in some particulars did
inform him, how by no great pains, and with a little cost he might better that
preparation tenfold; and moreover, how to exalt that very process only by a
secret in operation, beyond what Mr. Mathews ever wrought or knew, according to
which he has made his Pills to my knowledge as far exceeding the Unlearned
Alchymists, (which I fear will grow each day worse in his Widows hand, and is
no more then himself feared in his life time, of which I am witness) as a
pebble is exceeded in worth and value by a Diamond, as those who desire may
experiment in both; I may judge my self able to discern and determine as to
this particular, being the first Author of the Process that ever was known by
effect or writing in Europe or the World, and from whom he received what he
had, for other ends, and on other terms then he practiced after he knew it:
Several hundreds (among whom are many of Honor and Learning) know, that the
secret was known and used by me in the year 1651, five years before his name on
this score was known in the world; they therefore who will, may believe my
testimony, or else may by proof be convinced. How far yet this preparation has
by me been advanced, I shall declare at large in a Tractate speedily intended
to be made public, in which I shall give a large account, and make a desirable
discovery of such medicinal secrets, in comparison of which this will be
accounted trivial, although really excelling all Galenical Compositions. This
for the honor and justification of this learned and truly ingenous Author I
thought good to add, as a testimony and vindication of him from that fogg which
has endeavored to choke his credit, raised by an envious Muck-fork, raking in
a Dunghill in hopes to find a precious Pearl which is challenged by

GEORGE STARKEY who is a Philosopher by the Fire.
St. Thomas Apostles, next door to black Lion Court, at the Coffee-sign, October.
19. 1663.
THough by reason of my living at a distance from London, I could not appear at
the beginning of this work; yet I conceive it concerns me to give my testimony
to what has been in this Book affirmed: How our friend Mr. Mathews
communicated the receipt to me, and Jonathan Loddington, you have it faithfully
related by Jonathan Loddington: when it was given to George Kendal, I was
present; and can testify, that Mr. Mathews did affirm, that what alteration he
had made in his Pill, after he had given the receipt to us, was wholly
contained in this latter; and this he then gave him upon this condition (waving
all former proposals that had past between them) that he should promise to
perform such Articles as he himself should (when he had convenient leisure)
draw up: But it pleased God suddenly after this, to visit him with sickness;
and in that sickness, he did charge us all, as you have heard, to make it
public; if he lived, not to do it; which we had done before this, had we not
been prevented by that engagement, being made known to us, which he was under
to Mr. Starkey, the first Author of it; but now this is taken off by Mr.
Starkeys consent; so that now you have it not only by the appointment of the
reputed, but also by the consent of the true Author: you have it also fully
explained, as it was the purpose of Mr. Mathews to have done, had he published
it himself, so far as I could apprehend by what I have heard from him. As for
the groundless complaints, and false assertions of the Widow, I think them not
worth taking notice of, our consciences bear us witness, that we have not done
her any injury, or falsified any trust reposed in us by her deceased Husband.
This is thought fit to be added by me, who am

A lover of Truth and Peace AHASUERUS FROMANTEEL.

IF any person (notwithstanding what has been here asserted) be unsatisfied as
to the truth of the Receipt, I shall here give my testimony. I brought Mr.
Mathews first acquainted with Mr. Starkey, of whom we both received Pills for
our own use; and finding benefit by them, we had the manner of preparing them
communicated to us, and I first made them for Mr. Mathews, and made trial of
them upon my self before he durst venture on them, and afterward made much for
him, and was acquainted with what variation he made; and when Mr. Mathews told
me of his design to make it public, I opposed him in it, knowing what
engagement he lay under, to Mr. Starkey; and also fearing the Pill might be
spoiled of his virtue and efficacy when it come to be made common by indiscreet
persons: but seeing it is now public, I do affirm it to be truly and
sincerely done, whatever by any may be said to the contrary, and to this I
subscribe my name,

AMBROSE ANDREWS.

THe whole business touching the Pill being now made manifest, and the Pill it
self herein published, will clearly expel all the clouds within that horizon,
and Anne Mathews ends in relation to persons and things about it will plainly
appear to all judicious men, and in that respect I have the less occasion to
speak; yet it will be necessary for me to signify how I came to the knowledge
thereof, which was as follows: Being with Anne Mathews, she told me her self
that her Husband had communicated his Pill, I desired to know the persons with
whom he had left it, which she refused to inform me, some time after I
understood with whom; and I spoke with Jonathan Loddington about it, who gave
me a relation of the business; And also gave me the Receipts, and further told
me that he would communicate it: and in regard I find these expressions in Anne
Mathews Book; And if it be proved that any of these men have sold the Receipts
thereof to any one of the commonalty, etc. and that her agent was with me,
after it was Printed to know whether I gave money for it, I do hereby signify
as I did then to him, that I had it freely in respect to and upon the account
of Rich. Mathews will, and I do declare to the world that I find the Pill made
by Richa^d Mathews Receipt, as good and as effectual to the best of my
understanding, as any that I had of him while he was living, having had a large
experience of both upon my own body, and am confirmed by many more that have
proved it, which will now appear to be truth to the world by the Receipts
themselves: and doubtless all rational men will find that there is no difficulty
in the operation or preparation thereof. The Pills are both good, Take which
thou find most suitable to thee. Let George Starkey have his due, Ric.
Mathew^ had the original from him, as George Starkey and Ambrose Andrews told
me, and Ambrose Andrews affirmed to me that he had it from George Starkey at
the same time that Richard Mathews had it, but Richard Mathews has added, and
differs from him in time and manner of preparation. Anne Mathews agent upon her
account offered me the Pill upon extraordinary conditions, and a reward if I
would not make or sell any other but hers, which I had no need to do, having as
good, and being able to make as good as any; and I had it as legally and as
much right so to do; now how causeless, and to what end she made use of my
name is evident; this I have done in respect to truth, the public good, and
Richard Mathews will, which was, that its virtue, safety and efficacy should be
made known and manifest in respect to public good, not that a cloud should be
cast over and a flood after it, who am a friend to, and a Lover of the public
welfare in realitie.

NATHANIEL MERRY.

An effectual Diaphoretick, Diuretic,
Pill, purges by Sweating, Urin

THis Pill being composed of Simples of a very powerful operation, purged from
their churlish and malignant quality by an excellent Balsom of long
preparation, is by it made so amicable to Nature, that it has upon ample
experience been found effectual for curing the diseases following:

It removes the Ague, if two Pills be taken two hours before the fit comes, and
a Glass or two of Sack drank after it, and the patient put in a warm bed
disposed for sweat, and one Pill taken each intermitting night. The like for
Fevers, only instead of Sack drink Whitewine. It helps the Headache,
Toothache, Cold, Cough or Surseit. Dries up dropping Rhumes and Catarrhs which
destroy the Lungs. It removes pains of the breast, trembling of the heart,
cleanses the blood; helps fits of sudden Swoonings and Convulsions. If
Whitewine be drank after it, it cleanses the Reins and Kidneys of gravel,
opens the urinary passages, drives out the stone if not coagulated, and
oftentimes with the urine sends forth like jags of cloth or paper of sundry
colors. Also it sends forth by vomit or otherwise clotted blood; breaks inward
Impost-humations to astonishment. Effectually eases pains and aches got by
Surfeits, Colds or Bruises; whereby many secret and hidden griefs are cured,
which otherwise could not be discovered. It is an easy and sound cure of the
French disease, if used according to such direction as may be given. It cures
some kind of Gouts and gives ease in all, especially if the places affected be
anointed with true and simple Oil of Amber, which is rare to be had at any
Apothecaries, but may be had with the Pill. It helps the shaking and
trembling of the joints, strengthens the brains, increases memory, revives
and comforts the heart. It is very fafe for women with child, and of excellent
efficacy for women in Childbed, to ease them of their pains, and bring them to
rest. It opens obstructions, and in like manner stays fluxes. It strengthens
and opens the Spleen, and expels wind in an incredible manner. Dries up
Hydropicall Humors. It is with safety and good success given to infants as soon
as born, and after to expel winds. Brings to rest, and prevents or cures the
Rickets. It helps in Ruptures. It has been found very effectual for
hastening and making firm the cure of wounds, all sort of sores and swellings.
Neither is there any disease in old or young, in which it does not afford
releif and ease, if not a perfect cure. It works not as ordinary Physic, which
is pretended to take away that humor the Disease feeds upon, and so to weaken
Nature, that it may conquer the Distemper, by which means it many times kills
the Patient with the Disease: But contrarily, this being a sovereign Cordial,
fortifies Nature, enabling it to grapple with it is enemies, and hereby becomes
effectual for the curing of several Diseases. If it cures not all that use it,
know, that it is the blessing of the Lord upon all means that makes them
effectual when he pleases, that so all may use them with submission to, and
dependence upon him.

The ordinary dose for men and women, is about 10. or 12. grains, or the
bigness of a great gray pease; to children of 2. years old the quantity of a
barley corn; to them new born, of a pins-head; every one may increase the
quantity as they find themselves able to bear it, and their necessity requires.
It is ordinarily taken at going to bed, with a little Sack, White Wind, Ale or
Beer drank after it, to carry it down, and care taken of Cold both in and after
the sweating.

ERRATA.
Epistle page 1, line 2, for Thetis read Treatise. page 5, ^ine 2, for down
read dumb.


