K. WILLIAM, or K. LEWIS. Wherein is set forth The INEVITABLE NECESSITY THESE
NATIONS LIE UNDER, Of Submitting wholly to One or Other of These KINGS; And
that the MATTER in CONTROVERSY Is not now between K. WILLIAM and K. JAMES, But
between K. WILLIAM and K. LEWIS of France, For the Government of These Nations

Written out of Cheshire by a Gentleman lately arrived there from Ireland.

London, Printed for Ric. Chiswell at the Rose and Crown in St. Paul's
Churchyard. MDCLXXXIX.

ADVERTISEMENT.
THe Reader may be assured, That the following Pages were Penned by one that
had sufficient Authority for all the Matters of Fact related therein: And the
Author mentions them not with a Design of Aspersing; but, on the contrary, is
most heartily sorry they are true; Yet thinks it his Duty to show his Country
their Impending Evils, that by God's Mercy and their Prudence they may timely
divert them.

LICENSED,

J. FRASER.
April 30. 1689.
KING WILLIAM, or KING LEWIS. Wherein is set forth The Inevitable Necessity
these Nations lie under, of Submitting wholly to One or Other of these Kings;
and that the Matter in Controversy is not now between King WILLIAM and King
JAMES the Second, but between King WILLIAM and King LEWIS of France, for the
Government of these Kingdoms.
AT the first breaking out of these Motions in our Countries, there was nothing
more earnestly enquired after, than the Secret League with France, for the
Subversion of the Laws and established Religion of England: And there was a
misguided Party amongst us, who finding hitherto that no such abominable
Contrivance was publicly proved against the late King James, that therefore he
was never guilty of any such evil Machination, and some were so far misled, as
from hence to doubt, whether he were guilty of some other Enormities that were
objected against him. But to those it may be sufficient to answer, That the
then Prince of Orange did not in his Declaration publicly charge King James
with any such League; and therefore the World cannot object against King
William, that in this Matter he has falsely aspersed him. There is nothing
contained in that Declaration (which I suppose is the Summary of what King
William has to object publicly against King James's Proceeding) that the most
Devoted to King James's Party can possibly deny; it contains nothing but
Public Matter of Fact, transacted before the Face of all the Nations; save
only in the Matter of the Pretended Pr. of W. which is a thing so ridiculous
and despicable, that the Nation has not thought it fit to be taken notice of,
or insisted upon. So that granting the Earl of Essex's and King Charles the
Second's Death to be unjust Accusations, which have never been otherwise
mentioned than as Coffee house Chat, and in some idle Pamphlets published by
Private Persons; and granting even the French League to be so too; there
remains many and grievous Accusations, certainly true, and sufficient to make
us conclude with the incomparable Grotius, That Voluntas Regendi and perdendi
Populum consistere nequeunt. But what if the League with France be not yet
publicly proved? I hope by this time the Eyes of the Nation are so opened,
that now there needs no such Ceremonious Process. King James the Second
deserted his People, abdicated his Kingdoms, leaving the Throne Vacant, and his
Kingdoms in the first State of Nature, without Government or Head; and threw
himself into the Arms and Bosom of the French King, the most inveterate Enemy
to the English Nation and Government both in Church and State: To him he
applied for Help and Succor in the Distress he had brought on himself, by
observing the Measures set him by France and Rome, for the utter Extirpation of
the Protestant Religion in these Kingdoms: And the Ambitious French Monarch
presently lays hold on this Opportunity, receives him graciously, and promises
all Assistance. Great Preparations are immediately ordered at Breast, for
Ireland; and after the English King had received his full Instructions from
Lewis the Fourteenth, and was put under the Tutelage of two or three French
Generals for managing the War, and French Treasurers and Officers for managing
the Revenue, together with Monsieur d'Avaux for giving Instructions, he
embarked for Ireland, with a great Stock of Money and Arms.

It was expected, and certainly promised, by several in England that stood very
well affected to King James, though not of his Religion, That as soon as he
should put his Foot on Irish Ground, he would immediately begin with all Lenity
and Mercy to his Protestant Subjects, he would wholly cast himself upon them,
by turning out Tyrconnel, and committing the Sword to a Protestant Governor,
by admitting Protestants, especially of the Church of England, into all
Imploys, both Civil and Military: For this they knew was the only Measures he
could reasonably take, for the regaining the Hearts of his Protestant Subjects
in England, and of obtaining once more his Deserted Throne. But what difference
is there between English and French Politics? Instead of these Methods, as
soon as he arrived at Dublin, he was Addressed by Speeches from some Irish
Popish Bishops and Clergy, (particularly by Bishop Terrell, Tyrconnel's
Secretary, and Doctor Moor) advising him to consider his Papist Subjects of
that Kingdom for all their Sufferings these Thirty last Years, and to restore
them to the Churches and Possessions which had been so unjustly usurped from
them. (They should have added* for the horrid Rebellion they had raised in
Forty one, and for the many thousands of Barbarous Murders committed by them to
maintain the Romish Religion*) Monsieur d'Avaux also at his Public Audience as
Ambassador from his Most Christian Majesty, advised him in his Master's Name
to the same Favors toward his Catholics of that Kingdom. Whereupon
immediately the few Protestants that remained in Imploys, were commanded to lay
them down: Not a Protestant was allowed to sit in Council, or bear Arms; Lord
Grauard, Lord Chief Justice Keating, Sir John Davis, Sir Thomas Newcomen,
Colonel Russel, etc. were all laid aside, and no one permitted to hold any
Place, but Papists* though these Gentlemen went as far to serve the King, as made
some suspect them for being of his Religion. But a signal Example we have of
his Majesty's Gratitude to those that serve him, in the late Bishop of Chester,
who coming with him out of France, died at Dublin, and was so miserably Poor,
as to want Common Necessaries; and being dead, was buried at the Charge of a
Charitable Prelate there.

But to proceed: The Protestants, who for two Months before King James came
into Ireland had suffered most grievous Violences and Wrongs from the Irish
Soldiers, being Pillaged and Robbed of all their Cattle and movable Goods,
thought that upon his Majesty's Arrival they should find some Protection* or
Abatement of their Troubles; but upon several Complaints made by them to the
King for Injuries received, he would answer them, That he would do for them
what he could; but they never received further Satisfaction or Justice: And
particularly, the Lord Galmoy had in the North most barbarously cut off a
Gentleman's Head, and made the Gentleman's own Son carry it on a Pike in
Triumph before his Regiment: Upon Complaint of this to the King, he seemed
mightily displeased at the Bloody Inhumanity; yet the Lord Galmoy, the very
next day after the Complaint, carried the Sword before his Majesty to Mass.
When the Protestant Bishop of Mead, with a Body of Clergymen, waited on the
King, the Bishop addressed himself to him in this manner: May it please your
Majesty, The Clergy of this City of Dublin, with several of the Rural Clergy,
that are retired from this Country for Safety, attend your Majesty, to
congratulate your Arrival in this Kingdom; and do humbly implore your Royal
Protection to them, their Churches, and Religion; desiring that from time to
time they may be admitted to make their just Complaints of those Injuries they
have lately received: His Majesty's Answer was, That he would protect all Men
in their Religions and Properties, and as for the Wrongs that had lately been
suffered by several, 'twas impossible, in these Times of Commotions, but such
would happen; but he should as far as he could prevent and redress them:
However, if I am Invaded in the Kingdom, as I have been in England, I must
secure my self as well as I can. What could the King possibly intend by this
last Expression? Can it be otherwise, than that as he found the Protestants of
England desert him upon the Invasion, and some of them fly over to the Prince's
Party, he would prevent the like Trick in Ireland, by cutting them all off, or
securing them under close Confinement? Now what reason have Subjects to trust a
King, that will nor trust them? When the Band of Mutual Credit is broken, all
Government fails immediately. But that we may see more plainly, that King James
never designs any more to trust his Protestant Subjects, but to oppress them,
and utterly to extirpate their Religion from these Nations, I shall here relate
a remarkable Passage that was lately between a Protestant Clergyman of Dublin,
and an Irish Lord who came thither with King James out of France.

The Clergyman said to the Lord, That he hoped now the King was come amongst
them, he would protect his Protestants, and redress them in those Injuries they
had of late groaned under; and not only so, but that his Majesty would be more
than ordinary kind and favorable to them, advancing them to Places of Trust
and Power, and granting them a Share both in Civil and Military Employments;
for that this was the most probable Method for gaining on his Protestants of
England, by whose means only he must expect, if ever, to be resetled in his
Throne. To this the Lord (who is one of the best sense amongst them, and coming
with the King from France, does certainly know all their designed Measures)
made this Return; That his Majesty was naturally Merciful and Compassionate,
and that he would, as far as he could, prevent all Injuries to any of his
Subjects: But for doing this with the Design you mention, or for his trusting
his Protestants, I assure you it is far from his Thoughts: Both he and we had
rather he should hazard and lose Forty Crowns, than be obliged to his
Protestants for the Possession of his Kingdoms. He can never expect to come in
by their means, unless tied and fettered with Conditions, which he cannot, nor
shall not observe to them. It Is by the Force of the Arms of his good
Catholics, and by Assistance from the Glorious Monarch of France, that he
designs to regain his Dominions: And then he comes in free and boundless, like
an Absolute Conqueror, and shall afterward do what he pleases.

By this we may plainly see, what King James, by Direction from King Lewis,
designs. And if after all this, the Eyes of the Nation are not enlightened, we
are all destined to Ruin and Misery. But, thanks to God, in a great measure,
these Proceedings of King James in Ireland have had their natural Effect on
several good Protestants, that before were pretty well inclined to his
Government; but by these most unreasonable Methods which he has taken in
Ireland, contrary to their expectation, and his own visible Interest, they are
clearly taken off, and have abandoned him to be destroyed by the Measures set
him by France; and are resolved to stick firm to the Protestant Interest, under
Their Majesty's King William and Queen Mary, on whose auspicious Government the
Protestant Religion, not only of these Kingdoms, but of all Europe, does wholly
rely.

For should King James succeed in his Designs, we may plainly see what we are
to be brought to: And after that, what will follow? We shall be made a Prey to
France, whose restless Contrivances have been bringing that about these Twenty
Years, for which this seems to be the most convenient Opportunity that ever
presented. Holland must certainly expect to be suddenly destroyed by that
ambitious Monarch; and then I propose it to the Consideration of all thinking
Men, whether he will let England be quiet, though under the Government of his
Dearly beloved Catholic Brother King James? No certainly, he knows well
enough, that King James has neither the Conduct nor Power to defend his
Dominions from his Powerful Arms: He has lately supplied him with Money,
Ammunition, and Arms, in great Quantities; and is yet making greater
Preparations for him at Breast, designing to Land an Army of Forty or Fifty
thousand French in England, or some other of these Kingdoms, on purpose to
conquer them. And can we think, that he does all this merely out of a Principle
of Generosity and Honor, for Re establishing his Brother? All the World knows,
the French King's Generosity extends no farther than his Interest; and in his
most glorious Archievements, he has his secret Designs. What then can he more
reasonably intend, than that one day or other England may be brought to a
severe Account for these vast Expenses; and the Non repayment of them, may be a
sufficient Pretense of War, whenever he pleases? Moreover, we may plainly see,
the French King uses King James in this Juncture merely as a Stalking-Horse,
over whose Back he designs to render himself Master of these Kingdoms. By his
Covert he has already got strong Footing in Ireland; All there is transacted,
even at this time, by King Lewis: King James has only the empty Name; Monsieur
d'Avaux gives all Instructions, and was sent there by the French King so to do.
The French Officers manage the War against the poor Remains of struggling
English there: Only King James's Name is used; but he has nothing to do in the
whole Affair. And even in the Treasury for Disbursing the Money, it is performed
solely by a Treasurer sent out of France; and King James has no more Power in
the Matter, than the King of Bantam: And several Irish Officers are displaced,
to give way for those French Plenipotentiaries. So that already we may reckon
his French Majesty sole Master and King of Ireland. If therefore these Measures
are taken there, what may we suddenly expect in this Place? The same French
Power that has seized on that miserable Kingdom, will soon overspread this,
unless we unanimously unite together under their Majesty's King William and
Queen Mary, for opposing this Deluge of Tyranny that threatens us. And in doing
this, we may plainly see, that we oppose not King James; his Name is an empty
Sound, used only as a Cheat upon the People: It Is the Great Lewis, the
Tyrannical Lewis, that implacable cruel Enemy to the Reformed Religion, whom we
oppose. He has of late been so puffed up with these nauseous Flatteries offered
him by his Barbarous Clergy, for his glorious Extirpation of Heresy, that he
will venture half his Kingdoms at this Juncture, to render himself Master of
Great Britain and Ireland, that he may practice the same Cruelties here, for
bringing us over to the detestable Abominations of Rome. And when the
Protestant Religion is suppressed in Holland and England, there is an end of it
over the Face of Europe. In France it is already vanished, and the Lesser States
of Germany will soon be reduced: So that at present the universal Concern of
all the Protestant Princes seems engaged in this Juncture. And as we cannot
mistrust God's good Providence in preserving our pure Reformed Religion,
notwithstanding all Attempts of Wicked Men; so we cannot doubt of an hearty and
unanimous Agreement of all Good Men to the only visible Means for the effecting
thereof; which is an entire Adherence to Their Majesty's King William and Queen
Mary, in whom, as our late Deliverance, so our future Safety seems wholly wrapped
up. Under their Government, if Great Britain will be at unity in it self, Great
Britain will be safe and happy: Happy in a Pure Religion, Just Laws and
Liberties, and a flourishing Trade. Holland, our Potent Allie, will be able to
secure it self, and help us; and in so doing, to confirm the Protestant
Interest all over Europe. And all other the Injured Princes of Christendom will
be able to take their just Revenges against France, that aspiring Monarch, who,
to gratify his Ambition, has basely abused all the Princes of Europe.
Wherefore their Interest seems also involved in the present Affair, and they
are obliged to hinder the French Tyrant from trampling these Nations under
foot. I hope I need say no more to make us unite. I shall add but one word to
the scrupulous Clergymen, some of whom do yet seem to hesitate and make a
pause. Is it for fear of injuring the Church, that you do thus? (And I see no
other Reason you can possibly pretend.) Is it that you fear the Church of
England should be undermined by some other Reformers? Consider with your
selves, whether we ought to stand upon the Interest of any one Church or
Congregation, when the Concern of the Universal Protestant Church is in hazard?
Can you expect, if King Lewis (for I will not mention King James, as being only
a pretended Name, as he himself, if he had any Consideration, may perceive) Can
you expect, I say, that either you, your Churches, or Religion shall be
preserved? No certainly, you cannot, except you are blind. What then remains to
be done? Let us unanimously join in our Prayers to Heaven, in behalf of King
William and Queen Mary, That God would protect and preserve them, and
strengthen their Hands to the accomplishing that great Work which they have so
happily begun, and hitherto so successfully carried on with the joint consent
of both Houses of Parliament, wherein all things have hitherto been carried on,
for the Advantage of the Church of England, and by God's Blessing and our own
Unity will so continue. But if by our own Divisions and Animosities amongst our
selves, we give King Lewis a signal Opportunity of destroying us, we shall be
the most contemptible, as well as the most miserable Nation upon Earth, and our
Ruin will come upon us unpitied. How ridiculous will it appear in the Eyes of
the present Generation, and how despicable will it found in the Ears of
Posterity, that the English Nation (hitherto reputed for its Wisdom and
Constancy) should thus happily begin and carry on their own Deliverance and
Security, and in the Middle way resign both to a perpetual Overthrow.

FINIS.

