A LETTER TO THE AUTHOR of a SERMON, ENTITLED, A SERMON Preached AT THE FUNERAL
Of Her Late MAJESTY Queen MARY, Of ever Blessed Memory.
SIR,
WHen I heard of the Sickness of the Late Illustrious Princess, whom I had
never failed to recommend to God, in my Daily Prayers, and that your self was
Her Confessor, I could not but hope, that at least on Her Deathbed, you would
have dealt faithfully with Her.

But when I had read the SERMON, you preached at Her FUNERAL, I was heartily
grieved, to find my self disappointed, and God knows, how bitterly I bewailed
in Secret the manner of Her Death; and Reflecting again and again, on your
Conduct of Her Soul, methought a Spirit of slumber seemed to have possessed
you, otherwise it was impossible for one, who so well understood the Duty of a
Spiritual Guide, as your self, who had such happy Opportunities, and such
signal Encouragements, to Practice it in Her Case, should so grossly fail in
your Performance, as either to overlook, or wilfully to omit that which all the
World saw besides your self, and expected from you, and was of great Importance
to Her Salvation.

You are a Person of Noted Abilities, and had a full Knowledge of your Duty,
you had been many years a Parish Priest, and exercised your Function with good
repute, no one could be better versed, in the Office for the Visitation of the
Sick than your self, and the Sick Person was no stranger to you, and you very
well knew Her whole Story.

As you had a full Knowledge of the Person, and of your Duty, so you had happy
Opportunities to have put that Duty in Practice.

You had free and frequent Accesses to Her, at your Pleasure; and on Monday
when the flattering Disease occasioned some Hopes, but especially on the next
Day, the Festival of Christ's Birth, when those Hopes were raised to a kind of
Assurance, p. 25. and continued so till Night, the Peculiar favor of Heaven,
seemed to have indulged you, all that inestimable Day, on purpose, that you
might carefully Employ it, in clearing Her Conscience with God, and Man, and in
perfecting Her Preparations for Eternity; which had She recovered, were as
Necessary, to render Her Life Holy, and Happy, as Her Death.

Your Joy enduring but a Day, and that Day being closed with a dismal Night,
you gave Her the Warning of Her approaching Death, which you say She received,
with a Courage agreeable to the strength of Her Faith, P. 26. You were set a
Watchman over Her, and if you did not give Her due Warning of Her Sin also,
especially when you had so proper a time for doing it, and saw Her so capable
of receiving it, God will require Her Blood at your hands.

You had this advantage also, which is often wanting to such Persons, that in
the Visits you made Her you did not find Her Delirious, and the Orders She gave
for Prayers, p. 24. Her calling for Prayers a third time, when She feared she
had slept the time before, the many most Christian things She said, p. 26. Her
appointing Psalms, a Chapter concerning Trust in God, and a Sermon more than
once, to be read by Her, p. 29. are signs She was not, at least that she was
not so, in the Intervals wherein you officiated by Her.

It Is true she was often drowzy, but she was so very sensible of Her
drowziness, that she called for Prayers before the time, for fear that she
should not be long composed, p. 28. and when ever you applied your self to Her,
she was wakeful enough.

You said indeed, p. 27. That at the Receiving the Holy Eucharist, she found
her self in a dozing Condition, but add, that she presently stirred up Her
attention, and from thence forth to the end of the Office, had a perfect
Command of Her understanding, and was intent upon the Great Work, she was going
about: And methinks Sir, if you had been jealous over her Soul, with a Godly
Iealousy, when you gave Her the Viaticum, and saw that she had then a perfect
Command of her Understanding, and that she was intent; you had another fit
Season offered you by Heaven, to have minded Her of any, but probable defects
in Her Repentance, and to have Exhorted Her, to a short Supplemental Confession.

Nay to Her very last, she seemed not wholly incapable of any pious Intimations
you might have given her, for her Understanding continued to that degree, That
nothing of Impertinece, scarce a number of disjointed words were heard from
Her; insomuch, that she said a devout AMEN, to that very Prayer, in which her
Pious Soul was recommended to that God who gave it, p. 49. So that your own
Sermon will testify against you, that you had very happy Opportunitys, of
directing her Conscience; I must add, that you had as Signal Encouragements
also.

You had to deal with a Person, whose Knowledge and Wisdom you justly Commend,
p. 3. and who might easily have been Convinced, if in any one Instance, she had
mistaken her Duty.

You had to deal with one, whose Piety, Charity, and Humility, you in many
respects deservedly Magnify, p. 10. I only wish you had added her Justice
also, to have made Her Character complete; However, those three Virtues, were
powerful Inducements, to have used a Conscientious freedom with Her.

You had, as appears by the Character you give Her, a Pious, Charitable, Humble
Soul, under your Care, a Subject most happily disposed to work on, who had
always been very Reverent and Attentive at Sermons, p. 9 who had an Averseness
to Flattery, p. 12. and who would thankfully have received, any Pious, or
Charitable, or humble Admonition, you had given Her.

I now beseech you Sir, to spend a few thoughtful Minutes, in comparing your
Performance, as you yourself represent it, in your own Sermon, with your
Knowledge, with the Opportunities, and Encouragements you had, and with the
Rubric of the Church.

You mention a very Religious Saying which fell from Her, That she had Learned
from Her Youth a true Doctrine, That Repentance was not to be put off to a
Deathbed, p. 26. But it was your Duty, considering the Deceitfulness of all
Hearts, and the usual Infirmities, and Forgetfulness, and Indisposedness of
Sick Persons, to have Supplied all Her Oversights, and Omissions, and to have
Examined the Truth of Her Repentance, whether she truly Repented of her Sins,
and where you know any thing of Moment, which had escaped Her Observation, you
ought to have been Her Remembrancer.

I therefore challenge you to answer before God and the World, Did you know of
no weighty Matter which ought to have troubled this Princesses Conscience, though
at present she seemed not to have felt it, and for which, you ought to have
moved her to a special Confession, in order to Absolution?

Were you satisfied, that she was in Charity with all the World? Did you know
of no Enmity between Her and Her Sister?

Did you know of no Person who ever offended Her, whom she was to forgive? Did
you know of no one Person whom she had offended, and of whom she was to ask
Forgiveness? Did you know of no one Injury or Wrong she had done to any Man, to
whom she was to make Amends, to the uttermost of her Power?

Was the whole Revolution managed, with that Purity of Intention, that perfect
Innocence, that exact Justice, that tender Charity, and that unreproachable
Veracity, that there was nothing amiss in it; no remarkable Failings, nothing
that might deserve one penitent Reflection?

You cannot, you dare not say it; and if you should, out of your own mouth I
can condemn you; for you your self in your serious Intervals, have passed as
severe a Censure on the Revolution, as any of those they call Iacobites could
do; you have said, more than once, That it was all an Unrighteous thing; Why
did you not then deal sincerely with this Dying Princess, and tell Her so, when
you must needs be sensible, that steering Her Conscience wrong you ship-wreck'd
your own.

If then Sir you consider, The happy Opportunities you have lost, the Signal
Encouragements you have neglected, and the Tremendous Hazard to which you have
exposed the precious Soul, of this Illustrious Princess by your Unfaithfulness;
If you lay to Heart how much you have acted against your own Knowledge and
Convictions, what ill Example you have given to the Clergy, what Scandal to all
good men, what Wounds to our most Holy Religion, and what Occasions to the
Enemy to Blaspheme, what have you to do, but to testify your Repentance,
before God and the World, and to mourn in Sackcloth and Ashes, all the
Remainder of your days?

What was it Sir, that moved you to act thus notoriously against your own
Conscience? Was it the fear you had, of losing the Favor of the Court, which
made you rather venture the Indignation of Heaven, even that fear was vain, for
it had been no offense against the Government, to have persuaded a dying
Daughter, to have bestowed one Compassionate Prayer on her afflicted Father,
had he been never so Unnatural, though the Case was here quite contrary, for He
was one of the tenderest Fathers in the world.

Besides, her Illustrious Consort, who manifested so very great and worthy a
Passion for her, would I dare say, have had nothing omitted, which might have
been thought conducible, to her Eternal Happiness; and a Conscientious Faithful
Confessor, especially on the Deathbed, is one of a thousand, who Will always
be desired and valued, and revered. Believe me Sir, you have given the World
reason to conclude, that your own Conscience misgave you, being sensible, that
in reproving her, you must have reproached your self.

You say, She was so Judicious and Devout a Saint, the degene-rate Church of
Rome can by no means show us, p. 9. but surely it had been Prudence in you, to
have waved that Comparison, for should you chance hereafter, to blame that
Church for Canonizing Thomas a Becket, for which she really is blameworthy,
it is obvious for her, to make this appropriate Reply to you, that it is as
justifiable in her to Saint such a Subject, as for you, to Saint such a Daugher.

You tell us she was one whom I am well assured had all the Duty in the World,
for other Relations, which after Long, and Laborious Consideration, she judged
consistent, with her Obligations to God, and to her Country, p. 15.

The Consideration then which she used, to reconcile her Judgment to the
Revolution, was it seems, Long and Laborious, notwithstanding the assistance of
her new Casuists, it being no easy matter, to overcome the contrary
Remonstrances of Nature, and of her own Conscience, and to unlearn those
Evangelical Maxims, which were carefully taught her, by the Faithful Guides of
her Youth, others might begin to instill opposite Principles into her, others
might Confirm her, but the finishing strokes were reserved for you.

But what do you mean Sir, by other Relations, we may guess that you mean her
Royal Father, Mother-in-Law, and Brother, but you are at liberty to say, you
mean any other Relations if you pfease, you give us ambiguous and general words
only, when you should have given us, most express and particular.

All the Duty in the World is a comprehensive term, but wherein Sir, did any
part of all that Duty appear? Why are you not so just to her, and to your self,
as to give us some of those Compassionate, and melting Expressions of Filial
Duty, which flowed from her on that Subject? Why do you not produce some
instances of her Mildness and Mercifulness to her Enemies, p. 16. and whom you
knew she treated as such, though their Crime was their being her Fathers
Friends, they would have been much for her Honor; would have given great
satisfaction to all good People, would have convinced the world, that the
manner of her Death had been in all respects truly Christian, p. 23. would have
been much for your own Reputation, and much for the Credit of the Revolution in
which you are as great a Zealot, as a Gainer.

If you were so well assured of all that Duty, what dreadful negligence were
you guilty of, in not putting her in mind of it on her Deathbed? Methinks Sir,
you are not just to her, when you give us instances of her Charity, to several
sorts of indigent People, and to Strangers, which all the World knew, and give
us no instances of even her Natural Affection, to her own Royal Father, of
which all the World doubted; when had you suggested that Duty to her, as you
ought to have done, she would have showed her self a tenderhearted Daughter,
and would have been extremely afflicted, for having been instrumental to her
Father's Calamity.

It is far from my intentions here to dispute the Lawfulness of the Revolution,
yet I may say that I never met with any so Bigoted to it, who would undertake
to justify all the part, which she as a Daughter had in it, and I am persuaded
that it would mightily puzzle you, to tell us in particular, what those
Obligations were, which she had to God, and to her Country, which were
inconsistent with her Filial Duty.

You complain p. 17. Great is our loss of a most Pious Queen, in an
Atheistical, and Profane Age, in which the Seeds of Impiety, which have been
sowing for some years, have sprung up in greater plenty than ever; but Sir, did
not your Heart smite you, when you uttered this Complaint; for I would fain
know whether any thing has more contributed, to render the Age Atheistical and
Profane, or more promoted that fatal Plenty, than the Prevarications of your
self, and your Time-serving Brethren.

You take notice more than once, of the shortening the life of this Illustrious
Princess, that she was taken away in the midst of her days, p. 18. at thirty
three years old, p. 32. in the flower of her Age, p. 33. but you take no notice
of that which most probably occasioned it, for the Fifth Commandment is not to
be evaded, Honor thy Father and thy Mother, (which is the first Commandment
with Promise) that it may be well with Thee, and thou may live long on the
Earth, and if any, even Princes, for the Command makes no exception, do visibly
Dishonor Father and Mother, and their lives are cut short, the very Command of
God assigns the cause of it, and I hope the surviving Princess will consider,
and take warning, and Repent, lest God be provoked, to cut her life as short as
her Sisters.

You say p. 30. That having like David served her own Generation, by the Will
of God she fell asleep; and if you had been a true Nathan to her, the
Similitude had been very proper, but her Virtue having like David's, suffered
an Eclipse, you took no care that it should break out again, in as Conspicuous
a Repentance.

You metion the strong Hopes you have of her everlasting felicity, p. 32. but
as you managed her Conscience, you should rather have called them, strong
Presumptions, I have Hopes of her everlasting Felicity as well as you, though not
at all grounded on your Guidance, but on the Infinite mercy of God, who makes
most gracious abatement for all our Infirmities, and for all the degrees of
excusability we can plead, and when I consider her conjugal Love and Awe, the
horrid misrepresentations made to her, of her Royal Father, the various, and
studied Trains laid to delude her, the plausible pretenses of Religion, of
Scripture, and of the Glory of God, which she heard daily inculcated, and the
unfaithfulness of her Guides, who had wholly possessed her Ear, together with
her subdued will, her soft and ten, der Sex, and Temper, her well-meaned though
misguided Zeal, the Piety of her Inclinations, and her ardent Desire, that her
Soul might be without spot presented to God, which she manifested, in ordering
that Collect to be read twice every day, p. 24. I have Hopes, that God accepted
of her general Repentance, and by a super-effluence of Grace supplied the
defects of it.

What therefore I have said, is not in the least to derogate, from any of her
Virtues, but to Expostulate with you, for being the occasion, that they did not
shine out in their full Luster; and whether such Shepherds may not be said, to
feed themselves rather than the Flock, whether your Behavior to this dying
Princess, does not reach those Expressions of the Prophet, Of crying Peace,
Peace, when there is no Peace, and of daubing with untemper'd Mortar, whether
it is not Healing a Spiritual Hurt slightly; Let all my Reverend Brethren of
the Clergy, who are untainted with the Latitudinarian Leven, whether they are
Possessed of their Benefices, or Deprived, be the Judges.

Before I take my leave, I cannot but remark that spiteful Reflection, you
bestowed on the poor Sufferers, which you thus express, And Domestic
Discontent reigning in those, whose Resentments, are stronger than their
Reason. p. 18.

The Persons whom you thus Characterise will tell you, that it is much easier,
for you, to revile their Reasons, than to Answer them, of which you are so very
sensible, that no one labors more industriously than your self, to debar them
the liberty of the Press.

As for their Resentments, the greatest they have at present, are against your
self, not for your Promotion, which I know none of them that envy, but for your
misguidance of that Illustrious Princess whose everlasting Happiness they
Prayed for, and whose untimely Death they deplore.

In the mean time Sir, none of that dirt, which you cast at the faithful
Remnant will stick, but will recoyl on your self, and I have reason to believe,
that That Great Prince, whom such as you, had rather flatter, than imitate,
does esteem them at least Honest Men, and indeed in their being tender of their
former Oaths, they have followed that Illustrious Example, which he himself set
them; for there was a time, when he being Prince of Orange, had the Sovereignty
of the Seven Provinces offered him, and offered him by a Power, which would
have put him into Possession, and he rejected that tempting offer. with a most
Heroic and Christian Answer, to this purpose, That he had lately taken an Oath
to be true to his Country, which he would by no means violate.

It was Wisdom not that which is Earthly, but that which is from above, which
taught the Prince of Orange, to prefer a good Conscience before a Kingdom, a
Blissful and an Eternal Crown, before one that was Vexatious and Transitory;
and may the same Divine Wisdom in his present Circumstances, vouchsafe to be
his Counselor; If then, he when a Prince was so Conscientious in observing
his Oath to the States can he have an ill Opinion of Priests, and of Bishops,
who are alike Conscencious in observing their Oaths? It Is improbable he should,
unless he has such Confessors as your self, to exasperate him against them; but
from such Confessors, I beseech God to deliver him.

God of his Great Mercy grant, that what I have written, may awaken you out of
your Slumber, and conduce to your Repentance, the only Preservative against all
those Woes, which are denounced against careless Shepherds.

Your faithful Friend in our Common Savior.
March the 29th 1695.

