FIVE DISCOURSES On so many Very Important Points OF Practical Religion.

Never before Printed.

By John Kettlewell, late a Minister of the Church of England.

With a Preface giving some Account of the Author's Life.

LONDON, Printed for A. and J. Churchil at the Black Swan in Paternoster Row.
1696.

The Preface.
THE following Sermons are all that the Reverend Author left finished for the
Press; those which had not his last Hand, were by his particular Order forbid
to be Printed; so that the Reader may be assured, that as he is not imposed
upon by imperfect Copies, made entire by the care and diligence of Friends; so
neither must he expect any other Remains of this kind, than those which are now
offered to his charitable perusal.

And if Discourses, composed upon the weightiest Subjects, handled with great
Clearness, and strength of Judgment, animated with a true Spirit of Piety,
stood in need of any Recommendation, the Name of the Worthy Mr. Kettlewell
might go far to procure them a favorable reception: For such was the Luster of
his Eminent Sanctity, that all Parties paid a due Veneration to his Character;
and how wide soever they differed in other Matters, they owned the Perfection
of his Christian Morals: Indeed, his great Piety, useful Learning, and solid
Judgment, rendered him a public Blessing, and a peculiar Ornament of the Church
and Age wherein he lived; and the wise Improvement he made of such valuable
Talents, will cause his Light to shine bright to Posterity, and future
Generations shall call him Blessed.

It must be confessed, that he has given the World a perfect Image of his own
Mind in his admirable Writings, the durable Monuments of his true Worth: But
because it is much easier to prescribe wise Rules for the Conduct of others,
than to make use of them in the government of our own Lives; and that to act
reasonably, is of greater value than to write well: I have good grounds to
hope, that a very skilful Artist will set this Pattern of Primitive
Christianity in its true Light, and convey him down to Posterity in his full
proportion, that the World may know how carefully he practiced those Duties he
preached to others, and confirmed his Doctrines by the powerful Attractive of a
suitable Example, which will make his Name to live, and be mentioned with
Reverence in the Records of Church History.

I know his great Modesty thought the Day of Judgment soon enough to lay open
the several Particularities of his Life; Where every Work shall be made
manifest, whether it be good, or whether it be evil: And all his Care was, how
to stand before the impartial Scrutiny of that Dreadful Tribunal; yet as a Work
of this nature, may be a just Tribute to the Memory of one so truly Great, if
Wisdom and Piety, Learning and Virtue, and a large beneficent Mind, may be
allowed to constitute the Character: So, moreover, it may prove very
advantageous to Christians in general, especially to those who have the great
Honor to attend at the Altar, and are dedicated to the more immediate Service
of God, by furnishing them with so complete a Model for their Direction,
Examples being allowed to have a mighty Force in forming us to a right Temper
of Mind, by a lively Representation in practice of the Possibility and Easiness
of those Precepts which are so agreeable to our best Reason, and which our Holy
Religion requires of us.

Now the Example of this Faithful Servant of God was fitted for Universal
Imitation, we find no Affectations of Singularity in indifferent Things, no
Stress laid upon some particular Duties to the prejudice and neglect of others;
but he had a respect to all God's Commands; his Life was of a piece, and he
distinguished himself by nothing so much as solid and substantial Piety; his
Conversation gave frequent Instances of a profound Humility, and admirable
Meekness of Spirit, and sweetness of Disposition; an unspotted Integrity, and a
blameless Sincerity; an universal Charity, and a particular Concern for the
Necessities of the Poor; a great Tenderness for the Afflicted, and an extreme
Desire to do Good to all the World: There was remarkable in Him, a great Love
of Devotion; an entire Submission to the Will of God, and a true Contempt of
the World, by not suffering it to allure or affright Him from his Duty; a
mighty Patience under all Afflictions, and so perfect an Abhorrence of all Sin,
that he started even at the very Appearance of it; the Flame of prudent Zeal
burnt bright in his Mind; and as nothing gave him a greater Concern, than the
hazard Men expose themselves to, by the neglect of their Eternal Salvation, so
his chief Solicitude and Care was always to search and contrive Means to
prevent their Everlasting Ruin; and his Thoughts were employed how to rescue
Souls from those Snares which are laid for them by the World, the Flesh, and
the Devil.

Though his Intellectual Faculties improved by the Advantages of a Learned
Education, might place him in the first Rank of considerable Men; yet what he
valued more in others, and upon which account he was really more valuable
himself, were his Moral Accomplishments, his Pious Temper, and Disposition of
Mind, his true Christian Spirit: For Learning, and Great Parts, separated from
Meekness and Humility, are like a dangerous Weapon in the Hands of a Madman,
who uses it indifferently against himself and others; and the Compiler of his
Life will have no great difficulty to find variety of Instances to justify
this part of his Character; for he showed out of a good Conversation his Works
with Meekness of Wisdom.

I cannot forbear upon this Occasion to mention his controversial Writings,
which bear evidence in this Case, and are a genuine Proof of what was so very
commendable in him; He never treats his Adversaries with ill Language, Scorn or
Contempt, nor with personal Reflections, or injurious Surmises; nor because he
thought they erred in one Point, did he ever endeavor to make them Guilty of
all; nor does he consecrate any unchristian heat under a pretense of defending
Truth; a dangerous Rock whereupon many Learned, and otherways good men have
fatally split; as if while a Zeal was expressed in matters of Belief, the
weighty matters of Practice might be neglected, and if while we show our selves
warmly concerned for God's Honor, we were exempted from all Christian Rules in
the Prosecution of it; but the Wrath of Man works not the Righteousness of
God; it being a very irregular Method to defend his Cause, by the breach of
many of his Precepts, and as improper to expect to convince a Man's Reason,
when we provoke his Indignation by any uncivil Treatment. The Suggestions of a
Heathen in this Particular are very pertinent, who advises, To give way to
falsehood with Mildness. Whereby as his Commentator, (...). Pytha. Carm.
Hierocles affirms, He does not mean we should embrace it, but only give it a
patient Hearing, and not to count it such a strange thing, if Men fall off
sometimes from Truth And that excellent Moralist, a little before admonishes
those who are able to destroy Error, not to do it vehemently nor insolently.

Moreover Plutarch, that great Ornament of Moral, (...). Hiero. p. 145.
as well as Historical Learning, makes the way of managing a Discourse with
modesty and mildness of Temper, neither suffering our selves to engage with
Vehemence and Passion, Tom. 2. p. 80.
nor to be hot and concerned in urging an Argument, nor to rail and give bad
Words, even though we are non-plush'd, to be a true sign of a great Proficient in
Virtue. De fin. Bon. and Mal. lib.
And the celebrated Roman Orator, gives it as his Opinion, That Disputes
accompanied with Reproaches, and opprobrious Language, with Passion, and
obstinate Contention, are unworthy of that Man that makes Profession of
Philosophy.

I am sure the Precepts of our Blessed Savior are full to that Purpose, Quae
cum legimus quem Philosophum non contemnimus? And that perfect Model of Piety
has set an Example of great Meekness, in instructing those that opposed
themselves, and exercised an abundance of Patience, in bearing with the
Infirmities of Men, and above all recommends the Pattern of his Meekness, as
the surest method of acquiring a Likeness to him, to which Purpose he was
pleased to be represented by a Lamb; and the Spirit that taught Christianity
came down in the shape of a Dove.

How charitable and beneficial a Mind he had, appeared in the whole Course of
his Life, which was spent in prosecuting the noblest Ends of making others
Happy; either by his pious Conversation, or charitable Offices, by his judicius
Writings, or profitable Sermons, which were always adapted to the necessities
of his Flock, and gave warning of those Dangers which threatened them: He was
ready upon all Occasions to supply the wants of the Poor according to his
Abilities; and the assistance he gave the Sick in his Parish by some skill he
had that way, was made use of as a favorable Opportunity to instill his
heavenly Instructions, and served as a Vehicle to convey Nourishment to their
precious Souls; nothing could set bounds to his large Mind, but that Period
which will set bounds to all things; for his Inclinations of doing good were
particularly conspicuous at his Death in that considerable Settlement he made
for ever upon the Poor of the Parish where he was born in Yorkshire. I call it
considerable, because Five and twenty Pounds yearly Revenue in that County very
well justifies it; besides it will more deservedly appear so, when the Reader
shall know 'twas near half of his Estate; the remainder was Dedicated to the
assistance of those Relations, whose Circumstances most requred his Help: but
since God had not Blessed him with Children, he gladly adopted the poor Members
of Christ, as Heirs to his paternal Inheritance; and instead of entertaining
the least repining thought for want of Issue, he thanked God for the
opportunity that was put into his hands, of testifying his Love and Devotion
toward him. And I believe there never was a Settlement of that kind made with
greater Piety and Prudence; the Qualifications of those who are to receive
benefit by it, are strict Obligations to the Virtues of a Christian Life; he
has laid down such Rules for the managing of it, as in humane Probability may
attain their End; and has provided for all those Difficulties which might
threaten to render it ineffectual; which was all the labor of his own Brain,
and received only its form from the skilful in the Law; it is possible the World
may see the whole at length, since it may serve to direct those whose hearts
God shall touch with such charitable Dispositions. Thus while the World lasts
he will be clothing the Naked, feeding the Hungry, visiting the Sick, (having
made a yearly allowance for their Necessities) instructing the Ignorant, and
powerfully persuading the Poor to apply themselves to the Service of God, by
making it the means of their support to obey him. Happy Soul! Thy joy of doing
Good will be still increasing by the Blessed fruit thy Zeal will bring forth
even after thy Death; and if in this Life where we see through a Glass darkly,
and where our best Services are allayed with the Infirmities of our frail
Nature, a good Man often thinks no Pleasure comparable to that of Glorifying
God; what an unconceivable Happiness must it be in the next Life, where all the
Excellencies of the Divine Being shall be clearly discovered, and where Love is
pure without the least mixture, and inflamed to its utmost Capacity; to find
that he still glorifies him whom he Loves, and continues to make him yet loved
by others? And this his charitable Temper appeared not only in his Actions, but
also in his Discourse, which was governed by favorable Interpretations of what
others either did or said; and where things were apprehended by him, so
apparently wicked and unrighteous, that they would not admit of his Candor,
there he showed his Charity in judging favorably of those Dispositions of mind
wherewith they were done, ascribing them, if he could lay hold of any Color
and Pretense, to the most excusable Principles.

He excelled in all the suffering Virtues which are the peculiar Beauties of
Christianity, and which the wise and good Providence of God, called upon him to
exercise; as Patience, Meekness, Trust in God, dependence upon him for Succor,
Self-denial, cheerfully taking up the Cross, forgiving Injuries, and doing good
to those that despitefully used him; and had he always lived in a calm we
could not have formed so just an Idea of his worth; for we must be in a
suffering state, and exposed to the weight of many and great afflictions,
before we can be assured how patiently and contentedly, how cheerfully and
courageously we can undergo them; and agreeable to this it is remarkable that
Plato to finish his Character of a Righteous man, makes him pass through a
scene of sufferings to justify the principle of his virtue; fleeting pains of
this short life well recompensed with everlasting joys.

His conduct in the work of the Ministry sufficiently evidenced to the world,
how truly he answered that important demand in Ordination; Whether he trusted
he was inwardly moved by the Holy Ghost to take upon him that Office and
Ministration?

The constant application of his time and pains to the discharge of his
Pastoral Duties; the great neglect he always showed in soliciting Preferments,
and his readiness and cheerfulness in parting with that Station he was placed
in, when he apprehended the keeping of it inconsistent with the peace of his
mind, is a clear proof that the only design he aimed at by engaging in the
Sacred Function, was the Service of his Blessed Master, and the Salvation of
the Souls of Men; and that he espoused his Profession as a happy Instrument of
doing good, rather than of being rich and great.

The last scene of his Life, his Sickness and Death still maintained the
character of strict Piety and Christian Devotion; and when I shall tell the
Reader that his admirable Book of Death made Comfortable, the last effort of
his Charity for the salvation of his Brethren, was the subject matter of his
own practice, and the constant exercise of his devout mind under that tedious
and lingering sickness, which put a period to his days; he may be satisfied,
that he died the death of the Righteous, and that his latter end was like his.

It Is true, Good men always die well, because qualified for that happy state
upon which they enter; though the circumstances of their death be never so
sudden, and though the nature of their Disease deprives us of their edifying
example in the exercise of deathbed virtues; yet when God gives time, and the
advantage of an undisturbed understanding, the pious soul is careful to make
use of such Blessings, for the securing a happy Eternity.

In order to this purpose our dying Saint, whose lamp was never without oil,
thought his sickness a proper season to trim it, and to provide for the
Bridegroom's coming; he prudently settled all his temporal affairs, and after
his large Legacy for charitable uses, he acknowledged the kindness of his
particular Friends by some grateful Remembrance, and rewarded the services of
his Inferiors by decent Gratuities. As to the concerns of his Soul, he
carefully reflected upon all the Actions of his past Life; diligently examined
his Writings, whether they afforded any matter for Repentance, (a practice
highly necessary to be imitated, by those who have been engaged in
Controversy) he heartily bewailed all his Miscarriages, and made those solemn
professions of his Faith, which the Church requires, and which have a great
Tendency to strengthen and confirm those that survive: he freely forgave all
the world, and was ready and willing to make Compensation for any wrong that
could be charged upon him; he daily joined in the public Prayers of the
Church, and frequently received the Blessed Sacrament, once as the Viaticum of
a dying Christian, with the benefit of Absolution from an eminent Bishop of our
Church; the remnant of his strength he managed for the exercise of his private
devotions, upon which account he excused himself from receiving the frequent
visits that would have been made him by many of his acquaintance: he bore his
languishing condition without the least shadow of discontent, and though his
mind was eagerly bent upon Heaven, he never betrayed the least desire for the
removal of his pains, till God's appointed time should come, and was willing to
bear yet longer those pressures under which he lay, if God thought fit to
continue them, even though they delayed that happiness he so earnestly desired,
and so comfortably expected, which answers S. Augustin's character of a good
Christian, Qui patienter vivit, and delectabiliter moritur.

No words can furnish us with a clearer Idea of his true Christian firmness of
mind, than those which fell from his own mouth upon the immediate approach of
death, when he expressed himself in this manner: I am entering upon my last
labor, the Lord gave and he is now taking away, blessed be the Name of the
Lord; for I thank my God I am going without any distrust, without the least
misgiving, to a place of rest and joy and everlasting bliss; there is no life
like to a happy death. I have endeavored even from my youth, to approve my
self a faithful servant to my Great Master: I have taken some pains in writing
several Books; I have seriously considered them, and am fully satisfied
(looking on those about him) that you may find in them the way to Heaven; the
Christian duties contained therein have been my practice as well as study, and
now I find the advantage of it, and therefore be careful to read them often
and seriously and live suitably thereunto, that when you come to the condition
I am now in, you may die with comfort as you see me do: I have some little pain
indeed, but my pain is nothing so extraordinary as my hopes; for I have
earnestly repented of all my sins, and verily believe, that through the tender
mercies of my God, and merits of my Blessed Savior Jesus Christ, I shall be
carried up into Abraham' s bosom. After which he made this short Prayer. I
wait, O God, for that everlasting rest which I want at present, but shall not
long; I am ready when thou my God calls for me, yet can stay with patience till
thou please, for thy time is the best time, and thy pleasure the best
pleasure. Such a careful and wise provision had he made for his last hours, as
to be able to look death in the face, not only without amazement, but even with
a great degree of joy and consolation.

In short, he was Learned without Pride; Wise and Judicious without Cunning; he
served at the Altar without either Covetousness or Ambition; he was Devout
without Affectation, sincerely Religious without Moroseness, Courteous and
Affable without Flattery or mean Compliances; Just without Rigor, Charitable
without Vanity, and heartily zealous for the Interest of Religion without
Faction. May we that survive imitate the pattern of his piety, that we may
attain that happiness which he now possesses as the reward of it, and in
consort with him and all those blessed Souls who have departed this life in the
faith and fear of God, sing Allelujahs to the King of Saints, salvation and
glory, honor and power to him that sits on the throne, God the Father, God
the Son, and God the Holy Ghost. Amen.

14. Dec. 1695. Blackheath. Nelson.

THE CONTENTS.
Discourse I. STating the Notion of Christian Salvavation, and showing it
chiefly to consist in a Deliverance from our Sins, Page 1 On Matt. 1.21. Thou
shall call his Name Jesus; for he shall save his People from their Sins.

Discourse II. Showing that this Deliverance, and entire Obedience is neither
impossible nor extreme Difficult, if sincere Christians set about it as they
ought, p. 35 On Philip. 4.13. I can do all things through Christ which
strengthens me.

Discourse III. How to form such a Purpose of sincere Repentance, and entire
Obedience, as will be effectual for this Purpose, Page 77 On Acts 11.23. And
exhorted them all, that with purpose of Heart, they would cleave unto the Lord.

Discourse. IV. How to take the truest Wisdom of worldly Men in their
Managements, and apply them with admirable Use and Advantage in the
Improvement, and Perfection of Holy Obedience, p. 103 On Luke 16.8. For the
Children of this world are wiser in their Generation, than the Children of
Light.

Discourse V. About the Return of Prayers; or when we may, when we may not
Promise our selves the particular Things we ask for, p. 143 On Matt. 7.7, 8.
Ask and it shall be given you, for every one that asks receives.


DISCOURSE I. Stating the Notion of the Christian Salvation, and showing it
chiefly to consist in a deliverance from our Sins.
On Matt. 1.21. Thou shall call his Name Jesus: For he shall save his People
from their sins.
SINCE all men, who make any Pretense to Sobriety and Religion, profess
themselves most earnestly desirous of Salvation; and the great Errand of our
blessed Lord into the world was to purchase it, and make a tender of it to
them; it may well seem strange to us, as once it did to the Apostles, that yet
for all this, there are but few who shall be saved. For the far greater number
of the Christian world, are impenitently wicked; they live all their days in a
course of Sin, and die without amendment; and such men the Scripture assures
us, in the last Judgment will not be forgiven: so, that notwithstanding all the
noise that is made about Salvation, the greatest part have very little, or no
share in it; it is but seldom found, though it be often talked of, and the
generality of men seem to be as far from it, as if the Gospel had never come
abroad to bring them to it.

Now one chief Reason, why so many men do at last miss of Salvation, after they
have put forth such eager desires, and spent such zealous Pains upon it, is
because they mistake its Nature, and understand not truly wherein it does
consist. They take it to be something else than what it is* and so are apt
usually to hope well of it, and, to think they have attained to it, when as,
alas! they are yet in a lost state, and at a very great distance from it; for
although that Salvation which Christ dearly purchased, and which the Gospel comes
to promote in us, be a Salvation from sin, as we shall see presently; yet that
which men ordinarily talk off, and expect by him is nothing less. They think to
be pardoned without Obedience, and to be saved from Punishment, whilst they
persevere in the Practice of their Sins. For if we come to the most profligate
Sinner, although it be upon his Deathbed, when he is going out of the world with
all his sins, and unmortified Lusts about him; yet even he, who is thus lost in
sin, will still talk of his Savior Christ, and hopes to be saved by him
notwithstanding.

To prevent or redress such dangerous mistakes in a matter of so high moment, I
intend in discoursing upon these words, First, To represent to you what that
Salvation is, which Christ has purchased for us. And, Secondly, To note some
particular Uses and Improvements of it.


First, I shall represent to you what that Salvation is, which Christ has
purchased for us.

To save, is, to deliver from evil and danger; and may be extended to as many
evils, as men may be delivered from. Thus every where in David's Psalms, the
Deliverance of the righteous out of afflictions and troubles, is called Psalm.
37.37. Act. 27.31. 2 King. 13.5.
his Salvation; and Gideon is said to have saved Israel when he rescued them
out of the hands of the Midianites, Jud. 6.14.

Now as for those evils which Christ came to save us from, in our Deliverance
from which consists our Christian Salvation, they are not the temporal evils
and afflictions of this Life. His Kingdom was not of this world; nor is his
Protection always from the evils of it; he himself was a man of sorrows, and
his Church must expect to be like him, and to live under Persecutions. But they
are, First, Our sins; and consequent upon them, Secondly, Those eternal
Punishments, which are due unto us for them. Upon these accounts it is, that he
is Christ the Savior; he shall be called Jesus, or a Savior says the Angel,
because he shall save his people from their sins.


As for the latter of these, viz. the Deliverance from eternal Death, and
Helltorments, which are the Punishment that is due unto our Sins; this Christ
has undoubtedly purchased for all those that are his. There remains no
Condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus; says the Apostle, Romans 8.1. but
they are passed over from death unto life, Joh. 5.24. God who should in anger
exact those Punishments, is reconciled to them by the death of his Son, Romans
5.10. so that now they are no longer under his severity as an offended Lord,
but can look upon him as their Protector, and Patron, having received the
Spirit of Adoption, whereby they can call him Abba, i. e. Father, Romans 8.15.

And as for this Deliverance, from the worm of Conscience, and Pangs of Soul,
from the eternal Pains of Hell, and the Horrors of Darkness, we are generally
apt to think it a Deliverance indeed, and such as we have all great need of;
for who is willing to live with everlasting burnings? Who would be content to
roar in never ending Tortures? There is no man who believes there is such a
place as Hell, but whenever he seriously considers of it, most earnestly
desires to be secured from it; and therefore among all those, who are not
Atheistical or desperately loose and inconsiderate, we see there are few or
none, who will not make some profession and perform some outward and easy Acts
of Religion, that thereby they may quiet their own Consciences, with some
confidence, although never so groundless, of their share in this Salvation. But
then,

Secondly, As for those other evils which Christ came to save us from, viz. Our
sins; men are not ordinarily so fully persuaded of their illness, nor think
they have any great need to be saved from them. For their sins they dearly love
and take delight in; and therefore they do not look upon it as a Salvation, but
as a spoil, to have them taken from them. And yet it is most certain, that this
was the great Salvation which Christ designed us, and which he became man to
procure for us; he shall be called Jesus, says the Angel* because he shall
save his People from their sins.

Our greatest Evils are our sins, and Christ's saving is his reforming, and
reducing the hearts of the sinful and disobedient to the Obedience of the Just:
He saves when he makes the bold, irreligious man awful, and the proud man
humble; when he possesses the hearts of the peevish and contentious, of the
envious and revengeful, with Meekness and Patience, Charity and Peace. He
delivers the covetous man from his unsatiable love of riches, the carnal mind
from its intemperate desire of sensual Pleasures. In one word he saves us from
our own Self-will, and makes us to become entirely resigned to the will of God.

This reformation of our hearts and lives, by rescuing us from all sinful Lusts
and wicked Practices was the great Deliverance which Christ was sent to effect
for us, as might be evidenced from the blessing promised to Abraham; which as
St. Peter expounds it, did principally intend it; Act. 3.25, 26. from the
Predictions of Prophets concerning the Messiah, which clearly foretold it,
Ezekiel. 11.19, 20. Isa. 62.25. Jer. 32.39. from the Covenant promised to be made
with the house of Israel in those days; whereof Jeremiah speaks, which in plain
terms expresses it; Jer. 31.33. from the Declarations of Christ and his
Apostles, who every where proclaim, that the end of his coming was to call
Sinners to repentance, Mat. 9.13. To turn men from darkness to light, Act.
26.18. To redeem us from all iniquity, and purify unto himself a peculiar
people zealous of good works, Tit. 2.14. and that his Gospel appears bringing
Salvation in teaching us, that denying all ungodliness and worldly Lusts, we
should live soberly, godly, and righteously in this present world, Tit. 2.11,
12. All these are so many direct Arguments, and clear Proofs of Christ's design
to save men, by making them better, and that his Deliverance was to consist
chiefly in their Reformation, and in rescuing them from the Bondage of their
sins.

But in regard the Gospel of Christ is the great means of working this
Deliverance, and the power of God as St. Paul calls it, to Salvation, I shall
rather choose at present to insist more particularly upon such parts of it, as
are peculiarly sitted for this design, which will be the best way of
demonstrating this Doctrine. And those are chiefly Three; the Precepts, the
Promises, the Threatenings, which are declared to us therein.

First, I shall consider the Precepts of the Gospel; and that the great
Salvation which these are designed to promote among us is this Deliverance from
our sins, is plain from hence, because they do most fully, and indispensibly
exact it. Never did any Laws of former Legislators, extend the compass of
Virtue so wide, and advance it to such a pitch, as the Laws of Christ do; they
require a more full Obedience, and a more perfect reformation, than before that
time the world had ever heard of; they teach Virtue in the highest degrees, and
require Obedience in all imaginable Instances; representing plainly the Nature
of several sins, and discovering clearly an irregularity, and Sinfulness in
several Actions, which the Gentiles, nay even the Jews themselves never dreamed
of.

1. They represent the Nature of several sins, and discover an irregularity in
several Actions, which by the bare Light, and Law of Nature the Gentiles never
saw: They discerned no evil in worshipping of Images, and inferior Deities, in
idolatrous Rites, and superstitious Observances; they knew no sin in hating of
an Enemy, in cursing and reproaching of him, in returning his Affronts, and
revenging his Injuries; Uncleanness and Lasciviousness, Fornication and
Whoredoms were held generally among them to be as lawful as their Meats and
Drinks; in these Actions as in several others, they had no sense of sin, nor
any fears of punishment; these things as the Psalmist says, God afterward
showed to Jacob and declared to Israel, but as for the heathen Nations, they
have not known them, Psalm 147.19, 20. but as for the Sinfulness of all these
things, and the dreadful Sentence which shall be denounced upon all, who
continue in these Practices, the Law of Christ is express and peremptory. He
that looks upon a woman, says our Savior, to lust after her, has committed
adultery with her already in his heart, Matt. 5.28. The works of the flesh,
says St. Paul, are manifest, Adultery, Fornication, Uncleanness,
Lasciviousness; of the which I tell you, that they who do such things, shall
not inherit the Kingdom of God, Gal. 5.19, 21. He who hates his Brother, says
St. John, by the Sentence of our Law, is a Murderer, 1 John 3.15. and he who is
angry with him without a cause; especially, if he suffer his anger to transport
him into reproachful words, and contumelious Expressions, such as Fool, and
Racha, or empty Fellow, He is liable, says our Savior, to Hell fire, Matt.
5.22. Render to no man evil for evil, says our Religion, but love your enemies;
bless them that curse you; do good to them that hate you; and pray for them,
that despitefully use you; that so you may be perfect, and the true Children of
your Father which is in Heaven, who is kind even to the unthankful, and the
evil, Matt. 5.44, 45, 48. and as for the guidance and direction of all
religious Worship, we are forbid to give that to any Creature whatsoever,
whether Saint or Angel; Thou shall worship the Lord thy God, and him only shall
thou serve, Matt. 4.10.

As for all those Sins then, which the Law of Nature did not discover at all,
or but very darkly, to the Heathens of old; they are almost plainly discovered
to us Christians by the Law of Christ; we are showed Sin more plainly, and
taught it more fully, because we must be reformed from it, more perfectly than
ever they were.

2. The Laws of Christ discover an Irregularity, and Sinfulness in several
Actions, which the Jews discerned not under the Law of Moses; although they had a
more perfect way to walk by, than the Heathens had, yet even their Obedience
fell much short of that pitch which ours must attain to; for in several things,
as the marrying of many Wives, the putting away their Wives for every cause,
the praying against their Enemies, and retaliating of their Injuries; the Law
it self was indulgent to them, by reason of the hardness of their hearts. And
as for other things, whose Sinfulness the Law did really discover to them; they
were still kept in a general Ignorance of them, through the corrupt Glosses, and
perverse Interpretations of their Wise Men. Of these our Savior has given us
several Instances; for as for the main, and most substantial Duties of the Law;
such as Justice, Mercy, and the like; they had made them needless, by an
Opinion of the sufficiency, either of their Sacrifices, for which the Prophets
are often reproving them, or of some cheap exterior Performances. Woe unto you
Scribes and Pharisees, says our Savior, for they pay tithe of Mint, Anise and
Cummin; but omit the weightier Matters of the Law, as Judgment, Mercy and
Faith; whereas these things chiefly, ye ought to have done, and not to have
left the other undone, Matt. 23.23. They had taken off all Duty to Parents
required in the Fifth Commandment, by an unrighteous Vow, or Oath called
Corban, of their own devising. Ye say, says our Savior, in opposition to what
God has said in the Fifth Commandment; That if a man shall say to his Father or
Mother, it is Corban, i. e. a gift by whatsoever thou might be profited by
me; he shall be free. And ye suffer him no more to do any thing for his Father
or Mother, Mark 7.11, 12. They had evacuated the Obligation, and cancelled in
great part the reverence that is due to Oaths; by their corrupt Casuistry about
them: Woe to you Scribes and Pharisees, says Christ, which say, whosoever shall
swear by the Temple, it is nothing; or whosoever shall swear by the Altar, it
is nothing; but whosoever shall swear by the Gold of the Temple, or the gift
upon the Altar, he is bound by his Oath to become a Debtor, Matt. 23.16, 18.
They had undermined all Obligations of Conscience to Obedience toward the
Roman Governors, because they were Foreigners and Heathens, and by a proud
conceit of their own Freedom and Privileges, as they were Abraham's Children.
For upon this account, it was they came to Christ, with that captious Question,
Master, what think thou, is it lawful to give tribute unto Caesar or not?
hoping by his Answer to have matter to accuse him, either of Disloyalty to
Caesar if he denied, or of betraying the Freedoms, and Privileges of the Jewish
Nation if he affirmed it, Matt. 23.15, 16, 17.

Thus defective was the Sense of Duty, which even the Jews themselves were
generally guided by under Moses's (...) if they were admitted into it, be a
place of Pleasure to them. Thus for instance, if a man is wholly given up to
Lust and Intemperance; if his greatest Pleasure be in Revellings and
Drunkenness, in Luxury and Wantonness, in Licentiousness, Mirth and Riotous,
Entertainments, he would as soon be condemned to Abstinence and Fasting, and
other Religious Severities, and Self-denials here on earth, as to undergo the
very same in Heaven. For there he must needs starve his eager desire, and
languish in the pain of an unsatisfied Appetite, the place it self affording no
such things, as would content them: In the Resurrection from the dead, says our
Savior, they neither Marry, nor are given in Marriage: That is a Fools wish,
and a Mahometan's Paradise; they neither eat nor drink to sustain them, since
they cannot die any more; being in these respects not like men on Earth, but
equal to the Angels of God in Heaven, Luke 20.35, 36. Again, if a man is
turbulent and factious, apt to set Friends at odds, and to inflame Enmities; if
his whole delight is to stir up strife, and to engage Parties; in Heaven he
must live alone, for he will find no Abettors, nor Encouragers, nor after all
his Labor procure so much as one adherent in that most peaceable and quiet
place.

Again, if a man is ill natured and envious; if he mourns because others
rejoice, and grieves at the prosperity of his Neighbors; to place him in
Heaven, where even the meanest Souls, whom he most contemned on Earth, are
Crowned with immortal Happiness, would be the readiest way both infinitely to
heighten, and to perpetuate his Torments.

Again, if a Man's heart is full of hatred and malice, if he delights in doing
mischief, and is glad at his Soul when he can work his spite, and revenge an
injury; what should he do in Heaven, where there is nothing else but Mercy,
Forgiveness and Love. There are none there, but who have loved, not only their
Friends, but even their Enemies: they have sought the good of all the World,
and have hazarded; yea, when it was needful, laid down their own Lives to
confirm, or bring others to the truth and make them happy. This was the
Gallantry of their Virtue then, and it is their immortal Honor and Delight
now; they still reflect upon it, and always rejoice in it; and then to make
such a man as this a constant Witness of that joy, is to confute and reproach,
to shame and torment him for evermore.

Again, if a man is proud and ambitious, if he give himself up to assume state,
and expect attendance; if his highest aim be to be above his Brethren, and to
have them submit and pay a deference, to bow and cringe to him; what delight
should he take in Heaven, where he would find every Saint raised to Honor,
whilst he stands off at a distance, only as a Looker on; for all the Saints in
Heaven, yea, even the very meanest whom he accounted unworthy to come into his
Presence here on Earth, are Christ's Brethren, and God's Heirs; they are set
upon a Throne, and Crowned with an unspeakable and immortal weight of Glory.
And this all the Saints about them, whether higher or lower in Happiness and
Honor, according as the degrees of their Faith and Obedience in this World
have been, are infinitely pleased with. For whilst they were here on Earth,
they were wont to esteem others better than themselves, Phil. 2.3. And to look
every man not so much upon his own things, as the things of others, 1 Cor.
10.24. And this temper they carried to Heaven with them, where every one
rejoices with each other, and counts his Brothers Happiness his own: If this
Man then were there, he would see all those exalted, whom his Pride would make
low; he would see them honored, whom he would have despised; he would grieve
and envy, fret and fume alone, and find them honored, and himself unpitied,
and contemned to all Eternity.

Lastly, if a man is an Enemy of God, and an hater of Religion, if it has been
his Practice to vilify God's Saints, and to deride his Ordinances, to
burlesque the Holy Scriptures, or to blaspheme the Deity; what content of heart
think you could it be to him, to see there is a God of utmost Majesty and
Excellence, mighty and irresistible in power to reward his Saints, and as a
flaming Fire to consume his Enemies? To see, that Heaven and Hell, which he
boldly and securely contemned as fabulous, are dreadful Realities? To see what
being Religious comes to, which he derided; and all good men fixed in height of
Glory whom he had despised, and thence expect the miserable state of those men,
who had set themselves as he had done, to laugh God's Servants out of their
Religion; or out-brave himself out of his Being? Surely to such a Person, this
sight of Heaven could be nothing less than the first Horrors and Amazements,
the beginning and foretaste of Hell.

And thus it appears, that all the sins of Impiety toward God, of Pride, and
Intemperance, of Envy, Hatred, Uncharitableness, and Unpeaceableness, which
take up in a manner, the whole Compass of Transgressions, are all so many
direct Hindrances, and utter Incapacities to our enjoying any Happiness in
Heaven; they make us dead to all the Enjoyments, and wholly unfit for the
Company of that place; For what Communication has God with wickedness, Eccl.
13.16, 17, 18.
what fellowship, says the Apostle, has righteousness with unrighteousness,
what Communion has light with darkness, 1 Cor. 6.14. Nay the being in Heaven
with all our sins unmortified about us, would not only deprive us of all the
Happiness and Pleasure of that blessed place; but it would also render it an
uneasy state, and make Heaven it self become in part a Hell to us. For it
would fill us as I have shown with shame and discontent, with remorse of mind,
and grife of heart, with eternal Torment and Vexation.

As for this Reformation of our Lives and Natures, and Deliverance from sin,
here then, it is plainly requisite and indispensiblely necessary, to fit and
capacitate us for any Enjoyments of Happiness in Heaven hereafter. And this the
Scriptures plainly affirm concerning it. St. Paul tells us, That the Vessels of
mercy, must through that method of Faith and Repentance which God has prescribed,
be prepared unto Glory, Romans 9.23. And that God's delivering us from the power
of darkness has made us meet to be partakers of the Inheritance of the Saints
in light, Col. 1.12, 13. And our Savior says expressly, That except we put off
the old man which is corrupted by sinful Lusts, and be born again, we cannot
enter into the Kingdom of God, Joh. 3.3.

This then is clear both from the Declarations of the Scripture, and the
evidence of the thing, that a Life of Virtue is plainly necessary to our future
Happiness; and that our being saved from sin in this World; is indispensiblely
requisite to our Salvation in the next. The eternal Life of Heaven is a Life,
as I have shown, that is after the likeness and similitude of God's; a Life of
unspotted Virtue, and complete Goodness, that implies an entire Exemption, and
most absolute Deliverance from all manner of sin.

This Perfection and Compleatness of it we must expect in Heaven, whereas St.
Paul says, The Spirits of just men are made perfect, Heb. 12.23. But as for the
Life it self, we must enter upon it, and begin it here. That Life of Virtue and
Reformation, which we engage upon at our becoming Christians is that very Life
which never ends, but which is to grow up to full degrees, and to be eternal in
the Heavens. And therefore, the Scriptures as in respect of the full Perfection
and Fruition of it, which is to be had in the next World, they are wont to
speak of it as a thing future; so in respect of that more imperfect Enjoyment,
which we have of it in this World, they use sometimes to speak of it as a thing
possessed here. He that believes on me, says our Savior, has eternal Life,
Joh. 6.47. And again, Whosoever eats my flesh and drinks my blood has eternal
life, Verse 54. St. John bids them, That believe on the name of the Son of God,
know that they have eternal life, 1 John 5.13. And that Grace or Goodness of
Spirit, which our Savior expressed by water, Joh. 4. and which he bid the
woman of Samaria to ask of him, Verse 10. he tells her, Shall be a Well of
water springing up to eternal life, Verse 14.

A Life of Virtue and Obedience then, is not only a necessary Qualification for
our Salvation, and eternal Life in Heaven; but in a degree it is that very
Salvation and eternal Life it self; our Deliverance from our sins, is not only
the way to Happiness, but in an imperfect measure it is that very Happiness,
whose perfection and complete Degrees we are bid to hope for in Heaven. The
Misery that befell us all in Adam, was our falling from God's image, wherein he
and all his Holy Angels are infinitely Happy; and that Happiness and Salvation
which is promised to us in Christ, is our Restoration to it. So that as for the
Promises of God, it is clear from them, that the great Salvation which they are
designed for is this Deliverance from our sins; since all other promised
Blessings are made to depend upon it, since it is not possible they should be
had without it; nay, since this Deliverance is the chief promised Mercy, and
even Happiness, and eternal Life it self; and as to the third part of the
Gospel, I proposed to speak to viz.

Thirdly, Those Threatenings which are contained therein, the Salvation which
they aim at, is evidently this Deliverance from our Sins, which are those very
things they are all denounced to. The Gospel though it breath out nothing but
Grace and Mercy to the Penitent, is yet the severest Dispensation that ever was
to all incorrigible Men. For therein God declares himself an utter Enemy to all
that will not be reformed, and that he will inflict a most terrible Punishment,
and exemplary Vengeance on them; the Author of Grace and Mercy, Christ himself
has spoken it, That except we repent we shall all perish, Luke 13.3. And St.
Paul tells us plainly, That at the last Day, God will render to all that obey
not the truth, but obey unrighteousness, indignation and wrath, tribulation and
anguish, and that upon every soul of man, whether he be Jew or Gentile, Romans
2.6, 8, 9, 10. Our sins then are plainly those Evils, which the Threatenings of
the Gospel would fright us from; and our Deliverance from them is that
Salvation which they would enforce upon us. Their end is evidently to make us
leave all evil ways, for fear least they should be inflicted on us for our
perseverance in them.

As for that Salvation then, which Christ came to purchase for us, from what I
have delivered it appears, I suppose, most evidently what it is. The
Declarations of the Prophets, of Christ and his Apostles, the prime end of the
Precepts, the Promises, and the Threatenings of the Gospel, the Nature of God,
of Heaven and Happiness; in a word, the Design of our whole Religion, and
Christianity, make it clear to us, that it is our Reformation; or, as the Angel
expressed it, our Deliverance from our sins. He shall be called Jesus, because
he shall save his people from their sins.

And thus having represented what that Salvation is, which Christ came to
purchase for us, and shown, I think clearly, that the great Deliverance
designed us by him, and promoted by his Gospel, is our Reformation, and a
Freedom from our Sins. I proceed now,

Secondly, To note some Uses, and particular Improvements of this Discourse.

1. Then from what has been discoursed upon the Nature of the Christian
Salvation we may plainly understand, what Faith, what Repentance, what Grace,
what Preaching, what Ordinances are saving. For if Salvation mainly consists in
our Deliverance from our Sins, as we have evidently seen it does; then that is
a saving Faith which makes us obedient; and that a saving Repentance which
works our Amendment; and that is saving Grace, which enables us to a pious
Practice; and that is saving Preaching, which is fitted, not to fill us with
vain Delights, or learned Niceties, or abstract Speculations, or mysterious
Notions, but to awaken our Consciences, and reform our Lives; and those are
saving Ordinances, which are powerful and proper means of our Conversion, and
virtuous Performances. This is to be the end of all the helps of Religion, and
this the Excellency of all the means of Grace, that they tend strongly to make
us leave our sins, and rescue us from Disobedience. Our Salvation is a
Deliverance from our sins, and then any thing is saving when it delivers and
frees us from them.

2. A second Use which I shall note of this Discourse, is for the Trial of our
State; to know whether we are indeed of the number of the saved or no; for if
Salvation consists in our Deliverance from our sins, then they are not saved
but lost men, who still live in them, and are enslaved to them. Is any man then
a contemner, or prophaner of God, of his dreadful Name, or of his holy word?
Does he spend his time in Luxury and Wantonness, Pride and Covetousness? are
his hands full of violence? or is he a stranger to the ways of Peace? In sine,
if he does not make it his business and care, to fear God and keep his
Commandments, to be humble, chaste and temperate; to do all men Justice, and to
speak the Truth, and love all, even his Enemies, and employ himself in all the
instances of Duty, which must at the last and great Day be the matter of his
Account, he has either no share at all, or not enough, in Christ's Salvation.
The chiefest Grace which they enjoy, is the Grace of forbearance. God does not
snatch some of them away in their deplorable, nor others in their insecure
Condition, but allows them time and opportunities of Reformation; and the only
advice which I can give them, is to renounce their evil Courses, and to live as
new men; and then they may comfortably conclude; that they are in a safe state,
and are not without their part in that Salvation which Christ came to procure
for them.

3. A third Use and Improvement, which I shall make of this Discourse is for
the directing of our Charity; in showing what things we ought most chiefly to
desire and endeavor after for our Brethren. For if our greatest Happiness, and
the great Salvation which Christ came to procure for us, consist in our
Deliverance from our sins, and we are to love our Brethren, as Christ loved us;
then it is plain, that the great benefit which we are to seek for them, is their
virtuous Life and Reformation. Holiness is the greatest Kindness which they can
receive, or we can endeavor to promote in them: And therefore, among all those
endeavors, which are very commendably used for our Brethrens good, whether in
their Bodies, good Names, or Fortunes, let us still be sure to have an Eye to
their highest good of all, their increase in good Living, and their Deliverance
from their sins; let our greatest care be to make them better, rather than
richer, and more honorable than they were. For this is true Kindness and Love
indeed to show our selves most concerned for that whereby they will be
infinitely most advantaged.

This Deliverance from their Sins then, is that which above all things, we
should endeavor to procure for them; and as this should be the great aim of
all our Labors for their advantage, so should it be of those more especially,
which are employed for reclaiming them from a false Religion, or establishing
them in a right one. For Repentance and Reformation are necessary to Salvation
in all Parties, and must carry men (whose other errors God shall see fit to
excuse, because of the Pityableness of their ignorance) to Heaven in all the
Sects of the Christian World. And therefore, if we convert a man to a Party,
but not to Obedience, we win a Proselyte but half way, Jam. 5.19, 20.
and have not saved a soul from death, till we have reduced him, as from
error, so from sin too. In all our endeavors therefore of this sort, let us
strive at least as much to win men to the Practice, as to the Profession of the
truth. Let us seek as much to rectify their hearts, as their understandings,
and to get them over unto an entire Obedience unto Christ, and not only to an
external Communion with our selves.

Some indeed instead of endeavoring to save, and rescue others from their
sins; take a pride in inveagling, and insnaring them into sin. They will Glory
in making a sober man drunk; or in corrupting a modest Virtue, and drawing it
Captive at last to Acts, and places of Debauchery; and some set up to ridicule
all Religion and Virtue, making them the Topics of their Jests and Merryment,
this way driving those out of all Professions, and open owning thereof, who
cannot bear to be laughed at.

Now these men, who thus make it their business, to decoy men into sin, are not
only unchristian, but base and barbarous. They betray them under a pretense of
Kindness, and seek eternally to destroy them under a Mask of Friendship. They
are vile Wretches and mischievous Instruments; nay I might say they are Devils,
and Destroyers in the very same Sense that Christ is a Savior: For he saves in
rescuing, and delivering men from their sins, and they destroy them in
entangling them therein, and making them subject to them.

And these are the Uses which I think fit to draw from the foregoing Notion,
and Explication of the Christian Salvation.

And God grant, that whilst we are all talking and hoping for Salvation, we may
not appear at last, to have been all the while lost men; but that we may all
make it our chiefest care, to get rid of all sinful habits and wicked Courses,
whilst we are in this World; that so we may be qualified for the joys of
Heaven, and the Conversation of blessed Spirits, and delivered from those
eternal Punishments which will be inflicted on all that are irreclamably
disobedient, in the World to come, Amen.

DISCOURSE II. Showing that this Deliverance, and entire Obedience, is neither
impossible, nor extreme difficult, if sincere Christians set about it as they
ought.
On Phil. 4.13. I can do all things through Christ which strengthens me.
THE things St. Paul here Glories himself able to perform, are the Duties of a
Christian, even those that are the greatest Trial of a strong, and well fixed
mind, and have more than ordinary Temptation in them; such as the knowledge of
our selves, and serving God in a prosperous, and trusting in him, and being
contented in a necessitous, State. And that which gives him this Ability he
confesses, is not any power of Nature derived from Adam, but the super-induced
Grace of Christ, which aids and strengthens him. In that forlorn state, wherein
Adam's sin left all mankind, subject to strong Lusts, surrounded with numerous
and powerful Temptations, and stripped of all Divine aids, and supernatural
Assistances, they all lay open to be made a prey, and were easy to be
overcome. But since Christ has been the restorer of the World, and recovered
more Grace and Strength for us than ever Adam forfeited; they are again enabled
to withstand Temptations, and perform all Duties unto God, even those which
seem to have most hardship in them. I know both how to be abased, or live
meanly, and how to abound in Honor and Plenty; every where, and in all places,
I am instructed both to be full without forgetting God, and to be hungry
without repining at him; both to abound, and still be humble and temperate, and
to suffer need, and at the same time praise and trust God, and rest contented;
I can do all things through Christ that strengthens me, Verse 12, 13.

By this performance of all Duties, we are not to understand such a perfection
of Obedience to them, as is intermixed with no Escapes; for so Christ does not
enable any of his Servants in this World, no not St. Paul himself. To live
without all sin is not to be expected from any mortal man, but only from the
strength of an Angel, or a just Soul made perfect in Heaven. Some sins of
ignorance, or forgetfulness, have and surprise, such as Paul's Speech to
Ananias, Acts 23.3. will adhere to the best men whilst they have earthly Bodies
about them: And Christ, who being in our Nature has a fellow-feeling of all our
Infirmities, when he comes to sit as our Judge will make fair allowances for
them, Heb. 5.2.

But it implies such a perfection of Obedience, as admits of no damning Sins,
that is, of no sins which are wilfully incurred, against knowledge, or it may
be against Checks and loud Alarms of Conscience; and which are also persisted
in without true Repentance, and Amendment of the same. These sins deprive us of
the favor of God, and destroy a Soul; and therefore, Christ must strengthen
men against all these, before he proves a Savior to them. And this strength
St. Paul says he found, as all other Christians will, who will make the
Experiment as he did, and not be wanting to themselves, or fail to make use of
it. Though they will not be strengthened against all involuntary surprises; yet,
if they are as careful to employ this Grace as Christ is ready to afford it,
they will be strengthened against all wilful Breaches of any Commandments, or at
least against all impenitent continuance in the same, when at any time they
have wilfully broken any. I can do all things through Christ that strengthens me.

My design from these words, is to show that the Grace of Christ is ready to
enable all Christians to obey his Laws; who are not wanting in their own Care
and good Endeavors. He earnestly desires the Obedience of men, and affords
them aid sufficient to help it on: So that no Christian can ever fail to do his
Duty, but through his own fault, when he either neglects, or rejects that Help
and Grace, which our Savior Christ holds out to him.

Indeed the great excuse which disobedient men are wont to make for themselves
is, that they would do better if they knew how to do it, and are therefore only
ill, because they cannot help it. They would plead impotence in themselves, and
impracticable heights, and impossibilities in God's Commandments. And if this
were true as it is most false, it would be a serviceable Plea indeed, and
excuse them both for being ill, and also for being idle: for if they cannot
avoid being disobedient, why should they be blamed for it? And if they are not
able to obey, do what they can, why should they throw away their Pains in vain
Attempts, and fruitlesly endeavor after it? There is neither Duty, nor
Discretion in attempting impossibilities, and laboring after that which is not
to be done: so that if Obedience were impossible, every man might as
innocently, and much more wisely, disobey at first, as at last, when he has
striven in vain against it; and it ought not to be censured as the fault of his
Choice, but pitied as his invincible misfortune.

Now as for this impotence, and impossibility of performing all Duties, it is
often pleaded by those, who seem willing and desirous to perform them. And in
regard it gives some Color to this complaint, because we hear it from those;
who have tried the Hardship, and so from their own Experience are best able to
judge of it, and who express a Goodwill for their Duty, and so may be presumed
to complain of nothing but what they find. In treating of this Subject, I
shall, (...)

2. Generally such as endeavor wrong, without using those fit means, which
should make them obedient. The means and instruments of Duty, are the way that
leads us to the performance of it; and in these it concerns us much to be
careful, what Choice we make if we pursue any Virtue, without the use of any
means at all; that is, as if we should set our selves to the dispatch of any
business with our hands behind us; and if we use improper and unsuitable ones,
like men who labor with ill Instruments in any Craft, we shall make but rugged
work, and find that too to prove very toilsome and difficult; and after much
time and Pains is spent, see but a very little Fruit of all. The means of
Virtue are, as I say, the way to it: And therefore, there is much depends upon
the means we use, when we would be virtuous, as upon the way we take, when we
would travel to any Town or Place; we may go the straight Road to it, and that
brings us thither in a short time, and without being much wearied; but if
either we take a contrary path, or go much about, we shall spend much more
time, and be much more tired in going; yea forced, perhaps, at last to sit down
short of our Journeys-end.

And this now is an ordinary fault of those Complainers, who endeavor to obey
without Success, and cannot compass any Virtue, though they do take Pains for it.
The reason why they fail, is because they are not well directed, and their
Labor is not wisely managed, and laid out in the use of such means, and in the
practice of such Rules, as are most proper and likely to gain the Point, and
introduce the Virtue which they wanted.

To illustrate this by some Instances; one man is of an irritable hasty Temper;
and he complains that he has striven, but is not able to bridle and conquer his
Passion; he labors, and does what he can; but such is the distracting Variety
of his business, the Crossness or Carelessness of those he is concerned with, or
the number of his Provocations one way or other, that notwithstanding all his
Care, his Passion is still too strong for him.

But I would ask that Person, who says his Labor is lost, whether he advised
well upon what he did, and took the ready, and the right way to this Conquest?
Has he for instance, besides his earnest Prayers to God for Grace to master his
Passion, avoided moreover as much, as the concerns of Life will suffer him, all
unnecessary Discourse, especially Disputes, with wrathful, loud, cross, or
scornful Persons; has he watched over himself daily at such times, and places,
and in such Business and Company, wherein he was like to meet with
Provocations, and particularly resolved within himself, not only long before;
but at those very times, that he will not be transported by them? And above all
Lastly, has he made this a constant Law to himself to forbear speaking, or
acting any thing suddenly, when he feels a Passion stirred in him; but to turn
aside, and say over the Lord's Prayer, or some devout Ejaculation to himself,
which will both gain him time for Consideration, and likewise call God and
Goodness into his mind, which will be the most effectual means of all to
restrain him? If these or such like means have not been used, he has not taken
the best ways he can; and if he will set himself to bridle his Nature in this
way, I doubt not, but God will bless him in it, and then let him complain he
cannot restrain himself, if he find reason.

Again, another who has accustomed himself to Oaths, complains that he is
convinced he ought, and endeavors to do it, but that he is not able to refrain
swearing. But besides his fervent Prayers to God, has such a Complainer
labored withal to possess his Conscience, with a great sense and dread of it?
Has he particularly called to mind, and resolved against it, not only when it
was at a distance, but when he was expecting any Disappointment, or coming into
the way of any Provocation, which would tempt him to it? And because men
subject to this Vice, swear often in eagerness of Spirit, and do not know it, has
he desired some true Friend, to be his Monitor, to warn him of it before, or
tell him when it is past, that afterward he may be more careful to prevent it,
or to punish himself for it? And in regard men who shun it at other times, are
generally pushed on to swear in haste, through the surprise of a Provocation, in
the eagerness of Sport, or through the suddenness of some cross Accident and
Disappointment: Has he taken Care lastly to speak nothing rashly, especially
whilst he is in heat and eagerness of Spirit, but to bridle his Tongue, and
consider what he is about to say before he utter it, that so if it prove to be
ill he may forbear it? These and such like ways, are the proper method for
curing this Sin; and if a man has labored against it, without them, he has
sought the end without the means, and pursued the cure without the right
Prescriptions. And therefore, if he will correct that Error, and begin again
to labor in right ways, I question not, but, that he will succeed well, and
find the effect through God's blessing.

Thus do men, who endeavor in vain for these, or for any other Virtues,
plainly miscarry, for want of choosing right ways; the Duties are not impossible
to be attained, if the right Course were used to attain them; but it is their
own neglect of means, or mistaken Choice of bad ones, which makes the
Disappointment. And therefore, if they would labor to effect, let them be
careful to pursue good things, by wise and proper methods. When they are
resolved to endeavor after any Virtue, let them learn from good Books, or from
their spiritual Guides, or the advice of any wise or judicious Persons, what
Rules serve most to compass it: And if they carefully and diligently follow
them, the Duty which seemed before impossible, will prove a very possible
thing. And this again would rid us of the greatest part of those Complainers
who fail at last, but yet endeavor something: for most of them, when they
endeavor to obey, do not endeavor wisely, or in the use of such proper and
discreet Methods, a sure sit to work Obedience in them.

But if any complain still, that they have taken advice about the best Course
and followed it; but yet all their labor has been without the desired effect:
Yet are they always,

3. Such, as when they use right means, endeavor but by halves, and do not go
through with them.

A faint Endeavourer, will never go through with any work, which requires either
length of time, or strength of Labor. If he put little strength to it, that
will not conquer the difficulty of the Task; and if he is soon wearied, he will
give over before it comes to an end. So that a man must apply himself to the
same, both earnestly and long, if he would succeed when he has begun, and go on
to finish and complete it.

Now our obeying God, and amending of our Lives, is a work of this kind. For
our sins being many in number, they will require a considerable space of time,
before they are all amended; and our hindrances in leaving them being great,
and the Temptations strong that daily assault and draw us to them, and our own
Lusts, and a treacherous Enemy in our own Bosoms, being always ready to take
their parts and strike in with them, it requires a great Watchfulness, and a
constant Care, and an earnest vigorous endeavor to overcome them. And this the
Scripture tells us plainly we must use, if ever we expect to prevail against
them; St. Peter tells us, we must give all diligence, 2 Pet. 1.5, 10. St. Paul
that we must be circumspect, Ephesians. 5.15. Our Blessed Savior that we must watch
always, and be ever standing upon our Guard, Mark 13.37. and strive to enter in
at the strait gate, Luke 13.24. which striving is called a warfare, 2 Cor.
10.4. and a fight, 1 Timothy 6.12. All which show the Greatness of that care, and
both the Earnestness and Constancy of that endeavor, which we must lay out
upon it.

And this now is the fault of all those Strivers, who, pursuing Obedience by
right and proper Methods, do yet miss of it at last. They endeavor but by
halves, and seek it, either by too short, or too slight Pains. They have not
either the Resolution to set manfully about it, or the Patience to go through
with it; and so being either faint in their pursuit, or falling off before they
are got to the end, they are not reclaimed from their sins by all their Pains,
but continue subject, and enslaved to them still.

But now when they fail on this account, it is not because they cannot, but
because they will not help it. They might become good, if they would be at the
trouble of it, and persevere with Patience, till they have finished it; but if
they will use only slight Endeavors and short Onsets; their missing of
Success, must not be charged upon the impossibility of God's Laws, but upon
their own sloth and remissness in performing them; they can and do take great
and incessant Pains to be rich, or great, or compass a worldly Interest: And if
they please they can labor as vigorously, and as incessantly too to be good,
and do what God Commands them. And if once they would do this, it would be the
best Demonstration, how possible a thing Obedience is; since less Pains than
this comes to, will ordinarily suffice them to that purpose.

And this will stop the mouths of all those Complainers, who have not been
silenced by the two former Considerations. If they have not complained before
they tried, and if in trying to be good, they took a right method; yet want
they one thing still, they endeavored but by halves, and were not vigorous and
constant enough in their endeavors, and that is the reason why they failed:
Whereas, if they will try again, and endeavor not only wisely, but also
vigorously and incessantly, they will most certainly be enabled to perform
their Duty: And their doing it actually, will be the most effectual Conviction
that it is possible to be done.

Having said this, to remove the prejudice that lies against this possibility
of performing the Laws of God, from the Complaints of those, who say they find
it otherwise: I proceed now,

2. To show that among Christians, there is no cause for such Complaints, and
that they will be strengthened to the performance of all Duties, if they are not
wanting to themselves.

They must be careful as I have observed, to use their own endeavors, because
God that made them, will not also save them without themselves. And these
endeavors must be in wise ways, since we must not expect God should give
effects to unsuitable means, and be at the expense of Miracles, to supply for
our Follies. And when we endeavor thus wisely, we must do it also vigorously
and incessantly; Obedience being a work of time and Pains, that requires both
the earnestness, and the continuance of our Applications. These things are
required on our part, and if we take care to perform that, the Grace of Christ
will make up the rest, and most certainly enable us, as he did St. Paul, to do
all things which he indispensibly requires of us; he will give us some strength
at first, and as we employ that, according to that great Rule of Gospel
Distribution, To him that has shall be given, Matt. 25.29. he will add more,
till at last we perform as much, as is indispensibly required, i^ e. as ^
noted, either not sinning wilfully, or sincerely repenting, and amending
whenever we do. If they are thus careful, I say, in their own endeavors,
this strength all Christians shall surely receive from the Grace of Christ to
these performances, as the Apostle in the Text declares of himself; I can do,
etc.

Now that every wise, earnest, and incessant Endeavourer, shall be thus enabled
to perform all Duties, will appear from these three things, First, Because God
indispensibly requires, and passionately exhorts us to this performance.
Secondly, Because he has promised this Ability, and Obedience to all who are so
qualified and prepared for the same. Thirdly, Because all good men heretofore,
and at this present time, do themselves find, and experience it.


1. That they shall be thus enabled to perform all Duties, appears, because God
indispensibly requires, and passionately exhorts us to this performance.

He indispensibly requires it. For now as St. Paul says, God commands all men
every where to repent, Acts 17.30. And that of all sins, they being all liable
to the same Punishment; The wrath of God being revealed against all
unrighteousness, Romans 1.18. And he that offends in one point being guilty of
all, Jam. 2.10. And this he requires under the strictest condition, as ever
they hope to avoid the wrath to come, or to obtain everlasting Salvation: If
the wicked turn from all his sins, and keep all my Statutes, then says God by
Ezekiel, but not before, he shall surely live, Ezekiel. 18.21. And they only that
do his commandments have right to the tree of life, says Christ, Rev. 22.14.

Now since God thus requires us to obey all his Laws, it must needs be possible
for us to obey them; for God never requires an impossible thing; what he
Commands, he both desires and Psalm. 5.2. Matt. 21.34.
expects should be performed; and therefore, calls men to the Jam. 1.25. Jo.
13.17.
performance of it; to be not only hearers, but doers of the Law, Romans 2.13.
And it is certain they may perform it, since he is too wise, either to desire,
or expect what is not to be had.

Nay, he does not only indispensibly require this Obedience, but Friendly and
passionately exhorts us to it; Repent and turn your selves from all your
transgressions, so iniquity shall not be your ruin. Cast away from you all
your transgressions, and (...)

Thus have we an assurance, that God will give us all so much Grace and
Strength, as will suffice to make us good, if we diligently, and discreetly
apply our selves to become so. This God engages, and he does not only permit,
but expect that we should believe him, and take his word in this, as well as in
all other Promises. He would not only have us to have faith in his mercy, for
the pardon of any Sins when we repent of them, but likewise to have faith in
his power and spirit, enabling us to overcome our sins, when we seriously
strive against them. When St. Paul bids us work out our own Salvation, he gives
God's working in us, as the reason, plainly directing us to work in that
Expectation, Phil. 2.11, 12. And we are kept to Salvation by the power of God
through faith, i. e. through Faith in the Power, says St. Peter, 1 Pet. 1.5. God
has promised his Spirit to strengthen us against sin, as well as his mercy to
pardon and forgive sin: And since he has promised both; our Duty is to believe
both, and not distrust him in either of them.

And since we both may and ought to have this Confidence in God's Grace; that
will perfectly answer the main Objection against the possibility of this
performance, which is taken from ourselves, and the reigning Power of our own
Lusts. For our Lusts are not too strong for God, though they be too strong for
us: Though there be great Might in corrupt Nature, yet the Grace of Christ is
mightier: And therefore, having that on our side, we shall certainly be
empowered to please God, let our own sinful Lusts, and the Temptations of the
World, oppose themselves never so much against it. Greater is he that is in us,
says St. John, Than he that is in the world, 1 John 4.4. And though we be able to
do nothing of our selves, as of our selves; yet having the same Promise we
shall all be enabled, 2 Cor. 3.5.
as St. Paul was, To do all things through Christ that strengthens us.

And as this possibility of keeping the Commandments, through our own Care and
Pains, appears because God indispensibly requires and exhorts to it; and has
promised his Holy Spirit and Grace, to enable all who duly labor after the
same: So does it yet farther,

3. Because good men heretofore, and at this present time, do themselves find
and experience it. Whenever they wisely, and earnestly endeavored, and did
not grow weary or faint, they always succeeded, and were enabled to have such
regard to their whole Duty, as God required the true Servants of God in all
Ages, have been endowed with so much strength as made them entire with God, and
able to perform all that he would exact of them. Caleb and Joshua followed the
Lord wholly, Numb. 32.12. David kept my commandments, says God, and followed
me with all his heart, 1 Kin. 14.8. Zachariah and Elizabeth were both righteous
before God, walking in all the ordinances and commandments of the Lord
blameless, says St. Luke, Luke 1.6. And what is so expressly said of all these,
is by plain Intimation employed of all others. They that are Christ's, says St.
Paul, have crucified the flesh with the affections and lusts, Gal. 5.24. If
Christ be in you, the body is dead because of sin, i. e. Sin must have no more
Service from it, than one would expect from a dead man, but the spirit is life
because of righteousness, i. e. lives in righteous ways, Romans 8.10. They who do
no iniquity walk in his ways, Psalm. 119.3.

Thus is it a constant thing in Scripture account, and Relations, and so it
was, and is still in all following Ages, for God's faithful Servants to
Experiment his Faithfulness in this grand Promise, and to be sufficiently
assisted to do his Will, when they diligently and duly applied^ themselves to
the doing of it. When they wisely and resolutely set themselves to it, and
stuck to it, and called to him for help; he put to his Almighty hand, and
strengthened them, to accomplish what they attempted; and God's Promise is still
the same to us, as it was to them, and he to the full, as inclinable, and as
able to make it good, his Ear is not grown heavy that it cannot hear, nor his
arm short or feeble that it cannot help us. So that if we follow their Example,
in wisely and faithfully endeavoring, we shall happily find their Success, in
acceptably, and entirely obeying too.

Nay, I add further, as the good Experiment this Power in themselves, viz. Of
doing their Duty through God's assistance, and evidence the same by their actual
performance thereof; so likewise do all the bad confess it, by repenting where
they fail. For there can be no repentance for a Sin, where there was no
possibility of avoiding it. All repentance is a blaming of our selves; and no
man can accuse himself for want of Power, where he is not left to be his own
Carver, but only for mis-use of it where he is. So that we can repent for
nothing, but what, had we been wise and wary enough, our own hearts tell us we
might have done otherwise. If any men then, in hopes to clear themselves, shall
deny it in words; yet, whether they will or no, shall they all confess this
Power in their Practice. When they do ill, they repent of it; and that shows,
how by the Grace of God, they might have done better, since otherwise they
could only be pitied, not blamed and censured for what they did. I come now in
the

3. And last place to show, that this performance is so far from being an
impossible Task, that it is not extreme difficult, when men set to it in
earnest. By the Grace of God, and Care of pious Parents, several good Souls are
trained up as soon as may be, to the keeping of their Baptismal Innocence, and
performance of their solemn Engagements. They are taught to know God, and to
fear him, to know good and ill; and in reverence to God, to do the good, and
refuse the ill, as soon as they are capable of knowing any thing. Now here
Religion grows up with them, and corrupt Passions and evil Customs (which are
other Peoples great Complaints and Difficulties) are stifled and prevented from
the first, and never come to grow Headstrong, or have any Power to reign in
them. So that what Difficulties they have to find in Religion, are chiefly the
Pains and Services of religious Actions; not those Self-denials, and
Mortification of corrupt Lusts and evil Habits, which create so much trouble to
other Persons.

But the greatest part alas! have given way to their Lusts, and subjected
themselves to wicked Customs, and their work is not retaining Innocence, but
recovering it, and rectifying and amending Transgressions; now in amending our
Lives, and obeying God after we have made our selves thus averse to his
Obedience, there is difficulty and pains at first. Our former Courses and
Customs generally must be altered, our Friends sometimes disobliged, our
temporal Interest crossed and thwarted, and our natural Lusts formerly
indulged, now gainsaid and conquered. All this is against our inclination,
which is a force upon any man, and that while it lasts, will make an uneasiness
in Religion. But to cure this, God's Grace will be working in us, and
New-molding of our Natures; and by use we shall grow perfect and inclineable to
the good things, which we set our selves to practice. So that after God's
Grace, and our own virtuous usage, have gone on for some due time, the Case
will be altered, and Religion will appear not only a reasonable and beneficial,
but likewise an agreeable thing. Divine Aids, and good Customs, will give us a
new sense of all our Duties, and make them almost always fairly tolerable, and
usually delightful things. And thus our Lord encourages us to his Service. Take
my yoke upon you, and learn of me; for my yoke is easy and my burden light,
Matt. 11.29, 30. And St. John speaking of keeping his commandments, for our
Comforts adds, that those commandments are not grievous, 1 John 5.3.

This it is plain our Savior says, but how, may some reply, does it consist
with sundry Severities and Strictnesses which his Law requires? For he enjoins
us to mortify our Lusts, the Plainfulness whereof is expressed, By cutting off
right hands, and plucking out right eyes; to take up the cross, and patiently
suffer persecutions; to watch and strive, and wrestle against spiritual
enemies. These are all hard things, and where there are such Severities, and
heavy Loads, how can we expect to find, I will not say delight, but easiness,
since it seems strange to expect ease, under such uneasy Impositions,

But in answer to this I observe, that these and all such like places of
Scripture, speak only either the Difficulties of Religion in some less common
Cases, as persecutions, in which the increase of Difficulty is so answered by a
proportionable increase of Strength, as makes it a tolerable Task to encounter
them: Or, the Hardships of it, at men's new entrance on it, after they had done
much to unfit themselves for it; at which time as I have said, it does call for
more Pains. Or lastly, such diligent and just Care, and watchfulness
afterward, as admits of Comfort and Delight enough to sweeten it to us.

1. The hardest things spoken of Religion concern it only in some less common
Cases, as Persecutions. To this Case all those hard Sayings relate: It is
hardly possible for a rich man to enter into the Kingdom of heaven: i. e. To
turn Christian, which was punished with Confiscation of Goods at Jerusalem; and
left the Disciples no other way of saving any thing, than by selling all, and
having all things common; which in those days, and all others like them, was an
extreme Difficulty, called here an impossibility, in the way of rich men, Matt.
19.23, 24. If thou will be perfect sell all that thou have and give to the
poor; which refers I suppose to that particular time, and other succeeding
times like it, when if he would adhere to Christ, a man could not keep his
Estate, Ver. 21. If any man will come after me; he must take up his cross,
Matt. 16.24. All that will live Godly in Christ Jesus, must suffer
persecutions, 2 Timothy 3.12. He that will save his life, shall lose it, and he
must be willing to lose it for my sake; that would expect to find it, Matt.
10.39. All which strict Sayings, do not respect the ordinary course and state
of Religion, but only its state in some certain Occurrences, which more seldom
happen, and under great Persecutions, which were very hot in the first days;
when as our Savior told them, they could not be his Disciples, without
forsaking houses and lands, and parents and brethren; yea and their own lives
also, Luke 14.26, 33.

But even in these Cases and suffering times, when Religion enjoins such hard
things, yet are not they too hard for good men; the increase of Difficulty is
so answered by a proportionable increase of Strength, as makes it no heavy, but
a tolerable Imposition. For things are hard, or easy in relation to our
Strength, according as we are more or less able to deal with them. What is hard
to a stripling, is easy to a grown man; and what would be an intolerable
burden to an Infirm, is a very supportable Load, to an Healthy, and Athletick
person. And in these suffering days, when God adds to our Task, he adds also to
our Strength, so that we are still well able to go through with it. When I am
weak, says St. Paul, in distresses and persecutions of the flesh for Christ,
then am I strong in Spirit to go through with them, 2 Cor. 12.10. As the
sufferings of Christ abound in us; so proportionably our consolation abounds
by Christ, 2 Cor. 1.5.

In extraordinary Trials God is faithful, says St. Paul, 1 Cor. 10.13. and
will afford extraordinary Assistances; and then however hard their Case may be
looked upon by others, who see only at a distance, it will appear fairly
tolerable and supportable; nay full of Comfort to themselves; as the numerous
Army of Martyrs, and Confessors have comfortably experienced; who were enabled
not only to bear, but as the Apostle says, 2 Cor. 12.10.
To take pleasure in necessities and distresses, for Christ; yea, who could
sing, and sometimes rejoice, and say, they felt no Pain even in the hottest
Flames. So that take even Persecutions for God and a good Conscience; for any
first, or second Table Duties, which seems the hardest Case; and the greatest
Hardship in that is farthest off, and men know least of it. But when good men
are called out to suffer for righteousness sake, and adhere to their Duty
inviolably, and rely on God, and entirely commit themselves to him in faithful
discharge of the same, they find such Assistances of Grace, as renders them
strong enough for what he calls them to; they cannot only bear, but through the
rich supplies of spiritual Comforts, the Applause of a good Conscience, and the
joyful prospect of a vast increase of future recompenses, for their Surplusage
of present Sufferings, they can take pleasure and rejoice therein; counting
such Losses for a good Conscience, to be their greatest and truest Gain; and
that God instead of being hard upon them, is therein most kind, and beneficent
to them.

2. Other Hardships attributed to Religion concern only men's new Entrance upon
it, after they have done much to unfit themselves for it, when indeed it
requires more Pains. And to this we may refer all those Scriptures, which speak
of cutting off right hands, and plucking out right eyes, i. e. Casting away all
evil Habits and Inclinations which are very near and dear to us, Matt. 5.29,
30. Of mortifying our members, which are upon the earth, Col. 3.5. and the like.

These are Difficulties at our first Entrance on the Amendment of evil Courses,
for then we throw off all sinful Lusts and Inclinations. It is very painful at
the first, but use makes it easier afterward. Custom rectifies our
Inclinations, and begets a new Nature, and reconciles us to those things,
whereto we were very averse before, so that the Hardship which these make in
Religion, is only when we begin the work of Repentance and Amendment. And though
it be harder then; yet even at that time it is a tolerable thing. It employs
our Strength, but it does not excede it. For when we do a little, God still
enables us to do more, and so carries us on by degrees, till at last we have
Strength enough to Conquer. And as we grow stronger, our Duty grows easier,
till it advances at last beyond an ease, into a pleasure. So that this
Difficulty is both tolerable while it continues, and besides it is soon over.

3. Other places of Scripture, denoting the Hardships of Religion, express only
such diligent and just Care and Watchfulness through our whole Course, as admits
of Comfort and Delight enough to sweeten it to us. And to this we may refer
those Texts which require us to watch, Mark 13.37. And to give all diligence, 2
Pet. 1.5, 10. To Luke 13.^^.
strive, and Heb. 4.^^.
labor and the like. Religion is not the effect of doing nothing, nor eternal
Life a prize that can be gained by lazy careless men. It requires Pains in all
at first, yea much and great Pains in those who have once corrupted themselves,
by contrary Lusts, and wicked Customs: And it also requires a constant Care and
Watchfulness for ever afterward. But this Care and Labor is moderate. It
fairly comports, not only with the necessary business, but also with the
prudent, convenient and moderate Diversions, and Entertainments of this Life,
so that our minding it will not force us to neglect our outward Comforts. It is
reasonable in degrees, not holding us up at the utmost stretch of our
Faculties: But will do our work, if it do but equal our Care and Pains, for the
Interests and Enjoyments of this world, which Pains men are very well content
to take without ever complaining of the Hardship of them. For if we are any
thing near so intent upon doing our Duty, as ordinarily we are upon the getting
an Estate, and will watch the Opportunities of doing good, as we do of growing
rich or great; it will abundantly suffice for it. And besides as this Labor of
Virtue, is in it self very moderate; so has it many Accessory Comforts, and
Considerations, which greatly sweeten and recommend it to us. It gives us at
present the applause of a good Conscience, and makes us pleased and satisfied
with our selves, and cherishes our heart, with the joyful hope of eternal Life
and Happiness. And when all the Pains we take is so pleasing to our selves, and
with this prospect, it will not only be found an ease, but a delight too.

And thus I have endeavored from these words, to assert this great and
necessary Encouragement to all attempts in Religion, viz. That by the Grace of
Christ enabling them, men shall be sure to succeed in them, if they are not
wanting to themselves. And that when men continue wicked, and say, they cannot
help it, they urge a shameful and very false Pretense. And the sum of what I
have urged against this Plea is this; They generally complain most of the
impossibility of obeying God, who least endeavor to obey him; or who endeavor
wrong, without using those sit means, whereby they should become obedient; or
when they use right means, endeavor but by halves, and do not go through with
their Endeavors; whereas would they endeavor diligently, and discreetly, and
incessantly for this Obedience, as they do for other things, they might be sure
to succeed, because God commands and exhorts them to it, and Promises by his
Grace to help them therein, and good men; who have endeavored thus, either now
or heretofore, have actually by such Endeavors, performed the same. Nay, if
they will be persuaded to make the Experiment, they will find it is not only a
possible, but after some time at least an agreeable Service: And that in all
the parts of it, it is a tolerable, in most an easy; and in many, a most
pleasurable and delightful thing.

God Grant, that as by his Grace assisting us, we have all the Power; so we may
likewise have the Will and Heart to make a right use thereof; and accomplish
that Obedience, which he so sincerely and earnestly desires we should; and will
most gladly enable us upon our honest Endeavors to perform.

DISCOURSE III. How to form such a Purpose of sincere Repentance, and entire
Obedience, as will be effectual for this Purpose.
On Acts 11.23. And exhorted them all, that with purpose of heart, they would
cleave unto the Lord.
WHEN some of those Christians, who were dispersed abroad, upon the Death of
St. Stephen, came to Antioch, and upon their Preaching, Multitudes believed;
the Church of Jerusalem sent out Barnabas; that he should go and confirm them
in the new Course of Life which they had undertaken; and in the Holy Faith
which they had received, and this he does in the words of the Text; Who when he
came and had seen the Grace of God, was glad, and exhorted them all, etc.

By cleaving to the Lord we may understand, not only adhering to God, and the
Christian Religion, in opposition to the Jewish Worship, and to all false Gods,
and Heathen Idols; a Point very necessary to be pressed, when they sought
Converts, among Jews and Gentiles.

Not only adhering to Gospel Truths, when they grow hazardous, a thing very
requisite to be inculcated under approaching Trials, and in difficult times:
But also adhering to him in Virtue and Holiness in opposition to a wicked Life;
a thing most indispensibly required, and fit to be studiously urged in all
times.

In adhering thus to God in a virtuous Course, we shall meet with many
Difficulties, and be put to de^y our selves, and very likely others too, whom
either out of some temporal Expectation, or Affection, we gladly would comply
withal; and this is enough to stagger our Choice, and to draw our hearts off
from God, unless they are fully bent upon his ways, and knit to him by a sixth
Resolution and steady Purpose of Obedience. And that the Apostle calls for in
this place, from those who were engaged in, and would go on with God's Service,
He exhorted them all that with purpose of heart, they would cleave unto the
Lord.

My design from these words is to show, how to form such a Resolution of new
Life, and penitential Purpose, as may both set us in, and also carry us through
with God's Service; and this may seem most necessary to be insisted on, because
the far greatest part of penitential Purposes fall off before they have wrought
an answerable Practice. So that it is highly useful to inquire what are their
Defects, and how in a Point of such eternal moment, we may prevent miscarriages.

It is not all Holy Resolution, that will overcome our Lusts, and keep us true
to our Maker against all Temptations. If it is weak or wavering, the
Solicitations of our old Friends will quickly alter, or the strength of great
Temptations overpower it. If it is chiefly for remote Futurities, and
over-looks what is next at hand, it will allow us to be wicked for the present.
If it be made only in a good Mood, and the absence of Temptations, it will not
bear us out when we come under them. If it were rash and hasty, without a due
foresight and Consideration both of the Duties and the Difficulties which we
resolved upon, it will be quashed, when Hardships come that were not expected:
If this Resolution is too indulgent about means and Expediencies, and not
strict enough against all occasions of Sin; it leaves open a Backdoor to let
in many damnable Offenses; and on the other side; if it is indiscreetly
rigorous in these Points, it will prove a snare to us; if it is only a
transient Act, and is not frequently repeated, and renewed again, in a little
time it will pass off from us. A resolution of Amendment may prove ineffective
and mis-carry upon all these Grounds; as is daily seen in the good Purposes of
awakened Sinners, which are ever and anon raised in them by Sickness or some
affecting Providence, but vanish and come to nothing, ere they have wrought the
Reformation, which they were designed for.

When our Consciences are awakened then, with a frightful sense of our Sins,
and we think seriously of reforming, and leading new Lives, great Care must be
taken so to fix the bent of our hearts, and to form such a penitential Purpose,
as may take effect, and bear us out in performing what we have designed. And
this I think will be well provided for, in these Particulars.

First, Our Resolution of a new Life must be considerate, and well advised.
Secondly, It must be without all reserve full and perfect. Thirdly, It must be
adequate to all times, or a Resolution to forsake Sin, not only hereafter, but
instantly, and now at present, not only when we are out of Temptations, but
also when we are under them; not only when we cannot Act our Sins, but also
when we can Act and repeat them too. Fourthly, It must not only be upon the
Duties, but also upon the means and helps of Duty, not only against the Sins
but against the Inducements and Occasions, that lead to sin likewise. And that
being once well formed, it may never wear off, but last through all times.
Fifthly, It must not only be a transient Act, but oftentimes repeated, and
renewed through our whole Lives.
1. To form such a Resolution of a new Life as may be like to take effect, it
must not be a rash and indeliberate Act, but well advised and considerate.

When some extraordinary Providence, as great Losses and Dangers, or severe
smart and Sickness, have awakened men's Consciences, and filled them with a
great and painful Dread of God's deserved wrath; to cure that Dread they
resolve without more ado, to please him by a good Life; never considering what
that is, or what Pains it costs, or whether it may not prove such a Remedy, as
afterward they will Fancy worse than the Disease it self. And when they are
thus rash and unadvised in resolving on it, they quickly repent of such
Resolutions, when they find it worse than they imagined, and meet with
Hardships which they never expected.

To prevent this Sickliness in our Resolutions of a good Life then it is
necessary, that we view and consider it well, what it is, and what Pains it
requires, before we make them, and look on all sides to see, both what may
discourage us from, and what may move us to them. And this our Savior has
plainly directed in two Similitudes; that of a Builder, who before he begins,
considers whether he have enough to finish; and that of a King making war, who
first consults, whether he is strong enough at least to defend himself, if not
to conquer; for speaking to those, who seemed desirous to become his Disciples,
he instructs them first to consider, what they are going to undertake, in these
two Parables. Which of you, says he, intending to build a Tower, sits not
down first, and counts the cost, whether he have sufficient to finish it? Or
what King going to War, sits not down first, and consulteth whether he be
able with ten thousand to meet him that comes against him with twenty
thousand; so that he may proceed not to fight but seek a Peace, if he find his
numbers are in that Disproportion, Luke 14.28, 31.

Thus when we resolve upon a good Life, if we would have that Resolution take
effect, we must consider and weigh well what we do before we make it. We must
bethink our selves and attently view, what that good Life is which we resolve
upon; and also what reason we have to resolve upon it; and when we have thus
considered all before, there is the less cause to fear, that any thing which we
meet withal afterward, should make us alter, or recede from it.

We must bethink our selves and consider, what that good Life is which we
resolve upon. It is not enough that we resolve in the general to be good, but
in our thoughts we must survey the particular Instances of Goodness, that so,
if we stick at any of them, we may give it all its weight at first, and that
after we have once resolved, it may not cause us to start back from it. When we
return to God then, to live as he has required, we must run over the several
Duties wherein we stand bound to God, our Neighbor and our selves, and
observing all the Particulars, ask our selves, whether we are willing to
perform all of them for his sake. And if we resolve to do them, after we have
taken such particular notice of them, this Resolution is like to do some good,
and we may expect the desired effect from it. And when we have thus seriously
considered, what a good Life is, we must next consider what great reason we
have to resolve upon it, and what those things are, which may either discourage
us from it, or excite us to it. To Discourse particularly upon these, would of
it self be sufficient, for a Sermon, and therefore upon this Point, I shall
barely mention them.

As for the Difficulties which may discourage us, they are such as these. When
we enter upon a good Life, we engage in a Course, wherein for some time till
use has made us Masters of it, we must undergo the Toil of Inexpertness, and
Act contrary to our former Customs, and lay restraint upon our natural
Inclinations, and contend daily against the importunity of Temptations, and
sometimes it may be, lose our Friends, and disserve our temporal Interests; all
which are uneasy, and discouraging Considerations.

Indeed, if by the Earliness of his Conversion, and by the advantages of his
place and station (his Lot being cast in innocent Employments, and among good
men) and by the virtuous bent of his natural Temper and Complexion, (an
invaluable Gift, which God bestows on some Persons) a man's Soul is originally
disposed, and timely secured to Holiness; he will find little trouble in these
things, nor be much pained, or hindered by them, from the first entrance. And if
he has not been blessed, in all these Particulars, to take off all Hardship from
the first, yet will he have this to mitigate, and sweeten all the Labor, which
he lays out upon them; the Toil he undergoes is for the sake of one, who has
endured far more for him, and infinitely deserved it of him, and if there is no
want in his endeavor, by the help of God he shall be sure to conquer them; and
to reap a present Content of Mind, and Peace of Conscience after every Conflict
with them, and in the end to gain the everlasting Joys of Heaven by them. And
when he has been used to them a little while, use will take off all the
Hardship, and then instead of being burdened by the ungrateful Duties, he shall
begin to like them, and take a Pleasure therein. All which are great Abatements
of the foresaid Difficulties, and very encouraging.

But let a good Life be difficult and uneasy as it will, when Hell fire is
threatened to a wicked Life, that sure is incomparably more difficult; and a
reason for us to resolve to be good beyond all Contradiction. For if the sight
of Pain must discourage us from any Course, I am sure Hell fire has infinitely
the most of it; and if Ease and Happiness may be any Inducement, the Ease and
Happiness of Heaven, can never in any degree be equaled; so that if we
seriously consider, and look upon eternal Torment as inseparably annexed to
every Sin; and on endless Joys as the sure Reward of our being entirely
obedient; they are an answer to all Temptations in the World, and bear down
every opposite Argument, and will make us resolve to lead a Holy Life, be the
Difficulties or Discouragements that attend it what they will.

Thus must our penitential Purpose be no rash and sudden Act, but deliberate
and well advised; when we resolve to lead a Holy Life; we must seriously
consider with our selves what an Holy Life implys, and what reason we have to
resolve upon it; attently viewing, both what may discourage us from it, and
also what, notwithstanding that Discouragement, may and will induce us to it.

2. The Second Qualifications of a penitential Purpose is, that it must be
without all reserve full and perfect.

When we resolve to amend our Lives, and become good, we must not except any
Duties, for God excepts none, nor reserve to our selves an allowance of any
Sins, for God forbids, and most severely punishes all sorts of Sin. Our
Resolution must know no other limits but our Duty, and extend to every thing
which God has required of us. And this compass of religious Purpose the
Commandment expressly calls for, when we are enjoined to love God with all our
hearts, Luke 10.27. For if we keep a secret reserve for any sin, our heart is
given but by halves to God, and is not whole with him. Jehu walked not in the
law of God with all his heart, says the Scripture, and the Proof is given,
because he had a reserve in one Point, and departed not from the sins of
Jeroboam, 2 Kin. 10.31. but David, says God, followed me with all his heart;
which appeared, because he did that only which is right in mine eyes, 1 Kin.
14.18. and what is said in this Case, the Psalmist expresses more universally
of all others, They seek the Lord with their whole heart, who do no iniquity,
Psalm. 119.2, 3.

Thus must our penitential Purposes be full and entire with God, not sticking
at any thing he has enjoined, nor allowing of thing any his Law forbids us; and
therefore, those Resolvers must not think they have finished, but only begun
the work, who have not renounced all but only the greatest part, and still
reserve themselves for some particular Sins; which are deep rooted in their
natural Tempers, or closely interwoven with their way of Life and business;
yea, or for some particular times, and Acts of any sin, resolving against it in
all Cases, save only when it is powerfully recommended by some great
Temptations; whilst they resolve thus by halves, they must needs perform and
obey by halves too.

3. A Third Qualification of a penitential Purpose, is that it be adequate to
all times, or a Resolution to forsake sin, not only hereafter, but instantly
and now at present; not only when we are out of Temptations, but also when we
are under them; not only when we cannot act them, but also when we can act and
repeat them too.

1. It must be a Resolution to forsake sin, not only hereafter, but instantly
and now at present. When men's Consciences are affrighted with the sense of
their sins, and are made to see the necessity of Repentance, yet thinking that
they may repent at any time, and desiring to enjoy the Pleasures of sin as long
as they can, to please their Lusts, they will venture to sin on for some time*
and to please God too in the end; resolve afterward to repent of them. They
will fulfill their wicked Lusts while they are in Health, and amend when they
come upon their Sick-beds; they will enjoy all the Liberties of Vice in the
vigorous days of youth, and grow severely virtuous when they are bowed down by
the infirmities of old Age. Or if they are afraid to defer the work of
Reformation so long, lest in the mean time Death prevent them; yet will they
venture still to put it off a little longer, and not set about it suddenly, but
delay it till the next Sacrament, or till some solemn time come.

But now as to this Dilatoriness in men's penitential Purposes; so far is it
from being an Act of true Repentance, that indeed it is only an Art and
Subterfuge for men's impenitence. For whilst we resolve only to repent
hereafter, it is plain we intend to continue wicked still at present; nay what
is more, we are in very great Danger, when that future time is come, to
continue wicked then also. For if we delay it till Death or Sickness seize us,
in all Likelihood, we shall neither have time, nor power for it. And if we put
it off till old Age, we shall then have far greater Difficulties, and much less
Strength to set about it. Nay, if we defer it to any time yet absent, besides
our dying in the mean Season, which may prevent our doing what we intend, we
shall find as great, or greater Hindrances then, than we do now.

If we delay it I say, till Death and Sickness seize us, in all Likelihood we
shall have neither time nor power for it. Indeed, if God so please he can work
Repentance in us, when there is the least time for it, and by the power of his
Almighty Spirit, both begin and finish the Change in us in an instant. And that
men may not quite despair in any State; one Case we have upon Record, wherein
he did thus, and that was in the thief upon the Cross, who was reclaimed and
converted to God, at the last moment, Luke 23.43. So that there is no
prescribing to the power of God, when he is willing to employ it in
extraordinary Favors, and work wonders in reclaiming, and regenerating us all
at once; whereas his ordinary way is to do it by more leisurely and gradual
Motions.

But whatever there may be in those rare Cases, wherein God works by unwonted
and extraordinary Grace; yet according to ordinary Rules, and the Course of
things, we are not likely to have either time or power sufficient to repent, if
we delay it till our Deathbeds. The Alteration of a whole Life, and long
Course of sin, requires much time, and a vigorous and diligent Application; for
ordinarily we cannot retrench our sinful Habits, but by an opposite Course and
Usage; we cannot turn the Bias of our Natures, and the bent of our corrupt
Inclinations, but by strong and frequent Exercise; the Duties which we are to
perform, are very numerous in Particulars, and in the ordinary way we cannot
attain, and become habitually inclinable almost to any one, till after many
Actions and repeated Trials. When we have a whole Life to alter and reform; and
must mortify, many natural Lusts, and root out many habitual Sins, and acquire
as many Virtues, which are not only very uncouth, but opposite and repugnant to
our Inclinations; we have a long and studious work that lies upon us, and that
requires both much time, and much Freedom, and Fitness in all our Faculties,
and how can we expect that upon our Deathbed? For then our time is short, and
all our Faculties enfeebled and oppressed, which utterly unfits them to be held
either much or long employed; so that if we delay our Repentance till Death
seize us, in all Probability we shall never thoroughly repent at all.

Again, if we delay our Repentance till old Age, we shall have then, far
greater Difficulties, and much less Strength to set about it.

The Difficulty which we have to conquer will then be greater. For by our
continuance in sin, all those things are strengthened and confirmed, which make
our return difficult; for all our sinful Habits are confirmed by Practice, and
all our natural Lusts are heightened by Indulgence; so that our continuance does
nothing else but add to the Disease, and make it harder to be cured afterward.

And as it heightens the Difficulties, so it impairs our Aids, and leaves us
much less Strength to set about Amendment. For by every Repetition of an evil
Action, our Conscience of its guilt is the more extinguished, and the good
Spirit of God is the more alienated from us, and provoked the more to withdraw
himself, and abandon us; and our own Conscience, and God's Grace, are the very
things, which must recover us out of our sinful state, if ever we do recover
out of it: So that to defer repenting to old Age, is only to put it off, till
we have contracted the greatest spiritual Impotence, and till sin is grown most
strong and potent in us; which is not the way to reclaim us from, but to secure
us fast in wickedness.

Nay, if we would not defer repenting, till our Deathbed, nor till we are
grown old, but only till the next Sacrament, or some other time yet distant;
yet even of this delay I must observe, that besides our dying in the mean
Season, which may prevent our doing what we intend, if we put it off to any
time beyond the present, we shall find as great or greater Hindrances then,
than we do now; for that which hinders us from an actual Reformation now, is
only the uneasiness of the work; and if we take time only to sin more, that, as
I have observed, is the way to increase that uneasiness, but not at all to
lessen or abate it. We have no Exception against the present time, but only
because it is present, and because we would have difficult things always
future, and far distant from us; and that Exception will lie equally against
all other times, when they come to be present too. Nay, 'twill lie against them
much more; because the longer we put off this difficult work, the harder will
it be at last when we come to it; the Hardships daily growing upon our hands,
and increasing by continuance in a Course of wickedness. So that when by reason
of the Difficulty of an entire Reformation; men deferr it to a distant time,
they will find to their Cost, when that time comes, that the same Difficulties
are still in force; yea, have more added to them, to make them delay it, yet a
little longer; and that which hindered them at first; if it be acknowledged a
sufficient hindrance, will equally, nay, much more hinder them, for ever after.
And this St. Austin ingeniously Confesses he found. Differens dicebam, modo,
ecce modo, sine paululum; sed modo and modo, non habebant modum.
When I delayed repenting, says he, I said yet a little while, and then again a
little while, and then I will repent: till at last I found, if I gave way to
these little whiles, they would be infinite and last always.

Thus if men would repent in earnest, and have their holy Purposes take any
good Effects, they must resolve to do it out of hand, and not delay it till
their Sickbed, or some other time yet distant. They are too late in all reason
to have a work of that necessity and importance yet to begin; and they may well
be the farther from it, but cannot expect to be more able or likely to begin it
at another Season. The present time is only that which they can call their own,
and that wherein they are like to go on most easily, and surely with the work
of Reformation. So that when they resolve to repent, the only wise Course is to
resolve to do it instantly, and use no delays at all.

But besides this, That our penitential Purpose must not only be to repent at
some time hereafter, but instantly now at present: It is necessary,

2. That it be made against our sins, not only when we are out of Temptations,
but also when we are under them: Not only when we cannot Act them, but also
when we can act and repeat them too.

Some men are very zealous against their sins, whilst they have no Temptation
to them; but their Indignation is quite cold, and all their Resentment is laid
aside; when once they have. They are never angry with them, but when they are
at a distance, and are melted down again into Love and Compliance, when once
they come to a second Meeting. Their holy Purposes are not owing to any
strength of their virtuous Convictions, but only to the absence of sinful
Inducements; so that as soon as they return upon them, they are altogether, the
same men, as unresolved, and unreclaimed as they were before.

And others are firmly set against some sins only, whilst they are
incapacitated for them; but instantly revolt, when they are able, and prepared
to return to to them again. A fit of sickness has cooled the flames of Lust, or
dulled the edge of Appetite; and whilst they are in this impotent Estate, they
can easily resolve against intemperance and uncleanness; because they are not
fit to undergo them, nor can take any pleasure in them; but if once their
bodily Indisposition is amended, having recovered to the same Desires, they are
set as much upon the same Practices as ever. Their good resolution was owing
only to the weakness of Nature, and so vanishes in Course, when it becomes
vigorous and strong again.

But a good resolution is made for the hour of Temptation; it is to be our
strength and guard, and is then most especially to be put on, when our virtue
is assaulted, and we have the greatest need of it. So that we must not only put
on resolutions, whilst Dangers are at a distance, but most of all, when they
are near at hand, and ready to assayl us.

Besides these Qualifications of a penitential Purpose hitherto insisted on,
there remain two more, which I recited at first, and which I have not time now
to explain, and can do little more than mention.

4. In the Fourth place then our penitential Purpose and Resolution of new
Life, must not only be upon the Duties, but also upon the means and helps, and
not only against the sins, but against the occasions and inducements to sin
likewise.

The neglect of this resolving upon sit means and helps of living well; and
against the occasions of doing ill, makes as many good Resolutions miscarry, I
believe, as any other thing whatsoever. For under some great Convictions, and
fright of mind men resolve to be good; but at the same time, they are not
careful to resolve upon the right way and means of being so: They do not
resolve in order to it, to store their minds with clear apprehensions of all
particular Duties; to think much of Heaven and Hell, Death and Judgment, and
other Motives to obedience; to make choice of religious Companions, who will
cherish in them a sense of good things; to show care in keeping out of
Temptations, and Watchfulness, and Circumspection, when they are under them;
and call themselves daily to an account of their miscarriages; and be instant
in Prayers for God's Grace; and to use other wise means and expedients, which
may enable them to accomplish what they design, and effectually perform that
good Life which they resolve upon; and for want of resolving thus wisely upon
the means, as well as upon the end, all those good beginnings and holy purposes
fall to nothing. For a Man may as well resolve to be rich, without resolving to
mind his Business, or resolve to be learned, without a diligent Application to
his Studies; as resolve to be good, without resolving also upon the right way,
and means of attaining Goodness. A bare resolution of it will not do the work,
for we must not only firmly resolve; but wisely endeavor it too.

And when we have thus considerately resolved to lead new Lives, and have
resolved it without reserve in all Points; and that too in all times, both at
present, and for the future, in Temptations and out of them; and that upon the
Means, as well as upon the Duties, and against the occasions, as well as
against the sins: When our penitential purpose, I say, is thus qualified in all
these Particulars, to make it strong and persevering in all times, we must take
care,

5 thly, That it be not only a transient Act; but oftentimes repeated and
renewed through our whole Lives.

As for the frequency of this renewal; there can be no fixed bounds set to all
tempers and states of Penitents, but that must be determined by the measure of
their Zeal for God; and the necessities of their own Souls. When at any time
they relapse into any wilful sin, they must renew their resolution particularly
against it, before they come to ask Pardon for it; because God will not pardon
any wilful Sin, till we have particularly repented of it. And when they come to
the Holy Sacrament, which is a renewal of the whole Baptismal Covenant; it may
be very fit and advisable, that at some times through all their Lives, but
much oftener whilst their falls are more frequent, and their state more
doubtful, they renew their Vows and penitential Engagements upon all the
particular heads of Duty, and against all known sins whatsoever. And to be
prepared every day, against the sins, which they are liable to incurr in the
constant Course of Life and Conversation; they may do well to repeat their
resolutions against all probable Temptations of that day every Morning, and lay
wait for the Opportunities of performing them in the daytime, and take a
strict account of their Faculties or Performances every night. And if
Repentance is thus made a designed work, and turned into a daily buness; it
will be like to go on well and prosper in our hands. We are still supplying it,
where it wants, and renewing it where it fails, and fortifying it, where it
begins to falter. And if we persevere in this Course, and proceed in it, not
only now and then by Fits, but always; we shall be in no danger of relapsing,
but continue Penitents, to our Lives-end Which God of his great Mercy grant,
etc.

DISCOURSE IV. How to take the truest Wisdom of Worldly men in their
Managements, and apply it with admirable Use and Advantage in the Improvement
and Perfection of Holy Obedience.
On Luke 16.8. For the Children of this World are wiser in their Generation,
than the Children of Light.
THIS is our Blessed Savior's reflection, on the unjust Stewards forecast,
and provision for his present State. When he had lost the favor of his Lord;
he seeks how to make Friends among his Tenants, that they may receive him into
their Houses, when he is cast out of his Lord's Service. Now though he is to be
blamed for his injustice and dishonesty, yet the Lord commends him for his
prudence and forecast, or for that in his way, or in the way of Worldly men, he
had done wisely, v. 8.

And this he observes is not peculiar to him, but is common to the Children of
this World. Though they are not careful more than the unjust Steward was, of
innocence and honesty; yet they are wise in their worldly Managements, yea
wiser in their Generation, than the Children of Light are in theirs. And though
we are to leave their injustice with them; yet our Blessed Lord would have us
learn Wisdom of Management from them.

In Discoursing upon these words, I shall show.

First, Who are the Children of this World, and who are the Children of Light.
Secondly, What it is for the Children of this World, to be wiser in their
Generation. Thirdly, Note those things, wherein their foresight, and discretion
is more particularly imitable; and wherein we may and ought to learn Wisdom
from them.
1. I shall show, who are the Children of this World, and who are the Children
of Light.

The Children of this World, are they who give themselves up to mind worldly
Ends and Matters, and pursue them by worldly Rules and Managements, not
regarding the Innocence, more than the unjust Steward did, but only the
Serviceableness and Expedience of them.

The Children of Light are they, who profess to walk in Belief and Obedience,
to the Religion and Commands of Jesus Christ. Whatsoever does make manifest,
says the Apostle is Light, Ephesians. 5.13. and our Blessed Lord is come to manifest
to us, all the Will of God, and the way to Heaven, and therefore calls himself
the Light, Jo. 8.12. and chap. 9.5. and 1.7. and all who give themselves up to
follow and obey him, to believe his Doctrine, and to walk in this way which he
discovers and prescribes to us, are the Children of Light.

2. What it is for the Children of this World, to be wiser in their Generation.

Now their Generation, is that Age or Time wherein they live; and those men of
that time, of like ends, Professions and Managements, with themselves amongst
whom they live. And their being wiser in their Generation than the Children of
Light are in theirs, is their managing their several worldly Ends, and
Professions among one another in their time, with more true forecast, and
Wisdom, than Christians in their day are wont to manage their Profession, of
paying their Services, and all Holy obedience unto Jesus Christ, or of doing
their Duty in all Points unto him. I come now,

3. Which is the main Point I am to insist upon from these words, to note those
things, wherein the forecast and Discretion of worldly men, is more
particularly imitable by us, and wherein we may and ought to learn Wisdom from
them. And this I shall note in these following Particulars.

1. It Is one part of their Wisdom, that they fix to themselves some certain
end, and so act not loosely, and by chance, but have a certain mark to aim at.

2. That when they have once fixed their end, they openly own and profess it.

3. That they are particularly careful, to be well skilled in, and thoroughly to
understand all the Parts and Offices belonging to their Occupation or
Profession.

4. That having thus fixed themselves upon their end, and made that their
Profession, it is the constant mark in their Eye, and daily Care and Employment
of their Life, and they are still vigorously intending and driving it on.

5. That they carefully and timely foresee, and provide for Futurities, so as
that nothing may be wanting to set on this end and profession, or fall out to
its prejudice.

6. That they are ready to cast off any other Cares or Concerns, when they
either find, or foresee they are like to prove Impediments or Encumbrances to
their main business.

7. They are studious and observant, to direct all Accidents and Occurrences,
and cast about how they may pick out, any advantage from them, or make them
serviceable, to their own great purpose.

8. When any thing is proposed to them, their Eye falls in the first place upon
their chief end, and they either accept or refuse the same, according as it may
be like to serve, or disserve them in their Prosecution or Attainment thereof.

9. They are jealous of their great end, and examine nicely, and are very
difficultly brought to give way to any thing, that seems to bear any color, or
may in any Likelihood turn to its prejudice.

10. They are very active and industrious to engage Succors, where they are
needful to their great Purposes.

1. One point of the Wisdom of the Children of this world, very fit for us to
imitate and learn from them, is this, That they fix to themselves some certain
end, and so act not loosely, and by chance, but have a certain mark to aim at.
Each one Proposes some particular thing or other to himself; so that his
Actions are not loose and without a steady aim, but he has every day a fixed
Point, whereto to direct them. One sets up for Pleasure, another for Power, a
third for Profit, but generally all of them for one thing or other, and this
makes some order and coherence in Life; their Actions are not loose, or
unrelated to each other, but a second backs and promotes the former, and all
concur to carry on, and compass the end which is fixed for them.

Now this Point of their Wisdom, is very fit to be imitated by the Children of
Light. Not that they must propose to themselves wrong aims like them. Either
such as are ill, or low and mean ones, which will be offensive to God, and
unworthy of themselves, and no ways fit to recompense the pains which they lay
out upon them. But, as they do, Christians must fix to themselves some end.
They must not live in their way as unthinking men, who have no design, and
whose Actions are altogether uncertain, carried about here or there, as chance
occasions, or undirected and ungoverned Fancy or the Humor calls them. But
they must always propose some spiritual aims to themselves, and fix their mark,
whereto they are to steer their Course; and to direct their labors and
endeavors.

And this Mark in one word, is their doing their Duty to their Blessed Lord in
all Points, and at all times, which is the only way to please God, and to
preserve a good Conscience, and to love their precious and immortal Souls. This
is the end which they are to fix themselves upon, who profess to have here no
abiding City, but to seek one to come, Heb. 13.14. who have renounced this
world, and laid up their Treasures in heaven, Mat. 6.20. who look for the
glorious appearing of our Lord Jesus Christ, and would be accepted by him at
his coming, Tit. 2.13.

2. Another Point of their Wisdom is, that when once they have fixed their end,
they openly own and profess it. They espouse the same in the Face of all, by
making it their Trade, their Occupation, their Employment in the World. And
this way they do more publicly engage themselves, to be careful and constant
in the Prosecution thereof, and bespeak the favor of all their Friends and
well Wishers, who may be in any Capacity, to help and further them therein.

And this it is very fit the Children of Light should learn from them. They must
not conceal and smother the Service which they bear to their ever Blessed
Savior, but be ready to make it known, and turn it into a free and avowed
Profession. They must as occasion serves, give all to understand that God is
their great fear, and that doing their Duty at all times toward him is, and
shall be their chief Profession and care: And this way they will strongly and
openly have engaged themselves ever after, to make good their own religious
Pretenses; and put a timely check upon ill men, not to tempt them with any ill
thing; nor to speak, nor do any thing offensive to God, or to a good mind, if
they expect to keep them Company.

And this we are called to, when we are called together in one Body, 1 Cor.
12.13. Romans 12.5. For that is to make open and united Profession of it, as a
visible Society. And when we are bid to let our light shine before Men, Mat.
5.16. To own our Savior Christ and his laws, in an evil and adulterous
Generation, Mar. 8.38. And with the mouth to make Confession to Salvation, Romans
10.10.

3. Another is that they are particularly careful, to be well skilled in, and
thoroughly to understand all the parts and Offices belonging to their Occupation
or Profession. A man may be ignorant of some things without blame; and the
ignorance of others may deserve Commendation. For it is both a part of
Innocence, and a Guard to it, to be ignorant of the ways of doing ill. And it is
a means of his quiet to be ignorant of other men's Affairs; and not busily
inquisitive into their Matters. And it is a sign of the well employed to be
ignorant of trifles and empty things. But it is a shame for any Man to be
ignorant of what he professes; for that is to be at a loss in his own business.
And this all men are thoroughly apprehensive of; and therefore all Trades serve
Apprenticeships, and are trained up for several years, to be thoroughly skilled
in all the parts of the Occupation which they profess; yea, even the ordinary
Husbandman, knows very well how to order and manage his ground, when to Plow,
and when to Sow, and when to Reap; and what are the fittest and properest
Seasons for the Market. However ignorant they may be in other things, they are
careful to know their own business, and Professions, and to be well skilled, so
as to need no Teachers in their own Employments.

And this is a most especial instance of Wisdom, which it necessarily behooves
the Children of Light to learn from them. For one of the first things, and of
the most necessary in the way of a Christian man to Heaven, is to be thoroughly
instructed in all those things, which God has made Articles of his Salvation.
If he must at last be judged by them, it is absolutely necessary that he set
himself in the mean time carefully to observe them. And if he must observe
them, he must first know them; yea, and have them made familiar to his
Conscience, so that it may readily remind him of them, as often as any
Opportunities occurr in course of Life, for him either to keep, or break them.
This knowledge of every particular Duty, which is to be a matter of our final
Account, as it is of prime necessity and singular advantage, so will it cost
pains and labor to attain it. But I know not how any truly good, and sincerely
pious minds, can employ themselves better. They must read good Books, where the
Catalogues of such Duties are most particularly recited and explained; and the
particular necessity of our Observance of them, (that we may give up a good
Account at the great day,) is shown most particularly from the Holy Scriptures.
And these they must read attently and often, till they have made themselves
Masters of them, and their Consciences are ready upon any occasion to remind
them thereof, as they are called at any time to observe them in the Course of
Conversation; and when their Conscience does thus remind them of any of them in
Conversation, let them by no means take off their Eye from what their
Conscience tells them, is a matter of their final Account; and instead thereof,
follow the Practice of other men, it may be, reputed good, or men of Note for
knowledge and understanding. For though it is a sad Reflection, yet it is a very
true one, that numbers of Christians, and those too of note and eminence for
Piety and Understanding, seem in their daily converse, to make no Account at
all, of a great number of those Duties, which God has declared, he will call us
all to a strict Account for. And therefore having themselves happily attained
this particular knowledge of all necessary Duties, let them stick to their own
knowledge on every occasion, and follow it without disputing; and not once
think of leaving the same, to follow the general neglect of many of these
things, which he may every where observe in other men.

And this we are called to in Scripture, when we are bid, To understand what
the will of the Lord is, Ep. 5.17. To be men in understanding, 1 Cor 14.20. To
give all diligence to add to our virtue, or courage knowledge, 2 Pet. 1.5. To
be filled with all knowledge, Romans 15.14. To be filled with the knowledge of
his will, Col. 1.9.

4. Another Point of their Wisdom is, that having thus fixed themselves upon
their end, and made it their Profession, it is the constant mark in their Eye;
and the daily Care and Employment of their Life, and they are still vigorously
intending and driving it on. It fills their thoughts, that they can afford
little room, to any thing else. It is the full Employment of their time, and
they labor in it with Pleasure, and are ready to deny themselves their
necessary food, their rest, their ease, to serve the end of their Occupation.

And herein it is most fit and needful for the Children of Light to imitate
them. The doing their Duty faithfully, and in all Points to their Blessed Lord,
which is their End and Profession, should be the constant mark in their Eye,
and matter of their Care, as being the chief thing they have set themselves to
mind, and daily to labor and employ themselves. It is the one thing necessary
which they have fixed and proposed to themselves, and must be their every days
thought and business. For in every day, and in all Companies and Dealings, they
will have Opportunities enough, to do their Duty in sundry Points, or
transgress it. And therefore every day, their Eye must be kept earnestly
intent, and their Care watchful, and they seriously, and vigorously at work, to
do the business of their Profession, and discharge faithfully, as they are
called to them, all those Duties which their Blessed Lord requires of them. And
this we are called to in the Holy Scriptures, under the several Expressions of
walking with God, Genesis 5.24. of walking before God, Genesis 17.1. Of setting the
Lord always before us, Psalm. 16.8. of being always upon our watch, Mar. 13.35,
37. and walking circumspectly, or still having our Eyes intent in every Affair
or time, how we may keep off from all sin, and faithfully discharge all those
particular Duties, which do await us therein, Ephesians. 5.15.

5. Another Point of their Wisdom, is that they carefully and timely foresee,
and provide for Futurities, so as that nothing may be wanting to set on this
end, and profession, or fall out unawares to prejudice the same. They are
intent and careful, not only to use what comes, and make it serve their turn;
but to look on carefully to what may come, and consider how it may be made
serviceable to their Purpose, or how to prevent or remedy, what might likely be
an hindrance; or any ways hurtful to it.

And this part of their Wisdom, in forecasting, and making provision for
Futurities, I shall consider in these three Particulars.

First, They forethink, what means and methods to take, as most proper for
their End and Profession, and fittest to serve it. Secondly, Having studied and
labored diligently and constantly to compass their desired End, they are
careful to secure their Claim and Title to it; and carefully fifth and inquire
into it, and take all ways they can to make it good, when a Trial is like to be
brought upon it. Thirdly, They timely provide and forecast Supplies against
streights and accidents, that when they come they may be as little hurt by
them, as may be, or otherwise provide against them, the best they can.
1. They forethink what means and methods to take, as most proper for their End
and Profession, and fittest to serve it; the Merchant wisely and carefully
considers, what Ports it is fittest to send to, and when, and what Goods give
greatest appearance of making the best return.

And men in all Trades consider well with themselves, where it is best to buy,
and what things are likeliest to sell, and forecast in their own minds, what
ways and methods are likeliest to make them thrive in their several
Occupations. A King going to War, as our Lord observes, will first very
carefully consider his forces. And a Builder going to build must consider his
Purse; and what it is like to cost him both in Work and Materials, Luke 14.31,
32. and Verse 28, 29. and the unjust Steward forecasting for his future
support, in his way, wisely resolves on passing false Accounts, that he may
find reception among his Lords Tenants, Luke 16.3, 45, 8.

And this is another piece of Wisdom, most fit for the Children of Light, to
imitate and learn from them. They must wisely consider and observe before hand,
what things do most help and further, what do most tempt and ensnare, what do
most obstruct and hinder them, in the way of their Profession, or in faithfully
discharging all the Duties of a Christian. They must have carefully, and
discreetly forethought with themselves against they enter upon every days
Actions, and Business, what Duties they will be likely called to exercise
therein, and how they may discharge them to the best advantage; what
Temptations also they may likely meet withal, and how likely they are to
withstand them; or how to prevent, or get seasonably out of their way, if they
are like to endanger, or prove too hard for them. They must, by no means, be
off-hand, and unstudied Livers; but have their Actions wisely forethought, and
be still in a readiness, to take the best ways of going on in the work of their
Profession; and sincerely discharging their Duty to their Blessed Lord in all
the Points thereof.

And this wise and careful forecast, and fixing on the fittest ways to serve
our Purpose, we are called to in the forecited Parables, of the Builder, and
the King going to War; and in the Parable of those, who built their houses, one
upon a rock, and another upon the sand, Mat. 7.24, 26. If forecast and wise
contrivance does not direct Actions and Undertakings, Folly and Shame are but
too like to be the issue and event of them.

But on this Point of their Wisdom, in forecasting, and fixing on the properest
ways and methods, I shall observe three other imitable Points of their Wisdom,
concerning the execution of them. For they put them in execution, I. Speedily,
II. With Assiduity and Diligence. III. With Resoluteness.


1. They put their well chosen means of thriving in Execution speedily. They
stay for nothing, but make the most of their good contrivance as soon as they
can. If they have put themselves in readiness against a good Market, without
more ado they take it. If they have laid in for a good Bargain, without any
delay they are for making an end of it. Where they have prepared an advantage,
they are for the first opportunity of taking Possession of it. So that they
lose nothing by delays, or by slipping their times and seasons. But earnestly
desiring to accomplish their Ends, they are still in a readiness hastily to
accomplish any wise means, which will make them Masters of it.

Now in this they should be followed by the Children of Light. For it is not
for them, after once they are wisely and well resolved upon their Duty, either
a good Life at large, or the Amendment and Improvement of some particular part
thereof, to use delays, and put it off from one Duty to another. They must not
be on and off in this great work, as men who are uncertain; nor slow as men who
are unwilling. Delays show nothing but the inability, or insincerity of their
own Purposes, and are a loud call for themselves, to renew and make them
better. But they must execute their wise Purposes of holy Living without more
ado. They must lose no time, but be eager of growing more perfect in it the
next day, than they were the day foregoing; they must make no stops, but still
earnestly push on; and not cease, till they have made themselves Masters of the
Grace, or good Improvements, which they had proposed to themselves.

And this we are called to in the Holy Scriptures, when it is said, To day if ye
will hear his voice, Psalm. 95.7, 8. and I made have and delayed not to keep thy
commandments, Psalm. 119.60. work, whilst it is day, for the night comes when
no man can work, Joh. 9.4. And in this great and most important business, no
day is to be neglected, because no man knows, but it may be his last.

2. They put their well chosen ways of thriving in Execution with Assiduity and
Diligence. The Tradesman will stick to his Shop from morning till night. And
men of other Occupations will be constantly attending, and ready to take all
advantages in the way of their business. And this they do with Good Will, with
great Diligence, and Vigor of Application. They will spare no pains, they will
miss no advantages, they are not slothful, but push on with all their might,
and show how they can bestir themselves to gain their Purposes.

And this it is extremely fit the Children of Light should learn from them. It Is
not for them to be negligent or slothful, in the work and service of the Lord.
It is their one thing necessary; the chief Point they have, or profess to mind;
and therefore they must constantly attend upon it, and stand ever ready to
perform a Duty, or avoid a Sin, as any Affairs or Accidents of Life shall give
them occasion for the same. And this they must do heartily and earnestly,
diligently laying out themselves upon it, and putting what strength they have
to it, which can never be better employed, nor laid out in any thing, for which
it shall in any comparable degree, be so happily and infinitely rewarded.

And this the Holy Scripture requires of us, when it calls us to be always upon
our watch, Mar. 13.35, 37. to attend this as the one thing necessary, Luke
10.42. To give all diligence in it, 2 Pet. 1.5, 10. and to serve the Lord with
all our mind, and with all our strength, Mar. 12.30. and the like.

3. They put these well chosen means in Execution with resoluteness; they are
not discouraged by occurrent Difficulties, nor driven back by the Labor or
Pains, or by the length and tediousness of their business. They are not weary
of their work, but overlook troubles, and bear Self-denials, and go on with
Zeal, and without Faintness, till they have accomplished their desired Purpose.
All labor is easy to them, that accomplishes their desire, and they will not
cease laboring, till they have done their utmost, to gain what they seek for.

And this also should be imitated by the Children of Light. If they want Zeal
and good Resolution, they are not like to do much; nor are sure to be constant
in the work of good Living. But they must go on without Fear or Slackness; they
must think no Pains too dear, to perfect themselves in any Duties. They must be
ready, and willing to part with any thing else, rather than wittingly
transgress their Duty in any particular, or fall short of eternal Happiness.
That is the pearl of price, which they must sell all to purchase, Mat. 13.44,
46. they must shun no troubles, or fly from any losses, which will surely be
repaid, with such an inestimable recompense. Nay, instead of shunning them,
they have the truest cause to give thanks, and rejoice therein.

And this the Holy Scripture requires, when it calls us to be strong in the
Lord, and in the power of his might, Ephesians. 6.10. to be terrified in nothing by
our adversaries, Phil. 1.28. Not to put on the spirit of fear, but of love to
God, of power, or Courage and of a sound mind, 2 Timothy 1.7. and to be always
steadfast and unmovable in the work of the Lord, 1 Cor. 15.58. To deny
ourselves, and to take up the Cross, and bear it after Christ, if we would be
his disciples, Mat. 16.24. and chapter 10.38.

2. Another instance of their forecast, and provision for Futurities, is, that
having studied and labored thus to compass their end, they are careful to
secure their Claim and Title to it. But more especially careful to sift and
inquire into it, and to take all ways they can to make it good, when a Trial is
like to be brought upon it. If it be a Trial for Estate, or much more for Life,
how forecasting and busy are they, in inquiring into the merit of their cause;
in collecting and clearing up Evidences; in preparing Witnesses, consulting
Counsel, and making their Case as good, as it can be made against the Great
Assize.

Now the Children of Light are absolutely inexcusable, if they learn not this
Point of Wisdom from them. For the Interest which they have to secure, is not
like that of worldly men, vain transitory and fading, which may soon be taken
from them, or which they shall surely be soon taken from. But it is an eternal
life, Mar. 10.30. A crown of glory that fades not away, 1 Pet. 5.4. a State
where they need no sun to light them; where all tears are wiped away from their
eyes, and there shall be no more crying, nor sorrow, nor pain, Rev. 21.4. and
23.

Now all this most happy State depends upon our perfecting our Obedience, to
all the Laws of our Blessed Savior, whilst we are here in this world. And
whether we have faithfully discharged the same or no, must come to a most fair
and just Examination and Account, when we all come (as we all most certainly
shall soon come) to be tried upon the same at the last Judgment. And therefore,
it infinitely concerns all good serious Christians, to be often and carefully
beforehand inquiring into the State of their Souls, to see whether they are
fit to stand in that Trial or no. They must pose themselves upon all those
Points, upon which God will try them; at least according to the best of their
knowledge they have of them, or under their Circumstances and Opportunities,
are sincerely able to compass of the same; and where they find they have
wilfully failed in any part of that Obedience, which God necessarily requires,
they must instantly amend, and recover themselves into a state of Bliss, and
Happiness. And this they must do; not only once or twice; for men's spiritual
State is often variable, and their Life is always uncertain, and therefore it
is a thing that needs more frequent doing; especially till they come to acquire
a steadiness in a safe Condition, that so they may be always ready, and if God
call them unawares, they may not be surprised thereby, but go with comfort to
give up their Accounts to him.

And this God requires of us, when he calls us, To give all diligence, to make
our calling and election sure, 2 Pet. 1.10. and to fear least having a promise
left us of entering into his rest, any of us should fall short of it, Heb. 4.1.
and to look diligently least any man fail of the grace of God, Heb. 12.15.

3. They timely provide and forecast Supplies, against Straights and Accidents;
that when they come, they may be, as little hurt by them as may be, or
otherwise provide against them the best they can. And this was the Wisdom which
the Lord commended in the unjust Steward: for he was in a great straight, being
warned out of his Lords Service; and makes a wise, speedy and seasonable
provision for himself, by taking Care to be received among his Lords Tenants.
And it is the same with men of all other Occupations. If straights or
misfortunes are like to come upon them, they foresee them in time, and try all
ways in due Season to prevent them; or to keep them off as long as they can, or
to make them fall as light as may be, when they do come. But be it better, or
worse, they are careful to make the best for themselves, which they are able to
do in their present Circumstances and Condition.

Now in this also, it is very fit the Children of Light should learn from them.
They must have their eyes before them, and timely foresee; where they want
Counsel, and there provide instruction; where they may be attacked on a weak
side, and there contrive how to keep out of the way of Temptation; where they
are like to be called to do their Duty; and there forecast how to do it
faithfully and profitably; where they are like to meet with Difficulties, and
disoblige Friends, and disserve Interests, and there either wisely contrive,
how to withdraw themselves from them, or vigorously, and steadfastly resolve to
break through them, where Crosses are like to come, how they may meet and
receive them with Meekness and Patience. A good Christian must not want
foresight, and be plunged in Difficulties, and fall into Folly unawares; but
must wisely and seasonably foresee what may happen, and be ready to make the
best of all when it comes.

And this the Holy Scripture calls for in the Parable of the wise and foolish
Virgins; the difference betwixt which two, lay in their forecast, and in
making, or not making seasonable and sufficient provision for Futurities, Mat.
25.1, etc. Of the two men building their houses, one upon a rock, and the other
upon the sand, Mat. 7.24, 26. Of the Builder fore-casting well with himself,
how to defray all Charges, and Accidents of work, and Materials, and how able
he is to finish, Luke 14.28. and the like.

6. A sixth Instance formerly noted of the Wisdom of worldly men in their
Managements, is, that they are ready to cast off any Cares, or Concerns, when
they either find or foresee, that they are like to prove Impediments, or
Encumbrances in their main business. If they have grasped at more business than
they can manage to advantage, they will ease their hands, by laying that aside
which is least for their Purpose. If some proves to be but of little Profit,
and uncertain hazard, and of much Pains; they will try another way, which is
like to yield better, with more ease and less uncertainties. They are ever true
to their Point, and will not engage themselves in ways, which make against it.

Now this likewise is very fit to be learnt of them by all good Christians.
It Is not for them to engage themselves for any Inducement in any ill things,
for that is absolutely contrary to all their obedient Professions. Nor in any
Occupations, or business which abound so much with strong Temptations, that
there is no reasonable expectation, of their keeping Innocence, and faithfully
discharging their Duty therein.

In their Consideration, and Choice of all these things; the first thing to be
looked at and cared for, is keeping Innocence, and whether their business is
fairly consistent, with an entire discharge of their Duty in all Points. And
where he can make a moderate, and reasonable advantage, by Innocence and
Fairness, there a good man will be easy and exemplary too in his Occupation.
Nor must they give way to overmuch business; Religion as our Savior says,
being eat up by the Cares of this world. Nor meddle with more, than allows them
daily to discharge their Duty both toward God and Man. And faithfully to
attend, and acquit themselves in all the Duties of a Christian as they come
before them.

Now this the Holy Scriptures require of us, when they tell us, that the world
is crucified to us in Christ Jesus; and we unto the world, Gal. 6.14. to lay
aside every weight, that oppresses us, Heb. 12.1. and not entangle our selves
in any Affairs, to the hindrance of his Service, who has chosen us to eternal
Life in Heaven, 2 Timothy 2.4.

7. They are studious and observant, to direct all Accidents and Occurrences,
and cast about, how they may pick out any advantage from them; or make them
serviceable to their own great Purpose. They are quick to espy an advantage,
and as quick to pursue it, and let nothing pass by them neglected; if they can
serve themselves thereof: And by this they bring in to themselves many an
accidental Advantage, in the way of their several Occupations.

And this it is very fit the Children of Light should imitate them in. In all
they do, and in all they receive, or meet withal, they should look about, and
carefully consider; how they may turn it to give Praise, or to do Honor unto
God; how it may be improved for the advantage and exercise of any Virtue, for
the greater sleighting, and contempt of this World, and preference of the next;
for the Encouragement, and Love of whatsoever is good; and for the Hatred, and
Discouragement of whatsoever is evil. And this is to Spiritualize all the
things of common Life; to turn Conversation, Business, and the accidents of
this World into Religion; to own God as the beginning, and to make him the end
of every thing. And it will produce a mavelous increase of Goodness,
Devotion, Godly care, and spiritual Heavenly living.

And this the Holy Scripture calls for, when it bids us, Whether we eat or
drink, or whatsoever we do, to do all to the glory of God, 1 Cor. 10.31. And
whatsoever we do, in word, or deed; to do all in the name of the Lord Jesus,
Col. 3.17.

8. When any thing is proposed to them; their Eye falls in the first place upon
their chief end, and they either accept or refuse the same, according as it may
be like to serve, or disserve them; in their Prosecution and Attainment
thereof. Their first Reflection is, how it suits with the interest of their
Occupation; whether it may be made serviceable thereto; or is like to be of no
use to them, or it may be a diversion, or prejudice to them, in their
Prosecution of the same. And they are sure to be true to their main Interest,
and listen to nothing, that would take them off from, or disserve them in it.
He who sets up for Gain, will neglect Power, or Pleasures, where they are like
to cause much expense. He who pursues Pleasures, will not listen to the motions
of Gain, or Business, when they are like to cost much Pains, or prove
inconsistent with his Diversions. He who is set upon Improvement of knowledge,
will set aside worldly Cares and Interests, when they take him from the
Prosecution of his Studies. Their great End is the rule of all the rest; and
they stand true and fixed to it; and rate and measure, the Desireableness of all
things thereby, which are offered to them.

Now this is an excellent Point of Wisdom, for the Children of Light to learn
from them. Whatsoever is offered to them, their Eye must fix in the first to
sift, and examine the Innocence, before they listen at all to any Suggestions
of the worldly Expedience of it. If it is ill, or tends to ill, or would hinder
them in the doing of their Duty, or expose them to transgress it; or make for
the Dishonor of God, or the Disparagement of the way of Godliness; no
Considerations in the World must make them listen to it; or deliberate with
themselves, whether they should or no. They must measure all Proposals, by
their Usefulness to their Souls, and take God and Religion into their
Consideration in the first place: And this is to act like men, who have
immortal Souls, and seek immortal Happiness, and know the price of both. And
this will make them not to judge, or act like other men. But they will
carefully seek, what others carefully shun; and be thankful, where they
complain. It will make them choose Self-denials, and Mortifications, which are a
worldly Uneasiness, when they are needful to a spiritual advantage; and refuse
the Pleasures of the flesh, and any advantages of this World, when they are
like to prove a spiritual prejudice. Yea, to embrace any worldly Losses and
Prejudices, and that with joy, when they come upon them for keeping strictly to
the way of Righteousness; and for doing their Duty faithfully to their Blessed
Lord and Savior, as they ought to do.

Now this also the Holy Scripture calls for, when it requires us to love God
with all our heart; that is to love him, above all, Matt. 12.30. That if we
regard iniquity in our heart, the Lord will not hear us, Psalm. 66.18. That if
we love lands, or father, or mother, or our own lives, more than our Blessed
Lord, we are unworthy of him, Mat. 10.31. Luke 14.26. And the like.

9. They are jealous of their great end, and examine nicely, and are very
Difficultly brought to give way, to any thing that seems to bear any color, or
may in any Likelihood turn to its prejudice. They may be over-seen in lesser
matters, but they are suspicious about this, which they count of price. They
will fear as far, as there is any cause or pretense to fear, and resolve with
great wariness, and be ready to start any possible Detriments, and Objections,
and pause on any appearance of Inconveniences which it may bring to them in
prosecuting the same.

And this again, is an admirable and useful Point of Wisdom, for the Children
of Light to take up from them. They must not be for taking the utmost Liberties
in any Duties, and coming as near the breach thereof as they can. Nor for
abiding in the Neighborhood, or within the Confines of sin, where they may be
in great danger of being won at last by its Temptation. But they must keep all
at the greatest distance, which may be like to damnifie, or endanger their Holy
Obedience. They must carefully preserve the Virgin innocence, the first
Modesties, Fears, and Reluctancies of Conscience, against every evil thing. And
not sit down by Dangers, or dwell with Temptations, or indulge small degrees,
or listen in the least to any ill Advice, or bear the proposal of any evil
things: But take Alarm at the remote approaches, and first appearances of sin;
and keep all Temptation, that may draw on the love and practice of any sin, as
far off from them as they can. They must rather wisely forbear lawful and safe
things, than by allowing themselves therein, bring themselves into any hazard
of others, which may bring danger with them.

And this the Holy Scriptures requires at our hands, when they tell us, that we
stand by faith; and must not be high minded, but fear, Romans 11.20. Watch and
pray, that ye enter not into Temptation, Matt. 26.41. To abstain from all
appearance of evil, 1 These. 5.22. And to have no fellowship with any deeds of
darkness; but to reprove them, Ephesians. 5.11.

10. They are very active and industrious to engage Succors, when they are
needful to their great Purposes. So the Steward was in the Text, when he had
lost the Friendship of his Lord, he seeks to make Friends among his Lords
Tenants. And thus the King going to war, if he finds he is too weak, seeks
about to strengthen himself by assistance of other Princes; which if he cannot
effect, he sends timely to offer terms and conditions of peace, Luke 14.31, 32.
Where danger appears they are careful, if they can engage help by any means,
not to stand by themselves, but to be prepared with such helps and succors, as
may give Protection from them.

And this also is a great and most serviceable piece of Wisdom, for the
Children of Light to learn from them. They must strengthen themselves in every
good and difficult work, and desire some good Christian Friend to be their
admonisher therein; yea, they are mutually to teach and admonish one another,
Col. 3.16. To exhort one another daily, Heb. 3.13. To stand fast and strive
together, Phil. 1.27. To pray for one another, Jam. 1.16. And earnestly to
desire each others Prayers, 1 These. 5.25. To pray earnestly themselves to God
for his grace, Jam. 5.13. 1 These. 5.10. And to be liberal in Alms, which send
up a sweet smell before God; and which though in the men of this World, who get
Money ill, and spend it ill, it be called the Mammon of unrighteousness; yet in
Christians, who get it justly, and lay it out virtuously and charitably, our
Blessed Lord tells us, it will make them friends in everlasting habitations,
Luke 16.9.

Such as these are the Instances of Wisdom, which I thought fit, pursuant to
our Lord's Direction in the Text, to note in the Managements of worldly men;
and earnestly to recommend to the Children of Light from them. And it is not to
be imagined what advantage they would find to themselves in the perfecting of
their spiritual Course, if they would but wisely observe, and remember these
excellent Rules of their Managements, and carefully use and follow them, in
pursuing their own infinitely better, and more happy Purposes.

For this way their Duty would continually be their Mark, and in their Eyes;
they would not only secretly propose, but openly profess it; they would study
to be thoroughly informed in every part thereof, that they might not be wanting
in the knowledge of their Profession; they would make it as their daily Mark,
so their daily Care and Employment, and be continually driving it on; they
would timely and carefully foresee, and provide for Futurities, contriving and
fixing on the fittest means of improvement in their way, and executing them
with speed, Assiduity and Resoluteness; and look often, and inquire before hand,
into the state of their Souls; to see whether they are fit to give a good
Account of themselves to God in the last Judgment; and if they are not, to
supply what is wanting; and that without delay, now whilst they have time for
it; and timely provide and forecast, against any spiritual streights and
accidents; that when they come, they may not be unready, or surprised by them;
they would be ready to cast off any Cares and Concerns which prove, or are like
to prove an hindrance, an encumbrance, or any ways a snare to them in the way
of their Holy Obedience. They would study how to direct all Accidents and
Occurrences; and seek how they may spiritualize, or pick any thing out of them;
for the Honor of God, and Improvement of themselves or others, in the way of
Holy Obedience and Religion. When any thing were offered to them, their first
Reflection and Inquiry would be, whether it were innocent, and lead to good,
and made for the easier, and more profitable discharge of their Duty, not
staying to give the least ear thereto, if it tend to the contrary; they would
even be jealous about doing their Duty, and keep all Dangers far off, and not
come near any thing, that may any wise lessen their Aversion to what is ill, or
tempt them to the Commission of it. And they would be very studious and
industrious to gain Succors, seeking out for all good and proper spiritual
Helps, when they are needful to their Holy Obedience.

Now what a Body of Christians would these ways make, would they all govern
themselves thereby, in the faithful discharge of their Duty, as I have
directed? We should hear no Complaints of the impossibility, or extreme
difficulty of doing their Duty. We should see a Generation of Saints, fit to be
Lights to the World, to live without any imputable fault or blemish; and die
with Comfort, and enter into everlasting joy and peace. Which God of his
infinite Grace and Mercy grant unto us all, for the sake of the Son of his
Love, and our only Lord and Savior Jesus Christ the Blessed for evermore. Amen.

DISCOURSE V. About the Return of Prayers, or when we may, and when we may not,
promise our selves the particular things we ask for.
On Matt. 7.7, 8. Ask and it shall be given you; for every one that asks,
receives.
IF we consider all those Blessings, which God has promised to this Duty of
Prayer; we shall presently be induced to conclude; that a man who can make use
of it, can stand in need of nothing. For so abundantly has God engaged himself
to all Supplicants, and so comprehensive the Promises, which he has made to our
Prayers, that we may seem to have it in our Power, to have every thing for
asking. The Lord is nigh unto all them that call upon him, says David, to all
that call upon him in truth, Psalm. 145.18. and in another place, Thou Lord art
good and ready to forgive, and plenteous in mercy to all that call upon thee,
Psalm. 86.5. And whatever you shall ask in prayer believing, says our Savior,
you shall receive, Matt. 21.22.

Thus ample and munificent, full and comprehensive are those Promises, which
God has made to our Prayers. If we want pardon for our sins, he bids us ask,
and we shall have it. If we need strength and aid to overcome Temptations, he
orders us to seek it at his hands, and we shall find it. If we want any Mercy,
either spiritual, or temporal, he directs us to address our selves to him for a
supply, and binds himself to grant what we desire of him.

But yet notwithstanding all these rich and extensive Promises, which God has
made to our Prayers; we daily see that vast numbers of men, who pray to God,
are not thus bettered or supplied by them. For how many are there in the world,
who are it may be every Morning and Evening upon their knees, desiring pardon
for their sins, who will yet be eternally condemned and punished for them? How
many men are frequently and importunately asking Grace, and strength to
overcome Temptations, who are still ordinarily overcome by them? They pray for
Sobriety, but yet they continue intemperate: they sue for Meekness, but still
they are fierce and passionate: they ask for Peace, but yet they remain unruly
and turbulent; they beg Humility, Contentedness, Charity and several other
Virtues, and after all they rest still as proud and covetous, wrathful and
contentious as ever.

Now here God's Promises are not performed, and men's Prayers are not answered;
so that it is certain, there must be a failure some where. Either God does not
give men what he Promises, or they do not ask as they ought to do, who shall
receive. Some fault there is, either in God's Faithfulness, or our Prayers,
which renders them so unsuccessful, and makes them so often bring down nothing
to us, where they are promised all.

And in this Competition, it is an easy thing to Apologize for my Maker, and
to assert the Honor of his truth, and Faithfulness in this business. He is
always as good as his word, and not only willing, but forward to give all; Nay,
more than he has promised, if we would but take care to ask as he requires. But
all the hindrance lies in our own selves. We do not ask like men who would
obtain; we do not sue for Pardon, as he will bestow it; nor pray for Grace, as
if we desired it, or had a mind to make any use of it, and therefore after all
our Prayers for God's Supplies, we are still as indigent as we were before; Ye
ask and receive not, says St. James, Ye desire and cannot obtain, because you
ask amiss, Jam. 4.2, 3. Whereas would we ask things, in such wise as God has
promised to grant them; and seek them upon such terms, as he has offered to
bestow them. Would we ask for Pardon of our sins, only in repenting of them,
and forsaking them; and for Grace and Virtue, in the use of good and wise
Endeavors after them; it is certain, we should not go without them. Ask, says
our Savior, it shall be given you; for every one that asks in this wise
receives.

To make my Discourse upon this subject as useful as I can, I shall enquire
into these two things.

First, Upon what terms we are to pray for any of God's mercies. And when that
is secured, Secondly, In what manner we ought to pray for them.
1. I shall inquire upon what terms we are to pray for any of God's mercies;
and under what Conditions we must hope to receive them. God's Promises run upon
Conditions, he engages to bestow Benefits when we perform Duties, and offers
the reward, after we have done the Service. And now what God promises only
conditionally, we must not ask absolutely; we must not expect that he will
give, till we come duly qualified, and fitted to receive; we must seek his
Mercies on his own terms; and ask them only in such wise as he has undertaken
to bestow them. And this is that rule which St. John prescribes to us, which he
makes the great Condition of our Prayers, and the measure of our Expectations.
This, says he, is the confidence which we have in him, that if we ask any thing
according to his will, he hears us, 1 John 5.14.

To know then when we ask any thing upon God's own terms, and sue for Mercies
in such sort, as he has promised to bestow them; we must enquire what his Will
is concerning any thing which we ask for, or upon what terms he will give them;
and on what Conditions the Gospel bids us hope to receive them; and if we come
duly prepared therewith, we may be sure upon our Prayers to receive them.

Now that Condition whereupon God has promised to forgive us any wilful Sin, i.
e. any Sin against our own knowledge, or against the Checks and Warnings of our
own Minds and Consciences, is our sincere Repentance of it, and Care to amend
and forsake it. And that Condition, whereupon he has promised to bestow upon us
any Virtue, is our own serious and diligent seeking, and endeavoring after it.
And that Condition whereupon he has promised, to confer upon us any gracious
Assistances of his Holy Spirit, is so far forth, as we are honestly prepared to
use them; and carefully cooperate our selves, and concur therewith; and that
Condition whereupon he has engaged to give us health, or ease, or safety, or
any outward Blessings, when we seek and labor after them, is so far forth as
in the Wisdom of his All-seeing Providence, he sees them fitting for us; or
conducing to the advantage of the World, and the benefits of others. Upon these
terms God has promised to bestow these Mercies; and if we have them to show,
when we pray, our Prayers shall certainly procure them; but if we are void of
them, our Prayers can have no such effect; but after all we shall still be
unrelieved and go without them. We ask what God is resolved not to grant, and
seek what he has declared, we shall never find; and such Petitions can never
take effect, but must needs be unsuccessful. If we ask his Pardon for any Sin,
whilst we impenitently go on therein, and continue to repeat the same; he tells
us plainly, if we will believe him, that we shall not be pardoned, but that
except we repent we shall surely perish. If we beg his Grace whilst we never
use it, nor endeavor after those Virtues which we pray for; he assures us,
that we shall be so far from being entrusted with more Grace; that we shall
lose what we have received already, and that from him that has not, shall be
taken even that which he has; these Prayers being altogether against his Will,
and contrary to the Declarations of his Gospel; they cannot be heard unless God
should change his mind, and give us a new Religion, and other ways of obtaining
his favor, than those which we have received already.

But in Matters of this moment to be more particular.

1. As for pardon of our Sins, God will not grant that, till we repent of them
and forsake them; so that whenever we ask Pardon of them, we must for ever
renounce them, and bid adieu to them; or else according to those terms of Mercy
Christ has purchased for us, we cannot hope to be forgiven. When the wicked man
forsakes his way, says God by Ezekiel, and turns from the wickedness he has
committed, and does that which is lawful and right; he shall save his soul
alive; he shall surely live, and not die, Ezekiel. 18.27, 28. Repent, says St.
Peter, and be converted, that your sins may be blotted out. Act. 3.19. But
except you repent, says our Savior, you shall all perish, Luke 13.3.

Thus is sincere Repentance, and forsaking sin made the great Condition of the
Forgiveness of it. And therefore if any man would pray for the Pardon of his
sins, according as the same is promised by God, and is to be expected by us, he
must first renounce the Sin, which he desires God to pardon, and pray for the
Forgiveness of it, with true penitential Purposes and Engagements, and change
of mind and practice; he must not lie laboring at the Throne of Grace, and
think to weary God with importunate entreaties, to pardon him without more ado,
and to forgive him his Sin, whilst he continues unreclaimed from it. He must
not pray against a dreadful Punishment, whilst he continues in a wicked
Practice; and seek to appease God, before he has reformed himself. No he must
fit himself for the favor before he ask it; he must first repent and amend,
and then let him in his Prayers profess he does, and upon these Petitions he
shall be pardoned. And upon these terms we are taught to beg pardon in our
public Prayers; concerning which I must profess from my own Experience; that
the more I understand of my Religion, and the further I consider them; the more
cause I see, as for the Body of them, most thankfully to admire and approve of
them. And in them when we are exhorted to confess our sins, to the end that we
may obtain forgiveness of the same, we are taught to do it, with a penitent and
obedient heart; and again when after the Confession of our faults, we come to
sue for favor, we do it only in confidence of this Profession of Repentance,
desiring God that he would restore them that are penitent. And when afterward
we come to hear the comfortable words of God, in the absolution of the
Minister, we are told only of his absolving those that truly repent; and of his
pardoning such as turn away from Sin. This I have noted for this end, that we
may understand our own Devotions, and come to them prepared, with that full
Purpose of reforming and change of heart, which is absolutely necessary for the
acceptance of them. And when we pray thus, and with penitent hearts ask for
God's Pardon, he will be sure to grant it, and we shall not miss of the Mercy
and Forgiveness which we pray for.

2. As for the Assistance of God's Holy Spirit, he has no where promised to
grant it, nor have we any ground to expect it, unless we are honestly prepared
to make a good use of it, and carefully to cooperate our selves and concur
with it.

And as for any gracious Tempers, and virtuous Dispositions, he has not
promised to give, nor must we hope to receive them, unless we our selves do
seriously and diligently seek and endeavor after them. So that whenever we
ask for the help of God's Grace, or for any holy Dispositions or Virtues, it
must be in the honest use of our own Industry and good Endeavors. God will not
bestow new Grace upon us, till he sees that we have made a good use of what he
has bestowed already: and we must improve the Talents which formerly were
entrusted with us, before he will think us duly qualified to receive more, as
we are told in the Parable of those, who had received the Talents, Matt. 25.
For this is the rule of God's Dispensation; unto every one that has, i. e.
has made good use and improvement of what he had committed to him, as the good
Servant had done, Ver. 20.22. shall more be given, and he shall have abundance:
but from him that has not; i. e. has not been careful to use and improve the
same, as the wicked servant had not done, who went and hid it, Ver. 25. from
him shall be taken even that which he has, Ver. 29.

As for those Prayers then which God will answer, if they be for pardon of
Sins, or for Grace and virtuous Dispositions, they must be sincerely penitent
and industrious. God has promised no Pardon but upon true Repentance, nor any
saving helps and assistances of his Spirit or virtuous Tempers, but upon our
honest Industry* and good Endeavors. And therefore if we would ask these
Mercies as God has promised to grant them, and as the Gospel bids us hope to
receive them, we must pray for Forgiveness with true Repentance; and for God's
Grace with sincere Purposes to make good use thereof; and for any virtuous
Tempers, with a Preparation to take pains for them, and seriously, and
carefully to endeavor afterward to acquire the Virtue which we have prayed to
God for. An impenitent man's Prayer for the pardon of his Sins, will be of no
avail with God; for he will not forgive us our Sins, whilst we go on in them.
And an idle unworking persons Prayer for any particular Grace or Virtue, is
offensive to him. The only Prayers which he hears for these things, are the
Prayers of sincerely, penitent and industrious; and if our Prayers are
qualified thus, they are such as he will own, and as he has bound himself, in
Truth and Faithfulness, he will most certainly answer and reward them. And then,

Thirdly, As for the Third sort of things, which men are wont to pray for, viz.
Health, or Sustenance, or Safety, or any other outward Blessings; God expects
in his Gift of these, as I have showed he does in his Gifts of Grace, and Holy
and virtuous Dispositions, that they themselves should labor after them; and
be diligent in the use of wise and due means to attain them; it not being his
way to heal or feed, or secure men by Miracle, but only by Blessing their own
care and pains in pursuit of these Mercies. And much more does he expect, both
in spiritual and temporal Blessings, that they should not take any Courses,
which are directly contrary to them. When they pray for Deliverance from any
Sin, they must not put themselves in the way of Temptations, which are still
apt to make them to fall into it: when they pray to God for Health, they must
not put it away from themselves by Intemperance; or by any gross neglects, or
abuse of their own Bodies? When they pray to him, to secure the Church or our
Holy Religion; they must not put a stop to their own Prayers, by seeking a
security from Sin, or by an unwise Compliance with any other methods, which are
liker to destroy, than to secure the same. If we expect that he should hear and
further our Prayers, we must show first, that we are in earnest with him, by
furthering them ourselves; and not falling to such Courses as directly
overthrow our own Petitions.

And when we do thus wisely endeavor after any outward things, God has no
where promised to grant them, nor may we hope to receive them, further than in
the Wisdom of his All-seeing Providence, he sees them fit for us, and conducing
to the benefit and advantage of the World, and the good of others. So that
whenever we ask them, it must be with this reserve, if in his Wisdom he sees
it fitting.

In spiritual Mercies, we are sure of the Grace or Virtue we desire, if we come
duly prepared to receive them. But in temporal; the having, or not having of
what we ask is uncertain, and always depends on this; if God in his Wisdom sees
it fit, we should have them. Sometimes outward Blessings, whether of Health, or
Ease, or Plenty, are not fit for us, but would turn in the end by far more to
our hurt than to our advantage. They would carnalize our Souls, and render us
sensual and earthly minded, proud and insolent; they would make us forget God,
and slight his Service, affront those who are placed above, and oppress such
as he has set below us. Prosperity is a state of great danger to men's Souls, it
exposes them to many Vices, and puts them under a number of Temptations to
several instances of Disobedience; and it is for the Concern of every one who
has pious Wisdom, and prudent Care enough; to avoid being ensnared by it. The
prosperity of fools, say Solomon instead of being a Blessing to them; does
destroy them, Prove. 1.32. When Jesuron waxed fat, says Moses, he kicked
against him who made him so; when he was grown thick and covered with fatness,
then he forsook God that made him, and lightly esteemed the rock of his
salvation, Deuteronomy. 32.15. There are but few minds, that can grapple with the
Temptations, which are still soliciting persons in wealth and honors,
pleasures, and affluence; but they are generally lead away into several Sins,
and overcome by them. And I doubt not but that several persons, whose Souls
have utterly miscarried in a prosperous, might have done well, and have gone to
Heaven, had it pleased God to have visited them more frequently in Crosses; and
to have kept them under the most gracious and wholesome Discipline, of a
troubled and afflicted state of things.

Outward Mercies then are not always fit for us, but would often prove a snare,
and a most dangerous Temptation to us. And when they would do so, they are
neither fit for us to ask, nor so long as he retains any love and kindness for
us, for God to grant us. They are no fit matter in this case for God to
promise, and so are no fit subject, wherein we are to hope he always should
perform.

Again at other times outward Blessings are denied; though not so much for our
own sakes, yet for the good of others, and the advantage of the World. Ofttimes
God sees it necessary in the World, to set out some examples of Content, and
instances of Patience; that men may see both what they ought to follow, and how
they may be able to perform it. And so never be discouraged with desponding
thoughts of their being unable to bear those things with Patience, if they
should be called to it, which they see are born by others like themselves with
Patience every day. Example is a great Encouragement to action, it shows that a
thing is feasible, and strangely animates any gallant mind, with undaunted
Courage, and great Confidence of Resolution, to pass through those
Difficulties, which they see Time and Patience, will overcome in the pursuit of
good and honorable things. And thus God set out Job and David, and abundance
of Prophets, and righteous men in the Old Testament; and our Savior in the New
set out himself, and his Holy Apostles, and generally the whole Body of
Christians in the first Ages, and great numbers in all Ages ever since; to be
Patterns of meekness in afflictions unto others; and to show men what it is to
bear hard things with Patience; and to submit to his Wisdom, and own his mercy
and goodness; in all his Disposals and Administrations of the World.

So that even when outward Blessings and Enjoyments might be trusted with us,
and would be no ways prejudicial to us in our own Persons; yet does God in his
good Providence, which is to take Care, not only of us, but of all the World,
see fit many times to deprive us of them, for the sake of others; that we may
be examples to them, and that they may learn from our Sufferings, and our meek
Carriage under the same, both to be thankful for their own Blessings, whilst we
want, and they enjoy them, and to be ready to part with them with Patience at
an evil day.

And since God will not bestow upon us outward Blessings, when either they are
unfit for our selves, or when he sees it proper to deprive us of them for the
sake of others: whenever these Cases happen we must not expect them. And
because when this would be, God only knows but we are ignorant: whenever we
ask any outward things, we must do it with Submission, and under this
conditional Reserve, if he sees them fitting and convenient, and leave the
Determination to the Wisdom of his unerring Judgment. And in this way our
Blessed Savior has lead us, in the highest instance of this sort of Prayers;
when he prayed against all the pains and horrors of his Sufferings, Father says
he, if it be possible let this bitter cup pass from me, nevertheless, I
determine nothing, but refer all to thy unerring Wisdom in this matter, not my
will but thine be done, Matt. 26.39.

Thus then we see when God will grant us any outward Blessings, such as Health,
or Ease, or Plenty, or the like, when we ask them for our selves. And the same
return will he make to our Prayers, when we pray for Peace or Prosperity, or
other outward Blessings for the public also. For if a Nation is just and fears
God, and is fit to be prosper'd; and if it would not abuse it, but serve God
more thereby; so that it would be no ways hurtful to themselves; or if the open
scandal of their Sins do not call for Justice, and require that they be made an
example unto others; and if it is otherwise agreeable and consistent with the
wise Ends of God's good Providence, and his Care of others; he will give this
outward Prosperity to a People, that earnestly begs and prays for it, and
carefully and wisely seeks it, and endeavors after it. But if their Sins call
for Scourges; if by Prosperity they would justify and harden themselves the
more in their iniquities, and grow wanton and bold in sin, and make use
thereof, only to make more Provision for their Lusts; if they have greatly
dishonored and offended God, and are not humbled for the things that provoke
him; if they have hardened themselves against all other means of God's
Providence, turning his Grace into wantonness, and his bounty and forbearance
into an occasion of greater Sinfulness, and are not to be reclaimed, but by
Chastisements and severe inflictions; or if there be a necessity in the Course
of God's Government to make them an example for the terror of others; or if any
other ways it would make against the wise ends of God's most Holy and good
Providence, then he will hold his hand; and notwithstanding all the earnest,
importunate, and incessant Prayers that are made for the same, refuse to bestow
it on them. So that in asking outward Blessings for the public, as well as for
our private Concerns; for the Kingdom we are of as well as for our selves; we
must always have this conditional reserve, if God sees them fitting, and refer
themselves to his Wisdom, whether he see convenient to grant them at our
Prayers or no.

And thus it appears, upon what Terms we are to pray for any of God's Mercies,
whether spiritual or temporal; whether relating to this life, or to that which
is to come. If we beg Pardon for our sins, we must ask it with true Repentance
and forsaking of them. If we desire Grace it must be with a full Purpose to
make a good use thereof and if we desire any Virtues and holy Dispositions, it
must be with a Preparation of mind diligently to use the means, and to put
forth our best Endeavors to attain them. And if we pray for any outward
worldly thing, whether for our selves or others, besides our laboring after
the same in wise ways, we must expect no issue but with this reserve, if God
sees them fitting, and then acquiesce in the Determination of his Wisdom,
whether he see fit to hear our Prayers, by granting of the same or no.

And thus having showed, upon what Terms we are to pray for any of God's
Mercies, whether spiritual or temporal, relating to this life or the next; I
proceed now,

Secondly, To show in what manner we ought to pray for them. When we come to
pay our Homage, and to make our suit to Almighty God; we must be careful of our
Carriage, that it show nothing of disrespect, or a careless regard, either of
him, or of those Mercies which we come to desire at his hands. God will be
honored in them that come near him; he expects they should treat him, with
that awe and reverence, that humble Decency; and dutiful Submission of mind,
which becomes them toward their Maker and Benefactor, their supreme Lord and
Sovereign. And all this awe and reverence, this Honor and humble Respect, must
not only be inwardly in their minds, but in their outward Carriage and
Behavior also. They must use such visible Indications as are known marks of
Honor, and express their respect to God by such dutiful and decent Carriage,
as they are wont to use toward their Governors, or toward one another. And
this way of expressing their Honor and Respect to him, by such allowed
Indications of it as are signs of Honor among themselves, is what God himself
appeals to; and that whereby he goes about most convincingly to reprove the
religious Rudeness, and ill Manners of the Israelites, Mal. 1. For when they
would pretend to honor God, but yet would put him off with any thing; when
they would make show of offering Sacrifice, and giving Presents to him, but yet
make choice of such things to present as were not worth receiving, offering to
him as he Complains, the blind, the lame and the sick: He tells them plainly,
he resents the Indignity, and sets them to consider whether it be any sign of
Honor to make choice of such unmannerly, mean, and refuse things, when they
have to do with God, as would pass for marks of Irreverence and Disesteem if
they were used toward men. Offer such things as these, says he first, to thy
Governor, and see whether he will be pleased with thee; accept thy person, for
such a Present; and if these Instances of ill Behavior and rude Treatment,
would by no means please, but highly provoke him; think not to honor God by
that, which would vilify and affront Men, Verse 8.

But in this matter to be more particular; if we would make our Prayers in
Christ's Name in such manner, as would become us to offer them, and God to hear
them; we must put them up,

First, With Reverence and Humility. When we pray to God, we must know, that we
poor Worms are treating with our Maker; that we most indigent and helpless
Creatures are suing to our noblest Benefactor; that we sinful Subjects are
addressing our selves to the supreme Lord and Sovereign of all the World. And
when we have to do with a person so far above us, so unmeasurably kind and
beneficial to us, and that has so absolute Authority and Empire over us; it is
necessary that then if ever we be mindful of our distance, and make our
Application with that Lowliness of mind, that decent humble Carriage, and
careful reverent Deportment, as may plainly evidence, that we have a just
Honor and Veneration for the Majesty of that God, whom we address our selves
unto. And thus in all our Acts of Worship, whether Prayers or Praises, or
hearing of God's word, or other Acts of Religion, whether in solemn Oaths,
sacred Hymns and Thanksgivings or the like, we compose our selves as in God's
Presence, and do not behave our selves lightly and carelessly, but with a
visible seriousness and reverence of Soul: We uncover our Heads, and compose
our Countenances, and use decent humble Postures, such as kneeling, bowing or
standing; and testify in all our Deportment, that we are concerned with that
God, whom we can never Honor enough, and whom we seek to evidence our respect
unto, by all the proper Signs, and most suitable Indications, whereby we are
wont to express it toward men. This we are all prone to pay, as it is fit we
should, to Persons that are placed above us; and as forward generally to exact
it, of all such as are set below us.

And since we thus expect it, and are ashamed to neglect it toward one
another; with what face can we deny it toward God. But if at any time we do,
how justly may he take up that reproof against us, which he did against the
unmannerly, and disrespectful Israelites; offer this careless and unbecoming
Carriage to thy Governor, in any Honor which thou payest him, and see whether
he will be pleased with it, and accept it of thee, Mal. 1.8.

Secondly, That our Prayers may be put up in such manner, as it is fit for us to
offer them, or for God to hear them, we must offer them up, with due Fixedness
and Attention of mind, and fervency of affection.

We must offer them up with a due Fixedness and Attention of mind. We must not
draw near unto God with our lips, when our hearts and minds are far from him:
We must not utter words by rote, or say our Prayers as Children are wont to Con
a Lesson, without any heed or Application of our minds to them; but our
thoughts must go along with our words, and our minds must be intent, and set
upon the Mercies which we pray for. God will not hearken to our Petitions, when
it may be we our selves do not hear them; he will not attend to our Requests,
when we our selves do not attend to them; he will not grant those Suits, which
had only a form of words; but nothing of an inward Desire, and spiritual
Application in them. So that if only our Tongues pray, and our Minds are
straying, we might as well be silent, and not pray at all.

We must offer them up also, with a good measure of desire, and fervency of
affection. A cold Petitioner bespeaks a Denial, instead of a gracious Answer.
He seems indifferent in making of his Suit, and so may well expect that God
should be indifferent too, and less concerned in granting it. He seems to
slight the Mercy, when he asks it; and so there is the less reason to expect,
that he should think himself much obliged by it, or be duly thankful for it,
after he has received it. But a fervent Prayer shows how eagerly we desire a
Mercy, and how thankfully we are like to receive it. And this is some
Encouragement, and a strong Inducement for God to bestow it on us. He is a most
tender and indulgent Parent; who cannot deny us any good thing that is fit for
us; when he sees we are wrought up to a due Valuation and Esteem of it, and our
hearts are eagerly set upon it. The fervent Prayer of a righteous man, says
St. James, avails much, Jam. 5.16.

Thirdly, A third thing that is requisite to an acceptable Prayer, and must
recommend it to God's favor, is faith, or believing we shall receive, when we
ask according to his Promise; which our Savior makes a necessary Qualification
to our being heard, Matt. 21.22. Whatsoever you shall ask in prayer believing,
you shall receive; and if any man lack Wisdom, let him ask in faith, says St.
James, nothing wavering, and it shall be given him, Jam. 1.5, 6. and the true
meaning of this is easily understood from what I have already said concerning
the Terms, whereupon God will grant us any of his Mercies. For then we are to
believe we shall receive them, when we have performed those Conditions,
whereupon he has promised to bestow them. So that then we must hope to obtain
Pardon for our Sins, when we forsake them, and ask it with true Repentance, and
Reformation. And then we must believe, that we shall receive some Virtuous
Endowments, when we are careful to attain, and industriously seek after them.
And then we must expect to enjoy the Assistance of God's Grace, and Holy
Spirit, when we are careful to concur with, and make a good use of it. And
then we must expect, upon our Endeavors after the same, to be heard for
Health, or Ease, or any prosperous turns of Providence and outward things, when
God in his Wisdom sees them fitting for us, and consistent either with our own
good, or with the greater benefit of others.

It is these Promises of God which must guide our Expectations, and then we
must hope to receive any of these Mercies from him, asking them in Christ's
Name, when we come qualified with these Conditions, whereupon he has engaged to
bestow them; to believe that he will grant what we ask of him, when we seek it
not upon these Terms, it is not Faith but Infidelity; to expect that we should
receive these Mercies any otherwise, that we should be pardoned without
Repentance, and made Virtuous without our own Care, and good Endeavors, is not
hope but Presumption. We must seek things in God's own way; and then, but not
before, we shall be sure to find them.

And that we may always come thus prepared to our Prayers, that so we may
obtain the Blessings which we seek for; God of his infinite Mercy Grant, etc.

FINIS.
Books Printed for, and sold by A. and J. Churchill at the Black Swan in
Paternoster Row.
A View of Universal History, from the Creation, to the Year of Christ 1695. By
Francis Tallents, sometime Fellow of Magdalen-College Cambridge. The whole
graven in 16 Copper Plates, each 15 Inches deep, and 12 broad; bound up into
Books, the Sheets lined. Price 16 s. Cambden's Britannia, newly Translated into
English, with large Additions and Improvements. By Edmund Gibson, of Queens
College in Oxford. The General Hist. of the Air. By R. Boil, Esquire 4 to. A
Complete Journal of the Votes, Speeches, and Debates, both of the House of
Lords and Commons, throughout the whole Reign of Queen Elizabeth. Collected by
Sir Simonds Dewes, Baronet, and Published by Paul Bows, of the Middle Temple,
Esquire The 2d. Edit. Fol. The Works of the famous Nich. Machiavel, Citizen and
Secretary of Florence. Written Originally in Italian, and from thence
faithfully Translated into English. Fol. Mr. Lock's Essay concerning Humane
Understanding. The 3d. Edition with large Additions. Fol. -- His Thoughts of
Education. Octav. The Fables of Aesop and other Mythologists; made English by
Sir Roger L'Estrange, Knight. Fol. Two Treatises of Government: The first an Answer
to Filmer's Patriarcha. The latter an Essay concerning the true Original,
Extent, and End of Civil Government. Octavo. Notitia Monastica: Or, A short
History of the Religious Houses in England and Wales, etc. By Thom. Tanner. A.
B. Octavo. The Resurrection of the (same) Body asserted from the Tradition of
the Heathens, the Ancient Jews, and the Primitive Church: With an Answer to the
Objections brought against it. By Humphry Hody, D. D. Bishop Wilkins of Prayer
and Preaching: Enlarged by the Bishop of Norwich, and Dr. Williams. Octavo.
Considerations about lowering the Interest and raising the Value of Money.
Octavo. Short Observations on a Printed Paper, Entitled, For Encouraging the
Coining Silver Money in England, and after for keeping it here. Octavo. Sir W.
Temple's History of the Netherlands. Octavo. -- Miscellanea. Octavo. Dr.
Gibson's Anatomy of Hum. Bodies, with Fig. Oct. Dr. Patrick's New Version of
all the Psalms of David in Meter. Twelves. Two Treatises of Natural Religion,
Oct. Gentleman's Religion with the Grounds and Reasons of it. The Novels and
Tales of the Renowned John Boccacio, The first Refiner of Italian Prose;
containing an Hundred Curious Novels: By seven Honorable Ladies, and three
Noble Gentlemen, Framed in Ten Days. The Fifth Edition much Corrected and
Amended. Logica: Sive, Ars Ratiocinandi. Ontologia: Sive, De Ente in Genere.
Pneum^tologia, seu Despiritibus. Auctore Joanne. Clerico, 12 s The Lives of the
Popes, from the time of our Savior Jesus Christ, to the Reign of Sixtus IV. By
Sir Paul Rycant, Knight. The Second Edition corrected. The Meditations of Marcus
Aurelius Antoninus, the Roman Emperor, concerning Himself. To which is added,
The Life of Antoninus, with some Remarks upon the whole: By Monsieur and Mad.
Dacier. Never before in English Octavo. Sermons Preached by Dr. R. Leighton,
late Archbishop of Glasgow. The Second Edition, Oct. The Roman History,
written in Latin by Titus Livius, with the Supplements of the Learned John
Fre^nshemius, and John D^jatius: Faithfully done into Engl. Fol. Annicius
Manlius Severinus Boethius, of the Consolation of Philosophy. In Five Books.
Made English by the Right Honorable Ric. Lord Viscount Preston. Oct. Sir
Richard Baker's Chronicle of the Kings of England, continued down to this Time.
The Reasonableness of Christianity, as delivered in the Scriptures. Octavo.
Prince Arthur; an Heroic Poem. In Ten Books. By R. Blackmore, M. D. Fellow of
the College of Physicians, London. Fol. The Christians defense against the fear
of Death, with seasonable Directions how to prepare themselves to Dye well.
Written originally in French, by Chart Drilincourt, of Paris, Translated into
English by M. D. Assigny, B. D. Third Edition. The Royal Grammar, containing a
new and easy Method for the speedy attaining the Latin Tongue.

