THE SOBER CONFORMISTS ANSWER TO A RIGID CONFORMISTS REASONS. Why in this
Juncture no Alteration should be made in the GOVERNMENT of the CHURCH of
SCOTLAND.

Prove. 26.4. Answer not a Fool according to his folly, lest thou also be like
unto him.

Verse 5. Answer a Fool according to his folly, lest he be wise in his own
Conceit.

M. D. Dickson, Papists hate nothing in Prelacy but what is Presbyterian, and
Presbyterians hate nothing in it but what it Popish.

M. R. Blair, The Bishops of England are like the Kings of Judah, some good
some bad. The Bishops of Scotland are like the Kings of Israel, not a good one
amongst them all.

Published by a Lover of Peace and Truth. Printed in the Year MDCLXXXIX.

REASONS Why in this Juncture no Alteration should be made in the GOVERNMENT Of
the CHURCH of SCOTLAND.
Reason I. BEcause Episcopal Government has not only the Advantage of
Apostolic Constitution and Natural Reception by all Christian Churches from
CHRIST to Calvin, but also is found by Experience to be the best Adapted for
preservation of Order, Peace and Unity.

Rea. 2. Because the most of the Gentry and Burgesses have taken the Test, and
therefore can never without perjury vote for the Introduction of Presbytry, or
choose such a Commissioner as may be suspected to favor that way.

Rea: 3. If Presbytry be voted, then returns upon you the Solemn League and
Covenant, as is evident not only from the present proceedings of the
Presbyterian Preachers, but also from the Natural Exigence of the thing, it not
being possible to conceive a Foundation for parity without it, and if the
Covenant return then, beside the many impieties of that Oath, it must make the
most considerable of the Nation either perjured or miserable; And no Man can
have any public place either in Church or State, but such as shall do penance
for taking the Test; and not only so, but a great part of the Laity of the
Nation, must be reduced to great straits, both in reference to Conscience and
Interest, and the present Regular Clergy be turned out, which will reduce the
Church to such Amazing Hardships, that the Gos pel shall not be preached in
three parts of the Kingdom, there not being an hundred qualified Presbyterians
in the Kingdom.

Rea: 4. Because if presbytry shall not be thus established in its integrity
but all that Alteration turn to a Non-Episcopacy, and the present Presbyters
continue in their Offices, then our deplorable Schisms and Divisions, will
continue without a remedy, or else the Magistrate will take the Government of
the Church upon him, and we must have downright Erastianism.

Rea: 5: Because the establishment of Presbytry will have a most pernicious
influence upon the Protestant Religion in this Island if ever Popery set up its
head. For the Churches of England and Scotland must stand on different bottoms,
and so will be obliged to justify themselves by different Arguments, which
will prove very hard for Scotland, seeing Presbytry will divid it from England,
which opens a door to the re-entry of Popery, which cannot but aleniate the
Affections of the Church of England from us, which considering our own weakness
will expose us a prey to the common Enemy.

Rea. 6. To be for Presbytry in this Juncture will exceedingly disoblige the
Princess of Orange, whose principles are known to all Europe in this matter,
and the Prince also who has no inclination for the Alteration of the Government
of the Church, as he has now abundantly declared.

Rea. 7: Let all thinking Men but reflect upon the Natural Tempter of
Presbytry, and view it in its Tyrannical, pragmatick, Meddling and Domineering
effects which many good Men yet living of all Qualities have severely felt. Let
them likewise consider the Hypocrisy, immorality and Antichristian genius of
that party, and then let them vote for it if they think fit.

Rea: 8: If the Church of England continue as it is (as undoubtedly is will)
and Scotland be reduced to Presbytry, then considering the boundless and
restless spirit of Presbytry, Scotland will impose, sicut ante, an uniformity
in Doctrine and Discipline upon that Nation, which will commence a new Civil
War, the thoughts of which cannot but breed horror in all reasonable Men.

SIR,
IF the wounds of a Friend be better than the kisses of an Enemy, they should
be far more acceptable then the wounds of an Enemy; And therefore I expect ye
will not be displeased with my Freedom in this line designed for preventing
your more severe and shameful Treatment, by our Adversaries to whom ye have
given great advantage, by some Reasons ye have written [ why in this Juncture
there s hold be no Alteration of the Government of the Church of Scotland] of
baffling our cause so unseasonably and weakly defended by you. For albeit there
are many sober Presbyterians whose generous compassion of our present
staggering condition, would not allow them to give you such an humbling
Repartee, as ye give too large ground for, yet as we deserve it not at their
hand, who have been so cruel to them in their low condition; so we cannot
expect it from every one of them, especially, when they are at once encouraged,
by the many Disadvantages of our pre sent circumstances, and irritated by your
extreme bitterness against them, and therefore I advise you would recall all the
copies of it, which I am hopeful have not yet spread far, for in. genuously
they are so weak, that few of our persuasion will be at the pains to transcribe
them, and I think they will be more careful of our Reputation then to suffer
them to come to the hands of any Presbyterian; as through time they may, if you
prevent it not. But lest your vanity make you confidently contemn my counsel; I
shall take a little pains to abate your confidence, by showing you how easily
and advantagiously our Adversaries with whom I have frequent converse can
answer you.

But I must first express my Dissatisfaction with the title ye give your paper
so liable to the most perplexing Exceptions can be made against us. I doubt not
but ye have heard (I have heard it so often) how lamentably Archbishop P: was
baffled of late by Mr. Roger at Glasgow, upon the like occasion given him;
Wear too conscious to our selves, that the sole support of our interest is but
Civil Laws (though the Bishops were at the making them) and that all
Ecclesiastic Authority is on their side; And therefore ye would be
inextricably puzzled, if they put the Question to you, Which of the two is the
Government of the Church of Scotland, that which is only introduced by Civil
Laws, without any Eeclesiastick Authority, contrary to the standing Laws of the
Church, never yet repealed by any Church Judicature, or that which is
established by many National Assemblies of the Church, though contrar to
posteriour Acts of Parliament, made without any consequent, far les s
Antecedent Determination of any Church Judicatory.

They may likewise give you an unanswerable challenge of monor polizing the
specious name of the [Church of Scotland] to us (excluding them) because we
have receded from old standing Ecclesiastic Laws without any other warrant
then new Civil Laws contrary to them; and upon that account charge us with
Schism and unwarrantable separation from them, having no Evasion left us, but
that we are the more numerous part of the Clergy, which scarce makes our
Separation tolerable, far less justifiable.

But that which is as unbecoming us, as unacceptable to them, is your pleading
[no Alteration] which will stumble your Readers with prejudice in the very
entry; For how ever difficult it be to prove the necessity of such an entire
Alteration as Presbyterians desire, yet they can easily pitch upon many things,
which we cannot ingenuously deny should be altered; And the book entitled the
Reformed Bishop, written by one of our Clergy, opens a wide door to them; Yea,
we are all of us too sensible, that our interest has been scrued up to so
dangerous heights, by the Laws, that there is no stable Basis left to establish
it in the Consciences of those who own it; And we have Reason to fear lest
those odious superstructures of the Magistrates unbounded Supremacy over the
Church, such rigorous impositions on the Consciences of Subjects, and so cruel
persecution of all Dissenters (which by an excess of Zeal we have erected, to
be the securities of our cause) may so much discommend the whole Fabric of our
Government, as to endanger the total ruin thereof. And I have always thought
it a great flaw in the Episcopal Government in Scotland, that as it has been
built upon no other Foundation, and advanced by no other Methods then Civil
Laws rigorously executed, so these are framed in such an Arbitrary and
persecuting style, that the least turn of Affairs will render them as odious as
before they were grievous to all moderate and judicious Men of both parties.

And finally, it surpasses my imagination, what has encouraged you to add [in
this Juncture?] Its evident that the whole present Juncture of Affairs has a
bad Aspect on us, and we can expect little Favor from such as duly consider
the same. What has infatuated you to such an unaccountable confidence? Alace!
your Reasons can never cancel these unhappy Addresses to the King, so fresh in
the remembrance of all Men; That of the Primat sent to King in name of the
Clergy, to thank him for the Liberty granted to the Papists, so full of base
sycophantry, and abject flattery, that even the Popish King was ashamed of it,
which I fear be printed at Fdinburgh before the Convention, though ye tempt
them not to the remembrance of it, and that other most unseasonable Testimony
of our Loyalty, expressing our Detestation of the P. of Orange his coming to
England, as an unjus t and unnatural Invasion; signed by the Bps to their
eternal s hame. Neither will ever this Paper of yours counterpoise the P. of
Orange, His Declaration in reference to Scotland, wherein we are represented as
the grievance of the Nation, and the necessity of an Alteration, insinuated as
clearly as could be done without directly reflecting on our Laws, which though
he does not approve, yet he Judges unseasonable as yet to condemn. Nor Finally
can all ye say for our vindication, outcry the loud voice of the Rigorous
Persecution, and violent Oppression, and innumerable Grievances, which may be
too justly charged on our party, and the Presbyterians are too apt to represent
and aggredge so, as to extort pity and compassion, even from the hardest
hearted of our Grandies without such an irritating remembrance as you are.

But to come to your Reasons, Presbyterians will think them weak enough, though
ye had not wronged them by such a vain Title. I wish ye had forborne the first
which is too Theologick, and so not only discovers the Author to be of the
Clergy, who are little regarded when pleading for their own Interest, but does
also give our Adversaries too large a Field wherein they are best acquainted
and most expert. Ye might have satisfied your self only with Politic
Arguments, which are the most proper and suitable to our cause, and would seem
to be the Sentiments of some Judicious Pers on of another Quality agenting it,
and so be a great deal more acceptable and considered with the less prejudice.
But I see no kind of reason in your Paper which Presbyterians cannot answer
without any difficulty and with great advantage.

Your first Reason has three things in it, which though it be sufficient
simply to deny because merely asserted, yet our Adversaries will not pass them
so bluntly, they give too fair an occasion to them, of giving the sharpest and
sorest wounds to our cause that it can meet with, and of prepossessing men's
Cons ciences with such evident Convictions in their favor, as will render all
your other Reasons ineffectual for persuading them to favor us.

The I. thing in it is (That Episcopacy has the advantage of Apostolic
Constitution,) a very fair Plea and plausible Pretense, which ye would
exceedingly oblige, the greater and better part of your Beethren, by making
good; But how can we expect this of you, when the Learned Hamond, who excells
all that ever took that Plea in hand for him notwithstanding all his wrested
Criticisms of Scripture, and stretched Allegations from Antiquity, has not
fully satisfied us in this point; so that all the Sober and Learned among us,
except a very few Judge Church Government a point of Indifferency, not
peremptorly determined by Christ or His Apostles, and that Episcopacy is
preferable only for its Convenience; And whether the Report be true that Dr.
Burnet has acknowledged its Inconveniency for Scotland, I know not; But I have
heard some of the most Judicious of our Clergy ingenuously confess, that though
to a People unbiassed with prejudices as in England that were to chose their
Church Government, Episcopacy is preferable to Presbytery, yet to the People of
Scotland (who are possessed with such invincible prejudices in favors of
Presbytry as the Church Government, which commenced with their Reformation from
Popery, and has been establi shed by so many full and free Church Judicatories;
and Ratified by the Civil Sanction of three Successive Parliaments, wherein
three Kings Successively were Personally present, and with no less Ins uperable
prejudices against Episcopacy as a Relict of Popery which amongst other
corruptions they were Reformed from, and as an Innovation Introduced, Advanced
and. Established by Arbitrary and Violent Methods, not only without but against
the Consent of the Ministry; and finally as an encouragement of Ignorance,
Profanity and Error to the paving the way for Popery) to such a prejudiced and
biased People Episcopacy is both inconvenient and intolerable. And
Presbyterians do so well know, that the sentiments of many of your Brethren,
differ from yours in this point, that they will not only redicule you as
Ignorant of the Scriptures, wherein the Names of Bishop and Presbyter are used
indifferently as signifying the same thing; nothing given in direction to the
ordinaty Officers of the Church, is peculiarly applicable to Diocesan Bishops,
yea, and the Superiority of one Pastor above another, is expressly prohibited
both by Christ in the Gospel and Peter in his Epistle, but they will als o
insult over you as impudent, in pretending that for your vindication, which not
only the Generality of the Learned among the Clergy; but all the greates t of
our Champions also as Bancroft, Bilson, Low, Sutclive, Whitgift, Hooker, etc.
do deny to be clear or concludent in our Favors; undervaluing this Topic most
laboriously as being conscious, it is against them asserting, that Apostolic
Institutions of Church Government, do not take away the Indifferency and
Mutability of it according to the convenience of every particular Church. And
as for these few Learned men, who maintain the Divine Right of Episcopacy they
do ingenuously confess, that there is no Episcopacy in any Church, now which
does not in many things Deviate from the Primitive Episcopacy which they own;
and they will readily acknowledge, that Episcopacy as its constitute in
Scotland, either as to its Elevation to such an hight of Superiority and Power
over Presbyters, or its complication with such gross Erastianism, or its
Conjunction with civil Dignities, and Characters is not only qu^te Different
from it, but directly opposite to it, So that it is the hight of Impudence to
have pleaded no alteration from the Topic of Apostolic Institution, which
does so evidently prove the necessity of an Alteration even in the sense that
both Parties have of it; and it is scarce so excuseable as the confidence of
some of our Writers, who doubt not to say roundly, that albeit Episcopacy was
not the Government of the Church in its Infancy, yet it is better suited to it
in its present Maturity, which the ugh it be not a sufficient ground of
preferring humane Inventions before Divine Institutions, yet is less
intolerable because it has some shaddows and color of Reason for it; And
after the great light, that these Famous Presbyterians, Blondell and Salmasius,
Parker and Didoclavius have given, to the advantage of Presbytry, in this
controversy, is the only shift left us to evade the Force of their Arguments,
both from Scripture and Antiquity against us.

The next thing ye assert is, that [ Episcopacy has the Advantage of a Natural
Reception by all Christian Churches from CHRIST to Calvin] Sir, Your Phrase of
a Natural Reception is s o Dark and Ambigous that they will put what sense on it
they will, and perhaps deride you and it both, by confessing that Episcopacy
had a great advantage of Reception from the natural (Corrupt and Carnal)
Reasonings and Inclinations of Men who are naturally Ignorant, that the
Excellency of all the means of the Churches Edification is their Institution by
a Supernatural Divine Wisdom and Authority, because they are not only adapted
to Supernatural ends, but depend entirely for their Efficacy upon a
Supernatural Divine Power and Blessing; and who are naturally no less Artogant
to add the Invention of their own vain Wisdom, as no less useful and necessary,
and to expect Gods Blessing thereupon which he has promised only to his own
Institutions. But albeit they put a more Fabourable sense on your Words as
importing an Early and easy Reception, yet they will not only retort, that
several acknowledged corruptions had as easy reception as it, and far more
early then such an Episcopacy as this of ours, which (taking it complexly) we
our selves cannot deny would have been odious and intolerable in the Primitive
Church, but they can likewise quite enervate your Argument, by proposing to
your consideration the Gradual and Insensible Progress of the Mystery of
Iniquity, which the Apostles observed to have begun its motion, and to be
misteriously working even in their time, and therefore could not be much
regarded yea scarce observed in the primitive Church, so full of unexperienced
simplicity and extended Charity, wherein there were many Pastors so Eminent
for their Wisdom and Gravity, Holiness and Humility, as seemed to challenge,
and easily obtained more then ordinary Deference and Respect from their
Brethren, and that from one Degree to another, until at last through time the
Church degenerated into a Prelatick Government, which could not be unacceptable
or at leas t intolerable to the Generality, being so well suited to the
Superstitious (the Predominant) Genius of these Times, though it past not
altogether without a witness from some of the most Learned and Seeing Men then
living, who were not so much incerted with the common distemper of the Age they
lived in but that they could both look back to the Primitive purity and parity
from which Episcopacy had declined, and forward to the Papal corruption and
Tyranny, to which it insensibly and gradually tended as it should at large by
Blondel and Salmasius to the full conviction of all who read their Labourious
Writings. Yea, they will not only Enervate your Argument, but turn the edge of
it upon your self, by instancing the Albigenses who preserved the Presbyterian
Government from the Apostles time to Luther, and whose e Testimony against
Diocesan Episcopacy is as strong, as it is by our own Confession against other
Romish corruptions. Nay! they will come nearer home and cite credible History,
narrating Scotland not to have received Episcopal Government for some hundreds
of years after it received the Christian Religion, as not only Bucchannan our
famous Historian shows, but our own great Doctor Forbes confesses in his
Irenicon. And finally they will foil this Argument quite, by showing Episcopacy
to have met with a more early and easy Ejection out of the Church when it was
Reformed from corruptions, as a Native step of its Reformation, then ever it
had reception by the Church, even when declining from its ancient Purity. And
though England has continued Episcopal, yet they will ask what reason is there
for Justifying the the Episcopal Government, more then Her Ceremonious Worship,
and why may not that Church be condemned for retaining the one as well as the
other? and they have too evident grounds for imputing their Contumation to the
stiffness of Q. Elizabeth as the Chief, if not the Sole hindrance of the
Ejection of both out of England, as well as the other Reformed Churches; which
was earne stly desired by the most Learned and Pious Divines in the Church,
though when they found their endeavors fruitless, they choosed rather to
comply therewith then disturb the Peace of the Church and Kingdom.

The last thing in this Reason is that [Episcopacy is by Experience found to be
the best adap^ed for preservation of Order, Peace and Unity.] Preshyterians
will hiss the Argument out of doors, because its the very same which Papists
use against Protestants for justifying the Papal power. And it is more easy
for them to resort our answer to Papist, on our selves, then for us to Evade
the Force of them without either derogating from the Episcopal power, which we
mantain against Presbyterians or Homologating the Papal power which Papists
maintain against Protestants. We grant the Papal power to be very much Adapted
for Wordly Pomp, Power and Policy, but upon that very score deny it to be a
Government becoming the Church, because Christ expressly discharges his
Apostles, and in them all their Successors to exercise Dominion as the Lords of
the Gentiles do over them. This Answer to Papists is an Argument so plate
against our selves, that ingenuously I am not fully satisfied with our subtle
Evasions of it. And though that of Dr. Burnets in his Latter Dialogues be the
best I have yet seen, that nothing is prohibited in these words, but the
Exercise of Civil Power by any Church Officer, over the Church; and so nothing
of the Papal power is condemned by it, but the Usurpation of a Temporal
Dominion over Princes; Yet s eeing this leaves his Ecclesiastic Supremacy,
(under which the subtle Jesuits Comprize all the Power he Exercises) untouched
and uncondemned, by the clearest Scripture Argument we have against it, which
all Reform^d Divines make use of (even the Episcopal themselves) in their
writings against the Papal Tyranny in Ecclesiastics as well as Civils, I
nothing doubt but the present Zeal of that great Man against Popery, would
disclaim this evasion frankly as the effect of his former eagerness against
Presbytery, hurrying him to a Critici sm so favorable to Popery. And when I
have considered the extent of the Parallel place, 1. Pet. 5.3. and the
particular Application in Reference to Spirituals, which the Apostle Paul
makes, 2. Cor. 1. last; I cannot look upon that otherwise then an oversight in
the Doctor, notwithstanding of my singular Es teem of Him and his Writings. But
the truth is (if we consider seriously) the aptitude of Episcopacy, for
preserving the Dignity and promoting the Interest of the Clergy; its similitude
to the Civil Government, and Conformity to the Carnal conceits men have of the
Church of God, are (even as it fares with Popery,) both its greatest advantage
and disadvantage, its greatest advantage recommending it to Carnal men, who
measure all things by their Carnal Imaginations and Inclinations, and its
greatest disadvantage discommending it to Conscientious men who meas ure all
the concerns of the Church, by the unerring Rule of the Word of GOD, and judge
of them by their influence on, and usefulness for the Edification of their
Souls. And alace! the odious effects of Episcopacy in Scotland, especially
since it was last introduced, are so recent and obvious, that if any witty
Presbyterian shall be at the pains, to rake up this Dunghill, I am afraid such
an intolerable stink shall be raised, as no Aptitude which our Government has
to what is good, or can pretend to have, will be either Regarded or Believed by
any who are Judicious, far less Sober and Conscientious. For Sense and
Experience are more convincing than all the Reasons in the World.

But to be more particular, ye say, [its found by Experince to be the best
adapted for preservation of Order] Presbyterians will answer, That what ever be
its apparent Aptitude for this, yet it is in effect, it self an alteration of
the primitive Order observed in the Church, which did gradually resolve at last
into a total innovation of the Churches Order, by a papal supremacy, which it
has exchanged for a Caesario-papatus in Scotland, lest the Church should not
be still monstrous with two heads, one under another; And it is indeed a hard
Question, Why Order in the Church, (which we say, cannot be without prius and
posterius, inferius and superius) does not equally require a Pope, or King
under CHRIST over Bishops, as a Bishop under CHRIST over Presbytry; Or why a
parity amongst Bishops should not be thought as inconsis tent with Order as a
parity among all Pastors. But neither does the Presbyterian Government want its
Order of superius and inferius, for amongst them single persons are subject to
Church Judicatories, and a lesser Church Judicatory still to a greater, etc. In
which Order seeing there is not only that ah inferiore ad superius, but a
minore ad majus, it is most agreeable to the Church, as it is the Body of
CHRIST, immediately depending upon CHRIST its Head. And I confess ingenuously,
when they have argued that feeding of Souls by dispensing the Word and
Sacraments is the sublimest piece of a Church Man's employment; that all power
of Church Officers is only Ministerial under CHRIST the Head and Lord of his
Church; that though he be the political as well as Mystical Head of the Church,
who as its King and Lawgiver, might be expected would not leave it without
Directions how it should be governed, yet there is no institution of a Diocesan
Episcopacy, that was ever pretented to be so clear as the Directions given
concerning the Office of a Deacon, the lowest Office in the Church; But the
checks given by him to the first appearances of an inclination to pre-eminency
among his Apostles, are clearly recorded in Scripture; and finally, that the
lodging of all Ecclesiastic power of Ordination or Jurisdiction, in the single
person of a Bishop does not suit with the immediate Dependence of the Church,
the Body of CHRIST upon CHRIST the Head of it; When they have Argued thus, I
say, and urged each of these Arguments at length, I have been extremely puzzled
to vindicat the Episcopal Order, and the superiority of one Pastor above
another; All I could say, was, That Bishops are as necessary to oversee
Pastors, as Pastors to oversee People, and they easily stopped my mouth, not
only by retorting the equal necessity of a pope, to oversee Bishops; But by
showing also that all Pastors were subject to the censure of Church
Judicatories, which could not easily be guilty of connivance and partiality,
toward the ignorant and scandalous as Bishops; and which by their solemnity
and impartiality, have as great and venerable an Authority as a Bishop by
virtue of his large Benefice, Lordly Titles, and pompous Train can have: Yea, I
have been almost persuaded to be a presbyterian, when they have reasoned, that
seeing we confess, the highest Ecclesiastic power on Earth to be in an
Oecumenick Council, and yet allow not of any further power in him that
preceeds, than like that of a presbyterian Moderator in a Presbytry-synod, or
National Assembly, and not like that of a Bishop in a Diocesan Synod, for fear
of a pope; Why do we not also acknowledge Ministers to be subject to inferior
Judicatories of the like frame, and an inferior and lesser Judicatory, to a
superior and greater still forward, till we arrive at an Oecumenick Council,
as the highest Judicatorie of all immediately and solly subject to CHRIST as
the Body to the Head, without any Diocesan Bishop over the se inferior more
than a pope over his supreme Judicatorie, as being the most equal and
Homogenious, and therefore also the mos t suitable and excellent Order of the
Church, making the Government of particular Churches, and of the Universal
Visible Church, to agree together with an excellent Harmony, and most orderly
Decency. I am Naturally of such an ingenuous Temper, that I had not the
confidence to reply, that the Members of the Oecumenick Cnuncils were Diocesan
Bishops, because I not only knew that presbyters have been admi^ed Members, and
voted as well as Bishops, and that presbyterian as well as Episcopal Churches
must be allowed their Delegates in case of an Oecumenick Council, without any
other power than that of the Representatives of the Church that sends them,
Repre: senting their Brethren, and not having power over them lodged in their
single person* But I perceive the strength of the Argument did not at all
consist in the Quality of the Members of a General Council; whether Bishops or
Presbyters, but its Frame and the Method of its Acting, and Exerting its
Authority: And finally, I have been greatly ashamed, and quite confounded, when
they asked, Whether an Erastian head, an Episcopal Body, and a Presbyterian
Tail, would orderly agree together, to make an entire Church Government; and
laughing at the monstrous Fabric of our Government, by such a mix^ ure, told
me that we At^ribute an Ecclesiastical Sup^emacy to the King, to unite him to
our interest, that we may abuse and pro^itute his Power and Authority, in
prosecuting and promoving it; And that we make use of Parochial Sessions from
the Example of Presbytry, though Lay Elders be contrary to our principles, for
amusing the Consciences of Ignorant People into the more willing subjection to
us, as nothing differing from Presbyterian Ministers: But that Episcopal
preeminencies and benefices are the chief Design of all, to satisfy the
Ambition and Avarice of the leading men amongst us and to be a shelter and
encouragement, to the ignorance, idleness, and profanity of the r^st of us.
Thus ye see how they have treated me in this point, who though I come short in
point of obstinate Confidence, yet I understand the Controversy betwixt
Presbyterians and us, better then many of my Brethren, and have had greater
advantages so to do then the most part of them; And I nothing doubt but ye will
meet with the like usage from your Adversaries, to your public shame, and
affronting our cause, if ye prevent it not.

The next thing is, that [Episcopacy is the best Adapted for preservation of
peace] Presbyterians will acknowledge; that it is a very calm, gentle, and
peaceable Government to scandalous Sinners, and in this has the Advantage of
being more acceptable then the Presbyterian to such, not knowing that favor to
their Sins is cruelty to their Souls; And yet I have heard some of our own
Persuasion say, that the Presbyterian Government amidst all its severity, was
more favorable then the Episcopal, because, though they were greedy of Folks
repentance, yet they were not greedy of their Purses. But ye may assure your
self, it will be accounted the height of impudence, so much as to have
mentioned peace as the native effect of Episcopacy, and all the World will be
app^ aled unto, whether our Bishops have not been the chief troublers of
Israel, and whether the connivence (to say no more) of the Episcopal Government
a^ Popery and profanity, (which are the only peaceable Effects it can pretend
to in Scotland,) does Counterballance its Rigor, and cruelty against
Nonconformity, (even when accompanied with Exemplary Sobriety, Piety and
Loyalty,) or whether it does not exceedingly aggredge the same, and render it
the more odious to all that compare its favor to th^se with its severity to
this. And ingenuously, whatever be in their imputing to Episcopacy, Tyranny
over Men's Consciences as its native effect, yet it is so sadly evident that it
has Extremly degenerated thereunto in this Church and Kingdom, that we cannot
doubt, but it will meet with an eas ie belief from most part of the Nation, in
spite of all your confident Assertions to the contrary, they will grant that
Presbytery has been so unfortunate, as not only to be rendered unacceptable to
our Kings, being at a distance in another Nation, by the cunning
Misinformations of Self-seeking Courtiers, the Calumnious Instigations of
English Bishops, ignorant of the Genious of Scotland, and the Pragnatick
Influence of Jesuits, whose greatest Eye sore it is. But also to be made a Mask
to the Politic Design of Incendiaries and Usurpers, (tho they retained it no
longer then their Designs behoved to be kept close;) and by this means to be
miscontrued, as the chief cause of War and Blood s head by these, who understand
not the Intrigues of Affairs, but after they grant you all this, nothing, they
will confidently accuse Episcopacy, that it has been both so cruel and
shameless, as even of choice, to turn, the most Serene peace and solid
Happiness that ever this Nation was blessed with, at the Restoration of K.
Charles the 2d. into a perpetual Tragedy of Persecution, Oppression, and of
Arbitrary Government, manifestly of design to Introduce and Establish it self
without the Conjunction of any other Malign influence imaginable: Though
perhaps a popish party stroke in to an After Game, finding Episcopals as
foreward as they could wish, to ruin presbyterians (though to the weakening of
the Protestant Interest) hoping that if they should not be ruined by us, yet
they should be so weakened and Exasperaced, as to be easily gulled by their
pretended Moderation to a concurrence with them, for the razing down the
securities of the Reformed Religion by the Penal Laws against Papists, (which
by a total desuetude we had rendered contemptible,) to shelter themselves from
our Rigorous and severe Laws against them, that so at Length popery might
swallow us up both. And no Thanks to us that the papists were disappointed of
their Design, by the presbyterians greater zeal against popery, then Resentment
at our greater Severity to them then to Papists, which when I consider, I have
a strong Apprehension that the Lord is about to reward their Faithfulness to
their Principles as Protestants, with a Legal establishment of their
Government, in its integrity under a Presbyterian King, according to their
wishes. So that you see what ever else you ascribe to Episcopacy, your was
folly to maintain peace.

In the last place you say [That Episcopal Government is found by Experience to
be the best Adapted, for preservation of Unity] And why not, say they, the
Papal Government for Unity amongst Bishops as well as the Episcopal for Uni^y
amongst Presbyters? But they will speak more home, and accuse us of Schism in
re^ding from the unrepealed Acts and Constitutions of the Church: And s^ Father
the Schism on Episcopacy, intruded into the Church by mere Civil Laws and
violently pressed upon all by the Sword of Persecution. Without any due pains
or proper methods used for preparing the Nation, for its reception. And albeit
that the present divisions amongst Presbyterians are much talken of, yet
judicious Persons will impute them rather to the want of Presbyterian
Government in the full and free exercise of its Authority, then to the weakness
of the Government in it self: and I am informed that lately both Parties are
endeavourting an Union; and resolve to Act Unitly against us: and when the
Moderation of the One, and the Zeal of the Other party are Joined and Tempered
together. They will make a more Formidable Figure both as to Counsel and
Action, then if they had never been divided. And though likewise the former
Divisions betwixt the Remonstrators and Public Resolvers are not forgotten,
and serve to highten the prejudices of such as are not acquaint with the
mysterious Intrigues of these times. Yet they who knew how cunningly they were
fomented under Board, by the Kings Courtiers on the one hand, and that wily
Fox Croniwel on the other: will not Impute them to the Presbyterian Government
as its native Effects, especially seeing that the chief Motive that induced the
Usurper to rob them of the privileges of free General Assemblies was the fear
of their Union, which he knew could eas ily be affected by it last and surest
remedy, that amidst their Intestin Divisions, he might the more easily setle
hims elf in his Usurped power, without any opposition from them, of whose
Conscientious Loyalty he had greatest Jealousies and fear. But alace! what can
we say for our vindication if they charge us, that while we boast of Unity, we
have not kept the Unity of the Faith. For they know well enough that as some of
our Clergy are Socinian, (the vilest of Heretics,) so also that the Generality
of the Learned amongst us are gross Arminians, who were condemned as Heretics
by that Famons Synod of Dort: to which our Famous K: James the 6th. Sent
Representatives from the Churches in Britain. And thus they represent our
pretended Unity under Bishops, so unconcerned with the Purity of Doctrine to be
rather Odious and Detestable, then Harmonious and Commendable; whereas the
Commendation of this Church for its Unity under Presbyterian Government is so
great in all the Reformed Churches: And was so frequently upbraided to the
English Bishops by K. James the 6th. from the displeasure he had at the Scots
Heresies and Schisms abounding in England, that Presbyterians will scarce think
thems elves oblidged to an Apology for any Divisions that were* or Schism that
is among them.

Sir, I have stayed the longer upon your first Reason, because it is the Basis
of all the Controversy; And as it is unbecoming; the Wisdom and Piety of the
Ensuing Convention, to be Acted merely by Politic Considerations in so weighty
a Concern: Wherein the Glory of God, and the Souls and Consciences of all in
the Nation are so deeply Interessed. So that if your Adversaries by a fair and
full answer not only enervate this Reason, but turn the edge of it upon us,
they may so prepossess the Consciences of the Members in their Favors that all
your other Reasons will avail little though they were better then they are. But
that I may proceed;

Your Second Reason is, [ That the most part of the Gentry and Burgesses have
taken the Test, and therefore can never without Perjury, Vote for the
Introduction of Presbyters, or choose such Commissioners as are suspected to
Favor that way] Sir, the Presbyterians will not fail to tell you that you loss
your 1st. Reason by this 2d. For if the Test be Obligatory to every point, then
also to maintain the Kings Prerogative, whereof this is a chief one, by Law,
that he may alter or dispose of the External Government of the Church according
to his pleasure, which whosoever is sworn to, he can no longer for shame, plead
for Episcopacy upon such grounds as you propose in your former Reason, unless
he renounce that Oath in part as not Obligatory, and as to some parts of it
presbyterians themselves, will approve it so far as concerns the maintaining of
the Protestant Religion, and the Renounciation of popery. And I have heard them
Applaud the Faithfulness of the last parliament, in keeping this part of their
Oath: For they know that the chief thing designed in the first overture of it,
was only the Security of the protestant Religion, though there were such
Additions made to what was intended for that end, as might weaken, break, or
ensnare that party in parliament that first motioned it, being looked upon as
too Jealous of, and Zealous against popery, and as for these Additions no
wonder they except again st the Obligation of them, seeing that even we our
selves did express s o much of our Aversion thereat at first: so long as we
expected by our General clamours against it, to procure an Exemption from the
Imposition thereof; And as our fear of Loosing our Benefices rather then our
Inclinations determined us, and the fair Color of the Explication given by the
Council, (though alace! what signifies the Explication of an Oath, that must
needs be taken in the Genuin Sense of the Words,) encouraged us to swear it, so
doubtless the rest of the Nation swore it with great Reluctance, rather from a
regard of their Places and Interests, then GOD and their Consciences, (which
generally at first accused them of Perjury that took it, as being obviously
contradictory in it self, and in many things contradictory to their Light;)
until the Generality and frequency of the Guilt abated, the sense of it, and
therefore cannot be expected, will be very precise in adhering to it, to
whatever confidence many have arrived, for justifying it in their Discourse (to
which length as is every part of it, few have come;) yet the remorse of their
Consciences for it, is not totally extinguished, at least is not turned to a
sense of its Obligation in every point; and to be plain with you, there must be
an Alteration less or more: This is both designed and desired by all Ranks of
Persons: They all agree in this, tho they disagree in the measure of it; And
next to the settling the Prince of Orange in the Throne, it is one of the chief
designs of the Convention, so that your Arguing from the Obligation of the Test
is altogether vain, especially seeing it is so unhappily framed, that if it
bind up from any, it equally binds up from all endeavors of any Alteration
whatsoever any manner of way, of the established Government either in Church or
State; and when upon this account, its Obligations will and must be trampled
upon. It cannot but be very unacceptable, to plead no Alteration for fear of
Perjury, but truly! understand not how every Alteration can be accounted
Perjury, in reference to any Article in the Test, for that part of it which
strikes most directly against any Alteration, is merely Assertory not
promissory, neither does it peremptorly assert that there should be no
Alteration, but only that there is no Obligation by the Covenants to endeavor
it, and it can hardly be expected that those who have taken the Test, will be
determined by any sense of the Obligation of the Covenants to endeavor an
Alteration, nor is it necessary, seeing Scripture, Reason and Policy, do all of
them together loudly and evidently call for it in this present Juncture, which
is a threefold Cord, more strongly binding then the Test can pretend to be, at
least in this point; So that you see how little weight is in your Argument from
the Test, and what it amounts to when duly pondered. I nothing doubt but the
Gentry and Burgesses will laugh at you, for proposing that for determining
their Consciences, which all know was mainly imposed for debauching their
Consciences.

Your 3. Reason contains several things in it, huddled together as if ye would
compense weight by number, wherein ye seem rather to design the insnaring the
Presbyterians to declare their Sentiments unseasonably, about some difficult
points, then to prove any thing against them; But they are neither stated in
such difficult Circumstances, nor so void of prudence, but that they can answer
you both confidently and cautiously to their great Advantage, by removing the
prejudices of many against Presbytry, because of the inconveniences they
apprehend must attend it.

The first thing ye allege is, That [if presbytry be voted, then returns upon
you the Solemn League and Covenant, as is not only evident from their Gen: Ass:
etc.] Sir, ye so manifestly betray your ignorance of the difference betwixt the
National Covenant and Solemn League, that those who are better acquaint with
the Principles and History of presbytry in Scotland, will account you an
Ignorant Scribler against things ye understand not; As for the s olemn League,
I know not what ye understand by [the Natural Exigence of it.] but sure
presbyterian Government might have continued in Scotland a thousand years
without any such League, if England had not given an Occasion of it: And it is
so far from being the only conceivable [foundation for its parity] that it is
but a late thing, which was not so much as thought upon either at the first
planting of Presbyterian Government in Scotland, after the Reformation, nor for
several years after it was re-established again, so that it is the National
Covenant which ye would be at; And as for the other, I shall show you what
presbyterians can say, for preventing your Feats, when I come to your last
Reason, to which it properly belpngs. Its true, the National Covenant is almost
as Ancient, as the Legal Establishment of the Reformed Religion, and
presbyterian Government in Scotland, it being about an hundred years since it
was taken by all in the Nation, at the appointment of King James the sixth: And
as it was then conceived, cannot be excepted against in any point by any sound
Protestant; being an Obligation against popery, and all its corruptions in
Doctrine, Worship and Government, so that if ye will have it even then to be
the foundation of paritie, ye do exceedingly wrong our Cause, and do in effect
justify the Explication annexed to it, thereafter showing Episcopacie be
included in the popi sh Hierarchy abjured therein, which presbyterians will
tell you was not only approven in parliament 39, but also solemnly Ratified by
King Charles the First, his own hand writing, when he was personally present in
Parliament 41. And they will ask you, how it comes to pass, that ye who was
just now so fearful of perjury, in reference to the Test? Should he be so
fearful for the remembrance of a poor Obligation upon the Church and Nation;
For as to any other Return of it upon us, presbyterians will not impose it
again without the appointment of King and parliament, and the general consent
of all Ranks in the Nation, for they have seen the disadvantage we have been
at, in pressing Conformity to the Episcopal Government, without pains taken to
prepare the Nation for it; And have learned to be cautious by our precipitancy.
Nor do [the present proceedings of the presbyterian preachers] give any ground
to expect the renewing of the Covenant, albeit they aggredge the guilt of
Compliance with prelacy from the obligation of the Covenant, as to these who
own it as contemning nothing, but what they are Antecedently obliged unto by
the Word of GOD. And this Antecedent obligation to every thing in the National
Covenant, is so common and confirmed an Opinion among all Presbyterians, that
they will defy you to show any one of these [manifold impieties in that Oath]
which ye speak of in General. And ingenuously, except its Abjuration of
prelacy, I know nothing in it, that any Episcopal will condemn who has read
it; and as for that point, if ever it be ordered to be renewed, by appointment
of King and Parliament, I know none of the most considerable in the Nation, who
(seeing such understand both their Duty and Interest) will either fear Perjury
by taking of it, or choose Misery by refusing it. And I hope the refusing it
shall never be judged a sufficient crime, to provoke the Government to reduce
any ranks of Persons, far less the most considerable in the Nation to misery.
And I find the Presbyterians to be Generally of such a cautious Temper, and
moderate Disposition, especially the leading Men amongst them, that I nothing
doubt, but they will carefully avoid all such practices, as they find do give
any ground of prejudices against their Predecessors, whom they do not deny to
have been over swayed in somethings to an Extreme by the Biass, and Torrent of
the time they lived in.

Next you allege, [ That if the Covenant return, no man can have public
place, either in Church or State, but such as shall do Penance for taking the
Test] what Lax Reasoning is this? that if Presbytery be Voted the Covenant
returns, as if there could not be a Voting for Presbytry without voting also
for renewing the Covenant, and if the Covenant return; no man can have public
Place without Penance for the Test: As if there were no other way of removing
the Scandal of a General and National Guilt, but by particular Satisfaction
from every Person guilty. I have heard some of the Sober and Learned amongst
them say, that the Generality of guilt renders a particular Satisfaction,
neither Seasonable nor Practicable-Necessary nor Suitable, and that Cordial
Joining in public Humiliation, and a Zealous owning of their Interest will
remove the Scandal and Satisfy them.

You say further that, [A great part of the Laity of the Nation must be reduced
to sad Straits, both in reference to Conscience and Interest] I know none need
to fear that, but these who undergoes Episcopal Government, have been
habituated to such an Licentious prophanity, that the restraining them within
the just bounds of sobriety; may prove hard and uneasy to their Lax
Consciences, which is no great Inconveniencie, or these who have had all their
lively hood by their dependence on the Episcopal Government and have been
undeservedly advanced to places of Benefit, Trust or Service, whose particular
Disadvantage by their losing their place, is the public Advantage of the
Nation.

And finally you infer, [That the Regular Clergy will be turned out, which
will reduce the Church to such amazing hardships, that the Gospel shall not he
preached in three parts of the Kingdom, there not being an hundred qualified
Presbyterians in Scotland.] Sir, It should be your desire and mine both, that
all the Insufficient, Scandalous and Erroneous among the Clergy were turned
out; and their places were Vacant, till able Men were provided; rather then
filled with such men (who do far more obstruct then promove the Edification of
the Church) without the hope of being better supplied. And alace! I Am afraid
that two parts of three of our Clergy, may be too justly reduced to one or
other of these three Classes; So that by my best Information, the Presbyterian
party, if ye join their Ministers, Preachers, and young Men, Ready for the
Ministry together: With such also, as have diverted themselves to other
Employments, because of the Discouragements of the Times, and are willing and
ready to serve the Church, if there were encouragement for the Ministry, they
have more qualified men amongst them; then there are Sufficient, Sober, and
Orthodox Men amongst our Clergy, so that they could within less then a year,
furnish the one half of the Congregations in Scotland. And when from about an
hundred and some more, they have in a year and an halfs space accreasced and
amounted to so many, without the help of Universities; We may easily calculate,
how short a time will increase them to the complete Number. But I am hopeful
that they will admit any Learned, Sober and Orthodox person amongst us upon
very easy terms; our acknowledgeing Presbyterian Government to be lawful, our
guilt of Separation from them and of taking the Test; And I know none of us
that will choose rather to be turned out, by refusing then kept in their places
upon accepting such favorable Terms.

Your 4. Reason is, [ That if Presbytery, be not thus established in its
integrity, but all that Alteration turn to a Non-Episcopacy, and the present
Presbyters continue in their Offices; Then our deplorable Schisms and Divisions
shall continue without a Remedy, or else the Magistrate will take upon him the
Government of the Church, and we shall have downright Erastianism.] Sir, The
foolishness of this Argument is so obvious, that I think I may spare my pains
in showing it unto you. One would think it the voice of a Presbyterian, proving
the necessity of an entire Alteration, rather than of an Episcopal pleading no
Alteration at all; Presbyterians will grant all you say, and turn the mouth of
this Cannon directly against your self, by Arguing thus, If Episcopacy be
contained, then our deplotable Schisms and Divisions shall be Remediless, also
we shall still have downright Erastianism, and how can ye evade the force of
this Argument of your own I see not; For it is evident by experience, that we
may despair of ever gaining the Presbyterians to a compliance with us; seeing
that so many years, violent Persecution has rather alienated them from us,
beyond all hope of either Reconciliation or Accommodation. And it is as
undeniable, that there is not so gross Erastianism in the World, as is
established by Law, and complicated, and tuisted with the Episcopal Government
in Scotland. Yea they will further baffle you, by reasoning with you thus, If
Presbytery were established in its Integrity, our deplorable Division would
easily be healed, and we should be altogether quite of Erastianism, and ye
cannot shelter your self from this more then the former Argument; For it is
more then probable, that few of us would refuse to comply with Presbytery when
once established by Law; and it is too much to be suspected, that the present
bitterness of many of our Clergy again st Presbyterians proceeds, from their
Consciousness to themselves of their insufficiency, profanity, or Heterodoxy,
(and perhaps also Cruelty,) which makes them despair of Admission into the
Brotherhood of the Presbyterians. And it is certain that there are no
Principles contrary to Erastianism more then the Presbyterian; For they allow
not any Ecclesiastic Power of Jurisdiction to be lodged in any single Person
though Ecclesiastic, much less Civil; and yet they do neither exeem Church Men
from their Subjection to the Magistrates power as his Subjects, nor the Church
from the Magistrates care as her Nursing Father. Their Principles in this point
are very Rational, for though they deny Ministers to be as directly subjected
to the Magistrate in their Ecclesiastic (apacity as Ministers, as in their
Civil Capacity of Subjects; Yet they ascribe as much power to him in reference
to the Church, as any Wise and Pious Magistrate will require; they grant the
Magistrate has a restitutive power, for reparing a broken Church, though not a
Constitutive of constituting the frame of its Government, and building such a
Fabric of a Church as he pleases; A power Convocative for calling Church
Assemblies to meet, for the Government of the Church, though not a power
Coercive of hindering them to meet at all; A power Defensive of defending the
true Religion, and the Doctrine, Worship, Government and Discipline of the
Church, though not a power Determinative, to determine concerning these things
at his pleas ure; a power Concursive, to concur by his Civil Sanction with the
Determinations of the Church, and confirm their Obligation on his Subjects,
though not a power Coactive, to force the Church to follow his Dictates in
things Ecclesiastic; And in a word, they grant him all Power even in
Ecclesiastics that is Cumulative to the Churches Advantage; though they deny
him to have any Privative power to the Churches prejudice. Whereas Episcopacy
in Scotland has no other Basis but gross Erastianism, so that you see how much
you may be foild with your own Weapons; And ye may expect a challenge to
express the ingenuity of your fears, (of continued Divisions and Schisms, and
of downright Erastianism,) by quiting the Episcopal way wherein ye Act the
Schismatic, in receiding from the standing Laws of the Church, in compliance
with New Civil Laws, and approve Erastianism in adhering to the Test.

Your fifth Reason is, [That the Establishment of Presbytery will have almost
pernicious Influence on the Protestants Religion in this Island, if ever Popery
set up its head, etc.] Sir, I confess it is more proper for you to show the
Inconveniencie that will follow, if Presbytry be established, then if not. Yet,
I suspect you be as unhappy in this as in the former Argument. The great st
Advantage that I find in your Reasons, is that you touch upon some things
concerning which, it is unseasonable and dangerous for Presbyterians fully to
express themselves. But alas! you do here but touch on that which is the very
Sore and Weakest Side of Episcopacy; for you cannot be ignorant of the General
Complaints of, and prejudices at our Government. As not only a shelter and
covert to Papists: But as Instrumental in advancing Popish designs, partly by
the Ignorance, Profanity, and Arminianism aboundoning under it. Disposing and
preparing the Nation for Popery, and partly by its Severity and cruelty toward
dissenting Protestants, to the manifest weakening of the Protestant Interest.
And even Envy it self cannot but acknowledge the Presbyterian Government, has
been abundantly both severe and successful against Popery; and nothing blunted
and slackned in its Zeal and Watchfulness against Papists amits all its
severities against Episcopals, whereas the Penal Laws against Papists were
brought to such a Des uetude by us, that the most threatening dangers from
Popery could not awaken us to the Execution of them, least we should have
diverted from persecuting Presbyterians, by a rigorous Execution of the Laws
made in our Favors against them, which did so entirely take up the Government,
that not only both Profanity and Popery have been connived at, but encouraged
in so far as they were assisting to us, in opposing and oppressing
Presbyterians; so that it will never be believed that Presbyterian Government
has any pernicious Influence upon the Protestant Religion, but rather that it
has a powerful Influence for securing it against Popery far more vigorous and
Zealous, yea, and effectual and successful then ever the Episcopal had, at
least in Scotland; And it is evident that the Presbyterian Interest, is every
way at present more directly opposite to the Popish Interests then the
Episcopal is, which I am afraid shall yet further appear by the carriage and
conduct of our party in the Convention, and that so manifestly as to highten
the Nations prejudices against Episcopacy more then ever, and make all sober
Protestants conclude, that we must of necessity have either Presbytry or
Potery, and truly I cannot otherwise Judge of it, then as an Infatuation,
presaging the ruin of our Interest, if the Bishops and the Nobility, Gentry
and Burgesses of our Persuasion shall join Issue with a Popish party against
the Prince of Orange his Interest: which is so inseparably Interwoven with the
Reformed Interest in Europe, and especially in Britain: That by adhering to the
Interest of King James the 7th. in opposition to his, they will unavoidably
either give provocation to the Prince of Orange to abrogate Episcopacy in
Scotland; in order to the advancing and establishing the Reformed Religion, or
else give occasion or advantage to King James the 7th. to Redintegrate his
Popish designs with more violence and success than ever before, to the ruin of
all professed Protestants, and especially of us Episcopals, because we have the
Laws upon our side, without any more regard to their Zeal and Activity for him
in his Extreamities, then the King of France had for the Protestants, who kept
the Crown on his Head; or Queen Mary of England, to the Counties of Suffolk and
Northfolk who advanced her to the Crown; or (to come home) then King Charles
the 2 d. had to the Presbyterians, who in his greatest extreamities brought him
home to Scotland, and spent their blood for him at Worcester. And its certain
that our refusing to follow Englands Example of Gratitude to the Prince of
Orange, will necessitate this Church and Kingdom; to stand upon a bottom more
different from: Yea, opposite unto that of England, than if presbytry were
Established, and will oblige us to secure our selves from Popery, by methods as
different from the wise Conduct of the English: As the binding of Samson with
Cords, was from the shaving the Locks of his Head: or to come nearer, as there
was betwixt Englands and Scotlands carriage toward the Duke of York; and at
the best will be very hard for Scotland, s o that your fears [ least the
establishment of presbytry necess itate the Churches of Scotland and England to
s tand upon different Costomes which will be hard for Scotland] are but feigned
and groundless, neither savouring of a politic Wit, not an Ingenuous Spirit:
For Church Government is Extrinsick to the Foundation of the Reformed Religion,
and Protestants were at a loss, if their Arguments against Popery were
principally founded upon this Topic, or could not be deduced from any other:
Presbyterians will tell you. That ouly the Scriptures are the Foundation of the
Reformed Religion, and the common bottom on which all the Reformed Churches are
founded. But also, that the greater part of the Episcopal Champions and Clergy
acknowledge Episcopacy to have no other Warrant, than an Ecclesia stick
constitution, which is a foundation common to all the popish corruptions; And
whereas ye repeat, That [presbytrie will divide Scotland from England, which
will open a door to the re-entry of popery;] Are they not united in one common
Protestant interest? Except in so far as the Clergy of England are generally
Arminians, excepting some few Learned Men, which I confess will oblidge them to
justify themselves by different Arguments, not only from Scottish
presbyterians, but all the other Reformed Churches, which will be harder for
England than Scotland. But that presbytrie will open a door to the re-entry of
popery, will never be believed, s eing presbyterians at first ejected it out of
Scotland; And all their time secured the Nation from it (more than ever since)
without the Assistance of England, which if ever Scottish presbyterians shall
need, they may expect it much more from the P: of Orange, when he shall be their
King, as well as Englands. Then even when Queen Elizabeth found her self
oblidged to give it, by the Tie of the common interest of Religion, without any
Relation to them as her Subjects. And as for your Tautolagick repetition again
(that presbytry cannot but alienate the Affections of the Church of England
from us, which considering our weakness, will expose us as a prey to the common
Enemy) it is altogether vain and foolish; For the Church of England can never
be more aleniated in their Affections to presbyterians, than at this present
toward our Bishops, and as their joining issue with papists against the prince
of Orange, has exceedingly discommended them to it; so the presbyterians
joining issue with him, by their Zeal against Popery, will as much commend them
to it. And how ever, ye may be-assured, that the interest of England will
oblidge them to assist Scotland in case of Danger from popery, more effectually
than their difference from Scotland in point of Church Government, can alienate
them, for ye know the Maxim; Tune tua res agitur paries cum proximus ardet.

But many are of Opinion that if Episcopacy be continued, it will perpetuate
such irreconcilable, intestine Divisions and Animosities in Scotland, as will
weaken and expose us a prey to Popery, more then any Assistance from England
can strengthen and secure us from it, whereas the establishment of Presbytery,
would bring us to such an entire and firm Union, that Scotland could secure it
self from all danger of Popery, without any Assistance from England; Yea, and
put us in Capacity to Assist England in case of danger from Popi sh Attempts;
which that Church and Kingdom, by the policy of some other laud may too readily
be brought into, which I wish heartily GOD may prevent: So that ye see how far
ye are out in this Reason.

Your 6th. Reason is so weak, that you need no more then sure Information from
England, and impartial consideration how the interest of the Prince and
Princess of Orange is stated to abate your Confidence in it. You say, [ That to
be for presbytery, in this Juncture will exceedingly disoblige (...) Princess
of Orange, whose principles are known to all Europe in this matter] Sir, ye are
greatly mistaken, for I have seen a Letter from a person who knows her
sentiments; showing that she is not only willing to give Dissenters all
satisfaction, and if Episcopacy be continued in England to her mind, that the
Prince be gratified by the Revival of Presbytrie in Scotland; But also, that
she has a particular Resentment of the severities and cruelties exercised
toward the Presbyterians in Scotland, and has frequently declared, that seeing
Presbytrie commenced with the Reformation of this Kingdom, has been solemnly
sworn to, and established by the National Ass emblies of the Church, and the
Sanction of the Civil Laws; She judges it neither Equitable nor convenient
that any other Government should be pressed on that People. And we need not
doubt, but as the Calamities of Presbyterians has begot a compassion in her
heart toward them; So the Bishops Loyal Address to the King, has much cooled
her Affection for us, and I wish their after Carriage do not heighten her
prejudice against them. And how ever, she is certainly a Princess of that
Wisdom, and Zeal for the Reformed Religion, that nothing will displease or
disoblidge her, that is most necessary and convenient for the Advancement and
Establishment of the Protestant Intere st in Scotland; for which Presbyterians
can too easily show the Re-establishment of Presbytrie to be the most propet
and effectual Method, which one of them has done already, by some Reasons
which I have seen, why in this Juncture Episcopacy should be abrogated and
Presbytrie Re-established. Moreover, she is a Princess of such moderate
Inclinations, that nothing can more dis oblidge her, then the persecution of
Protestants by Protestants; And she is not so ignorant of our Affairs, but that
she knows that unless the Episcopal Clergy can always patiently endure a
general contempt; or be secured from ever having any influence on the
Government. Episcopacy and persecution in Scotland are inseparable. And for the
Prince, I know not what Ground ye have for your confidence, to say, That [to be
for Presbytry will disoblidge him also, who has no inclination for the
Realteration of the Government of the Church as he has now abundantly
declared] You seem to be equally destitute of Policy, and good Intelligence:
For as it is known to all the World that he is Presbyterian; so his Declaration
for Scotland, has insinuated his inclinations to favor Presbyterians, as
clearly as was convenient for the Time. And though his Wisdom and Moderation be
s uch in expressing himself, that nothing can be certainly concluded from any
thing that has dropped from him, yet it is evident that he will Judge the
Presbyterian Party more worthy of his confidence and more suiable objects of
his favor, than the Episcopal, for he will doubtless expect, that these will
be more firm and faithful to his Interest, whose respect to him is established
by their conscientious zeal for the Reformed Religion again st popery, and who
shall be chiefly oblidged to him; for restoring their Former Privileges; then
these who are Acted Generally by their Interests, and have been so deeply
engaged in Interests opposite to his, and who must be in some measure
disoblidged of necessity, by Moderating and Ballancing their Exorbitant power,
and rescinding the cruel Laws made in their Favors. And I am afraid that the
Presbyterians will be more Active and Zealous in advancing him to the Crown of
Scotland, then these of our persuasion, and thereby oblige him to favor them
as his best and surest Friends; and albeit that the prerogatives which we annex
to the Crown be a great Tentation to one that designs Arbitrary Government, yet
it avails little, with a Prince of such a Wise and Moderate Temper, who has
seen his Predecessors either endangered or ruined, by their Attempting and
Exercising it, and who knows that Kings Sovereignty, and a Peoples Liberties,
are most firmly secured, when most equally established as (notwithstanding of
the prejudices of some against Presbytry, as inconsistent with Monarchy) I
confess they have been in the peaceable times of the Presbyterian Government,
when King James the 6th and his Son King Charles 1 st. were personally pre sent
in their Parliaments, and had greater advantages for understanding their own,
and their Peoples Interest, then can be had at a distance, and only by
Information from subtle self seeking Courtiers. So that you see how far ye are
decieved in your expectations from the Prince and Princess of Orange, who will
doubtless Endeavor to Redress the Grievances in Church and State, which ye
cannot conceive possible without some Alteration, and that greater then ye seem
to apprehend.

Your seventh Reason is, a Reference of several things to the consideration of
all thinking men, as sufficient to determine them to an aversion at Presbytry,
wherein ye go so far beyond the bounds of Sobriety, and give so great suspicion
of Calumny, that Presbyterians will represent you as a Machiavilan, throwing
much dirt upon them only of design that some of it may stick, [ let all
thinking men reflect (say ye) upon the natural temper of presbytry and veiw it
in its Tyranical Pragmatick meddling and Domineering effects, which many good
men yet living of all qualities have severely felt] Sir, I know not well what
ye mean by [natural temper more then by your natural Reception and Exigence]
but Presbyterians will refer their principles to the consideration of all
Impartial M^n, whither they be no more agreeable to Divine Institution in the
Scripture, then Episcopacy though they be not so agreeable to the Natural
Tempers of Men; which they grant to be no better in presbyterians, then in
others, yea to have been so very Episcopal in some of them, as to carry them t^
practices. Dissonant to their principles, and upon that account more hateful
then worse practices of Bishops, because suitable, or at least uns utable to
their principles; for that which would be accounted Gravity, Dexterity,
Actively and Zeal, in a Bishop, is accounted Tyrannical, Pragmatical meddling
and Domineering in a Presbyter. But these are not the proper and native Effects
of Presbytry, rather imitations of Episcopacie (proceeding from Men's natural
Infirmitives, and the peculiar circumstances, and torrent of the times they
have lived in) contrary to their principles. So that in effect all that is
quarrelled in Presbyterians is the Episcopal practice in some of them under a
Presbyterian profession, which cannot be justly charged on the whole party; and
for less on their principles, which have a quite contrary tendancy; And
ingenuously by Presbytry will be judged by few to have such a tendency to
Tyrranny over the Church, and Pragmatick meddling with the State, as Episcopacy
(as its constitute in Scotland) has; And they will desire all Judicious men to
cons ider whether Idleness, Ambition and Avarice in the Clergy; Ignorance,
Worldly mindedness and Profanity among People: Be not the effects of
Episcopacy; and indeed so manifestly have these abounded under Episcopal
Government, that the most part will decide the question in their Favors
against us. But I cannot wonder enough, what could move you to think [much more
deliberately to write of the Hypocrisy, immortality and Anti^ristian genus of
the Presbyterian party] seeing these e things may not only be retorted with
great Advantage, but cannot justly and ingenuosly be charged on the Generality
of presbyterians; you may assure your self this will tempt them to draw up a
Black Lybel against the Bishops and Generality of our Clergy, as alas they have
too large grounds for, recent in the remembrance of the Nation; and they will
think it enough to tell you calmly and soberly, that if persons unsutableness
to their profession be Hypocrisy, if the grossest of scandals and open
profanity be immoralitie: And finally, if violent persecution be the Effect and
Evidence of an Antichristian genius; All these things are more applicable to
Episcopals then presbyterians; So that all these Reffections directed against
them, will rebound on our selves; And I am afraid they will stick faster to us
then to them; because they not only agree to the general Sentiments of all
Ranks of people, but their Observations and Experience of them is late and
recent; Whereas the mos t part of old Malignants, who were formerly carried
away with prejudices against presbytry under the pretenses of Loyalty, have
turned Fanatics since, and as persons convinced of their mistakes, both of the
presbyterian cause and Interest which they opposed, and the Episcopal which
they owned, have thought it their duty so to do, though to the exposing
themselves to the Reproaches and other Persecutions of the Episcopal party, in
their greatest power. And it is indeed very observable, that those who
intertain prejudices against the presbyterian Government are either Young Men
who never saw it in its integrity, and living under a Government contrary to
it, have not heard any other account of it, then of the failings and
exorbitancies of some of that Profession, which are not the native product of
their Principles, but such excesses as the Biass of the Age and Circumstances
they lived in drove them into, or else old Turncoats and violent Persecutors,
who to justify their change of their Profession and their Persecution of these
who adhere to it, make it their work to fix an Odium on Presbytery, and by
their frequent impudence in reproaching it have at last deluded themselves into
an obstinate belief of their own invented Calumnies.

Your last Reason is, ( That if the Church of England continue as it is, as
undoubtedly it will, and Scotland be reduced to presbytery, then considering
the boundless and restless spirit of presbytery, Scotland will impose sicut
ante an Uniformity on England in Doctrine and Discipline, which will commence a
new Civil War, the thoughts of which cannot but breed horror in all reasonable
Men.] Sir, The only Foundation of these your Apprehensions is the Solemn League
tho you mention it not, which although it be a touchy point, yet presbyterians can
abundantly vindicate the same, s o as to prevent the fears of all Judicious
Men, whom they will desire to consider that it obliges the members of the
Church of Scotland, to no other thing in reference to England, then what is
Antecedently their duty toward it, and all other Reformed Churches by virtue
of the Sympathy and Communion, that every part of the Catholic Visible Church
ought to have with any other part of it; That its Obligation is to be measured
by the general rules of Judgment, Truth and Righteousness; that it is chiefly
obligding to oppose Popery, and to endeavor the peace and happiness of both
Nations; and finally that it obliges no Man to any thing, but what is proper
to him in his station, and therefore all your fears of a Civil War betwixt
England and Scotland from this ground, are but Melancholic Apprehensions, if
so be that the Prince of Orange shall be King of Britain, and so long as he and
the English Parliament think it inexpedient to seek, and he and the Scots
Parliament think it inexpedient to give assistance for the alteration of the
English Church Government from Episcopacy to Presbytry. But many fear upon more
solid Grounds that the house of Commons in England clip your Bishops wings by
degrees, as either to rid the Nation of them at length without the assistance
of Scotland, or else bring them to such a tolerable Mediocrity, as will render
them more acceptable to all the English Nation, then a Civil War can be suppos
ed will be to any English Presbyterians, who are so balanced betwixt the
opposition of these of the Episcopal persuasion in the one hand, and of the
Independent, on the other; that there is no party in England, either more
moderate or Cautions when they are.

Thus you see how weak a Defense of our cause these your Reasons now appear to
be, after they are considered, tho with more calmness and tenderness then you
can expect from a Presbyterian, who se answer to them to your disgrace and our
disadvantage, I wish may be prevented by this Friendly freedom of mine with
you, and I would advise you to wait a little longer till there be some better
product of the Labors of your Brethren who are studying this Controversy,
harder then ever in order to a learned and elaborate Vindication of Episcopacy;
and Refutation of Presbytry, to which if this paper can any way be subservient,
I allow you to communicate it to your Brethren, that they may be the more sober
and cautious in mannaging the controversy, but I pray you let it not come to
the sight of any Presbyterian, least they print it to the public Affront of
our cause, and I dissuade you as your Friend from the Resolution that I hear
you are upon of printing your Reasons, whatever emendations you make in them,
for it is an old Maxim in crist non movendum, and the Presbyterians modest
silence, amidst the present Advantages they have, will be more commended then
any thing we can writ, for our vindication in the dangerous circumstances that
we are in at present. And Sir, I am hopeful that you will not think your self
disoblidged by this friendly Duty, from

Sir, Your Real Friend and Humble Servant.

FINIS.

