A SERMON PREACHED at the Consecration OF A CHAPEL In the HOUSE of JOHN
COLLINS, Esquire Of CHVTE in Wiltshire.

Performed by the Right Reverend Father in in God SETH, Lord Bishop of Sarum,
on the 25th of September, 1673.

By JOSEPH KELSEY, B. D. Rector of Newton-Tony in Wiltshire.

(...).
(...).
Autholog. in Dedicat. Templi Resurrect. Dom. London: Printed for Jonathan
Edwin, at the three Roses in Ludgate Street, 1674.

TO THE RIGHT REVEREND Father in God SETH Lord Bishop of SARVM.
My Lord,
THe occasion of this Sermon, which but rarely happen's, having persuaded me to
the publishing of it; The extraordinary favors which I have constantly
received from your Lordship, will, I hope, excuse the prefixing so great a Name
to so inconsiderable a Paper. I humbly beg, that it may be accepted as a
testimony of my Sincere acknowledgments and that the innocent Design hereof may
not be denied the Protection of so Revered a Sanctuary.

Your Lordships in all duty, most Obedient Servant. JOSEPH KELSEY.

A SERMON Preached at the CONSECRATION of a Chapel in the House of JOHN
COLLINS, Esquire
1 Kings 9.3. And the Lord said unto him, I have heard thy Prayer, and thy
Supplication, which thou have made before me. I have hallowed this House that
thou have built, to put my Name there for ever, and mine eyes and mine heart
shall be there perpetually.
THese Words are the beginning of that Answer, which God gave to Solomon's
Prayer, at the Dedication of the Temple. The Devotion of which Service, (set
down in the foregoing Chapter) equal to the Magnificence of the building,
worthy (if any thing can be so) of that Majesty, whose acceptance they
supplicated, does both invite and justify, and is no less the security, than
an Example to this days solemnity. For though a Promise of so much grace and
favor may seem proportionate to nothing, but the glory of Solomon's Temple, and
the Privileges here granted, too big for a private Chapel, yet since
immensity can be no more contained in one, than in the other, and the
intentions of the Founders (which God always respects) may be equally full of
Piety and Religion: He whose Glory filled that House, may also fill a lesser
Oratory; and He, who bids us enter into our Closets, does thereby hallow the
place; and suppose a presence attentive to every Religious performance.

Solomon likewise understood very well, both as a Philosopher, and a Divine, by
Reason, as by Revelation, the infinite nature of God and His Omnipresence; that
the Heaven of Heavens could not contain him, much less the House which he had
built. He intended not to imprison the Godhead, in a place of thirty Cubits
high, or to nail the Divinity (as the Heathens did the Goddess of Victory) to
the Walls of His Temple: he forgot not, that a clean Heart, and a purified
Soul, were the habitations which God loved; and sincere Obedience, the
Sacrifice wherein He delighted; he foresee all those weak reasonings, which
have since heen used to discourage that Piety in the World (which wants much
rather to be inflamed) and to accuse the most Religious designs of Idolatry
and Superstition. He see them (I say) and did confute them: and so did God
himself. For it came to pass, when Solomon had finished the House of the Lord,
the Lord appeared unto him and said, I have heard thy Prayer, and thy
Supplication which thou have made etc. From which words we will consider, 1.
The meaning of to Hallow or Sanctify. 2. The Dedication of Places to Gods
Worship. 3. The Effects of it.


There is a twofold Holiness in Scripture, Original and Essential in God; and
that which is derived, in things that have relation to Him. The first does
necessarily belong to God, as He is the most perfect Being, in whom all
Excellencies do possess infinite perfection. So that the first notion of
Holiness in Him is a Supereminent Greatness in all His Attributes of Wisdom,
Power, and Goodness. He is often called the Holy One of Israel, the Excellency
of Jacob. There is none holy as the Lord; none comparable to Him in the
Greatness of all His Excellencies. Hence the Name of God is joined to words to
express their Greatness. (...) ( Genesis 1.) Vide R. Solomonem Melech. in locum.
which we translate The Spirit of God, the Jews expound a great and strong
wind moving upon the face of the waters, Nineveh was a great City (...) very
great. So the Cedars of God, and the Mountains of God. So also amongst the
Greeks (...) is expounded by the Scholiast (...), every way great and full of
Majesty. He that has arrived to any extraordinary attainment of Power,
Learning, or Piety has merited to be called Vir Magnus, and all the Severity
of Stoical virtues did make up that Magnitudo animi of which Cato loved so
often to dispute. But Holiness in created Beings is founded in that relation
they have to God, appropriated or separated to His peculiar use and service.
The Sabbath is called a holy day, -- (...). Judaea a holy Land, Jerusalem a
holy City. -- (...). The Israelites a holy People, as God himself speaks, I
have separated you from other people, that you should be mine, and ye shall be
a holy People unto me. And in other places, peculiar and proper are the same
with Holy: Nor are those great Titles, wherewith the Apostle has dignified the
Churches, to which he writes ((...)) of any other signification, than that they
(as of old the Jews) had entertained the Profession of a Religion, distinct
from others of the World, and of a far more Divine Revelation; whereby they
might be excited to the Acquisition of those Excellencies, which in the Object
of their Worship they did adore; and those names (of an as extended meaning, as
that of Christians) show rather what they ought to be, than assure us what they
were; for amongst those Saints were found strange Immortalities, altogether
contradictory to the Sacredness of their Vocation. So fallacious is it, from
the most specious pretenses to infer a Real Sanctity: because Hypocrisy is a
very Ancient Crime; and that Accusation has always been too just, Instit,
Proemi^m.
which Quintilian charged upon the Philosophers of his Age, Non enim virtute
and studiis, ut haberentur Philosophi labor abant, sed vultum, and tristitiam,
and dissentientem a caeteris habitum pessamis moribus praetendebant.

To Hallow therefore, or to Sanctify, is to treat any thing, or to behave our
selves toward it, as the Nature of its Holiness shall require. We then hallow
the Name of God, when with the deepest sense we acknowledge his Greatness, fear
his Power, love his Goodness, trust his Faithfulness, devoutly admire and
imitate every of his Excellencles, when all our thoughts, words, and actions,
are still composed most becoming of his Majesty; nor in them any thing unworthy
of so incomparable a Being (whose, both as Creatures and Christians, we are) is
to be found. The contrary to this, is to prophanc and pollute his Holy Name;
not giving that Honor which is due unto it, either by Atheism, which does not
only deny Honor, but superadds Contempt; or Polytheism, dividing and making
common that Religious Worship, which the notion of one God challenges as
incommunicable and proper to it self.

Persons are then hallowed, when being separated from the more common
employments of the World, and dedicated to the peculiar Service of God in
managing the Offices of Religion, they enjoy that honor and respect which is
due to the Agents of so great a Master: And so the Priesthood has been
honored in all Ages, in all Religions; their Persons esteemed Sacred as their
Office, and received with all the Differences, which are wont to make a
Reputation Glorious and Resplendent: and if to the great seize of the Age
wherein we live, the want of this may be reckoned a strong Exception, (the
contempt of the Clergy being become the Subject of Books and Discourses) in
vain shall we trouble our selves in searching out other Reasons of that
Incivility, which must be ultimately resolved into the decay of Reverence to
Religion, and of Loyalty to God himself. Where this is not, what Learning,
Wisdom, or Piety can oblige? or what could have defended him whom -- Nec
Apollinis infula texit? In the mean while, we cannot but justly wonder, that he
who all along pretends to have laid the Foundations of his Commonwealth in the
observation of Humane Nature, the Humors, Inclinations, and Practices of
Universal Mankind, should not remember that there never was any Nation, Time,
or Place, how Barbarous soever, which was not Highly Civil in this; and thought
themselves bound to reward the Procurators of their Religion with the best and
greatest of worldly things. So that the effect of his Politics may be very
much to spoil Christianity, by complying with the corrupt humors of men; but
shall never be able to introduce any other way of Religion, the Priesthood
whereof shall not have a considerable Rule and Interest in the World, when all
he has said to the contrary shall be forgotten.

The Sanctification which the Christian Doctrine teaches, (divested of those
adventitious niceties, whereby the disputing humor of some has much spoiled
the ancient simplicity of its Nature) is resolved into the two things we have
discoursed: (1) The Dedication of our selves to God (viz.) in Baptism: (2) And
the management of our selves according to the Holiness of that Relation: For in
Baptism we were admitted into the Church, incorporated into that Divine
Society, and made Partakers of all the Privileges of the Gospel. Here we were
taken into the Protection of the Holy Ghost, as the Jews say their Baptized
Proselite was put (...) under the Wings of the Divinity: by the assistance of
which H. Spirit, the Power of Original Sin (whereinsoever it does consist) is
overballanced, and our own industry concurring, made ineflectual; as the Jews
also believed the (...) vicious inclination was taken away by Circumcision. So
that since the infusion of Virtuous Habits has but seldom been experienced,
and brings but little reason, for which in these our days we should believe it,
what can be demanded more, as necessary to our Sanctification, than to be put
into possession of those Spiritual helps, which are always assisting our
sincere endeavors? or where can we fix the date of it, but in that Sacrament
where such a Right was bestowed? Hither also must be referred Regeneration,
Adoption and Justification, all which Blessings are the Acts of God, by that
means which in his Church he has ordained, by Baptism confirmed unto us: But
whether or no we have forfeited them in our after-lives, will not be known till
the Day of Judgment. For they are all Judicial Acts, and the words, with many
more in our Religion, terms not only of the Jewish, but Roman Law; and do, in
their nature, suppose a Corporation, but as distinct from the Temporal, as the
things signified by them transcend the Graces of Princes, or the indulgences of
any Imperial Constitution. To this I will only add, that if in Astronomy,
Philosophy, Anatomy, and other Sciences, that Hypothesis is by all esteemed
best and nearest truth, which does most easily, naturally and consistently
explain the appearances proper to it; then that the Church is a distinct
Society, (though upon no other reasons) will strongly challenge our belief,
because upon this does depend the Nature of many Essential parts in Religion,
the Solution of which is in vain elsewhere to be expected.

2. The second thing is the Dedication of Places for Gods Worship; where we
will enquire (1) The Antiquity of them. (2) What this Dedication does imply as
the reasonableness of it.

1. It cannot be doubted that Religion is as Old as Humane Nature, the sense of
man's own necessities forcibly producing an acknowledgment of a more Excellent
Being, upon whom he does depend: And if Reason or Cogitation be the Formality
of the Soul, Religion or Dependence must be the first Subject whereupon those
Faculties must be employed. But Religion (no dull or sluggish, but an active
and vigorous thing) will make its appearance by outward signs, and visible
effects; and therefore in the Infancy of the World, it soon put forth it self
in all material circumstances: They offered Sacrifice, and at a certain time;
for so the words (...) ( Genesis 4.) signify, a fixed period of a constant
Revolution. That it was at a stated place is reasonable, because in Paradise
there seems to have been one place, where more especially God manifested his
Presence, from which Adam fled, hoping to be concealed. After the Flood Noah
built an Altar to the Lord, and Jacob took a Stone, and set it for a Pillar,
and called it Bethel, and endowed it with the tenth of his whole Estate; which
the Gentiles imitating, worshipped their Gods in the shape of unpolished
stones, Boeharti Geogr. Sa. lib. 2. c. 1.
and called them (...). Their unsettled way of living, or the imperfection of
Arts, stinted the expressions of their Devotions, which in aster-Ages let it
self loose to that Superstitious Prodigality, in the number and Magnificence of
their Temples, which we read, and cannot but admire in Greek and Roman Story.
And this was only a true deduction from the Law of Nature; for there were
Temples in the Gentile World, before either the Tabernacle of Moses, or that of
Solomon; to the building of which, neither by any Command from God, or Covenant
of the Jewish Law, did he stand obliged.

There was indeed a sort of haughty and morose Philosophers, who alone
outbraved mankind, and boasted their own perfections, in affront to all the
world besides, who laying down, for the foundation of their morality, That all
things, out of the power of Man's own will, were (...), neither good nor evils,
made themselves independent of any external cause, and the Spring of all their
happiness to be in their own bosoms, upon which they grew proud, and insolent,
disdaining to ask the assistance of God himself. -- stulte quid fatigas Deum?
fac te felicem. It was to no purpose, to trouble heaven for these things, they
could bestow upon themselves, when they pleased. And as to them it seemed
unnecessary to pray to God; so they also thought Temples insignificant, and no
other than Monuments of men's wilful carelessness in the emendation of their own
minds. For so Cato in Lucan, being advised to ask counsel of Jupiter Hammons
Oracle, after the death of Pompey answers in their usual way of affectation.

Estne Dei seeds, nifi Terra, and Pontus and Aer,
Et Coelum, and Virtus? Superos quid quaerimus ultra?
Jupiter est quodcunque vides. -- Plutarchus de Stoicerum Repag.
and Zeno was accused of Atheism, for his Opinion, (...).

The Omnipresence of the Deity, and presumption of their own virtue, were the
two Topics upon which they superseded all external significations of Religion.
Which method of Reasoning is so contradictory to the common sense of mankind,
that it needs no other way to be refuted; besides that the boastings of their
self-sufficiency, how vain they were, the severest of that Sect have been
forced to acknowledge. But indeed the foundation of this, and most their proper
Opinions, was nothing but their Doctrine of Fatality, which gave life and
vigor to all their Singularities; which he who thoroughly believes, will never
be able to give any other reason of Prayer, or any Exercise of Devotion, but
that which Zeno gave his Servant why he beat him; a very bad one in Religion.
But above all things, he will be a very Fool to put himself to any great
trouble or expense for a Testimony of his Piety: he will never erect Altars, or
build Temples to such a God as Jupiter; who being overpowred by the more
Supreme Destiny, when his Dear Friend was near slain in the War, uses a
pitiful Interjection, the invention of some miserable Mortal. -- (...). Iliad.
4.

(...).


The (...), the Universe, was their Supreme Deity; and Matter, and Motion, the
Principles of their Divinity. And surely, if we consider the latter Ages of
Christianity, who can we accuse of that unspeakable devastation of Sacred
Places, but they who boasted of their impulses? who have introduced that
barbarous rusticity into the service of God so much as they who have Espoused
the Theology of the Stoics? Was it not unsufferable presumption to invite the
Deity into their own Souls, by no other argument, than the profanation of his
Temples? or when they had overthrown his Altars, to offer him their hearts full
of Sacrilege for his habitation? Into the Soul that is defiled Wisdom will not
enter. God is said to dwell in his Saints, and their Bodies are called the
Temples of the H. Ghost. So he did of Old, and yet he loved the Gates of Sion
more than all the dwellings in Jerusalem. Virtuous qualities of the mind only
make us fit to pay our Visible Devotions, not excuse us from them. Haec cedo,
ut admoveam Templis -- was the true use which the Satyrist makes of the
severest honesty: I will wash my hands in Innocence, and so will I approach thy
holy Altar. Some Primitive Writers indeed, in their Apologies for Christianity,
seem to speak the sense of this Objection. When Caecilius in Minutius asks, Cur
nullas aras habent (Christiani?) eur nulla simulacra? Octavius answers, Quod
enim simulaerum Deo fingam, cum sit Dei homo ipse simulacrum? Templum quod ei
extruam, cum totus hic mundus ejus opera fabricatus (...) capere non possit?
nonne melius in nostra dedicandus est mente? in nostro imo consecrandus est
pectore? Some other such passages do occur in Origin, Arnobius, Lactantius; but
either they are spoken by way of Rhetorical comparison, (because from undoubted
Authority it does appear, that before that time the Christians had not only
Public Places of Worship, but that they had been several times demolished by
the Edicts of the Emperors) or else they must be understood, that the
Christians had no such Temples as the Heathens, wherein the Images of their
Adored Deities were placed, the termination of their Worship, and plain
Idolatry.

In the beginning of Christianity, it is not reasonable to expect any great and
sumptuous Buildings, when the Preachers of it were of so poor and low
condition; and their Fortunes as unstable, as the Waters upon which they had
their Habitation. What Oratories could they surnish, who sold their Ships, and
all they had, to follow Christ? They then assembled in private houses, where
they had the highest Rooms allowed them, by the Piety of the Converted Owners,
set apart for the sole purposes of Religion: For which Charity, Aquila and
Priscilla, Nymphas and Philemon, shall be Recorded to all Generations. In the
heat of Persecutions, they met in Dens and Caves of the Earth, and sung Praises
to the Great Creator in Subterraneous places, where the light of the Sun never
came: in memory of which our Altars yet burn, and testify our thankfulness to
God for the Liberty we enjoy. Sometimes they had their Synaxes in Woods and
Groves, which then truly merited the style of Sacred and Religious: Sometimes
in Caemeteries, and over the Tombs of them which died in the Lord; where they
inflamed one another Zeal with the recordation of their Faith, and received
new Life and Courage from the Ashes of Martyrs, and hopes of a Resurrection.

So low were the Foundations of Christian Churches laid, in the humility of a
condition designed to sustain the height of that glory, to which not long
after, they did arise. For it would be too much to tell you, how these
contemptible beginnings increased to that proportion, as like the little Stone
cut out of the Mountain, to overtop the Splendid Heathenisme of the Nations.
How they struck dumb the famed Oracles of Jupiter and Apollo; making them
forget their Poetry first, and then condemned to eternal silence all their
ambiguous responses. How they overthrew the Idolatrous Altars, leveled their
Temples with the ground, broke in pieces the Amphitheaters, and consecrated the
Pantheons to the worship of the only true Eternal God. How the Priests of the
Gentiles mourned, and with unfeigned sorrow, early begun to celebrate the
Funerals of a Religion, which had already received its mortal wound, when, the
very day after the crucifixion of our Savior, Vide Vossium de Idololatria,
lib. 7. cap 3.
along the Arcadian Shore it groaned, and sighed its last, Great Pan is dead.
The Treasuries of the Church were no longer now supplied with the mites of the
poor; but filled with the Estates of the Rich and Honorable. One dedicated his
Bathes, another his House to the erection of Titles, and frequently the dying
person commended his Soul to God, by bequeathing his Estate to the
encouragement of Religion. So the House of Pudens, a Noble Senator mentioned (2 Timothy 4.) and of Theophilus of Antioch, St. Lukes most excellent Patron, were
converted into Christian Temples. Within an hundred years after the death of
our Savior; we read in the Dialogue ascribed to Lucian, called Philopatris,
(...) (says Critius) (...), Representing the Assemblies of the Christians, we
passed through iron Gates, and brazen Thresholds, when after many winding
Ascents we came to an House, whose Roof was overlaid with Gold. Nor is the
Authority of this Book made less, by any thing that either Blondel, in
opposition to the Antiquity of Churches, or the Socinians, in favor of their
Antitrinitarian Opinion, have disputed; seeing it is certain (whoever was the
Author) it was written (if not about the time of Nero, as some think, yet) in
the Reign of Trajan, Marcilius adlocum.
whose conquests over the Parthians he plainly does congratulate. He that
considers the several Classes of Persons, to every of which was an appointed
Station in the Church, and the distinct degrees, through which they passed in
the primitive discipline, before they were accounted perfect, must conclude,
that not a confused assembling, but a designed, methodized place was only
capeable of so regular, and orderly proceedings.

The poverty of their affairs did not discourage the Christians, nor the rage
of their enemies affright them; but they met together in hallowed places, where
they prayed for the lives of their Persecutors and did no other hurt, than what
Pliny relates' in his known Epistle. But if at any time, either policy of State
or the goodness of the Emperor, gave them release from their afflictions, and
exercise of their religion, then could they not rest satified to serve God,
amidst ruins and desolations; but with sumptuous charges, they reedified the
fallen Churches, which, for ought they knew, the next breath of an angry Tyrant
might again throw to the ground. When the Empire turned Christian, then was
there an Emblem of the general resurrection: (...), Eusebius. lib. 10. c. 2.
Religion seem to be clad in the joys of immortality: their Temples ascended
above all clouds and tempests, not afraid of a second death. Then was there, in
every Town and City, lasting monuments raised to that God who had at length
tamed the madness of the people, had spoken the word and delivered them from
further fears of Storms, and Shipwracks. Then might you have Seen the Splendour
of Paulinus his Cathedral at Tire -- (...) at the first sight to attract the
eyes and hearts of the enemies of the Faith: Cap. 4.
as the Panegyrist at that Dedication does express it. From thence that ((...))
great and heavenly quire made have to perform the like solemnity at Jerusalem.
De v^^ Constan. Cap. 43.
Jernsalem! the City of the great God, he was once well known in thy palaces
and in the gates of Sion: The glory of all nations the joy of the whole earth,
where the Lord said he would dwell for ever! in thee was he worshipped with the
beauty of holiness; till by the rebellion of thy people, the wicked obstinacy
of thy Priests and Rulers, when they truly murdered the Lord of life and glory,
the vail of thy Temple rent in sunder, the gates flew open on their own accord,
and a dreadful voice was heard let us go hence. Then did the Scepter and the
Glory depart from Israel, then was thy holy place profaned with all impurities
and buried in the dust. Behold now thy King comes, whom thou would not to
reign over thee, in greatness, Power, and Triumph; over the despised lodging of
his birth, shall be built a glorious Temple to his Name. Every place, which
formerly entertained his Sacred Person, shall be turned into an Oratory, every
spot of earth whereon he stood shall for ever be accounted holy ground. Here
will we raise Altars, to the memory of every action which he did, and
consecrate to eternity the particulars of his Sufferings; hither shall resort,
from the utmost ends of the earth, the weary Pilgrim, and prostrate pay the
Vows, which he made in trouble, at his shrines, here the mournful penitent
shall power fourth floods of tears where He wept, shall love the place where
He was scourged and by those stripes shall be healed. Here shall the
disconsolate spend his life in sacred retirement, and all devout employments;
here lastly shall men dedicate their time to Diviner Studies, write
Commentaries upon his Life, and defenses of his Religion. To this new Jerusalem
it was they made haste from Tire to the Encaenia of a Magnificent Temple, where
was a concourse of holy Confessors and Bishops from all parts of the Christian
World, attended by an innumerable company of every particular Nation. Some
sanctified the Solemnity with devout prayers, and pious exhortations; some made
Orations upon the virtues of the Emperor, extolling the sincerity of his love
to Religion, and the honor he paid to Martyrs. Others composed devout
meditations, from passages of holy Scripture, to the occasion. They who were
not of such seize made their Devotions ((...)) with unbloody Sacrifices,
Ibid. cap. 45.
and mystical Services, praying for the peace of the Church and Happiness of
the Emperor. The frequency of after-Dedications are not here to be mentioned,
nor need we add any thing in defense of them; it being so much a part of
natural Religion, and Gods ready acceptance of this in the Text so solemnly
performed, is an infallible Argument, that many Ceremonies in divine Worship
are approved by him, for which no particular command can be produced. It is
childish impertinency, when God has given us sense and reason, besides general
rules in Scripture, for our direction, to expect a divine Revelation to lead us
by the Hand, and mark out every step we are to go. I have hallowed this House,
that thou have built, that is, what you offer, I do accept and will bless it,
for those ends you have designed it. But some people are so afraid of the Law
of Moses, as if they had been present at the Thunder and Lightning, the
Shakeings of Mount Sinai. So terrified are they, at the very name of the
Ceremonial Law, that they are not capable of understanding what it is; nor will
learn to distinguish betwixt, what is so indeed, and what are truly the
results of nature and common reason. (...). Nazian. Orat. (...).
Of so undoubted Antiquity it is in Christianity, that Blondel himself, (who
writ an Apology for his own opinion, rather than St. Hierom's) acknowledges
Dedications to have been performed with the Solemnity of Prayer; only he urges
against the Superstitious Ceremonies of the Romanists; and will be sure not to
allow the Bishop the chief disposing of the Office, which yet is ever reckoned
in the number of his Prerogatives.

They, who first affixing a typical signification to every particular under the
Law, dispute that none ought to be retained, as receiving their full impletion
under the Gospel, seem not carefully to have attended the consequence of the
Argument; whilst they endeavor to give it an unbounded force, they make it
altogether lose its strength, increasing the shadow to such a vastness, as to
take away the light of the very Sun, and bring Universal Darkness upon all
Divine Revelation. If all shall be received for the sense of Scripture, which
the Allegorizing wits of men, warmed with thinking, have obtruded; who sees
not, upon what a Rack the litteral sense will be put, tortured into such
confessions as will call in question its Truth, and destroy its Being. All
Ages, as our own, have found, that the immoderate indulging Spiritual meanings,
have rendered the Scripture but a dead Letter. It seems a pleasant thing to
make apt similitudes: Allegories have been the entertainment of great wit, and
high Devotion: too often also the refuge of Heresy, when deserted of plainer
Scripture, We give due reverence to the pious industry of those, who by this
method of Interpretation, have performed any thing which may with pleasure
persuade to Virtue, or illustrate the Analogy of Faith. Yet will not the
quickness of Fancy be always found, to serve the ends of reasoning. It may
delight, but not convince; it may incline, but not satisfy the inquisitive
understanding. Such do appear to have been the extravagancies of this kind,
that having treated Sacred Scripture with the like levity, as the Jews by
their Gematria, they have been little less ridiculous, nor can they be
entertained without prejudice to the common Faith, and great inconvenience in
believing: the Egyptians and Greeks had their Mythology, Theology moralized:
the Jews not without probability, pretend an ancient Cabala they say from the
time of Moses, to which St. Paul seems to refer, well understanding the
learnnig of his own Nation. The Scripture alone must put bounds to our Faith in
this particular, nor are we obliged to acknowledge any other Types, than what we
find there declared. As to our present instance, the Temple, or Tabernacle is
not said by the Apostle (Heb. 9.9.) to be a figure, but those Ordinances of
worship therein observed, Gifts and Sacrifices imposed on them till the time of
Reformation.

St. John saw no Temple in the new Jerusalem; that is, as the Jews, in the
days of the Messiah expect a Temple, but different from any they had before,
as is that described in the vision of Ezekiel.

2. What Dedication does imply, as the reasonableness of it.

1. That hereby the place becomes public for Gods Service. For the Church of
Christ being Catholic, and intended to include whole mankind, it is no less
honorable than necessary for the maintenance of Religion, that the celebration
be as public as the design of it; both the better to invite the unconverted to
the same Profession, as also to preserve it self entire from Herefie and
Schism, which private Conventicles have always bred and fomented. One reason of
those Heresies which much defaced the beauty of the primitive Faith, was that
they being denied the public exercise of Religion, were constrained to divide
into many little bodies, whereby he who had a mind had the opportunity by his
wit and ambition to tyrannize over the Faith of others, and to compose a Church
of Disciples peculiar to himself. And it was great wisdom in the Dispensation
of the Jews, the institution of three general Festivalls every year, at which
the whole Nation was bound to appear, whereby they secured the unity and
integrity of the Worship, whilst they had no long intervals to forget the
constant settled method of Religion, or to invent and propagate new. They had
also but one Temple in the whole Land, which as it signified the profession of
one God, in opposition to the plurality of the Heathens; so was it also an
effectual Bar to all Schism and Innovation. The Religion of Christ indeed is of
another Nature, of much larger extent than from Dan to Beersheba, intending the
advantage of more than a little spot of ground, not two hundred miles in
length; for all Nations shall worship him, and his Dominion shall be from one
end of the Earth to the other: And therefore our Savior told the Woman of
Samaria, that neither in that Mountain, nor yet at Jerusalem, should they
worship the Father: but wheresoever a Temple was built, there, in the purity of
his service, might they find his presence. Happy was that time, when in what
part of the world soever a good Christian might chance to be, he might have
found the doors of Churches wide open to his Devotion, and God worshipped in
that form and order, to which without either scruple of his own Conscience, or
offense to others, he heartily could conform: when so inconsiderable were the
differences of Worship, that so prudent and pious a Bishop as S. Ambrose
thought it his duty, whether at Rome or Milan, or any other place, to observe
its Customs, and join in Sacred Offices: when he might have traveled from East
to West, and as soon have discovered another Sun, as another distinct allowed
Religion. Even in S. Austin's time, if a man asked the way to a Catholic
Church, no Donatist (that had not the ill humor of a Jew) durst have presumed
to direct him to his own. But now into how many thousand pieces does that
Catholic Doctrine stand divided; whilst it is forced to put on as many shapes,
as frail men are subject to imaginations? How many Altars smoke to it, with no
other than the Sacrifice of Fools! Strange Fire, and Incense, wherewith God is
not delighted, because himself did never kindle it: As if the Holy Jesus had
been designed ever to remain in Infancy; no where to be found or worshipped,
but in Stables, unseemly, unhallowed places; and his Religion never to take
part of that Happiness which Inspired Prophets have foretold. In Religion, as
in the Heavens, were our understandings placed in clear and pure light,
undisturbed with passion, prejudice or interest, and Earthly affections, we
should soon discover the easiness and native simplicity of its motions, no
contrariety, no irregularity there; and that only man made Epicycles, little
fancies of his own, and falsely said God lodged in them.

2. Dedication does imply, that we part with our own right in the thing, and
make God the sole Owner. So Solomon prayed, Arise, O Lord God, into thy resting
place, thou, and the Ark of thy strength: And therefore at the Consecration,
both of the Tabernacle and Temple, God by most manifest and extraordinary signs
declared his taking possession of them: for the Glory of the Lord filled the
Tabernacle, and the Cloud filled the House of the Lord. God is the Lord of all
the Earth, and all that we have, and by the particular assignment of some part,
we confess his Title to the whole. So the great King of Persia (to whom,
sitting Enthroned in Susa or Ecbatane, the Author of the Book De Mundo has
compared God) used to demand (...) of those Nations whom he intended to bring
under his Subjection; and that little he accepted as an acknowledgment of his
Dominion, as the denial was a bidding Desiance to his Power. There are two
consequences of this.

1. First, That seeing its Gods own, we take great care of our behavior
toward it: Reverence my Sanctuary; Holiness becomes thy House for ever: In
our entrance put off thy Shoes (in Western phrase our Hats) for the place
whereon thou stand is holy ground. Keep thy feet when thou go into the
House of God. The Adoration by bowing, is a most reasonable acknowledgment of
that Majesty we do approach: The Greek Liturgies call it (...), to put us in
mind, that we ought to have the humility, as we have the indigencies of a
Penitent Sinner. What composedness of mind, and settled devotion, purity of
heart, and innocence of hands, ought to be preserved in that place, where God
says his Eyes and his Heart shall be perpetually? he will more easily pardon
the miscarririages of life committed amidst our secular employments, than those
Errors which profane that place, where Religion ought to be our business.

2. That we never think of alienating it from that holy use to which we have
designed it. So jealous is God in this particular, that he would not suffer the
Censors of the Rebels to be employed to common uses, but for the service of the
Temple. He asks the Question by way of Admiration, Will a man rob God?
Sacrilege is a Crime which the Heathens generally so abhorred, that in their
Histories more severe judgments are recorded to have befallen the Committers of
it, than of any other sin against the Law of Nature. The Romans, in the height
of their Conquests, always preserved due respect to sacred places; and when
they thought it convenient utterly to destroy a City, they always by certain
Ceremonies invited the Gods, under whose tuition it was, to a fair removal, and
civilly promised them more fortunate habitations. (...), a term of the greatest
infamy and reproach imaginable. Only Christians (in the Apostles words) because
they abhor Idols, think God will easily dispense with Sacrilege: Because they
have a better name, think they may securely be guilty of more horrid actions.
Whereas God was always tender of his Sovereignty; and, though by methods to us
undiscernable, seldom leaves the boldness of this sin unpunished; but first or
last, uses his own ways and times for the regaining of his right, as our own
eyes have seen. For as by the overflowing of Nilus, all particular possessions
become undistinguished, and would for ever remain confused in Mire and Dirt,
did not Geometry, after the rage of the River is assuaged, recover the ancient
bounds, and gratefully secure that property to which it ows its first Original:
So when an armed Impiety, in this our Land, as a Mighty Flood, brake down the
Banks betwixt things Sacred and Common, swallowed up Churches with their
Revenues, and laid desolate the Sanctuaries of Piety and Religion, the
Inheritance of the Lord was well nigh lost in so great an Inundation, had not
that God ((...)) the Great Geometer of the Universe, come down with his Line
and Measuring Rod in his hand, (as once he did to Ezekiel's Temple) and
measuring the height, length, and breadth of our Church, retrived every part
which it did possess, and miraculously restored it to all its old proportions.

3. Lastly, We will consider the effects of this Consecration.

1. First, as to God: I have hallowed this House to put my Name there for ever,
and mine eyes and my heart shall be there perpetually: In all places where I
record my Name, there will I come and bless thee. By which, and many other
expressions, he assures us of his more peculiar presence in places sanctified
to his Worship. I will not now discourse the presence of Angels in Christian
Assemblies; it seeming to Learned men to have Foundation in Scripture, may
piously be believed, and to be that Retinue which makes up the Court of the
Heavenly King. The Gentiles, by the Power of Magical Arts, supposed their Gods
imprisoned in their Temples, to inhabit the Images fixed there, and to be
refreshed with the smoke and sumes of Sacrifices. God may be found in Woods or
Deserts, in a Dungeon or a Prison, in the wild Fields or open Air, but in his
own House is his promised residence. Here will I dwell, for I have desired it:
Hearken thou to the Supplications of thy People Israel, when they pray toward
this place. If a man trespass against his Neighbor, and come before thine
Altar in this house; if thy People Israel be smitten down before the Enemy, --
and make supplication before thee in this house, when Heaven is shut up that
there be no Rain -- if they pray toward this place, then hear thou in Heaven;
and when thou hear, forgive.

2. The effect upon our selves will be greatly to increase Devotion, and
promote our Piety in our Addresses made in so holy a place. There are few, I
suppose, of so settled a Stoical humor, as to be influenced by no external
circumstances in Religion. The decorousness of the Building, the gravity of the
Auditory, the solemnity of the Service, and the separated Relation of the
Place, cannot but move a man, whose composition is such as on purpose to
receive impressions either of pleasure or dislike from material Objects. There
is indeed a Religion in the World, swallowed up in the Apparel which only
should adorn it, where the external Grandeur of Piety tends to Atheism; and
there is a Religion dark and slovenly, as the minds which have made it;
containing nothing to invite, but to cause to nauseate and loath the Offering
of the Lord. The former winds up to too high a pitch, the latter lets down to
too great a laxity; both which do equally spoil that (...) of the Soul, (as
Philo calls it) wherein consists the health of its Constitution; only the
Church of England, like Virtue it self, preserves its Essence, by being placed
betwixt two opposite Vices, its deadly Enemies: Here is comeliness without
aflected gaudiness, beauty without meretricious painting, gravity without a
pievish morosity: a Religion, which being most fitted to the nature of man,
cannot but be most acceptable unto God. How dreadful is this place! it is no
other but the House of God, and this is the Gate of Heaven. Here are the (...),
the Port and Residence of that King, whose blessings (not like Isaacs) never
are exhausted. Here thou need'st not wait for those milder times, when only
that Serene Jupiter of the Flattering Poet would give a favorable Audience:
But when ever thy heart is oppressed with grief, or thy condition with
necessities; when ever thy joys or thy sorrows, thy Petitions or thy praises
are become too big for a mortal breast, here thou may come and empty thy
self, Heaven will receive them. In those Acts of Religion, where we most retire
our selves out of the World, and command our thoughts from pursuance of earthly
pleasures, wherein the devout mind betakes it self to a nearer converse with
God, when the doors of thy Chamber are shut, and an awful and reverential
Darkness fills thy little Closet; when a still silence all over gives thee
leave to open thy breast, and power out thy heart to thy Father which is in
Heaven; when with the fervency of thy Devotion the fire kindles, and thy heart
burns within thee; although thou can not boast with Loyola, of being lift up
some distance from the ground, nor tell of dark Visions of darker
Interpretation; yet tell me, if thou can, thou happy Soul, what unspeakable
pleasure thou perceivest. Do thou not see Heaven opened? or rather, do not
those unspotted joys crowd in upon thee, ready to overwhelm thee? Although thy
Will be Infinite, as is truly said, does it not here find satisfaction? Is not
this the Joy which the Apostle speaks is full of Glory? Does not the Presence
of God seem to forsake its Throne in the Immense Heaven, and fill thy little
Room, as once it did the Temple? Thou now think thy self in Heaven: Thou art
much above this World, and in this temper can easily despise all its most
flattering Temptations. The Temple is truly (...), Heaven upon Earth; Josephus
Antiq. lib. 3. c. 5. and 7.
as Josephus says of Moses his Tabernacle, that it was made (...) in imitation
of the Universe; the Holy of Holies was the Heaven of Glory, the Seven Lamps
the number of the Planets, placed inclining, to represent the obliquity of the
Zodiac. In this (...), as he calls it, God was; and hither they had resort in
all their difficulties: and such an one did Constantine carry throughout his
Wars, that he might never want that Presence, upon whose Blessing all his
Successes did depend.

In the Vision which S. John saw ( Revel. 4.) there seems to be in the second
sense, a short resemblance of the Christian Church: There was a Throne set in
Heaven, the Metropolitan Seat of S. James at Jerusalem, round about the Throne
four and twenty Elders, who having Crowns on their Heads, must be the Bishops
of his Province; out of the Throne proceeded Lightnings and Thundrings, (...).
Arrian in Epict, lib. 3. c. 21.
and Voices representing the Discipline and Doctrine of the Church; the seven
Spirits are the Deacons, the number of the first Election: Before the Throne
was a Sea of Glass, like unto Crystal, representing the Baptism of the Church.
And lastly, their set form of Divine Service; they rest not day nor night,
crying, Holy, Holy, Holy, Lord God Almighty, which was, and is, and is to come.
But more particularly we will consider those three parts, of which especially
Christian Temples were composed, viz. (...).

In the little spot of ground, through which ye go into the Temple, stand and
think that more are buried there, than a whole City will contain, Behold the
rising Graves, which swell no more with the Great and Proud, than with the Poor
and most despised man: No sweeter Flowers spring from the perfumed Bodies of
Princes, than the putrified Sores of Lazarus. How tame and quiet lie those
ambitious Monarchs, and great Oppressors, whose Voice once, like Thunder, made
the Nations tremble. See the Rich Caelius his Tomb, how are all his large
Possessions shrunk only to three Else of ground. Silent now rest the disputing
Divine, and the wrangling School man: Thy near Relations, and dearest Friends,
whose Converse thou lovedst as thy Soul, if thou speak will not answer, nor
tell thee what is the other life. Here the weary are at rest; no sighs, no
groans, no mirth, no laughter: the Rich tastes no more the pleasure of his
Luxury, and Abundance; nor do the Miserable feel the pain of Poverty, and
Oppression. Here is no Ambition, no Revenge, Caesar and Pompey's Urns may stand
as close together, as of Pamphilus and Eusebius. Hither we all make haste, and
over our Graves, e're long, somebody will discourse as now we do.

These thoughts are common to all mortal men, and were the surest relief the
Philosophical Heathens had, whereby they mollified the sharpest miseries of
humane life: But the good Christian has a more certain Consolation, being
assured of a far more glorious Immortality, than they by their most serious
Disquisitions could attain: For this is not common but sacred ground, a
repository of Bodies till the last day, a Dormitory till the Resurrection,
proper to those who die in the Faith of Christ, and Communion with his Church.
And certainly unwise are they, who despising the Authority of the Church,
pertinaciously refuse to give satisfaction to that Censure which they have
deserved; and yet think to take as quick a Rise to Heaven from a Garden, or
common Field, as if they lay pressed with no such heavy burden. Is it a
pleasant Doom to be cast out of the Church, and not to have the Burial of a
Christian, whilst Saints and Martyrs lie under the Altar? The Heathens
permitted no Burial to them who had not been initiated into their Mysteries:
The Jews Circumcise the Body of him who died without it; and some Christians
(not condemned for this) Baptized others for the Dead: And in all Religions,
(...). Chorus Aristoph apud inferos. Ran. Act. 1.
none were believed happy in the World to come, who died out of the Communion
of their sacred things. It is good to be wise before the Day of Judgment; for
Excommunication being included in the Nature of all Societies, without which
they cannot subsist; God, who has Constituted the Society of his Church, will
not leave its Censures against the Rebellious without effect.

1. The Porch (or (...)) was the first part of the Temple reserved for those
various sorts of Penitents, which the degrees of Crimes, and wary admission to
the Communion of the Church, had introduced. They were here kept sub ferula,
not to advance, but through all the severities of Ecclesiastical Discipline:
Here stood the ((...)) Lamenters, who underwent the hardest burden of Penance.
These clad in the vilest habit, Sackcloth and Ashes, their faces filled with
horror and amazement, did implore the prayers of the Faithful entering into the
Church. Prostrati in medium, ante viduas, ante Presbyteros, omnium lachrymas
suadentes, omnium vestigia lambentes, omnium genua detinentes. Here you might
have seen miserable Spectacles of those sins, and that contempt of the Church,
which our days have made but the Objects of Mirth and Laughter: You might have
seen the Politic but unfortunate Ecebolius, rolling himself in the dirt,
kissing the feet of the Saints, begging them to trample him under their feet,
if so to die, might satisfy for his Apostacies. More than this, you might have
seen the Great Theodosius, Emperor of the World, with the Retinue of a Prince,
but the Humility and Importunity of a distressed Man, begging of that Resolute
Prelate of Milan admission into the Church; which he never, without
satisfaction, could obtain. The consideration of these, and the other degrees
of Penitents, (too long here to mention) may make us reflect, how hard a thing
it was, in those better times, to obtain pardon of a wilful sin by the
necessary Absolution of the Church; and by those severities, she preserved
Honor to Religion, respect to her self, and even by violence, saved the Souls
of many such, whose Salvation we have now cause to fear, unless the way to
Heaven be much broader than it was. In this part, after-Ages placed the Holy
Laver of Regeneration, wherein we were made the Sons of God, and Heirs of
Eternal Life, being by the Answer of a good Conscience enlightened, and born
again: Which Efficacy not only the Jews allowed to their Baptism, but the
Heathens also to their Initiations, that they only after death should be happy
who were so Initiated, and miserable who died without it.

2. From hence, through the great and Silver Gates, they entered into the
((...)) Body of the Church, in the very middle of which stood the (...), or
Pulpit, whence the Congregation received instructions of Salvation from the
Mouth of the Preacher. This, the Object of equal both love and hatred, is not
more despised by some, than by others held in admiration; to these a Stumbling
Block, to them it is Foolishness; both dangerously perverting its Original
Institution. Of so great and serious consequence is the well management of it
for the Churches Peace and safety of Religion, that whatsoever Crasty Ulysses
shall gain this Palladium into his possession, 'twill not be long before he
Storm the City, and with Fire and Flames destroy the most flourishing Kingdom.

From this Throne the Tetrarchs of time (as a Great Wit calls the Clergy)
command Obedience, about one quarter of the year, from the attentions of their
often too heedless Auditories. This is the Watch-Towre, whence, as from an
Egyptian Pharos, the Seers of God dispense unto the World the Everlasting
Gospel, a Lanthorn to their feet, and a Light unto their paths. Hence they cry
aloud to tell Judah his transgressions, and Israel his sins; and give warning
of those Shelves and Sands which have drowned multitudes of Souls. From this
place it was, S. Peter at one Sermon converted three thousand to the Christian
Faith; and ever since, Pious Bishops and Doctors of the Church, have daily
added all well disposed minds. Here stood Origin, in whom all the Science both
of the Ethnic and Christian Philosophy was united: The stream of his
Eloquence, as prosound as was his Learning, clear as his Speculations; no Mud
or Froth, but what was raised by his too near approach to those Rocks, against
which unwary Wit too often suffers Shipwreck. Hence Nazianzen declaimed his
Christian Philippicks; and hence Athanasius, by the Might of his Courage, and
Zeal of his Elocution, stopped the Sun, as it were, that it did not set upon the
World, delivered Orthodox Faith from a most strong Captivity, and fear of
sudden death. Here lastly stood the Great Bishop of Constantinople, the very
Top of Ecclesiastical Eloquence, who by his Pious Behavior, and Power of his
Oratory, drew the minds, and bended the hearts of his Princely Auditory: No
Vice so high, which his Rhetoric would not reach; none so strong, which his
Preaching did not make relent: And how foolish soever to prejudice and
profaneness Preaching may appear, yet managed by study and wisdom, it
oft-times breaks the hardest heart, makes the most seared Conscience feel; it
will startle the most secure sinner, and sometime or other will be remembered by
those who most deride it; a dark night, a sick bed, or an uneasy sleep, will
reconcile the man to this Heavenly Doctrine, and make him abhor the thoughts of
jollity and indiscretion.

3. Lastly, Through the Gates called Beautiful, they ascended to the ((...))
the Holy Altar, from which I have too long detained you. To this Holy Table
therefore let us go, and participate the Food of Souls: There let us offer up
not only this Oratory, but our Souls and Bodies to his most Faithful Service;
promising him never more, by any wilful sin, to profane his Temples, nor drive
away his Holy Presence.

FINIS.

