A DISCOURSE Explaining the Nature of Edification. BOTH OF Particular Persons
in Private Graces, AND OF The Church in Unity and Peace. And showing That we
must not break Unity and Public Peace, for supposed Means of better Edifying
in Private Virtues. IN A VISITATION SERMON At COVENTRY, May 7. 1684.

BY JOHN KETTLEWELL Vicar of Coles-Hill in Warwickshire.

LONDON, Printed for Robert Kettlewell at the Hand and Scepter over against St.
Dunstans Church in Fleetstreet. MDCLXXXIV.

THE PREFACE.
EDification, as applied to the whole Body, is in Scripture-Notion the Uniting
of the Church; but now by a very unhappy, though a very common Mistake, it is
made the great Pretense for Dividing it. For that wherein our Dissenting
Brethren hope to shelter themselves in forsaking us, is their Edifying more in
Separate Congregations. This is thought a Good Answer to all Laws requiring
Communion with the Parish-Churches; for no Law, they think, can hinder them
from Edifying, and saving their own Souls: and a sufficient Reason for their
rejecting of any Imposed Pastors; which they fancy are not to be appointed by
the Will of the Patron, or the Prescription of the Church, but by every Man's
own Choice, because no other is so much concerned for his Edification, as he
himself is. To remove this Cause of Separation, some Worthy See a Discourse of
Profiting by Sermons: and another Of Edification.
Persons have taken very Pious and Profitable Pains, in showing how unjust the
Charge of an Unedifying Ministry is upon our Church, and how partial they are
in ascribing more Edification to their Meetings. And if our Brethren will
peruse what they have said with impartial Minds, and see this, as they may if
they will lay aside all Prejudice, there will be no need of saying any more to
satisfy them in this Business. But if after all they will be Judges themselves
where they Edify most, and in their Judgment prefer their own Ministers: yet
still there is enough to withold them from Separation on this account,
because they are to edify and build up the Church of God as well as
themselves, and must not break the Public Unity and Peace to carry on their
own Profiting in Private Graces. And therefore, referring them to the
forementioned Discourses (whose Principal Design I think that is) to convince
them that their Assemblies are not more, and ours less Edifying: in that part
of this Sermon which concerns this Case, I have applied my self more expressly
to those who shall still be unconvinced, and think they are: and shown them,
that supposing, what indeed is otherwise, that among them Particular Men have
better Means of Edification, yet will not the search of that warrant them to
divide the Church, and betake themselves to Separation.

And as it will not justify the People in Hearing: so, which is the only thing
I shall add further, much less will it justify their Ministers in Preaching in
a Separate Meeting. For the Preachers are not less, but more obliged than the
People are, to edify the Church of God in the first place. And whatever
Necessity they may think lies upon them to Preach the Gospel, in Places where
there are no other Preachers: yet where there are, (and our Brethren will not
deny there are store of Sound, and Profitable ones among us,) the Care of
Edifying the whole Church ought surely to restrain them from breaking Unity by
Preaching, and from drawing Men off from hearing us, only in Hopes they may
Profit more by joining with themselves. The Duty, and the Desire, (as of
reaping greater Profit themselves, so) of ministering to the greater Profit of
any other Particular Christians, must stop, as this Discourse shows, in
Peaceable ways. And therefore till our Brethren can Conform, and preserve Unity
under their Preaching; they ought to be silent, as the Old Peaceable
Nonconformists were, and quietly suffer the People to be taught by others; and
not exercise their Ministry out of any Hopes of doing more Good with it to
their Particular Hearers, when thereby they must cast off the Authority of
their Lawful Superiors, and make a Rent and Division in the Church.

1 COR. XIV. 12. -- Seek that ye may excel to the edifying of the Church.
THis Rule is here laid down in the Case of Extraordinary and Miraculous Gifts,
such as Prophecy or Inspired Preaching, Tongues, Miracles, and the like, which
the Corinthians zealously coveted, to amuse Beholders, and get themselves a
Name, more than to Do Good with them to others, and Edify their Brethren. But
it is equally applicable to all Ordinary Gifts, and Natural or Acquired
Endowments, as prompt and penetrating Wit, clear Understanding, sound Judgment,
Prudence in Conduct, Fluent and Elegant Speech, and the like: for God's Design
is the same in both; he entrusts us with them, not to feed Vanity, and only
seek Praise to our selves, but to Profit and Edify our Neighbors. And as it
holds in all sorts, either of Natural, or Miraculous Gifts; so also in all
Places and Offices, which make room for the Exercise and Employment of them.
For as Edification is here made the End of all Gifts and Abilities; so is it
elsewhere of all Offices and Dignities in the Church. God gave some, Apostles:
and some, Prophets: and some, Evangelists: and some, Pastors and Teachers; for
the Perfecting of the Saints, and the Edifying of the Body of Christ, Ephesians. 4.
11, 12. So that Edification is the Great End of all those Gifts wherewith God
endows Men, and of all those Stations and Capacities whereto he calls them to
show their Gifts in. It is the main thing, which all are to seek and propose to
themselves in all opportunities, either of doing, or receiving Good. Forasmuch
as ye are zealous of Spiritual Gifts, seek that ye may excel to the edifying of
the Church.

In Discoursing upon these Words, I shall,

First, Explain the Nature of Edification, and show what Improvements it
implies.

Secondly, Press it as the Great Point whereat they are to aim, on all sorts of
Christians.

First, I shall explain the Nature of Edification, and show what Improvements
it implies. And this well deserves to be distinctly and clearly stated, both
for its own sake, because God has made it the Prime End whereto all Men's Parts
and Opportunities are to be directed; and also for the Churches, because the
lamentable Divivisions, that have so long preyed upon the Vitals of Religion,
and the Bowels of this Church, are in great part owing to Men's Mistakes about
it. For one of the Commonest, and, I think, of the most Specious Pretenses our
Dissenting Brethren give for their leaving our Parish-Churches, is that they
Edify and Profit more in their Private Meetings. If this Pretense were true,
it seems very plausible. For St. Paul directs all Men to make Edification their
Aim in these things, and it seems to argue a great Goodness, and a great
Wisdom; and so to be most commendable in any Man, to desire to be bettered by
all the Prayers he uses, and every Sermon which he hears. And whether it be
true or no, they think they are fittest to judge, and that no other Persons are
so able to tell them what Prayers and Sermons they are most benefited by, as
from their own Experience they are able to tell themselves. And therefore,
fancying it is for their greater growth in Grace and Edification, they take
heart, and think no Good Man, who knows how bad he is at best, and is careful
to grow as good as he can, will blame them for it, to break the Unity of the
Church, and join themselves to Separate Congregations. Whereas, were they truly
informed in the Scripture-Notion of Edification, they would see clearly that
there can be no Pretense of Edifying in a Schism, and that supposing in some
Respects, they could edify more, as they say, by their own Preachers, yet
would not that authorize them to make a Rent in the Church, and separate from
us.

Edification in Scripture-sense is the same as Benefiting or Profiting. A
Neighbor, as St. Paul notes, is Edified, when he is pleased to his Good, Romans
15. 2: and strange Tongues, he says, do not edify the Church, because they do
not profit it. 1 Cor. 14. 5, 6. So that by our being Edified in Religion, is
meant our Profiting and advancing in it; when we attain, either some
Particulars which before we wanted, or more Strength and Firmness in those we
have already. The Reason why this Benefiting in Religion is called Edifying, is
because both every Private Christian, and the Whole Church, is compared in
Scripture to a Building.

Sometimes Particular Christians are called the Temple of God. Know ye not,
says St. Paul, that your Body is the Temple of the Holy Ghost? which is spoken
of Particular Persons. 1 Cor. 6. 19: and again, What agreement has the Temple
of God with Idols? 2 Cor. 6. 16. The Temple of God, i. e. a believing Husband;
with Idols, i. e. with an unbelieving Wife who worships Idols, that being
plainly the Case there treated of v. 14, 15.

And at other times, which is the most general use, the Whole Church or
Community of Christians is styled so. The Church is called the Ephesians. 3. 19.
House of God, -- in the House of God, says the Apostle, Heb. 3. 6.
which is the Church. 1 Timothy 3. 15. It Is called his Temple -- Ye are the Temple
of God, 1 Pet. 2. 5.
and the Spirit of God dwells in or (...)
among you, as it did in the Temple among the Jews. 1 Cor. 3. 16: and his
Building -- Ye, i. e. the Church of Corinth, are God's Building, 1 Cor. 3. 9;
and the Church of Jews and Gentiles mentioned Ephesians. 2. 19, is called the
Building fitly framed, that grows into an holy Temple in the Lord, builded for
an Habitation of God through the Spirit. v. 20, 21, 22.

And this Application of it to both these, is well noted by Theophylact. (...).
Theoph. Comment. in Ephesians. 2. v. 21.
The Temple of God, says he, is a Title given in common, both to the Church or
Collection of all the Faithful, and to every Private Christian. And because in
Scripture Language, both the Whole Church, and Particular Christians, are thus
called God's Building; pursuant to that Metaphor, the adding and laying
together those Excellencies that are to integrate either the Whole Body or any
Good Man, or the giving Strength and Firmness to them, is called Edification.

Now in explaining this Profiting and Spiritual Edification, I shall show

1. Wherein lies the Edification of Particular Men and Private Christians; and
that is in any Growth or Improvement, either in Faith, or Manners.

2. Wherein lies the Edification of the Whole Church; and that is mainly in the
settled Peace and Union of its Members.

3. That this latter is to be preferred, and must give Laws and Limitations to
all Means of promoting the former: So that no Man must ever seek to edify in
Schism, or break the Peace of a confessedly Sound and Lawful Church, upon
pretense that he can edify more in Separate Meetings.

1. I shall show wherein lies the Edification of Particular Men and Private
Christians; and that is in any Growth or Improvement, either in Faith, or
Manners. This Benefiting of Particular Men, is one sort of Edification the
Scripture speaks of. He that prophesies, says St. Paul, speaks unto men to
edification, i. e. to the benefit of every one that hears him. 1 Cor. 14. 3.
Let no corrupt communication proceed out of your mouth, but that which is good
to the use of edifying, i. e. to improve your Brethren as you converse with
them. Ephesians. 4. 29. And let every one of us please his neighbor for his good to
edification, i. e. to profit him in Religion. Romans 15. 2. In these, and other
Places, the Edification spoken of is that of Particular Men and Private
Christians, when they are any ways furthered and assisted in those Things,
which may please God, and save their Souls.

Now Religion consisting of two Great Parts, Faith, and Obedience; the
Spiritual Profiting and Edification of every Man, must consist in his being any
ways assisted, encouraged, or improved in either of these Duties. So that then
every Person is edified, when his Life and Practice is any thing amended, or
his Knowledge of Religious Matters is more clear and perfect, or his Belief of
them more firm and settled, or his Affections for them more fervent, or his holy
Resolutions and the Religious bent of his Heart more unalterably established,
or his Conscience more freed from Doubts, or fuller of Comfort and Joy in God,
than it was before.

1. The chief Instance of any Particular Man's Edification, and that which,
indeed, is the End of all the rest, is when his Life and Practice is any thing
amended. And thus it is, when he is more Devout and resigned to God, more Just
and Charitable to all Men, more Humble, Temperate, and Mortified to this World,
or improved in any other Parts of Good Life and Conversation. When he gains
more Virtues, or gets a greater Degree of Constancy and Firmness in them,
having fewer Escapes; and standing in harder Trials, and doing his Duty with
more delight and easiness, than he was wont to do. This Amendment of Life is
one way of Edifying. For St. Paul says of Church Censures, whose End is
Reformation of Manners, that they are given for edification, 2 Cor. 13. 10; and
of vain Questions and Disputes, which make none the better Livers, that they do
not minister to godly edifying, i. e. to Edification in Godliness. 1 Timothy 1. 4.
Yea, it is the principal point, and the main thing in Edification. For the
Religion of a Good Life is that which, through the Merits and Grace of Christ,
must save us all at last, and which God will Rev. 2^. 13.
look at in the Day of Judgment. It is the very End and Accomplishment of Faith
and Knowledge, for by Works, as St. James says, Faith is made perfect. Jam. 2.
22. It is the Casting Point, and the One thing necessary in Religion; so that
when Men seek to edify in Religion, they must seek above all to be bettered
and improved in Holy Living.

And when they seek to be edified in an Holy Life, that must not only be in
some Parts and Virtues, but in the whole Compass and Extent of it. With Zeal
for God, they must join Charity to their Neighbors, yea, even to their
Enemies, and Men of most opposite Opinions. With a serious owning of Religion,
Sobriety, and Temperance, they must join a Peaceable Temper, and Submission to
their Governors. And with Obedience to the Higher Powers, and the Decency and
Heartiness of Devotions, they must join all the Duties of Morality, of a sober
and just Practice. This I note, because the World is generally prone to measure
their Edifying in Religion, by their Edifying only in some Particulars: nay,
alas! many times by their Edifying only in the Beloved Notes of a Party, whilst
they are altogether barren and unprofitable, in the Broad Lines, and Great
Instances of Morality. When a loose and debauched Man, for instance, shows
himself a Favourer of the Dissenters, and espouses their Schism; how ready are
several among them, and perhaps he himself is not the last in believing them,
to cry him up for a Saint, and a Precious Person? And again, if a licentious
wicked Liver show a Zeal for the Churches Service, and for Submission to the
King, (which are things as truly Good, as the other by mistake are supposed to
be) how apt are others to overlook all his Vices, and, as if these were not
only some, but all Virtues, to set him up for a Right Good Man. When any thing
Men count a Part of Religion is opposed, and they are put more concernedly to
espouse and contend for it; because others unworthily slight it, they fall
oft-times too much to magnify, and place all Religion in it, and judge
themselves or others to be Religious from it alone, whilst in other things they
are irreligiously Wicked. They magnify on all hands the things wherein they
oppose each others, and make them the chief Notes of Virtue, and of the
Religion of Persons. So that the Religion of a Good Life is too often drowned
in the Particular Notes and Virtues of a Party, and so long as a Man is true to
their Side, he passes for a Good Man, whether in the wide Compass of other
Duties he be true or false to Almighty God.

But these Particular and Partial Notes are not the Standard of Edification,
nor the way to measure our Improvement in Religion by. If we take any one
particular Grace and Virtue, it is but one thing, not all Religion, and so is
but one Part, not the Whole of Edification. All the Duties of Good Life are
equally Parts of Christianity, and all necessary to our Salvation: and
therefore as it is, and ought to be our Duty and Aim, to explain, and press; so
is it the Duty, and ought to be the Aim and Care of all our People, to learn
and practice, and then they must judge themselves to edify rightly, when they
profit and improve in all of them.

2. A second Instance of Particular Men's Edification, is when their Knowledge
of Religious Matters is more clear and perfect, or their Faith and Belief of
them is more firmly settled. And thus the Apostle tells us, that Prophecy or
Preaching edifies, because it instructs and convinces Men's Understandings, and
so improves Faith and Knowledge. He that prophesies, says he, speaks unto men
to edification, 1 Cor. 14. 3; he edifies those that hear him, because they are
taught, and convinced by him. v. 19. 24. Whereas, on the contrary, strange
Tongues, he says, are very unedifying, because no man understands them. v. 2. 4.

And thus again a Man is edified in Religion, when he is any ways improved in
Light and Conviction, when he more clearly and fully understands the Doctrines
and Duties of it, or is more undoubtedly persuaded of them. And this
Improvement in Belief and Knowledge, he must not measure so much by the Number,
as by the Weight and Usefulness of Particulars. It is no Edification at all, or
next to none, to load our Understandings with an heap of nice, curious, and
unprofitable things; to lose our selves in searching into Mysteries; to hunt
after Conjectures, and scan doubtful Questions, about Angels, and the State of
Separate Souls, and the Time of the Worlds ending, and Gods Secret Will and
Decrees, which are not necessary for us to know, and which perhaps no Man will
be able to decide till God determine them. These things make us no better, nor
holier. For nice Disputes, and curious Conjectures, and aerie Notions, never
strike down a Lust, or correct a Sin: they are light things that swim at top,
and float only in the Brain, but never sink down into the Heart, or reform the
Life of any Man. And since our Heart and Life is not made better by them, they
are very unedifying. For the End of all Faith and Knowledge, is to guide, and
improve Good Life and Practice; so that then we truly edify in our
Understandings, when we learn things of weight and use, that are like to affect
our Hearts, and direct, stir up, and help us on in the Course of a Godly
Conversation. And thus it is, when we are instructed in the Great Articles of
our Creed, about Almighty God, and Jesus Christ, and the Future Judgment, etc.
and fully persuaded of them: When we are enlightened in all the Points of
Practice, discerning plainly what is the Nature of all Particular Duties, and
what is implied in them, and what Means are like to help us most in attaining
of them, and what are the most powerful Motives and Encouragements to quicken
our Care and Endeavors after them. When we are clearly informed in the Nature
of Repentance, and in the Readiness of God's Spirit and Grace to help on all
our Good Endeavors, and in any other things, whereon either our Growth in
Grace, or Peace of Conscience depends, and which are either necessary Parts, or
helpful Means, or prevalent Motives to Obedience. Our Minds, I say, are best
edified, when they are stored with such useful things.

Especially, which is the only thing I will add further, if they have an
useful knowledge of them; i.e. if they know them by Plain and Clear Accounts,
and not under a Dress of obscure Phrases, and Allegorical Descriptions. For
some Christians, especially among our Separating Brethren, think they are much
edifyed in Spiritual knowledge, when they have learned to talk much about
Christ, or Grace, or the Spirit, or Faith, or Regeneration, or other most
important Points, in dark Phrases, and far-fetched, and, very often, improper
Metaphors, and affected Allegories, which are very unfit for Definitions of
things, and are not a way to improve and Clear, but Darken Knowledge. And when
men are improved only in such mysterious Speeches, which, though they may
excite some good Affection, yet, I presume, can give no clear Apprehensions to
their own minds, since they are very puzling when others, even the wisest, come
to examine them: I think they cannot give them a Claim to any extraordinary
Edification. For many fine Figures, and pretty Allegories may be used in
setting off a thing, and yet there shall not be much knowledge in them. They
amuse the mind with pleasing Ideas, and strike the fancy with lucky hints
whilst they are recited; but they give us no just Apprehension of the thing,
and upon examination, a man shall find himself little the wiser, or more able
to explain it unto others, after he has heard them.

3. A Third Instance of Particular men's Edification, is when their Affections
for Religious matters are made more Fervent, or their holy Purposes are more
unalterably fixed and established. This exercise and increase of Religious
Affection, and Godly Resolution, is another way of edifying. And so St. Paul
says of him that speaks in the Church in an unknown Tongue, that he edifies
himself, i.e. in Devout Prayers and Affections, (for such Enthusiasms were
ordinarily expressed in Prayer and Praise -- he that speaks in an unknown
tongue, speaks not unto men, but unto God. v. 2. 1 Cor. 14. 4. And profitable
communication, which ministers Grace, i.e. a Gracious bent of Heart and Good
Affection, to the Hearers, he says is good to the use of edifying. Ephesians. 4. 29.
And their comforting or (...)
exhorting themselves together to be Firm and Resolute in the Faith of Christ,
amidst all the Dangers and Persecutions which then environed it, he tells the
Thessalonians is the way to edify one another. 1 These. 5. 11.

Good Resolution is the very Strength and Vigor of the Soul, which prepares it
for Trials; putting it upon all the Pains, and enabling it to conquer all the
Difficulties in Religion. So that then we are mightily confirmed in any Graces,
when we are more resolute, and bent upon them. Especially, if this Resolution
be not a rash Act, made hastily in some Religious heat, but the Effect of
serious and due Consideration: as it is, when we foresee the Pains, and
Self-denials we are to undergo in any Duties; but yet, being fully convinced of
the perfect Reasonableness, the absolute Necessity, and the incomparable
Advantage of them, we absolutely resolve upon them notwithstanding.

And Fervor of Desire and Devout Affection, will enable us more cheerfully, and
strongly to resolve upon any Good thing. It will make us careful and intent to
please God, and ready to deny our selves for his sake, and give us not only
Ease, but Pleasure and Delight in well-doing; it being natural for Men to be
inwardly satisfied when they have what is desired, and take delight in things,
when once they have an affection for them. So that then also we are furthered
and edified in any Graces, when we are stirred up to a greater quickness in
devout Affections, and find in our selves more ardent Desires, and a higher
Passion for them. Especially, if these Affections were kindled in us, not only
by pleasing Similitudes, and pretty Sayings, or solemn Looks, or melting Tones,
or the Preacher's Passion and Vehemence; but by the Weight and awakening Force
of the Reasons and Things themselves, which touched our Hearts, either when
they came from him, or afterward when we reflect and dwell upon them in our
own Meditations. If we are put into a Religious Heat and good Affection, only
by Voice, and Vehemence, and the Show and Solemnities of Action: that, indeed,
is something if a Wise Man have the government of it, who will apply it to the
embettering of his Life, and fix and fortify his holy Resolution whilst that
Religious Heat is upon him. Tho, I confess, if he stops in the Affection, and
does not take advantage thereby to be thus resolved; he is much more pleased
than profited with it, and gains not much of Edification. But when the
Conviction of our Understandings goes along with this Agitation of our Fancies
in the affecting of our Hearts, and we are struck by considering the Greatness
of the Motives, and the Weight of the Things: then we have such an holy
Affection, as is much more strong and lasting, and more apt to edify us. When
only Voice and Vehemence begot the Affection in us, a very small time will wear
it off, as they wear out of our Fancies, which they will quickly do of
themselves, or through our Fancy's being diverted and taken up with other things.
But when the Weight of Things and Arguments affected us: those are embodied
into our Minds and Judgments, and so are like to stay with us; and also
mightily startle and convince our Consciences, and so are like to have great
power over us. These Convictions are both Potent, and Durable things, which
greatly affect us for the present, and stick by us to affect us equally when we
reflect upon them at any time afterward.

4. A Fourth Instance of Particular Men's Edification, is when their Consciences
are more freed from Doubts, and Scruples, and are fuller of Comfort and Joy in
God, than they were before. And thus the weak Brother's being confirmed in
Conscience (tho that was in a wrong case) and emboldned, St. Paul calls his
being edified. If any see thee, who have knowledge, fit at meat in the Idols
Temple; shall not the Conscience of him that is weak, i. e. scruples it, be
embolned (the word is (...).
edified, i. e. made to lay aside his Doubts and Fears by the Authority of thy
Example) and eat also? 1 Cor. 8. 10.

Vexatious Scruples and distrustful Fears, are the Pain and Sickness, the
Swoonings and Faintings of a Religious Soul. They are a heavy Burden to it,
putting it into great Uneasiness, Horror, and Disquietude: and also a great
hindrance; for by disheartning they beget a Feebleness and break its Strength,
they keep its Thoughts and Intention employed mainly upon themselves, which are
things that do not profit, and detain them from making a progress in those
which are truly good. And since Doubts and Despondencies are so truly a Disease
and Unhappiness to our Spirits, and so great a Discouragement and Stop to all
Religious Service and Improvements; it must needs be an high part of
Edification to be clearly resolved about Practical Cases, and to have Peace of
Mind upon safe Grounds, and well-satisfied Consciences. So that then our Souls
are much edified, when our Doubts are cleared, and our Consciences truly
resolved and comforted. And thus it is, when they are loaded with a just sense
of necessary things, and freed from the vexation of needless Scruples; when
they are better satisfied, either about their Duty, being resolved whether some
Doubtful Cases are either allowed of forbid by some Laws; or about the Safety
of their State, being satisfied upon good Grounds of God's Favor and
Acceptance, which will give them Peace and Joy in God, and comfortable
Expectations.

And thus we see wherein lies the Edification of Particular Men and Private
Christians, viz. in any Confirmation or Improvement, either of Faith or
Manners. So that then a Private Person may know himself to be edified, when he
gathers strength, and improves in the practice of any, or of all Virtues; when
he thrives in plain, and clear Understanding and Belief, especially of weighty
and useful Things; when he is more fervent in Godly Affections, chiefly if they
are accompanied with Convictions of Reason, and raised by powerful Arguments;
when he is more unalterably fixed in virtuous, and holy Resolutions; more
satisfied in Practical Cases, and Doubts of Conscience; or more comforted with
Joy in God, and the Hopes of Eternal Happiness.

I proceed now

2. To show wherein lies the Edification of the Whole Church, and that is
mainly in the settled Peace and Union of its Members.

Edification in the Scriptures does Principally, and most commonly refer to the
whole Church. For it, as I have noted, is most usually styled, and most
properly resembled to a Building, since it contains in it such a Number of
Particulars, which, as so many live Stones, as St. Peter says, are built into
this Spiritual House. 1. Pet. 2. 5. And this Edification of the Church or Body
of Christians, is spoken of by St. Paul in the Text -- Seek that ye may excel
to the edifying of the Church: and so again to the Ephesians -- Christ gave
Apostles and Prophets, etc. for the perfecting of the Saints, and for the
edifying of the Body of Christ. Ephesians. 4. 11, 12.

Now this edifying of the whole Church, lies mainly in the settled Peace and
Union of its Members; and the Great instrument of that is Love, which makes us
look, not altogether at our own things, but at the things of others.

1. The edification of the whole Church, I say, lies mainly in the settled
Peace and Union of its Members. The Church indeed is edified in the edification
of its particular Members, when they grow in Faith and Manners; because it is
not barely a Body of Men, but a Body of Men professing Faith and Holiness, so
that then it is perfected and improved, when they grow in these Virtues. And so
those Gifts which were most instructing, and most apt to improve Knowledge and
Good Life, as Prophecy; are said here to be more for the edification of the
Church, than other Gifts less instructing, as Tongues. But the edification
Peculiar to it as it is one Body, and a Church, is the Peace and Union of its
Members. For Peace and Unity edifies and builds up, as Separation and Division
dissolves and plucks asunder all Societies. The laying together and cementing
Wood and Stones builds up, as the dividing and scattering them abroad pulls
down a House; and so do Unity, or Division, build up, or destroy all
Communities. A House, or City divided against it self, says our Savior, shall
not stand; and every Kingdom divided against it self is brought to desolation.
Mat. 12. 25. So that the edification of the Church, which consists of such a
vast number of Members, is the keeping and establishing them in Unity and
Peace, and nothing is more opposite to edifying, than Schisms and Divisions.
St. Jude opposes Edification to Separation. These be they, who separate
themselves -- but, contrary to that, Ye Beloved, building up your selves on
your most Holy Faith, etc. intimating, that to edify or build up, they must
forbear to Separate. Jude v. 19. 20. St. Luke says the Churches were edified,
when they ceased to be Persecuted and Dispersed, and were suffered to be
settled and united. Then, says he, had the Churches rest, throughout all Judea,
Galilee, and Samaria, and were edified. Acts 9. 31. where by Edified, I think
we may well understand their being settled in Peace, and established; not only,
because their Rest is given as the reason of it, to intimate that then they
were edified when they were no longer scattered; but also because the increase
in Grace and Spiritual Comfort (the other meaning of Edification) is mentioned
besides and added to it -- were edified, and walking in the fear of the Lord,
and in the comfort of the Holy Ghost, were multiplied. v. 31. And St. Paul says
the Church edifies it self, not only when by the supply of all the Parts there
is an increase in Goodness, but when moreover it preserves Unity, and the Whole
Body is compacted by what every part supplies: So that Edification must imply
Unity and Compactness in the Body, as well as other instances of Personal and
Private Virtue. From Christ, says he, the whole Body fitly joined together, and
compacted by that which every joint supplies, makes increase of the Body unto
the edifying of it self. Ephesians. 4. 16.

Thus in the Scripture Notion does the Edification of the Church consist in the
Unity, Peace, and Compactness of its Members. And this St. Paul plainly
teaches, when he exhorts to Follow after the things which make for Peace,
because it is with them we must edify one another. Romans 14. 19. And when he
ascribes Edification to Charity, that Great Bond of Peace and Union -- it is
Charity, says he, that Edifies, 1 Cor. 8. 1. And thus Theophilact well explains
the Scripture Notion. (...). Theoph. in Ephesians. 2. v. 22.
The Building, says he, that is, all the Faithful compacted and united into one
Body: So that in his Sense the Church is then Built up, when it is compacted
and united. And again, (...). Theoph. in 1 Cor. 8. 1.
Knowledge without Charity puffs up and swells, and by that means divides from
other Members, and makes a Schism: Whereas, on the contrary, Charity edifies
(opposing Edification to Separation) i. e. maintains Union.

2. And The great instrument of this Peace and Union is Love, which makes us
look, not altogether at our own Things, but at the Things of others. If Men
seek only themselves, and will use nothing but what seems best to their own
Fancies, and works most upon their own Humors and Affections, it is not
possible there should be Peace and Unity in any Church. For there is almost as
great a diversity in Fancies and Affections, especially about lesser matters,
as there is in Faces; and it is never to be expected, that, in such cases, all
Men should like and approve of the same things, more than that all Palates
should be pleased with the same Meats and Sauces. So that whilst every Man will
please himself, and gratify his own Humor, there is not like to be any Union
and Edification of the Church. But that which works this Peace and Union, must
be Love of others. The Body increases, says St. Paul, by the supply from every
Part, to the edifying of it self in Love. Ephesians. 4. 16. And whereas Knowledge
puffs up, and cares not though we lose others; Charity, says he, edifies, i. e.
preserves Peace in the Church, and keeps together all its Members. 1 Cor. 8. 1.
-- Unde utique manifestum est, eum, qui non est in membris Christi; Christianam
salutem habere non posse. Membra vero Christi per unitatis charitatem sibi
copulantur, and per eandem capiti suo cohaerent, quod est Christus Jesus. Aug.
de Unit. Eccl. cont. Ep. Pe^il. Donat. c. 2.
The Members of Christ, says St. Austin, are coupled to each other by the
Charity of Union, it being Love which unites them; and by the same Charity they
cohere to Christ their head too. It Is Love that is the Publick-spirited Virtue,
which, as the Apostle says, seeks not her own, 1 Cor. 13. 5; and carries us to
deny our selves out of care and kindness for our Brethren. And this care of
others is the only thing, which can maintain Unity, and prevent Schism. The
Members must have the same care one of another, says St. Paul, that there be
no Schism in the Body. 1 Cor. 12. 25.

And thus also it appears wherein lies the Edification of the whole Church,
namely, in the settled Peace and Unity of all its Members. For the Church,
being a Spiritual House, is edified and built up by Unity and Peace, but
plucked down and broke to pieces by Divisions and Separations. And this Peace
and Unity is not to be had whilst we all seek to please our selves, but only by
Love, which is a self-denying Virtue, and the care of others.

And thus having explained both the Edification of particular Men in Faith and
Manners, and of the whole Church in the settled Peace and Unity of all its
Members: I proceed in the

3. And last Place, to show that this latter is to be preferred, and must give
Laws and Limitations to all means of promoting the former: So that no man must
ever seek to edify in Schism, or break the Peace of a confessedly sound and
Lawful, much less of an excellent and very edifying Church, upon Pretense that
he can edify more in separate Meetings.

The latter of these, I say, is to be preferred, and must give Laws to all
means of promoting the former, and particular Men's using any ways, or seeking
any helps to edify in particular Graces, must always be in subordination to
the Unity and Edification of the Church.

As for all the Duties of Christianity, they are bound to them absolutely, and
no care of maintaining Peace and Unity must ever draw them to forego them. So
that when any Sins are required in any Church as the Conditions of Communion,
as Adoration of the Host, Worship of Images, and Profession of false Articles
are in the Church of Rome, though thereby they break the Peace and Unity of
that particular Church, yet must every private Christian stand out, and not
comply with them. For such Peace with that particular Church upon such corrupt
terms, were nothing less than entering into a Conspiracy, both against the
Universal Church which disclaims these Corruptions, and against Jesus Christ
the Head of it, seeing it is upon Conditions expressly forbid by his Laws.

But when all these Doctrines and Duties of Christianity are left free, nay,
openly taught and pressed on all men, which in Truth is, and our Brethren
confess to be our Case: then, as for all the helps and outward opportunities of
improving them, as what Prayers they shall use, and what Sermons they shall
hear, and such like; these must give way to public ends, and be subordinate to
the Churches edification. To use the best Prayers, and hear the best Sermons,
and be under the most edifying Helps, are very desirable things indeed; and he
is very careless of his own Soul, who, when he wants them, does not seek them
if they may be had; and unthankful to Almighty God, if he does not prize and
value them when he is placed under them. But when we desire, and, in all
Peaceable ways, endeavor to have as good as we can; we must at the same time
be content to take up with such as we may have, and not separate and divide the
Church to find better. We may be sensible of the want, and of our great
unhappiness under a less edifying means in any Church, when that is truly the
Case (though, God be thanked, however our Brethren mistake it, it is not so
with us) and both wish and fairly endeavor to remove the unhappiness. But when
we are sensible of them, and wish they were removed, we must not fall into
Schism to remove them, nor break the Peace and Unity of the Church for better
means of private edification.

To evince this, I observe,

1. If a Man breaks Unity and public Peace for better means of private
Profiting, he cannot be said so much as to improve in private Edification.

If we allow all Men to reject the established means, which stand by public
Wisdom, and to choose any which they fancy better at their own Discretion; they
will not be likely to choose such as are really more edifying. I know it is
Natural for Men to think well of themselves, and that, unless they are wise,
they will be apt to fancy he undervalues them, who would beget in them an
humble Opinion of their own Judgments. But in truth the generality of Men are
unmeet, and ill Judges in these things; so that to set them free from the
public means, and bid them choose better for themselves, is not the way to put
them under such as are more profitable for them. For some would still be
changing for varieties sake, not to have a more useful, but a New Man: it being
the Property of itching Ears, as well as of wanton Appetites, to be cloyed with
the best Entertainments when they are held to them, and never to like of any
thing long. And others would think to edify more, by those which really are
less edifying. They would too often choose to themselves a Pastor, either from
his Gesture and Actions, the cadence of his Voice, his Zeal and Vehemence; or
from his abounding in affecting Phrases, and taking Similitudes; or from his
Preaching pleasing things, and insisting most on their beloved Opinions: and
for their sakes reject others, who treat of more useful and weighty matters,
and lay out the great Points of Religion in all plainness, and speak more to
Men's Consciences, whose Discourses, though less pleasing, perhaps, to some
Fancies, are yet I am sure the more profitable Sermons. The greatest number of
Hearers are observed to be very injudicious in their choice and applause of
Teachers, and to prefer those who can do them less good, before such as are
really fitted to do more. This is observed by men of the best esteem among our
It grieves my very Soul to think, what pitiful, raw, and ignorant kind of
Preaching is crowded most after in many places, for the mere affectionate
manner of expression, and loudness of the Preachers voice. How often have have I
known the ablest Preachers undervalued, and an ignorant man by Crowds
applauded, when I that have been acquainted with the Preacher abincunabulis,
have known him to be unable well to answer most Questions in the common
Catechism? Mr. Baxter Cure of Chapter Divis. p 215.
Brethren, as well as by others amongst us. And it is no wonder it should be so
observable of other Hearers, when the Apostle tell us the very same of the
Corinthians in his own case. He was qualified, sure, in all respects, as one of
the most Powerful and Edifying Teachers, and the Corinthians had known him well
enough to see it, and believe so of him. But yet, such Judges were several
among them, of edifying Preaching, as to prefer others before him, and desire
rather to be under their Ministry than his, which put him upon speaking so much
in his own Praise, as he does 2 Cor. c. 11. and c. 12. So that, if all Men were
set loose from the means appointed by public Wisdom, And again -- The worlds
experience puts it past doubt, that the generality of the Vulgar, Unlearned and
Injudicious sort of men, do value a man by his Tone and Voice, more than for
the Judgment and excellency of his matter, if not put off by such Advantage.
Id. Defense of Cure Chapter Divis. p. 108, 109. Also Hildersh. Lect. 58. on Jo. 4.
p. 270.
and were left to choose better for themselves; since the generality are such
unfit Judges in this case, they would not ordinarily choose such means, as would
more profit them.

But if they were all so wise, as to fix on proper means, and, when they reject
the established helps, choose such instead of them as really are more edifying;
yet if they break the public Peace to come at them, they cannot account
themselves to improve in private Edification. If a Man breaks Peace to improve
in Knowledge, he loses more than he gets; for in Christianity Love is better
than Learning, and a peaceable Temper in the Eyes of God of higher Price, than
a skillful Understanding. Covet earnestly the best Gifts (among which Prophecy
and Knowledge must have 1 Cor. 14. 1. 5.
Preference) and yet show I unto you a more excellent way to be coveted beyond
all of them, viz. the way of Charity, which he begins there to treat of. 1 Cor.
12. 31. If he disolves Unity and incurs Schism, to profit better in some other
Duties of a Christian; he takes a very mistaken course, since Love and Unity
are most especially recommended, and are the very chief of them. If it be
possible, and as much as lies in you, live peaceably with all men. Rom* 12. 18.
Above all things, my Brethren, put on Charity, which is the very bond of
perfectness, i. e. most perfect in it self, and that which perfects all other
Virtues. Col. 3. 14. And above all things have fervent Charity among your
selves, for Charity shall cover the multitude of sins, i. e. it shall stand you
in more stead at the Great day, than any other Duties. 1 Pet. 4. 8. And now
abides Faith, Hope, and Charity, these three, all Chief and Cardinal Graces,
but the greatest of these is Charity. 1 Cor. 13. 13. Thus are Love, and Peace,
and Unity, the very top of Christian Duties, and the most edifying things in
all private Persons; so that they are first to be secured, and must not be
parted with in hopes thereby to improve in any others.

Nay, without them we cannot edify in any others to any purpose. For if we
throw aside Charity, which seeks not her own, but has a care of other Men, v.
5. (and that care of others, as he declared c. 12. v. 25.
just before, will keep out Schism) the greatest Proficiency in Knowledge, or
other Virtues, is unprofitable and useless. We have no profit at all by
Knowledge, or other accomplishments of our Understandings. Tho I have the gift
of Prophecy, and understand all Mysteries, and have all Knowledge, and the
Tongues of Men and Angels, and Faith to remove Mountains, If after all I have
no Charity; it profits me nothing. 1 Cor. 13. 1, 2. Nay, we have no profit by
the bravest Actions, but even the best and costliest things we do, (a sad Case,
God knows) are thrown away, and will not avail to save us. Tho I am Heroically
liberal in Alms, and, leaving my self naked, bestow all my Goods to feed the
Poor; yea, tho I die for Religion, and give my Body to be burned a Martyr; yet,
if I have not Charity, it profits me nothing. v. 3. So true was that
Observation of the Primitive Christians, that wilful Schism, that consummate
Breach of Charity and Union, is the same among other Virtues, that the Dead Fly
is among the Costliest Ointments; it will mar all that any man does, and is not
to be expiated by any thing, no not by Martyrdom. Tales etiamsi occisi in
confessione nominis fuerint, macula istae nec sanguine abluitur. Inexpiabilis
and Gravis culpa Discordiae, nec Passione purgatur. -- Ardeant licet flammis
and ignibus tradite, vel objecti Bestiis animas suas ponant; non erit illa
fidei corona, sed Paena Perfidiae, etc. -- Occidi talis potest, coronari non
potest. -- Esse Martyr non potest, qui in Ecclesia non est. Cyp. de Unit.
Eccles. p. 113, 114. Ed. Ox.
Schismatics, says St. Cyprian, tho they are slain for confessing Christ, yet
is the stain of Schism so deep, their very Blood cannot wash it out. It is an
inexpiable Crime, from which a man cannot be purged, though he dies for Christ.
-- Let him give himself to fry in the Flames, or be tore in pieces by Wild
Beasts; that shall not crown his Faith with Victory, but pass only for the
Punishment of his Treachery. -- He may be slaughtered, but he shall not be
Crowned. -- For he cannot be one of Christ's Martyrs, who is not one of the
Churches Members.

Thus are Charity, Peace and Unity, the most excellent, and edifying things in
every private Christian; nay, of that necessity, that no other Gifts or Graces,
not the deepest Knowledge, nor the noblest Alms, nor Martyrdom it self, are of
any use, or able to profit us without them. So that when to edify in other
Duties, Men transgress them, they give away more than they get, and are not so
truly advanced forward as set back, and so cannot pretend to go on in Private
Edification.

But besides that they are thus really made worse as Private Christians, I
observe,

2. That if they were as much improved, as really they are hindered, yet would
it by no means be lawful for them to make a Schism, and break the Peace and
Unity of the Church to be better edified: For though it be well, that Men
should seek to edify and profit themselves in particular Virtues, and do this
with care, seeking after the best means; yet at the same time it is equally
true also, that in so doing they must secure the Peace and Edification of the
whole Church. They must not be so zealous for any means of better edifying and
profiting themselves, as for its sake to make a Rent in the Church, and create
Public Disturbance.

And this may appear from these Reasons.

1. Because it is against the Fundamental Law of all Societies, which is, That
no Man shall seek his own* Private Profit and Enrichment, by the Public Loss
and Dissettlement. And particularly, it is against the Laws Christ has made for
the Peace and Preservation of his Church, who engages his Members to forego
their own Private Profit for the Public Peace and Benefit, more than any
others.

2. This breaking Unity to redress and supply less edifying Means in the
Church, is like Sedition in the State for Redress of Civil Defects and
Grievances, and subject to a like Condemnation.

3. It Is against the End even of the best Helps and Means of Edification, which
is to establish Peace and keep out Schism, and so are utterly perverted when
they are made the Ground of Separation.

4. When the Corinthians broke the Unity of the Church on this Ground, the
Apostle charged the great Sin of Schism upon them.

5. If this Pretense would acquit from Schism, there can be no such thing as
Unity in the Church, nor any stop to Separation.

1. I say, thus to break Unity and Public Peace, only that we may have better
means to edify and profit our selves in private virtues, is against the
Fundamental Law of all Societies, which is, That no Man shall seek his own
private profit and enrichment, by the public loss and dissettlement.

The Public Interest in all reason deserves to be more regarded, than any Man's
Private Benefit. For it is infinitely of greater weight, and contains more in
it: So that if any private profiting may claim to be pursued, the public much
more, wherein every single Man's share weighs as much as that, and has the vast
number of all the rest added to it. And the subsistence of all society and good
order requires it should be so preferred, since otherwise it would evermore be
some Man's turn, for his own particular profits sake, to break it. And when any
Men embody, and combine in Societies, by so doing they all virtually engage,
and profess to do it. And in all Communities he really is, and is generally
held an ill Man, who does otherwise. He is a bad Member in a Family, that will
please himself in some unmeet or unseasonable delight, to the disturbance of
the whole Household. And he is an ill Man in any Neighborhood, and a bad
Subject in any Country, who will seek his own private gain and emolument, tho
it be at the general loss, and when the Public suffers by it. It is ill in any
Member, for some private end, to bring any Detriment to the Public; but
especially to make Seditions, and break the Peace and Unity, which is the
Ligament by which it stands, for that is the Civil Death and Dissolution of it.

But as this is against the Fundamental Law of all Communities; so particularly
against the Laws Christ has made for the Peace and Preservation of his Church,
who obliges his Members to forgo their own Private Profit for Public Peace
and Benefit, more than any others. He puts us in mind, that we stand in his
Church, not as independent individuals, who have only our own gain to look to,
but as Parts and Members. -- God has made us the Body of Christ, says St. Paul,
and Members in particular, 1 Cor. 12. 27. And being Fellow Members, he would
have that beget in us a general care of all that are the same Body with us,
making us sensible, not only of our own, but of others wants, and ready to
deny our selves, or forgo our own pleasure or profit, for their advantage. If
one Member suffer, all the Members suffer with it; or if one be honored, says
he, all the rest rejoice with it, v. 26. And the Members should have the same
care one of another, v. 25. and let no Man seek his own, but every Man another
wealth, 1 Cor. 10. 24. And this looking beyond our selves, and having a mutual
care of others, will keep us from all Schisms, and dividing the Church for our
particular satisfaction or advantage. When the Members have the same care one
of another, there will be no Schism in the Body, v. 25. Among all the Duties he
has enjoined, he lays greatest weight, as I have observed, on those which make
for Love and Peace, so that they must be secured in the first place: they are
set as the Ruling Virtues, which must give Laws; which utterly excludes all
Plea of breaking them, upon pretense of Greater Profiting in any others: In
Religious Matters, says the Apostle, let us follow after the things which make
for Peace, and things whereby one may edify another. Romans 14. 19. Above all
things, says he again, put on Charity, which is the Bond of Perfectness: i. e.
which by binding us together perfects us, for all other Graces are imperfect,
as I before noted, without Unity and Peace, and it must be added to them to
gain acceptance. Col. 3. 14. And let the Peace of God rule in your Hearts,
whereto you are also called in one Body: i. e. of all others Peace must give
Laws, and be the Ruling Virtue, because it secures that which is the greatest
Profit, and most to be aimed at in all Societies, viz. Unity. v. 15.

Thus are Men in all Societies, and the Members of Christ's Church more than
any, obliged to be most tender of Public Benefit and Peace, and to deny
themselves in any Private Interests and Advantages, rather than in pursuit of
them, to break Unity and work Public Disturbance. When they are Members of
Public Bodies they must have Public Spirits, and not seek their own Benefit
against the Benefit of the Community. So that if any man seeks only to please
himself, and to carry on his own Profit and Satisfaction, he can only be Good
then, when there is none in the World besides himself, and he lives alone, but
is an ill man, and an awkward mis-form'd Member in all Society and Communion.

2. This breaking Unity to redress and supply less edifying Means in the
Church, is like Sedition in the State for redress of Civil Defects and
Grievances, and subject to a like Condemnation.

What Sedition is in the Civil State, that Schism is in the Church of Christ.
It breaks one Society into many Pieces, and makes them no longer one Body, but
so many several Bodies as there are disjoynted Parties. And therefore
Church-Schisms are called Seditions, both by St. Paul -- the Works of the Flesh
are Heresies, Seditions, i. e. Heresies and Schisms, Gal. 5. 20: and by St.
Clement ordinarily, and other Apostolical Writers.

And when this is made in any Church for Means of better Edification, because
the established Helps happen to have some Defects, and are not so fitted to our
Profit as we would have them: it is such another way of Redress, as when a
Sedition is made in a State, to remedy the Defects and Grievances of any
Kingdom. In both which, as the Remedy is most sinful, being such an high and
open Breach of Peace, which God has made the most sacred of all Duties: so is
it withal most foolish, and a way of Cure incomparably worse than the Disease.
For surely the tearing Things to pieces, is the worst way of mending Faults;
and Sedition, and the utter loss of Peace, are among the worst of Grievances
that can befall any Communities.

3. It Is against the End even of the best Helps and Means of Edification, which
is to establish Peace, and keep out Schism; and so are utterly perverted when
they are made the Ground of Separation.

As for Private Graces and Improvements themselves, the Exercise even of them
is oft-times subject to this End, and they are always best and most perfect,
when they are so used, as that we may not only profit our selves with them, but
edify the Church too. Love and Peace are the Ruling Virtues, as I have showed,
which must guide the rest, and the Great End whereto all others must be made
subservient. This Rule St. Paul gives the Corinthians for the management of
themselves in other Duties -- Let all your things be done with Charity; so that
even other Duties are in danger of losing their Grace, when they are exercised
uncharitably. 1 Cor. 16. 14. And the Exercise of Devotion, even in inspired
Prayers and Hymns when Men were acted by them, he tells them must be with
deference to Peace and Public Edification. Every one, says he, has a Psalm,
but let all things be done to edifying. 1 Cor. 14. 26.

But as for all the outward Means and Helps of Edifying in these Private
Graces, they are more absolutely subservient to Peace, and must be so used for
profiting Private Men, as that they be sure at the same time to edify the
whole Church, and maintain Union.

These Means of Edification, are either those Public Officers God has
appointed in his Church, or those Gifts he bestows upon them for the
Edification of Believers. And tho it be a great Design of both these, to edify
particular Persons in Faith, and Practice; yet is it an higher End to edify
the whole Church in Peace and Unity, and keep out Schisms.

1. This Edification of the whole Church, and preserving Peace and Unity, is
the main End of Gifts. Thus we are told of Knowledge, which St. Paul rejects
when it is used only to build up and please our selves, and is not governed by
Charity that edifies others. 1 Cor. 8. 1. And thus also of Prophecy or
Preaching, that great Means of Edifying Believers. For tho it was then an
extraordinary and inspired Gift, yet was it to be limited by Public Ends, and
the Spirit of Prophecy to be stinted and suppressed, when it came unseasonably
upon them in the Church, and, by moving several to speak at the same time, bred
confusion and Public disturbance. The Spirits of the Prophets are subject to
the Prophets, i. e. to govern them in subserviency to the Churches Peace: For
God is not the Author of Confusion, i. e. he bestows no Gifts to serve that
end, but of Peace, as in all Churches of the Saints. 1 Cor. 14. 32, 33. And to
name no more in this case, St. Paul, as I have showed, makes Charity, that
uniting Virtue, and sure obstacle of all Schisms, the most 1 Cor. 12. 3^.
excellent of all Gifts. So that when the gifted Men themselves are zealous to
exercise their Gifts, or others are zealous to be under them; they must both
have a higher zeal to show their Charity, and maintain it in the first place.
Follow after Charity, says he again, and desire Spiritual Gifts: So that in all
exercise and pursuit of them, they must not fail to follow Love, and take it
along with them. 1 Cor. 14. 1.

2. It is also the great end of those Officers, whom God has appointed and
empowered, and whom he has endowed with these Gifts for the edification of his
Church; such as Apostles, Prophets, Evangelists, Pastors and Teachers. For they
are given, says St. Paul, for the perfecting of the Saints, and the edifying of
the Body of Christ. Ephesians. 4. 11, 12. They are given for the perfecting of the
Saints, i. e. for the edifying particular Christians in Faith and Practice: but
yet so as to be given also for the edifying of the Body of Christ, till we come
in the Unity of the Faith to a perfect Man. So that when these Officers seek to
edify particular Believers, they must be sure at the same time to secure
another end, i. e. the edification of the Body, and Unity of the Church. They
are given as Members, which shows evidently they must make up but one Body, and
keep Unity with the other parts: Nay, they are given as joints, which are the
very Ligaments of Union and Compactness.

These Officers are given as Members of the Church, and that shows they must
make up one Body, and keep Unity with the other parts. For the Unity of the
Body is to be the care of all the Members, especially of those which excel in
Gifts, or are highest in Dignity and Office. Thus it is, as the Apostle
observes, 1 Cor. 12. in the Natural Body. It has several Members very different
in endowments, and destined, some to more, some to less honorable Offices. But
because of this difference, the more able and honorable Members do not set up
for themselves, and seek a Separate Profit or applause, or make a Schism, and
divide from others. Tho there be many Members, says he, they all make up but
one Body. v. 20. And the Eye, tho a more Honorable Member, cannot separate
Interests, or say to the Hand (tho less Honorable) I have no need of thee: nor
again the Head to the Feet, I have no need of you. v. 21. And none seek only
themselves, which would cause Divisions; but they have all the same care one
for another, if one suffer, all the rest suffering; or if one be honored, all
the rest rejoyceing with it; that there be no Schism in the Body. v. 25, 26.
And like to this in Natural Bodies, is the difference of Officers in the
Church. Tho that have variety of Gifts, as Wisdom, Knowledge, Prophecy, Faith,
Miracles, etc. v. 8, 9, 10. And variety of Officers and Ministers, some gifted
more, some less; some higher, some lower in Authority than others: for there
are differences of Administrations, v. 5; God having set first Apostles,
secondarily Prophets, thirdly Teachers, after that Miracles, and Gifts of
Healing, i. e. Persons endowed with them, Helps (i. e. some distributing
Charity, as Deacons, or attending on Impotent and Orphans) Governments as
Bishops and Presbyters, Diversities of Tongues. v. 28. Tho, I say, in the
Church there be this difference, both of Gifts and Ministries; yet must not
those differently Gifted or Authorized Officers draw different ways, and form
divided Parties, but all aim at the Unity of the whole Body as its Natural
Members. As all the Members in the Body Natural are one Body; so also is
Christ, the different Ministeries and Members making but one Body in him
likewise. v. 12: And the several Ministeries, as Apostles, Prophets, etc. are
all the Body of Christ, says he, and Members in particular, which therefore
must cement together, and not fall off and divide from each other. v. 27, 28.
And, as we have many Members in one Body Natural, and yet all these Members,
though the Body be but one, have not one and the same Office, more than these
Members of the Church: So we being many Members and Officers (the variety
whereof is described, v. 6, 7, 8.) are still to be but one Body in Christ, and
every one Members one of another (the difference in Offices giving no more
liberty to divide the Church, than the same difference in the Natural Members
does to divide the Natural Body) Romans 12. 4, 5.

Nay these Officers are not set only as Members, which, as we have seen, is
enough to prevent Schism; but they are set in the Church as joints, which are
to compact all the other parts, and are the very Bonds and Ligaments of Union.
The whole Body, says St. Paul, fitly joined together, and compacted by that
which every joint supplies. Ephesians. 4. 16. Every joint, i. e. Every Officer and
Church-governour; for in them the other Members are joynted and united to one
another. And since they are joints, they must fasten and unite all the other
parts together, not tear them from each other; what they supply, says the
Apostle, must compact the Body, and therefore must in no wise divide it, and of
one make many. So that as for the extraordinary Abilities, and edifying power
of some Pastors and Teachers, it must never occasion or head Schisms and
Divisions. But must be so applied by them, and so sought to by others; that
whilst it labors to build up Faith and Good Life in particular Persons, at the
same time it build up Unity in the Church and Body of Christ. When an increase
is endeavored, by the effectual working in every part; that must be in such
measure, as the Apostle says again, as secures the whole Body, and consists
with Public Peace and settlement. The effectual working in the measure of
every part, makes increase of the Body to the edifying it self in Love. Ephesians. 4.
16.

4. When the Corinthians broke the Unity of the Church on this pretense of
greater profiting, the Apostle charges the great sin of Schism upon them.

Under their Divisions they had this to plead, that the common means were
unedifying, and that the Public Assemblies were not so ordered, as that they
might receive the greatest profit by them. When they came together, every one
had a new inspired Psalm, or a Doctrine, or a Revelation, or an Interpretation;
the uttering whereof all at once bred nothing but confusion, and was not, as he
says, a doing things unto edifying. 1 Cor. 14. 26. They were generally so
forward to show their Gifts of Tongues, that every one in the Assembly that
could, was for uttering a Prayer, or Revelation, or an Exposition in a strange
Language. And this made their understanding Unfruitful unto others, v. 14. So
that the unlearned, not understanding what was said, could not say Amen at
their giving of thanks, v. 16; that the Speaker only edified himself, v. 4; but
that the Congregation was not edified. v. 17.

Nay, there was then, not only much unedifyingness in their Public Assemblies,
but they divided on this pretense, to associate themselves with more edifying
Teachers. They were Zealous, as my Text says, of Spiritual Gifts, and mighty
admirers of Gifted Men, but very prone to slight others, who were inferior to
them. They were all for setting up the most powerful and edifying Pastors --
they gloried in Men. 1 Cor. 3. 21. They would flock to those they most admired,
where they thought to edify most, and become their followers, but separate
from others -- they were puffed up for one against another. 1 Cor. 4. 6. Yea,
for the sake of their admired Teachers, they would disparage even St. Paul
himself, alleging that he was rude in speech, i. e. made less elegant, clear,
and Edifying Sermons; and less gifted, than some other more followed Ministers,
2 Cor. 11. 4. 6: which put him upon speaking so much in his own defense and
commendation, as he does, 2 Cor. c. 11. and c. 12. For so he excuses all that
glorying, and setting forth his own Praises -- I am become a fool in glorying,
but by such unjust preferring them above me, ye have compelled me. 2 Cor. 12.
11. But when they broke the Unity of the Church, and burst thus into Strife and
Division to set up the most Powerful Gifted Men, and seek better means of
edifying: he tells them they are guilty of the great sin of Schism. Whereas
there are among you these Divisions, tho sheltered under these pretenses, ye
are Carnal, and walk as Men. 1 Cor. 3. 3.

5. And lastly, If this Pretense of Edifying better by the Rent they make, be a
good and warrantable Reason for it, there can be no such thing as Unity in the
Church, nor any stop to Separations. For this Pretense will serve almost all
men, and that almost at all times, to break loose, so that no fast hold can be
taken of them in any Church. If the Rule be, to break off from others, and
still to unite with that Teacher by whom he edifies most: the next Question is,
Who shall judge who that is; and that must be every man for himself, for every
man seems best able to tell his own Gains by what he finds, and one is not a
fit Judge of another Profit. And when every man must seek a Teacher whom he
fancies most, tho in opposition to such as the Law has appointed; since men's
Fancies are infinitely various in this Point, how can there be any Bond of
Union in any Neighborhood? For one is most pleased with melting Tones, and
Voice, and Vehemence; another with pretty Sayings, choice Similitudes, and
affected Allegories, thinking there lies much Spirituality in affecting
Phrases; a third thinks Figures and Phrases only amuse the Fancy, but darken
Knowledge, and is for hearing Weighty and Useful things delivered in
Intelligible and Plain Discourses. In Sermons, some seek witty Conceits, and
Resemblances; others, ostentation of Learning in citation of Authors, and Greek
and Latin Sentences: Some again think lightly of both these, and seek more to
be informed in Deep and Mysterious Points, or to be fed with Discoveries of new
Notions; others, to hear a clear State of hard Cases; a third prefers the most
pathetical, moving Preachers; a fourth is for the subtilest Disputants, who
show most Dexterity and Skill in Controversies. Thus various are Men's Judgments
in these things. And therefore, if every Man be at liberty to choose that
Preacher, by whom he edifies most in what he fancies best, there is not like to
be any settled Union in Parishes or Churches. Nay, the same Man will not be at
unity with himself at different times. For Men's Humors, and Opinions of these
Matters daily alter; and when they change, by this Rule they must also change
their Teachers; and so are never like to be true and constant, even to their
own admired Congregations. If Men then are free to leave the Established
Ministry, and adhere to any whom they think they can hear more profitably; it is
plain the Church can be no such thing, as the Scripture every where Ephesians. 4. 4.
Col. 3. 15.
declares it is, viz. One Body.

And thus upon all these Accounts it appears, that the Edification and Unity of
the Church must be preferred, and sought in the first place, and limit us in
seeking out the best Means and Helps of Edifying in Particular Virtues. So that
we must never seek to supply supposed Defects, and get better Means of Private
Edifying by a Schism. We may labor after them as we can in all Peaceable ways;
but must in no wise for their sakes break the Unity of the Church, and make
Divisions. For this, as I have shown, is against the Fundamental Law of all
Communities, which forbids Men to seek their own Private Profit at the Public
Loss; it is against the Fundamental Laws of Christ's Church, who ingages all his
Members to deny themselves, and forego their Private Profit for Public Peace,
and to be careful of it before all other Duties; it is like raising Sedition in
the Civil State for Redress of Grievances, which is a most Foolish, as well as
Sinful Course; it is an utter perverting of the true End of all Helps and Means
of Edifying, whose main Design is to maintain Peace and prevent Schisms; it
makes Separation endless, and renders it impossible that there should be any
such thing as Unity in the Church; and when Men have divided the Church on this
Pretense, they have been charged with the great Sin of Schism in the
Scriptures. So that in seeking the best Means of Private Edification, every
Good Man must stop in Peaceable Ways, which are the only Ways that are
Innocent; yea, and the Ways that are best too, all things considered, and the
Benefit of Peace being cast into the Scales, tho some others should happen to
be better when considered abstractly in themselves. And therefore no
Conscientious or Wise Man, must ever attempt to procure a Means more edifying
to himself by Separation.

From this it may plainly appear, how unwarrantably our Dissenting Brethren act
in Separating from us, whom they confess to be a sound and lawful Church, upon
pretense that they can edify more in Separate Meetings. To satisfy them
wherein, it may be very fit to consider,

1. Whether that is indeed true, which is supposed by them, viz. That their
Preaching is in it self fitter than ours is for edification. It is an invidious
thing to make Comparisons, especially when they are to commend our selves: but
we may very innocently, and inoffensively admonish them, to examine this Point
well before they pronounce thus of it: Do they come to hear us, before they
complain of the unedifyingness of our Sermons? And if they come at all, is it
only now and then by fits, or often, if not constantly, for so long at least,
till they have heard all the Parts, and so can comprehend the whole Design, and
bear away the Connection of our Discourses? And when they are at Church, do they
give diligent heed, and attend to what we say? And in attending, do they hear
us without prejudice against our Persons, and a design to find faults, and pick
up something to complain of? Yea, what is more, do they hear us, as I presume
they do their own Teachers, with Reverence and composed Thoughts, which greatly
prepare the Mind to profit and edify by any Discourses, and which, tho
sometimes perhaps undeserved by the Preachers skill and eloquence, are yet
always most due to the Religion and Solemnity of the Service, and are Tempers
that all Men ought to put on, whilst others are speaking to them in Gods Name,
and delivering his Message? And after they have heard, do they give themselves
the trouble to make what they heard their own, and apt to stick by them and
affect them, by meditating upon it, and applying it to themselves, and so
bringing it close to their own Consciences? Without this Honesty and
Impartiality, and Godly care in hearing, they would not be edified if the Holy
Ghost himself were to preach to them; and when Christ himself was upon Earth,
his Sermons were unprofitable, and did not edify the generality of his
Hearers, for the want of them: and if they are in the same fault in hearing us,
no wonder they are little edified by our Preaching. And after all this, when
they pass Sentence, by what Rule do they try the profitableness of our
Discourses? Do they judge a Sermon edifying, only as it speaks according to
their Opinion; or insists most on some things, and delivers them in such forms
of speech as most please them; or is full only of the glorious Privileges of
the Saints (which, though fit to be treated of sometimes, must not ingross all
our Discourses, or be more insisted on than those Duties which are to secure
them to us,) and gives comfortable intimations that they are all theirs, which
may feast their Fancies with the delightful Thoughts, of their being more
precious and dear to God than others? Do they judge it to be edifying, I say,
only from such things as these; or as it answers the foregoing Description of
Edification? Do they hear Discourses of weightier matters, or more plain and
intelligible Accounts, less darkened with Phrases and Metaphors, or stronger
Reasons for any Doctrines, or clearer Explications of any Duties, or more
perspicuous and careful states of any Cases, or wiser Directions for any Points
of Practice, or more forcible Motives to engage to the use of them, or more
satisfactory Solutions of any important Questions and Doubts of Conscience in
the Separate Meetings, than they might hear in the Parish Churches? If they try
the Point by these Measures, it is like they will not be so forward to pronounce
against us, nor talk so much of the edification of their own Preachers, and the
want of it in ours.

2. If, as they suppose, their Sermons were fitter than ours are for
edification, yet are not they sure to edify more by them. For we are but the
Means and Instruments, but the Effect of all proceeds from Gods Blessing. We
are only Ministers, says St. Paul, by whom you believed. I have planted, and
Apollos watered, but God gave the increase, 1 Cor. 3. 5, 6. And we are most
sure of Gods Blessing, when we keep in Gods own way, and wait upon him in those
Means which he has allotted us. For God is wont to bless most his own
Appointments; and that not only when they best answer the end of their
Institution, and are most useful and edifying; but even when they are
degenerated, and edify less; and accordingly our Savior referred Men to them,
when that was really the Case. The Scribes and Pharisees in his time, were far
from the most edifying Teachers; being both wicked and ignorant, two most
unedifying Qualities. They were Blind Guides, Mat. 23. 16; and bad Livers,
being full of Vain Glory, Rapine, and Hypocrisy, etc. v. 5, 6, 14. But yet
unedifying as they were, since they sat in Moses Seat, he refers the Jews to
their Ministry, to expect the Blessing of God in their due attendance upon it.
v. 2, 3. The Priests in those Days, by the Scripture-accounts of them, were far
from the Holiest Men; so that if the Holiness of him that brings it be any
recommendation of the Gift, they were not in themselves the fittest to present
an Offering. But yet, because they were the Means of Gods appointing, when the
Leper was cleansed, and was to return God an Oblation, Christ orders him to
carry it to the Priest, because through his Hands God would accept it of him. Mat.
8. 4. Thus is Gods Blessing, which is the great cause of our profiting, to be
looked for in Gods own ways, and in attendance upon the means which he has
allotted us; and we have not a like reason to expect it when we reject them,
especially if we run into a plain Breach of that Unity and Good Order he has
established in his Church, in pursuit of others. And when Gods Blessing goes
along with them, we shall edify more by weaker means; so that a more edifying
Sermon in an unedifying way, such as Schism is, is not so like to profit us. But

3. If they could edify more by them, yet is it in no wise lawful thus to
break the Unity and Peace of the Church for better Edification. There is no
breaking Public Peace, as we have seen, for better means of Private Profiting:
so that no Man must ever seek to edify in Schism, or to grow in Grace by
joining in Separation.

And thus I have explained the Nature of Edification, and shown what
Improvements it implies; viz. Any increase in Private Virtues, or in Public
Settlement and Peace. So that then any Man edifies in Religion, when he is
bettered in any Point of Faith or Manners, or made more complying with innocent
Public Constitutions, and a more peaceable Member of the Church.

And having thus shown what it implies, I am now

2. To press it as the Great Point whereat they are to aim, on all sorts of
Christians.

And here had I time, I should urge all Christians to lay out themselves in
improving useful Knowledge, and obedient Practice, and peaceable Inclinations;
to stir up and cherish in themselves devout Affections, and daily renew and
strengthen Holy Purposes, and express in the whole course of their Lives the
power of Godliness, in all due submission to their Governors, and tender care
of the Churches Peace, as well as in all Duty toward God, and exercise of
Private Virtues. For this is truly to grow in Grace, and be edified Believers.

I would entreat you, my Reverend Brethren, in the Name of Christ, whose
Ministers we are, not only to be exemplary and shining Lights in edifying thus
your selves; but also to be wise and unwearied in your Labors, in carrying on
this Edification among all others you can any ways work upon, especially those
committed to your Charge. That you would instruct the ignorant with all
assiduitie and plainness; convince the erroneous, with all gentleness and calm
arguings, yea with all Patience and Perseverance, remembering that it is an hard
matter, and a work of time, for a Man to cast off old and rivited Opinions, and
that any one is troubled enough in being showed his error, without hearing of
it in Anger and Invective Speeches; and labor to win all Men over to an
universal Holiness with your utmosh skill and diligence. That you would study
to be plain, and useful in all your Sermons: Prudently bold, and impartial in
Reproofs; warning Men against all, even their beloved Vices, with such freedom,
as may keep their Consciences awake, and yet with such show of tenderness and
prudent timing of Reproof, as may not tempt them to fly out from us:
endeavoring to reclaim them from Schism, which is most mischievous to the
Church, and which nothing can excuse before God but an honest Ignorance, and
the pitiableness of unmasterable Prepossessions; and from all Profaneness and
Immoralities, which, without particular Repentance and Amendment, are most
surely mischievous to their own Souls, which have no Plea of Pardonable
Ignorance and Involuntariness, and for which there is no Excuse at all. In all
which, by the Love of Christ I would beseech you, to show all Wisdom, and
Diligence, and Patience, and unwearied Perseverence, and compassionate
Tenderness and Love for Souls.

I would in all Christian Love beseech our Dissenting Brethren, and be instant
with them, since it so nearly concerns both the Church and them, that they
would seek no longer to build up only themselves; but to edify the Church of
Christ, which they certainly pull down by their Separation.

In very deed they may have great Means of Private Edification in our Church,
and need not seek for better in any other Place. They will edify sufficiently
by our Sermons, as I have noted, if they bring along with them prepared Minds;
and and without them the Jews could not edify by the Sermons of Christ and his
Apostles. And if they cannot edify by the Churches Prayers too, the Fault, I
am sure, is not in the Prayers, but in themselves. For consider, Brethren, the
Prayers we use are not to give Affections to us, but to express those we have;
so that when we come to Pray, we must bring them along with us. And if we come
with an awful sense of God in our Minds, with serious and good Purposes, and
devout Affections; we need no better Helps to express them, than the Churches
Service. For therein are sound, suitable, and well-composed Prayers, which
extend to all Necessities, begging all needful Graces, and praying particularly
both against Sins and Calamities, and requesting outward Blessings, and giving
Thanks for Receipt of Mercies, and interceding for all States and Conditions of
Persons, and suited to the Great Periods and States of Life. In all which they
pitch upon the most pertinent, and proper things; and express them in Grave,
Plain, and Significant Language; and are intermixed with Responses to fix
Attention, and call back wandering Thoughts; and are parcell'd into Collects to
give Breath, and not weary us out with an uninterrupted continuance of intense
Affections. So that if we bring with us a Heart to desire these things, here we
have Prayers to suggest, and express our Desires of them; yea, such, as whilst
they do express, are greatly fitted to increase them. Thus fit are they to
edify in themselves, and this great Numbers of truly Pious and Devout Souls
have found, and from their own Experience can testify concerning them. And
now, if any shall still charge such excellent Prayers as unedifying; where lies
the blame? whether in the Deadness of the Prayers, or the Indevotion and
Unpreparedness of their own Hearts? If a Man thinks the most wholesome and
substantial Food distasteful or insipid, it is a sign he has a depraved
Appetite. And if he feels no Devotion in the use of such Pious, Wise, and
Profitable Forms, it is a sign his Soul is sick, and that his Spiritual Sense
has lost its Taste, since the most agreeable Food is no better rellish'd by it.
He is Indevout, not because the Prayers do not suggest Devout things, nor
cloth them in Proper and Devout Expressions; but because he does not hold his
Mind attent, or has not prepared his Heart to be affected with them. So that if
these our Brethren will take the Godly Care and Pains to mend this Fault which
is in themselves, and come with Reverent and Prepared Minds; they will not, I
believe, complain any longer of Deadness and want of Edification in the
Churches Prayers, which are not only Good, but, as those who use them without
prejudice, and with Devotion in their Hearts can testify, very excellent for
that purpose.

But tho they could not so well edify themselves in them; yet, by the Love of
Christ I would beseech them, to seek no longer to build up only themselves; but
to edify the Church of Christ, which they pull down by their Separation. Make
Conscience of Peace and Unity, Brethren, and think them as Necessary things, as
any others in Religion. Remember it is one of the necessary Properties of
Charity to have such care of others as keeps out Schism; and that without this
Charity there is no Benefit in any Services, no not in Martyrdom: and how then
can you account to your selves the throwing that away, for any other thing?
Esteem your selves as Members of the Body, and consider that the Body is built
up by Unity. This Christ has founded upon himself, and the Apostles, those
Master Builders, have edified, by compacting it into one: and how then will you
look either upon him or them, who pluck asunder what they put together, and
pull it down by Division? The Design of God in all the most Powerful Gifted
Ministers, is to build up the Body, and keep out Schism: and what account will
you give to him for crossing that Design, in making these not only the Heads of
Parties, but the Pretense of Separation? If you had lived in Corinth, when Men
separated, as you do here, to follow more Gifted Guides, would not you have
returned again to the Unity of the Church upon the Apostle's Admonition? And
why then should you not do the same now, upon this Intimation, that his Reproof
reaches you, as much as it did them? The Way of Separation, my Brethren, is a
most unedifying Course; for Unity builds up, but Schism destroys the Church,
and all Societies. So that if you would edify the Church, which is Christ's
Spouse; if you will be at any pains to build it up, as he was at the pains to
die for it; it must be in the way of Peace, and by submitting to any thing,
which you think may be done with a safe Conscience (as this Plea it self shows
you do think in our Case, it being against our Way only because, as you say,
less Edifying, not because of any Unlawfulness) rather than upon account
thereof to divide, and form separate Parties.

I would exhort you the Churchwardens to be careful of edifying, not only as
Private Christians, but also in the faithful discharge of your Oaths,
(considering that Perjury has in it a most horrible Guilt) and in the Duties of
your Places. That when you endeavor to suppress Vices, you would be impartial,
and entire in such endeavors; considering, that all Notorious Swearing,
Drunkenness, and Immoralities, as well as staying away from Church; and that
all staying away out of Irreligion and Carelessness, as well as out of Scruples
and pretense of Conscience, is equally a matter of your Oath, and a Point
wherein you may do God, and the Souls of Men Service. The Churchwardens swear,
indeed, to discharge this only according to the best of their Knowledge; but
then they must use a competent endeavor to know it, and this is no warranty at
all to affect Ignorance; and much less to pass over what they do know, in
negligence, or connivance. And many, it may be of those that fail, would
discharge it so far as they know, were it not that they are afraid to anger,
and displease their Neighbors. But it is most unreasonable any Man should be
angered with them for performing their Oaths, and discharging a Good
Conscience. Can any Man, if he has left the Conscience, have left the Modesty
withal so far, as to desire them to forswear themselves, and destroy their own
Souls to do him a kindness? Or will any Man that is Conscientious, and stays
from Church out of Conscience, take it ill that they should be tender of their
Consciences as well as he is of his, and dread the horrid Sin of Perjury, the
greatest wound to a Good Conscience? They have no liberty of Connivance, being
bound up by Oaths; so that if any favor and indulgence be expected, it must
not be from them, but at higher Hands. And therefore no Man, in any Reason or
Modesty, can be angered at them for acting faithfully according to their Oaths.
But if any be; that Anger at Men for performing Oaths and a Good Conscience, is
nothing less than frighting them from their Duty, and laying Stumbling Blocks
before others, and putting the Burden of the Cross on Good Men's Shoulders for
good Actions, which has so many Woes denounced to it in the Scriptures. And as
for the Churchwardens themselves, when they incur any Displeasure or Malice of
Men on this account, they may encourage themselves with this, that therein they
suffer for Righteousness sake, and endure the Cross for keeping a Good
Conscience, wherein they may comfortably commit themselves to God, expecting,
that either his Providence will prevent any ill effects, or infinitely make
them up to them afterward, because they have thus exposed themselves only to
be faithful in his Service.

FINIS.
Books lately Printed for Robert Kettlewel at the Hand and Scepter in
Fleet Street.
THe Measures of Christian Obedience; or, A Discourse showing what Obedience is
indispensably necessary to a regenerate state, and what defects are consistent
with it, for the promotion of Piety, and the Peace of troubled Consciences. By
John Kettlewel, Vicar of Coles-hill in Warwickshire. The second Edition with
large Additions, in Quarto. Price bound 8s.

An Help and Exhortation to worthy Communicating: or, A Treatise describing the
Meaning, Worthy Reception, Duty and Benefits of the Holy Sacrament, and
answering the Doubts of Conscience, and other reasons, which most generally
detain Men from it; together with suitable Devotions added. By John Kettlewel,
Vicar of Coles-hill in Warwickshire. In Twelves. Price bound 3s.

Two hundred Queries Moderately propounded, concerning the Doctrine of the
Revolution of Humane Souls, and its conformity to the truth of Christianity;
together with a Dissertation concerning the Pre-existency of Souls. In Octavo.
Price bound 2s. 6d.


