THE Woman-Preacher OF SAMARIA; A Better Preacher, and more Sufficiently
Qualified to Preach than any of the Men-Preachers of the Man-made-Ministry in
these Three NATIONS.

Quia non cognovi literaturam, introibo in potentias Domini,

Psalm 71. v. 15. (So the Ancient Latin, and so the Septuagint, in some Copies,
and so the Hebrew it self, being rightly Translated) In English thus. Because I
know not Letters I will enter into the Powers of the Lord.

By George Keith.

Printed in the Year 1674.

THE Woman-Preacher OF SAMARIA.
COme hither all you Men-Preachers, of a Man-made-Ministry, in the three
Nations; whether Conformists, or Nonconformists unto the present way of the
Ministry, and Worship in these Nations Established by an Humane Law, who cry
out against Women's Preaching, and Speaking, and say, Women ought not to Preach,
There should not be Women Preachers, They should keep them to the Affairs
within the House, and not meddle with our holy Function. Behold, a
Woman-Preacher! the Woman of Samaria ( John 4.) who may be an Example unto you
all; and the best of you, and most Learned and Qualified of you all, have need
to learn of her how to Preach. This Woman of Samaria may be your
School-Mistress to teach you to Preach; and it were good for you to learn of
her, who though being dead, yet speaks unto you. Verily, she is a witness for
God, unto the true way of Ministry, and Preaching, against you all, and against
all your false and invented ways. Oh for shame let alone your crying out
against Women-Preachers; while you are short, exceedingly short of this
Woman-Preacher of Samaria: and, first of all, learn the true silence, and to
have that mouth in you stopped, which God has never opened; that the true
mouth which is of his opening, you may come to witness, or else for ever to be
silent: that him you may know to open your Mouths, who has the Key of David,
who shuts, and no man opens; and opens, and no man shuts.

The Woman then left her Water-pot, and went her way into the City, and says
unto the Men, Come, See a Man which told me all things that ever I did, Is not
this the Christ? Then they went out of the City, and came unto him, etc. John
4.28, 29, 30.

Here she Preached Christ in few words, but very effectually, and with good
success. Come, See a Man that told me all things that ever I did, is not this
the Christ? These were her words, few and short, but very material, and
Pertinent; and very powerful and effectual, as appeared by the good success her
words had upon the men of the City: for it is said, Then (to wit, after her
speaking to them) they went out of the City, and came unto him: and v. 39. it
is said, And many of the Samaritans of that City believed on him, for the
saying of the Woman, which testified, he told me all things that ever I did:
but v. 41. it is said, and many more believed, because of his own Word.

But, How came this Woman to be a Preacher of Christ? First, Who taught her?
Secondly, Who called her? Verily she was not taught by Men, nor by Men was she
called, but by Christ. She had not been learned at the University, neither got
she her Ordination, either by the laying on of hands, of a Bishop, or company
of Men, called a Presbytery: yea we find no hands that Christ laid upon her in
the outward, but spoke unto her, and talked with her, and she with him. So then
she was taught of Christ himself, that he was the Messiah, or the Christ. She
had heard of the Messiah that was to come, but she knew not that he was come,
or who he was: yea for some time, though he was speaking unto her, she did not
know him to be the Christ; but when he said unto her, I that speak unto thee am
he, then she believed, and went her way into the City, and Preached him unto
the men of the City.

So first of all, she was taught Christ, by Christ himself; she was taught
immediately, and being thus taught, she believed on him, and then she went and
Preached him. This is an excellent Pattern, and Example unto all true
Ministers, and Preachers of Christ* First to be taught by himself, before they
go Preach him unto others. Secondly to believe on him; and having both heard
himself, and from his own word, and testimony, believed on him, then to Preach
him unto others. And this same Method Paul followed; who, of a Persecutor of
Christ, became a Preacher of him. First, he was taught Christ, by Christ
himself, and that inwardly Christ was revealed in him; When it pleased God,
said he, to reveal his Son in me, that I should Preach him to the Gentiles. And
Secondly, he was a believer in him, as he said himself, We having received the
same Spirit of Faith, we believe, therefore we speak; and, said David, I
believe, therefore have I spoken. And what sort of Faith was this? Was it only
an Historical Faith, which Hypocrites, and ungodly Men have, whereof Paul and
David spoke? Nay surely, it was the true, saving, renewing, and sanctifying
Faith, and according unto this, none ought to preach, who have not a measure of
true and saving Faith, and who are not truly in some measure Sanctified and
renewed, and by being Sanctified and renewed through Faith by the operation of
the Holy Spirit, are fitted and prepared for the work of the Ministry.

Now, by these two qualifications of a true and right Preacher of Christ, let
us try the Ministers and Ministry of those called Preachers in these Nations;
both Conformists, and Non-Conformists, Both of them affirm, and hold it as
their Principle, That true and saving Faith is not necessary unto a Man's being
a Preacher: It Is true they say, if he be a true Believer, and godly Man, he
will be the better Preacher, but a true and Lawful Preacher he is, and ought to
be followed, and heard, and maintained, though he be not in the least a godly
Man, or true Believer, if he be a Scholar, and can Preach in a Form of Sound
words, if he have Latin, Greek, and a little Hebrew and Logic, and such like
Natural Arts and Sciences, it is enough to qualify him to be a Preacher; and
this Principle James Durham, a great Presbyterian, expressly holds in his Book,
called, An Exposition upon the Revelation, in his digression concerning the
Ministry, and I my self have had sundry debates, with both Conformists, and
Non-Conformists so called, touching this same thing; both affirming that true
Faith and Piety was not needful to a Man's being a Preacher, but that Letter
Learning was needful; so that he could not be a Preacher without Letters, but
he could be a Preacher without Faith and Piety. Oh abominable Doctrine! And
this same Rule both follow, in their trying of men's qualifications unto the
Ministry; they try what knowledge they have in strange Languages, and Arts and
Sciences Natural, and what they can say upon pla^es of Scripture, but never one
word they question them concerning the work of God in their hearts, or
concerning their Faith and Piety. But alas! how can they try them concerning
the work of Grace in their Hearts, seeing they acknowledge th^^ have not a
discerning themselves, whereby to know them surely and infallibly; yea, they
affirm there is no such discerning in these days, as whereby men can be known
to be truly gracious. And does not sad Experience show it, that the generality
of those Preachers have not true Faith and Piety, their Lives and Conversations
are so gross and Carnal? Yea, do not many of themselves see it, and have they
not complained of it? And yet does not this Principle of theirs, That wicked
Men may be Preachers, and ought to be Received, lay a Foundation for a wicked
(...)? And (...) (...) being laid with their own Hands, will not wicked Men
come in thick and throng? And will not th^se (...) (...) to have all like
themselves? If they can have a wicked Man* will not the wicked prefer him to
another that but seems to be a godly, and may, or may not be, and thus in
process of time the whole Ministry will consist of ungodly men, the wicked
being still preferred by the wicked; and carrying it by most Votes, as among
them called Presbyterians, or by the Authority of the Bishop, as among the
Episcopal. Oh! for shame never say, that you are for a godly Ministry, while
you both lay such a Foundation for the ungodly.

And Secondly, as both sorts hold that true Faith and Piety is not necessary to
a Man's being a Preacher, so they hold that immediate revelation, and to be
immediately taught by Christ himself, is not necessary, either to his being, or
better being, yea, they wholly exclude it, and affirm that all immediate
Revelation and Teaching by Christ himself, so as to teach Men the Truths of the
Gospel, is ceased since the Apostles days, and is no more to be expected while
the World lasts; so James Durham, concerning Prophesying in his before said
Book, and in the first Page of that Book, he says, God has spoke his last
words to his Church, by John, in the Revelation; and so the Church nor any in
the Church is not to hear any word from God, or Christ himself; nay, he has
spoken his last words sixteen hundred Years ago. Oh gross blindness and
darkness! Is the Lord wholly absent from his Church? Or if he be present with
her, and in her, does he never speak himself? Has he lost the power of his
Speech, or his willingness to speak, that he has been so long silent? Surely,
nay, as it is written, Our God will speak, and not keep silence, he is not so
unkind, nor hard-hearted, as those Men would make him, so as not to speak
himself. And as concerning the immediate Teachings of Christ, who is such a
Stranger unto them, and their Principles, who know not that they deny them, and
are Enemies unto them, and that one of the main things of Controversy betwixt
them and us lies here; they say, the immediate Teachings of Christ are all
ceased, since the Apostles days; We say, not, and we are Witnesses of the
contrary in our Experience, who witness the New Covenant fulfilled, they shall
be all taught of the Lord, that is, immediately, else what does the new excel
the old, and first Covenant in? For under the old they were taught of the Lord
mediately, as by Moses and the Prophets; but under the new, they are taught of
God himself, who dwells in them, and walks in them, and is their Teacher,
Shepherd, and Husband.

And now, How can these Men be taught of the Lord himself, or immediately to
Preach Christ, who deny the thing it self? How can we have Charity unto them to
believe they are so taught, while they deny that any are so taught in those
days? And then what is their Preaching of him? it is but by hearsay, and
report; they are all short of this Woman, She both heard Christ himself, and
saw himself, which none of them, (as they confess,) have ever done: they say
they have never seen him, nor heard him, nor spoken with him, and yet they
preach; whereas she both heard him, and saw him before she Preached him; and
thus did John, and the Apostles Preach him: That which was in the beginning,
which we have seen with our eyes, and heard with our ears, and our hands have
handled of that Word of Life we declare unto you; for the Life was manifested,
and we have seen it, and delare it unto you, that you may have fellowship with
us, etc.

Now which of the two ways of Preaching are the best; to Preach only from a
hearsay by others, or from a fight, and hearing of Christ himself? Surely this
was the best, and therefore this Woman is a better Preacher, than all your
University men, and Doctors, amd Batchelors: she learned more of Christ from
himself, in that small time, (perhaps not one hours length) than your Doctors,
and University men have yet learned, for all their many years Studying*
laboring, Reading, and Hearing: As Christ, upbraided the Jews, that they had
neither heard his Fathers Voice, nor seen his shape; so it may be said of them;
yea, they say it themselves, they have neither heard him, nor seen him. Alas
for such Teachers! What should men hear them for? they can tell us no more of
him, but as they have heard it from men, or read it in the Seripture; and all
their knowledge is fron the Scripture, and all have the Scripture as well as
they, and so without them, by the Scripture, may know as much of Christ as
they, and save both their pains, and their Money.

And as concerning this Woman, it is manifest, that as she heard him, and saw
him outwardly, so she both heard him, and saw him inwardly, and was taught by
his spirit in her heart; for had she not been inwardly taught, and heard
inwardly, she could not have believed on him, which she did: neither had the
outward hearing and seeing made her blessed; for many heard and saw him
outwardly, and yet were not blessed: But, said Christ to his Disciples, Blessed
are your eyes, for they see, and blessed are your ears, for they hear; this was
inwardly, they both heard and saw inwardly, and this made them blessed, whereas
others heard and saw outwardly, and therefore were not blessed, as the
Disciples, and this Woman was. Yea that she was taught inwardly, and that more
largely, and fully, than by what she heard outwardly it does manifestly appear
from her words, in that she said, He has told me all things that ever I did:
now this could not be outwardly, for he told her but some things outwardly, as
concerning her Husbands that were dead, and how the man she had, was not her
Husband; and certainly, in so small a time as they had together, words
outwardly could not have told her the half, yea, not the hundred part of all
that ever she did; she was therefore inwardly taught by him, and told all these
things. Christ Jesus the Word, the Life, the Light in her heart told her, as he
well could, even in a moment* or the twinkling of an Eye bring all things
before her, and tell her all things in her whole Life; and certainly this was
it that made her to believe him, to be not only a Prophet, but more than a
Prophet, even the true Messiah, or Christ. He who has told me all that ever I
did, this must be Christ, this cannot but be more than any of the Prophets, who
told me some things, but no Prophet could tell me all but Christ only, who is
the true God, and knows all things, and searches all my my inward parts and
thoughts.

3. As concerning her Call, (as was said) she had it not from Men, and indeed
we read not of any outward Call she had from Christ; but certainly he who
taught her inwardly, called her also inwardly, by his Holy Spirit; yea, so
powerful was her inward Call, and the motion of the Spirit of Christ within
her, that it caused her to make have, she tarried not to carry home her water
pot, for it is said expressly, she left here water-pot, and went into the City,
and said unto the Men, Come, see a Man, etc. But as for their Call, it is
wholly from Men, and by Men; for as they deny all immediate Teaching, so they
deny immediate Calling unto the Ministry; yea, their Principle that immediate
Revelation is ceased, and that the Scripture is the only Rule, obliges them
to deny all immediate Calling, as well as immediate Teaching. Behold then how
she has this third qualification of a true Preacher which they want; she was
called immediately by the Spirit of Christ in her heart; she ran not unsent, it
appears the Lord sent her, and was with her by his Spirit, by the good effect
her Testimony had; for, as it is said, many of the Samaritans of that City
believed on him, etc. And this was through her Preaching. They did not despise
her because she was a Woman, they did not say unto her (as many now say) thou
art a Woman, thou should not Preach; neither did they say unto her, thou art
but Ignorant and unlearned, as Men commonly say now unto our Friends whom God
has taught, by his Holy Spirit, though they have not the Tongues, nor the
Natural Arts, and University Learning; Why do ye Preach who are unlearned, and
have not been at the University? I say, these Men, they neither upbraided her
with her being a woman, nor secondly, with her being unlearned; nor thirdly,
that she wanted her Call, and was idle, or meddled with a business that did not
concern her; they did not say unto her, Go home to your wheel, and your
Spinning, and such like words, as men commodly now say to Women Friends, whom
the Lord has taught and Called by his Spirit to testify of him, as he did
this Woman of Samaria. Nor fourthly, did they upbraid her with the place, as
men commonly also now do, who wonder, and gaze, and mock, and scorn, if they
see or hear any speak any thing of Christ in the streets; O, say they, this is
not the Church, go to Church, if ye would Preach, this is not a fit place to
Preach in. These Men of the City did not so unto this Woman, though she came
unto them, and spoke unto them, where she first found them, which might be in
the streets or any where else.

4. Also, this Woman, no doubt very unexpectedly, and far from any design she
had before had unto this work, became a Preacher, little knew she, or little
did she think, before she met with Christ, and heard him, that she should
preach him, nay verily, she knew nothing of it at all, nor had she any such
design before hand; far contrary unto these Preachers of the Man-made-Ministry,
who have designed it long before hand, and it was a design of their Parents and
Relations even from their Childhood: Yea, this was the End, and final moving
cause, of their being sent first to the Grammar School, and then to the
University; a design they should be Preachers: Quod est ultimum in Executione,
est primum in intention: i. e. what is last in Execution is first in
intention, so it was first of all intended. A Father has three Sons, one of
them he thinks may be fit to be made a Lawyer, another to be a Doctor of
Physic, a third (and that commonly the greatest Dunce or Dolt of the three,
finding him not so fit for other things) he resolves he will have him a
Minister, or Preacher, that it may be a Living to him; and so away be send^
them all to the Grammar School, and from that to the University; and thus one
becomes a Preacher only by that which is Natural and Artificial, as the other
two becomes the Lawyer and Physician, here is nothing of God or Christ seen
more in the one than in the other: Is it not so generally among them? They are
become Preachers by a design or contrivance of their Parents, or themselves. As
soon as they become but so old, as to have so much Natural wit as to see they
must make some shift how to Live, and looking about the many Trades, they
readily see it is the far easiest of many, or most Trades to be a Preacher, to
get money, for it is little labor in respect of many other labors, and much
gain, and also brings Honor, for if he had been of never so mean a degree, and
of the most abject and mean Parents in all the Country, yet to become a
Preacher, makes him to be esteemed a Gentleman, and be called Sir; and
perhaps, to be advanced to be a Bishop, and then he will be called, my Lord.
But how many either of one sort or another of them, whether Episcopal or
Presbiterian, are to be found, who have been called from some other Calling or
Occupation they were in before, to leave it, and go to Preach Christ, as this
Woman was called from her Water Pot immediately to go Preach him, in a City of
Samaria, called Sychar? And yet thus were the true Servants of the Lord called,
who were Mechanic Men, and Tradesmen, both Prophets, and Apostles; Elisha was
called from the Plough, Amos from the Heard, who was an Herd-man, and a gather
of Sycomore Fruit; and the Apostles, many, or most of them from their
Fish-Nets, who were Fishers; Matthew from the Receipt of Custom, who was a
Publican, and Luke was a Physician, and Paul a Tent-maker: and so most part of
all whom God ever sent to Preach had their Employments before, and not one ever
became a Preacher by an Humane design or intention before hand in order unto a
Living, and to get money as they do: and so this is a fourth difference betwixt
this Woman-Preacher of Samaria and them, wherein she excels them. Her
Preaching was not any Humane design, either of her, or any Man, or men else,
but it was wholly Divine, it was of the Lord alone, he designed it, and not
Man; whereas their preaching commonly and generally is a Humane design, and
contrivance from first to last, to get money, and Worldly Honor and preferment
with much ease and idleness.

5. She preached Christ freely, as she had freely received, so she freely gave;
She did not begin to Contract, or Covenant, or bargain with them before hand,
for money, or for any Worlds good; she said not unto them, what money or Hire
will ye give me, and I will preach Christ unto you? Nay, nay, she was not of
such a Mercinary Spirit, she was more Noble; far unlike the preachers of the
Man-made-Ministry in these days, whether Episcopal, or Presbiterian, as well
as Popish, where all is done for money, no money, no preaching, as the old
proverb is, No penny, No Pater Noster; And was it not so generally among the
Presbiterians, while they had the public places, and the Law of the Nation to
stand by them, and for them, who of them all preached without a stipend? Which
is in plain English, Wages or Hire; for stipend being a Latin word, signifies
properly Wages or Hire, but they will not have it called Wages or Hire, lest
they should seem to be Hirelings; they will take the Hire, they will seek it,
yea, exact it, yea, strain and distrain, and poind, and cast into prison for
it, and take away a poor man's pot or pan, or platter for it, as was done to
some of our Friends in the Presbiterian time, and this to pay those men's
stipend, who were called Godly men of the finest sort of the Presbiterians: A
strange thing of exacting wages of them, and forcing them to give them money,
who never hired them, nor heard them, and so took none of their Merchandise,
and yet thus it was, as they are living at this day, who can witness it done
thus unto them, so (as is said) they would take the Hire, and force it, but
they will not have it called Hire, but stipend; they must put a Latin face
upon it, that it may not appear in it is own deformed and ugly shape, it must be
called stipend, and not Hire, whereas the proper English of stipend, is Hire;
And now that they are out of their public places, having gone out through
fear, if any of them preach now and then in private places, without a set
stipend, that is but in order to propagate, and carry on the Presbiterian
design, that they may be set up again, and recover their places, and Hires
again. But which of them can say in the sight of God, at this day, they preach
freely without an eye to money or outward reward? So that if they got nothing
by it yet preach they must: Who of them all can say, Woe unto us if we Preach
not the Gospel, for a necessity is laid upon us to Preach; Who of them have got
their mouth opened by Him to Preach, who opens and no man shuts, and
shuts and no man opens? Has not Man, and the power and dread of Man, often
shut their mouths, and Man, with a little of his forbearance, or winking at
them, opened them again? how much of this has been seen these years by past
among these called, or accounted the best sort of them? where were they to be
found in times of hazard, when the power and dread of man threatened them to
suffer imprisonment, or Fining, or the like; so that it was likely they would
be apprehended, and haled to prison, to ly there they knew not how long, or
have a Fine taken of them. Did they preach then openly and in view? Could their
voice be heard in the streets? No surely. But if an Indulgence come, or that
the Magistrates wink a little at them, and they observe it, then they will come
out of their holes, and creep forth a little into common view or observation.
And thus man shuts them, and man opens them; for they know not him nor his
opening, who opens and no man shuts, and shuts and no man opens. And
does not all this exceedingly bewray and discover them to be of a Covetous, and
Mercinary Spirit, Hirelings indeed, who flee from the sheep in a time of
hazard, whereas the good Shepherd lays down his life for the sheep. Surely
this Woman of Samaria was of a more noble Spirit, who Preached both freely, and
boldly.

6. Though she was a Woman, yet she was not afraid to bear Testimony of Christ,
she did not call them, to whom she preached into a Cellar, or Vault under the
ground, or some private place, but openly, and publicly she preached him to a
great company, so many heard and believed because of her saying, and yet no
doubt there was a hazard so publicly to confess him, and own him in that day;
and though some believed in him, yet others were enemies to him, who were
Samaritans.

7. The Manner how she preached Christ, is observable, she preached him from
her own experience, as what she found done by him in relation to her own
condition. Come, said she, see a man who has told me all that ever I did, Is
not this the Christ? Who, among them all, thus preach him from their own
experience? or who preach him as the Psalmist did, who said Come, and I will
tell you what God has done for my Soul? who of them can say, I have met with
the Lord, and he has convinced me of all my sins, and told me all that ever I
did, and has set all things before me, and made me hate all my sins, and loath
both them and my self because of them, Is not this the Christ? Also it is
observable, the pithy and effectual way of hear reasoning, by Question, or
Interrogation, which implies both a strong affirmation, and a clear inference
or induction from the premises, leaving it as it were unto themselves to judge,
or conclude, Is not this the Christ, who has told me all that ever I did? this
cannot be a mere man, this cannot be only a Prophet, this must be the Christ,
seeing he has told me all that ever I did. How effectually does she reason, as
she was taught by the Spirit of Christ in her, though she never learned the Art
of Logic, yet surely she reasoned most effectually, and saw more into the
reason of the thing, than all the University men have done unto this day, by
all their artificial Logic. And her Reason, or Argument runs thus. He who
tells a man or woman all that ever they have done, must be Christ: but this
man has told all that ever I have done, therefore this is the Christ, or is not
this the Christ? The first Proposition is clear unto all men, because it is he
only who is God, that knows all the doings of a man, so it is he only who can
tell them all unto them, and so this He, who has told me all that ever I did,
must be more than any Man, or Prophet, who may know some things, but know not
all, He must be Christ, who is God. And as I said before this was inwardly, and
not outwardly, he could not tell her outwardly all that ever she did in so
short a time, but inwardly he could in a moment; even as the outward light of
the Sun in a moment represents things unto our eye in the outward, and
lets us see in a moment, all at once, as it were a thousand things; and thus
she was taught, and thus she reasoned concerning him: And thus also has the
Lord taught us to reason concerning Him. He who has in wardly convinced us of
our sins, and told us all the sins that ever we did, and brought them to
remembrance before us, when we had forgotten them, or cast them behind our
backs, this is the Christ, this Light in us must be the Light of Christ; or
this He in us must be the Christ, and not any mere humane, or natural Light,
this must be Divine, Spiritual, and saving, yea, the Savior, the Christ: so
she Preached him, and so the Lord has taught us to Preach him. But so do not
these Men of the Man-made-Ministry Preach him; Nay, but the contrary: for, say
they, That is not Christ which convinces every man of his sins, and tells him
all that ever he did, it is but a humane principle, not Divine; it is but
Natural, not Spiritual; a natural Light, and so instead of Preaching him thus,
as he is in the hearts of People convincing them of sin, and showing them their
sins, they plainly deny him, they confess them without, but deny him within;
and so deny his Divinity, and Divine power and Godhead: for if he be God, is he
not within? and that both in Believers, and Unbelievers, does he not by his
Spirit convince the world of Sin? Is he not the Light of the world, who
lights every man that comes into the world, that all men through him might
believe? as John declared, Chap. 1. Yea, so contrary are they unto the being of
Christ within, that they plainly, and openly deny him, to be really and
properly, and immediately, or essentially within his Saints; yea, to say, that
he is, they call it Blasphemy: O, say they, he is in us by his Graces, and by
his Operations, or Virtue, but not immediately, or essentially: He is in us,
say they, immediatione virtutis, but not immediatione suppositi: i. e. he is in
us immediately by his Virtue, but not by himself; as the Sun appears in us by
his Virtue or heat: yea, the real in-being of the Spirit of God by himself,
they have generally denied, and judged some among themselves who have affirmed
it: And yet how clear and full is the Scripture unto this Truth; that Christ is
not only in all men by his Light, but also upholdeth all things by his Word and
Power, which cannot be separated from him; and if he were not every where, he
could not be infinite; and as he is in all, so he has his several ways of
operation, and manifestation in all, in Unbelievers after one manner, and in
Believers in another, according unto their several capacities, and conditions.

8. She Preached him as One they could both come unto, and see immediately, as
she had heard him, and seen him her self, so she had a great desire that they
also might see him, Come and see, (said she) she did not thus Preach unto them,
it is enough for your Faith, O ye men of Samaria, that others have heard of
Christ, and seen him, and from what they have heard and seen, to have reported
of him unto you; Oh! Nay, but Come and see, And after this manner did all the
true Servants of God, Preach unto Peopole, O taste and see, said David* That
which we have heard and seen, we declare unto you (says John in the Name of
all his Brethren) that you may have fellowship with us; that ye may hear with
us, and see with us, and handle with us, of that Word of Life: But so do not
these Men of the Man-made-Ministry; neither Episcopal, Presbyterian, nor
Independent, so called; None of them all say or Preach, Come and see Christ
himself, or hear himself; Nay, nay, that is all ceased (say they) Christ is
gone into Heaven, and will not come again till the last day, he has left us the
Scriptures, and the Sacraments in his room* we cannot know him otherwise, but
by these visible things, we cannot see himself, nor hear himself, all immediate
Revelation is ceased, there is no Vision of God or Christ to be expected in
this life nor immediate teaching, or hearing of Christ himself O sad, and
Comfortless Doctrine! but this is their Doctrine, nor Christ's. I will rather
hear this Woman of Samaria, than hear them, She bids Come and see Christ
himself; they say there is no seeing of him, nor hearing of himself, so long as
we live upon earth: Oh blind and deaf men, who because they have neither heard
him, nor seen him, therefore deny this blessed privilege! Oh that people
should follow after them, and not see these blind men! What great matter can
they tell of Christ? what great or excellent thing can they attain by their
Preaching, who deny that they can either hear him, or see him while they are
upon Earth? But who, in some measure hear him not, nor see him while on Earth,
be this told unto you as from the Lord, it will be in vain for you to think to
hear him, or see him to your Comfort and Joy hereafter.

9. Again, the Method of this Woman's Preaching was not like their School
Method, who make a Tale of an hours length, and yet never come to the matter it
self; who take a Text from some place of Scripture, and raise from it so many
points of Doctrine, which they have studied so long before hand; and must study
a day, (and some perhaps two or three days) to preach one hour, and then to
deliver off unto the people that dry, dead and barren stuff, that they have
scraped and gathered together out of so many old and Worm eaten Authors, which
they cannot say is their experience, and have not received it from the Lord.
But they are Thieves, and have stolen it, yea perhaps it is an hundred times
stolen, having come through so many hands; who have stolen the words of God
concerning the conditions, and experiences of the Saints, as the false
teachers, and Prophets of old, of whom the Lord said Jer. 23. Behold I am
against these Prophets who steal my Words, etc. They shall not profit the
People at all. And is not this fulfilled abundantly? Where is the profitting of
the people? do they not remain still in their sins and wickedness? And as for
these made, and composed Sermons; by art and cunning of man's wisdom and Spirit,
it is plain deceit, and is expressly so called in Scripture, where the Apostle
said, That with feigned words the false Teachers should make merchandise of the
People. according unto the Greek properly and truly it is thus: With made, or
composed Speeches, or Discourses, they shall make Merchandise of you. And so it
is seen at this day: for as they make their Sermons by Art, and take great
pains (as they say) to Compose, and Frame them, so they make Merchandise of
them, and sell them unto the people for Money; yea, cause people to give them
Money, over, and over again for the same; and thus they they beguile them, and
make Merchandise of them also: so did not this Woman; she did not go home and
study what she should say, but she spoke what freely rose in her heart, as the
Lord taught her; and though her words were but few, yet they are very material
and weighty, and came no doubt from the Wisdom of God revealed in her, for her
own wisdom could never have taught her such excellent words, and so
excellently to prove that he was the Christ from her own experience. He has
told me all that ever I did, is not this the Christ?

10. Her Preaching had this good effect, They came unto him saw himself, and
heard him; and as some believed because of the Woman's saying, so it is said,
Many more believed because of his own word, and then their Faith had sure
footing, and found the right Foundation, to wit, his own word: then they
generrally came to hear himself, and so believed, because they heard himself,
as they declared themselves; yet she was an occasion unto them by her speaking:
But whom has these of the Man-made-Ministry brought this length, that they are
come unto Christ himself, and heard him, and seen him? nay, both Teachers and
People cry out generally, this is not to be expected in this Life, all Vision,
and Revelation is ceased: And no doubt as they came unto him outwardly, and
heard him, and saw him outwardly; so they came unto him, and heard, and saw him
inwardly, otherwise they could not have believed in him, nor loved him as they
did, nor been blessed by him, if they had not seen him, and heard him with
another eye than the outward, which many heard him, and saw him him with, who
remained Unbelievers, and were not blessed. And so now by these Ten Instances,
it is manifest, how this Woman-Preacher of Samaria, was a better Preacher than
any of the Men-Preachers of the Man-made-Ministry, who called the men of Sychar
out of the City unto Jacob's Well to see Christ: now Sychar signifies
Drunkenness, and does fitly answer unto the natural, and unconverted state, and
now Jacob's Well Typefieth the Spirit of Christ, which is the Well of
Living-water in true Believers, and so out of the natural state, and Spirit of
this World, she called them unto the Spirit of Christ, there to come unto him,
and to see him.

The 29th of the First Month, 1673.
Postscript.
BUT say, the Men-Preachers of the Man made-Ministry, Women ought not to
Preach, because the Apostle expressly says, But I suffer not a Woman to teach,
nor to Vsurp Authority over the Man, but to be in silence. To which I say,
first, what if I should understand by the Woman in this place, the flesh, as
Bernard, an Ancient Father in the Church, (who is of great account both among
them called Papists and Protestants) does understand it; for thus he writes
about five hundred years ago, In sermon de septem Spiritibu^, Fol. 87. Edit.
Paris. Ad Spiritum enim debet fieri Conversio Carnis, ut serviat ipsa, and non
serviatur ei, ut dicat Spiritus servo sno, veni, and veniat, fac hoc and faciat
illud, sic enim erit uxor nostra, sicut vitis abundans, and salvabitur per
geuerationem filiorum* qui sunt opera bona, si fuerit ipsa quidem in lateribus
domus nostrae i. e. in abscondito, and humili loco, anima vero resideat in
medio tanquam domina, tanquam Pater familias, tanquam Iudex. That is, in
English; For the Flesh ought to be Converted unto the Spirit, that she may
serve, and not be served; that the Spirit may say unto his Servant, come, and
it comes; do this, and it does it; for so our Wife shall be, as a fruitful
Vine, and shall be saved by bearing of Children, which are good works, if she
be indeed in the sides of our House, that is, in a secret, and low place; but
let the Soul remain in the midst, as a Mistress, as a Master of the Family, as
a Judge. Behold, how Bernard understands by the Woman ( which Paul suffers
not to teach) our flesh, and Paul speaking of this Woman, that she shall be
saved in Childbearing; Bernard expounds these Children to be good works,
notwithstanding she shall be saved (says Paul) in Childbearing, or in bearing
of Children, if they continue in Faith and Charity, and Holiness, with
Sobriety, 1 Timothy 2.12, 13, 14, 15. And that the Apostle says, if they continue
what is to be understood by these words? Whether outward and Natural Children;
or such Children as Bernard expounds to be good works? Or is a Woman saved by
bearing outward, and Natural Children, to wit, Male, or Female Children, or can
the Faith and Holiness of these Children save the Woman? I have made use of the
Authority of Bernard, in this place, not as if I would have People believe this
Exposition simply or mainly because Bernard has said so; But indeed, because
the Men of the Schools, and those called Clergymen, lay such weight upon the
Authority of the Fathers, who commonly say, We are to receive the Exposition of
the Scripture from the Fathers, and (if the Expoposition of a Scripture be
called in question) we are to hear, what such an Ancient Father, as Bernard, or
Agustine* or Jerome says upon it, and that is to determine the Case, if
especially the Scripture it self say nothing to the contrary; Let them hear
therefore Bernard in the Case* and leave off their proud and insolent words
against the People called in derision Quakers, as if they understood the
Scriptures all contrary to the mind of the Ancient Fathers, (for let this be
told them, that not only in this particular, but in most of all the things of
weight, wherein we differ from the present Clergymen so called, we have the
Ancient Fathers more on our side, than they have, as it may be made appear (if
God permit) in due season) And also let those weak and illiterate Man
made-Ministers, who pretend so much to Learning, and reading (and yet have so
little of it) forbear their frothy jearings, and mockings of our Friends as
touching the meaning of the Scriptures, lest in so doing they be found mockers
of them whom they call their Fathers, of whom either mediately or immediately
they borrow, or rather steal any thing they have to say, though often knowing
neither what they say, nor whereof they affirm, I have had an occasion given
me, not long ago by some of these Men to return them this advice: some of them
going about to represent it, as a most ridiculous, and inconsistent Exposition
to expound, by the Woman (which Paul permitted not to speak) the flesh; for,
say they, If the Woman be the flesh, then, who is the fleshes Husband? Now, let
them hear Bernard (a Man I am verily persuaded far excelling them both in Piety
and Learning) who says, the flesh is to be subject to the Spirit (or Spiritual
part in us) and so she shall be our Wife, a fruitful Vine in the sides of our
House: by which flesh, is not to be understood sin, or sinful Concupiscence,
but the animal or inferior part of a Man, which is the Creature of God, and is
of good use unto them who are Sanctified and renewed. And as concerning the
Woman mentioned by Paul, in his first Epistle to Timothy, Chap. 2. v. 12, 13,
etc. not only Bernard, as I have showed, but Augustine (who Lived twelve
hundred Years ago, and one of the most Renowned Fathers in the Church in those
days, and who is of great account at this day both among Papists and
Protestants) does by the woman understand the flesh, and by her Children, he
does understand good works; for thus he writes, Libro de trinitate. 12. upon
the words of the Apostle to Timothy; She shall be saved by bearing of Children:
In that Sex of Male and Female (says he) the Apostle Paul from this may be
understood to have figured the Mystery of something more secret; his words in
Latin run thus: In isto Sexu Masculi and Faeminae Apostolus Paulus occultioris
cujusdam rei figurasse Mysterium, vel hinc intelligi potest.

And again, the same Augustine writes thus, Tractatu in Psalm* 83. Salva ergo
erit Mulier quae in typo carnis accipitur, per filiorum generationem, id est,
si faciat opera bona. That is, in English, the Woman therefore shall be saved,
which is taken in the Type of the flesh, by the Generation of Children, that
is, if she do good works.

I Answer, secondly, If I should so far condes^end, or agree unto them, as to
take the words of Paul, for Women, in the common sense of speech, what will
they gain by it? That no Women are to speak in the Church; or that Women in no
case are to speak in the Church? if so, why then are they sound so great and
palpable transgressors themselves, who not only permit, but command Women
frequently to speak in their own Churches, even in their most public
Assemblies. And verily, if the thing were not so publicly and ordinarily
practiced in this Land. I should almost be ashamed to mention it, the matter it
self is so shameful a thing. How is it, I say (to you I speak who are called
Ministers of the Kirk of Scotland) that ye not only permit, but command, yea,
and force Women, and that of the worst sort, to wit, Whores, and Adulterous
Women, and who have committed Fornication again, and again, and that without
any real signs of true Repentance, to come in before the Face of the whole
Congregation, to speak. And the place wherein they are appointed to stand, is
not much unlike to your Pulpits, but that it is larger, that it may hold three
or four; and I my self, as many with me, have seen it filled, with as many as
it could well hold, and these unhonest Women are commanded to speak publicly
in the Church; yea, the Preacher, (after he himself has made an end,) calls
them by their particular Names one by one, and bids them speak to the
Edification of the Congregation; and so they must all speak one by one, to the
Edification of all; and those who are most impudent, and least sensible either
of their sin, or their shame, will readily speak most, but in great Hypocrisy
and deceit, for you your selves know, that a true Penitent is rarely to be
found among them. If you say, This is not Preaching or Teaching, but only a
confessing of their sins, and asking God Mercy, and the like; I answer, Is not
confessing their sins, speaking, and asking Mercy of God (so that the
Congregation may hear) is not this speaking? Now, the Apostle says, 1 Cor.
14.34. Let your Women keep silence in the Churches, for it is not permitted
unto them to speak. So the Apostle uses this general word ( to speak) And yet
surely confessing of sin, and praying for forgiveness, so that the Congregation
may hear, is speaking; yet it is permitted unto these* Whorish and Dishonest
Women at that time to exhort the People, and warn them to beware of the snares
of the Enemy, and the like words; and this i^ a sort of Teaching: and I my self
have heard some of them, who had learned the knack of it, more than others,
spoke by way of Exhortation, and Instruction, that she seemed to speak almost
as well, and to as good purpose, as the Preacher himself. Now, let all Sober,
and Impartial People judge in this Case, betwixt those Men, and us; they not
only permit, but command dishonest Women, (who have been Whores,) to speak in
the Church, whereas we command no Woman at all to speak in the Church; but this
we say, if God by his Spirit move or command a godly, sober, Religious Woman to
speak in the Church, we are not to forbid her, yea, we are to hear her, and we
may be both edified, and refreshed by her Testimony, it being the spirit of God
which speaks unto us, in her, and by her. Yea, That the Apostle did not
forbid all Women in all cases to to speak, is plain, for in the same Epistle,
chap. 11. v. 5. he shows, how the Woman is to be covered, that Prays, or
Prophecyeth, which plainly holds forth, that some Women at least, did both
Pray, and Prophecy in the Church, in his day, (yea, and ye your selves allow
Women to Sing in the Church, which is a sort of speaking, and if they sing
publicly in the outward hearing, why may they not pray publicly in the
outward hearing, for both is a sort of speaking, seeing in both they utter
words.) What sort of Women then is it, whom Paul does not permit to speak in
the Church? in these two places abovementioned, 1 Cor. 14.34. and 1 Timothy 2.12,
13. etc. taking them for Women in the common litteral sense) Verily, let us but
look into the Context, or words going before, in both places, and that will
clear it: for they are such women, as need to be taught themselves; even,
First, Unlearned Women, Secondly, Tatling Women, that were not yet come to the
true silence. Thirdly, Unruly, Proud Women, that were not come to the true
subjection, all which is employed in these words, Let the Women learn in
silence, with all subjection; for no doubt there were such Women among them of
Ephesus (where Timothy then was) who had need of these Instructions: And
Fourthly, vain Women, who were given to vain and gaudy Apparel, such as Gold,
or Pearls, or costly Array, and were not yet come to be covered with the Spirit
of the Lord. Fifthly, Such as Usurped Authority over the Man. Sixthly, Such as
were in the Transgression, and deceived as the first Woman was. Seventhly, Such
Women as transgress the Law, and not come to be under Grace, as said Paul, They
are to be under Obedience, as also says the Law: so read the words going
before, and behind, in both places, and you may observe, that a seven fold sort
of Women are not permitted by Paul to speak in the Church, and as is said, no
doubt there were of all these sorts of Women among them of Corinth, and
Ephesus, who were not permitted to speak, who had need of these Instructions,
for commonly such particular Instructions are not given, concerning such
things, where there is not need, or where none are guilty. But what if Paul had
said so concerning all the Women at Corinth, and Ephesus, (where Timothy at
this time was when he wrote to him, concerning Women) that he did not permit
them to speak, will it therefore follow that no Women are to speak in any Case
in the Church? I will put you in mind of one of your School Rules, which is
this, a particularibus ad universale non val^t consequentia, i. e. from
particulars unto universal the consequence is not valid: therefore, though it
had not been permitted either unto some or all of these two particular Churches
of Corinth, or Ephesus, to speak (because they might at that time, being but
young, not have the requisite qualifications) it will not follow, that
Universally all Women every where else ought not to speak; yea, these called
Presbyterians may remember, how they have both allowed, and countenanced Women
both to Pray, and speak of their Experiences* in their private Meetings, and
yet they cannot deny, but their private Meetings are a Church; for inded a
Church, according to the Greek, and Latin word, is nothing else but a
Convention, or gathering of the People, whether few, or many; so that Three,
Six, or Twelve, is as really a Church, as 300, 600, or 1200.

And further, let us once more take notice of the Apostles words, and we shall
find, that they do not signify, an absolute forbidding of Women in any case to
speak, teach, or Preach in the Church; I permit or suffer not a Woman (said he)
to teach in the Church, but if they will learn any thing, let them ask their
Hu^bands at home; For the better understanding of which, I am to remember you,
that even according unto Paul's own words, there was in that day a twofold
manner of speaking in the Church: One by Commandment, another by permission,
and this distinction Paul himself uses, writing unto the Corinthians, when he
said, as touching some particular things, 1 Cor. 7.6. But I speak this by
permission (said he) and not of Commandment; also in diverse other places, he
writes thus, I say, not the Lord, now this sort of speaking was used in the
Church, in two particular Cases;

1. In the propounding, or asking of a Question, for there were in the Church,
some who asked Questions, and some who Answered, the Unlearned Asked, and the
Learned Answered, which is the most proper way of Catechizing.

2. This sort of speaking, to wit, by Permission, was used in the Church in
matter of Advice, and Counsel, relating to the affairs of the Church, where men
(according to the Wisdom given them of God) finding the Spirit of the Lord
present with them, enlightening them, and directing them, might speak their
mind, in Cases, by way of Counsel and Advice, as seeing the Expediency and use
of it, for a certain time, though they were not to enjoin it as a Command. And
Paul himself uses this same Distinction, destinguishing betwixt things lawful,
and things expedient; so that some things may be lawful which are not
expedient, and some things may be both lawful and expedient, and yet not
commanded of God; and a man (as immediately taught by the Spirit of the Lord in
his heart) may see, both the lawfulness, and expediency of a thing, and may
speak by the spirit of the Lord moving him, in the Church, concerning both the
lawfulness and expediency of that thing, and yet he may say, I speak not this
by Commandment, as if what he said were a Commandment unto them; yea the Spirit
of the Lord may command and move him to declare unto them, that the thing in
hand before them, is not a Command, but an Expedient thing, and fit to be done
at that time. Now in these two Cases of speaking by Permission in the Church,
as first in that of asking Questions; and, secondly, in that of giving Advice
or Counsel simply, by a permission: if they would contend, that Women ought not
to speak in the Church, all that they can pretend with any show, or color of
Reason, at most is, That Women are not to speak in the Church by permission: if
they speak, they are not to do it by permission, but by commandment, whereas it
is permitted unto Men, at times to speak in the Church by permission, when not
by commandment: an unlearned man may be permitted to ask a Question in the
Church, which is not permitted unto a Woman, nor is it needful, for she may ask
her Husband at home.

But if the Spirit of the Lord Command or move a godly and Spiritually Learned
Woman to speak, in this case she is the Lords, more than her Husbands, and she
is to speak, yea, though the Husband should forbid her, for she ought rather to
obey God than Man. And in Christ Jesus there is neither Male nor Femal^ but all
are one in him* as the Apostle said. So both these Cases are in a matter of
Freedom or Permission, not in a matter of Necessity or Command: therefore
though Women may not speak by permission, which Men may do, yet they may speak
by Command, as when the Lord commands or moves them by his Spirit. And that
Women spoke in the Church, is most evident, from the second Chapter of Acts,
which was a very solemn time, and also a very solemn Convention, for the
Scripture says Expressly, Acts 1.14. that among the Apostles, Mary with other
Women were present, and it is said, Acts 2.4. And they were filled with the
Holy Ghost, and began to speak with other Tongues, as the Spirit gave them
utterance. So here the Women were filled with the Holy Ghost, and spoke, as the
Apostles did; for it is said so of them all universally: and it appears
further, that the women spoke, in this solemn Assembly from the Apology of
Peter, which he made in the defense of the women's Prophesying or speaking, out
of Ioels Prophecy, where it was Prophesied by Joel, that the Lord would pour
out his Spirit upon all Flesh, both Male and Female Sons and Daughters, Men
Servants and Maidservants, and they shall Prophecy; and so that Prophecy was
eminently fulfilled at that time as at other times afterward. And also before
this time, the Lord made use of women, to witness, speak, or declare, and that
unto the eleven Apostles, that Christ was risen from the dead, Luke 24.9, 10.
And was not this Convention a Church? And did not the Lord after his
Resurrection first of all appear unto a woman, to wit, Mary Magdalene? And did
not he command her to speak unto the Apostles, and Instruct them concerning his
Resurrection? Go (said he) unto my Brethren, and say unto them, I ascend to my
Father, and your Father, and to my God, and your God. Yea, and not only the
Scripture, but also the Church History tells us of women, who taught and
Instructed Men, as particularly that woman, who converted the Nation of the
Iberians unto the Christian Faith, as Eusebius relates.

FINIS.

