SOME REMARKS ON THE Life, Death, and Burial OF Mr. Henry Cornish, B.D. An
Eminent DISSENTING TEACHER: Who died on Sunday, Dec. 18. And was interred on
Thursday, Dec. 22. School. IN THE Church of BISITER in the County of OXFORD.

As Received in a LETTER from a Friend.

LONDON, Printed for John Nutt near Stationers' Hall, 1699.

SIR,
ON Sunday last in the Evening died old Mr. Henry Cornish, a chief Teacher in
the Meeting of Dissenters at Bisiter. The next Morning one of those Brethren
came to the Vicar, to desire the Use of his Pulpit for a Funeral Sermon, to be
preached either by Dr. W -- of Oxford, or Mr. O -- Rector of D -- in the County
of Bucks. The Vicar, as I hear, made a kind and prudent Answer; that his Pulpit
should be at the Service of any Regular Church-Divine, and especially of Dr. W
-- on whose Character and Station he could safely depend upon that occasion;
whether they declined to ask the Doctor, or whether he decently waved the
Office, I cannot tell. The Funeral was on Thursday after Noon; a Grave was
opened in the South-Isle of the Church, near the place where Mr. Troughton, a
considerable Teacher of that Party, had been interred in the Year 1681. The
Appearance was as great as Affection and Curiosity could make it. The Pall was
held up by six Teachers of the Separation, with all other Ceremonies which
remain indifferent. The Corpse was received at the Church-Gate, by the Minister
in his Surplice, with the Form by the Liturgy prescribed. The Preacher select
Mr. O. took his Text from Rev. 14. 13. And I heard a Voice from Heaven, saying
unto me, write, Blessed are the Dead which die in the Lord from henceforth;
yea, says the Spirit, that they may rest from their Labors, and their Works
do follow them. For near two hours Discourse, he betrayed nothing of the
particular Occasion, unless (as some think) in Tone and familiar Expressions.
He then fell upon the Subject of our Deceased Brother, and spoke to this effect

And now into the Possession of that Perfection of Blessedness, which I have
been describing, I do not only hope, as I would of every common Christian, but
I do confidently believe this Reverend good old Man is entered, the solemnizing
whose Funeral is the Occasion of our present Meeting together. I, for my part,
cannot say so much of Him, as his Character deserves; my Acquaintance with him
having been once interrupted for many Years; but yet I cannot omit saying
something of him. When I began my Acquaintance with him, he seemed an ancient
Man; but, by his Temperance and wary Life, and his peaceable Disposition, he
had extended his Life to half the Age of Man farther, it being thirty Years
since I first knew him. What I always observed in him, as peculiar to his
Temper, was a great Goodness and Benignity of Mind, a great Humility to the
lowest and the least of People, a cordial and sincere Friendship, and a
readiness to do all the Good he could, to all Men, not only of his own but of
other Persuasions. For he did not think that a difference in things not
Fundamental and Circumstantial, ought to alienate the Affections of Christians
from one another, where there was a good Agreement as to the main Doctrines and
Substantials of Religion. He was always therefore of a healing Spirit, and by
that means kept himself free from those Heats and Passions, which are the
Blemishes of overmuch Zeal in all Parties. He loved not a disputative and
wrangling Divinity, but only that which expressed the Life and Power of
Religion, and which tended to make good and heavenly-minded Men. He was of that
extraordinary Modesty and Self-abasement, as often to give the preference to
the Performances of younger Men, before his own grey-headed Knowledge and
Experience. Yet how earnest he was in the great Work of promoting Men's Eternal
Welfare, his unwearied diligence and Perseverance in the Ministry was a
sufficient Testimony. Ae was very affectionate in praying, not only for others,
but with others, as I my self have often heard him in a private, but a very
honorable, Family. Much more may be said of Him, but this I could not forbear
saying, though I know not what Reflections may be made upon it. Common Justice,
and my Gratitude to his Memory, demanded thus much of me. For I must confess he
has been a Friend, and a Patron, and a kind of Father to me. It was from him I
received my Instructions when I first entered upon my Ministerial Office -- You,
young Men, must not hope to reach to the Age of this Holy Man of God --

I do not, perhaps, remember all the Character, nor can I so far pretend to
have repeated the very Words; but I am confident it was to this Sense, and in
most of these Expressions: I may have omitted somewhat, but, to my knowledge,
have invented nothing.

It raised my Indignation, I must own, to hear this Harangue upon a professed
Maintainer of Division and Schism: To hear it delivered in that very Church
from which He had detained so many ignorant People: To have it spoke in Triumph
over the Head of the Parochial Minister, a diligent and sober Man: To proclaim
it with as much Noise and Assurance as Lungs and Liberty could take; and all
this by a beneficed Church-Divine, without distinguishing between his Charity
and his Judgment; without a Word of Exhortation to Unity and Peace; without so
much as wishing those People to come more frequently to that Holy Place, where
they were now assembled, and where their late beloved Teacher chose to lie at
Rest. Nothing but Applause of the Person, and then a silent Consent to the
Merits of the Cause. This, no doubt, was a more than common Joy and Insult to
that Party; and might be apt to strike some damp upon the regular and
well-affected Members of the Church; since one of their own reputed Ministers
could make Conformity and Separation such indifferent Things; and pronounce the
Man Blessed, who had been the Voice and the Soul of the Schism in that Town.

To give you, Sir, my own Thoughts, I am really as much against a persecuting
Spirit, as any of those Men, whose Interest or Coldness it is to be, for what
they call Moderation. I can freely converse, and exchange any Offices of
Humanity with a well-meaning Dissenter, of what Name soever. I am as much by
Temper, and by Conscience against Rudeness and Railing on the one hand, as
against fawning and Flattery on the other. Especially, I would have all Justice
and all Charity shown unto the Dead of all Persuasions. For I believe there be
some laudable Qualities in Men of the most desperate Sects and Factions.
Goodness of Nature can sometimes break through ill Principles; and the signal
Virtues of Morality, seem in some well disposed People to atone for their
Mistakes in Religion. Even the Pharisees had a Right to be commended for some
punctual Observances of Charity and Justice: Nay, the most deplorable Heretics
in the Christian Church, were none of them so lost to God and Goodness, but
that they said and did some things Praiseworthy, and of good Report.

And therefore I am by no means angry, that this grave ancient Man was
publicly treated with so much Respect and Honor. The Funeral Orations were
always heard with some allowance to Grief and Affection: And Sermons, on the
like occasion, ought to be interpreted with Candor and Concession; especially,
when He who performs that last Office, lies under particular Obligations to the
Party deceased. As it was in this Case; where the Speaker is said to be
possessed of a very plentiful Benefice, chiefly by the Interest and
Recommendation of Mr. Cornish, in whose Opinion He was a moderate and peaceable
Man: And therefore He did well to intimate his great Engagements to Him; and to
call Him expressly his Father, his Friend, and his Patron. This was ingenuous
and proper; but then He should have tempered his Gratitude with Discretion and
Truth.

He should first have considered his own Character, which was, by no means, to
be an Advocate for Indifference in Communion, nor cowardly to betray that
Altar, to the Service whereof He had been legally ordained. He should have
considered the Place, wherein he stood upon Courtesy and Sufferance, and
should in good manners have said nothing offensive to the Person, by whose
leave He came there. He should have considered, that the greatest part of the
Audience were already prejudiced against the Church, and the ordinary means of
Salvation in it; and to be now taught to have Men's Persons in greater
Admiration, would but seal up the Obstinate, and confirm them in the Error of
their ways. He should too have considered, that in the mixed Multitude, there
were some regular and conscientious Members of the Church of England, who must
needs be offended to hear their Church, in effect, delivered up by a professing
Disciple of it: And to find a Leader of misguided Separatists to be, as it
were, Sainted in that Place, where Unity and Conformity are yet established by
Law. And, above all, He should have considered, how he can answer it to God or
Man, to countenance Disorders and Divisions, to Daub with untemper''d Mortar,
to speak smooth things, and to prophecy Deceits; however the People may love
to have it so.

Most certainly, the Preacher, on this solemn Occasion, had been more true to
the Rights of his own Function, if He had took this fair Opportunity, first to
commemorate the great Charity of the Church of England, which, like a natural
and indulgent Mother, has always open Arms to receive even her Froward and
Rebellious Sons. And though, like the other true Parent, she had rather have the
Living Child than the Dead; yet in pity she allows her Offices of Christian
Burial, to those who despise her other Ordinances: Why should not this
Tenderness and Compassion of Hers, work upon the hearts of the Disobedient? Why
should it not make them sensible, there be some returns due of silial Respect
and Love, for her Bowels of Affection to them? Did she imitate the dire
Severities of the Church of Rome: Did she curse and exclude from Salvation all
that forsook the Pale of her Communion: Did she cast out their Bodies to the
Fowls of the Air, or rake into their Graves, and condemn their very Bones to be
burnt; as is known to be the frequent Practice abroad. Why then, these
unmerciful Doings might well create Aversion and Abhorrence in All that
differed from Hor! But when she patiently waits their Submission, while they
live; and affords them the last Offices of Piety, when they come to die, this
sure might win upon all ingenuous Spirits, to oblige Her with Conformity and
Obedience in all reasonable Service.

He might then have took an Opportunity to infer, that our dissenting Brethren
do not die so much out of Charity with the Church, as is commonly imputed to
them. When there has been any variance between Friends or Relations, if the
deceasing Party bequeath a Legacy to Him or Her that survives: This is justly
thought a Sign and Seal of Reconciliation and and perfect Love. Why do we not
in this Case make the same reasonable Inference? We see those Brethren live
many Years as Strangers and Aliens to the Church; yet when they come to depart
out of this World, they leave their Bodies as a Legacy to be there deposited in
Peace. Though, by strength of Prejudice, and force of ill Example, they chose to
serve God in a common and unhallowed Barn, rather than in the Place solemnly
devoted to be his House of Prayer: Yet on Deathbed Thoughts, they cannot will
their Bodies to be committed to the Threshing-Floor; but make it their last
Option to be buried with their forefathers, and let their Sepulchers at least
be on the good old Consecrated Ground. We ought to put the kindest Sense on
this their dying Disposition. We know it was a prevailing Error in the
Primitive Church, for the Novices and Catechumens in the Faith, to defer their
being baptized to the very Point of Death; upon a false Conceit that every Sin
committed after Baptism would be mortal; and, upon a charitable Surmise, that
just dying in the Communion of the Church would absolve them from all the
Errors of their past course of Life. Who knows, but the better sort of
Dissenters have these Scruples on them? That if they should be too soon
admitted into the Bosom of the Church, they could by no means live up to the
Rules and Orders of it; and so, by being unworthy Members, should be the
greater Sinners: Whereas delaying their admission to the last, they may
possibly suppose, that such a final Action determines their Salvation; and to
be buried in the Church, is a sufficient Atonement for long Absence from it.
Charity thinks no Evil.

Then He might have took occasion to persuade the Brethren there preseut, that
they would be as well affected in their Life and Health, as they generally come
to be in their last Sickness, and Point of Death; i. e. to bring their Bodies
to the Church, while their Souls are yet in them. For Souls and Bodies united,
might be offered as a more acceptable and wellpleasing Sacrifice to Christ, and
his Spouse, the Church; more acceptable, than the bare Carcass, and the Refuse
of Mortality. Why should they desire to be interred within the Precincts of the
Church? Unless they naturally think it their own last Home, and their proper
Place. Would any of Us request, that our dead Bodies should be carried into an
Enemy's Country, rather than be laid up in our Native Land? It must argue some
Affection to that Spot of Earth, where we resolve to lay down our mortal Man,
and mix our common Dust. Many of the good Old Christians, in the Times of
Persecution, when they had fixed upon their Place of Sepulture, in Rocks,
suppose, or Dens, or Caves of the Earth; when they had fixed, I say, upon the
Pla^^; they used often to visit it, to retire to it, to spend hours of Devotion
at it, to put them in mind of Mortality, and prepare themselves to depart in
Peace. It could be no Superstition in our Dissenting Friends, to use the like
preparatory Methods of Holy Dying; I mean frequently to visit the Sacred Place
allotted for their Burial, and there exercise themselves to that Godliness
which will be profitable for them.

He might further have thought fit to encourage those Brethren, not to forsake
the assembling themselves together in that Holy Place, where the Mournful
Occasion had now brought them. For they might perceive, there was no such harm
in the Church, or the Service of it. The Ground was not polluted with
Idolatrous Worship; if it had, their Reverend Teacher would not have desired to
find there an Ark of Rest for his Earthly Tabernacle. The Surplice, and the
Liturgy, were no such abominable Things; for they had now seen them innocently
used in the Conduct of their good Old Pastor to the Grave: Nay, and they had
seen six of their Living Teachers walking after them bare-headed, with as much
Decency and Respect, as good Manners, and good Conscience could advise. What
false Spies are they, who have brought this Evil Report upon the Church, as if
it were hideous and intolerable, and would eat up the Inhabitants? We see no
such thing: The Ceremonies are few and inoffensive: The Prayers are devout, and
pathetically good: The Sermons are practical and plain. The People seem
generally sincere and without Hypocrisy. Let us dwell with them together in
Unity. I was glad when they said unto me, we will go into the House of the
Lord. Our Feet shall stand in thy Gates, O Jerusalem.

And when He had come to speak more expressly of the Person and Character of the
Dead, He should have made a fair and ingenuous Apology for those Strokes of
Life and Conversation, which some People had objected, as Blots and Blemishes
to Him.

He might have plausibly said; that his being cast into those Ways of
Separation, seemed not so much his Choice, and his Judgment, as his Birth, and
his Breeding, and his Engagements in the World: For that He was born of
Puritanical Paients, and taught from a Child to censure, and condemn, what He
could not understand: That with these Prejudices, He was admitted in Oxford
under the Government of a noted Admirer of that way; and being there employed
in a servile Office, He was the more obliged to let his Conscience be at the
Command of his Superiors: That he took Orders at a fatal Juncture, when it was
Popularity and Gain to preach down the King and the Church: That his Zeal in
this Cause had recommended Him to the Parliament, so called, who sent him back
with other chosen Brethren to preach up Reformation in Oxford: And, for his
Pains there taken, did soon reward Him with a Canonry in Christ-Church, one of
the best Preferments in England, which the Iniquity of those Times had left
capable to be enjoyed. That these Obligations were enough to contract Him to
that Cause, by which he got his Wealth and Honor; whereas the Church had
offered little or nothing to retain him at first, or to bring him back again.
For when He was forced to leave his own ( i. e. Another's) Place in the
College, He saw afterward no I emptation to conform. He fell under the near
Influence of a Gentleman, who encouraged and supported his Nonconformity; and
made him perhaps dream of the Glorious Times of Restitution. In the mean time,
He was drove on the Necessities of teaching in Separate Congregations; which
Course of Life put him upon some Troubles and Afflictions, that might incense
Humane Nature, and provoke Him to be more disaffected to the Church, by which
He seemed to have suffered much, and to have lost All.

But herein He purchased, what really deserves to be called a good Report: For
notwithstanding these many Disadvantages of Education and Interest, and
Resentment; yet, after All, He was no Bigot, no violent Angry Man: He had
really a Meekness of Disposition, that kept him much from Wrangles and
Disputes: He had a Goodness of Nature, that inclined Him to a fair
Correspondence with some Church-Divines; and it seemed his peculiar Frame of
Spirit to be reserved and inoffensive. In the short Discourses, which I know to
have been held with Him, like a Wise and Good Man, He took only the defensive
part. He never, in my hearing, railed at, or run down the Constitution of the
Church; but pleaded calmly for Moderation, and Liberty of Conscience, and
bearing with One Another. He would often choose to make, as it were, some
Apology for keeping up a separate Meeting in Opposition to the Church. He would
say, He was brought thither by the Invitation and Importunity of such, as He
thought good People. That it was not his Intention to keep them altogether from
the Church; but should sometimes set them the Example of going thither himself.
And He did at first resolve to begin, and end, his Public Exercises at such
hours, as should not interfere with the Solemn Service of the Church; but
dismiss them from one place, to attend at the other. He seemed to desire no
better Character, than what had been truly given of his Predecessor in that
Town, Mr. John Troughton. Athen. Oxon. Vol. 2. P. 512.
He was not of so busy, turbulent, and furious a Spirit, as Those of his
Persuasion commonly are; but very moderate. And although he often preached, as
Occasions offered themselves, in prohibited Assemblies; yet He did not make it
his business, by employing all the little Tricks and Artifices, too frequently
practiced by other hotheaded Zealots of his Fraternity, viz. by vilifying and
railing at the Established Ordinances of the Church, libelling the conformable
Ministry, by keeping their Meetings at that very time when the Services and
Administrations of the Church are regularly performing, etc. He did not, I say,
by these, and such like most unwarrantable Contrivances, endeavor to withdraw
weaker Persons from the sacred Bosom of the Church, in order to fix and herd
them in associated defying Conventicles. He was respected by, and maintained an
amicable Correspondence with some of the Conformable Clergy, because of his
great Knowledge and Moderation.

Mr. John Troughton had this good Character given Him by a Writer, that had not
the Custom of flattering that Party; nor used He to speak better of Persons,
than they commonly deserved. And truly such, in most respects, Mr. Henry
Cornish seemed to be, peaceable and quietly disposed. He was known to have
valued himself on this Happiness, that he had received Holy Orders from a
Bishop of the Church of England; and therefore could not be thought an Intruder
into the Ministerial Office. I remember He has, upon several Occasions, called
himself, and wrote himself, Episcopally Ordained; and, under that Character,
would distinguish himself from other ordinary Dissenting Teachers. He married
one of his Daughters to a Conforming Divine, and used his Interest to possess
Him of a better Benefice, under the Conditions of Subscription and Declaration
which the Laws required. He has, in private Conversation, told the Minister of
the Place, that though he hoped to continue preaching to his Congregation for
his own Life; yet he thought to persuade them All after his Death, to let fall
the separate Meeting, and come unanimously to the Church: Which, I hope, the
honest Man sincerely meant. For when the Minister afterward charged him with
this Promise, and seemed to fear the breach of it; because He had taken in a
young Assistant to carry on the same Work, and to keep up the same Assemblies
of Opposition. The old Gentleman excused the Matter, and declared, that the
said young Person was sent for without his Orders and Advice, and fetched up
from another part of the Land, before He consented to it.

Now if these Instances of his Charity and Condescension had been faithfully
related by the Funeral Preacher, He had done more Justice and more Honor to
the Memory of his Friend and Patron. God forbid that He should have rudely
raked into his Ashes, for Faults and Reflections on them: He should rather again
vindicate Him from any Matters of Fact, or Fame, that had been objected against
Him.

That, from his Youth, He was blown up with that unhappy Ferment of Innovation,
that quickly ruined a once Glorious Church and State: This might be imputed to
that want of Age and Experience, that drew him away, before He could
distinguish between Good and Evil. That He left Oxford, when it was garrisoned
for His Majesty, and joined himself with those that were in Rebellion: This
might be ascribed to the impetuous Tide and Tumult of those Unhappy Times. That
He was remanded to the same University to preach the Scholars into Obedience to
the Usurping Powers: This might be resolved into the same Cause, the Running
Stream, and the Madness of that Age. That He took the Dignity, from whence the
great Dr. Sanderson was, for Orthodoxy and Loyalty, ejected; and so was said to
eat the Bread of one of the profoundest Scholars, and most Pious Divines in
this Nation: This too might be a little excused from the innate Principles of
SelfLove and Preservation. That he was even in those Times ridiculed and made
contemptible for a Puling Saint, and Sneaking Hypocrite, in Drollery and
Rhimes, entitled, Zeal overheated: By Tho. Weaver. Printed 1654.
Or, A Relation of a Lamentable Fire in a Religious Brother's Shop, where Holy
Cornish teached, etc. This might be the Common Genius of Poetry and
Profaneness. That He afterward put himself into a very swimming Humor, and
scarce knew whether to dissent, or to conform: This might be his comprehensive
Charity, and Latitude of Love. That his own old Friends have been heard to
complain, that He was too cold and silent, that He had wrote nothing for the
Cause: This might arise from his Modesty and Distrust of his own Talents; or
perhaps from a better Sense, that such controversial Writings had only inflamed
the World, and turned away the Spirit of Religion. That He was reported to have
little or no Learning, and that some of his Letters are said to remain a
Testimony of his writing what was scarcely Sense and not English: This sure
must have been the Imperfection of his declining Years, when he had outlived
the sight of his Eyes, when in his Sermons and Epistles he was forced to use
the Pen of his Maidservant; and when perhaps (as a notable old Professor said)
He had forgot more than others ever learned.

Stories and scurrilous Reflections are not so much the Talent of Men of our
Communion. Integrity and Truth need nothing but themselves, to support
themselves. Far be it from Us, to invent Libels and Slanders even against our
greatest Adversaries, much less against Him, who at some Times, and in some
Things, professed to be our Friend.

There is indeed a late Historian, who wrote for no Interest, and has therefore
among some Persons gained the Reputation of a plain and undissembling Teller of
Truth, One that really knew as much of Modern Things and Men, as any one Writer
of this Age and Nation. This Historian, I say, made bold to draw up and publish
the Character of Mr. Cornish, while He lived; which was the more ingenuously
done, that He might have pleaded his own Cause, and vindicated himself from any
false Aspersions. Perhaps, Sir, in your Retirement, you have not the Book by
you; and therefore I'llcite you the Words at large. But I beg your Pardon; I
would be only the Transcriber, and leave the Truth and Propriety of it to your
better Enquiries, and to the Credit of the Author.

An. Dom. 1649. About the same time, when the two last Athen. Oxon. Vol ^. P.
771.
Persons were created ( i. e. John Wilkins and Henry Langley) it was granted to
Henry Cornish, Bachelor of Divinity, and Canon of Christ-Church, that He, if
he please, might be actually created Doctor of Divinity; but he refused it, and
was not. This Person, who was Son of Will. Cornish of Ditchet in Somersetshire,
was originally a poor Scholar of New-Inn, and an Assistant to the Butler there
to put on (or enter Battles) in the Buttery-Book: And as he had been
Puritanically educated at home, so more under Dr. Rogers Principal of the same
Inn. Afterward He took the Degrees in Arts, and became a puling Preacher, left
Oxon when it was garrisoned for His Majesty, preached among the Godly Party,
and was appointed by the Parliament, with Langley beforementioned, Corbet,
Cheynell, etc. to preach the Scholars into Obedience to the then Powers: For
which his Service, He was made Canon of Christ-Church, in the Place of Dr.
Robert Sanderson ejected. After His Majesty's Restoration, He was removed, and
preached in those Parts as a Nonconformist, till the Five Mile Act was made;
and then retiring to Stenton Harcourt in Oxfordshire, where He was patronized
by Sir Philip Harcourt, a Favourer of such like Persons (as having been
educated in their Principles by one of the Parliament-Generals, named Sir
William Waller, who had married his Mother.) He lived, and carried on the Trade
there for many Years, and took all Occasions elsewhere to preach, when the
Indulgences for tender Consciences were granted; and did sometimes (after K.
William III. came to the Crown) preach in an antiquated Dancing-School just
without the North-Gate of Oxon: To which Place many People did usually resort.
Afterward this Meeting was translated to a House in St. Ebbe's Parish, where
it now (1691.) continues, and is chiefly carried on by a certain Person, who
had received some Education in Cambridge, etc. In the Year 1690. Mr. Cornish
left Stanton-Harcourt, and translated himself to a Market Town in Oxfordshire,
called Bisiter, where He now holds forth. So that He who had been a Licensed
Preacher by the Blessed Parliament, as it was by the Brethren, so called* and
had been Canon of Christ-Church, and much respected by those of his Persuasion,
while He lived in Oxon, for a Godly Man, does now in his Old Age, being now
about 80 Years old, preach in a Barn in the said Town of Bisiter, for
Profit-sake, to silly Women, and other obstinate People; such is the poor
Spirit of the Person.

I have, Sir, already intimated, that it shall be none of my business to
justify, or refute this Character, which stood upon Public Record, for
several Years, before the Reverend Man here described did depart this World. I
have no more to add, but my Prayers, and a desire of Yours, that while there
seems so fair a Prospect of Universal Peace Abroad, God would bless Us with
Unity and Concord here at Home, and grant Us All to be first Honest, and
Prudent, and then Religious: And I verily believe, that Men, so qualified,
could never desert or betray the Excellent Communion of the Church of England.

Your most Humble Servant.
December. 23. School.
FINIS.

