A DIALOGUE BETWEEN TWO FRIENDS.

LICENSED,

James Fraser,
April 22, 1689.
A DIALOGUE BETWEEN Two Friends, Occasioned by the late REVOLUTION OF AFFAIRS,
And the OATH OF ALLEGIANCE.

By W. K. A. M.

Romans 14. 22. Happy is he that condemns not himself in what he allows.

LONDON: Printed for Ric. Chiswell at the Rose and Crown in in St. Paul's
Churchyard. MDCLXXXIX.

A DIALOGUE BETWEEN TWO FRIENDS, A JACOBITE and a WILLIAMITE.
Jac. MEthinks we live in an Age of Wonders, Africa like, every day producing
aliquid novi. But few Months since Suspension, Degradation, Imprisonment, was
too little punishment for refusal to read the King's (as 'twas styled) Gracious
Declaration for Liberty of Conscience. And now I am as much Disaffected to the
Protestant Cause, for making some Objections against the Oath of Allegiance.


Will. It Is true, the wonderful Revolution of a few days is so unfathomably
Stupendous, that an ordinary Capacity may easily be induced to believe, that
Miracles are not yet ceased. Such signal Methods compassing such an unthought
of Rescue, loudly declare they are more than common. And your obstinate refusal
of a Deliverance written in such legible Characters, your voluntary depriving
your self of a share in so great and unparalled a Blessing, is a second
wonder to me incomprehensible.


Jac. It Is not (I protest) from an affected singularity, or a too high
conceitedness of my own Opinion, that, like Athanasius, I oppose the whole
World by my self. The only reason is, that I may keep a Conscience void of
offense both toward God and Man. I acknowledge the Prince of Orange has been
the great Instrument of our Deliverance from Popery and Arbitrary Power, and
more highly deserves of the Nation than can be expressed; yet I cannot forget
those Ties and Obligations that fix and river our Allegiance to our Dread
Sovereign James the Second.


Will. What are these strong and binding Obligations?


Jac. In number ten thousand, in nature superlatively Obligatory.


Will. Descend to Particulars and nominate one.


Jac. The Dictates of Nature bind me to Natural Allegiance, being by Birth a
Natural Subject to the King of Great Britain, my Duty is to pay Homage and
Obedience either Active or Passive to all his Commands.


Will. I readily grant, that as you are a Subject to the King of Great Britain,
his Majesty has an undoubted Right to challenge your Obedience, but the Ground
and Reason of this Right does not proceed as an Emanation from Nature, as I
shall immediately evince, when I have gotten a right sense of your Notion of
Passive Obedience.


Jac. By Passive Obedience I understand a submissive and patient suffering the
Punishment due to the obstinate refusal of Actively obeying those Commands and
Injunctions of my Superiors, that are either inconsistent with, or opposite to
the Laws and Precepts of the Divine Creator.


Will. Patience under Punishment, when Legally inflicted upon us, and there is
no lawful way to escape it, is a Christian Duty, as is clear and obvious, both
from the Doctrine and Example of our Savior, who despised the shame and
endured the Cross.

But if Passive Obedience (as you interpret it) be Sense, Logicians are much
mistaken in affirming ten Predicaments; since (in your account) Actio and
Passio are one. Obedience (in all Histories, whether Sacred or Profane) has no
relation to suffering, but always signifies the doing things commanded. Thus
Exodus 15. 26. If thou will heark^n to the voice of the Lord, and do that is
right in his sight. Exodus 24. 7. After Moses had read the Book of the Law, the
People promised their Obedience to do all that was there enjoined them. And 1 Samuel 28. 19. King Saul for not doing the Command of the Lord, was stigmatized
with the infamus Character of Disobedience, notwithstanding his suffering the
punishment of his Transgression. Acts 5. 29. the Apostles affirm they ought to
obey (that is Do) the Will of God rather than Man. And all those Express and
Positive Commands for Wives, Children and Servants, to obey their Husbands,
Parents and Masters, only import, it is their Duty to please them well, by doing
those things enjoined by them.

In opposition to this; Passive naturally implies, suffering the Penalty for
not doing; so that should we allow such a contradiction in Speech, as Passive
Obedience, 'twould naturally follow, that those who have suffered the
punishment of the Law, are justified by the Law; for if Suffering render Men
obedient, the Penalty being endured, they are cleansed from their Guilt and
become Immaculate: And by virtue of this Argument, Rebels, Thieves, Murderers,
or the worst of Villians are (after they have received the Reward of their
Transgressions) as honest Men, as good Neighbors, and as Loyal Subjects as
your self.

I know it is objected that Rebels, Thieves, etc. are actual Transgressors of
the Laws both Humane and Divine, and so fall as Criminals; but the others
suffer because they refuse to violate or transgress those Laws. But to this
it is replied, that according to your own Position they are Criminals alike; for
the Doctrine of Passive Obedience (especially as by you defined) does
sufficiently evidence (notwithstanding what you talk of Laws) that the Will of
the Supreme Magistrate is the chiefest Rule we are to walk by; for whatever
Command brings with it Authority to require Obedience, that very Authority does
plainly impress upon it the Character of a Law. Now Criminals, upon the account
of Omission, are equally guilty with those that have rendered themselves so by
Sins of Commission; it being equally the same as to matter of Crime, not to do
those things Commanded, and to act or do those things Prohibited. So that by
parity of Reason, if the one be justified so will the other; for facinus quos
inquinat, aequat.


Jac. I had no design to enter into a Controversy about Passive Obedience; I
asserted that Nature enjoined me to pay Allegiance to the Supreme Magistrate,
and my Reason was, because I was by Birth a Natural Subject.


Will. That Nature obliges you to Obedience, is a great Mistake; for the
constitutes no Subordination among Men; as we are produced by her, we are all
Equals; she ordains neither King or Peasant, Lord or Slave: Her Actions are
only internal, such as respect not those outward Adjuncts, or external
Qualifications. The Laws she designs for our Guide, are her own Precepts; (
viz.) those Innate Notions of Good and Evil, those Common Sentiments of Virtue
and Vice that are proper to all men, as they are Rational Creatures. The
Governor she appoints over us, is every man's own Reason; the Judge, our
particular Consciences. It Is indeed by the Force or Energy of Nature we are
made Men, but we are born free. This is evident from that absolute Authority
every particular Man has over himself, ( viz.) an independent Power in
disposing of his own person: Thus by Compact or Bargain, any Man (I speak of
Subjects) may become a Covenant-Servant, an Apprentice, or a Slave, without
Nature's being concerned in the Contract. For though a King's Eldest Son be a
Prince by Birth, and the first legitimate Male Offspring of an Earl, a Lord the
Day of his Nativity; yet those are Birthright Privileges accruing to them, not
from Nature, but the Laws of the Nation.

Thus Royal Blood and Descent from Ancient Progenitors, are only imputative
Qualities, and have so little Relation to Nature, that they are only Praemia
Virtutis, Rewards for Heroic and Generous Actions, that the persons concerned,
or their Forefathers were eminent for.


Jac. These Commands that are Moral, and perpetually to oblige, are esteemed as
Natural; but the Duty of Obedience is Moral, and perpetually to oblige (if the
Fifth Commandment be so,) which makes me account it Natural.


Will. As we are Subjects, the Duty of Obedience is a perpetual Obligation,
and, after a manner, essential to us; But our Allegiance has not its Foundation
in Nature, or her Operations, but in the Relation we bear to a Sovereign: And
more than this the Fifth Commandment does not evince.

This Precept is Moral, and perpetually to oblige; but the Rational part of it
is grounded not in Nature, but in Gratitude: For as Aristotle observes, Man is
a Sociable Animal, and there is nothing more destructive to Society, than
Ingratitude and Unthankfulness. And since Children have not only their very
Being, but their Well-being also, from their Parents, no Obligation can be
greater or more obligatory to the foresaid Duties.

So that were our Filial Obedience founded in Nature (as you fondly imagine),
the Obligation to that Duty would not be half so strong and valid. Besides,
Natural Duties have respect to the whole Species; and by this Argument, the
Bonds and Obligations to Obedience are General, and every man that is a Parent,
may challenge as strict a Duty of Obedience from us, as our immediate Parents
that begat us; and the Reason of this, is, because Nature is equally concerned
for the whole Species, as for an Individium.

But the Doctrine contrary to this, is so plain and evident from the general
practice of the World, that it needs no proof. For though we are by Nature
equally allied to all, being first in the Loins of Adam, afterward in Noah;
yet this Relation is never termed more than Common Humanity. And how firm or
lasting soever we esteem those Ties and Obligations you mention (which is
really nothing but Friendship), the Second or Third Age commonly expunges them,
if disobliging Carriage, distance of Place, or want of Converse, effect it not
in much less time.

That Paternal Love, and Filial Affection, is not founded in Nature, seems
plain and evident from those different Degrees of Love Men generally bear to
the Legitimate, and Spurious Issue; and that it is cherished by Converse, and
made firm and solid by process of Time, is more than probable, from the
affectionate Nurse, whose Excess of Love to the tender Babe, does often
transcend the affectionate Mothers. Yet it is clearly manifest, Man has a
Natural Appetite or Desire to survive in his Posterity, as irrational Creatures
have of preserving their Species: But this proves nothing against the Argument,
because the Issue of the latter (in riper years) are not by Nature obliged to
the Duties of Gratitude and Obedience.

That the Fifth Commandment enjoins us Obedience to our Superiors, is beyond
all controversy true; and the Reason is, because in the beginning of
Government, Soveraighty was part of the Paternal Power; but (to speak in our
common Language) if the Duty of Obedience in a Natural Son to a Natural Father,
be not a Natural Duty, much less can this Argument prove Natural Allegiance due
to our Civil Parents.


Jac. The Parliament Convened in the Twenty Fourth Year of King Henry the
Eighth's Reign, styles England an Empire, governed by a Sovereign Head, to
which there is a Body Politic joined, composed of all sorts and degrees of
People, who are bound, next under God, to render unto their King Natural
Allegiance.


Will. Natural Allegiance in that Act of Parliament, is only* a Rhetorical
Flourish, spoken after the largest acceptance of that Word; not that
Allegiance flows from Nature, but because it is a Duty so proper, intrinsical
and Essential to a Subject, qua talis. For men's very incorporating themselves
into a Civil Society (without the Obligation of Formal Oaths,) does
sufficiently evidence a tacit acknowledgment of Allegiance to the Caput
Communitatis, because without it it is impossible to defend and preserve the
Body Politic.


Jac. This Discourse (I confess) is somewhat Rational; but I cannot suddenly
digest a thing so Novel.


Will. What you term Novelty proceeds from the vulgar Expressions of Men, and
want of a more serious and weighty* Inspection into the Doctrine. And this will
appear more Rational, if we consult the Specimen of Government in general.

The great and fundamental Law of Nature is Self-Preservation; it is the Magna
Charta of all Constitutions, and the very End and Design of Government it self;
it is a Principle so deeply radicated in Nature, that it is engraven upon every
man's heart.

Had indeed our First Parents maintained the Original Beauty and Brightness of
their Creation, and preserved Nature in her state of Rectitude, Justice had
been our Director, Innocence our Guide: But by that Fall of theirs, the Nature
of Man was so depraved and vitiated, his Passions so transporting, his Desire
so covetous, his Revenge so implacable, that Meum and Tuum were measured only
by Strength and Power; the Longest Sword was the best Law, a securer Title than
Prescription it self.

Thus the more powerful preyed upon, and devoured the weaker; so that Nature
destroyed her own works: And the best course to countermand those Hostile
Proceedings, and preserve this grand Principle of Nature, was men's moulding
themselves into Tribes, associating into Colonies.

Thus, when a Company of Men, (whether many or few it matters not; for, Majus
and Minus non variant Speciem) are unanimously incorporated into one Society,
for the securer Maintenance of Peace, Correction of Vice, Reformation of
Manners, and the more equal Administration of Justice; Laws were enacted,
Constitutions made, and Statutes provided to redress all private Grievances
among themselves; and to protect the Society from the open Hostility of Public
Invaders.

And since neither Plaintiff or Defendant was fit to be Judge of his own Plea,
nor the Mobile Vulgus easily induced to a joint Method, a Unanimous Consent in
opposing the Common Enemy; a single person (if Monarchical Government) or
several (in other Constitutions) of such Virtue. Prudence and Fortitude, as the
whole Society thought fit to confide in, was elected, as an Impartial
Arbitrator in all Cases, whether private or public.

And to him, or them, was committed the sole Executive Power of these Laws; in
all Differences the Definitive Sentence was (according to Law) to be expected
from his, or their mouth. And this Supreme Authority being both Judge and
Protector of the whole Corporation, to advance the Grandeur of such Authority,
and completely to capacitate him, or them, for the Execution of those
Established Laws: This Power was held in high Estimation by the whole Society,
and by the settled Constitutions of the Government; a proportionable Tribute
from the Subject was by Law allowed as a Revenue to support that Royal Office.

And for the firmer uniting this Supreme Head and his Subjects, the former
obliges himself by the Sacred Ties and Obligations of an Oath, at his
Inauguration, to govern his People according to the Rule of the Established
Laws; and the latter as solemnly pays Homage, and swears Obedience. So that
Allegiance in all Subjects, whatsoever Government they live under, (and
especially in our own Constitution) is a Duty so perpetual and indispensible,
that a violation of it is an high Offense against God, as well as against his
Vicegerent.


Jac. This is my very Sense of the Duty of Allegiance; this the Reason I
refused to take that New Oath of Allegiance, because it is a plain Violation of
the Old, which you your self acknowledge perpetually to oblige.


Will. The Duty of Obedience is an inseparable Accident to every Subject; and
you may as well divest him of his Being, as his Subjection; for this Duty, like
the Royal Authority, never dies, but immediately descends from one to another.
But what you talk of is a perfect Frenzy of Loyalty, makes Allegiance an
infinite Duty, and exalts a King to the Honor of a God; if all his Commands
must be obeyed, we tacitly acknowledge he can command nothing that is evil;
for an illegal Mandate must not be obeyed, nor an evil Action committed, though
imperiously enjoined by the greatest of Men.

In all Governments, whether Monarchy, Aristocracy, or Democracy, the Subjects
Duty of Obedience is to be measured by the express and positive Laws of that
Government they are Members of, and not to be regulated by a fancied Chimaera,
of obeying no man knows what, it being now visibly apparent, that Men may be as
superstitiously Loyal as Religious; and the first prove as fatal and
destructive to the Peace and Happiness of the Nation, as the last to the Zeal
and Fervor of True Religion; when in good earnest, the utmost limits of
Allegiance, is but entirely to observe all the lawful Commands and Injunctions
of our Superiors.


Jac. Has the Supreme Magistrate no Authority to command our Obedience? And is
the Extent and Latitude of the Duty of Allegiance limited by declaritory and
express Laws?


Will. It Is a most certain Truth, especially in our own Constitution, where the
Government is a Monarchy Royal, in which the Subjects have as undoubted a Right
to their Religion, Liberty and Property, as the Supreme Magistrate has to the
Royal Prerogative.

For as the Inferior Laws limit the Peoples Rights, restrain them from invading
the Royal Privileges, and from offering violence one to another; so the chief
design of Magna Charta, is to reduce the Regal to a Legal power. The
Prescriptions and Statutes of this Nation are the impartial Arbitrators of
Government and Obedience.


Jac. At present a plausible Plea may arise from hence; but in the beginning
'twas not so; For Magna Charta was never heard of till King Henry the Third,
the Eighth King from the Conquest. And where were those Liberties then you so
much boast of now?


Will. Right! Magna Charta (in that particular form of words it is now
expressed) was not in being till the time you mention; but our Liberties and
Properties were as much then the undoubted Birthright and Inheritances of the
Subjects, as they are now; for Magna Charta (as the Learned and Renowned Lord
Cook observes) is for the most part Declaritory, informs us what our Rights and
Privileges are, instates us into what was lawfully and antecedently our own
Right, but confers no new Immunities upon us.


Jac. This is strange indeed, when the very first Chapter begins, We have
granted to God, and we have given and granted to the Freemen of this Realm. How
could King Henry give and grant those things were none of his?


Will. The Subjects Liberties asserted in this Great Charter, are not to be
looked upon as pure Emanations from the Royal Favor, or new Bounties, to which
the People had neither Right or Claim, but rather a restoring those Privileges
which by the Usurpation and Encroachments of former Kings, were forcibly
withheld from the Subjects. And the truth of this is evident from the Charter
it self; which in the words of Conveyance frequently mentions sua jura, and
suas Libortates, Their Rights and their Liberties; which shows the People had a
former Title to those Immunities, that by this Charter they were again put in
possession of.


Jac. This is a pleasant Story indeed: Are the Subjects Liberties more Ancient
than the Conquest? Has not a Conqueror power to impose what Laws he pleases
upon those Vassels and Slaves he has conquered?


Will. However pleasant it be, it is clear and obvious, the Liberties and
Properties of Englishmen are of greater Antiquity than King William, called the
Conqueror, as appears from the Laws that assert them, some as Ancient as the
Heptarchian Government, granted by Ethelberd, Ina, and Offa; others Cotemporary
with the Monarchical Regency, given and conferred upon the Subjects by pious
King Alfred. Neither were these Laws abolished by the Norman Duke, but were of
such Force and Vigor, as to survive (what you call the Conquest,) and set
Bounds and Limits to that pretended Conqueror.

It Is not denied, but an absolute Conqueror may propose and enact what Laws he
pleases, to regulate and govern the Conquered by: but this was far from King
William's Case, For though that great Victory over Harold, with such a mighty
slaughter of the English, gave him great encouragement, yet the Crown was
obtained by Bargain and Compact, as is plainly evident from those Grants made
to Stigand, Archbishop of Canterbury, and Eglesine, Abbot of St. Augustine's,
in behalf of the Kentish men, and also from the Coronation Oath it self; where
the King swears to maintain and observe the Laws and Customs of the Nation.

It Is true he made little esteem of violating this Sacred Obligation; and his
Successors vehemently encroach'd upon the Liberty and Property of the People;
but what power forceably snatched from them did not invalidate the Subjects
Right. Neither had King William (notwithstanding all his Pretensions to a
Conquest) power to dispose of the Lands or Inheritances of those Natives he
received to Protection: This is manifest from that known Case of Sherborn the
Saxon, who had a Castle and Lands in Norfolk, which the pretended Conqueror
gave to one Warren a Norman, and Sherborn dying, the Heir claiming the same by
Descent, according to the Law, it was before the Conqueror adjudged for the
H^ir, and the Gift made void.


Jac. The Coronation Oath is nothing to purpose, to evince a Paction or an
Agreement upon this Account; for that was made to God, not to Man; and if that
Oath prove a Compact, it is between God and the King, not between the King and
the People.


Will. It Is neither my design, nor pertinent to the business in hand, to begin
a Discourse of the difference between Vows and Oaths. Suppose the Oath were
made to God, (which in propriety of Speech is a Vow) how does that weaken or
invalidate the force of the Argument? It matters not, whether it be a Vow to
God, or an Oath to Man, so long as the matter of it is so express and
declarative of the King's Duty, and the Peoples Rights and Privileges.


Jac. The taking the Coronation Oath was the Conquerors Condescension; a
compliance with the Customs usual at the Inauguration of former Kings, and has
no tendency to a Compact or Bargain with the People.


Will. You may style it what you please: but 'twas such a Condescension or
Compliance, without which (unless he had first won it by an absolute Conquest)
he had never possessed the Crown of England. And the Ancient Rites of the
Coronation it self had some footsteps of this Contract, viz. The Presenting the
King, on the day of his Coronation, to the People upon every corner of the
Scaffold, and asking them if they would have him for their King? I do not
suppose the People had power, to refuse or reject the Person thus exhibited,
that would have rendered the Kingdom Elective; but the Custom being an ancient
Ceremony, and commonly used till Edward the Sixth's Coronation, is in my
Judgment a more than plausible Argument of a Contract between the Supreme Power
and the Subjects.


Jac. How can that be? the King of England is Invested with all the Rights and
Prerogatives of Royalty before he is Crowned.


Will. Right, The King is before his Coronation as absolute a Monarch as after:
This the Case of Watson and Clark (who Conspired against King James before his
Coronation, and were condemned of High Treason) puts beyond all Controversy,
and the Reason of this is clear; the Paction and Agreement between King and
People, is an inseparable Concomitant to the Crown, devolves with it to the
next Successor, and is the tacit Condition and Terms upon which he accepts the
Government.

So that it is no more necessary or expedient for every Heir, as to the Esse of
his being King, to Declare the Conditions immediately upon his coming to the
Crown, than 'twas requisite for every successive Generation, when the Court of
Wards was in force, to declare he held his Lands by Knights Service; the
ancient Tenure of the Estate sufficiently evinced the former, and the very
Descent of the Crown to the next of Blood, brings with it a tacit implication
of all the Immunities and Liberties of the Subjects, in as full and ample a
manner, as if they had been repeated a thousand times over.


Jac. The Court of Wards is as signal a Badge of a Conquest, as undoubted a
Character of Vassalage and Slavery, as any we can possibly instance in.


Will. The Court of Wards has so little relation to Slavery, that the Regale
Servitium quia specialiter pertinet ad Dominum Regem. Britton. sol. 187.
Law terms it only a Service, and all Servants are not Slaves, though all
Slaves may be called Servants in the most strict sense; it is only a Token of
Subjection, and comparatively an Ensign of Freedom; a lasting Monument of
Stipulation and Agreement between the Royal Authority and the People. When at
such an easy rate, as attending the Wars in extraordinary and emergent
Occasions, a Man has an entire Propriety in so large an Estate, so ample an
Inheritance. And the very Antiquity of these Courts does sufficiently evidence
the nulity of a Conquest: These being in force in the Reign of King Alfred, and
survived your Conquest many Generations.


Jac. A Paction between the King and the People is a strange Assertion; and to
say that the People can make a King is very little less than a contradiction.


Will. Pray explain your self, and show for what Reasons.


Jac. Because the Royal Authority has a power lodged in it, which the Subjects
have neither Right or Pretense to confer. For Example, The power of Life and
Death are in the hand of the Supreme Magistrate; which it is impossible he could
receive from the People, because no Man has power of his own Life; much less
has he Right or Authority to put it into another Man's disposal.


Will. Here we must distinguish between Absolute and Conditional: No Man has an
absolute Power over his own Life, so as to lay violent hands upon himself, or
oblige another to shed his Blood, yet every Man has has a conditional Power
upon this account; that is, he is capable (as he is a Member of the Body
Politic) to Covenant and agree with the Head, and the other Members; that
conditionally he violate those Laws, the Transgression of which, the whole
Society have by Statute Law Ordained to be punished with Death, he will submit
to the Punishment. So that the King has not an Absolute Power of Life and
Death; the latter is only a Penalty conditionally we break such Established
Laws: And this Power is rather in the Laws than the Supreme Magistrate; for the
King himself (without manifest Violence and Injustice) has no power to put any
Man to death contrary to Law, or upon a particular Humor.


Jac. Suppose we grant somewhat of Agreement or Paction, between the Conqueror
and the English Nobility; what Advantage is that to us? Did the People indeed,
and in reality, Elect the King as their Governor; when once the Act was done,
and Allegiance sworn, the People have no more Reason or Pretense to revoke or
annul that Election, than a Wife (who has chosen a Husband, promised him her
Obedience, joined her self to him in Marriage) has to put away her Husband, and
to say that the People may Depose their King if there be a Bargain or Contract
between them, is to affirm the Wife may Divorce the Husband because she chose
him.


Will. If all this be granted, you here contend for; I cannot imagine, how it
would weaken or prejudice our present Cause.

The Wife after Marriage may not put away her Husband, that lives with her as
an Husband: Nay, though a very ill Husband, turn Nonthirft, spend his Estate,
abuse her Person, prove unnatural to her Children; notwithstanding all this,
she is obliged to an entire Obedience.

But if her Husband prove Tyrannically cruel; so far prosecute the wicked
Counsels and Designs of her Enemies, as to give signal and evident
Demonstrations that he intends her Ruin, Destruction and Death: If he be in
himself insufficient, (as in the Case of the Countess of Essex by her Husband
Devereux) the Laws allow relief to such a Distressed Wife. And can we suppose
there is greater care taken for a particular Member, than for the whole Body?
In short, though the Wife cannot put away the Husband because she chose him;
yet the Cruelties, Injustice, Violence and Irregularities of the Husband may be
such, as may give just cause of Divorcement.


Jac. But were it not Grand Impiety, by violence to seize upon the Estate or
Goods of a private Man, and dispose of it to others? What Sacrilege then must
it be to Invade the Dignities Royal, and dispose of the Crown and Scepter?


Will. Causelessly to make forcible entry upon any Man's Goods or Estate, and by
violence to keep Possession, is plain and open Robbery; yet a Man may be Guilty
of such Illegal Actions, such indiscret and undue Behavior, as may cause a
seizure of both his Movables and Possessions without any manifest Wrong or
Injury to the once Right owner. And the Laws allow a particular Man for Just
and Reasonable Causes to Disinherit his eldest Son, and Entail the Estate upon
others of his Posterity, only for the preservation of a private Family; and I
would fain hear a solid Argument, why such an Advantageous Privilege (in
extreme Necessity) should be denied the Public?


Jac. The Reason is clear and obvious, the Rights and Properties of Subjects,
or private Men are confirmed by the Laws of the Land, made theirs by Agreement:
But the Prerogatives of the Crown, are a Divine Right, the Imperial Diadem
settled upon the Royal Head by the Almighties own appointment.


Will. If this were but proved the business were done: But alas! this Doctrine
is both groundless and absurd; for whatever Monarch holds his Scepter jure
Divino, must either be invested by an immediate Divine Designation ( viz.) a
special and extraordinary Commission from Divine Providence; as that of Saul,
David, Solomon, Jehu; or else Successively by a Legitimate Descent from Persons
thus Designed; as that of Rehoboam, Asa, Jehosophat; to the former of these,
the Monarchs of England have no Pretense; and if the latter invest them with
it, it is derived either from the Ancient Saxons, or from the Norman Line: That
the first had no such Divine designation is clear from the Story of Hengist and
Horsa.

And that no such pretense can be made from King William, styled the Conqueror,
will be more than evident from his Ambitious Designs; his illegal Attempts; his
hostile and unnatural Proceedings; and his Barbarous in Actions wading through
Torrents of Blood; riding in Triumph over heaps of slaughtered Innocents to
ascend a Throne and grasp at a Scepter, to which he had no more right than the
Great Mogul. And if Quod initio vitiosum est; non potest tractu temporis
convalescere.
the Norman Duke first entered by force of Arms, and after a Battle compounded
for the Crown, it is vain and ridiculous to urge Prescription to make a Divine
Right; be cause what in the beginning was not Divine Process of time can never
impress with a Divine Character.


Jac. But Solomon affirms, Eccles. 8. 14. Where the word of a King is, there is
power, and who may say unto him, what do thou?


Will. Right, the words of Kings are Powerful, and no Man ought to dispute
their Commands: But the Reason of it is grounded upon that Confidence we put in
the Supreme Authority; that his Mandates will be always Lawful.

But this Place of Scripture has a peculiar relation to the Kings of Israel; a
People whom God chose to enter into Covenant with, and over whom he Exercised
such a special. Providence, that 'twas usual with him to set up one, and pull
down another, and cause to Govern whom he pleased.

Thus when he had granted an extraordinary Commission to his Prophets, and they
had Anointed the designed Person King over that People, his Word was powerful,
and to be obeyed, because so immediately constituted God's Vicegerent. But this
Command is not adapted to our Circumstances: neither does it add to our Duty of
Allegiance; and we may as rationally evince the Levitical Laws obligatory in
England, as evidence the British Monarchy, Iure Divino, from this place of
Scripture.

Besides, if this Doctrine were applicable to the Monarchs we live under,
'twould be destructive to our Established Government, and repugnant to the
Apostolic Doctrine. If a King decease whilst his Heir is an Infant, by this
Argument the whole Realm must be subject to his fond and childish Commands; and
when he is arrived to those years in which Passions are more vigorous, and
youthful Lusts strongly importune to ascend the Stage, and act their Scene even
in the violent prosecutions of those lewd Debauches; a Grave and Reverend
Bishop dares not advise him to a Reformation of Manners, to live soberly and
become religious, for fear he transgress his Precept of saying unto him, what
do thou? But what is infinitely worse may happen: the Heir to the Crown may
be born a Fool, or Idiot, or by accident be a Lunatic, or labor under a
grievous Disease of Madness; and yet no man must gain say or contradict him, if
this Argument be valid?


Jac. A Child incapacitated to govern by tender years, ought to be put under
Protectors and Tutors during his Childhood; but in his Adult State, his mature
Age may challenge this Authority. A Fool or Idiot can never be brought sensible
what Government is; and a Lunatic or Madman is more incapable of Government
than either. So that not only Reason, but Nature's Instinct of Self
preservation, commands us to fence these from the Crown and Scepter.


Will. An Infant is as much a Monarch in his Minority, as in his mature and
riper Years; and if he ought to be under Tutors and Governors, they must have
power to say unto him, what do thou? Or we may reasonably infer he will be
very ill Tutored. A Fool or an Idiot (though in all his Actions innocent) must
be obliterated from the Line of Succession; and a Lunatic or Madman (who
never acted against, or endeavored the destruction of Church or State) must
lose his Right, because incapacitated by his Disease.

Why then by parity of Reason may not a Papist be excluded, who has already so
vehemently shook the Foundations of Government, both Ecclesiastical and Civil,
and for the future stands bound by all the Sacred Obligations of Oaths and
Vows, obliged under the penalty of forfeiting his Diadem and Scepter in this
World, and his precious and immortal Soul in that to come; to extirpate our
Religion, subvert our Laws, and reduce us to the Subjection and Vassallage of
the Roman Yoke.


Jac. This Argument (I confess) does a little stagger my Judgment; but when I
remember those other express and positive places of Scripture, so pertinent to
this present Controversy, I am radicated as firm as before, Prove. 8. 15. By me
Kings reign, and Princes decree judgment. 1 Samuel 26. 9. Who can stretch forth
his hand against the Lord's anointed, and be guiltless? What can be more clear
or obvious? what more positively evinced, than Monarchy, Iure Divino, from
these Texts?


Will. It Is true, the places of Scripture do sufficiently evidence the Divine
Right of the Kings of Israel, but they prove nothing for the Kings of England.
And indeed, not only these, but all other places of Sacred Writ, in the Old
Testament, that evidence Regal Authority to be founded by Divine Providence*
have such a proper Aspect, such a peculiar Relation to the Jewish Government,
that they can be expounded of no other Constitution, unless there be the
public Footsteps of an extraordinary Divine Designation, as in all Changes was
apparently visible in that Government, where commonly the Almighty chose, the
Prophets consecrated, and the People obeyed.

But in opposition to this, the Government of England is a Paction and Contract
between the Supreme Authority and the People; the former to govern according to
those Rules the Laws prescribe, and the latter quietly (without Resistance) to
submit to be governed by the Laws Established, and to support with their Lives
and Fortunes the Regal Power.

And this Agreement with the Subjects, does not lessen or depress the Authority
of the Supreme Magistrate, but rather advances it; for it is the Honor of a
King, not to be capable of doing wrong; and it is the Safety and Happiness of
the People, to be under such a Magistrate ^s only commands lawful things, which
capacitates the Subject to obey with safety, sub clipeo legis nemo decipitun.

Whilst the Execution of illegal Commands, is dangerous to the People; that
being an high Offense to the Public, and by Consequence no small Transgression
against the Supreme Magistrate. For the King being a principal part of the Body
Politic, must necessarily have a principal share in that grand Affront. And
this is the Reason of that Maxim, The King can do no wrong; all his lawful
Injunctions being Just and Righteous, and his illegal Mandates must not be
obeyed. So that would Court Earwigs leave off to flatter, and be exact and
impartially honest in their Duty both to King and People, the first would be
renowned, great and glorious, and the second, being free from oppression and
violence, would be loving, loyal, and dutiful Subjects.


Jac. But the Doctrine of the Gospel is so positive and express' in commanding
Obedience to Superiors, that if all other Arguments were away, this is
sufficient to turn the scale against all that can be said to the contrary.


Will. You mistake the very End and Design of my Intentions: I purpose not to
annihilate, or destroy our Obedience, but to reduce it to its due proportion
assigned it, both by God and Man; cause it calmly to run down within the Banks
of its own Channel. By which we shall be fitly capacitated to follow our
Savior's Advice; (viz.) to render to Caesar the things that are Caesar's, and
unto God the things that are God's.

The Evangelical Precepts confine us to no particular Platform of Civil
Government; in general, it provides for the preservation of Honesty, Justice,
and Peace; frequently inculcates our Duty of Obedience, pressing it by many
cogent and rational Arguments; and exhorts us patiently to bear all Calamities
or Oppressures, we have no lawful way to avoid: but it does not oblige us to be
Vassals and Slaves to an Arbitrary Power.

This is evident from pregnant Examples in the New Testament, especially from
the Epistles of the Two Famous and Renowned Apostles, Peter and Paul; and
particularly the last part of the 12th Chapter to the Romans, and the beginning
of the 13th, were penned wholly upon this account.


Jac. The Scriptures you mention, are so Diametrically opposite to the Doctrine
you teach, that it is impossible to find a more cogent Argument, or positive
Command for Absolute Obedience than those are. The Texts are largely insisted
upon by our Divines; and from thence they rationally evince an unlimited Duty
of Obedience.


Will. For the more clear Explication, and better understanding of the
particular Scripture above mentioned, we must enquire, what was the End and
Design of that Epistle, and especially this place formerly quoted. And the
Reasons of that, together with the knowledge of the Persons for whom 'twas
written, their Estate, Condition and Circumstance, will give us a very great
light toward a Right Apprehension of it.

The grand End and Design of this Epistle, was not to plant the Gospel at Rome,
or prescribe all the Doctrines requisite to the Foundation of Christianity; but
rather to refute those false Doctrines that Heretics had super-induced, and to
condemn and reform those wicked and revengeful Practices, that tho Christians
(upon some mistakes) were highly guilty of.

The Persons for whose sake and instruction this Epistle was written, were
chiefly Jews proselyted to the Christian Religion; but yet still strongly
tinctured with their former Leaven, John 8. 33. that they were Abraham's Seed;
and by that Foederal Pact between God and him, were so immediately under the
Government of Divine Providence, that no Heathen Potentate could have Authority
or Lordship over them, further than urgent Necessity or mere Compulsion forced
them.

And being at that time subjugated by force of Arms to the Yoke of the Roman
Empire, and by reason of Traffic, Commerce, and other occasions, necessitated
to inhabit at Rome, where the very Exercise of their Religion was an high
Transgression of the Imperial Laws, which, together with their refusal to pay
the accustomed Tribute, and to render some respect of Honor the Laws conferred
upon the Heathens; the Imperial Officers frequently dealt very severely with
those Christian proselytes; and the Christians (upon the aforesaid Principle)
used all opportunities as severely to revenge themselves; which rendered the
Christian Religion very odious at Rome, and was a great block to the
propagation of the Gospel.

So that the Christians resisting those imperial positive Laws, and their
opposition to the Execution of them, was the only Reason, the alone Cause that
moved the Apostle to write this Portion of Scripture to them; as appears from
Chap. 12. v. 17. Recompense no man evil for evil: v. 19. Dearly beloved, avenge
not your selves, but rather give place to wrath; That is, rather suffer the
punishment of the Law, and the Injuries that those who inflict it, offer to
you, than resist. Because (as he assures them, Chap. 13.) Obedience to the
Established Laws is a Christian Duty, though it be to the Laws of a Heathen
Prince.

And when these Laws are opposite or repugnant to the Divine Precepts, quietly
to submit, and patiently to suffer the punishment of Transgressors, verily
believing, that God will cause all such afflictions and calamities to work for
the benefit and advantage of his People.


Jac. What Is this but Passive Obedience you so much condemned in the beginning
of this Discourse?


Will. It Is so far from Obedience, that it is suffering for righteousness sake.
And indeed it is the only suffering that has a Promise annexed to it in Sacred
Scripture; for those lively Oracles authorize us not to cut our own Throats in
Obedience to the Supreme Magistrate, if he enjoin it, nor to sit still, whilst
others illegally act such violence.

The Gospel does not destroy the grand Principle of Nature, (viz.)
Self-preservation, but cherishes and encourages it.

But in respect of the Public, if Wrongs be personal, or Injuries peculiar to
particular Men, such as portend not destruction, or grand detriment to the
whole Body Politic; such must be patiently submitted to, rather than by
resisting, disturb the public Peace or Tranquillity of the Nation. As it is more
safe and prudent to bear with a little uneasiness in a particular Member,
conditionally it endanger not the other parts, than hazard the Health of the
whole Body by churlish Physic, to redress that Tolerable Inconvenience.

The Duties of Obedience the Gospel enjoins, is to lawful Authority, not to
illegal or imposed Jurisdiction; not an Arbitrary Power. It condemns not our
desending our selves from apparent Ruin and Destruction; and permits us to
dispute our Rights with our Princes, without that infamous Character of Rebels.

Besides, Romans 13. was written on purpose to confute that fond Opinion of the
Jews before mentioned, that they were so immediately in Covenant with God, that
no Foreiner had Authority to oblige them to obedience.

This the Apostle condemns by a positive Command to the contrary, saying, Let
every scul be subject to the higher powers; and withal, shows them the
Reasonableness of this Precept; because the powers that be (whether Pagan or
Jewish) are ordained of God; inferring, that they living under the Ordinance of
God, are obliged to be subject unto it: Verse the Second, he illustrates the
heinousness of the sin of opposing Lawful Authority, in the Execution of Legal
Commands; both from the Ordinance it self and the punishment due to the
Transgression of it. And persuades persons in these Christian Circumstances,
who were daily violating the Established Laws of the Empire, patiently to
suffer and quietly submit to the Legal Execution of the Laws.

Because opposition made by such persons, was resisting the Ordinance of God;
the punishment of which is Damnation. He farther Illustrates, that this was the
end why Rulers were Ordained; their Business and chief Occupation being to
punish such Violaters of the Laws as lived in an open Contempt and
Transgression of them.

And therefore plainly tells them, they must be subject (there is a necessity
laid upon them) not only for fear, wrath, compulsion, or punishment; the alone
Obligations that had power to keep the Jews in Subjection, but also for
Conscience sake.

And for the same Reason enjoins them to pay Tribute: Render therefore to all
their due, tribute to whom tribute is due, custom to whom custom, fear to whom
fear, honor to whom honor.

From hence it is clear and manifest, the Apostle did not command those
Christians to subject themselves to an unlimited or Arbitrary Power; but to
render Obedience to the express and public Laws of the Empire, because these
Laws only could determine how much Tribute, Fear or Honor Superiors
challenged, and Inferiors ought to pay.

The same Doctrine also St. Peter teaches, 1 Epist. 2. where observing the
Heathens distinguished not between the Jews converted to the Christian
Religion, and those which retained the Mosaic Principles, who, for the
abovementioned Cause, became the most obstinate, turbulent, factious and
seditious People imaginable, upon all occasions exerting their utmost
endeavors to raise Tumults, and embroil the State in Civil wars.

The Apostle, to dehort the Christians from the Belief and Practice of that
wicked Principle, earnestly persuades them not to follow the Example of that
obstinate and headstrong People, but by their regular and meek Behavior, quiet
and candid Carriage, to approve themselves to the Heathen Governors, by
submitting to the Ordinance of Man, for the Lord's sake; That is, Render all
due Allegiance, not only to Jewish, but Heathen Governors, even to Claudius
Drusus (in whose Reign the Ancients affirm this Epistle to be written,) though
the Emperor Claudius were elected to the Imperial Throne, by the Pretorian
Band, in opposition to the Design both of City and Senate.

This very Doctrine also St. Paul commands Titus to teach his Flock, Chap. 3.
ver. 1. And those parallel places, those most express and positive Commands,
Colos. 3. 18, 22. Wives submit your selves to your own Husbands: Servants in
all things obey your masters; are only Transcripts of this Doctrine: For
neither Wives nor Servants are obliged to obey, or stigmatized as disobedient,
for refusing to execute the illegal or wicked Commands of their Husbands and
Masters: Neither have the latter Power or Legal Authority to correct or punish
such Disobedience.


Jac. If this be the Genuine Sense, the Natural Signification of these places
of Scripture, how came the Primitive Fathers to interpret them in another
Sense? And why does St. Paul affirm, 2 Cor. 10. 4. that the weapons of
Christians are not carnal?


Will. This is the very Doctrine those Fathers delivered, as is evident from
the Epistles of St. Polycarp, and the Apologies of Justin Martyr, Athenagoras
and Tertullian, to free the Christian Religion from those Aspersions of
Sedition and Rebellion the Heathens accused it of, and to justify the Loyalty
and Obedience of Christians to the Powers and Magistrates under which they
lived. Thus,

Till the Conversion of Constantine the Great to the Christian Faith, the
Evangelical Doctrine was always in opposition to the Established Laws of the
Empire. And in all Cases, when the Divine Precepts were inconsistent with the
Laws Established in the Empire, the Christian Religion taught its Votaries
quietly to submit, and patiently to suffer the punishment due to the
Transgression of these Laws, without resistance, or calumniating Language; to
take up their Cross and follow their Savior. This the Primitive Fathers did
not only frequently inculcate to their Auditors, but manifested their Doctrine
(as is evident from their Works) very often by their own Sufferings.

But when the aforesaid Emperor had settled the Christian Religion, and added
the Civil Sanction, ( viz.) Established its Precepts as the Laws Imperial, the
Doctrine of the Gospel (as to the suffering part) was much altered. In all
former Mutations or Changes in the Government of the Empire, the Christian
Pastors constantly exhorted their Flocks to obey the Supreme Powers; not to
calumniate, or speak evil of Dignities, but patiently to submit to the most
barbarous Cruelties.

But when the Evangelical Doctrine and Discipline was Established by Law, and
Constantius the Emperor persecuted the Orthodox Clergy, Contra Constantum
Augustum.
St. Hillary, that Pious and Learned Father, roundly tells the Emperor of his
impious and unchristian Actions. And when Julian Apostatized from the Faith,
banished the Gospel, demolished the Churches, and scoffingly told the
Christians, their Doctrine was to suffer; an Eminent Man of that Age writ a
Tract De Regibus Apostaticis.
approved as Orthodox Doctrine by that Catholic and Renowned Bishop
Athanasius, which tartly informed the Emperor, That the Christian Religion
(when Established by Law) allowed its Votaries to justify their Rights, and
was not to be trampled upon, ruined, and destroyed, to gratify the Humor of
an Ambitious and Idolatrous Prince.

That of St. Paul has no Relation to our present Discourse; the Weapons there
mentioned, are no Shields or Bucklers against the Hostile Attempts of our
Adversaries, but such as the Church is invested with for the punishment of
Criminal Members; such as Excommunication, Censures, etc.

So that it is clear and evident those places of Holy Writ that enjoins
Obedience to Superiors, however express or emphatical in themselves, have
neither Relation or Aspect to our present Circumstances; they only enjoin
Obedience to all lawful Commands, and prohibit Resistance under the greatest
punishment, when legally imposed; which is so far from our late Transactions,
at which you scruple, that they were only acted to preserve our pure and
Apostolic Religion, and secure our Fundamental Laws and Ancient Government.

And it is most palpably ridiculous and very injurious to the Gospel, to wrest
places of Scripture, peculiarly adapted to the Suffering State of Christianity;
I mean whilst 'twas under Pagan Princes, and without National Laws to support
it, to blacken and condemn the Actions of Christians; whose Religion and
Liberties are Entailed to posterity by Established Laws; and whose only Action
(for which they are blamed) is for Rescuing their Religion from Superstition
and Idolatry, and their Ancient Liberties from the Vassallage and Slavery of
Arbitrary Power.


Jac. But it is observable, when God chastised the wickedness of the Kings of
Israel, he never did it by their own People, but by a strange Nation; showing
by the Conduct of his Justice and Providence, that Subjects must not correct
the Faults of their Kings, but leave that to God, to whom they are only
Answerable for what they do.


Will. It Is true, that was the general Method God commonly used in that Nation,
especially with those he had advanced to the Throne, by Virtue of an
Extraordinary Commission from himself. Yet the Histories of that Kingdom yield
us particular Examples of the contrary practice. Thus the Cruelty, Irreligion,
and wicked Reign of Jeboram, caused Libnah to revolt from under his Government,
2 Chronicles. 21. 10. And the Reason of this Revolt was because Jehoram had forsaken
the Lord God of his Fathers.

And the Maccabees, (when Antiochus Epiphanes, their Lawful King, had silenced
the Jewish Burnt-Offerings and Sacrifices, profaned their Sabbaths, and
polluted their Sanctuary) by opposition and violence, in a most hostile manner,
rescued their Worship from Heathen Idolatry, and cleansed their Sanctuary from
such Pagan Pollutions. And the renowned and thinking Lib. 1. de jure Belli.
cap. 4.
Grotius allows the Necessity of things to consecrate the Action. And the
Learned and Ingenious Thorndike [in his Right of the Church in a Page 306.
Christian State] affirms, God approved of this War; And Heb. 11. commends
their Faith for that Heroic and Virtuous Action.


Jac. Were I convinced of all we have hitherto discoursed of, there is another
Knot so intricate and perplexing, that I despair ever of satisfaction. The Oath
of Allegiance is so express and positive, so firm and binding an Obligation,
that nothing can possibly be a firmer Tie to secure my Obedience to James the
Second; (viz.) Not to take up Arms against the King upon any pretense
whatsoever: And to give this Oath of Fidelity to another, is not only a
Contradiction in it self, but a downright Violation of that former sacred
Obligation.


Will. The Objection, I confess, (before seriously considered) is a very
plausible plea, and of great importance; but when compared with the Rules of
Right Reason, and the Commands of Scripture, the Difficulty does immediately
vanish. Yet I deny not but such Oaths are of great advantage in a Public
Society: by these Princes are secured of their Subjects Allegiance, Generals of
their Soldiers Fidelity; Subjects assertained their Princes will not degenerate
into Tyrants; Leagues confirmed between Nations, Peace conserved among Men,
Mutual Commerce and Trading secured, Liberties and Properties maintained,
Controversies and Suits decided.

And among those the Oath of Allegiance challenges a prime place, being really
and indeed a very sacred Obligation; ( viz.) a calling of Iurare nihil est
aliud quam Deum testem invocare.
God to witness the Reality of our Inten^ion, to keep inviolable that Faith and
Obedience we have promised and sworn to our Superiors, Assumere Deum in testem
dicitur jurare.
the breach of which is a most horrid Crime, a superlative Perjury, very often
severely punished in this World, and (without a sincere and unfeigned
Repentance) will inevitably ruin us in the next.

So that whatever we thus promise, we are as firmly obliged to perform, as the
Wit of Man can contrive to bind us.

But notwithstanding all this, the Oath of Allegiance, however solemnly
administered, or however significant or express in it self, adds nothing to the
Duty of Obedience incumbent upon us as Subjects, without, and antecedent to the
formal Administration of it; it may indeed corroborate and confirm the
Obligation, by adding Perjury to our Disobedience, but it cannot increase or
augment the Duty.

And the very End and Design of the Oath, attests the same; for though the Oath
do particularly name the Supreme Magistrate (because he is Head of the whole
Society), as if 'twere designed only for his Protection and Safety; yet we may
rationally infer, That the Parliament (being convened for the good of the
Public) who invented this Oath, took it themselves, and imposed it upon
others, had in this Oath a more General and Notable Intention, of a more
Excellent and Transcendent Nature; ( viz.) to promote the Safety, Honor and
Happiness of the whole Society. This is evident from the Ridiculousness and
Injustice of that acceptance; for if the Oath of Allegiance be obligatory only
in the former sense; ( viz.) have respect only to the Protection and Safety of
the King's Person, without having any Relation to the Peace and Welfare of the
Public? By this Obligation our Representatives in Parliament, put both
themselves and us into the hands of the Supreme Power, to destroy us at his
pleasure; binding us by the most solemn Obligations imaginable, even the Sacred
Ties of the Oath of Allegiance, quietly to submit to the Invasions of our
Liberties and Properties, Confiscation of our Goods, Sequestration of our
Estates, Profanation of our Holy and Apostolic Religion, by Superstitious and
Idolatrous Practices; and to all other barbarous Outrages that the Pride and
Ambition of Man, or the Malice and Cruelty of Implacable Enemies, could invent;
which is a Soloecism of so grand a Consequence, as we may well think impossible
for so Learned, Judicious, and August a Senate to impose upon themselves.

Especially if we consider, that the Oath of Allegiance, taken only in the
former Intention, confounds and destroys all other Constitutions of Parliament;
is opposite and destructive to the Fundamental Laws of Nature; (viz.)
Self-Preservation, and plainly repugnant to the Divine Rules and Precepts,
which (to any Rational Man) methinks should be a sufficient Argument to engage
him to understand it, in the Second, and more Excellent Sense, since it is
granted by all Men of Reason and Learning, That Oaths are only obligatory in
the Sense of those Persons who invent and impose them, if their Intention may
clearly and rationally appear from the words, as expressed in the Oath.

Now the Oath of Allegiance, in different Circumstances, being capable of a
double Construction, and both apparently agreeable to the Intention and Design
of the Composers, I will a little illustrate the Reasonableness of this twofold
signification.

The Royal Authority being the Head of the Body Politic, the Life of the Law,
and the Soul of Government, it is not only highly reasonable, but absolutely
necessary for the Public Advantage and Behoof, to fence and defend this
Supreme Magistrate against Foreign Enemies, and secure him from private
Insurrections at home.

And to the end that Rebellion might prove abortive in the very Conception, and
that Cockatrice Egg be crushed ere it became a Serpent; the sacred Tie of the
Oath of Allegiance was judged the most effectual means to prevent all Civil
Wars, repel all open Hostility, and secure the whole Society of the entire
Affections of every particular Member.

And the King being the Person to whom was committed the weighty and important
Affairs of the Nation, and in whose Management and Conduct, the Happiness or
Misery of the Public does very much consist. This Oath of Fidelity was
personally made to the Supreme Magistrate, as Head, though really designed for
the Advancement and Promotion of the Peace, Happiness and Safety of the whole
Society.

And for the Truth of this Assertion, I appeal to the Capacity of the meanest
Reader, whether he can suppose, the Great Council of the Nation, Assembled in
Parliament, who composed this Oath of Fidelity, and enjoined it to be given to
the Prince; whether, I say, they designed it only for the Preservation and
Safety of the King? Especially when (by his own Option and Choice) he should
place his personal Interest and Safety in opposition to that of the Public
Weal?

From hence it is evident, That in all ordinary and common Circumstances; that
is, when the Interest of the Royal Authority, and the People, (which always
ought to be) are in Conjunction, the Oath of Allegiance binds all Subjects,
both with Life and Fortune, to assist and defend the Supreme Magistrate against
all Stratagems and Hostilities, whether public or private. And the Reason of
this is, because the Prince is so nearly allied to the Public, and so much a
part of it, that the Safety and Happiness of the latter is, in a very high
measure, involved in the Prosperity and Welfare of the former.

But in great Exigencies, and Extraordinary Junctures of Affairs, in which the
Ruin and Destruction of the Public is inevitably involved (especially if that
National Calamities be favored, advanced and promoted by that Person whose
particular Safety is designed in the Oath,) the promise of Fidelity in such
Circumstances, bind only in the latter, and more general Intention; for Kings
were made for the People, not the People for Kings. And it is plain Madness to
imagine any Obligation can bind us to hasten the Accomplishment, not only of
our own, but the Public Destruction; because such Actions are Diametrically
opposite of all Laws, both Natural, and Civil, and Divine.

And that Extraordinary Contingencies are not to be regulated but by
Extraordinary Methods, is plain and obvious from several Topics. In Common and
Ordinary Circumstances, the Laws secure every man in his Liberty and Property:
Thus the breaking a private man's House, forcibly seizing a man's Goods, or
violently restraining his Person, are Actions very unjust, and highly
punishable.

But in Extraordinary Cases, these are no Rules; but Necessity has her Laws: As
in time of a Raging Famine, Propriety of Goods may be forced; Corn may by
Violence be taken from private men, and sold for the public Relief; In a
Noisome Plague, and Infectious Pestilence, for the Common Preservation, Men may
be restrained from Commerce, and confined to their Houses: and in an apparent
apprehension of an Invasion from abroad, encouraged by a Party at home, Men may
be seized, or imprisoned, or restrained to their Habitations.

Thus Divine Providence Constituted the General Law of Nature to regulate the
Ordinary Course of things: but beside these, Miracles have been often effected,
which the aforesaid Law could never regulate: and yet these supernatural and
stupendous Works were always designed for wholesome and excellent Ends. Thus
Nature her self, for her own preservation in vacuums, etc. causes Natural
things to act contrary to their Natural Motions, forcibly attracting heavy
Bodies upward, and as impetuously compelling the light to descend.

And the express and positive Laws of the Decalogue, notwithstanding the
Solemnity of their Promulgation, together with the Evangelical Commands of the
New Testament (though backed with stupendous Miracles to attest their
Divinity,) are null and void, when by extraordinary Circumstances they are
placed in opposition to the Works of Mercy, Charity or Necessity. Our Savior,
confirming this Doctrine, Matthew. 12. 11. says, Which of you shall have one
sheep, and if it fall into a pit on the Sabbath day, will he not lay hold on
it, and pluck it out? Notwithstanding the strict Precept for the Sanctification
of that Day. And our strictest Casuists (in case of Necessity) allow
Apothecaries to Compound Medicines, Mariners to follow their daily Labors, and
Midwives to do their Office upon the Lord's Day; and all this for the
preservation of particular Persons.

So that the Natural Consequence from hence, is, That if the preservation of a
few Individuals be more acceptable to God, than the strictest Litteral
Observance of his Laws; and the Deliverance of the Public from Ruin and
Destruction, a Matter of such grand Importance, such absolute Necessity, as can
consecrate the Violation of positive Laws, both Humane and Divine. Then our
present Obligation, ( viz.) the Oath of Allegiance, Not to take up Arms against
the King, upon any pretense whatsoever, can be obligatory only in the Literal
Sense, when the Interest of the Supreme Magistrate is in Conjunction with
Public Safety and Happiness, and has no Relation to his particular Intreagues,
or Personal Humors.

And if the Royal Authority (as in our late Circumstances) be so deeply
infatuated by the wicked Counsels of Impious and Self-ended Men, as to sever
his Peace, Prosperity and Quiet from that of the whole Nation, and illegally to
prosecute that Advice so far, as to place his own Safety, Happiness and
Tranquillity, in Opposition to the Safety, Welfare and Security of all his
People; the Oath of Allegiance is then loose, as to him, and obligatory only in
the latter and more Excellent Sense.


Jac. But all Oaths, when once taken, (if imposed by a Lawful Authority, and
Legal Oaths) do so far invest the Persons sworn to, with a Right to the thing
sworn, that the Person swearing has no Power of himself (without the other's
Consent) to retrieve that promise, unless by Violence and manifest Injustice.
Now the Oath of Allegiance being a Lawful Oath, imposed by a Competent
Authority, my taking this Oath invested the King with a Right to my Fidelity
and Obedience; That without the Approbation of his Royal Person, it is not only
unjust, but even impossible to divest him of it, and confer it upon another.


Will. Right! The former part of your Assertion is true, the Oath of Allegiance
is a Lawful Oath, and imposed by a sufficient Authority; yet His Majesty,
before you took this Oath, was invested with as undoubted Right to your
Obedience, and in as full and ample a manner, as if you had taken the Oath a
Thousand times. Neither indeed has the Supreme Magistrate Power to absolve you
from this Obligation; And the Reason of this is manifest; for the Daty of
Allegiance does so mightily conduce to promote the Advantage and Happiness of
the whole Society, that the Public in General, (of which the Supreme
Magistrate is but a part) challenges so large a Concernment in it, that it is a
manifest Wrong, an apparent Injustice, for a particular person (though never so
great) to dispense with the undoubted Birthright of every Subject.

So that should the Oath be taken only in the first acceptance, as you seem
plainly to understand it, ( viz.) to have Relation only to the Safety and
Preservation of the King's Person, without an Eye to the Public Welfare and
Security, the Oath, in that Sense, is not Obligatory, but, ipso facto, void
from the very imposing.

And the Reason of this is plain and obvious, because all Oaths, or Promissory
Obligations, that are contrary to our Duty to our God, our Neighbor, or our
selves; repugnant to Piety, Justice or Charity, are invalid, and bind not. Rei
illicitae nulla obligatio, is a Maxim so consonant to the Doctrine of the
Gospel, that no Christian (I suppose) has a face to deny it. And that the Oath
of Allegiance, in your sense, is Res illicita, is easily manifested from
several Topics.

First, From its Opposition to Piety, and Destructiveness to Religion. His
Majesty to whom you have given this Oath of Fidelity, is by Profession a Roman
Catholic; and, qua talis, he is obliged, not only by the Principles of his
Religion, but sub poena, of Excommunication, Deposition, yea, Damnation, to
extirpate the Protestant Religion, to the utmost of his Power, and to propagate
Superstition and Idolatry in its room.

Now your Notion of the Oath of Allegiance, is both a License and Encouragement
to such a Supreme Magistrate, actually to free himself from the Ties of such
Powerful and Terrifying Obligations, by prosecuting the Business: For when his
Person and Government is secured (under the penalty of Perjury, and punishment
of Rebellion) against all Resistance and Opposition from the Public, what
Block can hinder him from working out his Liberty, setting up his Superstition,
Idolatry, and approving himself to his Holy Father, by subverting our Laws,
destroying our Religion, and by severely punishing those who obstinately oppose
his Arbitrary Proceedings?

Beside, if the Oath of Allegiance, (viz.) Not to take up Arms against the
King, upon any pretense whatsoever; but to assist his Majesty with Life, Limb,
and Terrence Honor, be to be understood particularly of the King's Person; by
this Argument, if a King degenerate to a Julian, his Subjects are (by all
sacred Obligations) bound to assist him with their utmost Abilities, in
demolishing the Temples and Houses of God, exterminating their Religion,
burning their Bibles, and banishing the Gospel from his Territories, and by
their endeavors to introduce Paganism, and establish the Worship of Infidels.

Secondly, The Oath of Allegiance in this Sense is not Obligatory, because of
its contrariety to Justice and Righteousness: Politic Justice commands us to
support as well as obey all the wholesome Laws of that Society we are Members
of; and the Divine Precepts enjoin us to protect the Innocent, relieve the
Needy, and defend the Oppressed; which are Mandates very inconsistent with your
Notion of the Oath of Allegiance: for according to your Interpretation of that
Obligation, all Subjects are obliged to support and defend the Supreme
Magistrate in all his Proceedings, as well when he oppresses the Loyal and
Innocent, as when he punishes the Guilty and Criminal; as vigorously in his
Encroachments upon the Liberties and Properties of the Subject (if he please to
invade them) as in maintaining his own Just Rights and Prerogatives.

But Thirdly, Whatsoever Plea or Objection may be made against the two former,
there is in the Oath of Allegiance, taken in the aforesaid sense, such an
evident Repugnancy to that Eminent and Evangelical Duty, Charity, so frequently
inculcated in sacred Scripture, that that alone does sufficiently evidence the
Invalidity of the Obligation.

The Duties of Mercy and Charity, are not only the Advice and Counsel of our
Savior, but his express and positive Commands, ( viz) That we show Mercy as
our Heavenly Father is merciful; that we deal by others as we would be dealt
with in the like Circumstances: Merciful not only to Men's Bodies, the perishing
part, but chiefly to their Souls, that are Immortal, and must live for ever;
that we may (as much as in us lies) promote and set forward the salvation of
all men; not to detract from, or add to the Word of God, nor to comply with
those that do it, but uncorruptedly to teach it to our sons, and our sons sons.

Now the Oath of Allegiance, in the aforesaid acceptance, can never be
reconciled to this Doctrine; for that Obligation, (whenever the Supreme
Magistrate pleases) destroys Christianity, confirms the Hobbian Principle,
opens a door to Popery, Turcism, Apostasy, Atheism, or what else that
Magistrate shall please to introduce.

And whatever Objection may be produced against it from our sins; ( viz.) that
they are as numerous and great as the Transgressions of Sodom, unparallel and
provoking as the Wickedness of Samaria, that our obstinate contempt, and
voluntary abuse of his Evangelical Mercies, cry aloud to Divine Justice, at
least, to obscure and darken his Gospel, if not totally to deprive us of it,
yet these can never justify our Proceedings to future Ages, or yield any
pretense to a Plea, to free us from our Duty of Christian Charity, to the
Infants of our Time, and the Children yet unborn, which doubtless are not
criminals upon this account, which notwithstanding will (by this unparallel
stupidity of ours, under the Mask or Vizard of Loyalty) be (as by a fatal and
peremptory Decree) for ever deprived of the knowledge of the right worship of
God, and inevitably involve them into such a lamentable condition, as will
certainly render them either in defiance of God their Creator, or in ignorance
of a saving knowledge of their blessed Redeemer.

The Natural Consequence from the whole is, That the Oath of Allegiance can
only bind in the first sense, when it is in order to effect the second; that is,
it only obliges us to protect and defend the Interest of the Supreme
Magistrate, when his Interest is subservient to the welfare of the whole
Society. But if bigoted Zeal, haughty Ambition, or wicked Counselors, be so
prevalent with the Prince, as to obliterate his Duty to the Public, and upon
private Picks and Humors, destroy the Laws, subvert Religion, neglect all the
Methods of Government, and separate his own Happiness from the Safety and
Welfare of the Public; the Oath in the former sense is void and inobligatory.

And the Reason of this Consequence is very plain, because men are under former
Obligations to the contrary: For in the Baptismal Vow, (which is commonly the
first men make,) they oblige themselves by that Covenant made with God, to
perform all Christian Duties, which respect either God, their Neighbors or
themselves, and especially to the Works of Piety, Justice and Charity. Now
After-Obligations can never bind such to opposite Duties; Obligatio prior
praejudicat posteriori; as in case of Marriage, A Pre-contract with one Party,
voideth After contracts with any other: And if a man convey Lands to several
Persons, by Deeds of several Dates, the first Conveyance stands in force, and
all the rest are void. Thus the Oath of Allegiance (though designed and taken
in your sense) becomes void and inobligatory, because it finds men formerly
engaged to contrary Duties.


FINIS.
Books lately Printed for Richard Chiswell.
Dr. PATRICK's Sermon before the Prince of Orange, 20, Jan 1688. -- Sermon
before the Queen at Whitehall, March. 1. 1688. -- Sermon at St. Paul's Covent
Garden, on the first Sunday in Lent, being a Second part of a Sermon preached
before the Prince of Orange. A Letter written by the Emperor to the late King
James, setting forth the True Occasion of his Fall, and the Treachery and
Cruelty of the French. King William or King Lewis, wherein is set forth the
inevitable necessity these Nations lie under, of submitting wholly to One or
Other of these Kings, and the matter in Controversy is not now between K.
William and K. James, but between K. William and K. Lewis of France for the
Government of these Nations.
Books lately Published.
A Letter written by a Clergy man to his Neighbor, concerning the present
Circumstances of the Kingdom, and the Allegiance that is due to the King and
Queen. 4o. The Case of Allegiance in our present Circumstances considered, in a
Letter from a Minister in the City, to a Minister in the Country. 4o. A Sermon
preached at Fulham, in the Chapel of the Palace, upon Easterday, 1689. at the
Consecration of the Right Reverend Father in God Gilbert Lord Bishop of Sarum:
By Anthony Horneck D. D. 4o. The Judgments of God upon the Roman Catholic
Church, from its first Rigid Laws for Universal Conformity to it, unto its last
End. With a Prospect of these near approaching Revolutions, viz. The Revival of
the Protestant Profession in an Eminent Kingdom, where it was totally
suppressed. The last End of all Turkish Hostilities. The general Mortification
of the Power of the Roman Church in all Parts of its Dominions. By Drue
Cress^ner D. D. A Breviate of the State of Scotland, in its Government, Supreme
Courts, Officers of State, Inferior Officers, Offices and Inferior Courts,
Districts, Jurisdictions, Buroughs Royal, and Free Corporations. Fol. An
Account of the Proceedings of the Convention of the Estates of Scotland, from
their first sitting down to this time; which will be continued Weekly. An
Account of the Reasons which induced Charles II. King of England, to declare
War against the States General of the United Provinces in 1672. and of the
Private League which he entered into at the same time with the French King, to
carry it on, and to establish Popery in England, Scotland, and Ireland; as they
are set down in the History of the Dutch War, printed in French at Paris, with
the privilege of the French King in 1682. Which Book He caused to be
immediately suppressed at the Instance of the English Ambassador. Fol. A
Discourse concerning the Worship of Images, Preached before the University of
Oxford the 24th of May, 1686. By George Tallie Sub-Dean of York. [For which he
was suspended.] 4o. Some Considerations touching Succession and Allegiance. 4o.
Reflections upon the late Great Revolution: Written by a Lay hand in the
Country, for the satisfaction of some Neighbors. 4o. The History of the
Desertion; or an Account of all the Public Affairs in England, from the
beginning of September 1688. to the Twelfth of February following. With an
Answer to a Piece called The Desertion discussed, in a Letter to a Country
Gentleman By a Person of Quality. 4o. Scriptorum Ecclesiasticorum Historia
Literaria a Christo nato usque ad Saculum XIV. Facili Methodo digesta. Qua de
Vita illorum ac Rebus gestis, de Secta, Dogmatibus, Elegio, Stylo: de Scriptis
genuinis, dubiis, supposititiis, ineditis, deperditis, Fragmentis; deque variis
Operum Editionibus perspicue agitur. Accedunt Scriptores Gentiles, Christianae
Religionis Oppugnatores; and cujusvis Saeculi Breviarium. Inseruntur suis locis
Veterum aliquot Opuscula and Fragmenta, tum Gracd, tum Latina hactenus inedita.
Pramissa denique Prolegomena, quibus plurima ad Antiquitatis Ecclesiasticae
studium spectantia traduntur. Opus Indicibus necessariis instructum. Autore
GVILIELMO CAVE, SS. Theol. Profes. Canonico Windesoriensi. Accedit ab Alia Manu
Appendix ab ineunte Saculo XIV. ad Annum usque MDXVII. Fol. 1689. Dr BVRNET
[now Bishop of Salisbury] his Life of Dr. William Bedell, Bishop of Kilmore in
Ireland; to which are annexed the Letters betwixt him and Wadsworth, about
Religion. -- Two Letters written upon the Discovery of the Popish Plot;
together with a Collection of several other Tracts and Discourses: Written by
him betwixt the years 1678. and 1685. To which is added a Letter written to Dr.
B^rnet, giving an account of Cardinal Pool's Secret Powers. The History of the
Powder Treason, with a Vindication of the Proceedings thereupon. An Impartial
Consideration of the five Jesuits dying Speeches, who were Executed for the
Popish Plot, 1679. -- A Vindication of the Ordinations of the Church of
England: In which is demonstrated, That all the Essentials of Ordination,
according to the Practice of the Primitive and Greek Churches are still
retained in the Church. -- Reflections on the Relation of the English
Reformation lately printed at Oxford In two Parts 4to. -- Animadversions on the
Reflections upon Dr BVRNET's Travels. 8vo. -- Reflections on a Paper,
entitled, His Majesty's Reasons for withdrawing himself from Rochester. --
Enquiry into the present State of Affairs, and in particular, Whether we owe
Allegiance to the King in these Circumstances? And, whether we are bound to
Treat with him, and call him back, or no? -- Sermon preached before the Prince
of Orange, 23d December. 1688. -- Thanksgiving Sermon before the House of
Commons, 31. Jan. 1688. -- Eighteen Papers relating to the Affairs of Church
and State, during the Reign of King James II. Seventeen whereof were written in
Holland, and first printed there; the other at Exeter, soon after the Prince of
Orange's Landing in England. -- Letter to Mr. Thevenot; containing a Censure of
Mr. Le Grand's History of King Henry the Eighths Divorce, To which is added, A
Censure of Mr. De Meaux's History of the Variations of the Protestant Churches.
Together with some Reflections on Mr. Le Grand. 1689.

