A SERMON Preached in the Cathedral-Church OF WORCESTER, AT The Lent Assize,
April 7 th. 1688.

BY DANIEL KENRICK, Master of Arts, and Vicar OF KEMSEY IN WORCESTERSHIRE

Allowed to be Published this 19 th. Day of June, 1688.

LONDON: Printed by David Mallet, next door to the Star between Fleet-bridge
and Bridewel-bridge. 1688.

To the Right Worshipful, Sir Walter Kirkham Blount, of Soddington, Barronet.
SIR,
IF the Honor conferred upon me, in selecting me particularly from my
Brethren, for the Preaching of this Sermon, were not a sufficient Reason for
the present Dedication, yet the likeness of the Subject to your Virtues, would
make the Discourse tend naturally toward you: For it is chief import is
concerning those best Qualifications, which are your great Ornaments (viz.)
Religion and Loyalty. And, tho it may possibly want Cultivation, yet I Am sure
it is not destitute of Charity and Honesty; which alone will be prevalent enough
to make it grateful to Sir Walter Blount, whose kind and upright Conversation
has obliged all to whom it has extended; It has created an extraordinary Love
to your Person, where there has been a Disesteem for your Religion, and forced
even the prejudiced Mobile to confess, that it is possible to be at once a Roman
Catholic, and an Honest Man. I must confess, such has been the Rude Insolence
even of my Brethren, and those of my own Communion, toward me, upon my
Preaching of this Sermon, that I may be judged by some to want rather a
Regiment, than a private Person for my Patron; and to lie under a high
Obligation of my giving God Thanks, that there is the force of an active Power
to obviate the Outrages of Passive Obedience. But Truth, which is it is own
Defense, is able, when it only shines, like the Light which Converted St. Paul,
to strike it is Enemies to the Earth; and as I never did: so with Gods help, I
am sure I never shall want Courage to Act honestly. And therefore I will
contemn their Frowns and their Threatenings; and more especially because, Sir, I
am under the Influence of such a Patron, who, like your Royal Master, never
dis-regarded your Friends, nor deserted your Servants; and whose Countenance
alone, like that of Caesar to his Soldiers, is able to inspire an undaunted
Resolution into him who is, Sir,

Your very Faithful, and Humble Servant, Daniel Kenrick.

ROMANS 13.1. Let every Soul be Subject to the Higher Powers.


IF This Text, and its import were not sufficiently known, and almost every day
Discoursed upon, I might minutely insist upon its Coherence and Explication;
discourse more largely upon the Origin, and necessity of Government;
distinguish it into its kinds, and set down some Rules, by which inferior
Governors, both Ecclesiastical and Civil ought to go: But as this would not be
altogether so pertinent to such an Audience, so would it rob me of that time,
which I hope more usefully to employ in this place. And therefore without any
such farther Disquisition, I shall briefly and generally Discourse, I. Of the
Necessity of our Subjection to the Higher Powers: And then more particularly.
II. Of the strick Obedience we owe to the higher Powers, or the Kings of this
Realm. III. Of the Reasonableness of our Obedience to the King in the present
juncture of Affairs.


I. There is a Necessity of Subjection to the higher Powers, because such a
Subjection to Man is the Effect of our Obedience we owe to God. For
God-Almighty has so far secured our subjection, to lawful higher Powers, that
we are not only peremptorily forbidden to do 'em Violence, or to speak Evil of
'em; but we have Injunctions moreover from Heaven, not so much as to have a
disrespectful thought of 'em, and not to Curse them even in our private
Resentments. And indeed, since the Higher Powers are constituted by God's
Designation, and subjected immediately to the Great Creator, it will not
appear reasonable for any Man by Rebellion, to endeavor the subjection of
God's immediate Minister, and to pull down beneath our selves, what Heaven has
set up next to its Divine Majesty.

And tho perhaps a Supreme Power can show no just Grounds for some of it is
actions, yet the height of the Seat, in which it is enthroned by God Almighty,
privileges it from being called to an account for such actions by any of its
Subjects. And therefore David, after all his injuries to Vriah, says, Against
thee only have I sinned, and done this evil in thy Sight. And this he says,
because God-Almighty, who was only above him, had a Rightful Power alone of
exacting a Punishment of him.

And this was a Duty men owed to God, not only before the Advent of our
Savior; but since his coming it is an obligation upon them: For our Savior,
his Apostles, and the Primitive Christians taught it at once and practiced it.
Their Doctrine was absolute obedience to the Higher Powers, and their Menaces
for rebellion and resistance, were no less than Threats of Damnation. And,
moreover, that all future Christians should not think the Doctrine of
Subjection Trivial, or Temporary, the Apostles submitted even to those higher
Powers, who were foretold to be Persecutors of them and their Religion.

The Primitive Christians obeyed the Sentence of Death, even when they might
have made a prevalent resistance, and Sealed the horrid unlawfulness of
shedding the Blood of Kings, by patiently permitting the Spilling of their own.
And therefore it is impossible, that a Rebel to his Prince should ever be a good
Disciple to his Savior, and that because he wants one of the great Virtues of
Christianity, which is meekness of Spirit in subjection to the higher Powers.
And therefore, by the way, we may remark, That when Rebellion is stirred up
upon the account of Religion, Religion cannot be the true and just Ground, but
only the pretended cause of such a Rebellion. and it thus frequently comes to
pass, when the Ambitious Statesman is defeated of his extravagant aims,
either by his own ill menage of his affairs, or by the Wisdom of the Prince,
he presently grows enraged and discontented, and being unable to satisfy his
revenge, or retrieve his Interest but by Rebellion, or too proud to do it by a
just Submission, he presently contrives how to make a Powerful disturbance in
the Kingdom, and finds no way more likely to succeed, than a pretense of
Religion. And thus like the Man who finding himself not able to Sleep, resolved
his Neighbors should take as little rest as himself, which he effected by
running about the Streets at Midnight, and crying Fire; Thus, I say, the
discontented and restless Statesman, rouzes the unintelligent Rabble with a
Clamor of Religion, and half Frantic himself by some precedent
disappointment, provokes the People to madness too. Religion is still the
specious Cry, when alas all his Religion is either Pride, Interest, Revenge for
lost Honor, or a wild humor for innovation. For it is utterly impossible that
any Man can have a serious awe of his Maker, or a Love and Adoration for his
Savior, and yet, contrary to the Dictates of Heaven, and the Doctrine of the
Blessed Jesus, make it his business to speak evil of Dignities, and disturb the
Peace of the Kingdom in which he lives.

II. I Proceed to show, that we owe a strict obedience to the Higher Powers of
this Realm. Which is easily evinced, because they are such Powers which are
Sovereign, and as they are absolutely Supreme, so ought we to be absolutely
obedient.

The Kings of this Realm are said crimine vacare, because they owe an account
of their Offenses only to Heaven. They are said to be Laws to themselves;
because, tho in the Court of their own Consciences they are obliged to reign
according to Law, yet they are absolved of all Laws in relation to an earthly
Tribunal. The Kings of this Realm like those of the Jews may do whatsoever they
think fit without Controlment from the Subject: For since they are Gods
Lieutenants, can they be accountable to any but their Almighty Captain? Since
they are Heads of the Commonwealth, what Member shall call them to Question?
and since they have the sole power of the Sword, what hand can justly draw it
without their Commission. The Kings of this Realm by virtue their Prerogatives,
when Laws become sharp may soften them as they please, and when too cruel
totally, pro tempore, suspend them. To the Prerogative we owe the calling of
Parliaments, the proroguing of the good, and the dissolution of the bad. To the
merciful exercise of the Prerogative we owe, that we our selves sit every Man
under his own Vine, and drink the waters of his own Cistern: For by the same
undoubted Rights of Sovereignty, that the King in dispensing with the Laws
shows the light of his Countenance to some of his Subjects, by the same he may,
if he please, become a Cloud, and darkness to the rest: For by the Rights of
Supremacy he may do all things without Controlment and Coertion: And although he
at any time act, as he may do, contrary to the Laws, which himself, or his
Ancestors have ratified, yet at the same time he Acts but according to the
natural Laws and Rights of his Prerogative. And indeed if we consider the
Natural Laws and Rights of Sovereignty, no Law can be made by a Sovereign, but
there must be this tacit Reserve in it, viz. That it shall continue in force
only so long as the Supreme Power thinks it necessary and convenient. And thus
since the Kings of this Realm are Supreme, we ought strictly to pay them such
an humble Obedience, as may be answerable to the greatness of their Power.

III. I come now to show the reasonableness of our Obedience to the King in
this present juncture of Affairs, that is, why we ought to comply, and
cooperate with his Majesty in the repeal of the Tests and Penal Laws, and
settling a lasting Indulgence in relation to Conscience, for Matters of mere
Religion. And this I shall evince from these Eight following considerations.

1. From the Nature of Conscience as to Matters of mere Religion. 2. From the
Genius of the Christian Religion, considered in its first Planting and
Propagation. 3. From the ill consequence of Force, and the happy Effects of
Clemency in affairs of Religion. 4. From the Allegiance and Gratitude we owe-to
His Majesty. 5. From the Liberty that is due to the Subject. 6. From the
Consideration of the Interest of the Church. 7. From the Duties we owe toour
Neighbors. 8. From the Kindness that is due to our Country.
First, From the Nature of Conscience, as to Matters of mere Religion.

Now Conscience in relation to Matters of mere Religion in the present case, is
a Conclusion of the reason. ableness or unreasonableness of our Belief drawn
from Scriptures. Thus when Men say they cannot believe such a particular point
of Divinity, or they must dissent from any parricular way of Divine Worship;
it is as much as to say, that their understanding tells them, that such a point
of Faith, or such a way of Worship, is not consentaneous to the Scripture. And
when Men say, they Believe and Worship according to their Consciences, it is as
much as to say, that they do both, because their understanding concludes, that
they act according to Gods Word. Thus Conscience in Matters of Belief, is
purely an act of the Soul, and since it is so, it is impossible it should be
forced, and the impossibility of it ought to supersede all endeavonrs toward
it. Nay, Conscience in relation to matters of Worship, which is the effect only
of the former, tho you may obstruct its public Exercise, yet without
converting Men into Statues, you can never hinder its private; and therefore
when the Peace of the Kingdom is concerned, it ought to be permitted.

Besides, let us consider, that every Soul is only the Empire of Heaven, and
God Almighty has set Conscience there, as he has placed particular Kings in
their respective Kingdoms, and that is, as his sole Vice gerent. Whosoever
therefore, violently Fights against Conscience, fights against Heaven, because
he endeavors by undue means to subject Gods immediate Minister. And tho
Conscience, like some Heathen Kings, prove many times erroneous, because it
draws undue conclusions from Gods sacred word; yet it is, like those Emperors,
only answerable to Heaven for such Errors. If it be here Objected, That men
justly ought to be punished, if they will not believe when Scripture is rightly
Interpreted: I answer, That I should have thought, that the Eye of Faith is
only the Gift of the Lord of Light, and he only can incline the Heart who made
it; and therefore to pretend to bestow the Gift of God, is to usurp the
Prerogative of Heaven. No, this Gift of God can no more be conferred by Penal
Laws, and taking away Money, than that which Simon hoped to enjoy by giving
money; Heaven never opens the understanding by unlocking the Chest: nor does it
prick and wound the Conscience by mangling an Estate and ruining the possessor.
But, some say, Dissenters are not punished as religious and conscientious, but
for their disobedience to the Laws of the Nation: But this Fallacy is so
palpable, that it is easily solved by asking one plain Question, viz. Why were
those Laws made? And the answer must be, that the Spring which first moved
their debate, was Religion, and the end for which they were made, was, that a
religious Uniformity might be observed by all the Subjects of this Realm; so
that whosoever is punished by the force of those Laws, whose source is from,
and whose ends are for Religion, is really punished as religious, and if he
suffer not besides as an evil doer, his punishment is unjust. For in such a
Punishment the Body suffers, because the Soul is not of the same stamp with
that of his Neighbor; and for the same reason a Man may be lashed, because he
has not as an agreeable a Face as those that lived around him: for neither his
Face nor his Soul were of his own fashioning. Thus force is most improper in
relation to Conscience, not only because it ought not, but because it cannot
effect what is designed by it. Force applied for the Errors of the Mind, is
like pulling a String for the untying of a Knot, your stress only serves to
make it the faster. By undue pressure, you shut the Box closer, which you
design to open; and too much heat contracts the thing it should dilate. And
therefore since Violence has been ineffectual, the King is pleased to propose a
softer method for the Peace of his Subjects. Since Conscience cannot conform to
the Laws already made, His Majesty proposes Laws that may conform to the
Conscience. And since a Kings Proposals are Virtually his Commands, every good
Subject will not only be obliged by his reason, but by his allegiance, to
contribute what in him lies toward the repealing of those Laws, which are so
uneasy to the King, and the Burden of the Kingdom.

Secondly, 'Twill appear reasonable to comply with His Majesty in the Repeal of
the Test and Penal Laws, from the Genius of the Christian Religion, and that
considered in its first planting or its propagation.

Our Savior chose rather to make his approach to Mankind in the Form of a
Servant, than of a Triumphant Monarch: and the reason may be assigned, Because
if the Christian religion had assaulted Men with violent Power, it had
persuaded them that it contained some secret weakness, and the World would have
conjectured that That Piety was a mere imposture which required so much Tyranny
for it is Establishment, By force, indeed, Christ might have Conquered, but not
with that only have converted the World; and his rigor might have regulated
the Body, but never put any influence upon the Soul. He therefore chose to
plant his religion rather by Doctrine, than by the Sword; by his own meek
Mouth, rather than by loud Clamours of War, and to give life to those who were
dead in Trespasses and Sins, by living and dying innocently himself. And by
this gentle Method as the Church was planted; so by the same only it thrived,
it grew when it was moistened with the Blood of its Members, but fell when it
self shed the Blood of Dissenters; it increased when its Votaries fell a
Sacrifice to the Heathen Penal Statutes, but decayed apace, when by virtue of
her own Penal Laws she turned the Sacrificer, and the Ecclesiastic Ark that
sailed secure when storms were raised for ruin by Pagan Persecutors, was always
wracked, and that without pity, when it self had raised the Hurricane for
Persecution: For when all around cry Peace, Peace, a Lasting Peace, none
scarcely will compassionate the defeat, if, in spite of all, a Man makes
himself ready for Battle; especially when by love and peace only as the Victory
may, so it ought to be obtained. And indeed whosoever endeaveurs to get it by
other means, are still suspected to be in the wrong, and all conclude, that the
best deciding Argument for what they profess, is only the sharp Sword which
they draw.

And moreover, suppose the suffering Parties to be what you will, yet the
Sanguinary Method must be unreasonable. For if they should be in the right,
they suffer as Martyrs, and you are guilty of their Blood; if in the wrong,
your Violence makes them esteem their wrong just, and so they dye to go to
Hell, who might have lived by a gentle way of Demonstration, have seen their
Errors, and rise at last to Heaven. If then we consider the Genius of
Christianity, we must not take up the Tests and Penal Laws, but the meekness
of the Cross, to be the true followers of our Lord and Master; For whosoever
pretends otherwise to follow the Lamb, follows him only as a roaring Lion, and
endeavors to tear and devour that Flock which he dyed to protect.

But suppose, say some, that Men Blaspheme; have their Hands in Blood, Vitiate
the Virgin, Ravish the Wife, and commit all Villainy, and that out of Principles
of Religion, should not Penal Laws be made and Executed against such? I Answer,
Yes, by all means, let all such be severely punished. He that sheds Man's Blood
out of a Principle of Religion, by Man let his Blood be shed. Let the Sword cut
off those who sin against the Unwritten Laws of God, and let the Darkness of
Death be a Recompense for those who dare to Transgress against Natures apparent
Light. But, in the mean time, let no Man forfeit his Head for the Frail Error
of his Brain, let no Man's Breath be stopped by Law, because he does not rightly
open a Text in the Gospel, and since no man shall be Damned for his mere
opinion in the next World, let him not be made miserable for it in this.

But for the Sake of Christ's Religion, must not Error be Penally punished, the
false Religion chastis'd, and Antichrist unseated? I Answer, By the same Rule
every Church must fall foul upon her Sister, and because she would think her
self a Rachel, not only conclude, but endeavor to make her Neighbor the
Blear-eyed Leah: For every particular one is apt to Stigmatize the rest by the
Name of Antichrist, to declare it in the wrong, and avow it self only in the
right; it thinks like some imperious Schoolmaster, it ought to have the sole
power of the Rod, and triumphantly above all others to be exempted from the
Terror of the Lash. And so consequently the pulling down Antichrist, must
dethrone Kings, depopulate Nations, and ruin the Christian World. If we pretend
to be inspired with the true Genius of Christianity, let us not pretend to fear
Fire and Faggot our selves, and at the same time heap Coals of Fire upon the
Heads of our Brethren; let us not seem to dread the Rubric of a Massacre to
our own Persons, and at the same time take all imaginable care for the
Slaughter of others; nor let us, lest Smithfield should be in a Blaze by
Popery, set the whole Nation in a Flame by Protestancy: For this is, whilst we
condemn the Crimson Dye in others, to wear the Bloody Colors our selves, and
whilst we blame the Dissenter for not being as white as Snow, it is at the same
instant to put on the guilty Blush of the Scarlet No, let the cool sedateness
of primitive Christianity control the growing heats of Sedition; instead of
Halters, let us meditate only the gentle Bonds of Peace; instead of Imprisoning
our Neighbors, let us put religious restraints upon our imperious desires,
instead of Levying Fines for Religions sake on Earth, let us by Acts of Love
secure a Treasure in Heaven; And let Charity be what it really ought to be, the
true and a chief Test of the Christian Religion. Such was the Spirit of pure
Christianity, when all Pride, Envy, and Interest were Sacrificed to the
Christian Peace; Then, when St. Chrysostom would rather part with an
Archbishopric, then ruin the Tranquil^ity of the Church, when one Father
relinquished the Sea of Constantinople; to avoid an approaching division, when
Clemens Romanus forsook the Wealth and Honor of the Chair of Rome, rather than
foment arising Differences, when Exile was more Eligible with Peace, then
shining greatness without it, when private interest and safety threw 'em selves
away, like Jonah, to prevent a public ruin, and when Christians like that
Prophet were more ready to endure the storm themselves, than to maintain it,
tho with their own security, to the Detriment of others.

Thirdly, 'Twill appear reasonable to comply with the King in the repeal of the
Tests and Penal Laws, from the consideration of the ill consequence of force,
and the happy Effects of Clemency in Matters of Religion.

1. We have known that the Fights for Religion were in the late time but so
many Battles against it. Atheism and Schism sprang up with a greater
Luxuriancy, and Faction grew double like an Hydras's Head, by cutting off of
the Conscientious. The force that has been used in former Ages against Persons
for Conscience and mere Religion, has been so sinistrously prevalent, as to
shake Established Kingdoms, to Degrade Royal Palaces into Recesses of
Murderers, and Conver^ Gods House of Prayer into a Den of Thieves. What
confusion has not force for Religion introduced? A Throne has been changed into
a Scaffold, a Royal Court into a Slaughterhouse, and the ignoble Shrub exalted
into the place of the Heavenly Cedar. Has not the Veil of our Temple been Rent
from the Top to the Bottom, our Churches rendered as poor as the Beggars which
usually attend their Gates, and the Altar it self made a Sacrilegious
Sacrifice? Our Mountains have been made to resemble Calvary; each Field almost
has been turned into an Aceldama, and our Rivers like those of Egypt convertrd
into Blood. Nor have the very Dead been spared, Graves have been rifled,
Sepulchers despoiled, and Tombs stripped and ruined, as if the deceased had
been guilty of Ceremonies, because they were adorned with an Escutcheon and a
Monument. Have not our Rocks resounded with the dying Groans of the Wounded?
Have not our Houses Echoed with Widows sighs, and bereaved Parents Moans? And
has not every Pavement almost flowed with the Tears of the Weeping Virgin, and
the distressed Orphan? And did not the Church of England expire with the loss
and death of her Martyred Head? Nor has severity for matters of mere Religion
had any good success since the Restoration of his Late Majesty. For it is too
well known that the Penal Laws destroyed that very Unity and Uniformity which
they were designed to preserve; They drove whole Multitudes from that Church to
which they should have drawn 'em, and the Excommunication from the Congregation
very often proved an Extermination out of the Kingdom. Nor can it be otherwise,
for (as I intimated before) Divine Love is no more obtainable by force, than
humane Affection: The Conscience, like Wax, grows still more stubborn by the
coldness of its usage, and nothing can so well bend the Spirit of Man, as the
soft Whispers of the Holy Ghost.

Since His Majesty therefore has been pleased to Grant an Indulgence, let us,
like the good Samaritan, instead of the Corrosive Method, pour Oil and Wine
into the Wounds of our bleeding Neighbors. Let me not be the unfriendly
Priest, or uncharitable Levite, to pass regardless by my Brethren, who like the
Man going from Jerusalem to Jerico are fallen among Thieves, stripped and left
half dead. No, let us have compassion on them, bind up their gaping Wounds, and
instead of Levying Money for their ruin, contribute a far greater Sum than the
Samaritans Two pence for their recovery. This way our Blessed Savior, this the
Apostles, this the Primitive Christians took; by meekness and suffering for
Religion, they won the Hearts of the World to it; they used no Sword but that
of the Spirit, but brake the Flinty Hearts of the Heathen by the soft and downy
Methods of the Gospel. Can we imagine that the way for our Brethren to hear our
winning Arguments, is to banish 'em our Conversation, to give occasion of a
Voluntary Exile that they may become good Subjects, and to exalt our selves
against them, that they may see our meekness in Christ? No; the Bonds which
bind the Dissenter serve too but to confirm his dissension: stripes, indeed,
may soften his Flesh, but never mollify his Spirit, and the Penal Laws, which
violently open his Purse, will serve but more closely to tie him up, and oblige
him to stick to his opinion. The way to convice the Papist, that there is no
Transubstantiation in the Eucharist, is not to force him to experience a fatal
change in his Estate; the way to demonstrate that there is only a bare
possibility for him of going to Heaven, is not to compel him to feel that it is
impossible he should live upon Earth; nor is the tying him up from serving his
King any good Method to evince, that he does not rightly worship his Maker. The
light of the Spirit grew still more hot and zealous by being Dark-lanthorn'd in
a Dungeon; the Goal that redue'd the Nonconformist almost to rottenness, could
never yet mellow him into compliance, and the reduction of a Conventicler to a
Morsel of Bread, never made him one jot the less in love with the Barn. It Is
not difference in, but the Penalties for opinion, that infringes the Christian
Love and Charity: The Person suffering envies his Neighbor that lives at ease,
hates the insulting Party, and murmurs against the Fountain of his pressure.
For Love and Stripes are consistent to no Nature but of a Spaniel, and tho an
irresistible force may procure quiet, yet it never can beget a lasting peace.
Most men like Steel springs, tho they violently stand bent, yet they have a
strong aptitude of coming into their places, like Bows they will break the
string that crooks 'em, and will be humble no longer than the pressure of their
Chains make 'em so.

But now kindness smooths the Furrows which the Iron Tests and Penal Laws had
deeply plowed, sweetens the Vinegar and Gall which harsh mulcts, fines and
confiscations had gencrated, and wins so upon all those who have the least
Generosity in their Natures, that they who would passively have dyed under an
oppressor, will dye for him when he appears and becomes merciful. Clemency
makes the Loyal Cement stick, which the roughness of severity would probably
have fretted off; it is the great Elixir of a State, which must probably
Transmute every Subject into the golden temper of Loyalty, and ferment the
whole Nation into the decent Crasis of a willing obedience: For all true Sons
of the Commonwealth must surely be pleased, when they perceive the King is not
at all confined to one Party, that he has Blessings in store for more than one
of his Children, that he will suffer no rapacious Excrescence in the Body
Politic, to draw the whole Nutriment from the useful Members, but that Gods
Vicegerent is such, that, like God himself, with him there is no respect of
Persons, but every one of every profession that fears God is accepted with
him.

I he fatal consequence of the contrary to this, no man can be ignorant of, but
must know that oppressed Parties have grown closer by the weight of their
Affliction, and and their Stripes have been able to beat 'em into the solid
consistence of a confederacy: For many Men, tho never so dastardly before, yet
when pressed and cooped up, have been apt to turn again upon the Government,
and when they have been run as it were to the Wall, they have thought it
extremely lawful to draw upon the adverse Party. Whereas give but their
religious Zeal room enough, tho never so fiery, like Lightning in open Air, it
does no harm, but stopped, it melts the obstructing Sword, and shatters the
opposing Oak; and that current of Conscience, which at liberty calmly slides
along, when it is once damned up, has grown impatient, ruined its Bars, and
deluged the adjoining guiltless Neighborhood. So that as those undue
restrictions have overturned Governments, their Relaxation is most likely to
set 'em upright and preserve 'em: For if a Kingdom be compared to a Ship, we
may conclude, that by taking in an over-ballast of Tests she may probably sink,
and insisting too much on Penal Laws, she may easily over-set. And therefore
let us comply with His Sacred Majesty in taking 'em away, and not let our Eyes
be so dazzled with the false Luster of private Interest, as not to see, or our
Faces so exalted with Pride, as to overlook in this our Day the things that
belong to our Nations Peace. By such a Lenity Faction will be ruined; and one
mighty advantage that such a Liberty will moreover procure, is the Separation
of the Sheep from the Goats, the distinction of the unconvertible Rebel from
the Honest Man; for when all have Liberty to separate like consistent
Heterogeneous Bodies in a large quantity of Liquor, every one will take his
natural place, and he that runs may read, who are Dissenters for Rebellion, and
who the well meaning Separatist for Conscience sake.

Fourthly, From the consideration of the Allegiance and Gratitude we owe to His
Majesty, we ought to comply with the King in the Repeal of the Tests and Penal
Laws.

The King, who is the Supreme Law, is so gracious as to endeavor to have all
uneasy Laws made void; whosoever therefore is so turbulent as to obstruct the
Halciondays designed, may be esteemed little less than doubly rebellious; for
he not only contradicts his Majesty's inclinations, which should have with all
Loyal Subjects the force of Commands, but he likewise so far encroacheth upon
the Prerogative of Heaven it self, as to pursue the supposed Transgressions of
his Fellow Subjects, even beyond the Third and Fourth Generation, for of such
an extent is the designed severity of the Penal Laws and Tests.

Nor let any man say, that he does not obstruct his Majesty's Inclination,
because he takes up no Arms against him: For if Adultery may be committed in
the Heart, Rebellion may be so too. You may Stab your Prince with a Traitorous
Thought; it is possible to be a Regicide by the Two-edged Sword which proceeds
out of a Malicious Mouth; yea, a Smile and Complaisant Carriage, at the hearing
of a Seditious Discourse, is no less then Treason in the sight of God-Almighty:
And to pray for the Destruction of my Prince, is not only to Levy War upon
Earth, but to endeavor to Arm Heaven against him too, and to instruct the
great Creator in that Vengeance which is alone his Perogative, as well how and
when, as where and of whom to take. And thus he that even for Religions sake
shoots out his Arrows, even bitter Words, is as disobedient, as he that throws
a Javelin; and to unsheath a Pen against his Prince, makes a Man in common
Sense as great Rebel, as he that draws his Sword. And therefore since to think
write or speak disloyally upon the account of our Relion, is certainly
resistance for it, and since resistance for it is equally as damning as the
denial of it: Let every Man conclude, that he cannot lift up even his Soul
against his Prince, but it is in God's account the same thing as listing up his
Hand against him, and against Heaven it self too, for which, without sound
Repentance, he must expect certain Damnation. Let none therefore by disloyal
Zeal force up the ill Seeds of unquietness and dissatisfaction: Let none sit
sullenly in close Cabals, to Hatch the Cockatrice of Jealousies and Fears; nor
let their Blood boil up in Passion against the approaching Peace of their
Fellow Subjects: For whosoever do so, will declare themselves to be no less
than Antichristians, Friends of the Father of Lies, and to owe their Sanguinary
Cruelty to him only, who was a Murderer from the Beginning.

But can we be disloyal, say some, if we are for keeping up the Laws and the
Government by Law Established? Yes certainly, I answer, for you cannot be
Loyal, unless you pay true Allegiance, which is not paid unless you obey your
King, and that actively, in all those his commands and desires, which are not
contradictory to the will of God. Now when the King desires you to send such
men to Parliament, that may repeal the Penal Laws and Tests, He desires nothing
but what is the Duty of every Freeholder to do; who ought to choose such men
that may as well repeal Old Laws that are become grievous, as contribute to the
making of New Ones, that may be more easy. The Government by Law Established,
is so Established pro tempore, for the been esse of the Kingdom; and when it
ceases to be so, all ought to concur, that by another Law the grievous
Statutes might be dis-established; for such Statutes are and ought to be
mutable according to the various Face of Affairs. The same Remedy even for the
same Distemper, will not always prove effectual. I say therefore, to those who
insist so much upon the Law, that it is possible that those Laws which were made
for us, and pleased us one Year, may not be for us but dissatisfie us the next;
and miserable surely would it be for this Kingdom, if the Supreme Power were
not upon all occasions a Dispensing one too.

I might urge against the Validity of the Test, that the Kings Concurrence
being rather forced than voluntarily had, it must necessarily want the
Essential Form of a Law. But it is certain, that such Acts as tend to lessen the
Kings Pretogative, are adjudg'd void in themselves, tho made by the Kings
consent. And what can be more against His Prerogative, than those Tests which
would deprive him of that Liberty, which even every Country Farmer enjoys, viz.
the Power of choosing his Servants and his Counselors? To alot a Prince his
Counselors, is like assigning him Tutors, and little less than to pretend to
Govern him. To preserve his person by such means, looks like its Imprisonment;
and to exclude all but our selves from being raised by him, what is it but
unjustly to defraud our honest English Neighbor, to exalt our selves against
our Brethren, and Lavishly to impose upon the Royal Prerogative? If by former
Acts of Parliament, none ought to have a Coercive Power over the Persons of the
Kings of this Realm, what shall we think of those, who endeavor their utmost
to make His Majesty do what they please? If to be adherent to the Kings
Enemies, to give 'em aid and comfort, be Treason; what are those Men who adhere
to them whom His Majesty esteems his Enemies, aid 'em with invectives against
those he accounts his Friends, and comfort them with the hopes and prospect of
a sudden Revolution? By which they must tacitly own, that it is lawful to be
Rebellious in present, that they may be Loyal in Reversion. If to remove the
Kings Counselors, to assign His Majesty Methods for the disposition of his
Forces, of which he had the sole Supreme Government, Command and Disposition,
be like Overtures to Rebellion; the Test cannot be altogether guiltless, which
aims at the same things. And whatsoever may be Harang'd, the contrary to
abridge the Kings power in granting Commissions, and choosing his Counselors,
is no less than to cut short the Prerogative.

Fifthly, We ought to comply with his Majesty in the repeal of the Tests and
Penal Laws, if we consider the Liberty of the Subject.

As we are Born English Men, we are born Subjects to the lawful Kings of this
Realm, and being so, we are born to all the Privileges of Subjects too, and
have a right to all the Liberty and Property which Subjects in our stations are
capable of, and no Act of Parliament for mere Religion ought to abridge us of
those Native Rights, nor can any Law justly take 'em from us, till we forfeit
'em by the Transgression of the Laws of Nature, and those other primitive
constitutions of the Government. For the Rights of the Members of Civil
Government were unalterably such before the Faith of our Savior was received
in the World, and therefore unless God had revealed it to the contrary, it is
impossible such rights should be destroyed by the Reception of out Saviors
Religion, and there being no such Revelation, they must stand still inviolable;
and so stand, that neither the Christian Religion should have any direct
influence upon them, nor they on the contrary upon the Christians as such,
since they originally were and ought still to be harmlesly apart. And hence
it is possible for a Turk or a Jew to be a good Subject to a Christian King.

Now therefore, if Religion be so different from the Civil Government, as it
ought not upon its own account to Rob the Members of such Government of their
Civil Rights and Privileges; 'twill then follow, That the Tests are very
unreasonable, which upon the account of mere Religion, rob the Subjects of
those Liberties and Rights: For my Right as an English Free holder enables me
to choose whom I think fit to represent me in Parliament, but the Test disables
me from it, and tells me, that unless I choose whom it self only thinks fit,
'twill make my choice vain. The Laws tell me, tho a Man cannot be apparently
Born to the Bar or Pulpit, yet he may be so Born to the Rights of Peerage, and
if not Born, he may be made a Peer, and either way have a sufficient Title to
those Privileges: But the Casuistical Test says, No Rights of Peerage without
Protestanoy, No Rights of Blood without rightly believing that of our Savior;
nor any Seat in the House of Lords, if I adhere to the Chair of Rome. My
Birthright tells me. I Am Born in a Capacity of my Sovereign's Favor, of
meriting Rewards from his Hand, and so consequently in a possibility of
advancing my Station; But the predestinating Test says gruffly and severely,
No; There is an irresistible Decree of Reprobation gone out against you, Red
Letters have certainly marked you for bloody Perdition in this World; and
deprives the Papist even of Ability of doing a good Work; or if it is possible
for him to do Ten Millions, yet the vast heap shall not be able to make the
least Step to advance him one Inch toward the happiness of this Life. The Test
savagely determines, tho the Papist has the Fidelity of an unfall'n Angel, the
King shall never trust him; tho the Valor of Achilles, his Prince shall not give
him a Commission; and though he had the Wisdom of Solomon, yet he shall not come
near to advise him. What can be more inhumane, what more barbarous, than to rob
our Brethren at once of their Birthright and their Blessing, and to ruin them
on Earth, because they take another way of going to Heaven? As if the
Sacramental Bread were designed to rob Men of their vital Morsel: As if the Cup
of Blessing in order to the next Life, was instituted for Mankinds Curse in
this, and the Blood of the Blessed Jesus flowed to destroy those whom 'twas
mercifully shed to save!

What makes the vast difference between the Papist and other Dissenters, and
us? Are some of us Loyal? So are some of them. Are we able to advise His
Majesty? They have an equal, if not a transcendent Talent that way: Do we
deserve Preferment, and not they? It lies in the King's Breast which Party
merits most. Have some of us been conspicuous for our Allegiance? They are our
Equals. Have some of their Religion been fatal to Kings? So have some of ours.
Have they been Plotters? So have we. Have we been instrumental in preserving
this King? They were so for the Safety of the last. Did Men of another
Communion bring the Royal Martyr to the Block? Many of our Church began the
fatal Quarrel. Have they been sanguineously cruel of late? Lo! by keeping up
the Tests we are so now. Our Reputation is checkered, as well as theirs; the
Proportion of the Black and the White of Vice and Virtue stands equal in
either: we have all been faulty, we have all gone out of the way. Let us then
return, by being charitable to each other, and obedient to His Majesty.

If it be here objected, That the Dissenters Principles are inconsistent with
Government: Who is better able to judge of that, than He that sits at the Helm?
If it be said, That their Religion is inconsistent with the true Worship of
God: Charity would believe, were they convinced of it, they would soon retract
their Error, And since every one of us aims at one eternal End, since we all
own one God and one Lord Jesus Christ, Charity would believe a possibility of
attaining the End, though in the use of different Ways. The Arrow that is shot
Compass may as certainly hit the White, as that which is directed straight. The
same City may be as surely entered by him that walks over a Mountain, or through
a Desert or a Wood to it, as by another that trave's over the straight and even
Valley. And Charity would believe, that the Crown of Heaven might possibly be
obtained by the round-about Runner, as surely as by him that thinks he more
advantageously casts his Ground; especially if we believe a possibility of the
Salvation of the Apostles before they believed the Doctrine of the Resurrection.

But suppose the Errors of our Brethren were never so inconsistent with
Government; once more I must observe, That a rough Method is not probable to
convert 'em: For Conversion is usually wrought by the softest means: The
Mildness of the Converter is most apt to melt the Soul of the Erroneous; he
must be softened before he can take a new Impression; and by the gentle warmth
of Love be made to relent, before he can be in a capacity of being cast into a
new Form: And therefore the Frost and Horror of the Test must be very
unsuitable for this purpose.

Sixthly, We ought ot comply with the King in the Repeal of the Tests and Penal
Laws, if we consider the Interest of the Church.

There are none that are truly of the Church of England, but are for the
Doctrine of Passive Obedience; and if so, they must grant, that the National
established Church can be no longer such than the Supreme Power will have it
so: And therefore the Church of England ought to please the King, if she would
her self be longer pleased in her Establishment. She ought not imperiously to
think her Station infallibly unprecarious, nor rudely to question the King's
Word, but reverently to obey his just Desires. How extremely ill does it look
to question the Word of a King, and of such a King too? I Am sure, if she had
given her Word for the performance of any thing, and its Veracity should be
doubted, she would think she had good reason to be desparately displeased. And
therefore she not doing in this Particular as she would be done by, she may
give occasion to be rewarded by her own Measures; and if she persists to
question the King's Word, the King may justly suspect her Loyalty. When the
King has given his Royal Word for my Security, if I then should doubt my
Safety, I may be adjudg'd by no means to deserve it. Not to rely upon my
Prince's Promise, is to forfeit the expected Support; and whosoever scoffingly
calls His Majesty's merciful Indulgence only a Scaffolding, may perhaps very
soon come to deserve a more dishonorable Death than is usually executed upon
the Fabric he mentions. And therefore if the Church of England would be secure
in her own Liberty, it is not only her Duty, but her Interest, to promote and
confirm that of others. I know we pretend to merit much, by obstructing the
Bill of Exclusion: Let us not then destroy our former Desert by our present
Errors; for it is possible that our Righteousness may be forgot, and in the Sin
that we sin we may die.

None certainly can be against the King's Inclinations now, but those who would
be now for His Exclusion; for he that contradicts his Prince's Inclinations
even in things Indifferent, tacitly insinuates; that he would not have such a
Man to ruse over him; and he that contradicts what by His Majesty and His wise
Council is adjudg'd to be for the Strength and Peace of the Nation, is no
longer a Friend, but a stubborn Enemy to the Government: For his Eye must
necessarily be evil because the King's is good. Common Gratitude methinks
should oblige our Obedience, not only in this, but in all other Affairs. His
Majesty has graciously confirmed to us all that we possess; and shall we, like
Jesurun, when we remain fat, kick against him that makes us so, and in the
height of our Plenty envy our poor Brethren the small Crumbs which fall from
our Table? Many of our Church have writ, spoke, and inveighed against what His
Majesty would have done; yet He daily forgives us: And when our Lord and Master
has forgiven us, should we in return take our Fellow Subjects by the Throats;
and when he is merciful to us, resolve to be cruel to the rest of his Servants?
His Majesty has promised to be our Defense, if we please; and shall we
foolishly and ungratefully reject His Safeguard? Shall we refuse His
Protection, but desire one Attribute of the Prerogative, viz. the Supreme Power
of the Sword, that we may destroy others, whilst we protect our selves? And
when He has promised to be our Shepherd, shall we refuse to be harmless Sheep,
but expect to be made Porcupines, and covered all over with Armor?

Let it not be recorded in our Annals, That we were lowly then only when we
were oppressed, inclined to Pity but in those days only when we could not
strike; and that the established Church, when it could not wound others, was
Felo de se, and turned militant against it self. For it is certain, that whilst
we stand up for an Arbitrary Safety, we seek and pursue our own Ruin; since a
common Understanding may easily foretell, that no such Pride can continue long
without the attendance of a Fall; and that by obstinate Methods taken for our
Safety, to the pity of our Friends, and the triumph of our Enemies, we shall
find our Security at last in the worst sense, and experience our Church to be
sure and safe, by being dead and gone.

Let it not be said of us who are for Passive Obedience, That we intend
passively to obey the King only so long as he would permit us actively to
afflict our Fellow Subjects; That we would accept him with his Throne and
dreadful Scepter, but not with the soft Plumes of his Mercy-seat; That we
approved of Majesty, not when 'twas clothed with its Forgiveness, but its
Terror; and desired it to approach the rest of the Nation as Jupiter did
Semele, with that Thunder which is certain to make its Peace an Abort. Let no
Sons of the Church of England presume henceforth with a Confessorian Boldness
to call His Sacred Majesty, who is a zealous Worshipper of the True God, an
Idolater: Let none dare impiously to name the King, who adores his Savior, a
Wafer-worshipper: For this is to treat a Prince with less Civility than is
given to his Subjects; it is no less than to spit rudely in the Face of Majesty,
to endeavor to justle the King out of the Affections of his People, and to
give our selves the Lie, when we do these things, and yet declare our selves to
be of the Church of England, which obliges us to the Obedience of Words and
Thoughts, as well as of Actions. And well it is for such a sort of Men, that
they lived not in Queen Elizabeth's time. Let no Sons of the Church of England
irrationally and uncharitably believe a Popish Prince incapable of Repentance,
and be tempted to pray for his Destruction; for it is expressly contrary to the
Doctrine of the Blessed Jesus: It might provoke a Prince to put a Regulator to
such Devotions, since, when such Men come to the Public Congregations, they
must seem to pray for the King, when they pray against him; and I declare, upon
a Supposition position of their incapacity of Repentance too, and that there
were no Laws in force to punish such treasonable Overtures, it might tempt all
honest and loyal Men, for the good of the Church and State, to wish that such a
kind of Church-Votaries would exactly copy all the Actions of the wretched
Judas, after he had barbarously betrayed his gracious Lord and Master. For,
with such Men, to love and honor the King, is to be an Apostate; to love and
be kind to our Neighbor, is to be highly irreligious; and to endeavor to
confirm the Reconciliation of the King to His Subjects, and to create a lasting
Friendship of the King's Subjects among themselves, is to be an Enemy to true
Peace. With such, a morose Stubbornness against, is to be Loyal to His Majesty:
Saucily to affront the King, is to be a True Protestant; and Disobedience to
the Father of our Country, is a manifestation of being a true Son of the
Mother Church. But let all those who are truly Religious and Loyal, encourage
themselves in the God of Peace, and in our merciful Savior who is the Prince
of Peace, and in His Sacred Majesty who is truly a King of Peace; and being so
encouraged, let 'em go about the great Work of Peace; and if they are pointed
at for being Loyal, let 'em know, that it is a Mark of Favor. To be stigmatized
for being thus peaceable, is to wear the Character of Heaven; and tho they fail
of the designed End in this World, they cannot miss the Reward of the
Peacemaker in the next.

Seventhly, We ought to obey the King in the Repeal of the Tests and Penal
Laws, if we consider the Duties we owe to our Neighbors.

It Is at once ungenerons and unjust, to monopolize the Common Good, to engross
the King to our selves, and to repine that all the Vital Spirit flows not from
the Sacred-Head to one particular Member; since Judah ought to have a
proportionable Share in her David, as well as contending Israel.

Where is the Kindness to our Neighbor, when we desire to give Life to those
Laws which are certain Death to our Brethren? The King, like Heaven, designs
that His Sun shine shall be darted on all, the Just as the Unjust; shall we
then raise a Storm to obstruct the refreshing Beams? Or shall the Church assume
the Nature of a Burning-glass, and so contract the extended Rays, as to
transmit 'em to the Conflagration of Dissenters? The King, like Heaven, designs
His Drops of Mercy shall fall on all around; let none therefore show themselves
so enviously covetous, as to wish the fruitful Moisture were all confined to
his own Channel. No; let us consider, that even those whom we think Prodigals
may expect the fatted Calf from the merciful Father of their Country, as well
as we, who too haughtily imagine that we never went astray. Let us not curse
whom the King designs to bless, nor call for Fire from Heaven to consume whom
He graciously means to warm: And when, like His Savior, He comes to save Men's
Lives, far be it from us to seek to destroy 'em, and that by those Laws and
Tests which some have very ill compared to Samson's Hair; but they may very
well, in time, be resembled to Samson's Lion, out of which no Sweetness can be
expected till they lay down their Terror and are dead.

If we would do as we would be done by, we should not lade Men with Burdens
which we are not willing to bear our selves. When we are well clothed, why
should we desire to strip our thread bare Brethren? Or why should we think it
reasonable to desire our Neighbors to lie still, that they may be the more
conveniently beaten?

Let it no more be said, That whilst Rome, like Saul, has slain its thousands,
the Church of England has extinguished its ten thousands. Let it no more be
said ^at we have separated the Inhabitants from their Native Country; separated
earning Parents from their weeping Offspring, the loving Husband from the
lamenting Wife, the Orphans Morsel from his hungry Stomach, and divided the
poor Widow from her little Handful and her remaining Cruise. Let it not be
said, That we endeavor to outdo the Miseries of France: For the Unhappiness
of the Hugonots was finished in short; but that of the Dissenters, by keeping
up the Tests and Penal Laws, must be endless. Let it not be said, That it is not
so much the Union as the Undoing of our Neighbors, that we seek after; that
it is not Diana, but her Shrines, that we regard; and consequently, that we our
selves are the Buyers and Sellers who deserve the Whip for the clearing of the
Temple.

Eighthly, We ought to concur for the Repealing of the Tests and Penal Laws, if
we would be kind to our Country.

It Is not the diversity of Religious Professions in a Kingdom that make a
Nation unhappy, as I observed before; but the Sanguinary Cruelty for such a
Variety. 'Twas not the nature of Joseph's many-colour'd Coat, but the Malice of
his Brethren, that separated him from his lamenting Father. And when a Nation
is separated from her Common Father, such a Division is not caused by the
various Complexion of her Religion, but by the Disobedience and Ingratitude of
her Sons: For we are assured from History, and our own Experience, that where
the Complexion of Religion is as various as that of the Rainbow, like a Sacred
Rainbow too, it keeps the World there from a Deluge of Blood, and an Inundation
of Poverty: For nothing depopulates a Country like the severe Endeavor for the
Uniformity of its Inhabitants. When pressed by the Heat of Penal Laws, they
quickly fly away like Mercury, and such a Mercury too, which carrys along the
radiant Metal and gaudy Wealth in its departure; or if they be hindered from
flight, for want of Vent they commonly burst the Vessel, and rend by Discord
the Kingdom which contains 'em.

But, say some, if the Tests and Penal Laws be taken off, they may be renewed
against our selves, and so our own Cannon will be turned upon us.

To this I answer, If a Security be possible to be made by King and Parliament,
we have the Royal Word it shall be done. The King of Himself might give His
People this Blessing of Peace for His Life, and very much longer; yet when He
designs a more lasting Happiness, He will not effect it without our helping
Hands, and, like Heaven it self, resolves not to save us without our own
Concurrence. By which general Concurrence, the general Security must be strong:
For when the Papist, the Church of England, and all Dissenters are jointly and
equally concerned, like so many Stones contributing to an Arch, the Fabric
must be sure. One will balance the other, and so evenly, that, like a known
Example in Mathematics, Where three Pieces are put together, it is impossible
that one without the rest should fall.

There are some who are for nulling the Penal Laws in relation to some
Dissenters only: But the Partiality is unreasonable; for it is to be easy to
some, that the Severity might fall with a greater weight on the rest.

There are others that are for the taking away both Tests and Penal Laws; but
they would only have it for the present Reign. To such I answer; Besides the
taking notice of the Impertinence of the Concession, since the King of himself
has Power to do it, there is an horrid Uncharitableness in it; for, to take
away the Tests but pro tempore, is only so to take 'em away, that they may
certainly return; and to plant 'em as it were underground, that they may
spring up in the expected time with a greater exuberancy: And then where is my
sincere Charity to my Neighbor, when I design to ruin him hereafter, tho my
Hands must be discreetly tied up for the present? Where is my Charity, when I
forbear to set Fire to the fatal Train now, but leave it ready, that I may the
more securely blow him up in the days to come? And where is my Christian
Temper, when I consent to let the Lion sleep in this King's Reign, that he may
rouse more strongly and devour the Innocent in the next? No; let us not rob our
Countrymen of their Rights in this World, because we think their Opinions in
the wrong for the next. Let us not imagine that they cannot be good Subjects to
the King in Temporals, because some of them own another Supreme in Spirituals:
Nor let us, against all Experience and Reason, conclude, That France and Spain
have no good Subjects, nor Absolute Monarchs, because we know they are perfect
and professed Catholics.

To draw toward a Conclusion therefore. If we would be grateful to the King,
let us divest our selves of all morose Roughness, and, like polished Bodies,
reflect back those Beams of Clemency which He daily sheds upon us. If we would
be merciful to our Neighbors, let us cut the cruel Knots which our own Hands
have kept too long tied. If we would be kind to our selves, let us not provoke
His Majesty to take away that Ease from us which we refuse to allow others.

Are we afraid of Popery? The King assures us, It Is possible to be happy,
without being pernicious. Ought the King to be afraid of Popish Recusants? He
must then be afraid of himself and his faithful Friends. Are the Laws that
ought to be repealed wholesome and rational? What can be more cruel and absurd,
than to oblige a Prince to prosecute his Friends for Traitors, to suppose him a
Foe to the Scepter he sways, and his Head an Offender against the Crown it
wears? Is the Test fit to live? It is concluded to have owed its Life to the
Breath of Perjury, to have grown by Currents of guiltless Blood, to be designed
against our Sovereign, and can only be preserved from death by those who must
err in their Charity and their Understandings.

Is His Majesty not to be believed? He has given the greatest Demonstrations of
his Veracity imaginable; and those who distrust him, after all, may justly
expect the Merits of a stubborn Unbelief. Is it impossible to have an agreeable
Prospect of Affairs, if the Tests be repealed? Set but aside the Mists of
Pride, Interest, and Malice, and all will be fair as the serene Peace which we
seek. Are Popery and Protestancy inconsistent in a Nation? Experience attests
the contrary; and if as different as Jacob and Esau, yet, like those Twins,
they might be nourished in a very narrow compass. Would we grant as much
Liberty as is in the Low Countries? Then let the Tests be repealed, which
deprive Men of the Honor of the Court; and the Profit of Employments.

Cannot the Church and State be preserved without Tests and Penal Laws? How were
they maintained before their Making, and how have they flourished since their
Dispensation? Ought the Laws already made to remain? No Laws ought longer to
remain, than they are for the support of that Peace for which they were
designed: But they ought rather to expire, when their Establishment threatens
the Destruction of our Peace and our Loyalty.

Does the Papist enjoy Toleration and Preferment from his Prince, and therefore
needs no further Security? May not the Catholics ask you then, If you are
secured of your Life to day, what need you an Assurance for to morrow? Or, If
you are secured of your own Life, what need there be a care for your dear
Posterity? Finally, Tho seeming Clouds appear, let our Fears and Jealousies be
laid aside, and fear no Darkness, since God and the King say, Let there be
Light. When the King sends out the pleaceful Dove let out turbulent Waters
abate, and let the Olive branch be returned to the Sacred Pilot. Like the Son
in the Gospel, who retus'd to do his Father's Will at first, but afterward
repented and went about it, let our Eyes after all be so opened, as to obey his
Majesty; that those Laws which owed their forced Generations to preternatural
Heats and Mistake, may be speedily destroyed by a cool and sedate Understanding.

And now I expect for this Public Discourse to be call^ what I have often been
styled for the Loyalty of my Pr^vate Converse to wit, A Papist. But if to love
and h^nour my God; and to preach the Practice and Doctrine (...) my Savior, be
to be a Papist, I am one. If to preach Allegiance to my Prince, and Peace to my
Brethren, be to (...) a Papist, I am one. Or if to entreat the Church of
England to love herself, and to act according to her own Principles, be to be
of the Church of Rome, I confess I am (...) For I declare, in what I have said,
I have only (...) discharged my Conscience, which would never suffer (...)
through the whole Course of my Life to be obstinately Irreligious toward my
Maker, to be indecently Irreverent to my Savior, to be in the least Disloyal
to my King, or Uncharitable to my Neighbor. For the preservation of which
Conscience, I here declare, I will be content to be a Beggar, or even Nothing
upon the face of the Earth, rather than by its Vastation to become the greatest
Subject in the World. And all who know me, (and I have the happiness of
speaking to a great number who do) know that I sincerely speak the Truth: By
which, if, with the Apostle, I am become any Man's Enemy, I must be forced to
tell him, That True Religion, and its Consequent True Loyalty, are far too
precious to be expended for the Purchase of a Seditious Friendship.

FINIS.

