THE Fall of Man DECLARED. AND The way declared in plainness and according
unto Truth, how fallen Man and Woman may be restored into that pure innocent
state and being that Adam was in before the fall. AND A Warning from the Lord
God of life and power in bowels of dear and tender love unto all, the Rulers,
Priests and People, that they hasten to Repentance, who are spending their time
without the fear of the Lord, and nourishing their hearts as in a day of
slaughter.

For the triumphing of the wicked is but short, and the hope of the hypocrite
but for a moment, and though his excellency mount up to the heavens, and his
head reach the clouds, yet shall he perish like his own dung, and he shall
vanish away like a night vision, and they which saw him shall see him no more.

LONDON, Printed for Thomas Simmons at the sign of the Bull and Mouth near
Aldersgate, 1661.

The Fall of Man Declared.
GOD who made the World and all things therein, who formed the mountains, and
created the Winds, who is a God at hand, and not a God afar off, who is near
unto all that call upon him in Truth and Righteousness.

Oh all people, Seek ye the Lord while he may be found, and call upon him while
he is near, you he created Male and Female after his own Image, and to do his
will, and to delight alone in him, and to worship, serve and obey him, who gave
man whom he created after his own image, power and authority, and set him over
and above all the creatures, which he by the word of his power created for the
use and service of man; I say the Lord God gave man, so long as man continued
in obedience unto him, power and authority over all the fowls of the air and
the fishes of the sea, and the beasts of the field; And the Lord God he planted
a garden in Eden, and he took man whom he had formed and put him into the
Garden to dress it and to keep it, and commanded him saying, Of every tree in
the Garden thou may freely eat, but of the tree of the knowledge of good and
evil thou shall not eat of it, for in the day that thou eatest thereof thou
shall surely die: And the Lord God he said It is not good that the man should
be alone, I will make him a meet help for him, and the Lord God made of the rib
which he took from man, a woman, and brought her unto man, and said; Adam, this
is now bone of my bone and flesh of my flesh, and she shall be called woman,
because she was taken out of man.

Now the Serpent being more subtle then any beast of the field which God had
made, says he, Yea has God said of every tree in the Garden you may not eat
of, The Woman said unto the serpent, We may eat of the fruit of the trees of
the Garden, but of the tree that is in the midst of the Garden, God has said
ye shall not eat of it, neither shall ye touch it least ye die.

Now the serpent being more subtle then any beast of the field, although God
had said in the day thou eatest thereof thou shall surely die: said the serpent
unto the woman, Ye shall not surely die, for God does know that in the day ye
eat thereof, then your eyes shall be opened, and ye shall be as gods knowing
good and evil, and when the woman saw that it was good for food, and pleasant
to the eyes, and a tree to be desired to make one wise, she took of the fruit
thereof and did eat, and gave unto her husband with her and he did eat, and
immediately their eyes were opened, and they saw that they were naked, and they
gathered fig leaves, and sewed them together to make themselves aprons, for to
make a covering to hide them from the presence of the Lord, (mark that) all ye
people who are yet in the fall, in the transgression, driven out from the
presence of the Lord into the earth, that when man and woman had disobeyed and
transgressed the command of the Lord God, in eating of the the forbidden fruit,
that was of the tree of knowledge of good and evil, which God commanded, man
whom he had created after his own image, saying, Of the tree of the knowledge
of good and evil thou may not eat, for in the day thou eatest thereof thou
shall surely die: I say that when man and woman had disobeyed the Command of
the Lord in eating of the forbidden fruit, immediately their eyes were opened,
and they saw that they were naked, and they sewed figg-leaves together for to
hide themselves from the presence of the Lord, And they heard the voice of the
Lord God walking in the Garden in the cool of the day, they seeing their
nakedness they hid themselves amongst the trees of the Garden from the presence
of the Lord, (mark that) all ye who are in the fall, in the transgression, and
spending your days without the fear of the Lord, and your precious time which
the Lord God spares you, for to see if you will return unto him, in sports,
pleasures, rioting and wickedness; turn in your minds into the light of the
Son of God, with which you are enlightened, which checks and reproves you for
sin and evil, and makes manifest the evil of your doings, and the thoughts and
intents of your hearts unto you, when there is no man present with you, or can
accuse of them, yet is the Lord God present with you by his light, which is his
true and faithful witness, which he has placed in you which never consented
unto sin and evil, but is a witness for God against sin and evil; I say, then
is the Lord present to reprove you, and to condemn you for the evil of your
doings; I say turn in your minds into the Light of the Son of God, with which
you are enlightened, and come and let us reason together a little; Is there not
in you after the height of your wickedness is over, and you come into a little
calmnesse in the cool of the day, a still low voice following of you, and
crying in you, man or Woman; Where art thou? what is this which thou have done?
Then by the light of Christ in thee, with which thou art enlightened, comes to
see thou have disobeyed the Command of the Lord God; And that thou have acted
contrary unto his pure mind, and will, and unto his true and faithful witness
in thee, which is the light of the Son of God, with which thou art enlightened;
So I say, by that thou comes to see that thou art naked, and then terror and
fear takes hold upon thee; and then thou strives to get a covering to hide thy
self from the presence of the Lord; then in that state and condition, as thou
art striving to get some Fig-leaved Garment, or some words, as the enemy of thy
souls peace, that old serpent, who was a liar from the beginning, shall put
into thee, or raise up in thee to speak; but this I tell ye all from the Lord
God, who are yet in the fall, and in the transgression, driven out from the
presence of the Lord, and without God in the World, that all the coverings that
you have made, or ever shall make, are too narrow, and they cannot hide you,
neither can you be hid under them from the presence of the Lord God; for from
the Lord God you cannot hide, nor from him you cannot fly, but unto him you
must give an account, for the deeds and works done in the body, whether they be
good, or whether they be evil; And the woe of the Lord is unto all ye who are
making false fained coverings, to hide you from the Lord, and from the eyes of
men; for woe says the Lord, unto the rebellious Children, who take counsel
and not of me, and that cover with a covering, but not with my Spirit; And woe
unto them that hide their sins, for they shall not prosper; And this I tell you
again from the Lord, that your coverings are too narrow, and they cannot hide
you, neither are you hid under them from the Lord, nor from the pure single
Eye, which the Lord God has opened in hundreds of his dear Babes and Lambs,
who are counted by you the offscouring of all things, and people not fit to
live upon the Earth, and as sheep for the slaughter; and are reproachfully, and
scornfully by you called Quakers.

So now all people as you tender the good of your own souls, and have any
desire to know the Lord God who created ye, this is the counsel of the Lord God
unto ye; Oh! Turn in, turn in your minds into the Light of the Son of God, with
which you are enlightened, and wait ye in patience in it; and hearken
diligently unto the Voice of the Lord, unto the Voice of the true Prophet
Christ Jesus, the Son of God, the light of the World, Who is the light that
enlightneth every man that comes into the World, who must be heard in all
things; For said the servant of the Lord, A Prophet will the Lord your God
raise up unto you, of your brethren like unto me, him shall ye hear in all
things, whatsoever he shall say unto you, And it shall come to pass, that
every soul which will not hear that Prophet, shall be destroyed from amongst
the People.

So all people who are yet in the fall, in the transgression, driven out from
the presence of the Lord into the Earth, and without God in the World; I say as
you tender the good, and welfare, and happiness of your immortal souls cease
from man, whose breath is in his nostrils, who keeps you ever learning, but
never able to come to the knowledge of the Truth; and give not way unto that
spirit which has led and acted you into sin, and into transgression, into
lightness, and ayrinesse; but turn in your minds into the light of the Son of
God, and keep in your minds, and wait ye in patience in it, and hearken ye
diligently unto the voice the true Prophet Christ Jesus, the Light of the
World, who is the true Light, that enlightneth every man that comes into the
World; I say, hearken ye diligently unto the voice of the true Prophet, which
is a still low voice which follows the Creature, and when the Creature turns
either unto the right hand or unto the left, it says this is the way walk in
it; (Mark that) all ye who are yet in the fall and in the transgression, that
is the voice of the true Prophet which cries in you for purity and holiness,
and after the height of your wickedness is over, and you come into a little
calmnesse, then in the cool of the day it cries in you Man or Woman, where art
thou? what is this that thou have acted and done, then you with the Light of
the Son of God comes to see your nakedness, and then you strive to make
coverings to hide your selves from the presence of the Lord, and in this state
and condition, as I said before, the woe of the Lord is unto you, For woe says
the Lord unto the rebellious Children who take counsel and not of me, and that
cover with a covering but not with my Spirit.

And the Lord God called unto Adam, and said, where art thou, says Adam unto
God again, I heard thy voice and I was afraid, because I was naked, and I hid
my self; so when Man whom God created after his own Image, had disobeyed the
command of the Lord who created him, in eating of the forbidden fruit, that is
of the tree of knowledge of good and evil, which God said in the day thou
eatest thereof thou shall surely dye, and immediately after Adam and Eve his
wife had eaten of the forbidden fruit, the Lord he opened their eyes, and then
they saw their nakedness, and they gathered fig leaves and sewed them together
to make them coverings, and they strove to hide themselves amongst the trees of
the garden from the presence of the Lord; and said the Lord unto Adam, who
showed thee thy nakedness? Have thou eaten of the forbidden fruit, which I
commanded thee that thou should not eat of; Then answered Adam unto the Lord,
the woman that thou gave to be with me did give unto me and I did eat; Then
said the Lord unto the Woman, What is this that thou have done? Then answered
the Woman and said, The Serpent did beguile me and I did eat; Then said the
Lord God unto the Serpent, for this that thou have done thou art cursed above
all Cattle, and above every Beast of the field, upon thy belly shall thou go,
and dust shall be thy meat all the days of thy life; And said the Lord God, I
will put enmity between thee and the woman, and between thy seed and her seed,
and it shall bruise thy head, that is the seed of the woman, and thou shall
bruise her heel.

And so now all people who are yet in the fall, and in the transgression, in
the earth driven out from the presence of the Lord, unredeemed, and without God
in the world; This I write unto you all in dear love, and in bowels of tender
love, and as you prize the good of your own souls consider, and lay it to
heart, how you have spent your time without the fear of the Lord God, who
created you to do his will, and to serve and obey him; so now I say unto you
all, come to a true and a serious consideration for what end and purpose God
created you, whether to do his will, and to serve and obey him, or to do your
own wicked corrupt wills, and to serve and obey your own hearts lusts, unto the
witness of God in all your Consciences do I speak, which I know from the Lord
God will answer, and confess, that God created you to do his will, and to
serve and obey him; Then this is the counsel of the Lord God unto you, and my
exhortation unto you all, in his pure dread and fear, and in bowels of tender
love unto your souls, Oh dread and fear ye God, and let the time past be too
much which you have spent without the fear of the Lord God, and cease to do
evil, and learn to do well, and go on no longer in rebellion and disobedience
unto the Lord God, least you provoke his wrath against you, to destroy you;
Therefore I say kiss the Son least he be angry and ye perish in the way, for
when his wrath is kindled but a little, blessed and happy are all they who put
their trust in him.

Now as touching the state and condition that man was in before the fall, and
before he disobeyed, so long as he continued in obedience unto the command of
the Lord, and in that pure, innocent, holy, and harmless being wherein God
created him, he did enjoy the presence of the Lord God, and had Union, and
Communion, and Fellowship with the Lord, and then he had power and authority
over the Creatures which God created for the use and service of man, but
through disobedience and transgression unto the holy and righteous command of
the Lord God, who created him, he the Creature man lost the image in which he
was created, and lost also his Union, and Communion, and Fellowship with the
Lord, which he had with the Lord before he disobeyed his command, so through
disobedience he was drove into the earth from the presence of the Lord, and
then the Lord placed Cherubims and a flaming sword at the garden of Eden, which
turned every way to keep the way of the tree of life, so through man's
disobedience he lost the image, and was driven out from the presence of the
Lord into the earth, and lost his Power, Authority, and Dominion which he had
with the Lord before he disobeyed, he lost that Power, and that Authority, and
that Dominion which he had over the Creatures which God created for the use and
service of man; So now since the fall of Man, his fall being so great, the
Creatures have had Power and Dominion over the Creature Man, and Man has been
in bondage unto the Creatures, through disobedience unto God the Creator, (Mark
that all ye unbelievers, who will not believe in Christ Jesus the Light) who
are yet in the fall, in the transgression, and in the Earth driven out from the
presence of the Lord, and without God in the world, who are in bondage and in
slavery unto the Creatures, and they have Power, and Dominion over you, some of
you running into the abuse of one Creature, and some of you running into the
abuse of another, your hearts being fixed and settled in the Earth, and in some
Creature-enjoyment, your treasure being in the Earth and Earthly things, there
is your hearts also; So now as you are in the fall, in the transgression driven
out from the presence of the Lord into the Earth, and you standing in this
state and condition, the Creatures which Man had power over at the beginning,
so long as he stood in the counsel of God, they Rule and have Power and
Dominion over you, you being run into the abuse of the Creatures, so hereby you
are in slavery and in bondage unto them.

No way out of the Fall but by following the Light.
NOw all people who are yet in the fall, and in the transgression driven out
from the presence of the Lord into the Earth, and without God in the World, as
the Lord God gives me utterance, I shall declare the way in plainness, and
according unto the Truth, how fallen Men and Women may be restored into that
pure innocent state, and being that Adam was in before the fall.

Oh all people, dread, dread, dread, and fear, and tremble before the living
God of Heaven and Earth, at whose voice the wind and the Sea obeys, who by
the breath of his Nostrils, and the brightness of his coming, he will slay the
wicked; Oh return, return, return unto the Lord God, and repent while ye have
time, and turn in your minds into the light of the Son of God, in your own
Consciences, with which he has enlightened you, who is the true Light that
enlightneth every man that comes into the world, who came not into the world
to save man in sin, but from sin, and in him is no sin, and whosoever abides
in him sins not, neither can he sin because his seed remains in him;
therefore I say unto ye all, unto the light of Christ take heed, and keep in
your minds, and wait ye in patience in it, in that which checks and reproves
you for sin and evil, and makes manifest the evil of your doings unto you, when
no man sees you, or can accuse you of it, yet is the Lord God present with his
Light, which is his true and faithful witness which he has placed in man,
which never consented unto sin or evil, but stands a witness for God in man
against sin and evil, I say the Lord God is present with his Light to condemn
you for sin and evil.

Therefore I say submit ye unto the Lord God, and unto the Light of his Son,
which is manifested in you, and humble your selves, and lie down under the hand
of his mighty power, that he may pour out his judgments, and vials of wrath,
and plagues, and woes upon the head of the wicked in you, which rules and
reigns in you as King, and has led and does still lead and act you into sin
and into transgression, that so the Lord God may show mercy unto your souls,
for the Lord he shows not mercy unto that which has led and acted the Creature
into transgression, but it is his own seed in man which lies yet in you
oppressed and burdened as a Cart pressed with sheaves, by reason of sin and
wickedness, which is yet remaining alive in you, and uncrucified, and
unsubdued, by the power of God; Therefore this is the counsel of the Lord God
unto you all, turn in, turn in your minds into the light of the Son of God, and
wait ye in patience in it, that you may feel the power of the Lord God to
crucify and to subdue, and to expel and to work out all that in you which
entered into man through disobedience and transgression, that so the seed of
God, the seed immortal, which is yet oppressed in you, may be eased and
delivered, that so it may grow and increase unto the praise and glory of the
Lord, who is God blessed for evermore, Amen.

Therefore I say in love unto all your souls, submit ye unto the Lord God, and
lie down under the hand of his mighty power, that so he may pour out his
judgments, and his vials of wrath upon that which has led and acted you into
transgression, that so he may show mercy unto your souls, for the Lord he shows
not mercy, as I said before, unto that which leads the Creature into
transgression, but he shows mercy unto his own seed in man, which never
consented to sin or evil, and he that repents and forsakes his sins, and turns
unto the Lord with a purpose of heart, then will the Lord God show mercy unto
his soul.

And this is the counsel of the Lord God unto you, in dear and in tender love
unto your souls, turn in, turn in your minds into the light of the Son of God
in your own particulars, with which you are enlightened, which is the true Light
that enlightneth every man that comes into the world; Therefore I say, unto
the Light of Christ take heed and wait ye in patience in the Cross, in that
which is a Cross unto your carnal minds and wills, which are running abroad
into the Earth, and Earthly things, for in the Cross and through the Cross is
the power of the Lord God felt and witnessed, although the preaching of the
Cross was unto the Greeks foolishness, and unto the Jews a stumbling block,
yet this I can give in my Testimony for the Lord God, that unto us which are
saved it is the power of God unto Salvation, unto ever, one that believes;
Therefore I say turn in your minds into the Light of Christ in your own
particulars, which is made manifest in you, and wait ye in patience in the
Cross, that you feel and see the power of the Lord to slay the enmity and to
take away the cause, and to break down the partition wall, and to rent the
vail; Now I say, who am a lover of all souls, wait in patience in the Cross,
that you may feel and see the power of the Lord God to take away and to remove
the cause, to take away that and to remove that, and to work out, and to expel
out all that in you which has caused a separation betwixt God and you, that is
to feel and to see the power of the Lord God to work out, and to expel sin and
iniquity; for says the Lord, your sins have separated you from me, and your
iniquities has withheld good things from you; so wait ye in the Cross, that
you may all seek, and see the power of the Lord God to break down the
partition wall, to break down that in you which is yet standing as a wall in
you, which is the man of sin, which separates you from the Lord God, who
created you; And so all wait in patience in the Light, and keep in your minds
staid in it, I say wait in patience in the Light, that you may feel and see the
power of the Lord God to rent the vail, and to take it off the heart, for
through man's disobedience unto the Lord God who created him, there came a vail
over the heart by reason of sin and transgression, which veiled the Creature
from the Lord; So now I say in love unto all your souls, wait ye in patience in
the Cross, that you may feel and see the pure power of the Lord God, to take
away, and to remove, and to expel, and to work out all that which is yet
remaining alive in you, which entered into man through disobedience and
transgression, by the reason of which man lost the image in which he was
created, and lost also his Union, and Communion, and Fellowship which he had
with the Lord God before he disobeyed; so through disobedience man was driven
into the Earth from the presence of the Lord.

So all people who are yet in the fall in the transgression, and without God in
the world, this is the counsel of the Lord God unto you all, turn in, turn in
your minds into the light of the Son of God which is made manifest in you, and
receive it in the love of it, for the light is in all, and the light is one in
all, but all have not received it in the love of it, and so by the light they
are condemned; Therefore I say as you tender the good of your own souls,
receive the light in the love of it, and prize it above all things, and yield
obedience to be led and guided by it; For this I testify unto you from the
Lord God, that as you receive the light in the love of it, and give up to be
led and guided by it, it will lead you out of sin, and out of evil, unto the
Father from whence it came, who is light, and in him is no darkness at all,
for every good and perfect gift comes from above, from God the Father of
lights, in whom is no variableness nor shadow of turning, and it will lead
you as you yield obedience to be led, and guided by it, out of all false ways,
worships, customs, and traditions that are in the world, and out of the Church
that is in the world into the true Church which is in God, which is built up of
living, pure, precious, and elect stones, of which Christ is the Head, and
there to worship the Father in Spirit and in Truth, for such the Father seeks
to worship him, and the time is already come, that the true worshippers do
worship the Father in Spirit and in Truth; And this I testify unto you from
the Lord, and I know what I say, having experienced the thing in my own
particular, that as you give up freely to be led and guided by the light of the
Son of God, with which he has enlightened you withal, that in it you will feel
and see the power of the Lord God to save you out of sin, and out of evil, and
in it is power, strength, and sufficiency to destroy sin, which is the Devils
work in you, and death, and he that has the power of death, that is the Devil;
for, for this end and purpose was the Son of God manifested for to destroy the
works of the Devil; (Mark that all ye unbelievers who will not believe in
Christ Jesus the light, nor to have him to rule over you, who live in sin and
in wickedness, and pleading for it term of life, and saying you cannot be free
from sin on this side the grave; here you do make your selves manifest to be of
that number in whom Antichrist, that is the man of sin, has his seat in you,
there he sits as if he were God, and he rules and reigns in you as King, and
his Servants you are, and his works you do, and his Kingdom you strive to
uphold, and plead for it term of life, that is sin and wickedness; for so long
as sin and wickedness rules and reigns in you, so long is Antichrists Kingdom
standing in you, and so you crying up and pleading for sin term of life, and
saying that the Creature cannot be free from sin while he is here on this side
the grave, here you make void and of none effect the coming of Christ Jesus the
Son of God; for as it is recorded in the Scriptures of Truth, and also seen in
the record of eternal life, that for this purpose the Son of God was manifested
for to destroy the works of the Devil; Now if the Creature must live in sin and
wickedness all the days of his life, as you conclude and say he must, then is
the Devils work not destroyed in him, which is sin and evil, and so as I said
before you make void and of none effect the coming of Christ, which was to
destroy the works of the Devil.

No place for Repentance after Death.
Here is a Querie unto all the hireling Priests of the Nation, who preach up
this doctrine; that people must live in sin all the days of their life, and
cannot be cleansed while they are on this side the grave, and yet when they die
they shall be saved and enter into Gods Kingdom.

WHere or when, or which is the place that men and women must be cleansed from
sin, if not in this life, of this side the grave, seeing that no unclean thing
shall enter into the Kingdom of God; and as the Tree falls so it lies; and as
Death leaves, Judgment finds; and said Christ Jesus the Light, except you
believe that I am he, ye shall die in your sins; and said he, I go my way, ye
shall seek me, and shall not find me, and whether I go, there ye cannot come.
Now I do believe that most people will confess, that Christ ascended up into
Heaven, and he says as it is recorded in the Scriptures, except ye believe
that I am he, ye shall die in your sins, and whether I go, there you cannot
come.

This is one of the damnable Doctrines, that the hireling Priests of this
Nation teaches, and it is no less then the Doctrine of Devils; for they
conclude that the Devil is of more power and strength to keep men and women in
sin, then the Lord God is to redeem them out of sin; But this I testify from
the Lord God against the hireling Priests of the Nation, and against all
opposers and gain sayers whatsoever, that Christ Jesus the light of the World,
who is the true light, that enlightneth every man that comes into the World,
who is the Power of God, and the Wisdom of God, whose Name is called the Word
of God; I say and testify from the Lord, that he is of more power, strength,
and sufficiency, to redeem fallen man and woman out of sin, and out of evil, if
they yield obedience to be led and guided by him, then the Devil, who is the
prince of the power of the Air, who rules in the hearts of the Children of
disobedience, has to keep them in sin and evil; Therefore I say, turn in your
minds, into the light of the Son of God, with which you are enlightened, which
light is perfect; and as you receive the light in the love of it, which is
perfect, and become one with it, you will come to feel the Power of the Lord
God, to work out imperfection, which is of the Devil; So now I say, when the
Creature comes to witness the Devils work destroyed in him, which is sin and
evil, which caused a separation betwixt God and the Creature; I say when he
comes to witness that destroyed in him, which must he destroyed by the Power
of the Lord God, Christ Jesus the light, who is the Power of God, and the
Wisdom of God, then he will come to have access unto God again; for it is the
light which reconciles and unites unto God, and so by the light the Creature
comes to have access unto God again; and as he keeps in the light continually,
having his mind staid therein, he will come to have union and communion, and
fellowship with the Lord, as Adam had before he disobeyed, and he will come to
feel the living presence of the Lord God to nourish his soul, and to refresh
his soul, and to strengthen his soul, which has been Lean, Dry, and Barren,
and Weak, and Feeble for want of Bread, and so as he has through disobedience
unto the Lord, born the image of the Earthly, I say, by yiedling obedience unto
the light of Christ made manifest in him, waiting there to feel the power of
the Lord God, to put off the old man with his deeds, that is the old
degenerated Nature, he will come to bear the image of the Heavenly; and as he
gives up freely unto the Lord, to be led and guided by him, he will come to
have power and dominion over the Creatures, which God created for the use and
service of man, as man had the power over them at the beginning; for as by the
disobedience of one, many were made sinners; so by the obedience of one, many
shall be made righteous; and as in Adam all die, so in Christ all are made
alive.

So all people who are yet in the Fall, in the Transgression without God in the
World, and are yet dead in sins and trespasses, this is the Counsel of the Lord
God unto you, Turn in, turn in your minds, which are yet abroad in the Earth,
into the light of the Son of God, as you prize the good of your own souls, and
wait ye in patience in it, that you may feel the power of the Lord God to raise
you up from Death to Life, and to quicken you, and ^o make you alive, that so
you may live for evermore, unto the Praise and Glory of his most Holy Name; And
this is the desire of my soul, that you may all come to have Union, and
Fellowship with the Lord God, as man had before he disobeyed; And that you may
enjoy his pure living refreshing presence, to nourish your souls, and to
refresh your souls, and may come to eat of the food Immortal, of the bread
Immortal, to nourish your souls, and to refresh your souls, and to strengthen
your souls, which are Immortal; For there is nothing that can satisfy the soul
which is immortal, but the bread immortal; For says Christ Jesus the
righteous, who is the Lamb of God, which takes away the sins of the World, your
Fathers eat Manna in the Wilderness, and they are dead, but I will give you to
eat of the hidden Manna of the heart, and he that eats thereof shall never
die, for says he, He that eats of the Bread that I shall give him, he shall
never hunger, and he that drinks of the Water that I shall give him, he shall
never thirst, for it shall be in him a Well of living Water springng up unto
everlasting life; And says Christ Jesus the Light, I am the living Bread which
comes down form above; and I tell ye from the Lord, except ye eat the Flesh,
and drink the Blood of the Son of Man, ye have no life in you, for his body is
Meat indeed, and his blood is Drink indeed; so he that can receive it let him
receive it, for they are the words of Truth unto you, and shall stand for ever.

So all people, this is my counsel and advice unto you once more, in the dread
and fear of the Lord God, and it is in dear and tender love unto all your
souls; Oh! turn in, turn in your minds, into the light of the Son of God which
is made manifest in you, which light gives life unto the soul; for he that has
the Son has life, but he that has not the Son, not life. And so I have in
plainness, and according to truth, and not contrary, but according also unto
the Scriptures of truth, which are as a cloud of witnesses for me and for the
truth which I have written, declared the way how fallen men and women may be
restored into that pure, innocent state and being which Adam was in before the
fall, and the cause of his fall, was through disobedience unto the Lord God. So
the God of Heaven raise up his own witness in you, and open your
understandings, and open that Eye in you which the God of this World has
blinded, that so you may see the things which belongs unto your souls peace,
which is the desire of my soul, the Lord God knows my heart, and that you may
partake of that living virtue which nourishes our souls, and to have
fellowship with us; for truly our fellowship is with the Father, and with his
Son Christ Jesus the light, who is the Author and Finisher of our Faith, and he
is the Anchor and Bishop of our souls, who is God blessed for evermore, Amen.

A Warning from the Lord God of life and power, in bowels of dear and tender
love unto all the Rulers, Priests, and People, that they hasten to Repentance,
who are spending their time without the fear of the Lord, and nourishing their
hearts, as in a day of slaughter.
REpent, repent, repent, and return unto the Lord God of Heaven and Earth,
whose voice is terrible unto the Nations, and all Nations are in his sight but
as the drop of a bucket, and as the small dust of the Earth; Oh dread and fear
ye the living God, who rules in the Kingdoms of men, who has the hearts of
all men in his hand, and he can turn them whenever he pleases; Oh all ye
tall Cedars, and stout Oaks, thus says the Lord God, that except ye speedily
repent and return unto the Lord, the Lord God will top you, and he will lay you
low, and the Lord God will make you bend and bow before him, and he will stain
the pride and the glory of all flesh, and will make all to know that all flesh
is as grass, and the glory of man as the flower of the field, for the grass
withers, and the flower fades away, but the word of the Lord endures for
ever; By which word except you speedily repent and return unto the Lord, the
Lord God will cut you off, and then woe and misery will be your portion for
ever; Therefore I say unto you all, who am a lover of all Souls, as you tender
the good, welfare and happiness of your immortal souls, Return, return unto
the Lord, and unto his light in your consciences which checks and reproves you
for sin and evil, and makes manifest the evil of your doings unto you, when
there is no outward eye sees you or can accuse you of them, yet the al-seeing
eye of the Lord God sees you and beholds you, and he is present with his light,
which is his true and faithful witness in you, to condemn you for the evil of
your doings, which light in you never consented to sin or evil, but stands a
witness for God in you against sin and evil; Therefore I say unto the light
of Christ take heed, as you prize the good of your own souls, and put not the
day of the Lord afar off any longer, for to day says the Lord, if you will
hear my voice harden not your hearts; Oh ye Stif-necked, and Rebellious, and
Uncircumcised, in hearts and ears, ye do always resist the holy Ghost, as your
fathers did so do ye; Oh prize the light, prize the day of the Lords Visitation
of you, for now he is visiting of you with his pure everlasting love, and he
waits to be gracious unto you, and for your return; Oh return return ye unto
the Lord God and hearken to his reproof, and go on no longer in rebellion, nor
stif-neckednesse against the Lord, for if you do you will provoke the Lord
against you to destroy you, which is not the desire of the Lord, if you will
return unto him, for says the Lord, I desire not the death of one sinner, but
rather that all should turn and live; for says he, Oh house of Israel, why
will thou dye, why will thou dye? turn unto me and thy Soul shall live; Oh
people why will ye dye, why will ye dye; Oh return, return unto the Lord; and
your souls shall live, for he has long waited, and is yet waiting for your
return, for said the Lord, Oh Jerusalem Jerusalem, how often would I have
gathered thee as a hen gathers her chickings under her wings, but ye would
not; And all the day long says the Lord have I stretched out mine hand unto a
disobedient and a gainsaying people, who would have none of my Council,
neither regarded they my reproof, but choose the things wherein I delighted
not; Therefore people as you tender the good of your own Souls, return unto the
Lord God while he waits for your return, and while his hand is stretched forth
unto you; For this I testify unto you from the Lord God, that the day of your
visitation is near passed over your heads, and the time is very near
approaching that the spirit of the Lord God will leave striving with you, for
my spirit says the Lord shall not always strive with man; Then woe and misery
will be your portion for ever, and a day of blackness, a day of darkness, and
a day of gloominesse, you shall assuredly come to witness where you shall weep
and howl for sorrow and vexation of spirit, and then there shall be none to
pity you, and this shall assuredly come upon you, except you speedily repent
and return unto the Lord, for what I speak, I speak infallibly, and it shall
stand for ever.

Therefore all ye Rulers, Priests and people, I warn you from the Lord God of
life and power that you hasten to repentance and amendment of life, knowing
assuredly from the Lord, that there is a woeful day approaching and is near at
hand upon all the heads of the wicked and the ungodly, and the Lord will make
many open examples unto others except they speedily repent and return unto him,
for the month of the Lord has spoken it; Therefore I say as you price the good
of your own souls, provoke the Lord no longer against you, but while ye have
time prize it, for the time present is all peoples time to make their peace
with the Lord, for the time past cannot be recalled again, and the time to come
is in the hands of the Lord, and he can stop the breath in your nostrils, and
take it out of your bodies, and then time will be no more to you; Oh! prize the
light, prize the day of the Lords visitation of you, for as I said before, so I
say again, from the Lord, that the day of your visitation is near passed over
your heads, and when it is passed over your heads, then you may seek the Lord,
and shall not find him, and call upon him, and he will not hear you. (Why?)
because says the Lord, when I called ye would not answer, and when I spoke ye
would not hear, then will the Lord mock at your calamity, and laugh when your
fear comes; Therefore I say, seek ye the Lord while he may be found, and call
upon him while he is near you for he is a God athand, and not a God a far off,
and he is near unto all that call upon him in truth and in righteousness.

Oh! Earth, Earth, Earth; Oh! People, People, People, dread and fear the living
God, and tremble and bow before him, whose day is at hand, that will burn as an
Oven, Yea, and all the proud, and all that do wickedness shall be as stubble;
and except you speedily repent and return unto him, he will burn you up, and he
will leave you neither root nor branch, and then the Rocks and the Mountains,
nor all your outward strength shall not be able to save you from the wrath of
the Lamb, nor from the indignation of the Just One, who is risen, and arising
as a Mighty man of War to take the Kingdom, and the greatness of the Kingdoms;
Yea, he is risen and arising to plead with all flesh by Fire and by Sword, and
the slain of the Lord shall be many, for the Sword of the Lord is drawn and
furbished, and he is preparing of it for the slaughter, and except you speedily
return unto the Lord, he will kindle a fire in your bowels which shall never be
quenched, until it has consumed you; Therefore all ye tall Cedars, Sturdy and
stout ones, if you go on in rebellion, and stif-neckednesse against the Lord,
and continue your persecuting, and imprisoning of the servants of the most high
God, which are by you reproachfully called Quakers; thus says the Lord God, I
will dash you to pieces as a potters Vessel, and will make you bend and bow
before me says the Lord, and will exalt the horn of mine Anointed.

Therefore all ye Rulers, Priests and People, whose trust is in the Arm of
flesh, and whose strength consists in the Host of men, and in Horses, and
Chariots, and in Tumults, Noises, and Voices, and although you have made a
Covenant with Death, and an agreement with Hell, yet your Covenant with Death
and agreement with Hell, shall be broken by the Power of the Lord God, and
although at the present you have power to cast the servants of the most High
God, some into one Prison, and some into another, and some into Dungeons and
Holes, and under many locks and boults, and make havoc and spoil of their
goods, yet thus says the Lord God, that he will not leave us, nor forsake us,
for our enemies to destroy us; but he will with his own outstretched Arm bring
deliverance for us, as we wait in patience on him; which deliverance shall be
beyond the expectation of man, whose breath is in his Nostrils; And it shall be
an astonishment unto all the Heathen round about, and the Lord God will give us
the necks of our Enemies to tread upon, and they shall be as ashes under the
soles of our feet; And this I can truly and boldly say, through the love of God
toward me, whose love I hope will never be forgotten by me, although at the
present I am in outward bonds, yet nevertheless in the pure Eternal truth of
God I do reign and triump, and do Trample upon all the heads and necks of the
wicked, and this I do declare in boldness from the Lord God, who has said and
does still say unto me, fear not what man can do unto thee, for I will never
leave thee nor forsake thee; That the Lord God will make you all bend and bow
unto his pure everlasting truth, which he has by his own power gathered us
into, who are scornfully and reproachfully by you called Quakers. (Mark) I do
not say that you shall bend and bow unto us as Creatures, but unto his pure
everlasting Truth, and unto his pure Divine power by which we are upheld, and
by which we reign over all the heads of the wicked.

Yea verily, the Lord God will make you bow unto his Son Christ Jesus the light
of the World, who is the true light, that enlightneth every man that comes
into the World, who is the Way, the Truth, and the Life, who is risen to rule
the Nations with a Rod of Iron, and he will make all bend and bow before him;
for there is no other Name by-which any man can be saved, but by the Name of
Jesus, at which every knee shall bow, and every tongue shall confess unto him,
and although Gog and Magog, Beast and false Prophet, and all the powers of
darkness join hand in hand, and gather to gather, and make a head against the
Lamb and his Followers, yet the Lamb shall gain the Victory; For there is no
Weapon formed against you shall prosper, says the Lord. And know this
assuredly, that the work which the Lord God has begun in the Earth, he will
accomplish it, and you can no more stop or hinder the work of the Lord which he
has begun, then you can stop or hinder the Sun from rising, or the Wind from
blowing, or the Rain from descending, no more can you stop or hinder the Work
of the Lord; Therefore in vain, do you strive against the Lord and his
Anointed, for if I do work says the Lord, who can hinder? Therefore all ye
fruitless Trees, which cumbers the ground, ye are good for naught but for the
fire, who have long made a profession of a God, and a Christ in words, but in
life and in power you do deny him; For now is the Lord come to seek for Fruit,
and behold what is to be found amongst you but corruption and wickedness, for
the best of you is as a Bryar, and the uprightest of you sharper then a Thorn
hedge, so you are found to be fruitless Trees which cumbers the Ground, ye are
good for nothing but for the fire, and now is the Ax laid to the Root of the
Tree, and every Tree that brings not forth good fruit, shall be hewed down
and cast into the fire; Therefore cease professing of a God and a Christ in
words, and make no more profession of a God and a Christ in words then you can
witness of them in life and in power; for profession without possession, is no
more before the Lord, then the Chafe is before the Wind, neither is it any
more in the fight of the Lord, then the cutting off a Dogsneck, or offering
Swines blood.

Therefore all ye Rulers, Priests and People, who profess and call your selves
Christians, truly it would rejoice my soul if I could see the fruits of
Christianity brought forth by you; Now consider and lay it to heart, and let
the witness of God in you all answer, unto which I speak, and unto which I am
commended, and unto which I do appeal, is not Swearing, Drunkenness, Lying,
Covetousness, Cozening, and Cheating, Defrauding, and doubledealing alive and
remaining in you, and is not Malice, Strife, Wrath, Envy, Hatred, and
Persecution alive and remaining in you, unto the Witness of God in all your
Consciences do I speak, which I know from the Lord God will answer for me, and
against your selves, and that you are guilty of these evils which are here
mentioned; then say I that the old man with his deeds is yet alive in you
un-put off, that is, the old degenerated nature, and so you do make your selves
manifest to be of them which say they are Jews and are not, but are of the
Synagogue of Satan, for he that is in Christ is a new Creature; (Mark that) I
say he that is in Christ is a new Creature, old things are done away, and all
things become new, so the old man with his deeds being yet alive in you, you
have got the name (Christian) but not the nature, so as the Body without the
Spirit is dead, so the Name without the Nature is dead also; for to say
Christians, is as much as to say Christ-like, but you are seen in the Eternal
light of God not to bear his Image, but the Image of another, the Image of the
Earthly, the Image of Antichrist, that is the man of sin, and his works you do,
and his Servants you are, and his Kingdom you strive to uphold; So now there
has been for many years a great talk of Reformation, the Nation of England to
be a Reformed Nation, and the People of England to be a Reformed People; Why
now consider, and turn in your minds into the light of the Son of God which is
made manifest in you, and commune with your own hearts, and be still, and enter
into your Closets, and let the door be shut, enter into your own hearts, and
take heed unto the light of the Son of God in you, and come and let us reason
together a little there; what is that you are reformed from, or what is that
you are reformed unto, does not sin and iniquity run down as a flood in
Englands streets, and ungodliness as a stream, and peoples. mouths filled with
bitterness and cursing, and are not they that depart iniquity made a prey to
those who live in iniquity, and they whom the Lord God has redeemed out of the
World, and stand in his dread and fear, they are the Song of the Drunkard, and
a byword unto a wicked and perverse generation of scorners, who say, who is
the Lord that we should fear him, and to the Almighty depart from us, for we
desire not the knowledge of thy ways, and say you we will not have this man to
reign over us; that is, you will not have Christ Jesus the light to rule over
you, you will not have the light of Christ in you to reign; for say you, if we
should own the light of Christ in us, and that to rule in us, then we must lay
down our Crowns, says you tall Cedars and great Ones of the Earth, and our
Honor and Glory we must loose, and says all you Priests and People, if we
should receive the light and that rule in us, then we must deny all our gain of
ungodliness, and all our Pleasures, Sports, and Pastimes we must deny; But thus
says the Lord, that except you speedily repent and return unto me says the
Lord, I will arise and wound the hairy scalp of the wicked, and your ears
shall tingle, and fear and terror shall take hold and surprise the Hypocrite,
and your hearts shall wax faint, and your strength shall be taken away, and ye
shall have your portion in the lake which burns for ever, and there ye shall be
tormented from the presence of the Lord.

Oh poor hearts my soul pities you, the Lord God knows my heart, and often
times is my heart taken up with a great lamentation, and a great pity runs
forth from me toward you, when I consider what a sad state and condition you
are in, as to your Eternal being, and also what a sad and a woeful day is coming
upon you, for many of you shall be made open examples unto others, except you
speedily repent and return unto the Lord; Therefore as you tender the good of
your own souls, turn at the reproof of the Lord, and cease from your outward
Teachers, who keeps you ever learning, and never able to come to the knowledge
of the Truth, who speaks a divination of their own brain, and not from the
mouth of the Lord, for they run and I never sent them, therefore they shall not
profit the people at all says the Lord, but if they had stood in my counsel,
then they should have turned people from the evil of their ways; therefore I
say turn in your minds into the light of the Son of God, and hearken diligently
unto the voice of the true Prophet Christ Jesus the Light of the World, who is
the true Light that enlightneth every man that comes into the World, and he
that will not hear this Prophet shall be destroyed from amongst the people;
Therefore I say as you tender the good of your own souls, cease from your
outward Teachers, from your greedy hirelings, from your deceitful Merchants,
who steal the true Prophets words, Christ's words, and the Apostles words, and
makes a Trade of them, and sells them to poor ignorant people for money; Oh
People, uphold their gain of Unrighteousness no longer, for you have sold your
selves for naught, and ye shall be redeemed without money, for they make
Merchandise of souls for dishonest gain, who are in the way of Cain, and run
greedily after the error of Balaam, who loved the wages of Unrighteousness,
and they stand in the gainsaying of Corah, and receive the wages of
Unrighteousness, who teach the things they ought not for filthy lucres sake,
whose mouths must be stopped, who subvert whole houses, whose God is their
belly, whose glory is their shame, whose end is destruction, who mind earthly
things, but such serve not our Lord Jesus Christ but their own bellies, their
throat is an open Sepulcher, and with their Tongues they utter deceit, the
poison of Asps is under their lips, and their feet are swift to shed blood, and
they run on in their own way, but the way of peace they know not; Therefore all
People, consider and lay to heart what they have profited you, and let the
witness of God in you all answer, and spend your money no longer for that
which is not bread, nor your labor for that which satisfies not; Now this is
the call of the Lord God unto you all, come forth from amongst them, and touch
not the unclean, and I will receive you says the Lord; Therefore I say come
forth of Babylon, and be not partakers with her in her sins, least ye also
partake with her in her Plagues; And this is also the call of the Lord unto you
all, Ho, every one that thirsts come buy and eat, yea, come buy wine and milk
freely, without money and without price, come to the water of life freely, for
there is a Fountain set open for Judah and for Jerusalem, for sin and for
uncleanness; Therefore I say People, spend your money no longer for that which
is not bread, nor your labor for that which satisfies not, for you have sold
your selves for naught, and ye shall be Redeemed without Money; Therefore all
People, as you tender the good of your own souls, drink of the Whores Cup no
longer, which Babylons Merchants holds forth unto you, as a golden Cup, but
within is full of deadly poison; but turn in your minds into the light of
Christ in your own consciences, and this I testify unto you from the Lord, as
you yield obedience to be led and Guided by it, it will lead you out of sin and
out of evil, and out of all false ways, Worships, Customs, and Traditions that
are in the World, and out of the false Church that is in the World, into the
true Church that is in God, which is built up of Living, Pure, Precious, Elect
stones, of which Church Christ is the Head; and it will lead you unto the
Father from whence it came, there to worship the Father in spirit and in truth,
for such the Father seeks to worship him, and the time is already come, that
the true Worshippers do worship the Father in spirit and in truth.

But the Beast and false Prophet, shall be taken alive and cast into the Lake
of Fire and Brimstone, which burns for ever, where they shall be tormented in
flames from the presence of the Lord God, who will reward every one according
unto their deeds, and works done in the Body, whether they be good, or whether
they be evil.

Of the Lord God of life and power was I moved to write unto you, and it is in
Bowels of dear and tender love unto all your souls, and whether you will hear
or forbear, I shall be clear of your bloods, and shall be a good savor unto
them that are saved, and unto them that perish; I remain a lover of your
immortal souls; but as the Lord requires of me, in obedience unto him, I must
hear my Testimony against all sin and wickedness, in whomsoever I see it,
whether in Rulers, Priests, or People.

As I was waiting on the Lord, and my mind being exercised in the light of the
Son of God, in the Dungeon at Warwick, on the 9th. and 10th. Day of the Month
called May, 1661. Most of this that is herein written, did the Lord God put it
fresh into my heart, and it did remain in me till the 20th. day of the same
Month, and then the Lord added more unto it, and in obedience unto him, I gave
it forth.

From a Prisoner and a Servant of the Lord, and a lover of all souls, who
suffered 16. weeks in outward Bonds, in the Dungeon at Warwick, (which is 20.
Stairs down) because in obedience unto the Lord, and unto his Law which he
has written in my heart, I could not promise to forsake the assembling of my
self with Gods chosen and elect ones, called Quakers, who is reproachfully, and
scornfully called Quaker, but am known to the World by name. Tho. Kent.

THE END.

