A SERMON Preached at St MARY'S in Cambridge, To the UNIVERSITIE September the
6. 1668.

The Sunday before STURBRIDGE Fair.

By EDWARD KEMP B.D. Fellow of Queens College in Cambridge.

CAMBRIDGE, Printed by John Field, Printer to the Universitie. 1668. And are to
be sold by Edward Story Bookseller in CAMBRIDGE.

2 CORINTHIANS. Chap. 2. V. 17. The former part of the verse. For we are not as
many which corrupt, (or as the Geneva Translation) deal deceitfully with the
word of God.
THis Text will give me occasion without seeking it far or abroad to bring into
view two very different professions; the Merchants, and our sacred Function.
They are both here or rather the abuses in them, exposed to the eye, yet one
stands but as the Metaphor to limn in more lively colors, the imposturages of
the other. To secular Trade, all wish well to the prosperity and managers of
it, and whether we do so or no it is likely to thrive in the world, the Masters
and Wardens of it are so intent in the improvement, and have so many arts and
wiles to drive it on; yet men complain (and they will so) of great decay; I
suppose they mean they do not gather riches so fast as they have a mind to do,
and truly God, nor any the best times can satiate them in those desires.

But I know not how our spiritual profession has got many enemies, whether
envy to it, or slander upon it, or, which it is to be feared, our own
infirmities (for we have this treasure but in earthen vessels) have made it
much reproached, meanly thought of, stained, blasted, wounded with evil
tongues; nay some are come so far to malign it as to scruple our Mission, to
cancel our Orders, to accuse it of usurpation, and making it self a peculiar
and an enclosure which they would have common; I wish I could say too that
sometimes even good men's mouths were not opened against us, that we did not
grieve and sad even righteous and holy men; we had never more need of walking
circumspectly and warily, never more need of preaching with sincerity, or in
our Apostles phrase to speak the truth in Christ and lie not; for many errors
have been sown in the ear first, which have since taken root in the hearts of
men. St Paul in my text intimates something as if all were not right, no not in
his days, but that there were mixtures and dashings in our spiritual wine,
which he clears himself from.

We are not as Many that corrupt, or deal dece it fully in the word of God.

Where you have first, an accusation. Secondly, a vindication. St Paul accuses
others, vindicates himself; he accuses, and so he may do in some trivial
matter; No, it is no light one, it is of corrupting; but it may be out of
ignorance, or error of judgment; neither: it is purposely, wilfully,
maliciously, for it is a cheat, corrupting and handling deceitfully: but
perhaps then in some petty merchandise; not so neither: a deceit in a staple
commodity in which all Christian souls have a share, for it is in the word of
God. Against whom is this accusation? not any single person but many, a
Corporation or Community, many that corrupt, or handle the word of God
deceitfully. And first of the accusation, corrupting or dealing deceitfully:
where we must somewhat take notice of the metaphor to which the Apostle
alludes, To trade and deceits therein; so that without a digression I might
step into shops and warehouses, where though it is never so cunningly and
closely carried, it is easier to detect fraud then reform it. I have as much an
aversion from unfolding or russling their goods as from plundering them; yet if
Christian advice could drive that devil of fraud out thence, and sweep them
from those cobwebs and desilements of deceit, perhaps trade might not have that
curse upon it as it has of decay, which is now the complaint. I come not to
their doors to reprove them, but now seeing they are come so near ours, they
must not take it amiss, (for it is no arraigning of them nor of their
commodities) though I put them in mind that if to God we must give an account
of every idle word, then sure of every lie that shall usher in a deceit; of
every gesture and hypocritical mine that melts the buyer to his great wrong and
injury, to stake an unreasonable price for good^, or any thing at all for
corrupt merchandise.

I know well that trade conduces much to the prosperity of a people. I intend
no invective against the industrious or ingenuous managers of it; they are the
very life, soul and Spirit of a nation, they serve not only our necessities,
but pleasures, if not wantonness, pride and luxury too; yet we may not deny
them their just nay honorable gains, such no doubt have quick judgments and
wise heads to see, Christian hearts to lament, nay warm wishes and desires for
the redress and reformation of such sordid abuses and grievances, which have
with much sliness insinuated into mysteries, to the great deflouring of the
chastity of commerce and debauching it by dissimulation, lies and arts of
falsehood.

I might further prosecute this Discourse, and perhaps very seasonably at this
time, though inventions and devises in trade are too cunning and many for me to
take notice or give any character of, scarce any Craft amongst them but has
hidden things of dishonesty; but I shall wind off, for indeed our holy Apostle
does but glance himself at it here, and so much he does, (which is my warrant)
he supposes that worldly commerce has the stain of guile upon it, subject to
be corrupted, and for us to deal deceitfully in; these being terms he borrows
from trade (to which deceit if it must be at all, I wish it were there
confined) but here out of a holy zeal, he reproves it in a more sacred
merchandise where he found it was the moth that fretted it, even the word of
God by our deceitfully handling it, (And sure if ever Divinity learned their
Arts it is much more since the foreman of the shop turned Preacher) since he
claimed to so much learning as to censure Church Doctrine and Discipline, since
cities by their wealth have so far governed the pulpit, as either to raise or
abate Ministers stipends and salaries, according as they shall please their
fancies and sooth their errors and sins.

It is not then the shop only, but the pulpit too is arraigned of these
deceits. And is not the Sanctuary free from them? have they builded their nests
in her Turrets? Are not Gods Altars nor sacred Oratories exempted from these
holy cheats? Christ overthrew the Tables and whipped the money Changers out of
the Temple, but did he leave this worser filth to defile it? I now could make a
further search into secular Cheats or retire, and indeed I must not cover or
cast a veil upon our spiritual cozenages, though they must needs reflect upon
some of our Function, and bring them upon the stage as very Artificial and
cunning Traders, if not Corrupters and Abusers of holy Scripture; Scripture,
the Oraracles of the Holy Ghost, truth delivered to us from inspired Prophets,
holy Apostles, confirmed by miracles, watered by the blood of Martyrs,
preserved to us in all the Combustions, Changes and Persecutions of the world
inviolate: This is the word which the holy Fathers of the Church spent their
time and oil in to explain, borrowing vacancies even from their vigils,
Canonical hours, Embers, Fastings, and other Penances, to meditate on the
sacred merchandise which with exquisite pains they unfolded, and aired (as it
were) with pious Homilies and Comments, that no pestilent breath of heresies
might pollute, nor errors ruffle or sully it. This merchandise the word, they
sorted for diverse Festivals, and with distinct portions of it celebrated them,
fitted and adjusted to anniversary Commemorations of our Savior, the Blessed
Virgin, and other Saints and Martyrs. This is the word in which are treasured
up the most sacred Merchandise that the world can or ever will show: Nothing in
it carnal, rich promises, oil of gladness, the Covenant of grace, seals of
pardon, Gracious offers, sharp reproofs, wholesome counsels, St Mary Magdalens,
St Peter's and other penitents tears, the blood of our Savior, indeed what not?
And if the Atheist, nor much more the hypocrite believes it not, (for the
wantonness of wit, Drolleries and scoffs of the one, and Pharisaical quoting of
it by the other, especially when he is to serve his worldly interest by
ostentation of godliness, are some evidences to me they do not,) yet the word
is still the same, and retains yet its Glofy, majesty, verdure and beauty,
these drencht in pleasures and sensuality are too mean and despicable to entice
sober Christians minds from so solid foundations, and excellent structures of
piety, but that they will always be ready to pawn their very souls for the
verity of it, and govern their lives and conversations by its holy precepts,
laws and injunctions.

Indeed the danger is somewhat more, and looks like a victorious mischief,
though the word it self can never be foiled or worsted, being an incorruptible
seed, which preserves in it self a pure and chaste sense, which neither Angel,
Devil, or any creature can pervert; yet, when some men that are set apart and
dedicated to holy ministrations, who besides the dignity of their Calling, may
have some varnish upon them of strictness and zeal to set them off with the
Vulgar (just as in trades they that would deceive to the utmost advantage,
affect to have the repute at least of conscientious men above others in their
dealing) shall with a daring confidence, nail an interpretation upon the holy
Scripture; then whatsoever they hold forth is with many the very word of God it
self, the milk of the Word, The Bread of life, though never so unlike the
candor, whiteness, and innocence of one or the other. And this gaudy show of
preciseness, sometimes with heat and passion against authorized Decencies in
religion, or sly touches wherewith we besmear any established Order in the
worship of God, with the odious Title of Stinting or quenching the Spirit, or
of Superstition, (for which we have taken our measure before of the Vulgar, who
are of the Combination:) This zeal cannot but win us the repute of godly,
conscientious, scrupulous tender men, and when we have once so builded our fame
upon the premises, how fast do we climb to such an estimation, that our persons
are had in admiration, so that we may then de^^^^ the whole trade of the
pulpit, vend all sorts of ware, good or bad; for people come to the Sanctuary
resolved to take them off our hands at any price, and never to examine the
goodness, folidity, Scriptural worth or Textual Argumentation for them.

I shall not deny (which we have learned from mysteries and crafts too) we put
off good and bad merchan dize together) as one helps off the other in shops.
The great and solemn Mysteries of Christ's Incarnation, his Crucifixion, Death,
Resurrection, are exposed sometimes to our view and our memories rubbed with
them, (and yet perhaps not neither at their proper Festivals) to vend these
they need no dark shops nor false lights; these are unquestionable, rich,
indubitable verities which we all adore, and to which all our faiths stoop and
bow; it may be too when they are in the frolic, they make, though not very
quick but duller and cold exhortations to charity, and some few other Christian
Graces: men perhaps that have sometimes smart touches against drunkenness,
swearing, uncleanness, and we could wish they had had that good success of
their lungs, pains and menacing hell fire to them as to have struck the guilty
into blushes, horror, repentance and amendment; but they have a concealing art
against sins of as deep and crimson a dye, such as they believe will not be
cheap'ned or bought up by their Great masters, or they reserve them for other
Marts, if they have any mind at all to vend them; they wind off and come not
near Sacrilege, lying, forswearing, cheating, hypocrisy, gluttony,
covetousness which is idolatry, schism and disobedience; these are wares they
rather let lie upon their hands, then anger the sly and cunning patrons of
them; and besides, they have their wrested and forced Doctrines, their rackt
wines, either sour; or made liquours, stained, course, ill dyed, thrummed
wares, stuffs (as it were) purposely dressed and perfumed for popular Auditories;
for that is another art and skill in commerce to know when and to whom we vend
one or the other: for all people are not easy alike to be beguiled: it is to
the unskilful Buyer we conceal our best, and expose our worst to sale. To speak
plainer, It must be granted if any where, that wisdom is requisite in our
calling, to know to whom we preach; for unless we watch opportunities to
discover the several necessities, tempers, and wants of men, how to urge them,
or forbear; to make our assaults, or to retire; they will scarce be ever our
crown of rejoicing in the day of the Lord: so if we be otherwise bent to
nourish sin, lusts, or corruption in them (as both are much in our power by the
Ministration committed to us) we can never do that so completely, artificially,
and crafts-men like, as when we spy out their inclinations, and accordingly
vend them incentives and provoking drugs, dress our Ambushes, and oil our
words; these advancements and proficiencies some of us have made, even to the
endangering of our own and other men's souls by borrowed Arts from wordly
Trades, which supply me with one more by which they work deceits and cozenages,
that is, they have ordinarily false weights and measures which differ from the
common and approved standard.

And it is as certain when some of us with weights and measures of our own,
careless of the Churches standard, which is the established Doctrine in her
Confession of faith, and Articles of Religion; by which we should mete out the
word to the people in our sensing and interpreting it, shall parcel out
Scripture, and so vend it as it were by retail, and not in gross; without a due
regard to the whole scain, intireness, harmony and unity, or to what the rich
and full sense of one piece may supply to to the short conciseness and seeming
vacuity of the other, how easily may we err and be deceived, and if any
temptations lie in our way, (as very often they do) especially of profit or
popularity, deceive others, and perhaps, which is the height of the accusation
in the text, purposely and maliciously too. When we once lay aside that
standard, the Churches exposition, upon which God has set so remarkably in all
ages his arms, engraven his motto and name; it is verily to be believed, at
least it is suspicious, when we yield the balance to our own wit,
understandings, fancies and inventions to hold it, that though it may go even
to the eyes of men, yet there may be too, (as it often happens) more cunning
then innocence in the hand that directs it: so needful it is for us to hear,
for the conduct and safety of souls to obey, and best too for the peace and
unity of Christians, is the Churches skill, sincerity, uprightness and
authority, that we can with no hands better trust these weights and measures,
the beam of the Sanctuary it self, her balance and scale, who may and no doubt
will preserve its steadiness, constancy and evenness, and is the most unlikely
to beguile, deceive, or delude us.

And this is a truth that experience has taught us, that when people make
light of the Churches doctrine, and are fond of new disguisings and
interpretations of holy Scripture, the Priest shall easily comply with that
humor, nay by insinuations and hintings to them much cherish it; for he is
under no trivial temptations to do so: he cannot but foresee the Mart he may
open for all comers to resort to; many passions are set on work besides pride
which tickles him with the conceit of great abilities in himself to deceive;
which confinements to an authorized sense of the word restrains him from, and
which, latitude and freedom cannot but gratify him in, especially having felt
the pulse of this age, distempered and bearing high with fevers, and new
diseases of refractoriness to Catholic Doctrine and wholesome words, and indeed
with great inclinations and longings for feculent glossings upon the dictates
of the holy Spirit, and divine and celestial verities: but now being master of
the mint, which is in his eye, it cannot but be a gainful office to him; for
the Scripture will be a rich Bullion to coin what doctrines he shall please out
of it, and then to imprint or stamp what gay and holy names he shall think good
upon it. Indeed we should be workmen that need not be ashamed, yet though our
pains is in the word, which is the finest Gold, we can mix much dross of our
own fancy with it, so that the earrings which we make out of it for the
people, and vessels which we frame for the Altar and Sanctuary service are too
too often of a mean and baser metal. We trade in the most holy of Grains, the
sacred Text; but it is so ill threshed out and winnowed by some of us, that the
wise buyer is loath to cheapen it, so ill it will serve for holy uses, or bread
of life.

It is not long since (though I hope we are now reconciled to a greater
sobriety, and primitive truth) that the Word, the Scripture, and its pure
streams, were fathomed, plummed, searched every bed, every corner of it, every
grain and sand of it to the least scruple weighed, to ex authorize the
Hierarchy, and to shuffle into the Church an Apocryphal Ordination.

This Word that teaches us exactly from whose hands we must receive our holy
Orders, without which we should not dare to minister in holy things; yet has
this been shamefully wrested to decry all solemn Designment of persons to holy
offices, and to level the Function with the very loom. These brave and gallant
attempts have been made upon our Profession, not by filings or washings of some
scattered pieces or medals of holy Scripture, but by melting down the whole
Plate, the sacred Text, every dram of it.

This Word that allows no protection, no patents for committing any evil, no
though good may come of it, yet have some culd examples out of it, and so have
upon occasion limned them out as handsome beautiful pieces not only to look
upon, but for imitation; as of Phinees, Samson, Ehud and Elias: and seeing
these drawn with colors laid in oil in the Scripture, that preserves them yet
fresh; some will not know, but that they may copy them out: but sure we must
not speak wickedly for God, nor talk deceitfully for him; for should now any be
so furiously bold beyond any moderate zeal, to tread the stage as they did, and
innocently might do, by some heroical Acts, which are not our measure: they
must be sure to have the same license, commission and anointings, the same
spiritual dress and attire; even Elias his mantle too, which they can never for
all their pretensions and illuminations wear or gird about them.

This is the Word, so strict in precepts, so severe in menaces against
disobedience to them whom God has set over us: this holy Canon of Scripture,
this sacred Forest, in which from the tallest Cedar to the lowest shrub, is
nothing but shade and protection for Princes and Governors to preserve their
Crowns and dignities from winds and storms, the rude violence of subjects,
nothing but sap and oil to anoint their persons and to sacre them: yet have
some malicious wits feld timber from it, unbark'd, hewed, hackt and exposed it
to sale for fuel to kindle seditions, to put kingdoms into combustions, to
frame new Common wealths, to erect Judgement-seats for arraignment, Bars for
Princes to plead at; nay to build scaffolds and stages, and then to dye them
with Royal blood.

This is the Word wherein as in a glass we may see our own deformities, and we
that hold out this glass to the people, should not make it so dim with our
breathing upon it; we should so set it before them, that is so impartially
expound the Word, that men may well see and view their many imperfections,
frailties and infirmities, by which they have contracted paleness and wanness,
much guilt and sin; whereas some of us do so cunningly hold it, that they can
spy in themselves nothing but beauty, comeliness, and excellent features, that
they are the children of Grace: when had this glass been with less art and more
innocence placed before them, not upon a hollow vaulted and inclining wall,
bending to parties, factions, and adherencies; they might have seen many spots
and blemishes in their lives which they daily sport in, and converse with, as
new and fresh guests; yea and some wrinckles and furrows too, Customary, aged
sins which have long lodged and housed in them; this artificial and dexterous
representing to men their condition and state, indeed soothing and flattering
them with the gay title of Saints and godly parties, whilst they see their
faces in a cracked glass by the divided word, or in the whole glass exposed to
them by some false light, in which they show them unheard of marks and
characters of grace in them, yet seals to them of their election; which if the
word were but truly, and without deceit applied to them, would perhaps make
them soon renounce and break in pieces such counterfeit seals of adoption, and
by all Christian endeavor and a holy care even to repent of those graces, and
call for more true and holy to wash them out. And this is so dangerous besides
a deceitful handling of the word, i even to their souls, to whom they present
this kindness of Saintship so unwarrantably as they do; that by this means,
they keep them perpetually warm with conceits of I know not what purity, that
they seldom but content themselves with that, which they are assured from their
Preachers gives them a title to eternal life and blessedness.

Thus these Drainers of holy Writ, (for they quote it much) by opening such
wide sluices to some doctrines, have dried up the streams, that is, made as it
were useless the precepts that should feed a holy life, to the impoverishing of
the Christian Commonwealth, and making us bankrupts of graces: a deceit and
cozenage so prejudicial to our holy Commerce, that we cannot but look upon them
as great betrayers of the profit, treasure and wealth of good souls, and will
one day answer for bringing into this Mart such wares as cannot but be
forfeited, as no way vendible to sober and well-minded Christians. But it is
less to be wondered at that men content themselves with so few graces and good
works to go to heaven with; even without purifying their lives and
conversations, when by some of our Scripture-drivers they are assured of
eternal life and sonship upon another account, which no vitiousness or
licentiousness can reverse, no good life can further, nor ill led life can
cancel; and so without any further pursuit of true piety and holiness indeed,
make a stand there, never seeing the error they are soothed into; which is
perhaps embracing filthy lusts, as spiritual pride and schism, for graces, and
going away in triumph with these; never looking back to repentance, humility,
or godly sorrow (which we may well suppose was never taught them) for they were
engaged in those sins under the specious Titles of Virtues and Godliness, are
miserably in the way to destruction; which these preachers have paved for them
with wrested and abused Scripture.

This Word is precise in all rules of holiness and austerities of life,
mortification, self denial, taking up the Cross: yet have some trimmers up of
more generous Doctrine smoothed and kembed these Texts to the great
satisfaction of the looser, joviall and more sanguine Christian; either by
lessning the weight of these Injunctions, or urging something in favor of
them, who have altogether dispensed with themselves for such severities; if not
by scoffs, taunts and censure of chastisers of the body, as of morose,
unsociable, sour tempers: But for taking up the Cross, I marvel not that that
Text feels not much the hammer of our Commenting: we are unwilling to preach
what people are averse to hear, perhaps our selves not well resolved to
practice; and truly some have got so much, I think, by wise avoiding of
suffering, that I should wonder ever to see them in the blessed list of
Confessors. Alas, they are too tender Christians to endure scratches with
thorns, though Christ himself our Head bleeded with them, and wore a Crown of
them in his Inauguration to his bitter passion. Indeed we cannot but conclude
that such texts in their hands are the greatest sufferers; which they torture,
make confess, and extort from them what the holy Ghost never breathed upon;
wise, politic Doctrines it may be, and so having something of the Serpent, but
few feathers of the Dove in them. He that would save his life shall lose it,
says our Savior: It is astonishment then to hear them boldly aver, that
Martyrs were too easily won out of their lives and estates, too soon parted
with and lost all; to see them make sallies from such texts for self
preservation, (which is indeed most in their eye, though Martyrdom may be in
their tongue) to hear them put in their cautions and advices, lest we should
unwisely strip our selves of the enjoyments of this life, and give our back to
the plowers. Indeed lest they themselves should not lay in provision to live in
all times, in all changes and variations; lest they should be to seek how to
clear Texts from difficulties, that may betray them some time or other to
proverty or want; lest they should fail of Arguments to swallow once more all
Oaths, or to demur upon alteration of religious worship, nay without any
niceness to step into other men's livelyhoods, proprieties and estates.

Thus these Rovers at Sea, and pirates in the trade of holy Scripture, exercise
their violence and robberies upon the sacred Text, sinking with their force
lesser vessels, wavering, weak, unstable Christians, which are a prey to them,
and they easily boarded, and indeed seldom themselves strike sail to primitive
and unerring verity.

I may soon tire you with the sorting out of such doctrines, as are exposed to
sale upon pretense that they are choice Balsams, Sovereign Restoratives,
distilled waters of the Spirit, costly spikenard, perfumes, rich embroideries,
fine wool of the holy Lamb: such names have they fixed to desperate errors
they have vended, varnisht, disguised with the Word it self, clapped holy
Scripture upon them, to put them off with, and to drill the buyer. Such are
Doctrines that wrong God, and injure him in his Attributes, his power, justice
and mercy, such as withdraw us from the love of God, our hearts and affections
from him, such as too much favor profanation, abhorrencies of persons that are
not of our adhevencies, perjuries, Sacrilege, schism, disobedience,
irreverence, slighting of Gods holy Service and Worship. These can never come
out of that Mint, out of that storehouse of holy Writ: only such as exhort us
to doing of justice, showing mercy, walking humbly, to study to be quiet, to do
our own business, to work out our salvation with fear and trembling; to purge
us from wordly lusts, that we may be vessels unto honor, meet for the Masters
use, prepared unto every good work. These are Merchandises, not shut up in
tills or boxes; not upon high shelves that we need stretch our arms, wrench our
sinews, our invention to reach them; but they lie scattered, open, spread in
every corner, in the lowest desk of holy Writ.

I shall take notice but of one thing more in this Text, Our Apostle does not
conceal, but confess the number of these Corrupters and Deceivers, Many that
corrupt.

And truly the world is much taken with numbers, either seducers and deceivers,
or the train that they draw after them. The Vulgar are much pleased with this
gaudiness, muster and show, and it is hard to take their minds off from this
pageantry; if there be many of these deceivers, they take as it were
fatisfaction to be deluded. The Apostle does indeed take notice of the strength
of their Faction, and so may we too, without any blame in us; but perhaps, if
it makes any great impression in us, we may too much gratify them in their
vain glory: for they love to be admired, yes, and feared too upon all occasions
for their Troops; none make more oftentation of the people, they boast every
where of their Many, which they produce, when either Reason or Arguments fail
them: just as the Devil in the Gospel did to Christ, My name is Legion; for we
are many. Yet Christ for all that, and perhaps the rather cast them out. I
doubt not, though it be a kind of menace to the government, thus to out-brave
it with force; yet God will still bear up both the Church and Crown, and
strengthen their hands to over-aw them that work now as Deceivers; but if their
adherencies were so great as their friends would make us believe, they would
quickly pull off their mask and disguise, and scarce so tamely ask and sue for
that, which with more daring they could command.

But in the mean while, it is the great joy of a Christian to meditate and call
to mind those remarkable abatements and casting down the courages and spirits
of such Deceivers (though never so numerous) by very late examples, when all
outward Force was theirs to make use of. And it cannot but be a great
refreshing to all humble hearts, and such as are sensible of our sad fractions,
that they can scarce find any Faction that took content, and high complacency
in multitudes; but God took some way or other in his good time to lessen and
abate their pride, either by the weak arm of a Supreme Magistrate deserted, or
by their own divisions: these numbers, no good Christian that has a heart
prepared to embrace what God shall allot them, (though it carries with it the
face of never so direful and angry a persecution) can tremble at or fear. Not
that I contemn, or despise numbers; for I hope I shall always have in great
veneration, the Glorious Company of the Apostles, the goodly fellowship of the
Prophets, the holy Army of Martyrs, and the Catholic Church throughout all the
world. But I was always of that opinion, when by Gods permission any strong
combination of men are knit together in detriment to the truth of the Eternal
God, and casting blots upon his Sacred Oracles, in unworthily betraying the
true and pious sense of holy Scripture, to serve wicked purposes and practices;
that neither their numbers, nor their cunning contrivances can keep them long
from the shame that must pursue such Sacrilegious Cheats: but as their numbers
must needs melt at the breath of Gods displeasure, for so high an impiety; so
their impure and stained cozenages and impostures are so easily detected
(though wilfulness may shut the eyes of the Vulgar) that their despicable
troops, together with their scattered and routed falsities, will but the more
at length dress out the triumph of pure and undefiled verity.

To conclude all. Our Apostle is in our eye, and he well maintains his
innocence, and denies any insincerity in his Doctrine; any deceit, cozenage or
imposturage in his preaching; which if true, he could not lose his reputation
in any thing sooner: and I could wish some that are ready thus to hazard theirs
upon the account of errors would consider it. So unworthy a thing it seems to
our Apostle, to be esteemed a Broacher of Corrupt Doctrine, a vender of paint
and fucusses, or indeed any thing that are mixtures and sophisticate, or that
has only the shadowings of truth, the fallacies of Arguments, and the pretty
Romance victories of Errors to elude with; far from that humor which is now
so common, to decline the Churches Doctrine as too mean a vassalage to submit
to; which truths perhaps may serve to so low ends as to serve God with fear,
reverence, purity and holiness, to the subduing of lusts, hating of sin, to
lead men into the paths of righteousness, and so to heaven; but not to the
triumphs and glorious credit that vended errors may procure them in this
world, (which is the brave design they drive on) and truly they might do much
to that end, but that ordinarily such falsehoods light into mean Artists hands
to dress, and into very dull souls to manage.

I must needs say the time is come, that many consent not to wholesome words,
nor can endure sound doctrine; but after their own lusts heap to themselves
teachers, having itching ears, and turn away from the truth; yet if we will
indeed do right to our sacred Order, win credit and honor to our holy Office,
and to our Ministration in the Word; if we would have Christians our hope, our
joy, our crown of rejoicing in the presence of our Lord at his coming, we must
not be vain talkers and deceivers, speaking lies in hypocrisy, and teaching
things that we ought not for filthy lucres sake: we must show incorruptness,
gravity, sincerity, sound speech that cannot be condemned; we must not desire
to please men, but God who tries our hearts. And we cannot have a more
illustrious example then our Apostle St Paul, who walked not in crastiness, but
by manifestation of the truth, commended himself to every man's conscience in
the sight of God; in all things approved himself as the Minister of God; by
unfeigned love, by the word of truth, that he had corrupted no man, that
Christians were in his heart to live and die with them; and his words toward
them were not yea and nay, or as my Text expresses him and Timothy,

We are not as many that corrupt the word of God, but of sincority as of God,
in the sight of God, speak we in Christ.

FINIS.

