Veritas Evangelica. OR THE GOSPEL TRUTH Asserted in Sixteen Useful QUESTIONS,
WHICH Being seriously Searched into, will open the way to find out assuredly
the True, and Saving Faith of Christ, which is but One, as the Apostle affirms;
Ephesians. 4. One Lord, one Faith, one Baptism.

Written by T. K. and now Published by R. C.

Read; Understand; and then Censure.

Published with Allowance.

LONDON, Printed by Not. Thompson at the Entrance into Old Spring Garden near
Charing Cross, MDCLXXXVII.

To the most Serene, and Supreme Nursing Mother of the Holy Catholic Church,
MARY, by the Grace of God, Queen of England, Scotland, France, and Ireland.
Madam,
THe Poor Woman's Mite, cast into the Treasury of the Church, was not only Mark
12. 41, 42.
accepted, but also commended by the Holy and ever-blessed JESUS, who is Truth
it self, and prime Author of that Truth, which under the Tutelage of your
Majesty's truly Great, and Glorious Name, this small Treatise now publicly
offers for the Good, and Eternal Welfare of your Majesty's Subjects, who can
never be truly Happy without embracing the Truth of the Catholic, and Saving
Faith of Christ. He, that will be happy in the end, (says Plato,) must lay hold
on Truth in the beginning; And that all your Majesty's Protestant Subjects
might attain to this Felicity, I am certain, is Your Majesty's most Sincere and
Gracious Desire; and it is the sole Design of this Book, wherein the Author
endeavors to un-deceive the People, who hitherto have been misled into
Errors, through the Ignorance of some, and the Malice and Avarice of others.

Dread Sovereign, to doubt of Pardon for the high Presumption of this
Dedication unto your Sacred Majesty by so mean, and simple a Woman, as I am,
were not only to doubt of your Superlative, well-known, and resplendent
Goodness, but also to detract from the worth of a design so good in it self,
and so congruous to the Christian Fervours of your Great and Noble Soul.

Wherefore, waving all puny Expressions of that Nature, I will turn all my
Excuses into Prayers for your Majesty's long Life and Prosperity, and humbly
beseech the God of Truth to send, and continue the True Religion amongst Us,
that the Stately Ship of your Majesty's Kingdoms and Dominions may always bear
the happy Badge of Castor and Pollux; I mean, a happy Conjunction of Truth and
Peace. And the Star of Jacob so guide the Course of our Royal Pylot (JAMES, the
Great, the Good, and Just,) through the rough Seas of these latter Times, that
He may safely Land the Ship of our Commonwealth in the fair Haven of
Tranquillity by the Actions of Peace and Prosperity; and may settle the State of
the Church on those Mountains of Ararat, Grace and Glory, that by this Jacob's
Ladder of Blessedness, God may always descend to Us in the Blessings of Peace;
And We at last ascend to God by the Benefit of True Religion, which is, and
will be ever the Cordial Wish, and Devout Prayer of

Your Majesty's most Humble, most Loyal, and Dutiful Subject. R. C.

To all Courteous and Nobly-disposed PROTESTANTS.
Noble and Generous Countrymen,
NAture, Duty, Christian Piety, have invited, urged, obliged me (after Twenty
Years search into Religion) to propose unto you the Evangelical Truth; which
this little Treatise, here humbly Offered up at the Altar of your Favor, will
doubtless discover unto you: For therein you will find (if affection overmuch
dimm not the eye of Reason) a Richer Jewel, than any that comes from the
Indies: The inestimable Margarite, I mean of the Gospel; that is, the True,
Divine, and saving Faith of Christ. Which being but one, as hereafter is
convinced, how studiously the same ought to be searched out; especially in
these our times, so fruitful of opposite and contrary Religions, the worth of
your Souls, the long Eternity of Joy, or of Sorrow, which we are to inherit,
cannot but dictate unto you.

Esteem me not to brag, before you read, what I write: neither Arraign me as
Guilty at the Bar of your Judgments, nor pass your Verdict upon me, till you
have well examined (by weighing my Arguments in the impartial Balance of right
Reason) whether Truth must Crown, or Error Disgrace, and cast me. I crave not
a mild, but a just Censure. I fear not Reason, but Passion: not solid
Learning, but partial Affection: not certain Knowledge, but prejudicate
Opinions; which the Tongues and Pens of your Educators and Teachers, by
misinformation, have engendered in you. And therefore I adjure you by the
Judgment Seat of Christ, (before which we are all one day to stand) if you
love your Souls, take not all for Truth, (touching the Old Religion, commonly
styled Papistry) which is delivered unto you, by those, who enjoy fair Women in
Rich Benifices (provided by your Forefathers for chaste Priests) by
disgracing, treading down, and keeping under this Religion. Which to be far
other, than you are made to believe, the worth of your Progenitors cannot but
assure you: Whom to have been earnest Professors of the same, you cannot doubt.

For, if you but read your Chronicles: If you but look upon the Windows of your
Churches: If you but reflect upon the Names of the same Churches, of diverse
Days of the Year, of diverse of your Colleges, upon the Crosses every where
erected: Upon the multitude of Monasteries, Abbeys, and other Religious Houses;
which heretofore flourished in this Kingdom: You cannot doubt, but that your
Noble Progenitors, almost for the space of a thousand Years, were zealous
Papists. Cast your Eyes then upon their Wisdom known by the Government, and
Laws which they established: upon their Piety, blazoned by the goodly Churches,
by the stately Monasteries, by the Renowned Colleges, which they Erected and
Endowed; and Censure them not to have been so stupid, so ungodly, that with so
great Zeal and Costs, they would have embraced, honored, and established
Papistry; had it been so absurd, so ungrounded, so Superstitious and
Idolatrous, and so dangerous to Princes and their States, as diverse of your
deceived, or deceiving Teachers do bear you in hand. Neither think your
Neighbors, who live Papists amongst you, so blockish, that they would forsake
the easy and flesh-pleasing Religion of Luther, Calvin, and other new
Teachers, to embrace, with so great loss and hazards, the austere Profession of
Papists; if the same were such, as you are made to believe.

Let not then any prejudicate conceits, defraud you of this fit Opportunity,
to free your selves from the worst of all mistakings; and consequently from the
fruitless pangs of too late Repentance; wherewith every one will be fearfully
afflicted, that departs this life culpably, in a wrong and false Religion; when
the Judging Light of Christ, shall lay open to him, how naked he is, (through
his own irremediable negligence) of Divine Faith, of Heavenly Charity, and of
other Celestial Virtues absolutely necessary to Salvation.

But take me not here to invite, or urge you to any Herculian Labor; to the
tedious Reading, and difficile discussing of the particular Controversies about
Faith and Religion now in question amongst Christian People; which few, I know,
have leisure, or means; fewer Capacity to look thoroughly unto, or ability to
distinguish always Light from Darkness, Truth from Falsehood in them. But my
Endeavor is, to stir you up to a serious consideration of certain general
Heads, and undeniable Truths, (which this little Treatise does present unto
you) easy to be conceived, yet powerful to lay open even to mean
Understandings, the assured Light of the True Gospel of Christ, and the
absolute necessity of admitting some sure and un-erring Interpreter of God's
Word, by him ordained, and enabled to deliver the right meaning thereof unto us
in all Ages; but especially, when Controversies about Faith and Religion are
raised: which Interpreter being once admitted of, and agreed upon, all other
Controversies about points of Belief, will quickly be at an end; Peace will be
restored again to Christians; and nothing will remain for the securing of Souls
conjoined together in the Communion of Saints, but a studious care to decline
from Evil, and to do Good, and Industriously to imitate the Blessed Life of
Christ.

But further yet to facilitate this affair: be pleased to distinguish in the
Belief of Catholics (whom I often call Papists, to condescend to the Style of
Protestants, so terming them, for adhering in Religion, to the Pope (in Latin
Papa, this word signifying Father) as the common Spiritual Father of
Christians, and supreme Pastor of the Flock of Christ) be pleased, I say, to
distinguish in the Belief of Catholics, Divine Faith from Humane: Their
Articles of Faith, from Humane Stories; which many distinguishing not; and
thereupon persuading themselves, that Catholics with equal certainty and
obligation believe the one and the other, that is, their Articles of Faith, and
the Humane Stories, which relate the Lives, Actions, and Miracles of certain
Saints; and finding some of these to be very strange, and to savor (in their
conceit) of fraudulent Fictions; take this to be a sufficient Warrant for them
to contemn Papistry, as a foolish, ungrounded, and fabulous Religion, and to
repute Papists indiscreetly credulous, and plainly to be led in darkness and
blindness.

But these do much mistake; for the truth is, that although all Catholics be
strictly bound to believe those points of Doctrine, which their Church does
propose for Articles of Faith, contained in the written word of God, or in the
perpetual Tradition of the Church; or deduced by General Councils, or by the
Pastors of the Church, out of God's Word, when Heresies are condemned: yet they
are not bound to believe the Relations of particular Authors, concerning the
Actions and Miracles of Saints, or other like things, farther then discreet
Prudence and Christian Piety does lead them; every Man being at liberty to
weigh the worth and honesty of the Relator, and the probability of the thing
related, and then to believe, or not to believe, as Reason and Piety shall
dictate unto him: Yet not forgetting, that God is admirable in his Saints: That
His Wisdom, Power, Justice, Mercy, and Sweetness, in Governing the World, and
in contriving and ordering the Affairs of Man's Salvation, is far above the
reach of our weak Understanding; That frequently there is less danger in
believing too much, than in believing too little; and that there are some as
strange things related in the Holy Scriptures (at which Atheists do stumble) as
are in the approved Histories of the Church.

Neither do Catholics believe these Stories, and their Articles of Faith, with
one and the same certainty: for these Stories they believe merely with Humane
Faith, for the Authority of the Relators, who may Err, mistake, or deceive: But
their Articles of Faith they believe with Divine Faith, for God's Authority
speaking in his Word, and by the ordinary Doctors and Pastors of his Church;
being bound, under pain of forfeiting the Name of Catholics, and of incurring
damnable Sin, not to disbelieve wittingly, any one of these Articles; all of
them being Divine Verities warranted for Truth by the Holy Ghost, who
continually guides and directs the Church in her Doctrine of Faith, as is
hereafter showed out of Gods Word: And so by disbelieving stubbornly the
Articles of Faith which the Church professes, Heresy is incurred; which is
not incurred by disbelieving her Stories.

Furthermore, if hereafter I affirm (not for want of Charity, but forced by
unanswerable Arguments drawn from the word of God) that the Followers of the
Protestant Religion, so dying, are not saved, take me to speak of those, who
culpably prefer this Religion before the Catholic, or culpably dye therein,
being thereby destitute of that Faith and Charity, which is of necessity
required to Salvation, and not of those, who being truly Baptized, and brought
up among Protestants, have excusable Ignorance of the Catholic Faith and
Church, by reason either of their tender Years, or of their weak Capacities, or
else of their mean and rude Education; for such are secret Members of the
Catholic Church; and therefore if they depart this Life, clothed with those
Garments of Christ, with which he adorned them in the Sacrament of Baptism, not
having fallen into mortal Sin, they shall certainly inherit the Kingdom of
Heaven.

In which happiness, none shall be Sharers, that pass out of this Life
destitute of Divine Faith, which is the Gift of God, (of which more hereafter)
or defiled with Mortal Sin; which is so called, because it destroys the
supernatural life of the Soul (received by Regeneration in Baptism) consisting
in Divine Faith, and other Celestial Virtues; but especially, in Sanctifying
Grace and divine Charity; without which Divine Charity, nothing does avail to
Salvation, as the Apostle teaches, 1 Cor. 1. 13.

Lastly, because diverse Protestant Teachers endeavor to make their Followers
believe, That the Fathers of the Primitive Church were Protestants, seeking
thereby to Illustrate the Protestant Religion; that the greatness, and boldness
of this Imposture (pardon the Word, for I know not how otherwise to express
truly the dealing of these Men) may clearly appear; I humbly entreat all
understanding Protestants (which know it not) to take notice, That those
ancient Worthies, and Lights of the Church of Christ, were either Monks, or
Founders of Monastical Discipline; or at least, Approvers and Praisers of the
same. St. Anthony was a Monk, and St. Athanasius his Praiser. St. Basil the
Great, a Monk, and the Founder of a Monastical Institute, which in the Eastern
part of the World is yet practiced. St. Gregory the Divine, was a Monk: St.
Chrysostom a Monk: St. Hierom a Monk: the Great St. Augustine the Founder of a
Monastical course of Life: St. Martin a Monk: St. Benedict a Monk, and Founder
of the Famous Order of Benedictine Monks, which does yet flourish in the
Western Church: St. Gregory the Great was a Monk; and by the Labors of Forty
Monks, did first plant Christianity amongst the English. Let any Man judge how
likely, or how true it is, that these men were Protestants.

Secondly, take notice, that these Ancient, and most Learned Fathers were great
Praisers and Practisers of austere and penitential works, consisting in
frequent Prayer, in much watching, in severe fasting, in hard lodgings, in
course and spare Diet, in wearing of Hair-cloth, and the like. They lived
single Lives. Many of them bestowed their Wealth upon the Poor, and other Pious
Uses, and professed Voluntary Poverty, following therein the counsel of Christ,
given Matthew. 19. 21. and they not only allowed of, but also most highly
extolled the observing of perpetual Chastity, and Virginity, preferring the
same far above Matrimony. Were not these men then strange Protestants?

Thirdly, Take notice, that these Ancient Worthies, even by the Confession of
all Protestants, were Men of excellent Wits, of excellent Learning: If then
they had found in the word of God (as Protestants say they find) that only
Faith does Justify; That Good Works are not meritorious: That in Works of
Grace Men have not Free Will: That they are not able to keep the Commandments:
That it is not in the power of Man or Woman to live perpetually chaste: That
Virginity is not more pleasing to God, than Matrimony: That to give all to the
Poor, to Fast, Pray, and watch much, and to undergo other Austerities, and
mortifications of the Body, does not profit and enrich the Soul: That there is
no Purgatory, no Penance to be done, no satisfaction to be made for Sin; no
punishment to be inflicted upon the Faithful for them after this Life.

If, I say, the ancient Fathers had found these, and the like Doctrines of
Protestants in the Scriptures (and why should they not have found them there,
if there they had been, they being so Wise, so Learned, and so industrious
Searchers of the Word of God, as they were?) If there, I say, they had found
these things, and had believed them as Protestants do; they would have lived as
Protestants do; for why should they not?

If these pleasing Doctrines, which are light and easy to Flesh and Blood, and
the sweet Liberty of the new Gospel had as feelingly pierced, and as strongly
possessed the Hearts of those Ancients, as it did, and does the Breasts and
Bowels of Luther, Zwinglius, Bucer, Peter Martyr, Calvin, Beza, and their
Followers, the Teachers of the Protestant Religion; they would, without all
doubt, with these, have preferred Pleasures before Penance; Feasting before
Fasting; the delights of the Conjugal Life before the continent and single; And
in a word, Riches, Honors, Pleasures, before the labors and smart of a
penitential and mortified Life; before voluntary poverty, and the vexing Attire
of Hair-cloth, or else they had been mad: had they believed as most Protestants
do, that such Exercises as these are needless, fruitless, yea, and
superstitious Toys.

But the Truth is, that those ancient and shining Lamps of Wisdom and Sanctity,
did not believe as Protestants do, and therefore they lived not as they do; for
they were otherwise instructed in the School of Christ; they read, and learned
another Lesson in his Divine Gospel, even the same that Papists now do, and
therefore they instituted their Lives, as they did; and were in very deed as
much Protestants, as the Pope and his Priests and Friars now are, and no more,
most certainly; unless we will have them to have been Sots and Madmen.

If a douzen Protestant Ministers now, should consociate themselves together;
and shaking off the Delights of the World, should apply themselves fervently to
much Prayer, Fasting, Watching, lying on hard Couches, wearing of Hair-cloth,
and such other austerities of Body; and forbearing to marry, should highly
extol the single Life, perpetual Chastity, and should exhort young Maidens,
Noble Gentlewomen, Princes Daughters, to the perpetual keeping of their
Virginity, and Consecrating of it to God; would they be held for sincere and
well-grounded Protestants? I think not. Nay, would they not presently be
suspected for Papists? No doubt but they would: the institute of their Life
plainly breathing Papistry, and wholly swerving from the Belief and practice of
Learned Protestants.

Let not then, my Noble and dear Countrymen, the misreports of some of your
Teachers, so far prevail with you, as to make you believe (the better to keep
and quiet you in Protestantism,) that the Fathers of the primitive Church were
Protestants. For certainly those Blessed Servants of Christ were as far from
being Protestants, as the most zealous of your Teachers are from being Papists,
yea, from being Monks or Friars, and from instituting their Lives, as those
Ancients did. If then you truly prize the Learning and Sanctity of the
Primitive Church and Christians, become of that Belief which their Lives and
Practices do Preach unto you. If you think them saved, be not so hardy as to
seek a new way to Heaven; for the safety of your Souls, is of greater moment,
then so to be exposed to hazard (being there can be but one saving Faith, as my
Tenth Question will make plain unto you.) Eternal Glory is not easily to be set
upon the Dice, when you may take a secure way to it. Become then of the
Communion of that Church, in which the Fathers lived and dyed: that therein,
seconding your Belief with a Virtuous Life, you may assuredly attain to
everlasting Happiness; which I cordially wishing unto you, shall infinitely
rejoice, if these my Questions (which I now leave to your perusal) shall
further, or occasion your return to that Religion, which assuredly leads
thither. As most certainly they will (Gods Holy Grace concurring) if you will
but attentively, and with impartial Eyes, read them; and not be shuffled off
with frivilous Answers; or rest satisfied, until you see my Arguments solidly
refuted; which you will never see, if you look well to their Fingers, who shall
undertake the answering of them. And so beseeching God to prosper your Reading
and Meditation to his own Glory, and the Salvation of your Souls, I remain
unfeignedly,

A Well-wisher of Your Eternal Felicity, T. K.

THE CONTENTS.
Question 1. WHere was the Protestant Religion believed, and practiced, the
last Five Hundred Years before Luther? Page 1. Question 2. If Luther was not
the first Teacher of the Protestant Religion, to whom did he immediately
succeed, in the Office of Teaching the same? Where also is treated of the
Mission of Protestant Teachers. (p. 4. Question 3. If the Protestant Religion
be truly Catholic; when was it spread over the World; and what Heathen Nations
has it Converted to Christ? p. 11. Question 4. What likelihood there is, that
to bring to pass, and effect the great and merciful Work, of the Conversion of
the Nations of the Earth, and of their Kings, to Christ, God has never yet
made use of the True Religion of Christ, and of the pure Light of the Gospel?
p. 12. Question 5. Whether it be not a very inconsiderable thing, and full of
danger, to prefer, in matters of Faith and Religion, the Teaching of Men,
before the Word of God? p. 16. Question 6. Whether God has left to Christian
People any sure Rule of Faith, and certain Guide in matters of Religion; any
Infallible Interpreter of his Word? (p. 24. Question 7. If God has left no
sure and un-erring Interpreter of his Word, in matters of Faith: how can it be
defended, that the Holy Scriptures are not unprofitable, and even pernicious to
Mankind? p. 30. Question 8. Whether the State of the great Family, City,
Kingdom and Commonwealth, Army of Jesus Christ, that is, of his Church, does
require a Supreme Spiritual Head, or no? p. 33. Question 9. Whether the way to
Salvation be narrow, or no? (p. 40. Question 10. How it can be defended, that
Jesus was the true Messiah, promised in the Old Testament, if the Church, which
he Founded, erred so many Ages, in her Doctrine of Faith? p. 42. Question 11.
Did the Church of Christ Err heretofore, because Christ could not preserve her
from Erring, or because he would not? p. 63. Question 12. If the Church of
Christ did Err for so many Ages, How can it be defended, that God is truly
Good, and does truly desire the Salvation of Mankind? p. 65. Question 13. If
the Church of Christ did Err from the true Light of the Gospel so many Ages;
could he find none fit, in so many Hundred Years, to restore the same, till
Luther, falling out with the Pope, and breaking his Vow of Chastity, began to
teach a new Religion, tending to Liberty and Looseness? p. 69. Question 14.
Whether God by Miracles, can draw and incline men to believe a false Religion,
or no? Where it is showed, that Cod by Miracles did draw our Forefathers, at
their first Conversion to Christianity, to believe Papistry. p. 74. Question
15. Out of which Religion the Elect of Christ, are to be gathered, at the day
of Judgment? p. 80. Question 16. Whether Protestants, or Catholics, do take
the sure way to Eternal Happiness? Where it is showed, that Papistry, by the
Judgment of all Learned Protestants, is a saving Religion; and consequently a
securer way. p. 87. An Appendix. Whether the Apostles were Protestants, or no?
p. 95.
Question I. Where was the Protestant Religion Believed, and Practiced, the
last five hundred years before Luther.
First I Demand of Protestants, where, in what Countries, Provinces or Cities,
was the Protestant Church and Religion, Extant and Practiced, the last five
hundred years, immediately before Luther's Revolt, from the Roman Church: Which
he began in the year 1517? First, To say, that Christ for those five hundred
years, had no True Church, no Saving Faith and Religion upon Earth, is flatly
against Daniel 2. 44. foretelling, that the Kingdom, that is, the Church of
Christ, should stand for ever; and c. 7. v. 14. That it should Never be
Corrupted: And against Christ himself, assuring us Matthew. 16. 18. That the
Gates of Hell should never prevail against his Church.

Moreover, out of this Answer, it follows, that Christ was not the Savior of
the World. For if the World, had no means of Salvation from him, for those five
hundred years: Such means it had not from him, the next five hundred years,
which passed before these: Which being granted, it will be hard, if not
impossible, to prove, either by Scripture or Reason, that for the space of the
next five hundred years, which reach up to the times of the Apostles, the World
from Christ had any true means of Salvation. And so by this Answer, he will be
wholly excluded, from being the Savior of the World; as hereafter more clearly
shall appear.

Secondly, No understanding Protestant will deny, that the World was full of
Christians before Luther began his new Preaching, or that they then had,
believed, and re-cited the CREED of the Apostles. If then a Christian in those
times, had been pressed by a Jew, Turk, or any other Infidel, to deny that
Article of his Creed, I believe a Holy Catholic Church, a Communion of Saints:
Whether might he, with a safe Conscience have denied it, or no? If safely he
might have denied this Article; safely also he might have denied the rest: In
regard that all these Articles, so far forth as they are the Object of Faith,
are of equal Truth and Certainty, as is manifest. For if one of them be false,
what certainty is there of the rest? But if he might not without damnable Sin,
and the high offense of God, have denied this Article, as doubtless he might
not; then this Article, as well as the rest, is a Divine Truth, which we ought
to believe, with firm and Divine Faith: And consequently there was extant in
the World, before Luther's rising, a Catholic Church, and a Communion of
Saints: That is, a common union or conjunction of Sanctified People in that
Church. Otherwise Christian People, could not so strictly have been obliged, to
believe that Article: For they cannot be obliged to believe a Falsehood. Christ
(then in the Ages immediately before Luther, began to Preach, and institute the
Protestant Church and Religion;) had on Earth a Catholic Church, and a
Sanctified People therein, united together in Faith and Religion, and in the
participation of his Divine Benefits.

Which being so: What will Protestants Answer to my Question? Will they grant,
as the Truth is; that although the Protestant Church and Religion, were no
where extant and in practice, the last five hundred years before Luther: Yet
Christ had then, and in all former Ages, a saving Faith and Religion? But then
I must tell them first; That if the Protestant Religion and Church, were not
then the Catholic Church and saving Religion of Christ, it cannot prudently be
thought, or possibly proved, to be so now. But rather all Discreet and
Judicious People, must hold it to be a new Invention; such as the Arrian, or
the Nestorian Profession was.

Secondly, I must tell them, that That Religion, which before Luther's
Innovation, was a Saving Religion, is still a Saving Religion: For why should
it not, it being the same that it was? Which being granted; the Protestant
Profession cannot be a Saving Religion: Because there cannot be two Saving
Religions extant at the same time, opposite and contrary one to another (as
hereafter more clearly shall appear) in regard that one of them, must of
necessity be a false Religion, and proceed (as from the prime Suggestor and
Author) not from God, but from the enemy of mankind: Who will never invent and
set a foot a Religion apt to save men in.

Thirdly, I must tell them, that if in all Ages before Luther's time, Christ on
Earth had a Holy Church, and a Saving Religion; as most certainly he had: The
first Protestants did very ill, in forsaking her Communion, and in raising
against Her such Factions and Tumults, merely for Liberty sake, as they have
done: For this breaking off, was not to secure their Souls, (whatsoever they
pretended, to have some color of their doing;) but to enjoy more Carnal
Liberty, than the long settled Discipline of that Holy Church could bear, and
allow. And as ill do They, who still maintain the same breach, and impugn the
same Holy Church, and saving Faith of Christ: Following New Inventions in
Religion, tending to Liberty: Of which they can never be groundedly secure,
that they are sufficient to Salvation; as this little Treatise does make too
too manifest.

Some Protestants perchance, being loath to grant, that their Church and
Religion, had no Being at all upon Earth, for the last five hundred years
before Luther: And yet not able to nominate, with any color of Truth, where
their Church then was, and where their Religion was believed and practiced,
(there being no Record, or foot-step of these things extant in the World) will
affirm, that for many Ages before ^^ther, their Church lay hidden under
Papistry. But how do they know this? Does the word of God, teach any such
thing? If the Papists, which then lived, did not know of any such thing; or
that there was any such Church: How do the Protestants, that now live, know it?

Certainly this saying is too too Childish, and fitter for Idiots, or Madmen,
to make, then for men of Judgment: For thereby Anabaptists, Quakers, new
Arrians, or any other foolish Heretics whatsoever, may pretend, that their
Churches and Religions, were ever extant in all former Ages, and ever in
practice in the World, even since the times of the Apostles: Than the which,
what can be more ridiculous? My first Question then, cannot be so Answered by
Protestants, as may satisfy the Consciences of Prudent men. But let us pass to
the next.

Question II. If Luther was not the first Teacher, of the Protestant
Religion;to whom did he immediately succeed, in the Office of Teaching the
same? Where also is treated of the Mission of the Protestant Teachers.
IF Luther was not the first Teacher of the Protestant Religion; to whom did he
immediately succeed, in the Office of Teaching the same? If in this Office, he
did not succeed to any other Doctor, who had the same before; (as most
certainly he did not, for no such former Teacher of the Protestant Religion,
can be named;) then clear it is, that Luther was the first Teacher of the
Protestant Faith and Religion. Further then I demand; Who set him a work, to
Teach as he did? God? Or the Enemy of God and Man? Not God most certainly.

1. Because nothing can be said, to justify the new Teaching of Luther, which
may not be said, to justify the new Teaching of Arius, or of Nestorius, or of
the Anabaptists and Quakers, or of any other false Prophet and Heretic, that
ever was. Let Trial be made, and this will be found to be most true. For by the
self-same ways, by which Luther can prove himself, to come from God, any
Heretic may prove himself to come from God. Will Luther say that he had a
private Instinct from God? That he saw, there was great need to Reform the
Doctrine of the Church? That the People and Princes, who followed him, gave him
Calling, and the like? The self-same might Arius have said; the self-same may
the Quakers, and Anabaptists say; and the self-same may any False Teacher say,
that can get People to follow him.

2. Because it is certain, that Luther had no Calling, or Mission from God at
all: Without Calling and Mission from whom, no man may take upon him the Office
of Preaching, and of Pasturing the People of God; as is clear out of his Holy
Word, Romans 10. 15. Heb. 5. 4. For he came not from God, either by Ordinary, or
by Extraordinary Mission: And so he had no sending from him at all. For God
does use no other sorts of sending, because no other are fit, to distinguish
the True Preachers of God, from the False Prophets of the Devil. For Calling
and Mission, from Temporal Magistrates, from the Common People, or pretended
from private Instincts, are agreeable, and common to False Prophets, and
Heretical Teachers: And some of these, for want of better, when they are urged,
they ever pretend: But Ordinary, or Extraordinary Mission, they are never able
to show.

Extraordinary Mission God does use, when he sends any one to make notable
Mutation about Religion. But then to assure the World, that those, whom He does
so send, do come indeed from him, he does ever furnish them, with the Gift of
Heavenly Miracles. Which Gift is as it were His Broad-Seal set to their
Commission: Whereby they are easily distinguished, from False Prophets, and
Heretical Teachers.

By this manner of Mission, God sent Moses and Aaron, and Christ and his
Apostles, to make those Mutations and Additions about Religion, which they
made; furnishing them with the Gift of Miracles, as is plain out of his Sacred
Word. Which Gift was so necessary, even to the Blessed Son of God himself,
notwithstanding, the great Sanctity of his Life, and Excellency of his
Doctrine: The plain Predictions of the Holy Prophets, and the weighty Testimony
of St. John the Baptist, that he affirms John 15. 24. That if he had not done
amongst the Jews, Works that no other had done, they should not have sinned; In
refusing Him for their Messiah.

Must Luther then (his Life and Doctrine being such as it was) be received as
sent from God, by Extraordinary Mission, to make so great a change in Religion,
as he did, without any Miracles at all? Who will think so, but inconsiderate,
blind, or madmen?

But Note here by the way, a thing worth the observing: That those, whom God
does send, by Extraordinary Mission, do never exclaim against the Church of
God, and the Ordinary Pastors thereof, which were before their time, as though
they had erred in matters of Faith, and abused and misled the People of God;
as appears by the 23 d. of St. Matthew: But this is ever the Property of
Heretical Teachers, raised up by the Devil, to seduce Souls; who always
pretend, to Teach the Church and People of God better than they were taught
before. And thereupon they cry out, that the Church and her Pastors had
Grievously Erred; Till they, forsooth, came, and discovered the True Light of
the Gospel. But how False and Fond the proceeding of such men is, will appear
by that which follows in the sequel of this Treatise.

By Ordinary Mission God does send those, who immediately, or in the time of
Succession mediately, succeed (by due Consecration, and Authorizing) in the
Office of governing (in things Spiritual, and Pasturing the People of God) to
them, who were sent from him by Extraordinary Mission. In this manner the
Priests of the Law of Moses succeeding Aaron by Generation, Consecration and
Authorizing, had Ordinary Mission from God, during the time, that That Law was
in force. And in like manner, the Pastors and Doctors of the Law of Grace,
succeeding to the Apostles, by due Consecration, and Authorizing, have Ordinary
Mission from God, during the time, that this Law is to be in force: Which is,
even till the Day of Judgment.

Which succeed, I say, to the Apostles by due Consecration and Authorizing,
that is, by that Consecration and Authorizing, which Christ ordained, to confer
Divine and Spiritual Power to his Pastors. For this Power being a Divine and
Supernatural thing, a participation of the Power of Christ, and of Force and
Efficacy to Bind and Loose Souls, to Cleanse them from Sin, and to Sanctify
them; no Mortal man, though never so eminent in Temporal Magistracy, is able to
invent and ordain Means, to give and impart the same. And therefore strange and
audacious, was their attempt, who in the time of Edward the VI. invented a New
Form to Consecrate Archbishops, Bishops and Priests, and to Endue them with
Divine and Spiritual Power. But into this Error they fell, by the singular
Providence of God, that thereby Infinite Sacriledges, and Abuses of the Blessed
Sacrament, might be avoided: Which would have happened in This Kingdom, if
Protestant Bishops and Ministers, had been True Priests indeed.

Out of this Doctrine, which is most True, it clearly follows, that neither
Luther, nor any other Protestant Teacher whatsoever, had, or has any True
Calling or Mission from God at all. For manifest it is, that none of these
Teachers had Extraordinary Mission from God: For they could never yet show his
Broad-Seal, which is the Gift of Miracles. And as manifest it is, that they
have not Ordinary Mission from him. For they cannot possibly extend the Line of
their Succession, beyond Luther's time; or Nominate any Rank of Pastors
reaching up, to the Apostles Times, to whom these men do succeed, in the Office
of Teaching the Protestant Religion. Dangerous then is the state of all
Protestants; because really, and in very deed, they want True Pastors sent from
God.

But some will say, that the Case of English Protestants is not so bad; because
they have Bishops, who have Ordination from the Church of Rome. I answer.
First, That these their Bishops, have indeed a certain shadow of Ordination,
but not the thing it self; because in their Ordination, the same Matter and
Form is not used, by which Priestly Power is conferred in the Roman Church: But
that which was Invented, in the days of Edward the VI. and Ratified in the time
of Queen Elizabeth; by which Divine Power cannot be given.

Secondly, I answer, that if these English Prelates, were truly Bishops and
Priests indeed, yet this could nothing avail them, or their Followers: Because
this is not sufficient to True Mission from God; in regard, that over and above
this, true Faculty and Authorizing, (from the Ordinary Pastors, of the Roman
Church) to Teach and Pasture the People of Christ, Succession of Truth in
Dogmatical Points is of necessity required, to Ordinary Mission from God. Which
Faculty and Authorizing, our English Bishops wanting, they should thereby be
destitute of all True Mission from God, although they were indeed True Bishops;
as it befell the Arian and Nestorian Bishops and Priests: Which having True
Ordination, and being Truly Bishops and Priests, were notwithstanding destitute
of all True Mission from God, being thereof deprived by God and his Church, in
regard of their Rebellion against the Church, and of the false Heretical
Doctrine which they Taught. For Christ would have it to be in the Power of the
Pastors of his Church, to deprive False Teachers of all Authority to Teach, and
to expel them out of his Flock, that they might not ruin the Souls of his
People.

Thirdly, I answer, That Protestant Pastors, cannot have True Mission from the
Roman Church, though she would bestow it upon them: Which she would never do,
unless they will become Catholics, and will undertake the Teaching, and
Re-planting of the Catholic Religion: Gods Grace and the care of their own
Salvation, and of the Salvation of those numerous Flocks of People, which
follow them, drawing them to enterprise so Heroical and Divine a work. Which
point I show thus. Either the Pastors of the Roman Church, or the Pastors of
the Protestant Church, are False Prophets, False Teachers, False Explicators of
the Word of God, and of the Mysteries of Christ: This is evident; for they
cannot be both Orthodoxal Teachers, seeing they contradict one the other, about
many of the Principal Articles of the Christian Religion.

If the Pastors of the Roman Church be False Prophets, and Heretical Teachers:
They have no Mission from God themselves, being by him prohibited to Teach, as
all False Prophets are: How then can they impart true and Divine Mission to
others? But if the Pastors of the Protestant Church, be False Prophets, falsely
Teaching, and Expounding the word of God, and the Religion and Mysteries of
Christ; then They are wholly incapable of True Mission, God himself prohibiting
them to Teach, because False Doctrine in matters of Faith, does tend to the
ruin of Souls, as is clear out of the Word of God, Matthew. 7. 15. And so the
Roman Church, if she would, cannot give Protestant Bishops and Ministers, True
Mission and sending from God.

Out of the Doctrine delivered in this Question, which is solid and true; it
clearly follows, that the Protestant Religion, is not truly Apostolic, that
is, descending from the Apostles, and the same, that they Believed and Taught:
Though it pleases the Teachers thereof, so to style it, to make it the more
acceptable, to their followers: Even as bitter Pills are sometimes Gilt with
Gold, that they may the more easily be swallowed. The reason is, that this
Religion, does not descend from the Apostles, by a continual Line, of Doctors
and Pastors, one succeeding the other, in the Office of Teaching, and
practicing the Protestant Religion; which reaches through all Ages, even up to
the Apostles.

If any Protestant will answer to this, that they esteem not their Religion
Apostolic, because it descends from the Apostles, by such a Line of
Succession: But because it is shaped out, according to the Model of the
Religion of the Apostles, expressed in the Word of God, so near as the Founders
and Shapers thereof, could guess. I reply first, that I will then grant, that
the Protestant Religion, may be styled Apostolic, in this sense, when all
Protestants shall be agreed among themselves, which Sect of theirs is best
shaped out, according to the Model, of the Apostles Religion, expressed in the
word of God, and comes nearest to the Purity thereof: That is, whether the
Lutherans, or the Swinglians, or the Calvinists, or the Anabaptists, or the
Quakers, or the new Arians, or the Parliamentary Protestants, or the Puritans
have shaped out their Religion best, and nearest to the Purity of the Apostles
times. But as they will never be agreed of this, the best rule to guide them,
in the work of shaping out Religion, being but the private guess of this, or
that Sect-Master, or Sect: So I shall never be tied to grant their Religion to
be Apostolic.

Secondly, I answer, that according to this manner of proceeding, every
Heretic, will prove his new Devices in Religion, to be Apostolic: If he
himself may be Judge, and may have leave to Sense and Expound the Scriptures,
as his own Guess and Conceit shall lead him. Which absurd Liberty being denied
to Protestants, they can never prove, even in this Sense, their Religion to be
Apostolic.

Question III. If the Protestant Religion, be Truly Catholic: When was it
spread over the World; and what Heathen Nations has it Converted to Christ?
IF the Protestant Religion be truly Catholic, as the Teachers thereof do
style it; it is now, and in former Ages must have been spread over the World.
For Christ, as Daniel foretold, c. 2. Was to grow into a Mountain, that is,
into a Church, which is his Mystical Body, that was to fill the whole Earth.
And as the Royal Prophet Sung, Psalm. 2. He was to have the Gentiles for his
Inheritance, and the ends of the Earth for his Possession. The Christians also
of all Ages, were bound to believe a Catholic Church, according to the Creed
of the Apostles, as I before showed. Which being so; if Protestants have been
this Catholic Church, and their Religion, the most common and Universal
Religion, believed over the World: They must have spread themselves and their
Religion over the World, by Converting Heathen Nations to Christ: according to
the clear Promises of God made to the Patriarchs, that in their Seed, that is,
in Christ, all the Nations of the Earth should be Blessed: (Which Promises you
shall find in my tenth Question) and according to the words of Christ, Matthew.
24. saying, This Gospel of the Kingdom shall be Preached in the whole World,
for a Testiomny to all Nations: And then shall come the Consummation: That is,
the end of the World.

Now then, I demand of Protestants, what Heathen Nations, in this, and in
former Ages, they have Converted to the Belief and Practice of their Religion,
and have thereby spread the same over the World, as the True Catholic Faith of
Christ ought to be spread? If they cannot truly name any such Nations, as
indeed, they cannot, unless they will feign: Let them confess, as the certain
Truth is, that their Religion is neither Truly Catholic, but so termed, to
delude the simple; nor the true Faith of Christ, by which in him the Nations of
the Earth are to be Blessed. Let each Prudent Protestant, who truly seeks
Salvation, thoroughly weigh this Point.

Question IV. What likelihood there is, that to bring to pass, and effect, the
great and Merciful work, of the Conversion of the Nations of the Earth; and of
their Kings, to Christ, God has never yet made use of the True Religion of
Christ and of the Pure Light of his Gospel.
IT is certain out of the Word of God, alleged in the last Question, that
Christ was to have the Gentiles for his Inheritance, and the ends of the Earth
for his Possession, as the Royal Prophet foretold, Psalm. 2. 8. That is, He was
to destroy false Religions, and the Worship of False Gods, and of the Devil,
through the World; and to introduce his own Divine and most Holy Religion, and
the True Worship of one God amongst the Nations of the Earth: Thereby to bring
unto them, the Blessing Promised, Genesis c. 12. c. 22. c. 26. c. 28. and Psalm. 71.

2ly. It is also certain, that Christ was to enter upon this his Inheritance,
and to begin the ruin of Idolatry, and the Conversion of the Gentiles, by the
Preaching of his Apostles, within some few years after his Ascension: As is
clear out of the Commission, which he gave them, Matthew. 28. saying, Go, Teach
all Nations; and out of the words of St. Paul, Act. 13. saying to the Jews, To
you it behoov'd us first to speak the Word of God: But because you repel it,
and judge your selves unworthy of Eternal Life; behold we turn to the Gentiles;
for so our Lord commanded us: I have put thee to be the Light of the Gentiles;
that thou may be Salvation unto the utmost of the Earth, Isaias 49.

Thirdly, It is certain, that although the Conversion of the Gentiles, was to
be begun by the Apostles; yet it was not to be completely finished by them; but
was to be continued by their Successors the Doctors and Pastors of the Church,
Ephesians. 4. 12. And not to be accomplished till toward the end of the World; as
is clear out of Gods word, Matthew. 24. Where our Savior being asked a Sign of
his coming to Judgment, and of the end of the World, gave the complete
Preaching of his Gospel to all Nations, for a sign thereof, saying, This Gospel
of the Kingdom shall be Preached in the whole World, for a Testimony to all
Nations, and then shall come the Consummation.

This also is manifest out of Isaias, by whom God foretold the conversion of
the Kings of the Earth to Christ his Son, and their lowly subjection to his
Church, saying, v. 7. c. 49. Kings shall see, and Princes shall arise and Adore
for the Lords sake. And again, Kings shall be thy Nursing Fathers, and Queens
thy Nurses: With Countenance cast down toward the ground they shall Adore thee,
and they shall lick the Dust of thy feet. And c. 60. Thy Gates shall be open
continually, day and night they shall not be shut, that the strength of the
Gentiles may be brought to thee, and their Kings may be brought: For the Nation
and the Kingdom, that shall not serve thee, shall perish. And a little after,
speaking again of the Church of Christ gathered out of the Gentiles, he says,
For that thou wast forsaken (viz. in the time of the Law of Moses) and hated,
and there was none that passed by thee, I will make thee to be the pride of
Worlds, a joy unto Generation and Generation: And thou shall suck the milk of
the Gentiles: And thou shall be Nursed with the Teats of Kings.

Out of which clear Prophesies, it seems to be manifest, that the chief
Conversion of the Gentiles was to be effected, long after the times of the
Apostles: When the Roman Empire, the strength then of the Gentiles, in the time
of Constantine the Great: And in the following Ages the Kings and Princes of
Spain, France, England, Scotland, Ireland, Denmark, Norway, Swedeland, Poland,
Hungary, and of other Countries, were Converted to the Faith of Christ, and
wonderfully Honored and Enriched his Church; as the Laws of exemption, which
they made, or received, the Edifices which they Built, and Bishoprics and
Monasteries which they Founded, and Endowed, do abundantly testify. For in the
Apostles days, and some Ages after, was rather fulfilled the Prediction of
Christ, foretelling Luke 21. That his Disciples and Servants should be Hated
before Kings and Presidents, and should be Despised, Persecuted, and Killed by
them.

Which things being so, I demand of Prudent and Considerate Protestants, what
probability there is, that to bring to pass the Divine and Merciful work, of
the Conversion of the Nations of the Earth, and of their Kings to the Chaste
and Holy Faith of Christ, and to the Worship of the true God, from the Impure
Service of False Gods, and detestable Worship of the Devil. God has never made
use of the True Religion of Christ, and of the Pure Light of his Gospel; (if
the Protestant Profession be Christ's True Religion, and the Pure Light of his
Gospel) but has ever made use, to effect this admirable work, of his Power and
Mercy, of the Blind and Superstitious Religion of the Papists?

That God for the space of above a thousand years, in the Conversion of Heathen
Nations and their Kings, has ever made use of Papistry, is evident, out of the
Histories of former times, which relates the Conversion of Nations. Yea, even
in these latter times, in which, since the rising of the Protestant Religion,
the Faith of Christ, has been infinitely spread in the East and West Indies,
and in diverse vast Islands of the Sea, amongst Heathen and Barbarous Nations:
God has utterly neglected the True Religion, and the pure Light of the Gospel,
that is, the Protestant Religion: And has made use only of Papistry, to make
these Nations Blessed in Christ. Now is not this a very likely thing, if
Papistry be a False, and Protestancy the True Religion? As likely, certainly it
is, as that the Sea does burn, as that the Sun is dark, and Snow black.

For (to speak plain English) If Protestancy be Gods Religion, and Papistry the
Devils, in regard, that God cannot in very deed, be Author of both these
Religions, they being opposite, and contrary one to the other: How can God
neglect the Protestant Religion, and make use of Papistry, to spread the Faith
of his Son over the World, to make thereby the Nations of the Earth Blessed in
him? Nay, how can they be made Blessed in Christ, by the help of the Devils
Religion? How can it become the Wisdom and Goodness of God, to neglect his own
Religion, and to spread, increase and exalt the Devils? To neglect the True
Light of the Gospel, and to delude the Nations of the Earth, with the
Superstitions of Papistry?

Who then is so short and dim sighted, that he does not see, that even from
hence is most clearly proved, that the Protestant Profession, is not Gods
Religion, is not the Pure Light of the Gospel, ordained by God, to give Light
to the Gentiles, and to make them Blessed in Christ: But a late and new
Invention suggested by the Enemy of God, to destroy in these Northern parts of
the World, that Religion which God made use of heretofore, to root out Him and
his Idolatrous Worship; and to make these Nations Blessed in his Son?

I conclude then this Question with this Syllogism: That is Gods Religion, and
the True Gospel, and Doctrine of Christ, which is Preached over the World, to
spread therein the Name and Faith of Christ, for a Testimony to all Nations.
But Papistry, and not Protestancy, is so Preached over the World: Ergo
Papistry, and not Protestancy, is Gods Religion, and the True Gospel, and
Doctrine of Christ. The Major is certain, and clear out of the Words of Christ,
Matthew. 24. above-related. The Minor is certain, and also clear out of the
Histories of former Times; and also of this present Age. The conclusion follows
well. And so it rests demonstrated, that the Holy Catholic Roman Faith,
Nick-nam'd Papistry, is Gods Religion, and the True Gospel of Christ. Which
will appear yet more clearly out of the Questions following.

Question V. Whether it be not a very inconsiderate thing, and full of danger,
to prefer, in matters of Faith and Religion,the Teaching of Men, before the
Word of God?
ALthough the Arguments of the precedent Questions, be firm, and strong, and
sufficient, to make Considerate Protestants to look about them; yet many of
them, will be little moved therewith; because they are possessed with a strong
imagination, that Their Religion is grounded upon the word of God, is squared
out thereby, and wholly, or at least very much cleans'd, from the Doctrines of
men: To free them from which false and dangerous Conceit and Persuasion: I here
demand.

Whether it be not a thing of great Inconsideration, and of no small danger, to
prefer, in matters of Faith and Religion, the Teaching of Men, the Doctrine of
This, or That Preacher, before the Word of God? Yea, in effect, to hazard and
pawn ones Soul, that the Teaching of these, or those new Masters, is truer, and
rather, to be followed, than the express word of God it self?

This will seem to Protestants a strange demand, because they esteem Papists
not a little culpable, for relying too much upon the Doctrines of Men: And
therefore they will here bid me, take my self by the Nose. Nevertheless,
whatsoever they imagine, I will easily here free Papists, and prove them guilty
of preferring the Doctrines of Men, before the express Word of God.

That Papists are not guilty of this Crime, is clear enough. First, Because no
Text of the Word of God, taken in its proper Sense, (and as the Ancient
Fathers, the general Councels, the ever visible Catholic Church of Christ, did
take it,) does directly contradict, any Article held by the Roman Church. For
example, no Text does say, that we are not justified, by Faith and Good-Works:
That Works of Grace done in the state of Grace are not Meritorious: That the
Body of Christ is not really in the Holy Eucharist: That Lawful Priests, have
not Power (as Gods Instruments) to Absolve from Sins rightly Confessed: That no
Satisfaction, is necessarily required on our Parts: That there is no Purgatory:
That it is not Lawful, or Profitable to Pray to Saints, to Honor them, as
Sanctified Creatures, to respect Reverently their Relics; to have Holy
Pictures, and Reverently to regard them, for the Love of Christ, or his Saints;
and the like. No Text, I say, of the Word of God, does expressly condemn These,
and the like Articles believed by Catholics: Though many make expressly for
them, as Catholic Divines do show.

Secondly, Although all True Catholics, do Humbly and Obediently believe, as
the Church Teaches: And thereupon do firmly embrace diverse Articles proposed by
Her, which are not, in express Terms, found in the Scriptures: Yet in these
very Points, they do not believe the Doctrines of men, or prefer the Doctrines
of men, before the express Word of God; or hazard their Souls, that the
Teaching of Their Pastors, is truer, or rather to be followed, than the Word of
God: But in these particular Articles, they rely upon the Authority of God, and
believe the Word of God, speaking in, and by his Church; which will not be hard
to show.

For the Office of Preaching the Word of God, by Christ committed to his
Apostles, died not with them, but continued with their Successors. And so the
Preaching of their Successors, was the Preaching of the Word of God, not only
in the first Age after the Apostles, but in all succeeding Ages, the Holy Ghost
Ever abiding with them, John 14. And Teaching them all Truth, in matters of
Faith, John 16.

Moreover, in the Ages after the Apostles, not only those who had Skill and
Means to Read the Scriptures: But those also, who could not Read them, might
believe in Christ, and might be Saved by him: And consequently they might have
true Faith in him: Which they could not have, but by Believing the Word of God:
The Apostle saying Romans 10. Faith is by Hearing, and Hearing is by the Word of
Christ. Whilst such then Heard and Believed The Doctrine of the Church; that
is, the Teaching of the Doctors and Pastors of the Church, they Heard, and
Believed the Word of God: The same do Papists now.

Futhermore, it cannot be doubted, but that the Gospel and Voice of Christ, is
the Word of God; and that those, which hear these, hear the Word of God. But
the Preaching and Teaching of the Doctors and Pastors of the Church of Christ,
is the Gospel and Voice of Christ, Ergo, etc. This is clear out of Matthew. 24.
where Christ says, This Gospel of the Kingdom shall be Preached in the whole
World, for a Testimony to all Nations, and then shall come the Consummation.
For who do Preach this Gospel, in all Ages, till the end of the World, but the
Doctors and Pastors of the Church? Their Preaching then is the Gospel of
Christ, and consequently the Word of God. Christ likewise says, John 10.
speaking of his Sheep, which he is to gather out of the Gentiles, even till the
end of the World: Other Sheep I have, which are not of this Fold, (that is, of
the Flock of the Jews;) Them also I must bring, and they shall hear my Voice.
Christ did not, nor does not Preach to the Gentiles, to gather his Sheep from
amongst them, in all Ages, by his own Corporal Voice: But by the Voice and
Teaching of the Pastors of his Church. Their Voice then is his Voice, and
consequently the Word of God.

Which is yet further showed out of Luke 10. where Christ says to his Pastors,
and Teachers: He that hears you, hears me. Wherefore while Papists do hear
the Teaching, of the Doctors and Pastors of the Church, lineally succeeding the
Apostles, they hear the Word of God, the Gospel of Christ, the Voice of Christ;
yea, Christ himself. And therefore they cannot be justly said, to believe, in
matters of Faith, the Doctrines of men: Or to hazard their Souls upon the
Doctrines of men: But upon the Authority of God speaking in, and by that
Church, which his continual assistance makes to be, The Pillar and ground of
Truth, 1 Timothy 3.

But the Case is not so with Protestants: For they do not only rely, and hazard
their Souls, upon the Doctrines of Men: But they also prefer the Doctrines of
men, before the express Word of God. For in diverse most weighty Points of
Religion, they leave, not only the Ancient Fathers, the General Councils, and
the ever visible and Catholic Church of Christ, but even the Word of God it
self, to follow the Teaching of their new Masters. This will seem at first a
strange, or rather a very Injurious, and Contumelious Imputation: But let us
make it plain by some examples.

The Word of God, says James 2. 24. Do you see that a man is justified by
Works, and not by Faith only? But Protestant Teachers say, that a man is
justified, Not by Works, but by Faith only. Mark how directly, they contradict
the Word of God. For that says, By Works, and not by Faith only. And these do
Protestants believe, rather than the express Word of God, in the weighty point
of Justification: On which their Salvation depends; which is not obtained, but
by the true manner of Justification.

Secondly, The Word of God, says, Luke 1. 6. That the Parents of John the
Baptist, Were both Just before God, walking in all the Commandments and
Justifications of our Lord without blame. Whence it clearly follows, that this
Holy Couple kept all Gods Commandments. For he that breaks them, does not Walk
in them without blame. The Word of God likewise says, 1 John 5. 3. This is the
Charity of God, that we keep his Commandments, and his Commandments are not
heavy. But Protestant Teachers generally affirm, that the Commandments of God,
are Impossible, are such as no man can keep, are Insupportable: And
confequently they must say, that no man is bound to keep them. For no man is
bound to do more than he is able. By which Doctrine, they do not only loose the
Bridle to all Vice, and make God more Indiscreet, and more Tyrannical, than any
other Commander in the World: But They also flatly contradict the word of God:
Which not only shows, that some men have kept the Commandments, but also
expressly affirms, that they are not Heavy. And yet Protestants rather believe
these, than the Word of God in this most weighty point. But Note well, what
follows, against these Teachers, out of the Word of God, 1 John 2. 4. Which
there says, He who says he knows God, and does not keep his Commandments, is a
Liar, and the Truth is not in him. But Protestant Teachers affirm, that they
rightly know God, but do not, nor cannot keep his Commandments, Ergo, They are
Liars.

Our Savior Instituting the Holy Eucharist, says, Luke 22. 19. This is my Body
which is given for you. But English Ministers generally say, That the Eucharist
is not Christ's Body, which was given for us; that is, his True Body: But a
Figure, or remembrance of it. Christ says, My Body, which is given for you:
That is, my True Body. For his True Body was given for Us, suffered for Us, and
not a Figure or Remembrance thereof. But these new Teachers say, Not his True
Body; not that, which was given for Us, that suffered for Us: But a Figure of
it, which the Word of God no where Teaches. And thus they flatly contradict the
Word of God, in this most important Article of Faith: On the right Belief, and
Use of which, Salvations depends, as is manifest out of the 6 St. Joh. and out
of the 11. of the 1 of Corinthians. And yet These our English Protestants
believe, rather than the Word of God, though it expressly says, That the
Eucharist is the Body of Christ, The Flesh of Christ; He himself saying, John
6. 51. The Bread which I will give, is my Flesh for the Life of the World.

4ly. Dani^l 2. 44. The Word of God says, In the days of those Kingdoms, the
God of Heaven will raise up a Kingdom (that is, the Church of Christ) that
shall not be dissipated for ever: And his Kingdom shall not be delivered to
another people. And it shall break in pieces, and shall consume all these
Kingdoms; and it shall stand for ever. Of which Church of Christ speaking
again, c. 7. He says, His Power is an Eternal Power, that shall not be taken
away; and his Kingdom, that shall not be corrupted. Conformable to which clear
Prophecy of Daniel, concerning the Perpetuity and Incorruption of the Kingdom,
and Church of the Messiah; Christ speaking of his Church, Matthew. 16. says, And
the Gates of Hell shall not prevail against her. That is, The Power of the
Devil, and false Doctrines, by which men are seduced, and brought to Hell. John
14. 16. He says, That the Holy Ghost should Abide with his Apostles for ever.
That is, with them and their Successors, the Doctors and Pastors of his Church:
For they were not in their own Persons to abide for ever with the Church to
Teach and Guide her. And John 16. 13. He says, That the same Divine Spirit,
should Teach them all Truth. In respect of whose continual abode with the
Church, to Teach her, in matters of Faith and Religion, All Truth: St. Paul
styles her 1 Timothy 3. 15. The Pillar and ground of Truth.

But Protestant Teachers say, that the Church of Christ Has been Corrupted:
That the Gates of Hell, that is, the Devil and his Instruments, Have prevailed
against her, and have filled her with Pernicious Errors, and Superstitions, for
above these thousand years: That the Holy Ghost, has not taught her All Truth;
but has given place to the Devil, permitting him, to replenish her, with
Errors and Superstitions, to the ruin and loss of Infinite Christian Souls:
That She is not the Pillar and ground of Truth: But the receptacle and sink of
falsehood. And thus they directly contradict the Word of God, about this prime
and most important Article, of the Truth and Incorruption, of the Church of
Christ, in matters of Faith and Religion: And yet Protestants rather believe
Them, than the clear Word of God; so much does draw and blind, the Love of
Novelty and Liberty.

But they will say, we leave not the Word of God, to follow the Teaching of
Men: But to follow the right meaning of the Word of God, delivered unto Us by
our Teachers. I answer, First, Have you just cause to think, that these your
Teachers, who have neither Unity, nor Sanctity, nor Antiquity, nor the Gift of
Miracles, nor any true Calling and sending from God, do rather deliver unto
you, the right meaning of the Word of God, than the Ancient Fathers, General
Councils, and ever Visible Church of Christ guided by the Holy Ghost? I believe
not.

I Answer, Secondly, That you are mistaken. For you leave the Word of God, to
follow the Interpretation of your Teachers. Which Interpretation, is not Gods
Word, but their Word, their Conceit, their Doctrine, and Explication of Gods
Word: To follow which, you leave, as I have showed, the express Word of God.
And therefore most true it is, that you leave the Word of God, to follow the
Doctrines of Men: If your Teachers be men.

Thirdly, I answer, That, if Affection did not make your Judgments miscarry,
you might easily see, that the Doctrine of your Teachers (being so directly
contrary to the Word of God) cannot be the meaning thereof. For God in his
Sacred Word, Ordained to instruct, and not to delude us, and in his profound
Mysteries, does not use to speak one thing, and to mean the clean contrary: To
say that the Eucharist is his Body, and to mean, That it is not his Body, but a
Figure of it: To say, that men are justified by Works, and not by Faith only:
And to mean, that they are not justified by Works, but by Faith only. For this
manner of dealing is fitter for a Jugler, than for God: And if the same be once
allowed of, what foolish, wicked, damnable Heresy can there be, that may not
be thus defended by Scripture? Or what Articles of the Christian Faith may be
firmly proved out of the Word of God, if wilful, headstrong, Presumptions
Teachers, may in this sort Explicate, Delude and Contradict, the clear, plain,
and Literal Sense thereof?

If any one desire, to see more places of Gods word, contradicted in this
manner, by Protestant Teachers, let him look in the Industrious Collation of
Doctor Smith, formerly Bishop of Calcedon; and he shall there find demonstrated
to his Eye, that these men, by their new Doctrine, do oppose the express Word
of God, in above two hundred Points of Religion, now Controverted betwixt the
Catholics and them: So far off they are, from Teaching the Pure Word of God,
as they make their Credulous Followers believe: And so wide their Doctrine is,
from being the True Light of the Gospel, as they usually style it. Whereas in
very deed, it is only their own new Interpretation of the Gospel; not the
Gospel it self: As is evident by the multitude of Sects, which are amongst
them: Some being Lutherans, others Swinglians, others Anabaptists, others
Calvinists, others new Arians, others Quakers, some Puritans, some Arminians,
some Parliamentary Protestants, and the like: Which could not happen, if all
their Teachers, indeed did follow the Word of God, (that being but one) and
not their several Explications, and Interpretations of it. Whence it does
clearly appear, that the state of Protestants is most dangerous: Because, in
those Points of Doctrine, in which they differ from the Old Religion, instead
of following the Word of God, they merely follow the Word of Men.

Question VI. Whether God has left to Christian People, any sure Rule of
Faith, any certain Guide in matters of Religion; any Infallible Interpreter of
his Word?
TO discover to Protestants, the true Root of their Division into so many
Sects, I demand of them, whether they have any certain Rule of Faith, or no?
That is, whether they have any sure and un-erring Guide to Direct them, in
matters of Faith, to the right meaning of the Word of God: Any Infallible
Proposer of their Articles of Faith: Any un-erring Director, in the profound
Mysteries of the Christian Religion, and in the practice of the Worship of God?
If they have none of these: How can their Faith be certain? If it be uncertain,
doubtful, wavering, as indeed it is, for want of a sure Rule to guide it by:
With what Prudence may Christian People hazard their Souls therein?

If Protestants have any certain Rule of Faith, why do not the Learned of their
Churches, make use thereof, to agree and atone the Controversies which are
among them? That they are divided into such several Branches, as I a little
before named, cannot be denied. That they jar, and contend about weighty Points
of Religion, is manifest. For they differ about Predestination, the Cause of
Sin, the Redemption of Christ, his Descending into Hell, his Ascension up to
Heaven, and sitting at the Right Hand of God, his Equality with his Father, the
Baptizing of Infants, the Real Presence, of the Body and Blood of Christ, in
the Eucharist, Church Government, Ceremonies, and like. Which to be weighty
matters, and such as wring the Conscience, beside the Nature it self, of these
things, is clearly showed, by the Reluctation of our English Non-conformists.

But, to avoid the Disgrace of uncertainty, in Matters of Faith, some
Protestants will say, that they want not a Sure Rule, to square out their Faith
by: For the Scripture to them, is a certain and Infallible Guide. But to
manifest how defective this Answer is; I demand, whether the Scripture of it
self, or Interpreted, be a sure Rule of Faith? If of it self, without the help
of an Interpreter, it be such a Rule: Why have not all, that read it, one and
the same Faith? Why do not all believe the self same Articles, and Divine
Verities, if the Scripture it self, clearly and distinctly propose them to all?
Where the Rule is certain, all that is measured by it, is Uniform, and of the
same quantity: As is manifest by a Pound, by a Quart, by an Ell, by a Bushel,
and the like. And therefore if the Scripture of it self, without the help of
any Interpreter, be unto Men, a sure Rule, a certain and stinted measure of
Faith; it does to all, that Read or Hear it, measure shape, and square out, one
and the same Belief, one and the same Religion, one and the same Worship of
God. But this is evidently false: Ergo, evidently also false it is, that the
Scripture of it self, without the help of an Interpreter, is a sure Rule and
Guide, in matters of Faith.

For what is more manifest, then that several Readers, left to the guidance of
the Scripture it self, and not tied to any Interpreter, do gather out of it,
several and opposite Faiths and Religions, though they use all Humane
Diligences, to understand them rightly, and be never so Learned, never so well
skilled in the Greek and Hebrew Tongues? This is evident, by the several
branches of Protestants before-nam'd: Who all take the Scripture it self, (as
they say and pretend) for their Guide and Director, in matters of Faith and
Religion: And yet they differ and contend so infinitely as they do. Which
differing and contending, we must not conceive to spring in them, merely from
Malice, and the Spirit of Contention: But rather from the Obscurity of the
Scripture, and the depth and profundity, of the Mysteries therein contained: In
which our weak understandings may easily mistake; and may easily be deluded by
the Devil, if we want the help of a sure and Infallible Interpreter.

This I think, understanding Protestants, will not deny. And therefore, if they
will have the Scripture to be a Sure Rule, to direct their Faith and Religion
by, will they, nill they, they must admit of, and adjoyn to the Scripture, a
sure, un-erring and Infallible Interpreter thereof: But such an one, it is
impossible for them to find, unless they will leave the Protestant, and return
to the Catholic Faith again: For seeing they reject the Interpretation of
Fathers, of Councels, of the Ordinary Doctors and Pastors of the Church: And
hold, that the Church of Christ may err, yea, and has shamfully and
perniciously erred, for above these thousand years; where will they find an
Vn-erring Interpreter of the Scripture? Or in whom has God placed this high,
most necessary, and most important Office?

If he has not placed it, in the Doctors and Pastors of his Church, which he
has ordained to Perfect his People, and to keep them from wavering in matters
of Faith, Ephesians. 4. And which the Holy Ghost has placed in the Flock of
Christ, Act. 20. To govern the Church of God: Has he placed it in the Temporal
Magistrates, of Kingdoms and Commonwealths? Or in some one Temporal
Magistrate, to whom God has committed the Teaching, and directing of all
Nations? If God has not placed this most needful Office in General Councels
consisting of the Learned Sages and Prelates of the Church; has he placed it
in the Parliaments of England; consisting for the most part of unlearned
Laymen? I think no Sober Protestant will say so.

Neither will any Understanding Protestant, I think, fly here to the private
Spirit: And make thereby every Crack-brain'd Scripturist, an Infallible
Interpreter of Gods Word. For if hither he fly, not only a Quaker, an
Anabaptist, a Presbyterian, but a Tailor also, a Button-maker, Weaver, or
Cobbler, will make his Party good, with any Doctor the Protestants have, and
dart Text for Text with him, for whole Hours together, without loosing one Inch
of ground: Till Church Authority, the deadly Weapon of the Papists, be urged
against him. By urging which against these Fanatic People, Protestant
Prelates, do not a little, or slightly Wound themselves; they being as
blameworthy indeed, if not much more; for resisting the Authority of the
Catholic Church of Christ, as these are, for resisting the Authority of the
Church of England.

Nevertheless I approve not, but detest the Male-peart boldness, of these and
the like Ignorants: Who, transgressing the bounds to them prescribed, and
entering upon, (to their own Perdition,) the smoking mount of the Holy
Scriptures Exodus 19. wherein God does speak to Moses and Aaron, and deliver his
Sacred Oracles, to be by them made known to his People,) dare take upon them to
interpret the same, and to search into, and Sense the Profound Mysteries of
God, wickedly betrampling with their Impure Feet, and Polluting with their base
Conceits, those pure but deep Fountains of Heavenly Verities: It being their
Duty to Learn, and not to Teach. Yet I cannot but pity their Mislead Zeal:
Which if it were steered by the True Church of Christ, would Enrich their Souls
with the precious Jewels of many Christian Virtues; whereas now it is likely to
be the utter ruin of them.

Neither can I but greatly blame those, who to draw these weak and unwary
People off, and to separate them from the Breast of the Catholic Church: (At
which they were securely nourished, with the Milk of Celestial Doctrine, Meat
befiting their state and Weakness,) did put the Bible into their Profane
Hands, inviting them to the Gospel, to the Pure Light and Liberty of the
Gospel: And assuring them that those Sacred Volumes were easy to be
understood, and that in them they were to seek for the Truth of Gods Religion,
as being ordained by him, for the Reading and Instruction of all. And to
facilitate this desired separation; those New Teachers, spared not to Disgrace
with all Art and Cunning, the Rank and Dignity of the Prelates of the Church,
and to Vilify Church Authority; Proclaiming it to be Tyrannical: And that to
urge men to believe, as the Church does Teach, was no less than plain
Butchering of Consciences.

But when these New Masters, had effected, what they sought; and by the help of
Temporal Power, had brought Multitudes of People under their Command: Then
presently they stepped into the place of the Ancient Prelates: Took their
Authority upon them, and in matters of Faith and Religion, would have all to
dance after their Pipe, all to believe, not what they themselves Learned out of
the Book of God, but what these men thought fit to propose: That Book now being
too hard, for Vulgar People, for the Unlearned sort. Who now must stand below,
and not ascend, and enter upon that obscure and smoking Mountain: But must hear
Moses and Aaron; must hear Authorized Teachers; must obey the voice of the
Church, viz. Of Saxony, of Geneva, of England; and must follow in Saxony one
Faith, in Geneva another, in England another. Now they must learn the Law of
God, from the mouth of Teachers allowed of by the Commonwealth, and be tied to
believe what they propose.

And therefore in Saxony, they must not budge from Luther; in Geneva from
Calvin, in England from the Belief Established by Parliament: Which if they do,
presently they are urged, and sometimes born down by Church Authority:
Presently excellent and pithy Sentences, extolling Church Authority, and
showing the Necessity thereof, are Alleged, Magnified, urged in Sermons, in
Books, out of the Scripture, out of Tertullian, St. Cyprian, Lirinensis, and
other Fathers: Notwithstanding that these very Sentences, through the sides of
these poor Ignorants, do deadly stab the Hearts, of those which allege them,
for disobeying that very Church Authority, which these Sentences speak of, and
commend.

But with what Equity, (if I may be so bold as to ask) with what Security of
Conscience, do these Authorized Teachers, proceed against these Zealous
Ignorants, for following that Belief, which they gather out of the Word of God,
put into their Hands, by these their Teachers, and force them to follow
another, which by the very Rules and Tenets of these men, they cannot but
esteem Superstitious? May they not justly say: If the Scripture only be the
Rule of Faith, why do ye not permit us to believe, what we find therein? If it
be easy to be understood, why do you punish us, for holding that Doctrine,
which we gather out of it? If it be not easy, why do you put it into our
Hands? If we are not bound to believe, in Points of Faith any thing, that is
not expressly in the Scripture, why will ye force us to believe and practice
that, which there we find not?

If Church Authority is to be rejected, why do you interpose yours? If it be a
Butchering of Consciences, to force men to Believe, as the Church does Teach;
Why do you force us to Believe as you Teach? If you contemn the Authority, of
the ^ver Visible Church, why do you force us to Reverence, and to stoop to
yours? What signs do you show, what Miracles do you work, to demonstrate unto
us, that your Church Authority is rather to be Followed, rather to be Obeyed,
than the Church Authority of the Ancient Fathers, of the General Councels, of
the ever Visible Church of Christ? If Church Authority be to be Followed, be to
be Reverenced, be to be Obeyed, Restore Us to that, which Hoary Autiquity,
which Succession of Prelates, which Consent of Nations, which Excellent
Sanctity, which Manifest Miracles do commend unto Us. If it is to be rejected,
leave us to Gods Word, and force not our Consciences against that Light, which
shines unto us, in Reading the same. Thus may these misled People now
complain, against those, who having drawn them out of the Bosom of the
Catholic Church, do now endeavor to Inthrawl them to themselves. But much
more terrible, I fear will be the Bill of Complaint, which one day they are
likely to put up, at the Chancery Bar of Heaven, if a speedy and serious Course
be not taken, to restore these misled Souls again, to the secure feeding of
their Mother Church: Which God of his Mercy, bring to pass, for the Eternal
Happiness both of Them, and their Leaders.

Question VII. If God has left no sure, and un-erring Interpreter of his Word,
in Matters of Faith; How can it be defended, That the Holy Scriptures are not
Unprofitable, and even Pernicious to Mankind?
PErchance some Protestants, not able to give a satisfying Answer to my
Question, about the Interpreter of the Scriptures, will affirm, That God has
not ordained any certain Interpreter of those his Sacred Oracles: but has left
them to the scanning, and guess of all Readers whatsoever. But then I demand,
How it can be defended, that these Divine Books are not hurtful; yea, and even
pernicious to Mankind? For evident it is, that they may be taken in diverse, and
opposite Senses: Yea, evident it is, that they are de facto so taken, by
several Learned Men. Who, following no surer Interpreter, than the strength of
their own Wit and Learning; do gather out of them, contrary Faiths and
Religions, and several worships of God: Of which some of necessity must be
false, and hurtful to all that follow them; for False Religions are ever
hurtful, yea plainly pernicious, to those which follow them; as more clearly
hereafter shall appear.

And indeed three things are questionable about the Holy Scriptures, which,
without the help of an un-erring Interpreter, authorized, and enabled by God
himself, to guide us to the Truth about them, can never be rightly, and
fittingly decided. The first is, Which Books are Canonical, and truly the Word
of God: And which are not? The second is, Which Translation is good, right,
authentical; and which is not? The third is, Which is the true and right
meaning of the Holy Ghost, in this or that Text, or Sentence of Scripture,
touching upon some point of Faith: About the sense whereof, the Learned do
contend.

Which being so, diverse People, persuaded in their Consciences, that the
Scriptures are Divine Books, and really the Word of God: And that by believing
them rightly, and by following that Religion, which they teach, they may obtain
Life Everlasting: Will earnestly endeavor to search out the true meaning of
them. Which they being not able every where to find by their own natural
Forces, without the help of a sure Interpreter, directed by the Holy Ghost:
They will pick out diverse false Senses; yea, and Religions, out of the
Scriptures, by mistaking their right meaning: Which they will repute the true
meaning of them, (being not tied to any Interpreter,) and will defend Tooth and
Nail, to the assured Perdition of their own Souls, and theirs, whom they draw
after them; and to the raising of several Factions, endless Contentions, and
bloody Broils amongst Christian People; as we see fallen out since the rising
of Luther.

For each of those, who thus search the Scriptures, without regarding any
Infallible Interpreter, will easily persuade himself, that is the right meaning
of the Holy Ghost, which he has lighted upon, and that, the true Light of the
Gospel, which shines to him, in reading and scanning the Word of God; and that
therefore it stands him upon, if he will not betray the Truth, and lose his
own Soul, to stick firmly thereunto; and to strive even to death to maintain
the same: Yea, sometimes such Searchers of God's Word, esteem themselves bound
in Conscience, to bandy with all the force they can, against those, who seek to
Ruin, what they would Raise. From which manner of persuasions, have proceeded,
not only great varieties of Religions, and great Animosity in the defense of
them; but all the furious Garboils also, and bloody Contentions about Religion,
which now for above these Hundred Years have miserably turmoil'd the Christian
World; and yet are likely further to turmoil it; unless Christian Princes open
their Eyes, to behold the true Root of these Dissentions; and how absolutely
necessary it is, to admit of some one Infallible, and Un-erring Interpreter of
God's Word, authorized, and enabled by the Holy Ghost, to deliver the true
Sense thereof unto us, and to guide us in Matters of Faith and Religion; if
ever they mean to repress justly, the Irreligious boldness of Fanatical
Interpreters, and to see Peace again restored to the Christian World.

Which Root of Dissension is no other thing than that liberty, to Read and
Interpret the Holy Scriptures, which the Protestant Religion instilleth into
Men; while it denies the Infallibility of the Church, admits of no certain,
and un-erring Judge of Controversies, to whose definitive Sentence, all are
bound to submit; and makes the written Word of God, of it self, without an
Interpreter, the sole Rule of Faith; by which all Men ought to square out their
Belief and Religion.

By all which, it appears to be manifest, That, according to the Grounds and
Tenets of the Protestant Religion, the Sacred word of God, is not only
unprofitable, but even hurtful and pernicious to Mankind, for want of a Sure
Interpreter, appointed by God, to guide us, (in Faith and Religion,) to the
right Sense and Meaning thereof: As beside the Reasons given, the manifold
Examples of diverse unfortunate Men, do convince; who, by over-boldly searching
into the Bible, have either cracked their Brains, or fallen into despair, or
turned Jews, Turks, or Atheists, or embraced absurd and ridiculous Opinions;
for what made Hacket formerly, Naylor, and others lately, to give themselves
out for New Christ's? What made so many false Prophets, and Prophetesses appear
in the late Confusions of England? Or what occasioned then so many Sacriledges,
Barbarities and Cruelties, but too much poring into, and meddling with the Bible?

Question VIII. Whether the State of the Great Family, City Kingdom,
Commonwealth, Army of Jesus Christ that is of his Church, do require a Supreme
Spiritual Head, or no?
ALL understanding Protestants, will easily grant, that no Family, City,
Kingdom, Commonwealth, Army, or Navy, can be fittingly, and rightly ordered,
and governed, without some Head, or Supreme Magistrate, to whom Subjects may
have recourse; and from whom they may receive Directions, as need shall
require. Which being so, I demand of Protestants, whether the State in Earth of
the Great Family, City, Kingdom, Commonwealth, Army of Jesus Christ, that is,
his Church, does of necessity require, for the fit Uniform and peaceable
Government thereof, a Supreme Head, a Supreme Spiritual Magistrate, to whom the
Subjects thereof may have Recourse, and from whom they may rereceive
Directions, in matters of Faith and Religion, as need shall require?

To deny the Necessity of such a Supreme Magistrate, for the fit Government of
the Church of Christ, consisting of Men, yea, of so many several Nations,
differing in Laws, Customs, Affections, Empire, and the like, is manifestly
against Reason. And to affirm, that although such a Magistrate be extremely
needful, for the due Government of His Church, yet he neglected to provide Her
of any such, is to accuse him of want of Wit and Discretion, for there was
never yet amongst Civil People, so simple a Founder of a Commonwealth, or so
simple a Lawmakers, that ordained no Supreme Power in his Commonwealth, no
Interpreter of his Law, no Judge to decide and end Controversies. Christ then
being Founder of the best Commonwealth that ever was, and maker of the best Law
that Mankind ever received; it can be no less than Blasphemy, to affirm, that
he left this his Noble Commonwealth without a Supreme Magistrate, to whom his
People might have recourse; and his Divine and Evangelical Law containing so
many obscure Verities, so many profound Mysteries, without an Interpreter,
without a Judge, to decide, and end Controversies.

Moreover, If Christ has ordained no such Supreme Magistrate, Head or Guide of
his Church, in things Spiritual, appertaining to Faith and Religion, it seems
to follow clearly and manifestly, that every man is at liberty to believe what
he list, and to practice what Worship of God he thinks best. What Unity then in
Faith, what Uniformity in the Worship of the Divinity can there be in the
Church of Christ? Or what sure means have Christian People to know who be right
and who Heretical Believers? Or to discern their true Prelates, whom they are
bound to obey, Heb. 13. 17. from False Prophets, from Heretical Teachers, whom
they are to shun, under pain of Damnation? Matthew. 7. Tit. 3. Yea, How can any
man be proved to be a false Teacher, if there be not some known true Teacher?
If no man has Power and Authority from God to direct the Faith of others. If
no man be bound and obliged by Christ to Believe, or to Teach as an other would
have him, how can any man be justly esteemed to Believe or Teach amiss? Or why
should he be reputed to Believe or Teach amiss, if he be not bound to limit and
square out his Faith and Teaching, by the Judgment and Discretion of some
other?

Wherefore, either we must say, that the Church of Christ is not to be obeyed,
that false Prophets are not to be avoided, that no man does Believe or Teach
amiss, so long as he Believes and Teaches well in his own Judgment; and that
no man is, or can be, in respect of Men, an Heretic, or a false Prophet: All
which is contrary to the Word of God, and plainly overthrows all
Christianity; or else we must affirm, as the certain Truth is, that God has
ordained and appointed some to teach and to direct others, what they ought to
Believe and Practice to obtain Life everlasting; and others to be taught and
guided.

What will Protestants to this? Will they deny all possibility of Unity and of
Order in the Church and Family of Christ? or else will they grant (as Reason,
and as the Truth requires,) that God has ordained some visible Ministerial
Head, some Supreme Spiritual Magistrate in his Church, to whom all may have
Recourse in the Affairs of Religion, and by whom all are bound to be directed
in Points of Faith, and in the Practice of his Divine Worship?

If this they grant, I demand which is this Head, this Spiritual Magistrate,
and in whom does reside this Supreme Spiritual Power and Authority? Does it
reside in Supreme Spiritual, or in Supreme Temporal Magistrates? If in Supreme
Temporal, does it reside in one, or in many? If in one, who is this Supreme
Temporal Magistrate? Who has Power and Authority, even by Gods Ordination, to
direct the whole World, all the Nations of the Earth, in matters of Faith, and
in the Practice of Gods Worship? And how is this proved out of the Word of God?

If this Supreme Power reside not in any one Supreme Temporal Magistrate; Does
it by Gods Ordination, reside in many, that is, in the Supreme Temporal
Magistracy of each Commonwealth, in such sort, that the Supreme Temporal
Magistrate, Prince or King of each Commonwealth or Kingdom, has Power and
Authority from God to direct the Subjects thereof in Faith, and to appoint them
what Religion they shall follow, what Worship of God they shall practice? If
so, then the Subjects of each Commonwealth are bound, under Pain of Damnation,
even by Gods Ordination, to be of that Religion which their Supreme Temporal
Magistrate will have them.

And so, where such a Supreme Magistrate is a Catholic (that is, a Papist,
according to the Style and Language of Protestants,) his Subjects are bound to
be Papists, if so be he will have it. Where he is a Lutheran, they are bound to
be Lutherans; where he is a Calvinist, they are bound to be Calvinists; where
he is an Anabaptist, Quaker, Arrian, or Nestorian, they are bound to be of the
same Profession, if their Prince will have it so, and that even by Gods
Ordination; if those Protestants say true, who will have every Temporal Prince
to be within his own Dominions Supreme Director, Leader, and Guide in matters
of Faith and Religion, even by the Ordination of God? than the which, what can
be more Absurd? yea, more Impious and Blasphemous? for this does make God far
worse than the Devil, in regard that the Devil can but only entice and solicit
People to follow false Religions; but here God is made to tie and oblige them
even under pain of Damnation, to embrace and practice false and Heretical
Religions, when seduced Princes, or Supreme Temporal Magistrates will have it
so.

Where note by the way, The late hard and harsh Dealing of some English
Protestants, toward their Catholic Neighbors, whom they termed Traitors,
often vexed and afflicted, and esteemed worthy of all Punishments, because they
would not believe and practice that Faith and Religion, for True and Divine,
which it has pleased this Commonwealth to Frame (not out of the Holy
Scriptures, Ancient Fathers, General Councils, and Perpetual Tradition of the
Church, but out of the Doctrine of Luther, Melancthon, Suinglius, Peter Martyr,
Calvin, and the like, who in their Rising, Calling, Proceeding, were as like
Arius, Pelagius, Nestorius, and other former Heretics, as one Egg is like
another) which I say, it has pleased this Commonwealth to frame, and to
propose; though Catholics cannot so do, without incurring the high Offense of
God, and certain Peril of their own Souls; because they are persuaded in their
own Consciences, that to embrace or profess the Protestant Religion, is a
damnable Sin, in regard that the Profession thereof, is the Profession of a
False Religion, (which is ever damnable to the Conscious Professor) and the
denial of the True, that is, of the only Right and Saving Faith of Christ;
which Catholics hold to be no other than the Ancient, and commonly received
Faith of the Christian World, not rashly, and upon slight, but after serious
Consideration, and upon firm and sure Grounds, as every judicious man may
easily perceive, at least in part, out of that which this little Treatise does
present him.

Hard then, and much to be pitied, was the late Condition of English
Catholics; who either truly and really must have been Traitors to Christ, and
ruin their own Souls, or else they must have exposed themselves to be reputed,
by their Mis-inform'd Neighbors, Refractory, Disobedient, Unsure and
Treacherous to their Prince; a thing, to all good Catholics, most Hateful, most
Detestable, and must have run the Hazard to loose their Goods and Liberties,
and have laid open to the Malice of Spiteful Neighbors, to the Spleen of
Furious Protestants, to the Railing of Slanderous Predicants, to the base
Vexation of Pursevants, and to the Depilations of Promoters, and of other Under
Officers. To these Miseries I say, Innocent Catholics have been exposed, till
it has pleased God to raise up a good Josiah, our Gracious Sovereign, James
the Second, to Protect them, and to extend his bountiful Favor toward them.

But to spin out the Thread begun, if it be contrary both, to Scripture and
Reason, so to enslave Religion, to the Check of Temporal Lords, that Subjects
must believe as it shall please them to appoint. We must admit that Supreme
Power to Guide and Direct in Matters of Faith, does immediately reside in
certain Spiritual Rulers, Prelates, and Magistrates, even by the peculiar
Ordination of God. Which being so, I demand of Protestants, whether this Power,
by Gods Ordination, resideth in one, or many? This I say, I demand of
Protestants, in regard that of the right knowledge of this Point, does depend
the right knowledge of the True Gospel and Religion of Christ, which we cannot
learn, but of those Doctors and Pastors whom God does send and Authorize to
Teach.

What then will Protestants answer to this Question? what will they answer?
Much, no doubt; but not much to the purpose, because they are not yet agreed
among themselves about this Point; for the Lutherans will have this Power to
reside in their Teachers; but the Calvinists in theirs. The Anabaptists will
have it reside in their Congregation; but the Quakers in theirs. The English
Protestants will have it reside in their Bishops and Parliaments; but the
Puritans will have it to be in their Consistorian Elders. And so none of these
can make a satisfying Answer to my Question, all of them disagreeing as they
do, and no one Sect of them having better Grounds out of Gods Word than the
rest. For I demand, First,

In whom did this Power reside, the last five hundred years before Luther? If
it were then in any Protestant Doctors, let them be named, and let it be showed
out of good Records, whether they were Lutherans or Calvinists. But if no such
Doctors can de named, as certainly they cannot, because there were none such,
and that this Power did then reside in other Teachers; how came any sort of
Protestant Doctors to have this Power afterward? here nothing can be said for
Protestants, that may not as rightfully be said for Arians, Nestorians, or any
other Heretics whatsoever.

Secondly, I demand, Whether this Power reside in one, or in many? If in one,
who this one among Protestants is? If in many, who these many are, and whether
they have any visible Head among them or no, to whom all the rest are bound to
stoop, and to submit their Judgments in the Decision of Controversies about
Faith and Religion,? If they have no such Head, what Hope of Unity in Faith,
and of Uniformity is there in the Service and Worship of God? certainly none at
all, as evident Experience does teach, by the Example of the Lutherans and
Calvinists, and of other Protestants.

And so, while Protestants refuse one Supreme Spiritual Head, authorized and
enabled (by the continual Assistance of the Holy Ghost, clearly promised in the
Word of God) to direct them in Faith, and in the right Worship of God, without
danger of mis-leading and deluding them; they refuse in very Deed, not only
Unity in Faith, and Conformity in the Service of God, but the true means of
Salvation also, which Christ our Savior has ordained for them, within the
Communion of his Catholic Church.

Out of whose happy Communion, they will not acknowledge themselves to be, nor
see the Danger they are in, till it be too late. Because willing, (without
searching seriously into the matter) they repute the Old Religion to be such,
so Vile, Absurd, and Superstitious, as the false Tongues and Pens of diverse of
their Teachers (who like to those of Isaias 28. 15. make Lying their Hope, and
are protected with Lying) depaint it to be, that so, with more tranquillity of
mind, they may enjoy the Liberty of their New Religion, esteeming the
Absurdities reported of the Old, to warrant them sufficiently, not only not to
look after the same, but also utterly to hate and detest it.

Yet in a Business of so great importance, as is the Salvation, or Damnation of
their Souls, they might remember, that one Tale is good till another be heard;
and the rather, for respect to their Noble Progenitors, and to the numerous
Troops of Blessed Souls, now reigning with Christ in Glory, which have lived
and died in the Old Religion. But seeing that neither the Wisdom and Sanctity
of these, nor the earnest Cries of Catholics now living (who continually
avouch that Protestants are misinformed, mistake, mis-construe, mis-understand
the Tenets and Practices of the Catholic Religion) can move them to make a
serious Scarch into Religion. Catholics must comfort themselves, to think,
that howsoever their Religion is here dis-esteem'd, yet the Haters, Impugners,
and Oppressors thereof, will be of another mind at the Judgment Seat of
Christ, when their great Account must be made, when Pleasures, Riches, Honors
will be past, when Obedience to Christ and his Church, when a Holy and
Mortified Life will be prized, and when the Glorious Troops of Holy Doctors and
Pastors, and of innumerable other blessed Men and Women will stand up in
Judgment, with great constancy, against all that have neglected, vilified,
contemned, derided their Authority, Teaching, Practice, Examples, as many of
the New Gospellers usually do.

Question. IX. Whether the Way to Salvation be narrow, or no?
IN the Ninth Place, I demand of Considerate Protestants, whether the Way to
Salvation be narrow or no? If this happy Tract be not indeed a narrow Way, Why
did Christ, with a kind of Admiration, say, Math. 7. 14. How narrow is the
Gate, and straight the Way that leads to Life, and how few there are that
find it? Was he deceived? or did he intend to deceive us? if neither, because
in very Truth, this Way, to Flesh and Blood, is narrow, and not to be kept and
traveled without much Labor, great Difficulty, and frequent Mortification,
both of the Body, by crucifying the Flesh, and the Concupiscences thereof, Gal.
5. 24. and also of the Mind, by subjecting the Will to the Laws of Charity, 1
Cor. 13. and by bringing the Understanding into Captivity, for Obedience to
Christ, in believing as the Apostles and their Successors do teach, 2 Cor. 10.
5. without suffering much for the Love of God, for the Practice of Virtue, for
the avoiding of sin, and for the Profession of our Faith, if a storm of
Persecution arise. If, I say, for These, and such like respects, the Tract of
Salvation be indeed a narrow way, as the Blessed Son of God affirms, who best
knew this matter: How may any Protestant Prudently persuade himself, that the
Protestant Religion, is really this hard and narrow way; seeing that it is one
of the easiest Religions in the World; one of the widest and broadest ways?

For what greater ease, and freedom in Religion, can there be, than to be tied
to no sharpness, and Mortification of Body: And to be at liberty in Mind, to
believe in matters of Religion, what we think best our selves? Which liberty
most certainly all Protestants have, by the very Tenets and Principles of their
Religion; which freeth them from being bound (in their own Conceit) to Believe
as the Church Teaches: And takes from them, in the same manner, the yoke of
Fasting, of Confession, of Penance: Freeth them from all necessity of doing
good Works, to be Saved: Yea, and of keeping the Commandments of God, as most
Protestants hold: And Teaches them, to esteem themselves justified from Sin,
and secured from all pain, in the next Life, and sure of Salvation, by only
Faith, by Believing only and steadfastly, that the Lord has died for them, and
paid the shot of their Sins.

That this is so, not only their express Doctrine, but even also the Lives of
Protestants, especially of their Teachers and Ringleaders, do evidently
convince. And therefore seeing that no doubt can be made, but that the
Protestant, is a most easy Religion, and exceedingly pleasing to Flesh and
Blood: There can no doubt also be made, but that it is not that narrow way, of
which our Savior did speak, which leads to Salvation: But rather the broad
way, which leads to ever-lasting Perdition. What satisfying Answer to this,
Protestants may make, I see not. And therefore such of them, as truly desire to
secure their Souls, and to avoid everlasting misery, may do well and wisely, to
return (whilst they have time) to that Religion, wherein their Forefathers,
for the space almost of a thousand years, were Saved: And wherein also they may
be Saved, if they will, even by the grant of their own Learned men, as
hereafter shall appear; which Religion, if they will practice exactly, they
shall find it indeed, to be a Narrow-way, to Flesh and Blood: Yet sweet and
easy to Minds elevated by Grace, and inflamed with the Love of Heaven.

Question X. How it can be defended, that Jesus was the True Messiah, promised
in the Old Testament, if the Church, which he Founded, erred so many Ages, in
her Doctrine of Faith.
IT is a certain, undoubted, and undeniable Truth, and not to be questioned
amongst Christians, that Jesus the Son of the Virgin Mary, is the true Messiah,
the True Christ promised in the Old Testament, the Omnipotent Son of God, Truly
God, Truly Man, and the true and sole Redeemer of the World. This I say, is a
most certain Truth, and not doubted of by any, but wicked Miscreants. Yet to
discover the Nature of the Protestant Religion, and to show clearly, to my Dear
Countrymen, whether it tends, that thereby, if they will, they may receive
the less hurt by it: I must crave leave to demand, how this prime and
Fundamental Truth of Christianity, can be defended, and maintained against
Atheists, Turks and Jews, if we admit for a Truth; that, That Church, which
Jesus founded, and which his Apostles planted in the World, has grievously and
perniciously erred in her Doctrine of Faith, and in the practice of the Worship
of God, for many Hundred years? Yea almost even since the times of the Apostles?

That the Church of Jesus has so Erred, is the Main, Prime, and Fundamental
Ground of the Protestant Religion, as is well * The Homily against the Perils
of Idolatry. p. 57.
known; For upon This, as upon a sure Foundation, Protestant Teachers have
raised all their New Buildings: Upon this as upon a sufficient Cause, they have
forsaken the Old Religion, of the Christian World, pretending it to be
Erroneous, Superstitious, Idolatrous, and have undertaken their various, and
discordant Reformations; about which they themselves cannot yet agree. Which
being so; to Demonstrate clearly that this prime Ground of the Protestant
Religion, and general Tenet of all Protestant Teachers, does directly lead,
yea, inevitably force, (if it be thoroughly looked into, and searched to the
bottom,) to the denial of Christ, and all Christianity.

I lay for my First Ground, That without Faith in Jesus Christ, no Man can be
saved. This is not only the Belief of all, that wear and deserve the Noble
Title of a Christian, but certain also out of the Word of God. Act. 4. 12.
There is not Salvation in any other; for neither is there any other Name under
Heaven given to Men, (to wit, but the Name of Jesus,) wherein we must be saved.
Mark 16. 16, But he that shall not believe, (namely, the Gospel, and Religion
of Christ,) shall be condemned. Heb. 11. 6, Without Faith it is impossible to
please God. Romans 5. 1, Being therefore justified by Faith, let us have Peace
toward God, by our Lord Jesus Christ: By whom also we have access, through
Faith, to his Grace. This Ground then is certain, and cannot be denied by any
Christian.

For my Second Ground I lay: That this Faith in Jesus Christ, which by God's
Ordination, is of necessity required to Salvation; is not a mere Natural Faith,
or Humane Credulity; which Men may have by their own natural Forces, without
the help of God's special Grace; such as is the Faith of Heathens, of Jews, and
Turks; and such indeed, as is the Faith of all Heretics: But it is a Divine,
and Supernatural thing, which Men acquire and attain to, by the special Aid of
God, by the help of Divine Grace; and therefore this Faith is called, and truly
is, The gift of God.

This ground is certain, first out of the Word of God, which clearly teaches,
That saving Faith is the gift of God, Phil. 1. 29. To you it is given for
Christ, not only to Believe in him, but also to Suffer for him. Ephesians. 2. 8. By
Grace you are saved through Faith, and that not of your selves, for it is the
gift of God: Not of Works, that no Man may glory. Joh. 6. 44. No Man can come
unto me, (that is, believe in me; for our first step toward Christ is Faith,)
unless the Father that sent me draw him. And Verse 65. Therefore did I say to
you, that no Man can come to me, unless it be given him of my Father. Joh. 15.
5. I am the Vine, you the Branches; he that abides in me, and I in him, the
same brings much fruit; for without me, you can do nothing. Namely,
appertaining to Salvation; and therefore not believe, as is requisite to Life
Everlasting, without the help of Christ, that is, of Divine Grace by Christ
merited, and purchased for us. These places are clear.

Secondly, This ground is strongly proved by Reason: For the end of Man being
to enjoy Supernatural Glory, that is the clear Vision of God, in his blessed
Kingdom: The means to obtain this high and divine End must be suitable to it,
that is, Divine, and Supernatural. For who will say, that Man of himself, and
by his own forces, without the Aid and special Favor of God, is able to make
himself fit, and proportionate, to be associated to the Saints, to the Angels,
to Christ, to God, in Eternal Glory? Who will say, that of himself, he is able
to cleanse his Soul from the stains and filth of Sin, and to put upon her a
Wedding Garment, a Golden, and Resplendent Vesture, suitable to the Banquet and
Banqueters, of Heaven? The special Operation then of Divine Grace, must Purify
and Embellish the Soul of Man, and Attire her in Holy and Divine Virtues, that
so she may be fit to be the Consort of God, in the fruition of his Eternal
Glory. And so Faith, which is one of these Virtues, and the very Ground and
Foundation of the rest, must be Divine and Supernatural, and spring in Man,
from the help of God's Grace; and be Adorned and Dignified by it, that so there
may be a fit proportion betwixt the Root and the Tree, the Seed and the Fruit,
the Egg and the Bird, a Christian Life, and the Glory of Heaven.

Whosoever will deny this ground, must not only forsake the clear Doctrine of
the Holy Scriptures, and go against the light of Reason, but he must also fall
into the Pelagian Heresy, condemned by the Church of Christ, Twelve Hundred
Years ago. Which held, That the Gospel of Christ, being proposed by his
Preachers, Men of themselves, without any further help of Divine Grace, are
able to believe the same, and to do all therein required to Life Everlasting.
Which proud phansy of Pelagius, St. Hierom, S. Augustine, and especially the
Bishops of Rome, by the invincible force of God's Word, did crush, confound,
and beat to the ground.

My third Ground is, That as God cannot be the Author of a Lie, of false
Doctrine, of a false Faith, of a false Religion: That is, of a Religion and
Doctrine of Faith, that is mixed with Falsehood, and is partly true, and partly
false: So he neither does, neither can stir up, and draw Men by his special
Grace, Aid, and Operation, to believe those Religions, or Doctrines of Faith,
which are so mixed with Falsehood. This seems to be evident, even by the light
of Reason; for as it is the proper work of the Devil, to mix Religions, and to
pollute them with Falsehood: So it is his continual, and studious endeavor, to
stir up, and induce Men, (by proposing some pleasing and delectable thing or
other,) to believe and embrace the same, that so he may deprive them of Divine
Faith, which is the Gift of God, and bring them assuredly to Everlasting
Damnation. Neither let any one be so simple, as to imagine, That the Devil is
only the Author of those Religions, which are wholly False. For scarcely is
there any Religion in the World, that does teach no Truth at all. And therefore
it is sufficient, to prove a Religion to be the work of the Devil, if there be
any Falsehood in it at all, as S. Paul does seem to teach, 1 Timothy 4. 1. where,
foretelling the rising of the Manichean Heresy, which long did Pester the
Church of God, he call's the Doctrine thereof, the Doctrine of Devils:
Notwithstanding that those Heretics, with some Falsehoods, did teach many
Truths; even as all Heretics do; who, nevertheless, are the Instruments of the
Devil, to seduce and destroy Souls.

Wherefore, whosoever do culpably Believe, and Follow Religions, or Doctrines
of Faith, partly True, partly False, do never believe the same with Divine
Faith, which is the Gift of God; though they esteem the Religion which they
follow, to be the best of all others; yea, to be the pure Light of the Gospel
of Christ: But their Faith is ever a mere Humane Credulity, such as is the
Faith of all Mis-believers, which can never bring them to Eternal Happiness,
how laudably soever they live; because without Divine Faith, that is, the Gift
of God, no Man can be saved, according to the settled Ordination, and
Providence of God; as I before have clearly showed out of his Word.

Out of this Doctrine, which is most True, does appear, First, The Reason of
the Doctrine of Christ, delivered Matt. 7. where he declares, That false
Prophets, that is, false Expounders of the Word of God, in Matters of Faith, do
destroy Souls, like as Wolves do destroy Sheep; and that it is as impossible,
that they Followers should acquire, by their Teaching, Divine Faith, and True
Sanctity, as it is impossible, that Thorns should bring out Grapes, or
Thistles, Figgs. The same Doctrine is taught by the Apostle; who affirms, That
Heretics are Subverted, Tit. 3. And Subvert the Faith of others, 2 Timothy 2. 18.
That they make Shipwreck about Faith, 1 Timothy 1. 19. That they depart from the
Faith, 1 Timothy 4. 1. That they are Reprobate about Faith, 2 Timothy 3. 8. and the
like. Which mischief they fall into themselves, and bring upon their Followers,
though they Err but in one Article of Faith, as Himenaeus and Philetus did, 2 Timothy 2. 18. And as Arius did at the first, denying the Equality of the Father
and the Son.

But Note here, That the Apostle in the places cited, does not mean, that
Heretical Teachers, do so Subvert and Ruin the Faith of their Followers, that
they leave them no Faith at all; but that they Subvert their Divine Faith,
which is the Gift of God, wholly overthrowing that, though they leave them
store of Humane Faith; to which seduced People firmly sticking, yea sometimes
even to Fetters and Death, do reap thereby nothing at all, but Temporal
Commodities, and Vainglory, purchased with the Eternal loss of their Souls.

Secondly, Does appear, out of the same Doctrine, the great Obligation that
Christian People have, to keep themselves within the Bosom of the True and
Catholic Church of Christ: Because that this Church, being continually
assisted by Christ himself, Matthew. 28. 20. And taught all Truth by the Holy
Ghost, John 16. 13. does propose unto her Followers, in her Doctrine of Faith,
nothing but Truth; whereby their Faith does easily come to be Divine, and the
Gift of God, his Heavenly Grace Cooperating with them. It does also appear,
how deeply they are obliged to take heed of, and to shun, and avoid False
Prophets; False, and Heretical Expounders of God's Word; which run of their own
accord, not being sent, authorized, or allowed of, by the Ordinary Doctors, and
Pastors, of the Ever Visible and Catholic Church of Christ: And how wary they
ought to be, not to have itching Ears, after new Masters, 2 Timothy 4. 3. Or
greedily to hearken to their Novelties in Matters of Faith; which upon the
reckoning, will be found to be no better than Fables, that is, than the
Fictitious and Self-inventions of Men's Brains: Though these busy Teachers
palliate them, with specious terms, and bear their Hearers in Hand, That these
their new devices, are the Pure Light of the Gospel. For by forsaking the
Doctrine of the Church, the Spiritual Mother and Mistress of all Nations; and
as the Apostle terms her, 1 Timothy 3. 15. The Pillar and Ground of Truth,; and
following such New Teachers, they make Shipwreck of their Divine Faith, and run
themselves assuredly upon the Rock of Perdition.

Thirdly, It appears how dangerously those are deceived, who think they have
Faith enough to Salvation, if they believe those Points of the Christian
Religion, about which both Catholics and Protestants agree; esteeming
themselves not obliged to believe any of those Articles, about which the
Learned of these two Religions do differ and contend. As though Christian
People were not obliged, under pain of Damnation, to beware of False Prophets,
Matthew. 7. To shun Heretical Teachers, Tit. 3. To obey their Lawful Prelates,
and to be subject unto them, in Matters of Faith and Religion, Heb. 13. To hear
those Teachers, whom Christ does send, Luke 10. To hear and obey the Voice of
his Church, if they will not be held to be in as ill Case, as Publicans, and
Ethnicks are, Matthew. 18.

Or as though they were not bound to know the right means, by which they are to
be Justified, cleansed from Sin, and Saved; to Believe rightly, and to Receive
worthily, the great Sacrament of the Body and Blood of Christ, 1 Cor. 11. Joh.
6. And as though they were not obliged, under the same Penalty, to believe and
profess the True Gospel, the True Faith and Religion of Christ; and to Serve,
and Worship God rightly. Seeing those which believe not his Gospel, that is,
the whole Sum of Divine Doctrine, taught by his Apostles, Apostles, and by
their Successors, the Ordinary Doctors, and Pastors of his Church, are to be
Damned, Mark 16. As those also are, Which deny Christ before Men, Matthew. 10.
33. Which Crime all commit, who deny themselves to be of the True Religion, as
is manifest by the Example of St. Peter, who denying only, that he was a
Follower of Christ, and of his Company, was reputed to deny Christ; even as
those will be, who culpably profess a False Religion. For such by their very
Fact, deny the True, and themselves to be of the Communion thereof, and of the
Company, and Society of the True Followers, Disciples and Servants of Christ,
whereby, at his Judgment Seat, they will be reputed to have forsaken and
denied him.

But to open this Point a little more (because many, even of the better sort,
are brought thereby into no small danger of Perdition) this their Conceit is
not grounded upon any clear Text of Gods Word, or upon the Authority of any
Unerring Church, but merely upon a Mistake of their own; by which, out of one
or two Truths, they infer a pernicious Falsehood; upon which, while they trust,
they trust to a broken Staff, which at their last Leap, will let them fall into
the deep Ditch of Perdition, if before their Death they cast it not away.

The first Truth is, that the Illiterate, Simple, Unlearned of the True and
Catholic Church of Christ, are not bound to know, and expressly believe (that
is, with Faith explicit, as Divines speak) all the Articles of Faith, which the
Learned Doctors and Pastors of this Church, do know, and believe. But such do
satisfy the Precept of Faith, if they believe with Faith explicit, the prime
and more celebrated Articles and Mysteries of the Christian Religion contained
in the Creed, or solemnized by the Church, which appertain to the right
knowledge of the Trinity, Incarnation, Passion, and Resurrection of Christ, and
which concern the Redemption, Justification, Sanctification and Glorification
of Man, so that they believe the rest with Faith implicit; that is, so that
they believe as the Church believes, being ever ready, in Heart and Affection,
to submit their Judgments, in matters of Faith and Religion, to the Judgment
of the Church, and to believe as She shall teach.

But yet although such are not bound to believe expressly, and in particular,
all the Articles of Faith which the Learned Pastors of the Church believe, yet
they are bound, under the Penalty of Eternal Damnation, not to deny wittingly,
any one of them, nor to doubt stubbornly of the truth of them, nor to believe
wittingly the contrary; for he that so does, falls thereby into the damning
Crime of Heresy. Which ever includes an Election, or Culling out (of certain
Articles) out of the Doctrine of the Church, which are embraced for true, and a
Rejection of the rest, as Doubtful, False, or Erroneous.

Which presumptuous discarding of Divine Verities, revealed by Christ to his
Apostles, for the direction of Mankind to Eternal Happiness, and by them laid
up in the Treasury of the Church, as a Sacred Depositum, 1 Timothy 6. 20. under
the sure Custody of the Holy Ghost, is no less than High Treason against Christ
our Savior, in regard that it raises a most pernicious Rebellion in his
Spiritual Kingdom, bringing part thereof again under the Tyranny of the Devil.
It frustrates the full Operation of his Passion, extinguishes the true and
right Worship of God, despoils Christian People of Divine Faith, and thereby of
the true means of Salvation. It deprives the Saints of due Honor, defrauds the
Faithful departed of necessary Relief. It robbs Heaven of Souls, and inriches
Hell with innumerable unwary, and most unhappy People. For which respects, it
is rightly styled one of the greatest Sins, and of the loudest crying Crimes
that is.

Although I say, the Unlearned of the Church are not bound to believe
explicitly, all Her Sacred Verities, yet they are bound not to deny any one of
them wittingly; even as they are not bound to know all that is in the Sacred
Scripture, yet they are bound not to deny any thing therein contained, though
it be never so small a thing, because all is warranted by the Authority of God,
which is of equal Force and Worth, of equal Truth, both in great and in small
things, which therefore are of equal Certainty, it being as far from God, to
lie and deceive in small things as in great. And therefore prudent Men, in
Matters of Faith and Religion, seek no farther, than whether this, or that be
warranted by Gods Authority, or no, which they learn by the Teaching of the
Church, guided by the Holy Ghost, for there is no other sure and infallible
Means on Earth, to direct us in the obscure Mysteries of Faith, about which
anew, God now reveals nothing, but leaves us to the Teaching of his Church,
guided, as I said, by the Holy Ghost; which makes all Discreet Christians to
submit so humbly their Judgments to the Church, and to rely so securely upon
her Authority; God himself assuring them, that She is the Pillar and Ground of
Truth, 1 Timothy 3. 15.

The Second Truth is, That the Subjects of the Church of Christ, are not bound
either to know or believe certain disputable Points of Divinity, not defined by
the Church, which are controverted among the Learned.

The pernicious Falsehood inferred out of these Truths, is, That Christian
People, who are not Learned, are not bound, under hazard of their Souls, to
believe those Articles of Faith, taught by the the True and Catholic Church of
Christ, which false Prophets, which Heretical Men, reputed Learned, do
question, deny, and dispute against. As though the Bad, Proud, Rebellious and
Ungodly, proceeding of these Men, were a sufficient Warrant unto others, to
doubt of the Truth of Gods revealed Verities; to mangle and believe by halves
his Sacred Religion, to disobey their Lawful Prelates, to deprive their Souls
of the fruitful use of Christ's Divine Sacraments, to contemn the Doctrine, and
to forsake the Communion of the Church.

Which is manifestly absurd and untrue, being contrary both to Reason and
Scripture, as I have showed. Which teach that Christian People, in the profound
Mysteries of the Christian Religion, are bound to be guided by those Doctors
and Pastors, Act. 20. which God has placed in his Church, and authorized to
Teach, Direct, and Guide them. And that they are likewise most deeply obliged,
to beware of, and to shun false Prophets, and Heretical Teachers, and not to
heap to themselves new Masters, with itching Ears, leaving the Truth of the
Pillar of Truth, the Church of the Living God, and turning to Fables, that is,
either to their own Self-conceits, or to the Self-conceits of others, which in
the Mysteries of the Christian Religion, when they swerve from the Doctrine of
the Church, are no truer than Fables, though they be gilded over with the fair
Title of the true Light of the Gospel; and therefore the Faith of those, who
are guided by such Conceiters, is never Divine, never the Gift of God, never
available to Salvation.

For the clear understanding of which Assertion; Note First, That most true it
is, that God has revealed many profound Mysteries. and Divine Verities for Men
to believe, to be thereby directed fittingly what to hold, and to practice, for
the obtaining of ever-during Happiness.

Note Secondly, That it is also most true, that Man of himself, without the Aid
of Celestial Grace, is not able to believe these Verities fittingly and
suitably to his Supernatural End.

Note Thirdly, That God cannot stir up, and draw men, by this his Heavenly
Grace, to believe these Verities, unless they be proposed to be believed
without all mixture of Falsehood; for if any Falsehood be packt in among them,
and proposed with them for a Divine Truth, revealed by God, he cannot draw men,
by his Grace, to believe them thus mingled and proposed with Falsehood, as is
manifest, because he cannot induce men to believe any Falsehood at all. And
therefore, whosoever does thrust in, among some Divine Verities, any false
Doctrine, contrary to that which God has revealed, proposing the same to be
believed as a Divine Truth, and therein stubbornly contradicting the Teaching
of the Church, he debars God from co-opperating with his Grace, and from
drawing People to believe, with Divine Faith, the Doctrine so mixed and proposed.

Note Fourthly, That Gods revealed Verities will fall out to be of no utility
at all to Mankind, but rather a Trap to ruin them, unless there be some sure,
un-erring and infallible Proposer of them, who does propose them to Gods
People, without any mixture of Falsehood at all, in such sort, that he does not
propose any thing, as an Article revealed by God, which is not so, or which is
false, and contrary to that which God has indeed revealed. And therefore that
God may draw men, by the special aid of his Grace, to believe with Divine
Faith, his revealed Mysteries and Verities; he must cause them to be proposed
to men sincerely, and without all mixture of Falsehood; He I say, must cause
them to be so proposed, because no man of himself, without the continual
guidance and assistance of the Holy Ghost, is able always so to propose them.

All then, that will have Divine Faith, must be guided by Gods Proposer of
Divine Doctrine, and believe as he does teach. For if they follow any contrary
Proposer, who does mingle Truth with Falsehood, contrary to the Doctrine of the
right Proposer, their Faith cannot be Divine, nor avail them to Salvation. If
any one ask who is Gods un-erring Proposer of Divine Verities, I answer now, as
I answered before, no other but the Ordinary Doctors and Pastors of the ever
visible and Catholic Church of Christ; which Doctors and Pastors, among other
things, propose as a Divine and certain Truth, that out of the Communion of the
True and Catholic Church, no Salvation can be had: out of whose Communion,
those most certainly do live, who are separated from the Chair of St. Peter,
and profess Riligions by it condemned. And therefore those which esteem
themselves secure, by believing only those general Points of the Christian
Religion, which are not controverted betwixt the Learned of the Protestant, and
of the Roman Church, are greatly deceived, they being not only destitute of
Divine Faith, but also very far off from performing the Duty of good
Christians, as may sufficiently appear by what is said. And therefore this
their Conceit, serves to little else, but to bring them to Hell with a quiet
and unfrighted Conscience.

Fourthly, Out of the Grounds laid, a sufficient Reason does appear of the
Doctrine of the Ancient Fathers, who constantly taught, that out of the
Catholic Church there is no Salvation; which Catholic Church, they esteemed
to be no other, than that which is joined in Communion with the Chair of St.
Peter. Hear a word or two out of those ancient Worthies; St. Athanasius in his
Creed, approved of, and received by the whole Church, speaks thus, Whosoever
will be saved, before all things it is needful, that he hold the Catholic
Faith; the which, unless one keep entire and inviolate, without all doubt, he
shall perish eternally.

St. Cyprian, De Simpl. Prelat. And St. Augustine, De Simbol. l. 4. c. 10.
says, If any one be found without the Church, he shall be an Alien from the
Children of God, neither shall he have God for his Father, who would not have
the Church for his Mother. The same St. Augustine, speaking of Emeritus a
Donatist, and a Bishop says, Sermon. de gestis cum Emerito. He cannot have
Salvation, but in the Catholic Church, out of the Church he may have all but
Salvation. He may have Honor, he may have the Sacrament, he may sing Alleluja,
he may answer Amen, he may hold the Gospel, he may both have and preach Faith,
in the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost; but Salvation
he can no where have, saving in the Catholic Church. Where note, that Bishop
Emeritus being a Donatist, was not so much separated from the Roman Church, as
Protestants are. And yet this Learned Father, and great Light of Gods Church,
esteemed him to be out of the Catholic Church, and out of the State of
Salvation. In vain then do Protestants confide, that they are within the
Catholic Church, they being farther separated from the same than this Bishop
was.

St. Fulgentius, De Fid. ad Pet. c. 39. says, Most firmly hold, and in no sort
doubt, that each Heretic, or Schismatic Baptized in the Name of the Father,
and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, if he be not restored to the Catholic
Church, how great Alms soever he give, yea, though he should shed his Blood for
the Name of Christ, yet he cannot be saved. Thus these Holy and Learned
Fathers, with whom, in this Point agree the rest.

Fifthly, It appears by the Grounds aforesaid, that there can be but only one
saving Faith and Religion in the World, because there can be but only one
Doctrine of Faith that is wholly true, and free from all mixture of Falsehood;
for all other Doctrines of Faith, must of necessity be mixed and stained with
some Falsehood, more or less, according as they do, more or less differ from,
and contradict, that one Divine Doctrine of Faith, which is wholly true, as is
manifest. And therefore God cannot draw men to believe any of them, with Divine
Faith, required of necessity to Salvation. And so no Religion, whose Doctrine
of Faith is mixed with Falsehood, is truly and really a saving Religion; how
much soever it be adorned by the seducing Teachers, or the seduced Followers
thereof, with the gay Title of the pure Light of the Gospel.

Sixthly, It appears how just cause all Protestants have to return with speed
to the Roman Church, in which they may assuredly be saved, even by the
Judgment of the most Learned among them, as hereafter shall appear; because it
is more than probable, that the Protestant Profession is not a saving Religion,
in regard, that the Doctrine of Faith, which it imbraceth, is not, nor cannot
be wholly true, but really and certainly is mixed with much Falsehood, 1.
Because in diverse weighty Points of Faith, it directly contradicts the express
Word of God, as I before have showed.

2. Because this Doctrine of Faith, is not directed by any sure Rule of Faith,
by any Infallible Interpreter of the Scriptures, by any Un-erring Judge of
Controversies, nor proposed by any sure and Infallible Proposer. 3. Because
Protestants are divided into several Branches or Sects, which greatly differ,
and are contrary one to another, in diverse weighty Points of Faith, as I before
have noted. And 4. Because Protestants hold, that all Churches are subject to
erring, yea, and have erred in their Doctrine of Faith. What assurance then
have they, that Theirs does not err? none at all.

But to come now to the principal Point intended in this Question; I affirm,
that out of the Grounds laid, which Christianly cannot be denied, it clearly
follows, that according to the main Tenet, and Ground of the Protestant
Religion, Jesus, the Son of the Virgin Mary, was not the true Messiah promised
in the Old Testament, nor the true Savior of the World. This monstrous
Falsehood, and detestable Blasphemy, I say, does clearly and inevitably follow,
out of the chief and Fundamental Ground of the Protestant Religion. For if the
Church, which Jesus founded, came to err in her Doctrine of Faith, in the Ages
after the Apostles, and to be corrupted with many pernicious Falsehoods and
Superstitions, as Protestant Teachers affirm, the Promises of God, concerning
the Messiah, made so seriously to the Patriarchs of the Old Testament, cannot
possibly be verified of Jesus, and consequently he was not the true Messiah,
the true Christ and Savior of the World; for of the true Messiah these
Promises must be verified most certainly, in regard that God cannot be false of
his Word.

Thus then he promised to Abraham, Genesis 12. 3. In thee shall all the Kindreds
of the Earth be blessed. Genesis 18, 18. In him (Abraham) are to be blessed all
the Nations of the Earth. To Isaac, Genesis 26. 4. In thy Seed shall be blessed
all the Nations of the Earth. To Jacob, Genesis 28. 14. In thee and in thy Seed,
all the Tribes of the Earth shall be blessed. That is, in Christ, in the true
Messiah, as the Apostle does interpret; Gal. 3. 6. Of whom also the Royal
Prophet sang. Psalm. 17. 7. All the Tribes of the Earth shall be blessed in him,
all Nations shall magnify him.

Now then, out of these places of Holy Writ, it seems clear: First, That
according to Gods often re-iterated Promise, all the Nations of the Earth, are
truly to be Blessed in the Messiah, the Hopeful Seed of the Patriarchs.

Secondly, It seems clear, that this so Solemnly Promised Blessing, was not
chiefly to consist in Earthly, Temporal, Transitory Riches and Happiness, but
in Heavenly, Spiritual, Eternal.

Thirdly, It seems clear, that the Nations of the Earth, are to obtain this
Blessing, by Receiving, Believing, Practicing that Religion, and Worship of
God, which the Messiah was to institute, and to introduce amongst them, by the
Teaching of his Doctors and Pastors. See Ephesians. 4. 12.

Fourthly, It seems clear, that the Religion of the True Messiah, is not to be
introduced amongst the Nations of the Earth, in one Year, or in one Age: But by
degrees, and by the Labors and Charitable Endeavors of many Ages: Because the
same is not to be brought in by Force, but by Fair Means: Not by the Soldiers
Sword, but by the Teachers Word: Not by Violent Compulsion, but by Gentle
Persuasion; such as the Apostles and Apostolical Teachers have ever used.
Going, (says our Sweet Savior) Teach all Nations, Matthew. 28. And therefore
this must needs be a work of long continuance; the Nations of the Earth being
so many as they are, so dispersed over the whole World, and dis-joyn'd one from
another, by Mountains and Seas; so Barbarous, so Drenched in Sin, inured to
Carnal and Brutish Customs: And the Religion of the Messiah, being so Holy and
Profound, as Gods Religion must be. Yea, this Divine Work, of notifying the
Messiah, to all the Nations of the Earth, and of Converting them, or at least
part of each of them to him, is to endure and last, even till the end of the
World; as is manifest out of our Saviors Words, before alleged out of the 24
of Matthew. See the place, and weigh it well.

Fifthly, It is certain, out of the grounds before laid, that the Nations of
the Earth, cannot believe the Religion of the Messiah availably to Salvation,
and gain thereby the Promised Blessing, without the help of Divine Grace: That
is, unless by the special working and Aid of God, they be effectually moved,
stirred up, and drawn, to forsake their Old and Blind Traditions, their False
and Idolatrous Worships, their Beastly and Abominable Manners, to embrace and
practice Religiously the Holy Difficil and deep Religion of the Messiah,
believing the same, with such, and so Divine a Faith, as really is the Gift of
God; without which no man can be Saved.

Sixthly, It is also certain, out of the same grounds, that God by his Grace,
and special Aid, cannot stir up, and effectually draw the Nations of the Earth,
to Receive, Believe and and Practice the Religion of the Messiah, unless it be
wholly true: Unless I say it be wholly True, wholly Pure from Errors and
Superstitions. For if with such stuff, it be mixed, corrupted, defiled, and
made displeasing to God, and hurtful to the Soul of Man, it is impossible, that
God by his Aid and Grace, should induce and draw Men to Believe it: As the very
Light of Reason does Teach. Note, This well.

And therefore, as the Work of the Conversion of Nations, to the Messiah, that
they may be made Blessed in him, must continue in all Ages, even till the end
of the World: So most certainly, the True Messiah must ever preserve in the
World, even till the end thereof, a Holy and Divine Religion, a Doctrine of
Faith entirely and wholly True, entirely and wholly Pure, from Errors and
Superstitions, that so the Blessed Majesty of Heaven, by his Divine and
Powerful Grace, may draw the Nations of the Earth, to Believe this his
Religion, and to practice it Religiously, that thereby they may become Blessed
in Him. All this is clear and manifest out of the Word of God, the Light of
Reason, and the grounds laid.

But Jesus, for above these thousand, twelve hundred, or fourteen hundred
years, has not had any Religion spread over the World, among the Nations of
the Earth, and Preached unto them, to make them Blessed in Him, which has been
wholly True, and Pure from Errors and Superstitions; (if Protestant Teachers
say true; and do not most dangerously mistake, to the Perdition of themselves
and their Followers) Ergo, Jesus is not the true Messiah, the True Christ and
Savior of the World, according to the General Tenet of all Protestant
Teachers, and the main ground of the Protestant Religion.

For the True Messiah, must of necessity, have such a Religion in all Ages,
that thereby the Nations of the Earth may be Blessed in him: As I have clearly
deduced and showed. But Jesus (according to the Doctrine of Protestants) has
not had such a Religion scarcely since the Apostles times: And therefore the
Nations of the Earth, have not been Blessed in Him: And consequently, if their
Divinity be good, he is not the True Messiah.

The Nations of the Earth, I say, for above these twelve hundred years, have
not been Blessed in Jesus, by believing in him, for want of a True Religion,
though very many of them, within this space of time, have been Converted to
him, by the Roman Church, by the Labors and Industry of Papists, both in
Europe, Asia, Africa, and the Newfound World: Neither are they ever likely to
be Blessed in Him: For if already he has not taken order, to preserve a True,
Divine, and Pure Religion among them, to bring unto them the Promised Blessing,
that is, to Sanctify, and Save them: He is never likely to do it. For he is not
likely to be wiser, or better, or more Powerful hereafter, than he has been
heretofore: Neither is he likely to come into the World again, to found a new
Church and Religion, and to establish it better, then He did his first, for the
Salvation of Mankind.

Out of all which it follows clearly and manifestly, that, according to the
Doctrine, and fundamental ground of the Protestant Religion (which is, that the
Church of Jesus, for many hundred years, has shamefully and perniciously erred
in her Doctrine of Faith, and in the True Worship of God,) it follows, I say,
out of this Assertion, clearly and manifestly, that Jesus was not, nor is not,
the True Messiah, the True Christ and Savior of the World. Behold, here the
true depth of the Protestant Religion, and whether it directly leads, if it is
searched to the bottom: And doubt not, but that the Bird is naught, that lays
so bad an Egg.

What will Protestants answer here, to struggle out of these narrow straits?
Will they say, that although Jesus had not, for so many hundred years, any
Visible True Religion; yet he had an Invisible True Religion, by which the
Nations of the Earth were made Blessed? But then I demand 1st. With what
Spectacles do these men, who thus Answer, see this Invisible Religion? Or how
do they know there was any such in the World? What Text of the Bible, what
History makes mention thereof? 2ly. Who were the Preachers of this Invisible
Religion? Who the Followers? What Nations received it? What Sacraments had it?
What Divine Service, or Worship of God? In what Churches was it practiced, or
Caves, or Deserts? How did the Followers thereof know one another? What Candles
did they use at their Meetings, all being Invisible amongst them? 3ly. What
Foolish Heretic, may not, by thus Answering, maintain, that his Devises were
ever extant, though Invisibly, and that the Nations of the Earth by them have
been Blessed, yet Invisibly?

This Answer then being too too Absurd and Ridiculous: Will other Protestants
hope to evade, by saying, That although the Faith of the Roman Church, grew by
degrees to be full of Errors and Superstitions; yet the Nations of the Earth,
were Saved thereby, and thereby were made truly Blessed in Jesus? But then I
demand first, whether the Faith of the Roman Church, be truly Holy, truly
pleasing to God, and profitable to Man, or no? If it be not, how could God draw
Men by his Heavenly Grace, to believe it? But if it be, why did Protestants at
the first revolt from it? Or how durst they lately Persecute it? May they
securely Persecute and seek to ruin that Religion, by which for so many
hundred years, the Nations of the Earth, have been made Blessed in Jesus? I
believe not.

Secondly, I demand by what Text of Scripture, or light of Reason, will
Protestants maintain, that God by his Grace and special operation, can draw men
to believe a false and Superstitious Religion? A Religion, that had so great
need of Reforming, that the World was to be turned up-side down, and Infinite
Tumults, and Bloody Broils to be set a foot, rather than not to undertake it?
If God can draw men by his Grace, can move and stir them up, to embrace and
believe Errors and Superstitions, or Religions, that are Erroneous and
Superstitious; how is he not, in this respect, as bad as the Devil? Or upon
what firm ground can we maintain, that the Religion of Moses, the Religion of
Jesus, was Pure and Holy? By saying and proving that God was the Author of
these Religions? That proves nothing, if God by his Grace, can draw men to
believe Errors and Superstitions.

Thirdly, I demand If Jesus was the true Messiah, and that God did intend, to
draw the Nations of the Earth, to believe in him, and to make them Blessed by
him; was he not able to provide himself of a True, Holy and Divine Religion; to
which with his Honor he might draw them: But must he needs make use of a
False, Blind, Superstitious one, to the extreme Disgrace of himself? These
Answers then being Absurd, and far from satisfying Prudent men: To maintain,
that Jesus is the True Messiah, and that the Promises of God, made to the
Patriarchs, have been really fulfilled in him: Will considerate Protestants
grant and acknowledge, that he has ever had in all Ages, a Divine Religion,
wholly True, and truly Saving, spread over the World, to bring to the Nations
thereof, the promised Blessing? If this they will do, they shall do like Good
Christians: But then they must name a Divine, Pure and Illustrious Religion,
different and distinct from Papistry, which has Converted the Nations of the
Earth to Jesus, and in all Ages has made them Blessed in him: Which is
impossible for them to do: Or else they must acknowledge, and grant, that
Papistry is a Divine Religion, is wholly true, is the True Light of the Gospel
of Christ, is his only Saving Faith, and abundantly apt and able, to bring to
the Nations of the Earth, the Promised Blessing (all which is most true) as I
hope they will grant; rather then deny, that Jesus was the True Messiah and
Savior of the World, as some Protestants have done, to the assured damnation
of their Souls: Being by this Argument choked; and not able to find, any
satisying Answer thereunto; unless they would yield, that Papistry is a Holy
and Saving Religion, and the true Light of the Gospel of Christ: Which they
being unwilling to yield unto, either for shame, or for their extreme hatred
thereof, turned either Jews, Turks or Atheists, and so made sure their Eternal
Damnation. But our Protestants, I hope, will be Wiser, and will rather return
to the Faith, of their Noble Progenitors, in which they may assuredly be Saved;
than run into so great madness, and thereby perish Eternally.

Question XI. Did the Church of Christ err heretofore, because Christ could not
preserve her from erring, or because he would not.
MY Eleventh Demand of Protestants, is, if the Church of Christ, has erred, as
they say, in her Doctrine of Faith, from whence proceeded, this her erring? Did
this happen, because Christ could not keep her from erring; or because he would
not? If he could not, how is he God? How is he Omnipotent? How is it True, that
he had All Power given him both in Heaven and Earth, Mat. 28. 18. If Christ
could enable his Apostles, to Preach his Religion, over the World, without
danger of erring, and of deluding the Nations of the Earth; why could he not
also Enable their Successors, the Ordinary Doctors and Pastors of his Church,
to Teach and continue the same Religion, in all succeeding Ages, without danger
of erring, and of misleading his People? If God could direct men to write his
Holy Scriptures, without danger of erring; why can he not direct men, to
explicate the same Holy Scriptures in all Ages, without danger of erring, in
matters of Faith?

Well then, Protestants must say, that Christ could have preserved his Church,
in all Ages, from danger of erring, in her Doctrine of Faith; but would not.
But why would he not? Did the Increase of his own Credit and Glory, move him to
this neglect, or the good of Mankind? Not the Increase of his own Credit. For
what Credit, Honor, Glory could acrew and arise to him, by the erring of his
Church? Does this commend his Workmanship, in Founding her? His Wisdom,
Goodness, Power in Governing her? I think not. Nay, could it become the Wisdom
of a Discreet man, to take so great Pains, and to suffer so Painful and
Ignominious a Death, as Christ did, for the Founding of an Erring Church, which
should Delude and Mislead the World? Would any Honest Protestant, if he had the
like Power, that Christ had, have Founded so miserable a Church, as they esteem
Christ to have Founded? I believe not.

Was it then, the good of Mankind, that invited Christ, to Constitute an erring
Church? Truly no. For no good can come to men, by such a Church; but rather
much harm; yea, infinite mischief. As endless Discord, Broils, Contentions;
Bloody Encounters, uncertainty in matters of Faith; contempt of all Religion;
and the ruin and destruction of Infinite Souls. For the Devil would never go
about to seduce the Church, and to Pollute her Doctrine, with Errors and
Superstitions, but to do Mischief, and to bring Souls to Perdition.

Wherefore seeing that it could not redound, either to the Glory of God, or the
good of Men, that Christ should Found an Erring Church; it is a very gross
Error, to hold that he did. And those, who so think; do greatly mistake, and
exceedingly wrong the Wisdom, and Goodness of our Savior; as will more clearly
appear by the next Question.

Question XII. If the Church of Christ did Err, for so many Ages; How can it be
Defended, that God is Truly good, and does Truly desire the Salvation of
Mankind?
TWelfthly, If it be true, that the Church of Christ, for so many Ages, has
Erred in her Doctrine of Faith: Embracing, as it were, with both her Arms, and
instilling into her Followers, many Pernicious Errors, many gross
Superstitions: Notwithstanding, that Christ her Spouse and Savior Promised,
Math. 16. That the Gates of Hell should never prevail against her. That the
Holy Ghost should Abide with her Pastors for ever, St. John cap. 14. and should
Teach them all Truth, Joh. 16. That he himself would be with them All days,
even till the End of the World, Mat. 28. And notwithstanding, that God
Promised, that His Spirit and Word should never depart from this Church, Isaias
59. That she should Stand for ever, Daniel 2. And should Never be Corrupted,
Daniel 7. Being indeed the Pillar and ground of Truth, As the Apostle affirms,
1 Timothy 3. If I say the Doctrine of Protestant Teachers, about the Erring of the
Church of Christ, being so contrary to the Word of God as it is, be true.

I demand of Prudent and Understanding Protestants, how it can be defended,
that God is truly Good, has a Fatherly care of Men, does truly Love them, and
tender their Spiritual good, and has a true desire of their Eternal Salvation:
Seeing, that whereas he does freely permit the Devil, to fill the World, with
False and Wicked Religions, with Abominable and Detestable Worships, to bring
Men assuredly to everlasting Damnation: He himself (though he could most easily
do it) does not continue, maintain, and uphold in the World, in all Ages, so
much as one True Religion, so much as one Holy and Divine Worship, to bring
them to Salvation? No, not after that his Blessed Son made Man, by Infinite
Humility, by Innumerable Labors undergone for his sake, by shedding his most
Precious Blood, had endeavored to appease his Indignation, to mitigate his
Wrath, and to Molify his Heart, and to gain and purchase Love and Mercy for
them.

What Christian Breast, can believe so monstrous a thing as this? Or who can
Harbor so base a Thought of the the Wisdom, Goodness, Sweetness and Mercy of
God? Or how come Discreet and Understanding Protestants, to swallow so gtoss an
Absurdity as this? If the Tenet of Protestant Teachers, touching the Erring of
the Church, be true; how is that true which Christ says, John 3. 16. That God
so loved the World, that he gave his only begotten Son, that every one that
believes in him, perish not, but may have Life everlasting. For God sent not
his Son to judge (that is to Damn) the World; but that the World may be Saved
by him: Or that which St. Paul says, 1 Timothy 2. 4. God will have all men Saved,
and come to the knowledge of the Truth? How I say are these Divine Assertions
true, if to bring Men to Salvation, God does not ever preserve a True Religion
in the World? Does not ever uphold the Truth of his Gospel?

For by False Religions, no man can be Saved; in regard, that the Devil, and
not God, is the Author and Suggestor of False Religions, by which he intends
the Damnation of Men, and not their Salvation, as is manifest. Yea, he neither
can, neither will induce men, to invent a Religion able and fit, to Save men
in. Mark this well, and also Note, that our Savior, in the Sentence alleged
by the word World, does not mean that only Age, in which He and his Apostles
lived, nor those Men only, which then lived: But all following Ages, and all
that were to live, even till the day of Doom. All which, God would have to come
to the knowledge of the Truth; namely, of his Divine Gospel: And to save them
all, he sent his Blessed Son into the World. And therefore we must of necessity
grant, that he provideth the People of all Ages, of a True and Illustrious
Religion, by which they may be Saved: And that he ever preserves, in all Ages,
the Truth of his Gospel (of which the Apostle speaks in the Sentence alleged)
that so men may come to the knowledge thereof.

For if the true Gospel of Christ, be not extant in all Ages, how has God a
true Will and desire, that the People of all Ages, should come to the knowledge
thereof? Neither is it sufficient, that it be extant in the BIBLE, for all to
come to the knowledge thereof: For all cannot read the Bible; neither can those
which are skilled in Reading, thence pick out the true Gospel, without the help
of a True Interpreter, as I before have showed: But it must be ever extant in
the Doctrine, and Teaching, of the Ordinary Doctors and Pastors of the Church,
whom others are bound to Hear and Obey, Luke 10. Heb. 13. And of whom they are
to learn Divine Faith, which is gotten by Hearing, Romans 10. which is clear out
of Matthew. 24. where Christ expressly foretells, that his True Gospel, (viz.) the
same that he Taught, should be Preached to all Nations, even till the end of
the World, as I have before Noted: And therefore the True Gospel must not lurk
in the Bible, but be ever extant in the Preaching of the Church.

Out of that which has been spoken in this Question, who does not see, that
the Prime and Fundamental Article, of the Protestant Religion, does not only
extremely Disgrace the Wisdom, Goodness and Mercy of God, and extenuate the
Merits of Christ; but does also tend to the Denial of all Christianity: to the
utter neglect of God: Yea, and to plain Atheism it self? For who will think,
that the Son of God, really Died for Mankind, if he gained so little for them?
Or that there is a God, that does truly Love Men, and tender their Good, if he
be so mindless of them, and of their Eternal Happiness and Salvation. The
tending then of the Protestant Religion, so much to the Disgrace of Christ, and
of God, does clearly show, who was the first suggestor of it.

Wherefore how certain it is, that there is a God, who is Infinitely Wise, Good
and Merciful; and who does truly Love Mankind, and tender their Eternal Good:
And how certain it is, that Christ the Son of God, Died for us, took a most
Provident course, for our Salvation; and that his Merits are of inestimable
worth: So certain it is, that God has ever preserved in the World, a True,
Divine and Illustrious Religion, in which Men may be Saved if they will. For
Christ did not Light up a Candle to put it under a Bushel, Mat. 5. And so
certain it is, that the Protestant Religion, which is Erected upon so bad a
Foundation as the Erring of the Church is, is neither good, nor sufficient to
Salvation.

Question XIII. If the Church of Christ did Err, from the True Light of the
Gospel for so many Ages; could be find none fit, in so many hundred years, to
restore the same, till Luther ( falling out with the Pope, and breaking his Vow
of Chastity,) began to Teach a New Religion tending to Liberty and Looseness?
TO make way for my next demand, I must again repeat, that Protestants Believe
and Teach; that the Church of Christ, quickly fell from that Purity of
Doctrine, which he and his Apostles delivered unto her: And that shortly after
their times, her Pastors and Doctors, by Humane Inventions, and Traditions,
Obscured the true and sincere Light of the Gospel: And obtruded upon their
Followers, many gross Errors about Faith, many vain and hurtful Superstitions,
in the practice of Religion, and about the Worship of God. In which she
continued, still increasing them, for 1400, 1200. or at least a thousand years:
And from which, she ought long ago, to have been cleans'd, but was not, through
the Ambition, Negligence, or gross Ignorance, of her Pastors. Who living in
Blindness themselves, lead their Followers in Blindness, as Protestants
imagine. Who therefore call this long tract of time, in which they esteem the
Church to have Erred, the time of Blindness: But how Blindly, may partly appear
by that which I have already said, partly by this.

That those Articles of the Old Religion, which these men account Errors, are
the prime parts of the Religion of Christ, which tend to good Life, to nourish
Piety, and to inflame Devotion; and which he ordained to Animate, Help, Curb,
and Cure, our sluggish, weak and frail Nature; and to bring his People, to live
in the Fear of God, to walk in his Holy Commandments; to live according to
Conscience, to abstain from Evil, and to do Good; To Crucify the Flesh and the
bad Desires thereof, Gal. 5. 24. And in a Word, to imitate studiously his own
Blessed Life, and the Lives and Actions of his Holy Apostles, and other prime
Saints, who Forsook all to follow him, Mat. 19. 27.

Such are those Articles, of the Old Religion, which bind under pain of
Damnation, to the necessity of keeping the Commandments of God (by abstaining
from Mortal Sins, such as are Murder, Fornication, Theft in a notable quantity,
Perjury, and the like, by which property they are broken) to the necessity of
Fasting, as the Church Commands: Of Confessing all grievous sins Sacramentally
to a Lawful and Authorized Priest; Of doing Penance for them, in this Life, or
of Suffering severe Punishment in the next: Of restoring other men's Goods
unlawfully gotten, or possessed; and to the necessity of obeying the Church,
and all other Lawful Superiors, in things appertaining to their Power.

Such also are those Articles, which Teach the merit of good Works proceeding
of Grace, and done in the state of Grace; and the excellency of the Evangelical
Councils of Christ, of perpetual Poverty, Chastity and Obedience, practiced in
the Church of Christ, even since the Apostles times, by innumerable Holy Men
and Women.

All which Articles, and diverse others connex'd with these, are the things
which Protestant Teachers repute Errors, and dislike in the Old Religion; as
restraining too much from the Liberty of the Gospel; that is, (to speak plain
English) from the Liberty of the Flesh, from Venus and Bacchus: Which Liberty
is chiefly entrenched upon, by the Roman Church, in that she will not admit any
to the high and Heavenly Function of Priesthood, who will not Voluntarily Geld
themselves for the Kingdom of Heaven, (Mat. 19. 12.) By Vowing perpetual
Chastity; which point indeed does chiefly sting many Protestant Teachers, and
does incite them to rage so furiously, and to stand out so Rebelliously, as
they do, against this their True and Ancient Mother; though diverse of the more
Learned amongst them, do it, with some Reluctation of Conscience, which tells
them, that Chastity is a Decent, dignifying and excellent Ornament of Christian
Priests; and which therefore not Obscurely foretells them, that the short
solace, which a Wife, in this Life affords them, is likely to cost them in the
next, the Eternal loss of their Souls.

But to come to the matter and question here intended. If the Church of Christ
did Err, from the true Light of his Gospel, so many Ages, and embrace so many
gross and dangerous Superstitions (as She is accused to have done) I demand of
Prudent and Considerate Protestants, how it could become the Wisdom, Goodness
and Mercy of God, first to drive off, and defer the Cleansing and Reforming of
his Church, so many hundred years, to the great Dishonor of Himself, and of
his Blessed Son, and to the loss of Infinite Souls; and then after so long a
tract of time, to make choice of such Instruments, as Protestants imagine he
did, to restore again to the World, the true Light of his Gospel.

Could he find none fit, to take in hand, and to bring to effect, this Needful,
Merciful, and Holy Reformation, till Martin Luther, a Choleric and Bold
Austine-Fryer, Incensed with Anger, because the Preaching of certain
Indulgences, granted by the Pope, was committed to the Dominican-Fryers, and
not to his Order, fell out with the Pope; cast away his Religious Weed, brake
his Vow of Chastity, which he had long kept, Married a Nun Consecrated to God,
and plunged himself into a Carnal course of Life?

Could God, I say, find none fit, neither amongst the Fathers of the Primitive
Church, nor amongst the Saints and Sages of the next thousand years: to be the
Actors, of so Needful a Reformation; till the Love of Carnal Liberty, made
Luther and his Brood, show themselves to the World? There lived in those times,
St. Basil the Great, St. Hierome, St. Ambrose, St. Augustine, St. Gregory the
Great, Venerable Bode, St. Bernard, St. Anselme, St. Thomas of Aquin, St.
Bonaventure, beside Innumerable others, all excellent Men, for Learning,
Wisdom, Sanctity; and all so Devoted to God, that He had them all at his
command: And yet among all these, could he find none so fit, to be his
Instruments, in the Divine Work, of Reforming his Church, and of restoring
again to the World, the true Light of his Gospel, as Luther and his Associates?
Who dares Pawn his Soul hereon?

Especially if he consider, that these Men, were not only destitute of
Excellent Sanctity of Life, (which those usually have, who are Gods peculiar
Instruments, in the effecting of any such kind of work) but were also branded
with all the Marks of False Prophets, of Perfidious Heretics, as Learned
Protestants cannot but know: Insomuch, that it is not possible for them to give
a proper and True Definition of an Heretic, but therein they must involve, and
enclose Luther, Calvin, Zwinglius, and such other prime Founders, of the
Protestant Religion.

How improbable then a thing is it, that God among so many Wise, Learned and
Holy Men, as flourished in his Church, in the long tract of above a thousand
years, could not find any fit, to be by him particularly employed, for the
restoring of the True Light of his Heavenly Religion, to the World again, (if
it were lost) till Luther and his carnal and jarring Offspring appeared? And
how slenderly do Protestants provide for the safety of their Souls, who hazard
them upon so manifest a Falsehood as this?

Question XIV. Whether God, by Miracles, can draw and incline men to believe a
false Religion, or no? Where it is showed, that God, by Miracles, did draw our
Forefathers, at their first Conversion to Christanity, to believe Papistry.
MY Fourteenth Demand is, Whether God by Miracles, can move and draw Men to
believe a false Religion, or no? Or thus, whether Men may safely, and without
danger of their Souls, esteem that Religion False, Wicked, Pernicious, and
worthy to be hated and persecuted; to believe which, God does stir up, and
induce men, even by Miracles? as by curing the Lame, Blind, and the like. I
think no understanding Protestant will be so ill advised, as to affirm this,
for he that should so do, should utter a manifest Blasphemy, tending to the
denial of God, and of all Christianity. For he that draws men to believe false
Religions, cannot be a good Spirit, but a Bad, cannot be God, but the Devil;
(as is manifest,) or the Devils Agent, God being infinitely Wise, Good, and
True, and a zealous Hater of all Falsehood.

Moreover, what certainty can we have of the Truth of the Scriptures, of the
Doctrine of Moses, and of Christ; or that Christ was the true Messiah, and
Savior of the World, if God by Miracles, may draw and induce men to the
embracing of a false Religion? Far then be it from all true Christian Breasts,
to hold so great a Blasphemy as this; and therefore let me lay for a sure and
uncontrollable Ground, that God by Miracles cannot draw men to embrace a false
or bad Religion; and that therefore, that Religion, to believe which, God by
Miracles does stir up, and induce, is not Bad, Superstitious, and False, but
true, Holy, and Divine; yea, wholly True, and the only Saving Faith of Christ;
because there can be but only one Faith, but only one Religion in the World,
that is entirely True, and truly Saving, as I before have showed. This Ground
being agreed upon, which Christianly cannot be denied, I propose to all prudent
and considerate Protestants, this Syllogism.

That Religion, to believe which, God by Miracles does stir up, and draw, is
wholly True, Divine and Saving. But God by Miracles, does stir up, and draw men
to believe Papistry: Ergo, Papistry is wholly true, Divine and Saving; yea, it
is the only Saving Faith of Christ. The Major is clear and certain, out of the
Ground laid. The Minor I could prove by the Testimony of innumerable grave
Authors, and by relating the Conversion of diverse Heathen Nations to Christ,
brought to pass in former Ages, and also in our Times. But omitting these, to
avoid Prolixity, I will only insist upon the Conversion of our own Nation to
Christ, which was effected a thousand years ago, by forty Holy Monks, sent
hither by Gregory the Great, then Bishop of Rome, (St. Austin, the first
Archbishop of Canterbury, being the Chief of them) who converted our
Forefathers, not to the Protestant Faith (which then was not so much as
thought of in the World, but to Papistry; for what Religion should the Pope
send in, and Monks bring in, but Papistry?

This is manifest by the Churches, Altars, Abbeys, Monasteries, Nunneries,
which our first Christians built. By the Names which they imposed upon
Churches, and upon sundry Days of the Year; as Christmas, Ash Wednesday,
Palm Sunday. By the Crosses which they every where erected. By the Pictures,
wherewith they adorned their Altars, and the Glass Windows of their Churches.
By their perpetual Subjection to the Pope, and the Paying of the Peter Pence
unto him, from the Time of King Inas, even to Henry the Eighth.

Yea, This is so evident, that even the most earnest of the Protestants cannot
deny it. Bale Cent. 1. Fol. 3. says, That Austin was sent from Gregory to
season the English Saxons with the Popish Faith. Doctor Fulk, Confu. of Purg.
page 333. for this cause terms our Conversion to Christ, our Perversion.
Danaeus, Resp. ad disput. Bellar. Part 1. page 780. Terms the same, The
Inebriation of the Whore of Babylon. Mr. Ascham, Apol. pro caena, page 33.
Calls St. Austin, (who brought our Forefathers from worshipping the Devil, to
worship Christ, (The Overthrower of true Religion, and the Establisher of
Popish Doctrine. Mr. Harrison, in his Description of Britanniae, set before
Hollinshead, in plain terms confesses, That Austin came and brought in Popery.
Bale, in Catalog. cent. 14. page 117. says, That Austin, by his Interpreters,
taught our People the Papistical Faith.

The same is clear out of the Magdeburgians, Luke Osiander, and others, who
show, that scarcely there is a Ceremony now used by Papists, that was not then
brought in by St. Austin. And so there can no doubt be made, but that our
Forefathers, by their first Converters, were made Papists, and that that Faith
in Christ, to which God by his Grace did draw them, was Papistry. It rests then
to prove, that to this Faith, God did convert, and draw our Forefathers, even
by Miracles. Which Point being well and firmly proved, no prudent man will
deny, but that Papistry is truly and really a Holy and a Divine Religion, yea,
the true Light of the Gospel, and the only Saving Faith of Christ, as my former
Syllogism, does demonstrate.

That God then by Miracles, did incline and draw our Forefathers to believe
and embrace that Faith and Religion which Austin taught, that is, Papistry; is
testified first by Venerable Bede, a Holy, Grave, and Learned Author, who
living near the Time of our Conversion, while things were yet fresh in Memory,
and writing out of the assured Records of the whole Business then extant, and
to no meaner a Person than a King, is not likely to have erred through
ignorance, or to have feigned. This wise then and Holy man, in his first Book,
C. 26. speaks thus.

But when the King himself, being much delighted with the Purity of their Life
(namely, of Augustine and his Associates) and the Example of their Godly
Conversation, as also with their sweet Promises, (which to be true, they proved
by working many Miracles) did believe, and were Baptized; there began more and
more daily to resort unto their Sermons, and renouncing the Rites of their old
Gentility, to join themselves by Faith, to the Unity of the Holy Church of
Christ. Thus in this place, Bid.

Who in his Second Book, C. 2. relates a Famous Miracle wrought by God, at the
humble Petition of Augustine, to witness the Truth of that Religion, which he
and his Associates taught, which happened thus. Blessed Austine being desirous,
not only to convert the English to Christ, but also to reform some Errors crept
in amongst the Britans, about the keeping of Easter, and the Ceremonies of
Baptism, and to have the help of the Britans, in the Conversion of the English;
procured a Meeting betwixt himself and the Learned of the Britains; at which,
when after long Disputation, the Britans would not yield; to bring the Matter
to some issue, St. Austine said.

Let us make our Prayers to God, who makes of one Mind the Inhabitants of his
Fathers House; that he, by Heavenly Signs, would vouchsafe to show which
Tradition is to be followed, and by which way we ought to hasten toward his
Kingdom. Let some sick Body be brought hither, and by whose Prayers he shall be
cured, let his Faith and Operation be esteemed by all, to be pleasing to God,
and to be that which we ought to follow. To which, though unwillingly his
Adversaries agreeing, a Blind man of the English Nation was brought, who being
offered to the British Priests, and receiving no Help by their endeavors;
Austin at length, by just necessity, compelled, bowed his Knees to the Father
of oar Lord Jesus Christ, beseeching him, that he would restore to the Blind
Man, the Sight he had lost, and by illuminating one man corporally, would
inkindle in the Hearts of many, the Light of Spiritual Grace. Presently the
Blind Man received his Sight, and Austin by all is proclaimed to be the true
Preacher of Heavenly Light. Then the Britains confessed, that they perceived
that Austin taught the true way of Justice, but they could not forsake their
old Customs, without the Consent of the rest of their Side. Thus Saint Bede.

What will Protestants say then? Will they deny that this Miracle was wrought?
Will they pawn their Souls that Bid recounts a Fable? I believe not, Bid
being so Wise and Honest, the Meeting so Solemn, the Fact so Public and
Famous. What then, will they attribute this Miracle to the Devil? That indeed
were desperately done, Austine praying to Gone, and not to the Devil, and the
Devil would think himself much honored by them, for attributing so great Power
unto him; for the Truth is, that although ^e can do many juggling Tricks, yet
to restore Sight to he Blind, far surpasses his Skill, and lies far without he
Sphere of his Activity.

Will they then yield to the Truth, and admit that both the Miracle was
wrought, and that it was the Work of God? If this they grant, they also must
admit, that Papistry is the true Religion of Christ; and so they must not only
leave to hate and persecute Papists, but Papists also they must become, unless
they will run headlong to eternal Perdition; for God wrought this great
Miracle to testify, that That was the true Religion, and the right way to
Salvation, which Austine taught. And what taught he? Papistry certainly, even
plain Papistry, as I before did show, even by the Confession of Learned
Protestants. Papistry then is the true Religion, if Credit be to be given to
God.

The Second that I bring to witness St. Austines Miracles, is St. Gregory the
Great, a Holy, Learned, and wise Prelate, of whom Bid thus relates, Lib. 1.
c. 31. At which time Gregory sent unto Austine an Epistle, concerning the
Miracles which he knew were done by him. In which, (that through the Multitude
of them, he should not come within the danger of Vainglory) he exhorts him
with these Words. I know my most dear Brother, that the Omnipotent God, by thy
dilection, does show great Miracles toward that Nation, which he has chosen.
Whence it is needful, that for the same Heavenly Gift, thou should Joy with
Fear, and Fear with Joy. Rejoice because the Souls of the English, by these
outward Miracles, are drawn to inward Grace. But Fear, (least among these
Signs, which are done) thy weak Mind elevate it self thorough Presumption, and
while without it is raised to Honor, within it fall into Vainglory. And
again, Whatsoever Power, in working Miracles, thou have, or shall receive,
esteem, the same to be bestowed, not on Thee, but on Them, for whose Salvation
thou have it. Thus in this Epistle St. Gregory, where I would beseech every
considerate Protestant, to weigh maturely with himself, whether it be likely,
that so Grave, Eminent, Conscientious, and Wary a Prelate, as Great St.
Gregory was, would have written thus to Austine, if he had not been well
informed, by sure and certain testimonies, of the Multitude of Miracles wrought
by him, for the Conversion of the English?

So certain indeed, was this Holy Doctor, of the Miracles of Austine, that he
feared not to insert some mention of them, into his Famous Work upon Job, as Bede testifies, Lib. 2. c. 1. Behold, says he, the Tongue of the English,
which lately knew nothing, but to mutter barbarously, now has begun to resound
in the Praises of God, the Hebrew Alleluja, etc. Because by Precepts, by
Heavenly Words, and also by shining Miracles, the Virtue of Divine Knowledge is
infused into them. By which Words, says Bid, Blessed Gregory declares, that
St. Austine and his Associates, did bring the English Nation to the Knowledge
of the Truth, not only by the outward sound of Words, but also by the help of
Heavenly Miracles.

Which Holy Gregory testifies also, to Eulogius Patriark of Alexandria. To
whom, relating with joy, the Conversion of the English. Lib. 7. Epistol. 30.
Indict. 1. Know then, says he, that whereas the English Nation, etc. remained
hitherto in Infidelity, I did by the help of your Prayers, etc. send unto that
Nation (Austine) a Monk of my Monastery, to Preach to them. etc. And now
Letters are come to us, both of his Health, and of the Work he has in hand.
And surely, either He, or they which were sent with him, work so many Miracles
in that Nation, as they may seem to imitate therein the Power and Miracles of
the Apostles themselves. Thus to Eulogius Gregorius.

By whose most grave, and so often iterated Testimony, as also by, St. Bedes,
it seems to be convinced, that Austine and his Associates, did draw the English
to Papistry, not only by the Sanctity of their Lives, and by Preaching, but
also by great store of divine and undoubted Miracles, even such as were like to
the Miracles of the Apostles.

But that which strikes this matter dead, and which proves undeniably, the
intercourse of Divine Miracles, in our Conversion to Christ, is the Epitaph
placed upon the Sepulcher of Blessed Austine, shortly after his Death. For who
can persuade himself, that King Ethelbert, newly then converted, and full of
Divine Zeal, and of the Love of the Truth, would permit, or the Holy Bishops
which St. Austin left behind him, attempt to inscribe upon his Tomb, notorious
Lies and Fictions, to the Scandal of the King and his People, in the Infancy of
their Christianity, which many then living could easily have controulled, if a
Worker of Miracles Austine had not been? But hear the Epitaph recorded by
Bid, Lib. 2. c. 3.

Here rests Blessed Austine, the first Archbishop of Canterbury, who was
sent hither by Blessed Gregory, Bishop of Rome, and aided by God with the
Operation of Miracles, did bring King Ethelbert and his People from the Worship
of Idols, to the Faith of Christ, and fulfilling in Peace the Days of his
Office; dyed the Seventh of the Calends of June, the same King yet Reigning.

Thus the Epitaph, into which no man of Wit, Modesty, or Honesty, would have
inserted the Gift of Miracles, if it had not been notoriously true, that this
our Apostle was therewith adorned, and by the help thereof, did convert the
English from Idolatry to the Faith of Christ.

And so it rests inevitably proved, that God by Miracles did draw our
Forefathers to Papistry. Whence it as evidently follows, yea much more
evidently, that Papistry is a Divine and Holy Religion, entirely True, and
really the True Light of the Gospel, and the only saving Faith of Christ; which
no Man can Hate, Impugn, Persecute, without the high offense of God, and
extreme peril of his own Soul. This, I say, is most clearly proved, and
evicted, by the Argument drawn from the Miracles, which it pleased God to work,
for the Conversion of the English.

Neither let any Protestant flatter, and delude himself, by thinking, that a
satisfying Answer may be made thereunto, for certainly it cannot; for neither
can it be denied, with any color of Truth, that such Miracles were done, for
the Conversion of the English, as are certified by Bid, by Gregory, by the
Epitaph. Neither can it be maintained, that God by Miracles may draw Men to a
false and wicked Religion: And as impossible it is to prove, that the Devil was
the Author of the Miracles wrought by Saint Austin.

For if the Devil could never yet effect such Miracles, to draw Men to false
and wicked Religions, as to Judaism, Arianism, Turcism, Paganism, or to the
direct and express worship of himself: How great madness is it to think, that
he wrought these Miracles, to draw Men from himself to Christ? From the worship
of False Gods, to the worship of the True God?

If any protern and wrangling Wit, will reply, that the Devil effected these
Miracles, not to draw Men to Christ, but to Papistry, which contains the
worship of Saints and Angels, a thing very pleasing to the Devil. I demand,
whether it be more pleasing to the Devil, and displeasing to God, to have
Christ worshipped for God, and his Angels and Saints honored, (not as Gods,
(for that is the Fiction of Protestants, not the Fact of Papists,) but as
sanctified Creatures, dear to God, and by his Grace Dignified, and made worthy
of Respect and Honor,) then to have wicked Men, senseless Creatures, the Devil
himself worshipped for Gods? May not a Jew, a Villain, a Miscreant wrangle,
according to this Example, and say, That the Miracles, which are said to have
been wrought by Christ and his Apostles, were wrought indeed by the Devil, to
draw Men from the True Worship of God, prescribed by the Law of Moses, to the
False Worship of a Crucified Man? Far then be it from the hearts of prudent and
sober Men, to attribute to the Devil, the manifest works of the Holy Ghost, so
to maintain a Faction, (to their own Perdition,) against the True and Saving
Faith of Christ, proved most clearly by the Miracles of S. Austin, to be no
other, but the Roman Catholic Faith, styled by Protestants, Papistry, and
Popery.

Question XV. Out of which Religion, the Elect of Christ, are to be gathered,
at the day of Judgment?
BEcause diverse Protestants, especially of the purer strain, esteem themselves
to be the Elect of the Lord; and adorn, not seldom, their Brotherhood, with
this goodly Title: That these Men may see the folly of this their proud
presumption, I demand, Whether the Elect of God, are to be gathered out of all
Ages, and out of all the Quarters of the World: Or, out of some few Ages, and
out of some small Parcel of the World? If they are to be gathered only out of
some little part of the World: How is that true, which our Savior says, Matthew.
24. 31. And he (the Son of God,) shall send his Angels with a Trumpet, and a
great Voice: And they shall gather together his Elect from the four Winds, from
the farthest parts of Heaven, even to the ends thereof? Or that true, which the
Elect themselves say, Rev. 5. 9. Thou art worthy, O Lord, to take the Book, and
to open the Seals thereof: Because thou wast slain, and have redeemed us to
God, in thy blood, out of every Tribe, and Tongue, and People, and Nation? Or
that which St. John says, Rev. 7. 9. After these things, I saw a great
multitude, which no Man could Number, of all Nations, and Tribes, and People,
and Tongues, standing before the Throne, etc.

How, I say, are these most express places of God's Word true, if his Elect are
to be gathered only out of some small Parcel of the World, possessed by the
purer sort of Protestants? But if according to these express and clear places,
the true Elect of God, are to be gathered out of all the quarters of the World,
and Nations of the Earth; as most certainly they are: How dangerous is the
state of all Protestants and how ridiculous the presumption of those Purelings,
who being but Birds of Yesterdays Hatching, and Nestled only in a Corner of the
World, will needs be, forsooth, the Elect of the Lord, and the only Guests that
must be admitted to his Banquet?

But let not Protestants here deceive themselves, by imagining, that although
for many Ages, they were not extant, not ever hitherto spread over the World;
yet that hereafter they shall arrive to this happiness. For first, If God has
not yet made use of their endeavors, to convert the Heathen Nations of the
Earth to his Son; when is it likely that he will change his Style, and
rejecting his old Workmen, employ the Leaden Zeal of these new, Laborers shall
I say, or Loyterers?

2. When will the Needle of these Men's Zeal, point toward the Conversion of
Heathen Nations; seeing that when it was newly touched, and in it self most
vigorous and active, it only turned toward the perverting of old Christians,
never minding the misery of Heathens?

3. What real hope can there be, that Protestant Teachers, will ever spread
their Religion over the World, by converting Heathen Nations to Christ; seeing
they are destitute of Unity in Doctrine, of excellent Sanctity of Life, and of
the gift of Miracles? All which are necessary for the effecting, of so hard and
Divine a work, as the Conversion of Heathen Nations is; as is manifest by the
Example of the Apostles, and of all the excellent Laborers of the Catholic
Church: Which hitherto have been the Converters of Heathen Nations? Certainly
none at all. And as little solid hope can Protestants have, that they shall one
day be gathered together, by the Holy Angels, and placed amongst the Elect of
God?

For certain it is, that the Elect of God, are to be gathered out of the
Professors of the True Faith and Religion of Christ: (which is but one, as I
have already showed, and as the Apostle affirms, Ephesians. 4. 5. One Faith, one
Baptism, one God,) and out of his True Church, and Fold. Which also is but one,
as he himself does teach, John 10. 16. And other Sheep I have, that are not of
this Fold: Them also I must bring, and they shall hear my voice; And there
shall be made one Fold, and one Pastor.

Out of which words, note, First, That Christ speaking of his Church, as she
was to be, after the Conjunction of the Jews and Gentiles together in one
Faith, assures us, that she should be One Fold; namely, under one Visible Head,
one Jurisdiction, one Government, having one Faith, one Worship of God, one
Communion, one means of Sanctification, for the Flock of this Fold.

Note, Secondly, That by this One Pastor, that was to be made, after Christ
spoke these words, may well be meant, (not only Christ himself; who was then
the Good Pastor, ver. 11. and was not so made after this time,) but some other
Supreme Ministerial Pastor, made by Christ, after the speaking of these words,
to preserve Unity in his Church; and fittingly to govern her, under himself:
Which was no other, but blessed Peter, made Supreme Pastor, of the Flock of
Christ, John 21. which Office he left to his Successors.

Thirdly, note, That the Voice of the Church of Christ, preaching in all Ages
to the Nations of the Earth, to bring them to his Fold, is the Voice of Christ,
by his own acknowledgement: And they, says he, shall hear my Voice: According
to that of Luke 10. 16. He that hears you, hears me. And so Christ has
hitherto preached, and does yet preach to the Gentiles, not by his own Corporal
and Personal Voice, but by the Voice of his Apostles, and of their Successors,
the Ordinary Doctors and Pastors of his Church: Whose Voice is his Voice,
because by him they are sent to teach, and by him in their teaching are Guided.
And in like manner, the sound of the Apostles does yet go forth into all the
Earth, Psalm. 18. Romans 10. And must go forth even till the day of Doom, for a
Testimony to all Nations, Matthew. 24. 14.

Now then, seeing that the Elect of God, are to be gathered out of all the
World, and out of the Fold and Flock of Christ: And that Christ verily and
really has but one Fold, one Church, one Faith, one Flock, and one Supreme
Pastor under himself, to guide fittingly this large Fold, this great and
numerous Flock, spread over the World; And seeing also, that the Protestants
are neither spread over the World, that the Elect of God may be gathered out
of them; nor united to that Flock, nor participants of that Faith which is
spread over the World; nor within that Fold, that is One, nor under the
Government and Feeding of that one Supreme Pastor, of whom Christ speaks:
Deplorable for the present is their Case, most dangerous their State, vain
their Labor, and fruitless their Hope: And so it will ever be, until they
return to this Flock and Pastor again. Which return, how safely in Conscience,
and prudently they may make, my next Question will declare.

Question XVI. Whether Protestants, or Catholics do take the surer way to
Eternal Happiness? Where it is showed, That Papistry, by the judgment of all
Learned Protestants, is a Saving Religion; and consequently the securer way.
THe Doctrine delivered to Christian People, concerning Heaven and Hell, does
teach the one to be a place of such unspeakable Happiness: And the other of
such inexplicable Misery, that no discreet Man among them, will stick to say,
(if he be asked,) that every Man and Woman, does stand most deeply obliged,
out of their Duty to God, and the natural Love they owe to themselves, to take
the surer way, when doubt is made, to gain the one, and to avoid the other.

To take, I say, the surer way, when doubt is made about the ways, which are
said to lead to Heaven, or to bring to Hell. Amongst which ways, two are of
chief esteem, the Catholic and the Protestant, the Old and the New Religion.
Both which are said to be sure ways to Heaven; yet both are doubted of. The Old
is doubted of, among Christians, only by a few of the Protestant Party, who are
neither of the best Learned amongst them, nor of the most discreet. For Learned
Protestants generally hold, that the Old Religion, that is, Papistry, is a
Saving Religion, and a secure way to Heaven; and that those which live and dye
therein may be saved. Here this witnessed by their own Pens; and, first, by
Doctor Covel in his defense of Mr. Hooker's Books of Ecclesiastical Polity,
Published by Authority: Where he teaches this at large, saying, Page 77. We
affirm them of the Church of Rome, to be part of the Church of Christ; and that
those which live and dye in that Church, may notwithstanding be saved.

The same is taught by Doctor Field, in his Third Book of the Church, cap. 46.
page 182. saying, We doubt not, but the Church, in which the Bishop of Rome,
with more then Lucifer-like Pride exalted himself, was notwithstanding the True
Church of God: And that it held a saving Profession of truth in Christ; and by
force thereof, did Convert many from Error.

And by Doctor Some, in his defense against Penry, page 182. saying, In the
Judgment of all Learned Men, and all Reformed Churches, there is in Popery a
Church, a Ministry, a True Christ. And page 176. If you think, says he, that
all the Popish sort, which died in the Popish Church, are damned, you think
absurdly, and dissent from the Judgment of Learned Protestants. Thus these
Prime and Learned Protestants; to whom I could add many more of later date, but
that it is needless, in regard that all moderate Protestants do grant, that
Papists may be saved.

Yea, this is the common Tenet of all Learned Protestants, and of all Reformed
Churches, as you have heard out of Doctor Somes. And not without cause, in
regard that Learned Protestants see well enough, that if this they should deny,
they should not only very rashly, and without any sure ground, condemn to Hell
all their Forefathers, and the rest of the Christian World, for above a
Thousand Years before Luther, (not being well able to save from this Censure,
the Ancient Fathers, and innumerable other Learned Men, and Holy Saints,) but
should also lay open a fair way to plain Atheism; to the utter denial of
Christ, and of God; as my Tenth, Eleventh, and Twelfth Questions, do very
clearly demonstrate.

And therefore I may, without danger of slander, affirm, That those Protestants
which deny Papistry to be a saving Religion, and hold that Papists are not
saved, are neither of the best Learned, nor of the Wisest sort. For if they
were Learned, they would easily gather out of the Doctrine of the Scriptures,
and the Histories of the Christian Church, that to deny Papistry to be a saving
Religion, is to deny Christ, in effect, as I have before showed. And if they
were discreet and wise, they would not so rashly condemn, to the pit of Hell,
the whole Christian World; together with their Forefathers, for so many
hundreds of years, in which Papistry reigned over the World, without any firm
ground, or urgent reason at all. Unless their own mistaking, and ignorance,
must be reputed a firm ground.

For setting these aside, (by which their misinformed, and mis-guided Zeal,
does take Papistry to be that which it is not) what can they bring firm and
solid, to prove that Papistry is not a saving Religion? Will they say, that
Papists are ignorant of, or do not rely upon a certain special Faith, by which
they esteem themselves to be the Elect of God; and to be Cock-sure of
Salvation? Be it so. Neither did the Prophets, nor the Apostles, nor the
Ancient Fathers, rely upon this special Faith, as is evident by their Lives:
For they applied themselves to Holy Works, to much Prayer, to frequent Fasting,
to great Austerity and Mortification, seeking by these means, to make sure
their Vocation, 2 Pet. 1. 10. and really working their Salvation in fear and
trembling, as the Apostle advises, Philip. 2. 12. For all which Labor, Care
and Austerity, this special Faith is a Supersedeas, as is manifest by the Lives
and Actions, of those which rely thereon.

Wherefore, if for want of this Sin-nourishing special Faith, Papists do
perish, both Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles, and the Ancient Fathers; yea all
the Saints and Holy Servants of God, which lived from Adam's time to Luther,
must perish with them. For none of these were acquainted with, or relied upon
this special Faith. Otherwise there would have been clear, and manifest mention
thereof, in the Holy Scriptures; in which the Holy Ghost, not once or twice,
but most frequently would have inculcated the same, if it had been so needful,
that without it, Men could not be saved. But seeing that in all his Divine
Word, he has made no clear mention thereof, Papists cannot be in danger, for
not relying thereon. But rather those which rely thereon, are in manifest
danger of Eternal Perdition; because in so weighty a business, as their
Everlasting Happiness is; they forsaking the received Doctrine of the Christian
World, in the point of Jurisdiction, rely upon a mere chimerical Fiction of
their own, as at their death they will find.

What then; will these Zealous Precisians exclude Papists from Heaven, because
they commit Idolatry? But this foul and foolish Crime, Papists do no where
commit, but in these Men's mistaking Brains, as is evident to all that know what
Papists believe. But Papists, they will say, do Err in diverse points of
Religion; and therefore they cannot be saved. But do not all Churches Err, in
these Men's conceit? Are not all subject to Erring? Let them then either yield,
that Erring Religions are saving; or else let them boldly teach, That Jesus
Christ, has not provided the World of any means of Salvation; seeing he has
not established therein, (as these Men imagine) any Religion, that is not
Erring. By all which it is clear, that in these parts of the World, none do
doubt, but that Papistry is a Saving Religion, saving a few unlearned
Precisians, who doubt of this, but very indiscreetly, as I have showed.

But on the contrary, all the Papists in the World, (who are far more in
number, than the Protestants are, and really far excel them in Learning,) do
not doubt, whether the Protestant Religion be Saving, or no; but most firmly
hold, upon sure and undeceiving Grounds, that it is not; and that therefore no
Man can be Saved, precisely by the help of this Religion. Which makes so many
understanding Men and Women, that know it right well, forsake it,
notwithstanding that it is so easy, and so pleasiing to Flesh and Blood; and
to embrace Papistry, far less agreeable to their Sensual Appetites, with so
great hazard of their Quiet, Preferments, Liberty and Goods. Which certainly
they would never do, but to secure their Souls. Which security, if the
Protestant Religion were able to afford, no Man of Wit, here in England, would
forsake the same, to become a Catholic. But no such security is to be found in
this Religion, but rather certain danger of Eternal Perdition, as all do find,
that thoroughly search into it.

Neither are Papists, for thus Censuring of the Protestant Religion, to be
esteemed less charitable, then those Protestants, which brand not Papistry with
so hard a Censure: For the Case of Papists and Protestants, in this Affair, is
not alike: Because Protestants in believing, are at liberty, according to their
own Positions; in regard, That as they do not hold, that there is upon Earth
any Un-erring Church, whose teaching all are bound to follow, under pain of
Damnanation: So they do not esteem themselves bound to believe strictly, the
teaching of any Church; or to think, that Errors in Points of Faith do endanger
Salvation.

But Papists are not at the like liberty, because they believing, that the
Catholic Church, (which is no other than that Church, which being spread over
the World, is joined in Communion to the Chair of Peter,) cannot Err in her
Doctrine of Faith, by reason of the continual assistance of the Holy Ghost; do
esteem themselves bound to believe as she teaches. And therefore because this
Church, (guided by the Holy Ghost, and directed by the Holy Scriptures,) does
teach, that there is but One Faith, Ephesians. 4. but One Fold, Joh. 10. That
Christian People are bound, under pain of Damnation, to Obey their Lawful
Prelates, Heb. 13. And to hear the Voice of the Church, Matthew. 18. And to
listen to the Ordinary Pastors thereof, Luke 10. And that they are in like sort
bound to beware of false Prophets, that is false Expounders of God's Word; to
avoid Heretical Teachers, such as their Church has declared, Protestant
Teachers to be: For these, and the like respects, Catholics do resolutely
hold, (if they be such as understand their own Religion,) that by the help,
precisely, of the Protestant Religion, no Man can be saved.

Which they hold not for want of Charity, but for Obedience to the Word of God,
and to the True and Catholic Church of Christ. Let not then Protestants blame
Catholics, for believing as they do, seeing the word of God, and so great
Authority does force them thereunto. But rather let them blame themselves, for
following new Teachers, contrary to the Doctrine of the Scriptures; and for
dis-uniting themselves, from the True and Catholic Church of Christ; out of
whose Communion, there is No Salvation, as our Creeds do teach.

By all which, it sees to be clear, that the Old Religion of the Christian
World, called Papistry, wherein assuredly our Forefathers were Saved, is far a
surer way to Eternal Happiness, then the New and Protestant Profession is; in
regard that all Learned Men agree, both Protestants and Papists, that Papistry
is a Saving Religion: Whereas all Learned Papists, (who are far the greater and
the Learneder number,) upon sure grounds affirm, That no Man can be Saved by
the help of the Protestant Religion.

Which being so, I demand first, with what security of Conscience, do
Protestants hate, revile, tread under foot and persecute the Old Religion,
seeing it is a secure way to Salvation, even by the Judgment of all Learned
Protestants? May any Man, without offending God, persecute the Children of God,
and seek to ruin that Religion, by which the Holy Ghost does Sanctify and
Save Souls? Can this be accounted Charity toward God, Charity toward our
Neighbor? Nay, seeing that Protestants cannot deny, but that it is far the
securer, and surer way to Eternal Happiness, to live and dye Papists, than to
live and dye Protestants; with what Christian Piety, do Persecuting
Protestants, afflict Catholics, for taking, in the great Affair of Salvation,)
the surer and securer way?

Secondly, I demand, what Light of Reason, what Duty toward God, what Charity
toward themselves, does lead Protestants, not to take the surer way for their
own Salvation, they having so just cause to doubt, that their New Protestant
Profession, is not secure? Do they not know, that many Learned Catholics have
endured Imprisonments, Fetters, Tortures, Cruel Butchering of their Bodies, and
loss of their Lives, rather than they would hazard their Souls, in the
Protestant Religion? Do they not see, that many Prudent, understanding,
Generous, and Noble Catholics, did suffer disgrace, endured Vexations,
sustained the Abridging of their Liberties, and loss of their Goods, rather
than they would hazard their Souls among them?

Moreover, do they not see, how little Unity in Doctrine, how little Sanctity
of Life, how small Resemblance, of the holy Life and Virtues of Christ, and of
his Apostles, how little immitation of the Ancient Fathers, there is in the
Teachers, and prime Professors of the Protestant Religion? Do they not know how
great a decay of Humility, of Charity, of Chastity, of Sobriety, of
Neighborhood, of Justice, of Fidelity, of Conseience, the Protestant Belief
has brought into the World? Do they not know, that false Teachers, are known
by their Fruits? And that there is but One Truth? All this they know and see;
and therefore if they will but consult with reason, and not be lead by fancy,
or blinded by affection; they cannot but judge, that to live and dye in the New
and Protestant Religion, is far less secure, for their Souls, then to live and
dye in the Old and Catholic Faith: And consequently, they cannot but know,
that the tender care, which they are bound to have of their own Souls, and of
the Eternal Salvation of them, does put upon them a great obligation to become
Catholics, and to return to the Faith of their Forefathers, so to secure
those their most precious Jewels; which in their New Profession can never be
truly secured, as the Doctrine of this little Treatise does clearly
demonstrate. But rather they lie exposed most certainly to the misery of
Eternal Perdition; whereas in the Catholic Profession, they may certainly
secure them, by the Judgment, not only of the whole Catholic Church of
Christ; but also of all Learned Protestants.

To the Arguments, which support the strength of this Treatise, I could add
others not of Inferior force, to demonstrate, the Happiness of Catholics, the
Unhappiness and danger of Protestants, arising from their Faith and Religion.
But that which has been said is abundantly sufficient, to give Light to all,
who willingly will not be blind. And therefore I here end my present endeavors
for Truth and Peace: To which if any Protestant will frame an Answer.

I require of him First, that he abstain from Railing. Secondly, That he
abstain from Feigning, and from helping his Cause by Impostures. Thirdly, That
by vain Impertinencies, and Retorical Digressions, he seek not to lose and to
dazzle the Eyes, of Weak and less Judicious Readers. Fourthly, That he make not
vain Flourishes, by Citing some broken, or mistaken Sentences, out of the
Ancient Fathers, against me. For I will not allow him to meddle with them, but
upon two conditions. The one is, that he shall Tie himself, and his Church, to
stand to the Arbitriment, of those clear Lights of the Church of Christ, in
points Controverted betwixt Catholics and Protestants. For if he, will not be
stinted by them, why should I?

The other is, that he shall allow, the Ordinary Doctors and Pastors of the
present Catholic Church, to be of equal Authority, with those Ancient
Worthies, in matters appertaining to Faith; not in matters Historical. For
those Ancients, are better VVitnesses, of what the Apostles Taught and
Practiced, than those which now live can be: But yet they are not surer
Interpreters of Gods Word, in matters of Faith; nor surer Explicators, and
Proposers of the Articles, of the same Faith, than the present Doctors and
Pastors of the Church are.

This may seem to some a Paradox; and yet it is no more, then what the Rules of
True Theology, do warrant me to affirm. For those Ancient Doctors, were not
sure Guides in matters of Religion, by the strength of their own Wits, or
Excellency of their Learning, but by the assistance of the Holy Ghost; which
necessary assistance, in explaining and proposing Articles of Faith, the
Ordinary Doctors and Pastors of the present Church, have equally with them. For
Christ did not Promise, that the Gates of Hell should not prevail against his
Church, that the Holy Ghost should abide with the Apostles, and their
Successors, and Teach them all Truth, for four and five hundred years: Or for
the time of the Primitive Church; but even for ever. And therefore the ordinary
Doctors and Pastors of all Ages, are equally assisted by the Holy Ghost, and
equally free from erring in mattters of Faith.

Fifthly, I require, That my Antagonist assail me with no other Weapons, than
what the Light of Reason, and the express Text of Gods Word, will furnish him
withal: The express Text I say, of God's Word: for I will not allow him to
Interpret- Or accept of his Interpretation, against the Interpretation of the
Ancient Fathers, of the General Councels, of the ever Visible Church of Christ,
unless he can prove, by manifest Miracles, that God has sent him into the
World, to read us a new Divinity, and to Interpret his Divine Word, otherwise
than his Ancient Pastors have done. Which things if he cannot perform, let him
in silence attend to his own Salvation: and making use of that Knowledge, which
he may learn out of this Treatise, let him timely return to the Roman Church,
out of whose Communion most certainly, he will never be able to obtain
Salvation.

FINIS.
THE APPENDIX.
Whether the Apostles were Protestants, or no.

PRotestants generally conceive, and believe, that Jesus Christ and his
Apostles Preached and planted in the World, the Protestant Religion, even the
very self-same, that Protestants now believe and practice; and that they were
really Protestants, not in Name, but in their Belief and Practice: And that
they instituted their Disciples and Followers, that is, the first Christians,
in the self-same Liberty of Gospel, which Protestants now follow; and charged
them, that with all Care and Diligence, they should deliver this sweet and
easy Religion (which is so pleasing to Flesh and Blood) to those, who were to
succeed them; that so for ever it might be continued in the World, for the
Salvation of Mankind.

Thus, I say, do Protestants generally conceive; and upon the Truth of this
Conceit, they hazard their Souls, notwithstanding that they are not agreed,
nor cannot yet agree among themselves, (which makes the matter very strange,
and the conceit wholly improbable) whether the Apostles in their Belief and
Practice of Religion, were Lutherans, or Anabaptists, or Swinglians, or
Calvinists, or New Arians, or Quakers, or Arminians, or Parliamentary
Pretestants, for each of these sorts or Branches of Protestants, lay Claim to
the Apostles: and the Learned of each sort, do bear their Followers in hand,
That the Doctrine which they Teach, is the pure Light of the Gospel, even the
self-same, that the Blessed Apostles Believed, Taught, and practiced: and of
this they are all certain alike.

And so the conceit of Saxony, Denmark, Sweden, is, that the Apostles were
Lutherans. The Conceit of some of the Cantons of Switzerland is, that they
were Swinglians. The Conceit of many in Moravia, and in Holland, is, that they
were Anabaptists. The Conceit of Geneva, of Scotland, of Puritans of England,
and of some parts of Germany, is, that they were Calvinists. The Conceit of
diverse in England and Holland, is, that they were Quakers: And the Conceit of
the Protestant Church of England, is, that the Apostles were of the same
Belief, and practiced the same Worship of God, that by Act of Parliament, is
here settled and established.

But to speak the Truth, as it is impossible, that the Apostles should be of
all these Beliefs; so it is more than probable, that they were of none of them;
but rather, that all these Beliefs are mere conjectural Conceits of new
Teachers, who are wholly uncertain of what Belief the Apostles were. For if
they were certain, that the Apostles were of some one of these Beliefs, they
would all, doubtless, be of the same. But the Learned of the Protestants, being
indeed altogether uncertain, and really ignorant of the Faith and Practice of
the Apostles, by guessing thereat, so near as they can, they have divided
themselves into so many Branches, and into so many contrary Faiths and
practices; each of them having nothing, but his own conjecture, to lead him to
the true Light of the Gospel, and to the right Religion of the Apostles.

But notwithstanding, that Protestants do thus differ about Religion; and are
uncertain of the Faith and practice of the Apostles: Yet they will not,
forsooth, have it denied, but that the Apostles were Protestants; and that they
planted in the World, the Protestant Religion. And so it must be supposed, that
they Taught: That we are justified by Faith only: That we have not Free Will in
the works of Grace: That our best Works are impure, and stained with Sin: That
we do not merit by them, either Increase of Grace, or Glory: That by Faith in
Christ, we are freed from the Yoke of the Law, which is such as no man can
keep; and therefore Christ, having fulfilled it for us, our breach thereof,
does neither wound the Conscience, nor endanger the Soul.

Moreover, according to this supposed Doctrine of the Apostles, we are not
bound to confess our Sins to the Priests of God's Church: or to do penance for
them: no Works of ours being truly satisfactory: Neither is Sin punished any
where after this Life, but in Hell; and therefore we need not fear any purging
Flames, Christ having paid for all. Furthermore, we are not bound in Conscience
to Fast, or to abstain from Flesh, upon certain days, according as the Church
does appoint, this being contrary to the Liberty of the Gospel. It is likewise,
vain, foolish, superstitious, to endeavor to gain Heaven by Prayer, Fasting,
Alms-deeds; by a Holy and mortified Life; or to Vow Poverty, Chastity, and
Obedience; or to esteem perpetual Virginity Consecrated to God, better, more
noble, and more pleasing to God, than Marriage.

Again, according to the same supposed Apostolical Doctrine, the Church of
Christ is subject to Erring, in her Doctrine of Faith; and therefore we are not
tied, to believe as she Teaches, further than we esteem her Doctrine, to agree
with the written Word: for to be so tied, is against the Liberty of the Gospel.
Against which Liberty also it is, that Bishops and Priests, should be tied to
live Chaste and Single Lives. Lastly, all sorts of Protestants, saving
Lutherans, esteem the Apostles to have believed, and taught that the Eucharist
is not the true Body and Blood of Christ, but a Figure or Remembrance thereof.
And so they consequently hold, that Christ left no true and proper Sacrifice to
be daily offered in his Church; nor no true Priesthood which cannot subsist
without a true Sacrifice.

This is the Conceit of Protestants in general, real, or pretended: Real, it
may be, of the ignorant and simple: but pretended only, I believe, by the
Understanding and Learned: For these cannot but know, that if the Apostles
indeed, had been Protestants, and really had Preached, spread, and settled
amongst the Nations of the Earth (to which they Preached in Asia, Europe, and
Africa) the Protestant Religion, which is so easy and so pleasing to Flesh and
Blood; that the same had continued infallibly, at least for some while, in the
following Ages; and that it could not possibly, morally speaking; so, upon the
sudden, have been cast aside, and extinguished, in all places at once, but that
there would have remained illustrious Memory thereof, at least in some of the
primordial Churches; in some of the Countries, Provinces, or Cities, where the
Apostles Preached. This I think, no understanding man will deny.

1. Because the first Christians were zealous Followers, and Imitators of the
Doctrine, and manners of the Apostles, of whom they had a high esteem; as also
of their Doctrine, which they knew the Apostles had confirmed, by many true and
Divine Miracles.

2. Because they were very careful of their own Salvation, as is evident, by
their admirable Constancy, in suffering Losses, Tribulations, Torments, yea
terrible Deaths in the cruel and bloody Persecutions raised against them by the
Roman Emperors, for the space almost of Three Hundred Years. How then is it
likely, if thus they suffered to save their Souls, that they would wilfully
cast them away, by forsaking the true Religion of Christ, which his Blessed
Apostles had planted, and so firmly settled amongst them, to follow another of
their own inventing? Especially seeing, that living so near the time of our
Savior, and of his Apostles, they could not be ignorant, what Religion, He and
They, had Taught and Planted. Did they more esteem of the Religion of Christ,
than of all their Worldly Contents, and prefer the Profession thereof, before
their own Lives, and yet did they wittingly, and willingly abandon, and forsake
it, not for the good and safety, but even to the certain perdition of their
Souls? Who will so judge, but misled, and blinded Souls?

3. Because such a change as this, in the Religion of Christ, which is the
Heart and Marrow of his Church, is directly contrary to the predictions of the
Prophets, and Promises of Christ himself. For Daniel foretold, cap. 2. and cap.
7. That the Kingdom, that is, the Church of Christ, should stand for ever, and
should never be corrupted. Isaias foretold, cap. 59. that the Word and Spirit
of God, should never depart from the mouth, that is, from the teaching of the
Church. Christ promised, Mat. 16. that the Gates of Hell should never prevail
against his Church: that the Holy Ghost should abide with his Apostles for
ever, that is, with them and their Successors, even to the end of the World,
Joh. cap. 14. and should teach them all truth, John, cap. 16. All which had
been false, if the Protestant Religion, planted by Christ and his Apostles, by
the Folly and Wickedness of the Successors of the same Apostles, had been
rejected and abandoned, as Protestants imagine, and Papistry brought in,
instead thereof.

5. The impossibility of such a change, is clearly showed, and plainly
convinced, out of the natural Inclination, and common custom, of all Societies
of men; which is, as evident experience does teach, rather to descend, then
ascend; rather to fall, than to rise; rather to slide to looseness, and to more
liberty, than to aspire to more strictness, and to greater Sanctity; unless the
special Grace of God do stay them, and incite, and stir them up, which must not
be here admitted of; because God by his Grace, does not use to draw men from
the pure Light of the Gospel, to embrace false and erroneous Doctrine, and to
follow superstitious and Idolatrous practices; as Protestants imagine
Christians to have been drawn in the primitive Church. And therefore it cannot
be denied, with any color of Truth, but that good Discipline, Conscientious
Dealing, virtuous courses, strictness of Life, and the practice of Godly
Actions, do rather decay by tract of time, than get ground, and increase in all
Communities and Societies of Men: And on the contrary, Liberty, Ease, Idleness,
Sensuality, do ever rather increase, than decay, and vanish away of themselves,
as evident experience does teach: For as the Poet says, tendimus in vetitum
semper cupimusque negata: We tend toward things forbidden still, and covet
things denied.

This is manifest; First, by the decay of good Order, of honest and upright
dealing in Commonwealths; which has caused so many new Laws, so many new
Orders and Statutes, to have been made, Decreed and Enacted by Supreme
Authority, to repress the bad and vicious Inclinations of men.

2. By the decay of Ecclesiastical Discipline, from time to time, in the Church
of Christ, which has occasioned the Pious Endeavors of so many Zealous and
Apostolical Preachers, of so many Holy Biships, of so many Godly Emperors,
Kings and Princes, to reform and restore the same, by the help of General, of
National, of Provincial Councils.

3. By that, which has happened to most of the Religious Orders of the
Catholic Church: For although these Holy Congregations, have ever begun with
great Zeal and Fervor, and have been furnished with special Helps to continue
the same; yet through Humane Frailty, by tract of time, they have so fallen
off, that Reformation has often been needful.

4. In Cities, in Colleges, in particular Families, Reformation is often, and
vigilance of Superiors, is ever needful. Yea, who is it, though never so
Saintly, though never so well inclined and accustomed to Virtue, that finds
not, that his Inclinations have ever need of repressing, and his Manners often
of Refining?

5. The same appears evidently in all the Nations of the Earth, which
hitherto have been Converted to Christ, which ever, by degrees, fall from their
first Fervor, Zeal, and Devotion, of which we have a clear example in the Word
of God, Rev. 2. 4. I have against thee, says Christ to the Bishop and Church
of Ephesus, a few things, because thou have left thy first charity: Be mindful
therefore from whence thou art fallen, and do penance, and do thy first Works,
etc. If Penance was needful so quickly; if even in the times of the Apostles,
Charity, Zeal, Fervor, Sanctity, decayed among Christian people, how much more
afterward, in the Ages following?

How then is it so much as probable, yea rather, how is it not altogether
improbable, and even incredible, that the Christians of the Primitive Church,
through all the World, of themselves, of their own accord, without any Warrant
from Christ and his Apostles, but rather contrary to His, and their Doctrine
and Practice, without any good to themselves, yea even contrary to the Eternal
Good, and safety of their Souls; did cast aside, fall from, abandon the easy,
belly-pleasing, and sweet liberty of the Protestant Gospel, to embrace and
practice the hard, harsh, austere, and mortifying Discipline of Papistry.

In such sort, that neglecting the Doctrine of Christ and his Apostles, and the
example of their Lives, yet fresh in memory amongst them, they fell to believe,
contrary thereunto, as Protestants imagine, that we are justified, not by Faith
only, but by Faith, Hope, Charity, and other Divine Virtues; that we have
Free Will in the Works of Grace; that Works of Grace, done in the state of
Grace, do truly merit the increase of Grace and of Glory; That we are bound
under pain of Damnation, to keep the Commandments of God, by abstaining from
all great and mortal Sins, such, as are the Profession of false Religions, the
denial of the Truth, Perjury, Murder, Fornication, Theft, in a notable
quantity, Cousenage, Usury, and the like; that we are able to keep them, by the
help of Divine Grace; of which God, for the merits of our Savior, does measure
to every Man a sufficient quantity.

That we are bound, under pain of Damnation, to Confess all our mortal Sins, so
far forth as with reasonable Diligence, we can call to mind, to some lawful
Priest or other; That we are bound under the same Penalty, to restore all Goods
and Lands unlawfully gotten; to Fast, and to abstain from Flesh, as the Church
appoints and commands; That ordinarily, when our Sins are forgiven, God
does reserve some Temporal Pain, or Punishment, for which (if we get it not
released in this Life, by Prayer, Fasting, Alms-deeds, and other holy,
laborious, and penitential works) we shall suffer terribly, in the purging Fire
of the next. That to Vow perpetual Poverty, Chastity, and Obedience, is very
meritorious and pleasing to God; That Virginity vowed and Consecrated to God,
is better than Matrimony; That Bishops and Priests ought to live chaste and
single Lives.

That the Body and Blood of Christ is truly and really in the Blessed
Sacrament, which Sacrament is also truly and properly a Sacrifice, Christ
therein being truly offered, to his Heavenly Father, in an unbloody manner,
under the forms of Bread and Wine; which Sacrifice does not only represent the
Sacrifice of the Cross, but it does also copiously apply the same to those, for
whom it is Offered, both as it is impetratory, and also as it is satisfactory:
That it is not lawful, to interpret the Scriptures, contrary to the
Interpretation of the Church; or to reject any parts thereof by Her approved:
But in this, and in all other things, appertaining to Faith and Religion, we
are bound under pain of Damnation, to submit our Judgments to the Teaching of
the Church, and to believe as She does direct us.

These, and the like Points, professed now in the Roman Church, were in
practice amongst the Primitive Christians, which lived presently after the
Apostles, as is manifest, not only by the Records of Antiquity, but also by
their Practice, which clearly shows their Faith, For Fasting, the keeping of
Lent, the abstaining from Flesh on Fridays, the Vowing of Virginity, of
perpetual Chastity, Monastical Discipline, the wearing of Hair-cloth, and other
like Austerities, the single Life of the Clergy, and the like, were in use, and
did wonderfully flourish amongst them. Insomuch, that Sebastianus Francus, a
Learned Anabaptist, searching most curiously among the Writers of former Ages,
after the Protestant Religion, and finding no Footsteps thereof in all
Antiquity, even up to the Apostles times, he freely and boldly affirms, in
his Epistle, of abrogating all Ecclesiastical Statutes, That presently after
the Apostles times, all things were turned upside down, etc. and that for
certain, through the work of Antichrist, the External Church, together with the
Faith and Sacraments, vanished away, presently after the Apostles departure.
Into which Blasphemy, this Learned Protestant would never have fallen, if he
could have found any certain signs of the Protestant Religion among the
Primitive Christians, which lived presently after the Apostles: or could have
inclined his Conscience to outface the matter, with stout lying, as many of his
Fellows do, to conceal the Truth in this point, from the Eyes of well-meaning
People.

The same in effect, is affirmed by Coelius Secundus Curio, a Learned
Protestant also, in his Book of the Amplitude of the Kingdom of God, Lib. I.
page 43. Are we ignorant, says he, in how great Darkness and Blindness the
World has continued, almost from the Apostles Age, to these our times, in
which, beyond all expectation, the Lord has begun to manifest himself? The
Protestant Author of the Book Entitled, Antichristus, or Prognostica finis
mundi, page 13. affirms likewise, That from the Apostles times, till Luther,
the Gospel had never open passage.

To that there can no doubt be made, but that the first Christians, who lived
presently after the Apostles, did forsake and abandon the easy, pleasing, and
sweet Liberty of the Protestant Religion (if ever they were taught it by the
Apostles) and fell of themselves, through all the world, to believe and
practice the hard and harsh Discipline of Papistry, contrary to the custom of
Mankind. The which how improbable; yea, how impossible it is? Who is so
senseless, that he does not see? Which improbability, and moral impossibility,
will appear yet much more clearly; if we take into our consideration, that not
only a few ignorant People, must be thought, thus to have neglected and
abandoned the Doctrine and Discipline of Christ, and of his Apostles, (if that
indeed was such, as is now believed and practiced by Protestants) and to have
preferred, without any necessity, without any Utility, yea, with manifest peril
of their Souls, Fasting before Feasting; Penance before Pleasure; Labor
before Ease; course Diet before Dainties; hard Couches before Beds of Down;
rough Hair-cloth before soft clothing; a mortified, chaste, and single Life,
before the delights of Wedlock; seeking foolishly, as Protestants imagine, to
curb and bring under the Appetites of the Flesh, and to rid themselves of the
molesting temptations thereof, rather by severe, harsh, and cruel usage of
their Bodies, than by the pleasing remedy of a Female Consort, as Protestant
Ministers use to do.

Not only, I say, the ignorant and vulgar sort, must be thought, thus to have
neglected the sweet liberty of the Protestant Gospel (if ever the Apostles had
settled them in it) and to have embraced foolishly and madly the hard and
severe Discipline of Papistry: but the better sort also, even the Learned and
Holy Fathers of the primitive Church, such as were Dionisius, Ignatius,
Cyprian, Athanasius, Basil the Great, Gregory the Divine, Chrysostom, Hierom,
Ambrose, Augustine, and others, the chief and principal Lights (after the
Apostles) of the Church of Christ. All which were either real Practisers, or
Praisers of Monastical Discipline, of the chaste and single life, of vowed
Virginity, and the like; which they would never have done most certainly, if
these things had been contrary to the Doctrine and practice of Christ, and of
the Apostles, and against the true liberty of his Divine Gospel, of which they
could not be ignorant, being so excellently skilled in the Scriptures as they
were; and living so near the times of those Blessed Founders of the Christian
Religion; as they did.

And so the Doctrine and Discipline of the Ancient Fathers, and of the
Christians of the primitive Church, (which really was the same in substance,
that is now in use in the Roman Church) do evidently convince, that the
Apostles were not Protestants, neither in Doctrine, nor in Practice; but
rather, that truly and really they were Papists, in regard that they were
strict Practisers and Teachers of those many points in Papistry, which so
clearly shined in their Disciples and Successors, the Pastors and People of the
primitive Church: which is so certain out of the Doctrine of the Ancient
Fathers, and other Records of Antiquity, that it cannot be denied, with any
color of Truth. And therefore the Conceit of those Protestants, who imagine,
that the Apostles practiced and taught the easy Discipline and Belly-pleasing
liberty of their new Gospel, is but a mere fancy, a vain and empty Dream, there
being no colorable ground thereof at all: neither in the Word of God; nor in
the Records of Antiquity.

Out of which Records, how little may be expected, to prove that the Apostles
were Protestants, does sufficiently appear, by that which has been said: For
if by them it does appear, as most certainly it does, that much Fasting, great
austerity of life, Monastical Discipline, the vowing of Virginity, of perpetual
chastity, and single life in the Clergy, did greatly flourish among the first
Christians; what Hop can there be, to gather from thence, that the Apostles
were Protestants? certainly, none at all.

And as for the Scriptures, as from thence, we may easily gather, that the
Apostles were Papists: So we find not there the least Sign, that they were
Protestants. For if, as Reason dictates, we will judge of their Faith by their
practice; we cannot admit, that in Faith they were like the Protestants,
seeing, that in their practice they were plainly Papists. For they lived
perpetually Chaste; yea, and if ever any other, they also Guelded themselves
for the Kingdom of Heaven, by a Vow of perpetual chastity, according to the
Counsel of our Savior, given Matthew. 19. 12. They forsook all to follow Christ,
and to attain to perfection, according also to the Counsel of Christ given,
Matthew. 19. 21. as Saint Peter does confidently profess, Matthew. 19. 27. whereby
they practiced both Poverty and Obedience: Poverty, in forsaking all:
Obedience, in following Christ: wherein they were so exact, that they doubted
not at his appointment, to leave both Country and Friends, and to expose both
themselves and their Lives to infinite Labors and Hazards; while they
enterprized the Conversion of the Gentiles from their carnal and inveterate
Idolatry, to the Holy and Divine Religion of Christ. And therefore we may truly
say, that the Apostles were Religious Men, even such as are in the Catholic
Church, practicing Poverty, Chastity, and Obedience, and imitating thereby, in
an excellent manner, their Blessed Master, who was so poor, that he had not
whereon to repose his Head, Luke 9. 58. So Chaste, and so great a Friend of
Chastity, that even he would be born of a Virgin: and so Obedient (as he was
Man) to his Heavenly Father, that he gave his Life at his appointment, for the
Redemption and Salvation of Mankind, Philip. 2. 8. By the practices of which
excellent Virtues, this Blessed Lord laid the Foundation, of the Regular, or
Religious Life (consisting chiefly in the profession and due observance, of
perpetual Poverty, Chastity, and Obedience) so much practiced afterward in his
Church: For from him, as from the Original Fountain, the same has hitherto
flowed, and does yet flow with so full a Stream, in his true and Catholic
Church: For the Vowing of these things had never been of so high esteem, and of
so frequent use among the Ancient and Learned Fathers, and the choicest pieces
of Christian Sanctity, had it not been the nearest imitation of the Holy and
mortified Life of Christ: and of the practice of the Apostles, of John the
Baptist, of Elias.

To which practice of the Apostles, if we add their frequent Praying, Act. 2.
42. Act. 12. 5. Act. 10. 9. and their often Watching, and much Fasting, Act.
14. 22. 2 Cor. 6. 5. 2 Cor. 11. 27. it will manifestly appear, that they were
as far from being Protestants, as Monks and Friars now are: These things being
wholly out of use amongst Protestants, and not only contrary to the Liberty of
their new Gospel, but even fruitless, vain, superstious toys, according to the
Tenets and Principles thereof. By all which it seems to be manifestly
Convinced, that the Apostles of our Savior were not Protestants, but rather
truly and really Papists, both in their Belief and practice; their outward
practice showing their inward Belief, according to that of our Savior: Out of
the abundance of the Heart the mouth speaks, Mat. 12. 34.

But if any Protestants will be yet so wilful, that he will maintain, against
manifest Reason, that the Protestant Religion was in the times of the Apostles,
though afterward it appeared not in the World, till Luther revived it: I must
tell him, that this does not only prove, that the Protestant Religion is not
the true Religion of Christ, which must ever be extant in the World, for the
Salvation of Souls: but further also it shows, that it is a very vile and
naughty Religion; seeing the whole Christian World did so soon forsake and cast
it aside: notwithstanding, that it is so easy and so pleasing to the Carnal
Appetites of men. And so Protestants cannot reap much true comfort, by
imagining, that their Religion was in the times of the Apostles; seeing all the
Ancient Saints and Learned Fathers, yea, even the whole Christian World thought
it not worth the regarding.

Books Printed, and sold by Nathaniel Thompson, at the Entrance into the Old
Spring-Garden near Charing Cross.
A Manual of Controversies, clearly demonstrating the Truth of Catholic
Religion, By Texts of Holy Scripture, Councils of all Ages, Fathers of the
first 500 years, Common Sense and Reason And fully Answering the principal
Objections of Protestants, and all other Sectaries. Price bound 1. s. 6. d.

A Manual of Devout Prayers, Fitted for all Persons and Occasions. To which is
added the Rosary, Latin and English, Prayers to the Blessed Virgin Mary, etc.
The Prayers of St. Bridget, and other most devout Prayers upon several
occasions, never before published. With a Catholic Calendar for the year of
our Lord, 1686.

A most excellent way of Hearing Mass, with profit and Devotion Containing the
whole Mass in Latin and English; with diverse choice select Prayers before and
after Confession and Communion: And an Examen of Conscience, To which is added
the Rosary of our Blessed Lady, Prayers to the Blessed Virgin Mary, the Prayers
of St. Bridget, etc. And several other most Devout Prayers to our Blessed
Redeemer. Also the Vespers or Even-Song, in Latin and English, as it is Sung
in all Catholic Churches. Newly Corrected.

A Collection of 86. Loyal Poems, all of them Written upon the two late Plots,
viz. The horrid Salamanca Plot in 1678. and the present Fanatical Conspiracy in
1683. To which is added Advice to the Carver, Written on the Death of the ^ate
Lord Stafford. With several Poems on Their Majesty's Coronation, never before
published. The second Edition. Collected by N. T. Price Bound 2 s.

A choice Collection of 180 Loyal Songs, all of them written since the two l^te
Plots, etc. Intermixed with some new Love Songs. With a Table to find every
Song. To which is added, the Musical Notes to each Song. The third Edit^^n with
many Additions. Price 2 s.

The Lawyer Out-lawed; or a brief Answer to Mr. Hunt's Defense of the Charter.
With some useful Remarks on the Commons proceedings in the last Parliament at
Westminster, in a Letter to a Friend. Price 6 d.

Janua Scientiarum; Or, a Compendious Introduction to Geography, Chronology,
Government, History, Philosophy; and all gentile sorts of LITERATURE. Price
Bound 1 s.

The State of the Church Affairs in this Isaldn of Great Britain, under the
Government of the Romans and British Kings: Written by a Person of Quality: And
published by Authority: price 4 s.

The Succession of the Church and Sacraments, from Christ and his Apostles to
the end of the World, cleared, and stated, according to the Ancient Doctrine of
the Greek and Latin Churches: price 6 d.

A brief Explanation of several Mysteries of the H. Mass, and of the Actions of
the Priest Celebrating: Very necessary for all Roman Cacholicks, for the better
understanding thereof: Together with certain Reflections upon the Apostles
Creed, touching the B. Sacrament; and also diverse Meditations and Prayers both
before and after Communion: price 1 s.

Popery Anatomised: Or the Papists cleared from the false Aspersion of
Idolatry: price 4 d.

A Papist Misrepresented and Represented: Or a twofold Character of Popery,
etc. price 1 s.

Ordo Recitandi Divini Officii, pro Anno Domini 1687. price 6 d.

A Net for the Fishers of Men; being the same which Christ gave to his
Apostles; Wherein the points controverted betwixt Catholics and all Sectaries,
are briefly vindicated by way of Dilemma: By two Gentlemen Converts: price 4 d:

An Explanation of the Holy Ornaments and Ceremonies which the Priest uses at
Mass: price 2 d.

A Sermon Preached before the King and Queen in their Majesty's Chapel at St.
James', on Sunday, October. 24. 1686. By the Reverend Father Dom. W. Marsh, Monk
of the Holy Order of St. Benedict: Chaplain in Ordinary to his Majesty.
Published by his Majesty's Command: price 6 d.

A Sermon Preached before their Majesty's in their Chapel at St. Jamee's the
25th Sunday after Pentcost, Nov. 17. 1686. By John Dormer of the Society of
Jesus: price 6 d.

A Sermon Preached before their Majesty's in their Chapel at St. James's the 2
d Sunday in Advent: Dec. 6. 1686. By John Dormer of the Society of Jesus: price
6 d.

A Sermon of Judgment Preached before the Queen Dowager in Her Majesty's
Chapel at Somerset House, on the first Sunday in Advent, being the 27th of
November, 1686. By John Dormer of the Society of Jesus: price 6 d. All
Published by his Majesty's Command.

A Sermon Preached before the King and Queen at their Chapel at St. James's,
on the Feast of the Holy Patriarch St. Bennet. By J. Cross of the Holy Order of
St. Francis.

An Apology for the Contemplations on the Life and Glory of the Holy Mother of
JESUS, showing the Innocence, Equity, and Antiquity of the Honor and
Veneration giveen to Her by the Holy Catholic Church. By J. C.

FINIS.

