A BRIEF TREATISE Of the NATURE, CAUSES, SIGNS, PRESERVATION FROM, AND CURE OF
THE Pestilence.

Collected by W. KEMP, Mr. of Arts.

LONDON, Printed for, and are to be sold by D. Kemp, at his Shop at the
Salutation near Hatton-Garden in Holborn. MDCLXV.

TO THE Kings Most Excellent Majesty CHARLES THE SECOND, By the Grace of God,
King of England, Scotland, France, and Ireland; Defender of the Faith, etc.
Most Dread and Gracious Sovereign:
THE Glorious Sun, who communicates his beams and light, not only to the Stars
and Heavens where he does reside, but also to the Air and Water, and the
remotest part of the Earth, where the lowest shrubs are cherished with his
Influence, is a fit Emblem of your Majesty whose pious care was expressed not
only for the Nobles and Courtiers, that have the honor to be near your
Person; but also for the Commons and inferior people, that have the happiness
to be in your mind, in appointing and accepting the directions of the Learned
College of London, for the cure of, and preservation from the Pestilence.

In a great fire begun in the City, when the Sheriffs and other Officers are
principally called to the quenching of it, and though they discharge their
places with singular discretion and fidelity, yet many private persons of an
active and public spirit, are admitted to yield their best assistance.

In an Invasion of a foreign Enemy, or Insurrection of a Domestic Rebel,
others may take Arms besides the Lifeguard and Trayn'd-Bands.

The Plague is a Fire that is not easily quenched, an Enemy which the Undaunted
Valor of the Invincible English Nation, is neither able nor willing to
encounter with. For their sakes these Directions are published and presented at
your Majesty's Feet, and may be useful not only for the cure of those at Land,
but also for the preservation of them at Sea; in both which places your Majesty
has many thousands, in whose breasts the true English good natured and loyal
qualities of Love and Fear, Valor and Obedience, do most religiously meet, and
who would willingly part with* not only their Lives, but even their own
^ssence, to add to the greatness of their Sovereign: of which number is he, who
daily prays that your Majesty may obtain all your Desires from Heaven, and be
obeyed in all your Commands on Earth; that being safely guarded from all
dangers and diseases, you may live to see your Magnificent Intentions take
effect, not only for the good of England, but of all Christendom, Africa, and
the Indies, and bless the Age we live in, with the Miracles of your Wisdom and
Government:

Your Majesty's most Loyal Subject, and humble Servant, W. KEMP.

OF The Pestilence.
OF all Diseases whereunto the Body of Man is subject, the Plague is one of the
most venomous and most infectious, peculiarly opposite to the heart, consuming
the Vital Spirits, destroying the natural heat, and corrupting the humors,
usually attended with a Fever, and accompanied with variety of most grievous
and pernicious symptoms, and most commonly ending in Death.

Of the Causes of the Pestilence.
The Cause of the Pestilence is either
Supernatural, Or Natural.
1. Supernatural, When without the concurrence of Natural Causes, it is
immediately and extraordinarily sent from God, as a just punishment for the
sins of Mankind; and this not only Jews and Christians, but even Heathens,
Priests, Poets, Philosophers, and Physicians, have acknowledged in their
Writings.

Who can choose but with admiration adore his Almighty Power, who if he will
build, creates a World; if he rewards, it is with Paradise; if he will protect
his People, there is a Pillar of Fire by Night, and a Cloud by Day, to attend
them; the Wilderness shall feast them with Quails and Manna, the Rocks remove
their station, and give them drink, the Sea opens to yield them passage, the
Sun and Moon stay their Courses to enlarge and end their Victories.

But if he will punish, he sends a Deluge and drowns the World, Fire and
Brimstone descend from Heaven, the Elements are the Marshals of his Camps, all
Creatures are his Host, the Angels march in the Head of his Troops, whereof he
has thousand thousands that stand before him, and ten thousand times ten
thousand that minister unto him; one whereof slew the First born of every House
in Egypt in one Evening, threescore and ten thousand of the Israelites in three
days, and one hundred fourscore and five thousand of the Assyrians in one
Night.

If he send the Pestilence, as when the Israelites murmured, or David numbered
the People, there is no natural Balm of Gilead of sufficient virtue to preserve
from it, or recover of it: If Solomon had been then alive, and made an Antidote
of all his Gold that came from Ophyr, or extracted the quintessence of all
those Herbs whereof he knew the several operations, it would have availed no
more for the preserving the Israelites, than the fortification of Sennacheribs
Camp defended the Assyrians.

Can any thing help Nature against the God of Nature? Can man think to protect
himself with Medicines fetched from Vegetables, Minerals, or Animals? would they
not rather prove his Enemies, and sooner do him hurt, than afford him help? Was
not one of the greatest, Pope Adrian, killed with a fly? One of the wittiest,
Anacreon, choked with a raisin stone? One of the proudest, Herod, devoured
with lice?

But blessed be his glorious Name, his Clemency has not left us destitute, but
revealed to us supernatural Remedies, Faith and Repentance, Prayer and
Patience; which though not prescribed by Galen or Hyppocrates, nor found out by
Paracelsus, nor sold by Chemists or Apothecaries, are revealed by God himself,
approved by the Prophets and Apostles, and may be had for asking, and never
failed those that used them.

Many Learned Physicians have written of the Theory and Practice of Physic,
and experienced Doctors have published the Observations which they have met with
in the cure of Diseases, searched into the Secrets of Nature, discovered the
Virtues of Herbs, treated of the Preparations of Minerals, inquired into the
Operations of Animals, Merchants have brought Druggs from the Indies, Rarities
have been sought in the Wilderness, Pearls have been dived for in the bottom of
the Sea, the bowels of the Earth have been dug out, the Universe has been
rifled, the whole Creation ransackt; and yet not one Medicine found out to
preserve the Doctor, or make one Patient Immortal. The Imperial Crown cannot
cure the Headache, nor the Golden Garter keep away the Gowt. The best
disciplined and Victorious Armies, the most Invincible Navies, the best fenced
Cities, are not able to protect from Ordinary, much less from Supernatural
Maladies.

But these Celestial and Supernatural Medicines are of a far more Noble and
Certain Operation, and if any may be called (...) The Hands of God, these are
they. Faith brings to your help Manus Christi, better than all Confections, it
applies the Lignum Vitae of the Cross, of more effectual Virtue than
Xylobalsamum or Lignum Aloes. It makes a Sovereign Balsom of the most precious
Blood of the Son of God, that Incomparable and Unparalelled Physician, who died
himself, to save his Patients life. Saint Paul calls it (...), The Shield of
Faith, which will defend you from the Arrow that flies by day; which word
signifies also a Door, and will keep out the Terror by Night, and the
Pestilence that walks in Darkness, and the Destruction that wastes at Noon.

What shall I say more, for the time would fail me, to tell of Gideon, and of
Baruck, and of Sampson, and of Iepthah, of David also, and Samuel, and of the
Prophets, who through Faith subdued Kingdoms, wrought Righteousness, obtained
Promises, stopped the Mouths of Lions, quenched the Violence of Fire, escaped
the Edge of the Sword, out of Weakness were made Strong, waxed Valiant in
Fight, turned to Flight the Armies of the Aliens, and raised the Dead to Life
again.

Repentance purifieth the Soul of all corruption, purges out the old Leaven,
and cleanses the filth of Sin; the smiting of the heart drives away, and the
breaking of it, will not let it hold Infection; Poverty of Spirit makes it more
courageous, Sighs clear and cool the Air, Tears are the best Aquae Vitae, and
a better Antidote than Aqua Theriacalis.

You have heard of the Patience of Job, why, it was a plaster of Patience
which cured him of all his sores. Moses Rod when thrown down, became a Serpent,
but patiently took up, was but a Rod: and have you not deserved to be
corrected, and to suffer much more than is laid upon you? What is the shivering
of a cold fit to the gnashing of Teeth? What is a burning Fever to the Flames
of Hell Fire? To be shut up for a Month in your own Habitation, or a
Pesthouse, and there to be vexed with the Impertinencies of Nurses, the
Directions of Doctors, and Operation of Surgeons, for a few days, in
comparison of being imprisoned and tormented with the Devil and his Angels in
the Lake of Fire and Brimstone for evermore? Is not the loss of Gods Favor
more than the lack of Trade, or separation of Friends? Is not the Worm of
Conscience more painful than a Carbuncle? Is not the Death of the Soul
infinitely more grievous than the death of the Body? Why does the living man
complain that suffers for his sin? Any thing on this side Hell is mercy. Are
you not kindly dealt with, when in Justice you ought to lose your head, and in
Mercy you are censured only to cut your hair.

The wise King Solomon was a great Favorite, and might have obtained any
request in the Court of Heaven, yet when he petitioned concerning the
Pestilence, that might be sent by God among his People, never entreats that
Medicines might have their desired effect, to preserve the healthy and restore
the sick, but passes by the helps of Nature, and speaks as if there were none
to be had, being consumed by Famine, destroyed by Blasting, corrupted by
Mildew, eaten by Locusts, devoured by Catterpillars, and spoiled by Enemies,
and puts all their hope and expectation of relief in the Supernatural Remedy of
Prayer, 1 Kings 8. 37. If there be Pestilence, whatsoever plague, whatsoever
sickness there be; what prayer and supplication soever be made by any man, or
by all thy People Israel, which shall know every man the plague of his own
heart, and spread forth his hands toward this House; then hear thou in Heaven,
and forgive, and do to every man according to his ways, etc. Prayers, whether
they be Gods heavenly and sudden Inspirations, or our holy and premeditated
desires, are as so many Angels of intercourse descending and ascending between
God and us; and it is one of the greatest favors Mortality is capable of, at
all times, and in all places, and on all occasions, to have free access to the
Throne of Grace, and make our wants known, and be relieved; for God being
Universa! Goodness, and willing to communicate and diffuse the same unto his
creatures, how can we fail in having our petitions granted, when we concur with
him in desiring that help and pity, wherewith his very Nature does most delight.

Man was but a heap of dust, till the breath of life was breathed into him, and
then he became a living soul, and Prayer will keep him a living soul, from
returning unto dust again. Is wrath begun? Prayer will make an Atonement;
Phineas prayed, and the Plague was stayed: It as it were dis-armes the
Almighty, and in some sort may be said to bind his hands. It made him when
angry, to entreat Moses to let him alone. It holds the drawn sword of the
destroying Angel. It is an Incense, that being offered up with fervent zeal,
perfumes the air above all Arabian Odors, or the Spice of India. Hearty prayer
avails much, and is the most effectual Cordial, the best Preservative, the
most excellent Restorative, the most sovereign Antedote, the most powerful
Amulet. It Is best to be used fasting in the morning, and last at Night, three
times a day with Daniel, seven times a day with David, always, as Saint Paul
directs. As health is the salt of all earthly blessings, without which they
would be uncomfortable, so Prayer seasoneth and exalts the virtue of all
Medicines; nay it is the Universal Medicine, it cures all diseases, and makes
all work for the best, and like the Philosophers Stone turns every thing, nay
the iron rods into gold, and the dreadful marks and purples into Gods Tokens.

Secondly, The Plague may be caused extraordinarily, by the Devil. That evil
Spirit that by his temptations enticeth men to wickedness, is most ready upon
all occasions to reward them with punishment. He that can poison the minds of
men, by suggesting unto them most destructive and pestilent notions, much more
can poison their bodies with pernicious diseases. The Devil, though fallen, is
an Angel, and though he has lost his happiness, yet retains his power, neither
did his knowledge of Natural Causes and their Effects, depart from him with his
innocence. He that being permitted to vex Jobs body with biles and sores, that
could drive Winds and Tempests together to beat down his house, that could
bring down Fire from Heaven to destroy his Cattle, can alter the disposition
and healthy Constitution of the Air, whereof he is Prince and Ruler. When Egypt
was plagued, God sent evil Angels among them, and those Spirits that did
corrupt the Water, by turning it into Blood, and poison the Rivers with Froggs,
and the Cattle with Murrain, may also corrupt the Air and Water, and raise on
men's bodies botches and boils, and destroy them with the Pestilence.

Hitherto may be referred that Pestilence, which in some Countries follows
upon the death and burial of certain Witches, which though it may seem
fabulous, yet being related out of Hercules Saxonia by that most candid Author
the Learned Sennertus (whose honored Name must never be mentioned by me,
without a particular respect and grateful acknowledgement of his Learned
Labors in the Art of Physic) I shall mention it in Saxonia's own words.

I had ( says he) a very strong argument to confirm this thing; but because it
did seem to exceed all credulity, I did not dare to publish it: Namely, that in
Poland and Germany the Plague is sometimes caused by certain Witches, when they
are first dead and buried, and does not cease till the corpse be found and taken
up; then it has in the mouth of it, some pieces of its own grave-cloths, or of
some near adjacent carcass (which it holds fast in the teeth, as if it were
about to devour and eat them) then they cut off the head of it, and set it on a
pole, and bury the corpse again. Th because it seemed to pass my understanding,
I did not dare to write: but afterward being confirmed by manifold
testimonies, especially of the most learned Doctor John Ursinus, I did not
doubt to publish. The said Vrsinus having seen it with his own eyes, relates it
thus, In the year of our Lord 1572. when a certain woman of Rzesna in Poland
was buried near the Church of the Exaltation of the Holy Cross, the Plague
began to rage and spread extremely, whereupon the buriers with good reason
suspecting that there was a Witch there lately buried, dig up her carcass, and
find in her mouth some pieces of devoured grave-cloths; they cut off her head,
as the fashion is in such cases, set it on a pole, and bury the corpse again,
and the Plague ceased.

For confirmation whereof, the said Saxonia brings the testimony of several
famous men. And though the reason of it is not easily found out, yet it may not
be unpleasant for those that have more leisure to make further enquiry. Perhaps
these wretched persons being of the same malicious mind with him, that wished
the destruction of the World at his dissolution, and said, (...), might indent
with the Devil to do some extraordinary mischief when they themselves could do
no more; and he, to draw others into the like cursed contract, might get leave
to perform his bargain.

Martin Weinrichius has written a large Narrative of the Tragedies and
Troubles that a certain Tailor of Silesia stirred up after his death; and
Histories relate strange stories done by Witches in those places that are under
the power of the Prince of Darkness, and without the light of the Gospel. I
have heard of the Plague that has followed upon great Butcheries and
Slaughters of men that have been denied quarter, though their Corpses have been
all buried. If the body after death, neither by it self, nor by good, or evil
spirits, has no operation, how comes it to pass, that being taken out of the
grave, many weeks after it has been buried, it will bleed fresh blood at the
presence of its Murderer? I have heard of many strange stories of Tempests that
have attended on the death and burial of Conjurers and Magitians; and it is
probable there was somewhat more than ordinary in that Wind on the third of
September, when that detestable Tyrant and Traitor Cromwell died.

However the Devil can go no further than his Chain, nor exceed his Commission
in afflicting Job, nay he could not enter into the Gadarens Swine without
leave. The Indians talk much of the mischief their Powowes can do, but yet have
no power to hurt the English; and the wise Wife of Keith at the entreaty of
Earl Bothwell, could not hurt King James the British Solomon. The Light of
Religion destroys the Power of Darkness, and the Infernal Spirits are subdued
and overcome by the heavenly Virtues of Faith and Repentance, Prayer and
Patience; these call in Angels to our guard, which will take charge over us,
that there be no Enchantment against Jacob, nor Divination against Israel.

Secondly, The Natural Causes of the Pestilence are likewise twofold, 1. Such
as generate and breed it. 2. Such as propagate and spread it.


One cause of breeding the Pestilence is the Corruption of the Air, which is
occasioned, sometimes by the Influence of the Stars, by the Aspects,
Conjunctions and Oppositions of the Planets, by the Ecclipses of the Sun and
Moon, by the Consequences of Comets, by immoderate heat, and excessive
moisture, whereby Vapors and Exhalations being drawn up, and remaining
unconsumed, do rot and putrify, and so corrupt and infect the Air with a
venenate, malignant, and pestilential quality.

And though some may think it strange, that those pure and celestial Bodies,
as the Sun, Moon, and Stars, should produce any pernicious or hurtful Effects
to Mankind, or Creatures here below; yet when it shall be considered, that
Individuals have no perpetuity in themselves, but in their Species, and
therefore there is a necessity of Corruption as well as Generation, it will not
be difficult to answer, That the Stars intending no evil, hurt, or mischief,
produce it only by accident; of themselves they preserve, but by accident
destroy.

Moreover, The Effects that proceed from the Celestial Bodies, are not so much
to be judged by the Nature of the superior heavens, as by the disposition of
the inferior creatures: The same heat of the Sun does harden clay and soften
wax; the same rain that washes stones, makes miry places the more dirty. Do you
not see in the four Seasons of the Year, Spring, Summer, Autumn, and Winter,
which are accompanied with Warmth, Drought, Cold, and Moisture, which are in
themselves good, though many individual creatures receive damage thereby. The
warmth of the Spring is exceeding comfortable, and tending to the good of the
Universe, and yet that heat meeting with a body full of vicious humors, that
had been stored there in the foregoing Winter, stirs up Fevers, Plurisies, and
other diseases, whereof many die. The Summer Season attended with its parching
heat, serves for ripening of the fruits of the earth, and yet in some persons
it causes Calentures and mortal maladies. The rains of Autumn, the Cold and
Frosts of Winter, though good in themselves and seasonable to the Earth, yet in
some bodies, occasion Gowts, Palsies, Dropsies, and Consumptions.

And though these Stars, being as it were pestilently bent against us, and have
neither pity, sense, nor power to change their influence, or alter their
motion, yet our most gracious God, who is the Lord of the Host of Heaven, that
made the Sun and Moon stand still for Joshua, and the Sun to go back ten
degrees for Hezekiah; that God which Job speaks of, which removes the
Mountains, and shakes the Earth out of her place; He that seals up the
Stars, and treads on the waves of the Sea, Job 5. Can disperse any hurtful
Exhalations that are gathered in the Air, and suppress any noxious vapors that
arise from the Earth. He that can bind the sweet influence of the Pleiades, can
also hinder the malignant Aspects of the Planets; and he that can loose the
bands of Orion, can as well dissolve the Conjunction of Mars and Saturn, whom
it is no more difficult for him to overruled, than to guide Arcturus and his
Sons, Job 38. 31, 32. Astra regunt homines, sed regit astra Deus.

Secondly, The Corruption of the Air may be caused, not only by the influence
of the Stars, but also by the Vapors and Exhalations that ascend from Pools
and standing waters, from Lakes that do not run, from stinking sinks, and
ditches that are not cleansed, as also from holes and caverns of the earth;
they which dig in cole-pits, and work in mines, oft-times, to the damage of
their health and hazard of their lives, are made sensible of the effect of
damps that thence arise. Guainerius relates, that upon the opening of a pit in
Campania, there rushed forth such a poisonous breath, that presently killed the
bystanders. Physicians, out of Julius Capitolinus, make mention of an
exceeding old Chest, which being found and opened in Babylon, there began a
most deadly Plague, that reached as far as Parthia. And Ammianus Marcellinus
relates, that in the time of Marcus Verus the Emperor, Apollo's Temple was
sacked, and his Image brought to Rome, where some of the Soldiers of Avidius
Crassus espied a little hole, which afterward they opened, and thereupon
sallied out such a hurtful blast of Air, that kindled a most grievous
Pestilence.

The Air also may be corrupted by the Exhalations and Vapors that ascend out
of the bowels of the Earth, wherein are many poisonous Minerals, upon the
Eruption of Earthquakes, after which (as Histories report) most grievous
Plagues have followed.

Lastly, The Air may be corrupted by the steams and fumes that arise from
Carcases not at all buried, or not buried deep enough, or dug up to make
room for others before they have been quite consumed. I have read of a great
Plague that has begun upon the opening of a grave, and one might guess worse,
if he should conceive this to be one reason why the Parish of Saint Giles in
the Fields should be more infected than other places; and those that have
ability and authority may do a worse deed than cause the Churchyard to be
covered over with fresh earth.

Secondly, The Plague may be caused by corrupt and superfluous humors, which
being bred by ill diet, unhealthy food, unwholesome meat and drink, and being
long detained in the body, at last arrive to the highest degree of
putrefaction, and become venomous and pestilential: Hence came the Proverb
(...): After Famine comes the Plague. From this corruption of humors it is,
that especially Women and Children, that are of a hot and moist temper, and of
a soft and tender constitution; and the meaner sort of people that keep little
or no order in diet, and have small regard to preserve their health, but having
foul bodies, and abounding with peccant humors, become most subject to this
pernicious disease; from the danger whereof, others that guide themselves more
orderly, for the most part live more secure.

Secondly, As the Plague may be generated and bred by the corruption of the Air
and putrefaction of the humors, so is it often propagated by Infection,
whereby the like venomous disposition and diseased effect is produced in a
healthy body, wherewith that sickly person from whence it came, was first
afflicted; and it is most powerful if it be received into such a body,
proportionable and of like constitution, to that wherein it was formerly
kindled; whence Kinsfolks and those of the same blood, are soonest infected by
one another.

The Turks are persuaded, that every ones fate is written in his forehead, and
has a fatal destiny appointed by God, which it is impossible for any to avoid;
so that they believe, those that shall die by the Plague, cannot be slain in
War, nor drowned in Water, and those that shall die in battle, cannot be killed
by the Plague; by which credulity, they slight and neglect all care of avoiding
the infection, conversing with one another, and buying the goods out of
infected houses, and wearing the apparel of them that lately died. I shall not
trouble my self to confute this Opinion, since at Grand Cayre and
Constantinople there have been thousands that have suffered death, and
multitudes that have been executed by the Plague for this Heresy.

But would one think there should be any such in England, that in opposition to
the good Orders of the Magistrates, and without any regard to their own safety,
or the lives of their Families, their Children, Neighbors, Friends and
Acquaintance, and all with whom they have to do or come a-near, should not
refrain the Conversation of the Sick, and coming into infected places, when
they have no necessary occasion, that calls them thereunto.

I have seen some sit at the doors, where the Houses have been shut up, and
have heard them speak (I cannot say) reason) as if there were no such thing at
all, as that which people fear and call Infection; they say the Scripture does
not say the Plague is infectious: Why, neither does it say that Whoredom
breeds the Pox. They will tell you, they and many more have been with the sick
and kept them company, and eat, and drank, and lay with them, and yet
themselves never ailed any thing: They may as well argue that many have had the
Plague, Botches, Blains, Carbuncles and the Tokens, and recovered, and
therefore the Sickness is not mortal. When a Philosopher came to a Heathen
Idols Temple, one of the Priests showed him a Table of the Names of such
persons, that in extremity of Tempests and other dangers, made Vows to their
deity, and escaping Shipwreck came safe to Land; but quoth the Philosopher; Can
you show me how many made their Vows and yet perished?

I have observed that most of these people are extreme ignorant: and who so
bold as Blind Bayard? It would be no great difficulty to persuade an Indian
that never saw a Gun shot off, to stand before a Canons mouth when it is laden
and discharged: Or else they have no good nature, or kindness for Mankind; Or
else they are exceeding covetous; or such as care not much to be rid of some of
their Relations; or else such as have had the Plague formerly; or else they are
middle-witted persons and diseased in the pate, and are as fit for a Pesthouse
as a mad man is for Bethlem; and the proper way to confute them is not with
discourse or reason, but with a Padlock and a Watchman.

Are there not some diseases that are infectious? Do not some sick bodies send
out fumes and steams from them? Is not the Plague as infectious as the Itch or
Pox? Does not the apparel of several persons smell of such things as they daily
use and handle in their Trade? Things of a Homogeneous Nature contain their
whole essence in a little quantity; Every part of Quicksilver is Quicksilver;
the least drop of Oil is Oil; the least spark of Fire is Fire, and if it meet
with combustible matter, what a flame will it soon beget and kindle!

Any one that shall consider, what operation there is in a few grains of
Arsnick, or other deadly poisons; what dolorous effects, and most grievous
symptoms, are caused by the biting of any venomous beast, or stinging of such
little creatures as Hornets, Wasps, and Bees, that with their slender stings do
make a wound so small, that it is scarce discernable by the sharpest sight;
will soon be persuaded, that a great force and efficacy of Contagion may be
included in a small quantity of room, and like Leaven (a little whereof
leaveneth the whole lump) will soon dilate and spread it self throughout the
whole Body, and destroy the Vital Spirit.

This Infection is of a hot Nature, that it may disperse; it is subtle and thin,
that it may enter; it is viscous and tenacious, that it may stick; and venomous
and pernicious, that it may destroy. It is not conveyed after one manner,
sometimes it is communicated by breathing, sometimes by the pores of the skin,
sometimes by sweat, or in form of a vapor, and diverse other ways; but it is
then most dangerous, when it comes from those that are in a dying condition, in
whom Nature is overcome by the strength of the Disease; sometimes it lies hid,
and as it were dormant, and lurking for many days; sometimes it quickly
becomes rampant, and suddenly discovers its devouring Nature; sometimes a man
may carry it about him in his apparel, and not being infected himself, may
infect others.

Hitherto may be referred the Infection that is caused by Powders, Ointments,
Mixtures, and Compositions dispersed by mischievous persons, whereby the
Pestilence has been strangely spread abroad, and for which (as several
credible Histories report) many of them being discovered, have been deservedly
executed.

And here a Question may be asked, How it comes to pass, that such mischievous
persons escape themselves? and whence it is, that Nurses, Searchers, Buriers,
and such as minister about the Sick, are free from Infection?

To which I answer, that, perhaps this may not be always true, the pitcher
indeed goes often to the well, but at last may come home broken. There have
been some Chyrurgeons, that have had Plague sores; some Nurses have died with
their Patients, nay have died, when their Patients have recovered; and there
have been Bearers and Buriers that have stood in need of the same Office to be
done for them, which but very lately they did do for others.

Perhaps also, many of these persons have formerly had the Plague, and
recovered, being like some pieces that remain untoucht, when most of the house
has been consumed with the fire; or like some Soldiers, that have escaped
with life, when most part of the whole Army has been cut to pieces.

This their freedom from Infection, cannot be said to proceed from better
Antidotes which they take, nor from healthier Constitutions that they are of,
nor better Diet and Order which they observe; for many times such persons take
little or nothing at all, and are subject to several diseases which many others
are free from, and are often of disorderly and dissolute lives, given to
intemperance and excess of drink.

But it proceeds from an undaunted courage, a bold, ready, and present mind,
not distracted with fear, or terrified with any peril, whence they adventure on
and perform such actions, as others having their minds distracted with danger,
and spirits dismayed and dissipated with fear, could not undertake without the
apparent hazard of their lives; as we see some that slide on Ice, that walk on
Precipices, that swim in deep waters, that climb up tall trees, that dance on
high ropes, do it without any great difficulty, because undaunted; whereas
others that should attempt to do the same actions with fear would fail of their
enterprise, and break their necks.

Secondly, It may arise from a Particular Constitution they have, which is not
easily subject to this Contagion: Before any action can have its effect, and
make impression, the subject must be first disposed thereunto, and made capable
thereof. A Salamander is said to live in the flame, though a fly is consumed
therewith. Gunpowder and Brimstone will take fire presently, so does not Chalk
nor Clay.

It is from some particular Constitution, that some persons can neither sing,
nor distinguish any tune, neither care they for any Music, and yet others
there be which are even ravished with it. I know one, that playing at Gleek, for
more than he is willing to lose, cannot reckon his game aright, if he here one
sing; neither could he shake in the cold fit of an ague, if he heard a merry
tune on the bag-pipes; his best remedy against any pain is to hear some
pleasant harmony. There are many fine dames that love to play with a Squirrel,
and carry it in their pockets, and yet I know a Lady that will sound if she
come near one. How many are delighted with the fragrant smell of a Damask Rose,
and yet it did blister a Ladies cheek when laid upon it, though she was
a-sleep. There are some that will even sound and be very faint, not only at the
sight, but even at the presence of a Cat, though locked up and concealed in a
Chest; and yet how many are there that love their melancholy company? I have
seen some that will put a Snake in their bosom, and let it wind it self like a
bracelet about their arm, and yet there are others that will be put into
strange fits, and be extreme sick at the sight of an Eel. It is needless to
tell how many hate Cheese, and yet others think they have not dined well
without it.

Some persons there be which hardly any thing will make them sweat, others that
can hardly vomit, some that nothing will purge; some there are whom many drams
of Scamony will not stir, and yet twelve grains will purge others I know a
Gentlewoman now living, about sixty five years of age, and very well, that
about five years ago could not be made to vomit with more than three ounces of
the infusion of Crocus Metallorum, taken three days together, and yet would
rid her stomach twice or thrice in a morning with drinking a draught of plain
Ale; neither could she be purged with twenty grains of Resin of Ialap, and
twelve of Gambugia, and yet as much swelled as one that had the Dropsy, and
withal so feeble, that she could scarce hold a Card, wherewith she delighted
much to play; and yet was contrary to the expectation of all her acquaintance
perfectly cured, by being about five and twenty times let blood, and is now
living and very healthy. Also I know a Knight that will be as much purged with
eating of one Egg, as if he had taken a full dose of pills, or a churlish
potion.

Thirdly, This their freedom from Infection, may proceed from some Custom.
There have been some that by using themselves to the taking of venomous things
and poison, have made it as familiar and innocent to themselves as ordinary
nourishment. There have been some that have eaten Spiders and Hemlock, and
great quantities of Opium, without any hurt or prejudice. What Custom will do,
one may see by them that are great Drinkers, and smoke and chew and snuff
Tobacco, without distempering either their brains or stomachs. They who work in
Glass-Houses, or near great fires, seldom complain of that heat which would
even melt or roast others. Many of the poorer sort there be, that in the cold
North Country, go barefoot and wet-shod without catching Cold or Ague. Some
by using to dive in the Sea for Pearls, can hold their breath the space of
almost half an hour. And those who are accustomed, and make it their unhappy
Trade to empty Jakes and Privies, scarce perceive, neither are offended with
that smell, which is ready to poison others.

Secondly, As the Plague is propagated by Contagion, so likewise is it spread
by Fear and Imagination.

From the heart proceed the Vital Spirits, which are its Lifeguard, and if
they by fear are dissipated, or retire inwards, and leave the outward parts
forsaken, which in infectious times, are as it were environed and besieged with
pestilential air, in comes the Plague like a prevailing enemy, and easily
enters the Gates, scales the Walls, and surpriseth the Heart, which like a
Coward in extremity of danger, is not able to help it self, or make resistance.

Secondly, By Terror and Fear, there is not only an easy passage made for
infectious air to enter in, but also the Spirits retiring to the Center of the
Heart, do draw after them such noxious and noisome vapors, which are about the
Circumference of the Body (as the Sun draws toward it the vapors of the
Earth) and these arriving at the Heart, make a notable motion in the Blood, and
causing heaviness, compression and contraction, unite that force of the venom,
which before was weak and scattered, and makes it stronger and victorious.

Thirdly, When either by the influence of the air, or disorder of diet, or
corruption of humors, there is begotten in the body, a disposition or
inclination to, or as it were a seed of the Pestilence, Fear and Terror do
excite and stir it up, and quickly bring it into action; whence that which such
timorous persons did most fear, does unavoidably fall upon them.

Lastly, As the humors of the body do oftentimes work much upon the mind, in
like manner the passions of the mind work no less upon the body. There have
been some, who by imagination have been cured of those diseases, wherewith they
have been afflicted; and there have been others, who by imagination have fallen
into the same diseases they have feared. Thomas a Vega a learned Physician,
tells a story of one that was lightheaded, and sick of a burning fever, and
being in great heat, was extremely importunate, that he might have leave to
swim in that Pool there (pointing with his hand to the floor of the Chamber,
which he fancied to be water) for said he, If I should but swim there, I should
be immediately well: At length the Physician being overcome with his entreaty,
gave him leave, and presently with great content he gets out of the bed, and
cheerfully rowles himself upon the floor, saying, The water was now as high as
his knees, but he could wish it deeper; by and by after he was more pleased
that it was up to his middle, and withal he wished it a little higher, and
presently after he seemed to be over-joyed, for that the water came up to his
Chin, and then he said, He was very well; and so it was indeed, for he
presently recovered. Whereas on the contrary there be other stories, that make
relation of some, that did but see one infected with the Plague, and of some
that did but behold a-far off a Corpse going to be buried; of others, who being
in the House, did but hear the noise of the Buriers, and presently after have
caught the Sickness, and died of the Plague themselves.

It Is not seldom seen, that the weeping of one person will draw tears from the
eyes of another. When one begin to cough, many presently follow after. It Is
very usual, that the laughing of one man, will set another on laughing, that
sees him laugh, though he does not know the cause why the first man laughed;
and the like effect we see in yawning and stretching, which breeds the like
gaping in the lookers on; and this does proceed out of the action of the Object
upon the fancy of the Spectator, which making as it were the picture,
resemblance, or image of it self in the others mind, sends his spirits unto
the same parts, where they produce the same actions.

How great the force of Imagination is, may be seen not only by the longing
marks that are made on Children, when their Mothers cannot obtain the thing
they so much fancy; thus some have had the picture of a Cherry or Mulberry, or
some such fruit, imprinted on their body: but also by the impressions of those
things that are made on the Children, wherewith their Mothers were affrighted;
thus some have had the resemblance of a bird, or mouse, or blood, or some such
thing* which put the Mother in a fear.

Did you never see some frantic, distracted persons, who imagining that they
are bound, and tied, and cannot stir from the place wherein they are, will lie
still, and make great complaints of their imprisonment, and not go one step to
reach any meat or drink, that should be laid and placed very near them,
although they were never so much pressed with hunger, or with thirst; nay, they
would not rise up and run away, though an enemy came to them with a drawn
sword, or though thieves were rifling all the room, because the apprehension of
being tied and bound, is so strong in their fancy, that it neither can nor will
send any spirits into other parts of the body to cause motion. So when any
persons being frighted with this grievous disease, shall think of nothing but
the Plague, and have their thoughts and fancy fixed Night and Day upon this
Sickness, whereof they imagine they shall surely die and not escape, it comes
to pass that the apprehension of the Pestilence is so strong in their
imagination, that they forget and neglect to send any spirits unto the Heart,
to bring it succor and relief, against its mortal and pernicious enemy.

Now for remedy against these Passions, Fears, Terrors, Frights and
Imaginations, which are more easily discoursed of, than removed. When, nay and
before you are forsaken of Friends, and hear nothing but complaints of
Neighbors, the crying of Wives and Children, the mourning of Husbands and
Parents, the sorrowing of Kinsfolks and Allies, the Sickness spreading, the
Pestilence raging, and the Plague increasing from Tens to Hundreds, from
Hundreds to Thousands, and now ready to seize upon your self, as it has done
already upon others; remember how Saint Peter and the Disciples prayed in a
Tempest: Call to mind what David did when he was greatly distressed at Ziklag,
the Town taken, sacked, and burnt, by the Amalekites, his Wives taken Prisoners,
the Inhabitants carried away Captive, and those few Soldiers that he had left,
ready to stone him, 1 Samuel 30. 6. He comforted himself in the Lord his God:
Cast off then the love of the World, let the distrust of Gods mercy be far from
you, use the exercise of a holy Life and good Conversation, and because it is
Gods doing, repine not at his Providence: use the aforesaid approved
supernatural remedies. Faith is the best fence against Fear, Patience the best
plaster against Sores, Repentance the best Restorative, and Prayer the best
Antidote.

Of the Signs of the Pestilence.
Although after several evil Aspects and Malevolent Conjunctions of the Planets
after bad Constitutions of the Air, and distemper of the Weather, after dearth
of Corn and scarcity of Provision, whereby the humors of men's bodies have been
corrupted, and several Diseases have sprung up, yet no Plague has followed;
and on the contrary, though after the signs of healthy Seasons, plenty of good
and wholesome Diet, yea and after a most cold and dry Winter, and in a dry and
temperate Summer, the Plague has risen up and spread abroad; yet most commonly
there have been some Tokens, Signs, and Forerunners of it, which have given
men an Alarm to pre^^re for it, expect it, and provide against it.

These Signs are of two sorts: 1. The Signs of the Plague immanent, and
approaching. 2. The Signs of it present and raging.


First, The Signs of the Plague approaching, may be observed,

First, From the Causes producing it: Such as are the Position of the Heavens,
the Conjunction of Mars and Saturn, the appearance of Comets and Blazing Stars
(but what and how much may be from thence foretold, I leave to Astrologers)
such also are the alterations of the seasons of the year from their usual
temper, such are also the corruption of the humors, discovered by the
frequency of Malignant Fevers and Epidemical Diseases, the commoness of the
Smallpox and Measils, which often are Forerunners of the Plague; such also
are the Eruptions of Earthquakes, and digging up several places of the Earth,
especially old sinks and standing pools that have been formerly stopped up;
such is also Contagion, for if the Plague is, or lately has been in any
Neighbor Country, it does not usually cease there, but travails from one Place
and Nation to another, as Physicians and Historians do at large relate.

Secondly, The Signs of the Plague approaching, may be gathered from the
Effects.

First, In the Earth: If Herbs, Plants and Grasshoppers do wither almost as soon
as spring up, if the Fruits and Flowers of it be blasted and devoured by
Caterpillars, Spiders, Moths, and such like Creatures; if there be more than
ordinary increase of Mushromes, if there has been a Murrain among Sheep or
Cattle; for though the same Plague that destroys Man, does not hurt Sheep,
neither does the same Disease that kills Sheep, presently assault Men, yet it
may so come to pass, that by much and long eating of rotten Mutton, bad humors
bred thereby may arrive to so great a malignity as to kill men.

Secondly, In the Water: If there be a great increase of Frogs and Toads, if
Fishes die in Ponds or Lakes, if the Water of Springs, Pumps, Wells and
Conduits become muddy and troubled.

Thirdly, In the Air: If there be more Flies, Locusts and Insects than is
usual, if Birds die, or forsake their place, if Flesh sooner putrify than
ordinary, and Bread sooner become moldy.

Simon Kelway in the third Chapter of his Treatise of the Plague, printed at
London 1593. has these words, When we see young Children flock themselves
together in Companies, and then will fain some of their company to be dead
amongst them, and so will solemnize the Burial in a mournful sort, this is a
token which has been well observed in our Age to fore-shew great mortality at
hand. And I have heard that One did foretell our late unhappy Civil Wars, by
seeing Boys and Children make Officers, muster and imitate the Train-Bands;
saying, When he was in Germany, before the Wars did there begin, the Children
there did do the like. I remember about twenty years ago, one of the Chaplains
of his late Majesty King Charles the First of ever blessed memory, did preach
at Bristol upon this Text out of Genesis 4. 15. And the Lord set a mark upon Cain:
And in his Sermon did speak much against black-patches and beauty-spots, and
among other things, said that they were forerunners of other spots, and marks
of the Plague; and presently, within a very little while after, the Plague
brake out among them, and all those persons that did wear them, fled the Town.
And when Saint Andrews Churchyard wall did break or fall down this Winter, I
heard some prognosticate the coming of the Plague, saying, It fell in like
manner the last great Sickness in 1625. but what reason these had to say so, I
do not fully understand.

Secondly, The Signs of the Plague raging, are twofold:

First, such as are common to other Diseases.

Secondly, More proper and peculiar to it self.

When the Plague first seizes upon any particular person, before many have
been infected, it is very hard to discern it, because it has diverse symptoms
attending it that are common to other diseases, and there is no one perfect
proper, infallible, and inseparable sign to distinguish it, and many excellent
and learned Physicians have disputed and differed much about it; but when it
has continued a while, and spread it self abroad among many, it is very easy
to be known.

As man is called a Microcosme or little world, not only because he partakes
something of the ^^^ure of all Creatures, he has a simple being with things
without life; he has vegetation and growth with Plants, sense and motion with
bruits, and understanding with the Angels; but also because he has in him the
resemblance of all Creatures, his flesh like the soft earth, his bones like the
hard stones and minerals, his hair like the grass, the blood in his veins and
arteries distributed throughout the whole body, and all meeting in the heart or
liver, like the rivers and waters dispersed in the earth, and all meeting in
the Sea and Ocean; his breath like the wind, his head like the heavens, wherein
are seated his eyes, which some compare to the Sun and Stars: so also is the
Plague called the Great Sickness, because it borrows the Symptoms, and
includes and comprehends in it self something of the nature of all diseases,
whereof it is the Abridgement and Epitome.

It sometimes begins with a cold shivering like an Ague, sometimes continues
with a mild warmth like a Hectic Fever or a Diary, and increases with violent
heat like a Burning Fever. It corrupts the Blood and all the humors, it
afflicts the Head with pain, the Brain with giddiness, the Nerves with
Convulsions, the Eyes with dimness, making them look as if they had wept, and
depriving them of their lively splendour, it makes the Countenance look ghastly,
troubling the Ears with noise and deafness; it infecteth the Breath with
stinking, the Voice with hoarseness, the Throat with soreness, the Mouth with
drought, and the Tongue with thirst; the Stomach with worms and want of
appetite, with hickhop, nauseousness, retching, and vomiting; the Bowels with
looseness and the bloody Flix, the Sides with stitches, the Back with pains,
the Lungs with phlegm, the Skin with fainty and stinking Sweats; Spots, Blains,
Botches, Sores, and Carbuncles, the Pulse with weakness, the Heart with
sounding and faintness. It makes feeble like the Palsy, it causes sleepiness
like the Lethargy, watchfulness and madness like a Frenzy, and sudden death
like the Apoplexy. And these symptoms happen not alike to all, but differ and
vary according to the several constitutions of the parties that are sick. And
as in the times of great Infection all Diseases turn to the Plague, so the
Plague discovers the symptoms of all those Diseases whereof it had its
beginning and original.

And, though this grievous Sickness, most commonly comes in state, attended
with a Fever, and strengthened with other maladies, yet it is not always so,
for sometimes it comes stealing into the heart, whereby many have died
suddenly, without the sense of foregoing pain or preceding distemper. Jacob de
Partibus tells us of some that in the Plague time bronght him their Urine to
look upon, and he could perceive neither any symptom or grievous Fever that
they had, and yet they died either before, or as soon as they went from him.
Alex. Benedictus tells of some that whilst they have been employed about their
business in the House* their trading in the Market, their devotions in the
Church, have died suddenly; and sundry other Physicians relate the like, and
perhaps the same has or might have been observed here at London.

Besides these Signs that the Plague has in common with other Diseases, it
has some more proper to it self, and does incredibly destroy the Vital Spirit,
and weaken Nature, so that in a very short time, without any manifest reason or
foregoing cause, the party is as weak and faint, as if he had endured much
pain without ease, as if he had watched long without sleep, as if he had bled
extremely without stopping it, or purged or vomited exceedingly, without
staying it. It is the most venomous and infectious of all Diseases, it seiseth
upon many, and the most of them it kills.

What the event of the Sickness is like to be, one may from hence conjecture
and prognosticate:

First, If the sick party in the very first beginning of the Disease, and as
soon as ever he felt himself ill, did take some proper and effectual medicine,
and did not vomit or cast it up again; and if by chance he did cast it up, if
presently after he did take some more of the same, or some other, which did
abide in his stomach, and was digested, and did make him sweat, and if he grew
lightsomer after Sweat; if the Swellings, Botches, or Carbuncles quickly arise
to a place not dangerous, neither to the Heart, Neck, Throat, nor about the
Ears, and thereupon the symptoms do abate, if the swellings be great, or more
than one, and quickly break and run, and come to maturation: If the party has
an honest careful Nurse, and but one Physician (for two Physicians, a wicked
Nurse, and the Plague, are able to make an end of any one sick Patient) there
is great probability and hope of his recovery.

Secondly, But if the party has neglected to take any approved Cordial or
Medicine in the beginning of the Disease, before he slept, if the swellings be
but small, and arise slowly and near about the heart, if there be more
Carbuncles than one, if the swellings retire back, and quickly strike in again,
if the party continue lightheaded, talk idle or has Convulsions, or a deep
sleep, or be sick after sleep, or has no sleep at all, if he has a great
thirst, and the Tongue be black and scorcht, if the Eyes look ghastly, the
Voice be hoarse, the Nostrils drawn together, if he say that all things stink;
if he purge or vomit, or bleed at the Nose, and is not better for it, if he be
outwardly cold, and inwardly burn, if he does often faint or swoune, for the
most part death follows.

Thirdly, There is no Disease more treacherous and deceitful, for sometimes,
when one may think the worst is past, death is at hand, and when death seems to
be at hand, the party sometimes recovers beyond hope or expectation.

Fourthly, Children are most in danger, Women with Child next, and young Maids
that are marriageable, more than Elder or aged persons.

Lastly, Those that die of the Plague, have commonly to be seen upon them
Spots, or Marks, or Botches, Blains or Carbuncles, and though these sometimes
vanish or disappear, yet the flesh will be quickly softer in one place than
another, and the whole body, by reason of the corruption of the humors, will
grow limber, and become more soft than ordinary, and worse colored than other
Corpses, the Ears also, and the Nails and Nose will wax blew, as if they had
been beaten or bruised.

Of the Preservation from the Pestilence.
Death is not a greater enemy to Nature, than the Pestilence is a friend to
Death, and though it be so grievous a Disease, against which there is yet known
no general nor infallible Medicine; yet sometimes, either by the strength of
Nature, or help of Physic, it has been healed and cured. We see there have
been some Houses set on fire, and yet have been preserved; there have been
Possessions that have been entered by Adversaries, and yet have been recovered
and restored again to the right and lawful Owners; there have been Enemies, who
have invaded Countries, and entered Towns, and yet have been fortunately driven
out by the Valor of the Inhabitants; but yet the Householder could more easily
have prevented the Fire, than extinguish it; the Farmer with less trouble kept
his Possession, than have regained it; and the Citizens with less loss and
hazard have defended their Towns and Countries, than have cleared them of their
Enemies.

The Plague is a Fire that consumes all before it, and may quickly bring the
body to dust and ashes; it is an Adversary that riotously makes a forcible
Entry, and may assault, wound, and evilly entreat you, so that it may be
despaired of your life, against whom yon cannot get your damages nor
reparation; it is an enemy that seldom gives Quarter, but destroys, spoils,
and lays all waste before it, and far more wisdom it is to prevent the Malady,
than to abide the trouble, cost, and hazard of the Cure.

The way and means of Preservation (under Gods assistance, as in all things, so
especially now, we ought to seek by Prayer and Devotion) consist in two things:
1. In avoiding all the Causes of the Plague. 2. In strengthening our Bodies
against them.


One Cause of the Sickness, is the Corruption and Infection of the Air; for
when the Plague begins to reign in any Place, and the Pestilence is as it were
sown among the People, the Sick continually not only breath out of their
Mouths, but send out of their Bodies infectious steams and vapors, which being
dispersed and scattered in the Air, are soon after drawn in by the breath of
others; and thence whole Families are extinguished, and the Plague not only
creeps, but runs from one House to another: and hence it is that the Plague
destroys more in Cities than in Countries, and more in narrow Streets and
Lanes of those Cities, than in open places, because usually there are narrow
and little rooms, which are soonest filled with infectious vapors, and longer
keep them in; for though the Air be never so corrupt, you must draw it in with
your breath continually, for without it you cannot live an hour. As meat and
drink is the food of our Bodies, so is the air the nourishment of our Spirits;
and therefore as by unwholesome meat our Bodies are diseased, so by corrupt air,
our Spirits are easily infected, weakened, and extinguished; and therefore we
have good cause to avoid it, and provide against it. Hence it was that the
Ancients (as Plutarch relates in his Roman Questions) did always build the
Temple of Aesculapius the supposed God of their Health, without the walls*
because they judged the Country air more wholesome than the City. And in this
case the Counsel of Hippocrates in advising to change and fly the corrupted
air, is, and has been received as an Oracle, and as a Proverb generally
approved by all, The Antidote made of three Adverbs, Cito, Long, Tarde, Fly
quickly, Go far, and Return slowly, has oft-times proved effectual.

And if any of those that will strain at a Gnat, and swallow a Camel, should
pretend any scruple of Conscience about the lawfulness of this Remedy, in
flying from Infected Places, and say, out of envy, at the accommodation of
others, or discontent that they are not so well provided themselves, or some
secret design (as I have heard several express it) The Lord can follow them
and find them out; they may also understand, that it is not their desire to
fly from his presence, but his Plague, not from their gracious God, but from
his punishing and fearful rod. Do you not see this sort of people, if they
should be looking out at a window, and it should chance to thunder and lighten
in their faces, would they not presently turn their backs, and shut the
Casement, and retire inwards? and yet they cannot think that the Casement can
resist Thunder, or the Glass keep out Lightning. Do they not in Winter, Frost,
and Snow, wear Muffes and Gloves, and put on more Apparel? and yet the Psalmist
says, Who can stand before his Cold? Psalm. 147. But I shall leave these people
as diseased in the Pate, and as I have advised all my friends (though much
against my own interest) if possible to remove and change their dwelling; so I
think it no more unlawful for any persons, whose stay in infected places is not
more necessary than their lives, to take the benefit of better air, than for a
great man that has a large House, to remove from one end or side of it, that
is infected or set on fire, to another part of it, that is free and safe from
burning; only this I shall entreat of all that go from infected neighbors,
that they would thankfully adore Gods bounty in providing for them places of
refuge, and part with some of their Finery, Pride, Excess, Prodigality,
Superstuity, and Luxury, for the Alms and Relief of those that are now brought
to great necessity, and send up their prayers for the health of such places,
upon which some of their sins may have helped to pull down Plagues.

But as in taking of other Physic, it is necessary to observe and follow the
directions, otherwise you would run into an Error, and make the Remedy worse
than the Disease; so when you fly from infected places, you must observe the
rules to do it.

1. Cito, Quickly; You must delay no time, but remove with all speed, least you
be arrested by death, before you go, or carry the Infection with you, either in
your own body, which being stirred and heated with motion, may occasion the
humors to putrefie, and destroy your self; or else in your cloths, whereby
those persons among whom you come to dwell or sojourn, having not been
accustomed to such evil air out of which you come, may very easily be infected.
Evagrius lib. 4. of his History, relates that many sound persons coming out of
infected places, did infect the Inhabitants, and brought the Plague among them;
and the like may be remembered to be done in later years.

2. Long, Far; When there has been a little Cloud dissolved in the air, it
has been observed to rain sometimes at one end of a Town, and not at all at
another; Mists have been at the tops of the Hill, when there have been none in
the Valley; there has been Sunshine in one Field, and Rain in the next; it
has snowed in some grounds, when it has hailed in others; fearful Thunders
have astonished the people in some places, and yet twenty miles off they have
not been heard; but in a great over-casting of the Heavens, you must not think
to get out of the reach of the Rain or Storm in a little Journey. You cannot
smell Rosemary half a mile in England, but from Spain you may smell it many
leagues. If the Infection be in a Country Village, a little way will serve to
fly from it, but if it be in a great and Imperial City, you must go further,
and though you fare worse, you will escape the better.

Lastly, Tarde; As you must fly from the infected place in have, so you must
return to it by leisure; for you were better stay away a Month too long, than
return a day too soon. When a Fox is to pass over any frozen River, he puts
his Ear to the Ice, and if he hear the Water run, the memory of being formerly
wet, and the unpleasantnesse of swimming in the cold, coming to his mind, makes
him retire back. It Is no wisdom for you, having taken up a good shelter, to
come out of it into a Storm or Tempest, till all be calm. Those who are to
return into their homes that have still remained clear from the Infection, may
do it sooner than those who are to go into Houses that have been visited.
Infection as well as smells and perfumes, may last a long time in a Garment or
Apparel. Fracastorius tells of a Furre Gown (sure it was a mourning Gown) that
occasioned the death of five and twenty men that wore it, one after another in
Verona, and died of the Plague. And Alexander Benedictus speaks of Feather-beds
that have held the Infection seven years; if you lie in them too soon, the
linen may prove your Winding sheet, and the Down-Bed your Deathbed, where you
may sleep your last, and instead of having a Good Morrow, bid the World
Goodnight.

But least any with overmuch care should prejudice their own private affairs,
or the Trade of this Royal City of London (whose Wealth and Prosperity every
true Englishman is obliged to seek) he may be informed that in the ending of
the last great Sickness 1625. the people went promiscuously one among another,
and the Houses were quickly filled with Inhabitants, and fresh comers out of
the Country, and yet no new Infection followed. And I remember that in the
Loyal City of Bristol (the place where I was born) about twenty years ago, many
Houses were shut up, and hundreds died every week, of the Plague, both before
and during the Siege, whilst it was kept for the Kings most Excellent Majesty,
by that most renowned and and valiant Commander his Highness Prince Rupert;
but as soon as ever the Enemies entered in, as if the lesser Plague vanished,
and departed at the approach of a greater, the Soldiers made no great
difference of quartering in any Houses or coming into any company, and the
Inhabitants returned to their forsaken Dwellings at one Gate, whilst the
Pestilence went out at the other, and has not hitherto returned again.

But now if through Poverty and lack of means to maintain you, and want of
friends to receive and entertain you in better air, or having such Callings,
from the attendance whereon, you cannot with honesty and good conscience absent
your self, but are enforced still to stay, and cannot possibly avoid the
occasions of the Sickness; you must then,

Secondly, Strengthen your Bodies against the Causes of it.

For which purpose you must look upon the Plague as a most poisonous and
pernicious Serpent, as a most dangerous and deadly Dragon, whose venom is
increased by destroying, and you tied to encounter with him, where if he
assault you, you must either get the victory, or die upon the spot.

If you were to defend your self against a thief, a pistol would perhaps
affright him; if to duel a quarrelsome Hector, a sword or rapier would preserve
you; a staff will serve to beat a Dog, the showing of your self would chase a
Fox, and make him take his kennel; but the Plague is so venomous and
destructive an Enemy, that to defend your self, and get the victory, you must
be more than ordinarily armed and appointed.

Imagine then your self to be a Garrison, whereof you are the Governor, and
which you are commanded for to keep upon the hazard of your life, and in this
case do as a most discreet and valiant Soldier would, to defend and maintain
his trust, and save his honor. He will remove or secure all Traitors, and
secret Enemies, cut down all Trees and Hedges, and burn all Houses wherein the
Enemy may take shelter and annoy him; and spoil all provisions that may relieve
and succor him; he will repair all breaches and weak places, at which the
Enemy may make a Battery, and seek to enter by Assault; he will lay in
sufficient stores of Ammunition and Provision; he will fortify the place with
Trenches, Lines, and Outworks; he will raise and muster up a sufficient number
of Soldiers, and by good Discipline have them ready at all Postures, Marches,
and Commands; he will furnish himself with all manner of offensive and
defensive Weapons, Engines, and Fireworks. He will be jealous, and examine all
strangers and unknown persons that enter in. He will have his Spies abroad for
Intelligence, and never be secure, but always on his Guard.

Now in the Body, bad corrupt humors are as Traitors, which will soon take
part with the Disease, and let him in, if you do not suppress the breeding of
them, and purge them out. All slovenly or sluttish nastinesse, all disorder and
excess, are as so many shelters, wherein the Enemy may lurk and lie in Ambush
to assault you. The infirmity or weakness of any part, is a breach, by which
the Sickness may enter, and which you must make up and repair to keep him out.
Issues and Fontanels, are as Trenches, Graffes and Ditches; Fumes as Fireworks
and Grenades; Amulets as Fortifications and Outworks, which you must make to
keep him off: The Natural Animal and Vital Spirits are the Soldiers, which you
must by all means maintain and cherish, revive and comfort, and keep from fear
and fainting. Good Diet and Cordials are the Provision which you must not want.
Medicines are your offensive and defensive Weapons, to preserve your self, and
destroy your Enemy. Intelligence and knowledge with whom you do converse, or
have to do, are your Spies, and Carefulness your Guard and Sentinel that keeps
you from being surpised; and little enough, you cannot be too careful; for
there have been places that have been betrayed by the Inhabitants, surpised by
Ambush, yielded up by Cowardice, starved for scarcity of Provision, surrendered
for lack of Ammunition, could not be made tenable for Breaches, overcome for
want of Soldiers, taken by letting in unknown Persons, and surpised by being
secure. The City of Troy was taken by bringing in a Wooden Horse, whose Belly
was full of armed Greeks; some places have been surpised by Soldiers covered
with a load of Hay; and others by Enemies brought in with Household Stuff. But
your life is in greater hazard, it may be lost by a pair of Gloves, a Periwigge
or a Muffe, or any Apparel; your destruction may be brought upon you by your
Meat from the Shambles, by your Wine from the Tavern, by your Bread from the
Bakers, by your Drink from the Brewers; it may come in a Nose-gay from the
Garden, in Herbs from the Fields, in Fruit from the Market; it may be handed to
you by the Water you wash in, it may be drawn in by the Air you breath in; and
as at other times you are so frail, that your breath (so in times of Infection
your Death) may be in your Nostrils.

Secondly, To strengthen our Bodies against the Causes of Infection.
One Cause of Infection, is, the Corruption of the Air; and the way to fortify
our selves against it, is, to correct and purify it.

And here the Air may be considered two ways: First, In General. Secondly, In
Particular.


The General Air, is, that of all the Region and Place where people live, which
is, and may be purged by cleansing and removing all filthy and offensive things
out of the Streets, and adjacent places. Physicians, in the time of great and
grievous Plagues, have used several means, and tried diverse ways to clear and
purify the Air. Some direct to make great fires in the Streets, as Hyppocrates
did in the Plague at Athens, and burning among them sweet Odors, Spices and
Perfumes, Fragrant Ointments and Compositions, whereby he freed the City from
Infection. Some would have Guns and Muskets discharged in the Streets,
especially in hot weather; and this makes a greater commotion, though less heat
and inflammation. Cardanus directs to burn leather, and things that send out
strong scents, though they be never so odious and stinking. Others, as
Alexander Benedictus, would have Dogs killed, and left in the Streets unburied,
that the Carrion smell might expel the venom of the putrid air; and perhaps for
this reason, that poisons have not only an Antipathy to their Antidotes, but
also sometimes to one another, it being no more unusual for one poison, than
for one heat, to drive out the other. Moreover, seeing that everything does
work upon its like, and there ought to be something agreeable and suitable
between the Agent and the Patient (as we see that oylwill presently mix and
incorporate with grease or wax, but not with vinegar, and many gums will
dissolve in vinegar, that will not melt nor mix with oil) it might be probable,
that in an extraordinary Infection, those odious scents being somewhat of the
same nature with those poisonous vapors that caused the Pestilence, might
incorporate with them, and carry them away, whereas delightful and better odors
and perfumes, by reason of the contrariety of their Nature, might have no
effect upon them. Rodericus a Castro would have Kine and Oxen driven up and
down the Streets, that the impurity of the air might be cleansed by the sweet
smell of their breath; and I have heard the smell of Sheep very much commended;
and some have also suspected it, least their flesh afterward when they come to
be killed should poison the eaters. But as the same Plague and Murrain that
kills Sheep and Beasts* will not hurt men, so will not the Plague that kills
men, hurt Sheep or Cattle.

The particular air is that in our own private houses, and which we breath into
us, and this is purified by Smells or Fumes, of both which, as well simple as
compound, there are a very great number prescribed by Physicians. I shall
commend this. Take White Wind Vinegar and smell to it, and wash your mouth and
nostrils with it, or mix it with water that you wash your face and hands with;
or wet your face and hands with it, after you have washed them with water, and
let the vinegar dry in, without wiping of it off.

Or else use it thus.
Take Sage and Rue, of each a handful, steep it in a quart of White Wind
Vinegar, and use it as aforesaid.

Or else use this.
Take Nutmegs, the roots of Contrayerva Virginia, Shakeweed, Pestilence Wort,
Angelica, Elicampane, Zedoary, Master-wort, Lovage, of each an ounce bruised,
infuse them in three quarts of White Wind Vinegar close stopped in a bottel,
and use it as aforesaid, and smell to some of the Root and Nutmeg; and carry
some about you in an ivory or other box with holes in it; or wet a piece of a
sponge in the liquor, and carry it about you, and put a piece of any of the
ingredients in your mouth.

Rhasis, a costly Physician, would have linen cloths dipped in Vinegar, and
hanged about the room, instead of hangings.

Some do commend Pomanders and sweet perfumes, and others dispraise them, that
they only recreate the Spirits, but being no Antidotes-resist not poison; but
Vinegar is a thing without exception, and any or all of those ingredients, do
exalt the virtue of it, and make it admirable: And if you cannot get all the
aforesaid roots, get as many as you can, and abate a proportionable quantity of
Vinegar.

Also, The Urine of a Goat is much commended by the Arabian Physicians,
Avenzoar and Averroes, as having in its smell a specific and appropriate
quality to help the infection of the air. And Mercurialis tells that he went
to Vienna to medicine Maximilian the Emperor of Germany, one day when he dined
with the Chancellor of Hungary, he espied a great Goat, and asking the reason
why it was there kept, they told him for an Antidote against the Plague. And
there is as good reason for it, as the smell of a Fox should be a defensative
against the Palsy; and it is not for nothing that Physicians prescribe the
burning of Goats Horn, as a good Fume against pestilential and infected Air.

For as the air is corrected by Smells, so is it also by Fumes, of which there
are multitudes prescribed, and I shall commend this.

Take either some plain White Wind Vinegar, or compounded as aforesaid, and put
it into a perfuming pot, either by it self or with Rose water, or any other
sweet water, or with any perfume, or put it on a hot Fire-shovel, and let it
smoke about the House.

Also, The American Silver-weed, or Tobacco, is very excellent for this
purpose, and an excellent defense against bad air, being smoked in a pipe,
either by it self, or with Nutmeg shred, and Rue Seeds mixed with it;
especially if it be nosed; for it cleanses the air, and choaketh, suppresseth,
and disperseth any venomous vapor; it has singular and contrary effects, it
is good to warm one being cold, and will cool one being hot. All Ages, all
Sexes, all Constitutions, Young and Old, Men and Women, the Sanguine, the
Choleric, the Melancholy, the Phlegmatic, take it without any manifest
inconvenience; it quenches thirst, and yet will make one more able, and fit to
drink; it abates hunger, and yet will get one a good stomach; it is agreeable
with mirth or sadness, with feasting and with fasting; it will make one rest
that wants sleep, and will keep one waking that is drowsy; it has an
offensive smell to some, and is more desirable than any perfume to others; that
it is a most excellent preservative, both experience and reason do teach, it
corrects the air by Fumigation, and it avoids corrupt humors by Salivation:
for when one takes it either by chewing it in the leaf, or smoking it in the
Pipe, the humors are drawn and brought from all parts of the body, to the
stomach, and from thence rising up to the mouth of the Tobacconist, as to the
helm of a Sublimatory, are voided and spitten out.

There is also a fume made of Brimstone and Saltpetor, but of this in the
latter end of the Book.

Lastly, To guard your self from the corrupted air, you may do well, not to
walk abroad till the Sun has drawn up and dispersed all foggy vapors, and to
be within doors at Noon and the heat of the day, when the pores being more
open, are apter to receive Infection, and not to be abroad in the Moonshine,
whose beams are hurtful; nor at Night, when noisome things may be thrown out of
doors or windows into the Streets; or when the diseased persons with sores
about them, either by their own craft or contrivency of their Keepers, obtain
liberty to go abroad.

The Second Cause of the Pestilence, is the Corruption of the Humors, which you
must be as careful to defend your self from as against the Putrefaction of the
Air: And how that may be done by Bleeding, Purging, Vomiting, Sweating, and
Observation of Diet, comes next to be considered.

Of Bleeding.
Concerning Bleeding, though I believe that it is an effectu^l means not only
to prevent, but also to cure most Diseases; and though none be more free and
ready to comply with the inclination of any Patients desirous thereof, nor more
earnest to persuade them to the submitting thereto, and have not in my Practice
been unfortunate therein; but have seen Diseases that have been exasperated by
other Medicines, beyond expectation cured thereby; and do think it most
commonly so excellent a remedy, that many Patients admitting thereof, would
much shorten the time, and lessen the cost and trouble of their Sickness, and
not stand-in need of one quarter of those Medicines and Antidotes, those
Preparatives and Corroboratives, those Infusions and Decoctions, those Pills
and Potions, Purges and Vomits, Cordials and Bolus, Juleps and Emulsions,
Extracts and Juices, Waters and Spirits, Salts and Oils, Syrups and Conserves,
Electuaries and Powders, Plasters and Ointments, Blisters and Glisters, they
are made to take; and though there be many Medicines that will purge Phlegm,
Choler and Melancholy, yet none are yet known, that will safely purge blood or
lessen it; yet I cannot in this case of Preservation from the Pestilence,
advise any one to open a Vein, but rather dissuade them from it. And because it
may take better from another of more authority than my self, I have gotten
Jacob Sylvius in his Book of the Blague to deliver his opinion in plain
English. As for Blood-letting (says he) it is no way profitable for the
preventing of this Disease, because the blood* being diminished, the body is
made more: open and liable to external injuries, and the strength decays by
the loss of blood, the food and treasure of life. Of the same mind also is the
most excellent Physician Sennertus, who though in the cure of most other
Diseases he begins with Phlebotomy, yet in this forbids it; and the most
learned Riverius is of opinion, that bleeding causes one to be infected the
more easily, as also to escape the more hardly; it being in this venomous
Disease as in those that have taken poison, who by bleeding draw the poison
inward, and very difficulty are recovered, and therefore upon the very
suspicion of being poisoned, most skilful Physicians abstain from letting
blood: Nevertheless, they conclude, that if there be any notable fullness of
blood, or necessary evacuation suppressed, a vein may be opened upon (...)
account, (and then very sparingly) but not in reference to the Pestilence. And
as to the present time of the year, Galen forbids to let blood in a hot and dry
season of the Air.

Of Purging and Vomiting.
Although as Hyppocrates says in his Aphorisms, That, Those which are of
sound and perfect health do quickly faint, and grievously endure a purging
(...) nor superfluous humor to draw out and work upon, does first dissipate the
Spirits, and then dissolves those parts of the body which are humid and moist,
and afterward corrupts those which are solid, and although (as Crato says)
there be no purging or vomiting Medicines, which are primarily and directly
opposite to the venom of the Plague: yet because foul bodies are more subject
to Infection than those which are pure and clean, and the humors they abound
with, may disturb Nature, and interpose themselves, and take off and dull the
Operation of any Cordials or Antidotes, and being agitated by the Disease,
might flow and settle to some noble part, and bring the party into a most
grievous Fever, Frenzy, or some other Inflammation, whereby he may be endangered
as much as by the Plague. There have been several purging medicines directed by
Physicians, and I shall prescribe these.

The Pills of Ruffus, otherwise called the Common or Pestilential Pills, are
very excellent, you may take of them once or twice a week when you go to bed;
the dose of them is half a dram for an ordinary constitution, or a whole dram
for a strong man. You may have them at any Apothecaries, or else make such like
yourself.

Take fine Aloes two ounces, fine Myrrh one ounce, English Saffron half an
ounce, make them into powder, and with Venice Turpentine make them into pills;
and take half a dram, or a whole dram, as aforesaid. The Aloes clears the
Stomach from bad humors, and the belly from worms, the Myrrh preserves the
body from Putrefaction, the Saffron cheers the Spirits, and the Turpentine is
good against the Pestilence.

Or else take this.
Dissolve an ounce and a half of Manna in six ounces or a little draught of
spring water, and one spoonful of vinegar warmed together on the fire, then
strain it, and take an ounce of Venice Turpentine, and put to it the yolke of a
new laid egg, and stir it about, and mix it, and it will look like cream,
then by little and little put to it the liquor, being first quite cold, wherein
the Manna was dissolved, and stir it about, and drink it up, and keep warm,
ordering your self as is usual in other purges or vomits, when it works upwards
you may take posset drink and downwards broth: If it had a pleasant taste,
those that know the virtue of it, would never take any other medicine: It is
strong enough for any of the strongest constitution, and for those that are
weaker, six drams, or half an ounce of Turpentine is dose enough.

Women with child may use this.
Infuse a dram of Rubarb slieed six hours in six ounces or a little draught of
Endive or Succory-water, or Spring Water, then strain it, and put to the liquor
one ounce, or else two ounces of Manna, and dissolve it over the fire, and
strain it, and drink it up.

Children may take an ounce or two ounces, or half an ounce of Manna dissolved
in Succory of Endive-water, or in Spring Water, or Barly-water, or Broth, or
Posset Drink.

But beware of strong purges and vomits, which will sooner bring the Plague
upon you, than preserve you against it, especially at this time, when it is
more probable that the Sickness is occasioned by the Corruption of the air,
than by the putrefaction of humors; there having been no scarcity of provision,
whereby the poorer sort might have been necessitated to feed on unwholesome
diet, and therefore no necessity of taking any purging Physic. I remember
about four years since, many were sick of a malignant Fever, and the
discontented party did attribute the cause to the keeping of Lent, and eating
of Fish: what would they have said now, if Lent had been strictly observed?

Of Sweating.
As purging, vomiting, and bleeding, do draw in the humors and vapors from the
circumference and outside of the body, to the center and inside of the heart;
so medicines that cause Sweat, expel them from the heart to the outside of the
body, and rarifie those humors into light and thin vapors, which turn into a
watery sweat, as soon as they come out of the skin into the air, and thereby
drive out those humors and vapors, which breed the Pestilence.

For which purpose it would not be inconvenient to take one or two drams of
London or Venice-Treacle, or of Mithridate or Diascordium, or Confection of
Iacynth, according to the age or strength of the party; or one dram of
Electuary de Ov^ in White Wind Vinegar; or a draught of Posset Drink made of
Vinegar and Water put into the Milk instead of Beer or Ale.

Or else this, which is most excellent, without heating of the body, or hurting
of the purse.
Take Crabs eyes one ounce, burnt Hartshorn half an ounce, the black tops of
Crabs claws an ounce and a half; make them all into a powder, and take of it
one dram, or two drams, in a glass of possetdrink when you go to bed, and drink
another draught of posset drink after, to wash it down.

Or else you may drink a draught of Oxymel Posset Drink, made as follows.
Boil a quarter of a pint of English Honey, with a quart of water, and skum it,
then put to it one pint of vinegar, and let it boil nine or ten walmes; then
let it cool, and boil a quart of Milk, and turn it with a sufficient quantity
of the Oxymel, and put away the curd, and drink the posset drink when you go to
bed.

Or else take a dose or quantity of the Antipestilential Vinegar, of which
hereafter.

Of Observation of Diet.
Although you defend your self never so safely from the evil air, and retain
your Blood as the treasure, and maintain your Spirits as the guard of your
life; though you purge out vicious humors, and sweat out bad vapors; yet if
you by any neglect, disorder, excess, or defect, do recruit those humors,
corrupt your blood, or spend your spirits, it will be to no more purpose, than
if you had washed your cloths never so clean, and yet afterward should tumble
them in the dirt, or trample them in the mire.

By Observation of Diet, Physicians understand, the well ordering of a man's
self in those six things which they call* Non-Natures, the Air, Sleep, and
Watching, the Passions of the Mind, Labor and Rest, Repletion and Evacuation,
Meat and Drink, which some have called the six strings of Apollo's Harp,
wherein consists the harmony of health: If these be in tune, the body is sound,
but if any of these be skrewed up too high by any excess, or slackened too low
by any defect, or intemperately used then is the body put out of tune, and made
subject to diseases.

1. For the Air, let it not be too cold nor too hot, and choose rather to wear
by day, and to be covered, at night, with too many cloths, than too few; and
let your apparel be rather stuff then cloth, which will soonest catch, and
longest hold Infection: but take heed of too great heat. Mercurialis tells of
many Smiths and Glass-men that died in the Plague at Venice, who by the heat of
fire had made their bodies too open and apt to receive Infection.

2. As for Sleep, let it be moderate, and take heed of too much watching.

3. Let your Passions be calmed, and your mind serene, and as much as possible
refrain Anger and banish Fear.

4. Let your Exercise be moderate, and forbear over-heating your body, whereby
you will be necessitated to draw in more air; and it has been observed that
many hard Laborers, have not only been infected, but died of the Plague.

5. For Repletion and Evacuation, take heed of Excess, and keep your body
neither too loose nor costive: Look upon Venus to be as great a friend to the
Plague as Mars or Saturn, and the Venereal Marks and Swellings no preservative
against the Spots and Botches of the Pestilence. It is no less unfortunate and
wretched, than devilish and wicked advice, for any to get the Pox, to avoid
the Plague; for Experience, which is the Mistress of Fools, has taught some,
that have no care of their souls, that it is as dangerous for the body to go
into some other Houses, as into a Pesthouse.

Lastly, For Meat and Drink, you are to have respect not only to the Quality,
that it be good and wholesome (and take heed of surfeiting on any Summer fruit)
but also to the Quantity of what you take. As the body is not to be weakened,
nor the Spirits spent with Fasting, so is it not to be overcharged with
Surfeiting: They that will eat till they can feel the meat with their fingers,
and drink till they can paddle with the liquor in their throats, and be ready
to shed it out of their mouths, are in the way of cutting their throat with
their tongue, and digging their grave with their teeth. Mercurialis says of
his own knowledge, They are much deceived, who think to preserve themselves by
eating and drinking; and tells of many great drinkers both at Padua and at
Venice, that died of the Plague, from which they thought to preserve themselves
by drinking Wine. It was the Saying of a Politician, that, Maxima pars
frugalitatis est been domatus venture; so it may be the Aphorism of a
Physician, Maxima pars sanitatis est been domatus venture. As he that loves
pleasure, will not be quickly rich, so he that is given to excess, will not be
long well. Temperance and Abstinence as they are not only remedies against
most diseases, as Lessius treats at large in his Spare Diet, and Cornaro made
experiment, by a little and very wholesome food, so are they also a great
corrector of any inconvenience that comes by evil nourishment. When the
impregnable City of Carlisle, under the government of the most invincible and
resolute Governor Sir Thomas Glenham, in the late Wars, was besieged by an
Army of Warlike English and hardy Scots, there was great scarcity of Provision;
the besieged did eat all the Dogs and Cats, never Roast-beef was sold so dear
as Horseflesh; of which when Horses were killed and sold in the Market, no
Family for their money, might have above their allowance; the best provision
that an Officers wife could procure whilst she lay in Childbed, was a young
Colt: the Soldiers were allowed but two meals a week, and that was a quantity
of beans, and the water they were boiled in, and yet so courageous as to say,
Give us but a Bean a Day, and we will keep the Town. Though the City was full
of Inhabitants and Garrison Soldiers, and many of the Loyal Gentry, and diverse
Valiant Knights, and delicate and tender Ladies came to live there, to defend,
and be defended in the place; yet during all that Siege of above forty weeks,
as I have been credibly informed, there was not one person sick or died, except
one Woman, who surfeited upon Bread made of Hemp Seed. And if you would know
what an excellent Antidote Temperance does furnish you with against the Plague,
Histories will tell you, that in the most grievous Plague at Athens, described
by Thucidydes, Socrates the Philosopher lived free and not infected. To
conclude, sleep when you are drowsy, rest when you are weary, drink when you
are dry, and eat when you are hungry; and mix with your Diet something that is
cordial, as Vinegar and Nutmeg where it is agreeable, and rise from the Table
with an appetite.

Of Issues.
Seeing it may easily come to pass, that in unhealthy times, notwithstanding
the most exact Observation of Diet, some bad humors may be bred in the body,
which may prove offensive to Nature, it will be convenient to have recourse to
issues, one in the left arm, and the other in the right leg or thigh, and by
how much the greater is your danger, the more issues you ought to make: the
benefit will recompense the trouble, for they evacuate excrementitious humors,
which might become a receptacle for the Sickness; for the prevention whereof,
they have been found a sovereign and useful remedy. Mercurialis in the 23.
Chapter of his Book of the Plague, says, That he did not only find these
Issues to be much commended by Nicholaus Florentinus, a Physician of great
authority, but has also proved them to be excellent by his own experience, and
that he can testify, that amongst almost an innumerable company which he saw
dead of the Plague, he never saw but one that had an issue* and desirous to be
further satisfied, he made inquiry among other Physicians, who testified the
same, that they likewise never saw one dead that had an Issue. Which may be an
argument that they are very helpful, and there is good reason for it; because
like sinks they continually drain the body of superfluous humors. And Skenkius
in his Sixth Book of his Observations concerning Epidemical Diseases, relates,
that many make Issues and raise Blisters with prosperous and good success of
health and safety, although they do converse with thousands of them that die.
And for this purpose Physicians forbid the drying up of running sores, the
healing of filthy ulcers, or striking in the itch.

And though some may say, It is good sleeping in a whole skin, yet it is not
good dying in one; and you were better to have your skin broken with a Lance
or Cautery, than with a Botch or Blain; and you will find it less cost, pain,
or trouble, to go to a Chyrurgeon to make an Issue, than to have him come to
you to dress a Carbuncle: Or else you may make one your self, for to handle a
Launcet is as soon learned as to sew with a Needle; and you may sooner grow
expert to cut your skin, than to work Cut-work: and though it may seem irksome
to keep them always running, yet there is no more danger of drying them up,
when the Cause for which they were made is removed, than there would be to heal
a cut in the arm, or broken shin, that has been sore, or run a quarter of a
year: and though some have died that have had Issues, and neglected other
helps, it is no more disparagement to the Medicine, than that a Town having good
ditches, should be taken by an Enemy that entered in at the Gates that lay open
and secure, and which ought to have been defended by other helps and forces.

The Third Cause of the Pestilence, against which for our preservation we must
defend our selves, is Contagion and Infection.
Seeing it is almost impossible to avoid the occasions of Infection, which may
either assault you against your will, or invade you against your knowledge, or
set upon you on a sudden, to the end that you may break the force of it, that
it may have less power to enter in, and you more strength to keep it out, you
must make use not only of Purges, Vomits, and Issues, which are not helps
directly, and of themselves contrary to the Plague; but also, you must have
recourse to appropriate Medicines both external and internal, Amulets and
Antidotes.

Of Amulets.
Amulets are certain outward medicines most commonly made of poisonous things,
hung about the Neck and worn upon the Breast, supposed to have a hidden power
and secret virtue to defend the heart from the venom of the Pestilence. They
are worn upon the breast, because the heart is the place principally affected
in this Disease: but whence and how they have their operation, the learned
differ and vary in opinion.

Some think that the heart becomes thereby somewhat more familiar and
accustomed to poison* and will not so easily be hurt and overcome by it.

Others are of opinion, That Arsnick, and such like hot things, whereof Amulets
are made, do dry up noxious humors, and disperse offensive vapors, as we see
the heat of fire dries moisture, and hinders Putrefaction.

Others think that these Amulets being placed near the Heart, the Vital Spirits
do thereupon, by a certain averseness and antipathy unite themselves together
and become the stronger; as we see Springs and Fountains, by reason of the
coldness of the ambient Air in Winter time, do keep in all their heat, and even
smoke with warmth.

Others say it is done by Atraction, as it is commonly said, That hot Bread and
Onions will draw unto them all the Infection in the Room. And these Amulets by
a kind of sympathy do intercept the pestilential vapors before they can be
received into the body; or else presently draw them out before they can settle
there to do any mischief to the Heart, it being in this case as with one that
is stricken of a Viper or Scorpion, who is best cured by applying and binding
to the place the bruised body of the beast that stung him, and if they cannot
get that, they apply some other venomous creature, and the party will presently
be relieved, as if the venom had been drawn out by a Cupping-Glasse; for one
poison having a conformity with another, does move and join it self unto it,
and affects union with it; even as we see, that holding a burnt hand to the
fire, draws out the heat; and bathing a frozen member in Spring Water, helps it
of the cold and numbness.

But whatsoever the cause be, they are much commended, and Mercurialis that
prescribes this, says that Pope Adrian the Sixth did wear one.

Take of white Arsenick two ounces, white Dittany and English Saffron, of each
two drams, of Camphire and Euphorbium of each one dram, beat them into Powder,
and with Gum Arabic dissolved in Rose Water, make them into little Cakes about
the breadth of a Shilling, and the thickness of two half Crowns, and dry them
in the Sun, or in an Oven after the Bread is taken out.

Skenkius commends this: Take white Arsenick two ounces, yellow Arsenick one
ounce, powder them, and with the white of an Egg, or Gum Dragon dissolved in
water, make them into Cakes, as aforesaid.

Some there be, that would have only a piece of Arsenick sewed in Silk, and
worn in the bosom, and have little or nothing mixed with it, least it should
hinder its virtue and efficacy of operation; others put in many things, that
some of them might meet with and resist the pestilential venom, which
oftentimes is not of the same, but of a different and various Nature.

Sennertus directs this: Take of white Arsenick two ounces, Zedoary two drams,
Saffron one scruple, Camphire half a dram; beat all into powder, and with Gum
Arabic dissolved in Rose Water, as aforesaid, make it into Cakes.

Rhenanus commends this as the most perfect Amulet, which has this property,
to be moist, and as it were sweat, at the approach or presence of the
Pestilential venom, and they are then to be dried at the fire, or over a fume.
Take (says he) of white and yellow Arsenick of each half an ounce, the powder
of dried Toads two ounces, Mercury sublimed, Wheat Flower, the Roots of
Dittany, of each three drams, Saffron, the Fragments of Jacynth and Emerald, of
each one scruple, make them all into powder, and with Gum Dragon dissolved in
Rose Water, make them into Cakes, and dry them as aforesaid.

I need not tell you that you must not eat them, but sew them in a little silk
bag, fastening it to a ribbon, and hanging it about your Neck, let it lie about
the middle of your Breast. You are to avoid all violent exercise and
over-heating of your self, for fear of growing fainty whilst you wear it.

I have known some of these worn in the City of Bristol, in the time of the
Plague, and the parties sometimes would have little pimples like the Itch, rise
about the breadth of the Amulet in their Breast, which they did rub and
scratch, but never had the Plague, and are alive till now.

There are also some Physicians that praise Quicksilver as the best, and prefer
it before any other Amulet. Its virtue was found out thus, It is usual with the
Italian women to wear Quicksilver in their bosoms, enclosed in a Quill or
Nut-shell, against the drying up of their Milk, because by attenuating gross
humors, and rarifying thick blood in the veins, which could not pass the
kernels of the Breast, the Milk is thereby increased: Now it so fell out, that
during the Plague all those women that wore it, escaped Infection, and it has
since that grown in request, and has been fortunately tried several times. And
there be those which say they have known the shell break, and the Quicksilver
fall out at the very instant that the ware was infected, and this might be by
the super-abundance of the force and matter of the Contagion, which so little
Quicksilver could no longer resist or contain.

It is made thus.

Bore a hole in a Filberd or Hazel-nut, and with a Needle pick out the kernel,
and fill the shell with Quicksilver, and stop the hole with wax, and wear it
in your bosom, sewed in a little purse or bag of silk.

And whereas diverse Physicians have not only spoke but writ against these
Amulets, so likewise there are many altogether as learned, that have used them;
and whereas some might question the receiving of any inward benefit by such
external applications, one may also ask them if they did never hear of pigeons
applied to the feet, and compounded mixtures to the wrists, and plasters to
the Stomachs and Navels of sick Patients, to draw out such vapors and humors
which infest the body. It Is no difficult matter for an Apothecary to make a
little ball, which being held in the hand, and smelled to at the nose, will
extremely purge his Patient. Many have had their Bladder hurt, by having a
blistering plaster put to the Neck. And Skenkius mentions some that pist
blood, by carrying Cantharides about them in their purse or pocket. There be
them that will tell you that the liver of a Frog applied to the heart will
mitigate the fits of a burning Fever. A ring made of an Elkes claw is good
against the Falling Sickness, and some have been helped by wearing a Piony Root
about their Neck. It is for some good reason that Gold is given to those that
are cured of the King's Evil. Several restless and unquiet persons have found
ease by wearing of a spleen stone. The Aetites or Stone found in an Eagles
Nest, if worn above the middle of a woman with-child, preserves her from
miscarrying; but if below the thigh, does hasten her delivery; and if not then
taken away, her death. A piece of a dried Toad sewed in silk, and worn in the
bosom, helps bleeding at the Nose, so does the Heliotropian and Cornelian
Bloud-stone worn in bracelets about the Wrists or Neck. Why may not then such
things whereof Amulets are made, have operation against the Pestilence?

But if you fear the danger of having them near you, because they are esteemed
venomous, it may be said that Glass taken inwardly by its cutting corroding
quality may prove as deadly as Arsnick, which being worn only outwardly, may be
as innocent as Glass; and Quicksilver worn before your bosom, may be as
harmless as that behind your Looking-glass. The Plague is a venomous Disease,
and you were better wear poison on the outside of your skin, than the inside
of your heart; and though some have died with Amulets about their Necks, so
also have there with my Lady Kents powder in their bellies, and the last liquor
they have taken, has been Aqua Mirabilis, and yet both cordial and harmless.
You know Outworks may be useful for some Garrisons, though perhaps by
carelessnesse they have been surpised by the Enemy, and have no way benefited
that Town which they were made for to defend.

Of Antidotes.
As the Pestilence being the general and great Sickness (as has been formerly
showed) does comprehend in it something of the Nature of all other Diseases; so
we have hitherto already spoken of some general helps that belong to the cure
of other maladies, as well as of the Plague; but because it has in it
something more than ordinarily opposite, and pecullarly dstructive to the Vital
Spirits, we come now to speak of such Medicines which have a more than
ordinary, and especial virtue to resist its venom, and preserve the heart; and
these are Antidotes, which are to encounter the Disease not only afar off,
where we may chance to meet with it as we go abroad, but also near at hand,
when it comes to assault us at the doors and seize upon us in our Houses. And
here it is necessary to give direction,

What is to be done, when there is one sick or dead in the House wherein we
live.
This question may well be asked, because the danger is great, since you are
more apt to draw in the infected air, which the sick continually are breathing
out; yet if the sick recover, the venom of the Disease is then conquered and
dispersed, and seldom any of that family fall desperately ill, after the first
has escaped; but this danger is far more, when there is one lies a dying, for
it is observable, that then many of the Family are infected; since Nature in
the sick does by all means endeavor to drive out the venom by the breath and
pores. It Is in this case as when a Lamp or Candle burns, there is always some
fume, that rises from the flame, which would blacken any thing held near or
over it; but this is very little offensive, because the stinking noisome vapor
is consumed by the flame before it can reach to any considerable distance, but
when it is just burning or blown out, there comes from the the week or cotton,
a most noisome smell which spreads it self over all the room. Now in this case
you must be as careful as you can to avoid the parties breath, and some
Physicians advise to put a piece of hot bread before his mouth, to receive the
Infection, and afterward be sure to burn it. Some counsel to put a pail or two
of hot water in the Chamber: Some also put in a handful of green Copperas in
the water, and afterward throw in three or four hot burning bricks.

But in the mean time, you must be sure to take Antidotes, Vinegar either
simple or compound, as you were before directed, against the infectious Air.

Also for your preservation, this Antidote is very excellent: Take Diascordium
two ounces, Venice Treacle three drams, Confection of Iacynth two drams,
Nutmeg, Seeds of Rue, Root of Angelica, Zedoary and Elicampane of each two
drams powdered, Vinegar two ounces, Oil of Sulphur twenty four drops, Syrup of
the Juice of Citron, or Gilly-flowers enough to make it into a moist Electury;
and very often, or six or eight times a day, take of it as much as a pease, and
let it dissolve in your mouth, and swallow it down.

Or else use the tincture of Roses hereafter mentioned.

Or if you are hot and dry, and have a desire to drink, you may take as much
Conduit or Spring Water as you please, and drop into it as many drops of Oil of
Sulphur or Oil of Vitriol, or Spirit of Vitriol, as will make it as sharp as
you desire to drink it, and the sharper it is, the better; then sweeten it with
Sugar, and drink it up. You will find the excellent virtues of Vitriol in the
directions how to make Tincture of Roses.

If sometimes you cannot be without strong waters, you may drink Aqua Petasitis
Composita, or Angelica, or Imperial-water, or Aqua Mirabilis, or Treacle-water
at the Apothecaries; or some of that water that goes by the Name of the Lady
Allens Water.

If you must needs have Wine, you may put to a quart of Wine a dram of Angelica
root, or of Contrayerva root, or Virginia Snakeweed, and one Nutmeg bruised.

You may sometimes eat this breakfast, sprinkle Vinegar on toasted bread, then
spread it with butter, and put on it the powder of a Nutmeg, and eat it fasting.

Or else this, Toast a Nutmeg till it sweat, then powder it, and put to it as
much salt as you would eat with one bit of meat, and mix it with two
spoonfulls of Vinegar, and eat it.

Or else this, Take twenty leaves of Rue, one grain of Salt, two Figgs, and two
Walnuts, eat these sometimes in a morning fasting.

Wallnuts have a strange virtue against the Plague and Worms, and Droetus tells
of one that was executed for spreading of the Plague, that confessed he took
nothing to preserve himself, but a Wallnut roasted and a little burnt. Women
with-child, may eat Angelica stalks candied, or Citron peel candied, or
preserved; or drink a little Zedoary and Nutmeg, with Sugar, in a Glass of
Wine, Beer, or Ale.

If there be any infants that can take nothing, wash their bodies all over with
Vinegar, at Night when they go to Bed; once or twice a week you may do so to
elder children; and use it your self.

If you have neglected to make an Issue, you must lay one or two blistering
plasters broader than a five shilling piece, to the inside of one of your
arms, between the Elbow and Shoulder, and when it has raised a great Blister,
which will be in about twelve hours, you may take it off, and lay on the place
some Melilot plaster, or else a Plantain or Colewort Leaf, and change it twice
a day; and when that Blister is healed begin to make another in the other arm
or thigh, and keep one sore all the while you fear the Infection. You may have
plasters at the Apothecaries, or else make one your self thus; Take six
Spanish Flies, shread them very small, and mix them with a little Mustard and
Wheat Flower, or Dough, or Leaven moistened with a little Vinegar, spread it on
leather and apply it.

Let care be taken how Bread is brought home from the Bakers, because it will
draw to it any infection, and therefore you may do well to cover it with a
cloth, and put on that cloth another wet in Vinegar.

Be careful that your victuals stand not near the infected, and if you want
room, cover it with a cloth wet in Vinegar.

Again remember what I told you of Socrates to be very spare and moderate in
your Diet, discreet Abstinence is as good a Medicine as can be bought at the
Apothecaries.

Of Preservation from the Plague, when it may be caused by Fear and Imagination.
The learned Galenists in the method of their Cure, teach, that Diseases are to
be helped by contraries: Drowth is cured by Moisture, Heat with Coolers,
Consumptions with Restoratives, Poisons with Antidotes; so Fear must be cured
by its contrary Hope. The Industrious Chemists in their undertakings observe
some resemblance and agreement between the Agent and Patient, the Disease and
the Remedy; Aqua Fortis will melt Silver, but not Brimstone; Myrrh and
Frankincense will not dissolve in water, so will Gum Dragon and Arabic,
because they are of a watery Nature: Sulphurous Diseases must be removed with
Sulphur Medicines, Salt Diseases dissolved with Salts, Mercurial Maladies with
Mercurial Remedies, Tartareous pains eased with Tartar, and the Stone is best
cured with Stones, such as are Lapis Lincis, Spongiae, Iudaicus, etc. so
Imagination must be cured with Imagination, one Fancy by another, and Conceit
is the best Receipt for an Opinion. Thus Trallianus tells of one that imagined
he had a Snake in his Belly, who was cured by conveying a Snake into the Basin,
when his vomit wrought. Another thought he had Sparrows in his Head, and was
cured by one that brought some in his sleeve, who fumbling about his Ears, made
him believe he took them out from thence. One fancied that he had so big a
Nose, that he could not go abroad for fear of peoples treading on it in the
Streets, and was cured by a Physician, who coming to the Chamber Door, seemed
to be stopped for making further entrance, and being asked why he came not in,
desired the Patient to put aside his Nose, that he might get by it, without
treading on it; the Patient did so with his hand, the Doctor gravely enters by
the wall, and seemed very careful of his staff and steps; the Patient is well
pleased at the Doctors plain dealing with him, in acknowledging he had that
Disease which his Friends and Family did deny, and said, He was sure he was the
man that of all others must do the Cure, and desires his help. The Doctor
scarifies his Nose, and let us run upon and from it a great quantity of blood
that he had brought with him enclosed in an empty gut, and clapped a plaster to
it; and in a few days he grew well.

Imagination directs and moves the spirits and humors to such parts the fancy
runs upon; if one mind eating, the spirits run to the Stomach, and help
digestion; if venereal things, the spirits are sent to those parts that serve
for generation; if one be studious, they have recourse to the brain, to help
the memory and further invention; in one that is a coward, they descend to the
feet, and help the legs in running; in one that is quarrelsome they fly to his
hands, and his fingers itch to be a fighting; and in the sick that think well
of Cordials, the spirits pass presently from the Speculum or Septum Lucidum,
which is the Seat of Fancy in the Head, by a Nerve which Anatomists observe to
reach to the very substance of the Heart, where it begets hope, and this hope
makes confidence, and confidence brings joy, and joy excites heat, which
reviveth the spirits, whereby they better digest their Medicine, and as it were
join forces to overcome the Malady. This hope makes them obey the Doctors
precepts, and think highly of his Medicines, and those Medicines that conceited
persons think well of, the Stomach desires more earnestly, keeps them the more
closely, and digests them perfectly, whereas the best Medicine that they are
averse to, does do them little good; and it is for nothing that people desire a
fortunate Physician: Think well then of your Doctor, and oblige him whilst you
are in health, to venture his life to preserve you when you are sick; and think
gold ill saved from Apothecaries, to procure you and and your Household the
richest Medicines, if it must be laid out on Mercers and Tailors to provide
your Family mourning.

This Electuary is very excellent both against Fear, and a good preservative
against the Plague; Take Conserve of Roses, Gilly-flowers, Borage and Bugloss
Flowers of each two ounces, Candied Orange-flowers, Candied Citron, of each two
ounces, Powder of Laetificans Galeni half an ounce, Cinnamon, Zedoary Roman,
Doronicum of each two drams, Saffron one dram, make those things into powder
that are to be powdered, and with syrup of the rinds of Citron make an
Electuary, of which you are to take the quantity of a great Nutmeg Morning and
Evening.

Of the Cure of the Pestilence.
It was the direction of a wealthy Citizen, when he took an Ingenious Youth an
Apprentice into his House, that by reason of the badnesse of the times, he
should think every one that he did not know, which came into the Shop, to be a
thief: Now in these dangerous and contageous times, when all Diseases are so
apt to turn into the Plague, you may do well to suspect every Disease to be the
same; and though it come like some old Customer, disguised like the Headache,
which you have formerly had after too liberal drinking; or like some pain about
the Stomach which has oppressed you after excessive feeding, or some old Fever
or Ague that you have formerly been acquainted with; yet suspect it to be the
Plague, and trust not to your own strength, in hope that you shall grow better,
for fear you should grow worse; for he that delays to take Medicines before
his strength fails, is almost in as bad or worse case, than he that would not
make use of a ladder, till after he had broke his Neck. In this case the
opinion of the most judicious Sennertus is very considerable, lib. 4 of Fevers
cap. 6. I think (says he) so many men do die of the Plague, because most of
them take Antidotes too late; who might have been recovered, if they had took
them sooner, before the venom of the Disease had corrupted the humors of the
Body. I have sometimes observed in Pestilential Seasons, that some as soon as
ever they have perceived themselves infected, have presently taken some
Antidote, and put themselves in a sweat, and presently after have recovered,
and the day following have gone about their wonted occasions: whereas if they
did delay 8. or 12. hours before they took some medicine, scarce one of a
hundred did escape.

As that is a happy Nation, which provides in times of Peace and Plenty, for
things useful in War and Famine; and as it becomes good Soldiers to have their
arms ready, and fixed, before the Enemy enters the Town, and not have them then
to buy at the Gun-smiths: so should you be furnished with some Medicines ready
made, and not lose so much time, whilst you get a Physician to prescribe, and
an Apothecary to compound them; and it were far better, that the Medicine were
lost for want of taking, than you lost for want of a Medicine; and it were far
safer to cure any Disease, as the Plague, than to neglect or cure the Plague,
as any other Disease.

First then, As soon as ever you feel your self ill, without further staying
for, or expecting the Signs or Symptoms, the Spots, Botch, Blain, or
Carbuncle, having called upon God for pardon, favor and assistance, betake
your self to remedies, such as are Cordials and Antidotes, to defend the heart
against poison.

The Simple are, White Wind Vinegar, the Roots of Virginia Snakeweed,
Contrayerva, Pestilence Wort, Angelica Elieampane, Zedoary, Tormentil,
Valerian, Lovage, Divilsbit, Dittany, Master-wort, etc. The Leaves of Sage and
Rue, Berries of Ivy and Juniper, Wallnuts, Nutmegs, Bole Armenick, Terra
Sigillata, Fragments of Iacynth, Emerald and Sapphire, Bezar, Bone in a Staggs
Heart, Hartshorn, Horn of a Rhinoceros, Unicorns Horn, Crabs Eyes, and Tips of
Crabs Claws, etc.

The Compound are, Venice and London Treacle, Mithridate, Diascordium,
Confection of Iacynth, Electuary de Ovo, Pulvis Saxonicus, Species Liber antis,
Gascoygne Powder, the Lady Kents Powder, Compound water of Pestilence-wort,
Compound Angelica-water, Bezar-water, Treacle-water, Treacle-vinegar, Troches
of Vipers, Oil of Sulphur and Vitriol, and a thousand others, as the Physician
can direct, as he sees occasion; all which do serve for Cure and Preservation.

As soon then as ever you feel your self sick, take some Antidote to make you
sweat; for which purpose, This Contra-pestilential Vinegar is excellent.

Take Nutmegs, the Roots of Virginia Snakeweed, Contrayerva, Pestilence-wort,
Angelica, Elicampane, Zedoary, Tormentil, Master wort, Devilsbit, Ivy Berries,
Juniper Berries, of each one ounce bruised; Sage and Rue washed in Vinegar, of
each one handful, Saffron one dram, Juice or Syrup of Elder Berries two ounces.
To every ounce of the roots, put half a pint of White Wind Vinegar, stop them
close in a Glass Bottle, and let them stand infused till you use them.

Or else, Take Nutmegs, the Roots of Contrayerva, Virginia Snakeweed,
Pestilence-wort, Angelica, Elicampane, Tormentil, Zedoary, of each one ounce,
bruised Sage and Rue of each one handful, washed in Vinegar. To every ounce put
in half apint of White Wind Vinegar, and stop it close in a Bottle, and let it
stand for your use.

Or else, Take Nutmegs, Angelica, and Elicampan^ Root of each one ounce, Sage
and Rue washed in Vinegar, of each one handful, put to them for every ounce half
a pint of White Wind Vinegar, and stop it close in a Bottle, and keep it for
use.

Or else, Take Tormentil and Celendine of each four ounces, Scabius and Rue of
each two handfuls: Boil them in two quarts of White Wind Vinegar in an earthen
glased vessel, for a quarter of an hour, and let it cool, and bottle it up.

Note that the most compounded are the best. Now take any of these Vinegars, or
else (if you can get no other) plain White Wind Vinegar twelve spoonfuls more
or less, but as much as you can well drink down, and mix with it two drams of
London Treacle, or Venice Treacle, or Mithridate, or Diascordium, or Confection
of Iacynth; stir it about and drink it up, and go to Bed and sweat. Two drams
of any of these is a sufficient ordinary dose, or quantity, for an ordinary
person to take at once; they that are stronger than ordinary, may take more;
those that are weaker, may take less.

If you cast or vomit it up; take presently within a quarter of an hour,
another dose or quantity; and if you cast or vomit up that also, take another
and less quantity; for it may well be that your stomach being laden with
corrupt humors, being a little assisted with the Medicine, may rise up and
strive to exclude them, and that with fortunate success and hopes of future and
more speedy recovery.

Remember that the saving of your life consists in sweating out the poison of
the Disease; and therefore you must endeavor to sweat as long as possibly you
can endure it, whether it be three, six, or twelve hours, the longer the
better, and avoid sleeping, and let the sweat be wiped off with hot cloths.

All the time you sweat, and afterward, you may sustain Nature, and keep up
your spirits, by eating some preserved or candied Citron peel, or candied
Angelica stalks, or preserved Raspices, or Syrup of Citron, or
Clove-Gilly-flowers; now and then drinking a spoonful or more of Vinegar, or
taking some posset drink made with Vinegar, you may afterward eat some
Hartshorn Gelly, or drink some Almond Milk, made with distilled waters, or
Barley-water, putting into it a few drops of Oil of Vitriol, to make it sharp.

Remember also that you drink not any liquor whatsoever, unless you first make
water, though never so little, and then you may drink without danger.

During the time of Sweating, the Sick should be comforted with sweet perfumes
and odors that refresh the spirits, and some Rose Water and Vinegar is
convenient to be cast on a hot shovel, or else sprinkled on a Napkin and laid
near his Nose.

Also whilst the Sick does sweat, it would be good to apply to the Navel a hot
Loaf with a hole made in it, and two drams of Treacle put therein, that the
bread may draw the venom: Some apply to the heart the pith of a Manchet dipped
in Vinegar, and some apply only a cloth dipped in Vinegar: Some bruise radishes
and lay them to the feet.

When you have done Sweating, if you can be persuaded, you are to forbear the
changing of your Linen; but if you must needs change it, as you tender and
regard your life, put on no fresh linen, though never so well dried and aired
by the fire; but put on some linen that has been worn by your self or some
body else: for if you put on fresh linen, whether it be by reason of the soap
that has some malignity in it, or for some other cause, it has been often
observed that the Sick have relapsed into great anxiety, and bad symptoms, the
forerunners of Death, have quickly returned upon them.

Some do highly commends this, Take of Bezar-stone and Emerald powdered, of
each seven grains, Iacynth powdered three grains; It is best to put them in a
spoonful of Vinegar, and swallow it down, and drink some more Vinegar after it.

Sennertus commends this, Take Bezar-stone twelve grains, the bone of a Staggs
heart one scruple, Emerald and Iacynth of each seven grains, powder them very
small, and take them with Vinegar: But because true Bezar-stone is hard to be
gotten, and there be those in the World that have done as great matters as
counterfeit them, that you cannot know the true from the false; and because the
fragments of those precious stones, which be commonly sold, are but the spare
and crust of them, I would be loath to venture my life on their operation,
neither do I persuade others to rely upon them.

The root of Virginia Snakeweed and Contrayerva are most excellent, and you may
take the weight of half a dram of each of them in powder, or a dram of any one
of them in powder in a spoonful of Vinegar, drinking a draught of Vinegar after
it.

For young children that can take nothing, let them be wrapped in a cloth that
has been used before, and dipped in Vinegar, and put the child in the cloth so
wet, and let him sweat.

Elder persons may sweat the same way also, being wrapped in a sheet dipped in
Vinegar.

In the Works of several Physicians, there is often mention of taking Vinegar,
as it were by the By, in a small inconsiderable quantity, not for its own sake,
but with other Medicines, as if it were only a thing to help them down the
better, and make them pallatable; they will tell you that Vinegar is good with
Cucumbers, and gives a pleasing relish to a Sallet; whereas in truth neither
one nor the other are good, but only with Vinegar. It is a thing, which is not
only wholesome in it self, but also makes other things wholesome, and takes
away their hurtfulnesse. When you speak of this singular liquor, away with cold
commendations, which argue rather a willingness to dispraise, than a readiness
to commend: If it did whet ones wit, as much as sharpen ones stomach, there
could nothing dull or flat be spoken of it. It is Food and Physic, Meat and
Medicine, Drink and Julep, Cordial and Antidote: Did you formerly taste it but
as a common Sauce? do you now eat it as a common Remedy. When you are well,
it is a Preservative from Sickness; when you are sick it is a Restorative to
Health. It Is like Apparel, which you put on, not only for comeliness, to hide
shame, but also for warmth, to keep out cold. It Is like the Swords which
Gallants wear, not only for Ornament when they walk, but also for defense, to
fright a Thief when they travail, and slay an Enemy when they fight. It Is
Relish for Sauce, it is Sauce for Meat, it is Medicine for Diseases, it is cordial
for the heart, not only a Cordial for the Spirits, but an Antidote against
Poison; not only an Antidote against Poison, but against the Plague, the chief
of poisons: so Vinegar is the chief of Antidotes, as the Sword is the King of
Weapons.

If you look upon the Plague as caused by the Corruption of the Air, you may
take notice that the Air which deadeneth and sowreth other liquors, does not
hurt Vinegar, but rather exalt its virtue. It Is something to preserve it self;
but that is not all; its virtue is communicated, and preserves others. If Roots,
Herbs, Flowers, and Fruits, be steeped in Vinegar, they are kept thereby from
withering, moulding, and decay.

If you consider the Plague, as arising from the Corruption of the Humors (as
indeed it is the supreme and highest degree of Putrefaction) you may also take
notice there is nothing that resists it more. It Is Vinegar that keeps Fish, as
Salmon and Oisters, and the like (which otherwise would soon corrupt) from
rottenness and stinking; and if it would not do the like for flesh, why has
it been so much used for the embalming of Dead Corpses; nay, it does not only
preserve, but recover Flesh from Corruption. Roast stinking Meat, and baste it
with Vinegar, and it shall neither offend your Nose or Palate.

If you look upon the Plague as a Poison, Vinegar is an Antidote against it.
Hence it is that Physicians to suppress and take away the fiery venom of
Spurge, Laurel, Mezereon, and other plants, steep them in Vinegar, and so give
them safely to their Patients, whereas otherwise they would kill and be a worse
Remedy than the Disease. Some have been choakt by eating of poisonous
Mushromes, but had they taken a Draught of Vinegar, they had been out of
danger; but that is a small matter, not to be choakt with a Mushrome. Hypoc.
says, that, Those who are strangled and foam about the mouth, though they be
not quite dead, yet do never recover to life again. Yet Christoph. a Vega tells
of one that was strangled with a rope, and did foam about the mouth, and yet
was recovered by drinking Vinegar. The heart of a Viper being dexterously cut
out of the body, will live and move 24. hours after, but cast a drop of Vinegar
on it, and it dies presently. Dioscorides tells you that it resists all poisons
hot and cold; and Celsus says, it is the most effectual remedy against them;
and tells of one that was poisoned by the sting of an Asp, and being at such a
place where there was no liquor, and not being able to go to another, where any
might be had, by chance he found a flagon of Vinegar, and drank it all off, and
presently recovered.

If you consider the Plague as bred by Ill Diet, what is more commonly eaten
with dangerous Meats with Vinegar? If that go along with it, your stomach is
guarded from receiving hurt; How else could you eat such viands, as Muscles,
Oysters, and Mushromes? Malt is a sad thing wherewith to make Bread, and yet
the Meal thereof tempered with Ale Vinegar (nothing to be compared for goodness
to Wine Vinegar) in a besieged Garrison has been hearty and wholesome.

If you look upon the Plague spread by Contagion, there is nothing that does
sooner choke and smother it.

Is the Plague attended with a Burning Fever? nothing does sooner extinguish
fire. Let it not seem tedious, to consider a little how it preventeth or
assuageth its grievous symptoms. Have you not seen when some sorts of liquor
have been put into hot Milk, how it all presently turns to Curds and Whey, and
upon stirring, the Curds go one way, and the Whey another; in somewhat like
manner it is, when the Plague infects the blood, the thin and watery part
sweats, and is as it were spewed out of the Capillary small veins into the
skin, and becomes Spots, where staying a little while, it loses its proper
color, and appears various to the eye, according to the humor that is mixed
with it, as if it be Choler, they incline to a purple or dark yellow; if from
Phlegm, they are paler; if from Humors, more adust, they are blew and
blackish; but the thicker and grosser part goes to Botches and Carbuncles on
the top of the flesh or outside of the Skin, even as you see in boiling of the
said Whey, the Curds will rise to the top of the Vessel.

Now Vinegar hinders and preventeth both these, the Spots, by resisting the
Putrefaction; and then the Carbuncles, by suppressing the Inflammation of the
Blood. Vis est mirifica refrigerandi Sanguinis indege arcendi Putredinis, e qua
febris Pestilens suboritur, and reprimendi fervoris ac incendii sanguinis un^^
Carbunculi nascuntur. Such sour things (says Vidus Vidius a very great Master
of Medicines) do work wonders, in cooling the Blood, and driving away
Putrefaction, which cause Pestilent Fevers, and suppressing the heat and
burning of the Blood, from whence Carbuncles do arise.

Has the Plague taken away your stomach? Vinegar will stir it up, and get you
an Appetite unto your Meat. Is your Throat scorcht, your Tongue black and
chopped, and your Mouth sore? any ordinary Nurse will tell you the virtue of
Vinegar to make a Gargarisme, and wash it. Are you like to be choakt with
Phlegm? Syrup of Vinegar is a common Medicine to cut it. Is your Brain laden
with vapors, that you are like one in a Lethargy or Dead-Sleep? let some
Vinegar on a hot iron be smoakt under your Nose, and it presently makes you to
awake. Are you pained in the head, and troubled with tedious watching? wet a
Rose-Cake or Cloth in Vinegar, and lay it to your Temples, and you may go to
sleep, and take your rest.

But least so much Vinegar in any one should cause the heart-burn, and make him
look sour, and set his Teeth and Tongue on edge to discourage you from using
it, as not approving it himself, you may consider, that there be some that
laugh at Unicorns Horn, and say Treacle is too hot, that find fault with
Tormentil as too binding, and dispraise Bole Armenick as too stopping. One
thing is too dry, another too cold, this hurts the Stomach, and that the
Bladder, every thing must be condemned, but what themselves extol. Cervantes
(in his time, the wit of Spain) derides in the person of Don Pedro Rezio
Physi^^^^ to Sancho Panca, such find-fault Philosophers. (...) will say that
Broth ingenders Rheum, and Mutton is Choleric, that Brawn breeds viscous
Humors, and Lamb is hard of digestion, that Veal turns into waterish, and Beef
into gross blood, that Pork is phlegmatic, and Venison melancholy, and
Partridge most dangerous to eat, for fear of surfeiting.

Many Antidotes and Medicines, as well as some Meats, may have some
inconvenience, but that is inconsiderable, in regard of the benefit by them.
Think you not, that it is a disquiet for Citizens to make their Town a
Carrison? and yet who would not receive a Regiment, to defend them from an
Enemy? I have known Soldiers that have been troublesome in the House where
they have quartered, and yet have been born with, because of the service they
were to do. Had you rather a Child should be drowned, than pulled out of the
water by the hair, when one cannot take him by the hand? They that will not put
their mouths out of taste, to put their lives out of danger, are fitter to have
their heads purged with Hellebore, than their hearts preserved with Cordials. I
have heard of one, writing to a Judge for a friend, entreated him, If he was
innocent, that he would free him for his own sake; but if he was guilty, that
he would yet free him for his sake; but however he must free him. If Vinegar be
simple and uncompounded, take it for its own (...) mixed with other Antidotes,
take it for (...); but however take Vinegar. Pliny finds fault with Physicians
(...) his time, for not knowing its excellent virtue. Vinegar being contrary to
most other liquors in distillation, may well have something more than ordinary
in operation: The Spirits of Wine and Beer, and other liquors, presently
exhale, and fly away, and have nothing but phlegm; but when Vinegar is
distilled, the phlegm rises first, and the Spirits stay behind.

Now as Galen says of Poisons, the hundredth part of a Cantharides does not
hurt, nor one spark of fire burn to any purpose; so it is in Cordials, too
little will do little good, there must be a considerable quantity, and
sufficient dose; you cannot in reason think one spoonful of Vinegar enough to
quench such a heat, as the Plague brings.

It Is for the virtue of Vinegar that I wrote this Book. I would be loath to
present you a Glo-worm instead of a Diamond, or put a Bulrush instead of a
Spear into your hand, when you are to fight with such an Enemy. Imagine well,
and think highly of this Medicine. I value my own life, as much as another man
does his. I had rather take Vinegar by it self, than many other, nay then any
other single medicine without it. Despise it not, because it is easy to be had,
neither let it be contemned, because familiar. It is the more excellent,
because common; the more precious, because cheap; the virtues of it so many,
they will hardly be believed; and therefore the greater, because incredible.

But because the pestilent venom has a power to corrupt, putrify, and
inflame the humors, and oftentimes the Sickness is accompanied with a Fever,
which sometimes may be almost as dangerous as the Plague, there must be care
taken thereof; so that as you may not by too cold things strike in the Plague,
so by too hot, you may not exasperate the Fever, but have respect to both: for
which purpose you may take cordial and cooling Juleps, made of distilled
waters, of Sorrel, Endive, Cichory, Borage, Bugloss, Meadow sweet, Angelica,
Dragons Dandelyon, Betony, Scabius, Balm, Fumitory, to which you may put as
much oil of Brimstone, or Vitriol, as will make it very sharp to your taste,
and to every quart thereof about half a dram of Lapi^ Prunella, or Sal Niter,
or Sal Peter, and afterward sweeten it with any Cordial Syrups, as of
Gilly-flowers, Citrons, Lemons, Violets, adding to it, if you please,
Alchermes, and when you are hot and dry, you may drink as much as you please,
and as often as you will. As thus,

Take of Meadowsweet and Cichory water, of each one pint, of Borage and
Buglosse water half a pint, of Dragon and Angelica water of each four ounces;
put to it as much Oil of Vitriol as will make it very sharp, then add to it a
dram of Lapis Prunella powdered, Syrup of Gilly-flowers four ounces, Alchermes
two drams, and drink as much and as often as you please.

Or else you may make the Tincture of Roses thus.

Boil four quarts of Spring Water, then let it cool, till it be but about
scalding hot, then put it into a glased earthen pot, and put to it two good
handfuls, or two ounces of dried Red-Rose leaves, and stir them in the water,
that they may be all wet, then put to them one Silver spoonful of Oil of
Brimstone, or Oil of Vitriol, or as much as will make the liquor very sharp,
stir it all about, and presently the Roses and the liquor will be of a delicate
red color; then let it stand covered about four hours, then strain it gently
without squeezing, into an earthen pan, and sweeten it with a pound or two of
Loaf-Sugar more or less, as you please, and with more Oil of Vitriol make it
very sharp for your taste, and keep it in Glass-bottles, and when you are hot
and dry, drink as much as you please; and if you list, you may put any Cordial
Syrup to it, as Gilly-flowers, juice of Citron, Lemons, Poppies, or the like.

Or else you may take some Spring Water, and put it fresh into a Glass, and
drop some Oil of Vitriol or Brimstone into it, to make it sharp, and sweeten it
with Sugar, and drink it, both as a Preservative against a Fever or the Plague;
and as a Medicine and Julep in time of Sickness; and let me tell you that
plain Spring Water and Oil of Vitriol or Brimstone, is a better Julep in the
Plague, Pestilent, Malignant, and other burning Fever, than almost any other
distilled water without it.

Note that it is a vain and scrupulous error, to take when you are dry and
burning hot, but two or three spoonfuls of Julep at a time. I never denied my
Patients drink in the heat of a Fever, but let them drink Julep as much as they
please, for a little Julep does but little good, and rather increases the
heat, as the pouring of a little Water on a Smiths fire does make it flame the
more, and burn the hotter, whereas a great deal does quite extinguish it and
put it out.

And because this Oil of Vitriol is so excellent and useful a remedy mixed with
water, in this and all hot Diseases, I should advise every ingenuous person
that lives in the Country, never to be without it.

These Oils you must understand, cannot be taken by themselves, but with spring
or distilled waters; and you must be careful of spilling any drop on your
cloths, for then it will fret and make a hole in them. Now if you refuse to
meddle with them, for fear of receiving any hurt, you may as well do so by
fire, which you must not sit by, least a spark light on your apron, neither
must men take Tobacco for fear of burning their faces. And yet I must tell you
that it is better to have a spot on your gown, or a hole in your cloths, which
the negligent slabbering of it may occasion, than a Purple in your Skin, or a
Botch or Carbuncle in your Flesh, which the discreet taking of it will hinder.

I have heard of a Norwegian, that coming out of his frozen Country, into the
South parts of the World, saw some Damask Roses growing in a Garden, and said,
Well may the weather be so hot, when fire grows upon the Trees; at which the
hearers fell a-laughing, and told him they were most sweet and fragrant
flowers, as pleasing to the smell as delightful to the eye, and gathered him
one, and bid him smell to it, but he refused, neither would he take it into his
hands for fear of burning his fingers, nor smell to it least he should fire his
beard, or singe his furred cap.

To persuade you not to fear, but use this Oil of Vitriol, let me tell you what
the most candid and judicious Sennertus says of it in his fourth Book and 11th
Chapter of the cure of pestilent and malignant Fevers. Great in this case is
the use of Oil of Vitriol, which has a notable faculty to stay putrefaction,
to open obstructions, to cut, disperse, attenuate, cleanse, and separate all
corrupt humors, and further the activity, and exalt the virtue of other
medicines with which it is most usefully mingled; for whereas the Syrups of
Succory, Endive, Violets, and the rest, by reason of the Sugar in them, are not
sufficient to extinguish the heat nor thirst in a Fever, but are rather turned
into choler; yet if Oil of Vitriol be mixed with them, so us to make them
sharp, they most happily slake the thirst and allay the heat, and with good
success answer the expectation for which they were taken. And Mindererus in his
15. chap. of his Book of the Pestilence, where he treats of the Oil of
Vitriol and Brimstone, says, There is no Putrefaction, whose strength it does
not break, no infection which it does not overcome, no depravation of humors
which they do not rectify. In truth, if I may speak freely, if I should be
hindered or forbid the use of Vitriol, I would never come to the cure of the
Plague, or if I did come, I should come disarmed.

Afterward, when you find your self at any time of your Sickness, especially
at the end of any burning fit, inclinable to sweat, you are to follow the
conduct of Nature and endeavor to second it by the use of Medicines.

For which purpose, Take two drams of Confection of Iacynth, or Diascordium, or
one dram of Electuary de Ovo, or of the Powder of Cantrayerva, or Virginia
Snakeweed, or of the Powder of Crabs Eyes and Claws and burnt Hartshorn, as
formerly you were directed; or else two drams of Gascoyn powder made without
Bezar. And indeed considering the uncertainty of true Bezar, there may be
Gascoyne powder made as well without Bezar as Confectio Alchermes made without
Musk; for as some cannot endure the smell of Musk, so many cannot go to the
price of Bezar. Or else you may take some of the compounded Vinegars, ordering
your self for sweating, as you were formerly directed.

As for Purging and Bleeding, there have been many learned Physicians that have
made diligent enquiry into the Nature of the Pestilence, and cure thereof, who
would have it wholly omitted, and do commend rather timerousness than rashness
in opening a vein; for neither purging nor bleeding do oppose the Disease, but
weaken the party. In this case, the Saying of Hypocrates is very considerable;
Where Nature aims its course, thither it behooves the Physician to direct his
help. Now Nature labors by all means to expel the venom of the Disease to the
Superficies and out side of the Body, and bleeding and purging draw it inwards
toward the heart, the Center and Seat of Life. What is said of War ( Non lioet
his peccare (for the first error will be your overthrow) is true in the cure of
the Plague, the first error will be your danger, and the second day of purging
or bleeding (if you live so long) the first day of your repentance. In this
Disease the blood is the life of the party, which if you take away, you soon
destroy. Paraeus, a most expert Chyrurgeon, in his Book of the Plague,
relates, that in the year 1566. when there was a great mortality throughout
all France, by reason of the Pestilence, he diligently enquired of all the
Physicians and Chyrurgeons of all the Cities where he came, what success their
Patients had after they were let blood and purged? whereunto they answered all
alike, That all that were infected with the Pestilence, and did bleed some
quantity of blood, or had their bodies somewhat strongly purged, thenceforth
waxed weaker and weaker, and so at length died; but others which were not let
blood and purged, but took Cordial Antidotes, for the most part escaped and
recovered their health.

Of the Blain, Botch, and Carbuncle.
The Blain is an angry little blister, somewhat like the Swine or Small Pox,
but far more painful, sometimes of a blue, reddish, or leaden color, and being
opened, affords corrupt matter. It may arise in any part; sometimes there
will be one or two, but never many: It seldom kills or hinders the cure of the
party; but being anointed with oil of Saint Iohnswort, will break, heal, and
scale of.

The Botch is a swelling about the bigness of a Nutmeg, Wallnut, or Hens Egg,
and comes in the Neck, or behind the Ears, if the Brain be affected; or under
the Armpits, from the Heart; or in the Groin, from the Liver; for cure
whereof, pull off the feathers from about the Rump of a Cock, Hen, or Pigeon,
and rub the Tail with Salt, and hold its Bill, and set the Tail hard to the
swelling, and it will die; then take another and another, and do so in manner
aforesaid, until the venom does not kill any more. Or else take the pith of a
hot Loaf from the Oven, and clap it to the Sore. Also it is very good to lance
it; for though some pain do thence arise, yet Nature does not draw back from
the place pained, but sends humors thither after the launcing. Also take
Wheat Flower, Honey, and the Yolke of an Egg, and Venice Turpentine, of each a
like quantity, mix it well, and lay it on just warm; this will ripen, draw,
and heal it. Or else take an ounce of Venice Turpentine, the Yolke of an Egg,
and Oil of Saint Iohns-Wort one spoonful, mix it, and apply it warm, it will
draw and heal it.

The Carbuncle, so called from its heat like a burning coal, rises in any part
of the body, like an exceeding angry Wheal, with a certain redness near it,
and as if a hole had been made with a hot iron, will quickly eat out a piece of
flesh about it. It ought presently to be scarified, to let out the venom; or
else you may burn the head of it with a small hot iron, and you need not fear
this burning to be too painful, for it touches nothing but the point of the
Carbuncle, which by reason of the scar that is there, is void of sense.

Paraeus commends this plaster, Take of Soot from a Chimney or Oven wherein
only Wood is burnt, four ounces, Common Salt two ounces, powder and mix them
with the Yolks of two Eggs, and apply it warm.

Others highly commend this, Take of Soot two ounces, Sour Leaven, Butter,
Venice Turpentine, Salt, of each one ounce, Castile Soap one ounce and a half,
Venice Treacle half an ounce, with the Yolks of three Eggs make it into a
plaster, and apply it twice or thrice a day.

Some direct to make a Circle about the Carbuncle with a right Blow Saphyr, and
say, that presently the Carbuncle dies as a Coal that is quenched with water;
according to that of the Poet, Sapphyri solo tactu Carbunclus abibit.

Diet in this Disease, especially during the Fever, ought strictly to be
observed: Avoid such things as turn into Choler, and breed bad Humors, such as
are Sugar Sops and Cawdels. I do not commend, but rather condemn the eating of
Eggs. I have made enquiry concerning Milk, and am satisfied, that those that
eat it during the Fever, never live long after, to complain of the hurt it did
them. You may safely take Water-Grewel and Panada with Corants, Mutton, Veal,
Chicken, or Barley-Broth, is wholesome, and if you eat any of the Flesh, let
your sauce be Vinegar. Almond-Milk made with Barley-Broth, is good and
pleasant, but Hartshorn Gelly is both, Meat and Medicine, so also is candied
and preserved Citron, eat but a little and often, Discretion, Moderation and
Temperance, are as good a Dish or Medicine as you can either fetch from the
Cooks or buy at the Apothecaries.

For a Fume.
Take Sulphur Vivum, otherwise called Quick Brimstone one pound, Saltpeter one
ounce, powder them severally, and melt them over the fire in an iron pan, then
stir into it an ounce of Yellow Amber powdered, and pour it out on a stone or
in a mould, and it will be a Cake: Break a piece of it less than a Nutmeg, and
light it at a Candle, and set it on a Trencher, and let it burn in the room
where you are.

Note that, A Grain is the weight of a Barley Corn. A Scruple is 20. Grains. A
Dram is 3. Scruples. An Ounce is 8. Drams.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
Page 28. Line 1. for Grasshoppers, read Grass. p. 42. l. 8. real all little
enough. p. 46. l. 5. read when he went. p. 56. l. 6. read Non Naturales. p. 64.
l. 32. for the ware was, they were. p. 82. l. 17. for with Vinegar, read than
Vinegar. p. 83. l. 20. for indege, r. indeque.

Any one may make these Medicines themselves, or be-speak them at their own
Apothecaries, or buy them ready made, at Mr. John Dansons at the Sign of the
Pestle and Mortar in Coleman-street, or at Mr. Hamnet Rigbies at the Seven
Stars in Fetter-Lane.

To the Readers.
Courteous, Good Natured, and Kind-hearted Readers;
THe Italians have a Saying, that, To speak ill of another, is the fifth
Element whereof every one is made. Do not you then wonder that I give you this
Title, since some either out of envy or ignorance, may be more ready to requite
my pains with a hard censure, than a kind acceptance. Well, in giving you civil
language, I for this time, follow the humor of a certain Frenchman, who being
near his death, and in despair, was encouraged to put his trust in God, and
defy the Devil; but he creepingly replied, That they would please to pardon
him, for he would defy no body, only he prayed to God to keep him and his
soul from -- Monsieur the Devil; at which uncouth and strange expression one of
the Bystanders being somewhat surpised, asked him what reason he had to give
the evil spirit such a title, and he answered, That it was convenient to give
every one good words, because he knew not well into whose hands he might chance
to come.

Being often requested, and almost tired, to give directions for preventing the
Infectoon of the Plague, and being since much satisfied with the good success
to all that followed it, and considering the self-ended concealing, and the
geeat cost in buying several medicines, which many people would, nay, must
rather die, than be at the charge of; and knowing how difficult it is for a
Doctor, how diligent soever, to attend above twenty sick Families, and how
ignorant many sick people are, and how little they can learn from Nurses, and
what errors are committed in bleeding and purging, and how hard a matter it is
for those who are sick in the Country, to procure speedy advice and remedy,
since people are so far from visiting the sick, that they will hardly allow or
permit those that are well to visit one another, amongst many distractions, and
setting aside my private affairs, I endeavored to publish this Treatise.

If you think I have been too brief, upon request I shall be ready to enlarge
it, if not, you may do it your self; if too tedious, you may do as at feasts,
where is variety of dishes, take what you please, and leave the rest; if too
plain, there are more sick-folks and Nurses that cannot understand Latin and
hard words, than Apothecaries and Chyrurgeons that will not understand English.
I should be a rich man, if I had five shillings for every one that does not
know the weight of a French Crown.

I have heard of Elixir Vitae, the Grand Cordial, the Infallible Antidote
against the Plague, and I remember a Story of a Friar, who pretended to have a
plume of the Angel Gabriels feathers, which fell from him at the Salutation of
the Virgin Mary, but when he came to show it after Sermon to the multitude, he
perceived that his feathers had been stolen out of the box, and a Charcoal put
in their stead, and very confidently laid the disappointment upon the
indisposition of the people, who were not fuly prepared for the fight of so
heavenly a Relic: nevertheless out of his own good will he would show them
one of the Coals that was taken from under the Gridiron that Saint Laurence was
broild on. I do not much fancy quid proquo, neither do you greatly care at
present for Elixit Vitae Ae^e^^ae, neither would you have such a Cordial as
should cure you of all Diseases, though the Antidote may be infallible, yet he
that takes it may be deceived: Many concealed Medicines are dear enough, when
they cost the taker his life; and many cried up s^crets do greater cures on the
Purse of the Seller, than on the Body of the Buyer, into whose handt, as soon
as they chance to come, they lose their virtue.

If things hard or impossible to be done, would have pleased you, I could have
given you directions extravagant enough; How for getting into a better Air, you
must ride on Pegasus every day in the Elizian Fields, or else take one of the
Planets Houses to dwell in; and get your Goods sent thither in Charles's Wain:
It Is very healthy, to walk a turn or two in Via Lactaea, and when you are
weary, sit down in Cassiopoeia's Chair. For Diet, you may have your Mutton at
Aries, and Beef at Taurus, your Fish at Cancer or Pisces; and let Ganymede fill
you no Wine, but what is fine, neat, and racy, with an excellent scent and
flavor, etc.

Also if things difficult or impossible to be gotten, would have gave content,
I could have told you, how handsome and warm a Colchos Mantle, made of Jasons
Golden Fieece would sit upon your shoulders; how to dress your hair with a
Myrmaids Comb, would cure the Headache, and help Perspiration; what an
excellent Cordial a Mornings Draught of Nectar or Ambrosia would be, in a
Unicorns-Horn; how two Phaenix Eggs for Break fast would make a rare Cawdle;
how excellent a Black Swan would be roasted for Dinner, especially, if he sang
before he was killed; how sweetly you would sleep after you had supped upon a
Manucodiata or Bird of Paradise; how delightful a Dish of Fruit from the
Hesperides or Pine Apples of America, would be in the Afternoon.

But my directions aye plain and familiar, and easy to be understood by an
ordinary capacity; they which know better, may be provoked by my example, to
publish them, with the method and direction how to use them; which I had rather
communicate for the good of the people of my Native Country, than to have
gotten an Estate, by giving them a hard Name, to keep them secret, and having
them sold for my private advantage, (as the Custom now is) at an Apothecaries
or Stationers Shop: And so I hope that the superlative excess of my love,
shall excuse the defect of my skill.

Holborn, July 22. 1665. W. K.


