AN HELP and EXHORTATION TO Worthy Communicating.

OR, A TREATISE Describing the Meaning, Worthy Reception, Duty, and Benefits OF
THE HOLY SACRAMENT.

AND Answering the Doubts of Conscience, and other Reasons, which most
generally detain Men from It.

Together with SUITABLE DEVOTIONS ADDED.

By John Kettlewell, Vicar of Coles-hill in Warwickshire.

LONDON, P^inted by R. E. for Robert Kettlewell, at the Hand and S^ept^r over
against St. Dunst^n's Church in Fleetstreet. 1683.

TO THE Right Honorable SIMON Lord DIGBY, BARON OF GEASHILL.
MY LORD,
THe Holy Eucharist is a Rite of the greatest Honor and Endearment that ever
God vouchsafed to Men, and the most Sublime and Blissful Instance of our
Communion with him. For therein he calls us to his own Table, not to attend as
Servants, but to Feast with him as his Friends: He treats us with the most
Magnificent Fare, presenting That to us for our Food, which one would think
were not to be eaten, but adored, even the most Sacred Body and Blood of his
own Son; in which he conveys to us all the Benefits of our Redemption. And
being thus apt to excite in us the highest Devotion, and to enrich us with the
greatest Fullness of Grace and Blessing, one would expect it should be had in
Reverence, and most Thankful Received by every Christian.

But yet in our Days what part of Religion does so generally suffer, or is so
universally neglected among Men? For the greatest Numbers have either little or
no Reverence at all for it, or too much, which makes them afraid of it; they
Neglect it through Carelessness and Causeless Scruples, or Profane it by Unworthy
and Disrespectful Usage: So that among all the Professors of Christianity, few
pay that Honor to their Lord, or secure that Benefit to themselves by
Receiving, which he intended All should do.

This, My Lord, is the Grief and Complaint of all, who have any just Honor for
their Dearest Savior, and this Venerable Ordinance; or any generous Compassion
for the Souls of others. And that, by the Grace of God, I may help something to
redress it, I have endeavored to describe a Worthy Communicating, and to set
out both the Duty and Advantages of it in this Treatise, that thereby I may
recommend it to the Choice of all who are Wise, and to the Consciences of all
that are Religious. In the Management whereof, I have shunned all fruitless
Disputes, and nice Speculations, seeking only to get it Authority among the
Loose, and Reverence with the Careless, and to reconcile it to the Scrupulous,
and to make the Duty as Clear, Easy, and Useful as I can to all. Particularly,
I have designed all along to make it not only an Honorable Remembrance of our
Dear Lord, but a most Solemn and Strict Engagement to a Good Life in all that
use it; for then I am sure they will be infinitely Happy in it.

And this Discourse, My Noble Lord, I here humbly offer to Your Lordship,
desiring it may stand as a Public Testimony of the great Honor and Affection
I have for those Excellencies that shine so clear in You. God has endowed Your
Great Mind with a strong Love and a steady Choice of Virtue; and, what I have
beheld with Pleasure, with a Generous, and, as there is Place for it, an Active
Compassion for those that want it. You have the True Wisdom, upon Deliberate
and Well-studied Reasons, to be Religious; and the Courage, in this Audacious
Age, when Irreligion is set up for the only Creditable Dress, to own it, and
study to be thought so. For it is Your Lordships Honor to think that nothing
can truly make You Greater, than to be an humble Worshipper, and Faithful
Servant of Your Holy Savior. This Noble Piety and Zeal for Goodness, will
endear You, My Lord, to Almighty God, and to all Good Men. And if by these
Papers I may in any wise contribute to them, I shall think my self happy in
having served to set on the Virtuous Growth of One whom I hope God has set out
in a Time that so infinitely needs it, for an Illustrious Example, that may
give both Ornament and Support to Religion.

But besides this, My Lord, I have another End in this Dedication; and that is,
That these Sheets may remain a Lasting Monument of my Gratitude for the
Endearing Favors I have received from Your Noble Hand. They were Composed for
the Benefit of a Place where I am now fixed, and whereto I was designed by Your
great Generosity and Nobleness, when I thought of nothing less. For so truly
Public was Your Lordships Spirit in the Filling of that Church, that You
pitched upon a Person whose Face You had never known, and who never knew of it,
only because You believed he would make it his Care to promote Religion, and to
Benefit those Souls which You had to commit to him. And this, My Lord, I humbly
beg Your Lordships Leave to mention, not for Your own, but for the Publicks
sake. For in this degenerate Age, when either Filthy Lucre, or at least some
other mean and sordid End, have made a Merchandise, and bred Corruption even in
the most Sacred Trusts, I think the World has need of such Examples.

I have nothing more to add, but to beg of Almighty God, That he who brings
about the Noblest Ends by the Weakest and most Unlikely Instruments, would make
this Book effectual to his own Honor and Service; and also bless Your Lordship
with a Continuance and Increase of all Virtuous Excellencies, Honor, and
Happiness in this World, till at last he shall take You to shine in his own
Immortal Glory in the World to come. This is the most hearty Prayer of him, who
very much for Your Favors, but more for the true Affection and Esteem You have
for the God and Savior he serves, is in all sincerity,

My Honored Lord, Your Lordships most Affectionate obliged Chaplain, and
humble Servant, John Kettlewell.
From Your Lordships House near Coles-hill, Jun. 27. 83.
THE CONTENTS.
PART I. The meaning of Feasting in the Sacrament. CHAP. I. Of the meaning of
our eating and drinking in the Sacrament. THree ends of Feasting in the Lords
Supper. 1 (...) in Remembrance and Commemoration of our Savior Christ, and of
his dying for us. To remember him is not barely to call to mind that once there
was such a Person, but to think of his particular Quality and Relation to us,
which are worth remembering, as of his being our most Faithful Teacher, our most
Gracious Governor, our most entire Friend, and noble Benefactor. These things
usually commemorated by Festivals. 2 End is in confirmation of the New Covenant
which his Death purchased for us. An account of the New Covenant. Christ's Death
purchased it: It is ratified in the Holy Sacrament, which is shown from the
same thing being done in Baptism, Circumcision, and the Passover which
answered to it: more particularly. 1. From the Words of Institution, wherein
the Cup is called the New Covenant, and we are bid to drink of it, which was a
Covenant-Rite; and the Bread Christ's Body, to the same intent the Paschal Lamb
was, which was a Federal Conveyance of it. 2. From its being a Feast or
Sacrifice, for Sacrifice is one way of Covenanting with God, and by Feasting on
it we partake of it. 3. From its conveying the particular Blessings of the New
Covenant, which otherwise than by Federal Promises, or Performances are not to
be had. 3 End is in Ratification of a League of Love and Friendship with those
Brethren that Communicate with us, and with all others. This Chapter summed up.
Page 5. CHAP. II. Of the Worthiness of Communicating in the Sacrament. To
Communicate Worthily, is to do it with such Tempers and Behaviors as are
worthy of it, and becoming Things which are meant by it. The First End was to
remember Christ, both, first, As our Lord and Master, which calls for Honor
and Reverence in our selves, and a care to maintain his Honor among others.
For mindfulness of his Commands, and Resolutions of Obedience. 2. As our most
kind Friend and Benefactor, which calls for Love and an hearty Affection for
him. For Joy and Gladness in what we receive from him. For Thankfulness for all
his Kindnesses, particularly in Dying for us. And as this Death was a Sacrifice
for our Sins, the Remembrance of it calls for a deep sense of our own
unworthiness. An utter Abhorrence of our Sins, which caused his Sufferings. A
Resignation of our selves to his Use, as thereby we are become his own
Purchase. The Second End was to confirm the New Covenant with God which his
Blood procured. This calls for Sincerity and Faithfulness. A Third End was to
confirm a League of Love and Friendship with all Christians. This calls for
Peace and Charity to all Persons, and particularly for Alms to the Necessitous.
A Summary Repetition of these Qualifications. A Belief of these Things, which
carries us on to these Tempers and Performances, is the Faith that makes us
Worthy Communicants. page 48 CHAP. III. A further Account of this Worthiness.
These recited Tempers are all necessary in the Person Communicating, but not at
all necessary to be expressly exercised in the Time of Communion. A Direction in
which it may be fit to lay out our Devotion at that time. All these are
provided for in the Churches Prayers, so that we may exercise them worthily if
we go along devoutly at all the Parts of the Communion Service. page 87 CHAP.
IV. Worthy Receiving not extraordinary difficult, and of unworthiness to
Communicate. To silence the Complaint of extraordinary difficulty in coming
worthily to this Sacrament, three things noted. 1. All the particulars of
worthy Receiving, are necessary parts of Duty, and of a good Man; so that no
more is required to fit us for receiving, than is required to fit us to dye, or
to go to Heaven. 2. They are all necessary Qualifications of an acceptable
Prayer, Vow, or Thanksgiving; so that no more is required to it, than to a
worthy discharge of all other Acts of Religion. 3. However they may be
commended, yet they are not necessarily required in more intense, and
transporting degrees in it, than in other instances of Devotion. The only
unworthiness, which can put us by this Ordinance, is Impenitence: if Repentance
will go down with any man, nothing else need stick with him. This Point of
Worthy Communicating summed up. page 100
PART II. CHAP. I. Of the Duty of Communicating. To Communicate is a Duty
incumbent on us, as appears, 1. From the obliging import of the Command about
it. This Command of Christ shown, and several Notes added, which reatly
recommend and enforce it, viz. It is such an Instance, as best shows our
peculiar Reverence and Love to him; the whole yoke of Jewish Ceremonies is
taken away, and only it, and Baptism, two cheap and easy Rites, imposed in
stead of them; it was his last Command, he gave it the Night before he
suffered; in St. Paul's Commission to Preach the Gospel, it was particularly
specified; without greatest Danger to our selves it cannot be neglected, as
appears from our Saviors Words, Joh. 6.53. which are shown to speak of it; and
from the Danger of Neglecting the Jewish Passover, which answered to it. 2.
From the obliging Nature of those things which are meant by it, viz. Because
therein we publicly own Christ and his Religion, and solemnly remember him,
and confirm the New Covenant with God, and a League of Friendship with our
Brethren, and are vouchsafed the highest Honor, and receive Tokens of greatest
Love, and enjoyment of present Graces, and pledges of future Glory from him:
all which no Good man ought, and no Ingenuous man will decline, when he is
called to them. This Duty obliges those only who are of Age for it, and them
too only at such times as they have an Opportunity and a fit Occasion offered.
An Objection against its being a Duty, from 1 Cor. 11.25, answered. The Neglect
of it is a great Sin. This God may excuse in those good Souls, who through
Ignorance or Error are held back, and because of their over-high Veneration for
it, think themselves unworthy to come to it, whilst in the honesty of their
Hearts they thus mistake it. But he will not excuse it in them when they are
better informed; and much less in others, who neglect it because they are
careless of it, or too Wicked and impenitent to receive it. Page 126 CHAP. II.
Of the Benefits of Communicating. The Sacrament is full of Blessings, which
make it not only our Duty, but our Privilege. In the general, it is the most
effectual means in all Religion to recommend our Prayers, and make them
powerful; and so is the likeliest way to attain all Mercies. In particular, 1.
It seals to us the Pardon of our Sins for the Peace of our Consciences. 2. It
increases and Confirms in us all Graces. Those are ordinarily such as we bring
along with us. It confers Grace, 1. By the Natural Virtue and Tendency of those
Duties, which it both exercises and excites in us. 2. By those inward
Assistances, which it conveys to us. Since on all these accounts it is so
excellent a Means of Grace and New Life, it is the best Rule any Person can
observe who would go on in the Work of Repentance. All these Motives to
Communicate, both from Duty and Interest, summed up. Page 167
PART III. Of the Hindrances that keep Men from the Communion. CHAP. I. Two
Hindrances from Communicating. One most general Hindrance, that keeps men from
the Sacrament, is a Fear of their being Unworthy and Unfit to receive it. This
Answered, by showing, 1. The Partiality of it, because they are not so
scrupulous about Neglecting, as about Unworthy Receiving, though there be the
same Cause for it. 2. That every true Penitent is worthy of it: Yea, he that
has only fully purposed Amendment, though he has not had time to perform it. 3.
Impenitenee, which unfits them for it, is no Excuse for the Neglect of it. 4.
Impenitent men, who alone are unfit, if they understand the danger of their
State, cannot continue in it, but amend it, and then they may worthily
Communicate. 2. A Second Hindrance is, because an Unworthy Receiver eats his
own Damnation, 1 Cor. 11.29. which makes not Receiving seem the safer side. By
Damnation is meant, 1. A Damning Sin, which is deadly till we repent of it; and
such are both unworthy Eating, and sinful Abstaining, so that they are equal as
to that Point. 2. Temporal Penalties, which were inflicted for their
Intemperance at this Feast, and other Disorders peculiar to those Times, and
are not now usual in ours; so that the Fear of them need not discourage us from
it. Page 197 CHAP. II. Of Three other Hindrances from Receiving. A Third
Hindrance is, because therein they are to promise concerning every Sin, that
they will no more commit it; which Promise some dare not make, because they
fear they shall not keep it. If this be sufficient to hinder any man from the
Communion; it ought also to hinder him from Prayers, and being Baptized a
Christian. But it must not hinder men from any of them. 1. Let them promise
this Amendment, and keep it, and then the Doubt is answered. They ought to make
it. And by God's Grace they may perform it, if they have a mind to it. 2. If
after some time they happen to break it in any Instance, they have the Benefit
of Repentance afterward. A Fourth Hindrance is the great difficulty supposed
to be in it, and want of time and leisure to prepare for it. This lies not more
against the Communion, than aganst an Holy Life, and all Religion. But it must
not put us by from any of them. For, 1. If it required all that Time and Pains
which is supposed, that would be no Excuse for any of us to neglect it. To true
Penitents, the Time and Pains is not so great as is imagined. It requires more
of Ill men, but less of Good, who may prepare for it in a less time, yea, if
used to Self-examinations, upon a few Minutes warning. 3. The poorest and most
employed have time sufficient, if they would use it to that end: and where they
have fewer helps, and less time, the less Preparation is accepted of them. A
Fifth Hindrance is, because they see others, or have found themselves to be no
better by it; so that it is not worth their while to fit themselves for it. If
this have any Force, it is not to be restrained to the Sacrament, but holds
stronger against Prayers, and other Parts of Worship. But it ought not to
hinder any Persons. For, 1. Where it is true, there is no Excuse from it. 2. In
all good men's case it is false, for they are really better by it; many by
improving in their goodness, all by continuing in it, for which it is richly
worth their pains to come to it. 3. Where they are not bettered at all, or not
so much as might be expected; that is purely through their own Fault, in not
using the means of improving by it: so let them amend that, and this Hindrance
is removed. Page 223 CHAP. III. Of want of Charity. A Sixth Hindrance is a Fear
lest they want that Charity, particularly toward Enemies and those who have
given them Provocations, which is required to it. An account what Love is, and
what is not due to such Persons. 1. We are bound to show them all the Offices
of general Charity, which are due to our Neighbor at large, or to all others.
This Love contains in it all the Particular Offices of Justice, Charity, and
Peace, which are due to all mankind: It is transgressed by all the opposite
Instances, but by nothing more than hard and uncandid Censures and Suspicions.
The commonness and sinfulness of this Carriage. The want of this Charity unfits
men for this Feast; but so i^ does for Prayers, and all other Religious,
Worship. 2. We are not bound to show them all the Offices of special Esteem,
Trust, and Confidence, which are not fit to be placed on all men, but on such
only as are qualified for them. When they sufficiently show Repentance of their
Fault, they are to be readmitted to the same state of Favor and Friendship.
We must be Candid in Judging when their Repentance is sufficiently evidenced.
An humble Confession is ordinarily a sufficient Proof of it for the first
Fault; but not when it has been often repeated. Luc. 17.4, which seems to affirm
it, answered. Several Cases cleared, which are sometimes thought by Pious Souls
to be a breach of Charity toward Enemies, but in reality are not. As, not
forgetting Injuries or Unkindness, but still retaining a Remembrance of them.
Thinking the worse of those who offered them. Being troubled at the sight of
them, as that puts them in mind of the great Losses they have sustained by
them. Showing more reserve, and carrying a greater distance in Conversing with
them, than with other men. These are no breach of Charity toward them, nor can
be a just Hindrance from the Communion. Page 262 CHAP. IV. Of Lawsuits. They
are an Hindrance from the Communion, when there is sin in them. They are not
sinful in themselves, which is shown, 1. From the necessity of them. 2. From
the Magistrates Office being appointed for them. 3. From Gods taking Legal
Determinations upon himself, as if he were the Author of them. 4. From Courts
erected by consent in the Apostles Days, which ministered to them. These St.
Paul prescribed to the Corinthians, 1 Cor. 6. They are the Assemblies mentioned
Jam. 2.2, 5. From our Saviors, and St. Paul's Practice, who in claiming the
Benefit of them, warranted and authorized them. An Objection from Mat. 5.38,
39, 40. considered; which is shown not to condemn defending our selves in any
case when others implead us; nor moving Suits in all, but only in case of
lighter Losses and Indignities, such as our Savior there mentions, or making
them minister to Revenge in any others. And 1 Cor. 6.7. answered, which makes
them not a Damning sin, but only when some Virtuous ends do not require them, a
Defect and Diminution. But they are sinful, 1. When they are begun upon an
unjustifiable Ground. Such they always are, 1. When they are Vindictive, not
Reparative; as when we sue insolvent Persons; or others upon such Words or
Actions, for which, besides Costs, no Damages that are valuable are like to be
allotted us. 2. When they are for Reparation of small things, which countervail
not the evil and hazard of a Suit, but ought to be a matter of Patience and
Forgiveness, and so be quietly put up without recourse to it. In judging of
this smallness, we must not estimate by our own Pride and Passions; but by the
reality of Things, and the Judgment of indifferent, humble, and dispassionate
Persons. This is true, not only in case of Injuries to our own selves, but also
in case of Trust, when we have the charge of others. 2. Suits are sinful when
they are carried on by a sinful Management: As they are, when they make us
transgress any of those Duties toward our Adversaries, which oblige us toward
all Persons. To avoid all these in Suing, is an hard Point: So we must be slow
in coming to it, and very circumspect when we are forced upon it. The Answer to
this Hindrance summed up. Page 304 CHAP. V. Of Three other Hindrances. A
Seventh Hindrance, is, because others are not in Charity with them, so that
they are afraid they want that Peace which is required to it. As for other men's
uncharitableness, it is their sin, and so unfits them; but not being ours, it
unfits not us for Receiving. If that ought to exclude any from the Sacrament,
it had excluded Christ and his Apostles, and the Primitive Christians, since
none had ever such implacable Enemies as they had. Care to be taken that their
Enmity be not continued through our Fault; so that if we have given just
occasion, we must endeavor a Reconciliation; and if we gave none, be careful
not to hate them again. An Eighth Hindrance is, because it is a Presumption in
us to come to it, and therefore an Humble man ought in all modesty to abstain
from it. But, 1. It Is no Presumption to come when we are called, and to do what
we are bidden. 2. It Is a very great Presumption to stay away, and leave it
undone. 3. If the height of Privilege and Honor in it be sufficient to make
an humble man refuse the Communion; it will also carry him to renounce the
whole Christian Profession. A Ninth Hindrance is, because many good People are
seldom or never seen at it, so that they have good Company, and may be good
too, if they abstain from it. But, 1. In inquiring after our own Duty, we are
not to ask whether others practice it, but whether Christ has any where
enjoined it. 2. If any Good People keep from the Sacrament, that is no part of
their Goodness, so that therein they are not to be imitated. 3. Though they
might be acceptably Good, whilst through innocent Scruples and honest Ignorance
they were afraid to come to it: yet will it be a very great Fault even in them
to Neglect it after they are better informed, which will not be forgiven, but
upon their Amendment of it. Page 362 CHAP. VI. Of Two more Hindrances. A Tenth
Hindrance is, because others who are unworthy of it, are admitted to join in
it. But, 1. They ought not to be forward in judging others unworthy, lest they
be mistaken in it. 2. When some, who, as they have great cause to think, are
unworthy, do receive, yet ought not that to hinder them from joining in it. For
if it be a sufficient Hindrance, it had equally hindered our Savior Christ, and
the Primitive Christians. It ought not only to hinder us from the Communion,
but also from being Members of the Christian Church and Profession; but it is
plainly of no Force for either of them, since one man shall not bear another,
but every man his own burden. 3. If still any are really offended at the
Communion of the Wicked, upon complaint made in the Congregation they are to be
suspended from the Holy Table, and denied the Sacrament. An Eleventh Hindrance
is the Gesture of Kneeling, which is required to it. When any are absent upon
this account, there is no excuse from it. Three things insisted on to prevent
their being hindered by it. 1. Kneeling is no unsuitable Posture in receiving,
so that if we were left at Liberty, we might have enough to justify our selves
in making use of it. 2. It is appointed by our Governors, whom God Commands us
to obey in all lawful Things; so that every Good man ought to observe it. But
if it neither had Authority to enjoin, nor Reason to recommend it, but another
Posture might be better used: Yet, 3. Since it may lawfully, though not so
well, be used too, for the Sacraments sake, which is not otherwise to be had,
we should at least comply with it. No Hindrance to this Compliance, because the
Gesture of Kneeling is different from what our Savior used. For so is sitting
too, and therefore they and we are equally concerned to answer it. The Posture
he used was no part of the Institution, so that the Institution is not broken
when the Posture is altered. Neither it, nor any other, has any Command of God
for it; so that none is necessary, but all are still indifferent. When a
Posture, different from that at the first Institution, was intro^uced in
Sacraments, our Savior himself, and they too have submitted to it. Again, no
hindrance to it from the fear of worshipping the Bread, or its being a Popish
Rite. A conclusion of this point. Page 381 CHAP. VII. Of some other Hindrances.
An Account of some other Hindrances. One abstains because the day before he was
at a Feast. Another, because his Child is sick, or he himself is lighty
indisposed. A third, because his Wife or Husband cannot come along with him to
join in it. A fourth, because he has a Visit to make, or a Friend come in, who
in all civility must be attended. A fifth, because of a Shower of Rain, or a
sharp Air abroad, so that he must endure a piercing Blast, or wet his Foot, to
go out to it. These are no Excuse from it, but still Men are bound to
Communicate. Some Devout Meditations and Prayers to help them in a Worthy
Discharge of it. After they have received, they must be careful to make good
those holy Vows and Promises which they made to God in the Holy Sacrament. Page
421 Heads of Self-Examination, for the use of those who would find out what
Sins they have to Repent of, either before a Sacrament, or at any other Times.
Page 465 A Prayer before the Sacrament. Page 474 A Prayer and Thanksgiving
after the Sacrament. Page 478 A Morning Prayer for a Family. Page 484 An
Evening Prayer for a Family. Page 487


AN HELP AND EXHORTATION TO Worthy Communicating.
The INTRODUCTION.
IN this matter of the Holy Sacrament of the Lords Supper, there are two great
Faults which are every where incurred, and which all that Love their Savior or
their own Souls ought most carefully to avoid; and they are, a Refusal or
Neglect, and an unworthy Usage or Profanation of it; both which are most
offensive to Almighty God, and to our dear Lord. For our Blessed Savior has
appointed it, and expressly commanded us to come to it, and showed us by
manifest Tokens that he lays a particular weight upon it; so that we are
greatly undutiful and disobedient if we keep back from it: And he has appointed
it for sacred Ends and solemn Purposes, which call for a very Reverent and
Devout Carriage; so that we profane it if we come carelessly, and behave our
selves unworthily when we approach thereto. It is a most necessary part of our
Religion, and therefore not to be passed over, and let alone through
Negligence; and a most awful one, and therefore not to be performed with
disrespect, and an irreverent Carriage. So that we must be careful, both to
partake of this Holy Feast when we are called to it, and to come to it worthily
when we do. And this St. Paul prescribes concerning it, 1 Cor. 11. Let a man
examine himself, says he, and so let him eat of that Bread, and drink of that
Cup. v. 28. Let a man examine himself, i. e. let him approve himself, as the
(...).
word here rendered examine signifies v. (...), they that are approved may be
made manifest.
19, and Chap. 16. v. (...), Whoms^ever you shall approve.
3: let him so long try his fitness for it, till he see cause to like and
approve himself, and think he is worthy of it; for he would not call unworthy
Receivers to the Sacrament, but drive them from it, as he does by telling them
the extreme danger of it, v. 27, 29. But when once he is so approved, and fit
to come to it, then, says he, let him not forbear the Feast, but hasten to
partake in it; Let him eat of that Bread, and drink of that Cup.

Thus are both a careless Forbearance, and an indecent unworthy Usage of this
Holy Feast, great Indignities to our Blessed Lord, and criminal Violations of
it. It suffers on either hand, so that to secure it in its just esteem and due
observance, both are carefully to be removed. And to do what Right I can to
this Holy Ordinance, and what Service I am able to all such as shall seek help
from this Treatise, I shall endeavor, what in me lies, to cure, or prevent
both, in that which follows.

Now to do this with the greater clearness, in Discoursing upon this Subject I
shall do these five things.

1 st, I shall show What is the meaning of eating Bread and drinking Wine in
the Blessed Sacrament.

2ly, Wherein lies the worthiness of doing it.

3ly, How much it is every good Christians Duty to frequent it.

4ly, What great inducements we have to it, and how great the Benefits are that
come by it, which should make us press to it of our selves, though it were not
commanded.

5ly, I shall consider those Excuses, and take off those Pleas, which are most
usually made against it.

And when all this is done, I think I shall have said enough, both to invite,
and press men to this Feast, and also to a worthy partaking of it, that so they
may come to it when they are invited, and be welcome and worthy Guests when
they do.

PART I. The meaning of Feasting in the Sacrament.
CHAP. I. Of the meaning of our eating and drinking in the Sacrament.
The Contents.
Three Ends of Feasting in the Lords Supper. 1 End is in Remembrance and
Commemoration of our Savior Christ, and of his dying for us. To remember him
is not barely to call to mind that once there was such a Person, but to think
of his particular Quality and Relation to us, which are worth remembering, as of
his being our most Faithful Teacher, our most gracious Governor, our most
entire Friend, and noble Benefactor. These things usually commemorated by
Festivals. 2 End is in confirmation of the New Covenant which his Death
purchased for us. An account of the New Covenant. Christ's Death purchased it:
It is ratified in the Holy Sacrament, which is shown from the same thing being
done in Baptism, Circumcision, and the Passover which answered to it: more
particularly, 1. From the Words of Institution, wherein the Cup is called the
New Covenant, and we are bid to drink of it, which was a Covenant-Rite; and the
Bread Christ's Body, to the same intent the Paschal Lamb was, which was a
Federal Conveyance of it. 2. From its being a Feast or Sacrifice, for Sacrifice
is one way of Covenanting with God, and by Feasting on it we partake of it. 3.
From its conveying the particular Blessings of the New Covenant, which
otherwise than by Federal Promises, or Performances are not to be had. 3 End is
in Ratification of a League of Love and Friendship with those Brethren that
Communicate with us, and with all others. This Chapter summed up.

FIrst, I shall show what is the meaning of eating Bread and drinking Wine in
the Blessed Sacrament, and what we are to understand by them, and think of
them, when we do them.

When we come to eat Bread and drink Wine in the Holy Sacrament, we must not
come only for a Bodily refreshment, or for eating and drinkings sake, as we do
to our common Food: For this is to eat, as St. Paul says, not discerning the
Lords Body; but as if it were bare ordinary Meat, 1 Cor. 11.29. But we must eat
and drink with special ends, and particular Intentions, which may render our
eating and drinking, not an ordinary Repast, but a Religious Feasting upon the
Body and Blood of our Lord. And these ends are three.

1 st. In Remembrance and Commemoration of our Savior Christ, and of his dying
for us.

2 ly, In Confirmation of the New Covenant, which his Death procured us.

3 ly, In Ratification of a League of Love and Friendship with those Brethren
that Communicate with us, and with all others.

First, We must eat Bread and drink Wine in Remembrance and Commemoratio^ of
our Savior Christ, and of his dying for us. By these Actions we must be put in
remembrance and call to mind our selves, and commemorate or tell it out to
others, what a good Friend and Savior Christ has been to us, and how at last
he died and gave his own Hearts Blood for our sakes. And this our Blessed Lord
expressly ordered at the time of Institution, This do, says he, both of the
eating Bread, and drinking Wine, in remembrance of me, 1 Cor. 11.24, 25.

To Remember one, is not barely to call to mind that once there was such a
Person; but also to think of their particular Quality and Relation, what they
are to us, or what they have left with us, or what they have done for us which
is worth Remembering. If we bid a Servant remember us, we intend he should be
mindful of the Commands which we have left with him; if a Friend, that he
should bear in mind the Great Love and Faithfulness which we have always
expressed toward him; if one we have highly obliged, that he should gratefully
resent, and think of the kindnesses which we have done him; or if one, lastly,
whose favor we desire, and of whom we have requested any thing, that he would
be mindful of the Good turn which he promises to do, or which we ask of him. In
desiring any of these, or any others to remember us, we mean not barely that
they should call to mind how once there were such men as we in being; but, over
and above that, that they be particularly mindful of the Relation wherein we
stand, and think of what we have done, what we deserve, or what we desire or
expect from them.

And this our Blessed Lord intends, when in this Holy Feast he Desires, and
Commands us to remember him. He would have us think of him in all those
Capacities, and reflect upon him under all those Relations, wherein he so
infinitely deserves to be remembered by us: Such as are that of a Faithful
Teacher, a Gracious Governor, an entire Friend and noble Benefactor, doing the
highest kindnesses, and working the greatest deliverances for us, and for all
Mankind.

1 st, He would have us remember him as our Faithful Teacher, who has made
known to us the whole Counsel of God concerning us, and to call to mind those
excellent things which he has revealed to us. As namely, That for the sake of
his Death, and through the merits of his Blood, all mankind, who were utter
Enemies before, shall be put into a way of Reconciliation with God, and have
the Benefit of a New Covenant, which proffers Pardon to all that truly Repent,
and Spiritual help and inward Grace to all that carefully endeavor with it,
and the Blessings of Heaven and Happiness to all that are entirely obedient,
promising that at our Death our Souls shall go into Paradise, and at the
General Judgment our Bodies, which till then were held in their Graves, shall
be raised up again to Eternal Life.

2 ly, He would have us remember him as our Gracious Governor, whom God has
anointed to give Laws to us, and to recollect and bear in mind those Commands,
which, as our Sovereign Lord and Master, he has laid upon us. As namely, That
we love God, and trust in his Goodness, and submit to his Providence, and
Worship him with Prayers and Praises, but above all with an Holy and a God-like
Life; that we be Humble and Heavenly-minded, Chaste, Temperate, and Contented;
that we be dutiful to our Governors, respectful to our Superiors, courteous
to our Equals, condescensive to our Inferiors, grateful to our Friends, loving
and obliging to our Enemies, and just, charitable, and peaceable toward all
Persons, of whatsoever Nations, Sects, or Parties, even to all Mankind.

3 ly, He would have us remember him as our most entire Friend, and noble
Benefactor, who let us in so deep into his Heart, and heaped his Favors on us
at so prodigious a rate, as never was, nor ever will be equaled. For he loved
us without any thing of our own Deserts; and in spite of our highest
Provocations; and without expecting any other recompense, besides the Pleasure
of being kind to us; and to such a degree, as made him forego the greatest
pleasures which he might have held without all interruption in Heavenly places,
and become a man of Sorrows, and lead a Persecuted, difficult, and necessitous
Life, and at last dye a most exquisitely painful, and ignominious Death for our
sakes, which ransomed us from the greatest Curse, and procured us the most
valuable Blessings that our Nature can admit of. And this Benefit of his Death,
being not only in it self the costliest, but the very price and purchase of all
the rest, he would have remembered above all others in this Feast; and
accordingly he has suited the Food in it to be broken Bread, and Wine poured
out, which do most lively represent it. As often as you eat this Bread, and
drink this Cup, says the Apostle, you exhibit to all that look on and observe
it, or show forth the Lords Death till he come, 1 Cor. 11.26.

These are the things which our Savior Christ calls us seriously to remember
and consider of in our own minds, and which the Actions themselves commemorate
and show forth to others, when we eat Bread and drink Wine in this holy
Sacrament. When we partake of this Feast, which he has appointed us, he would
have us remember him, and think with our selves how Faithful a Teacher he was
to us, and what good Lessons and Declarations he has left with us; how gracious
a Lord and Master he proved, and what Commandments he has laid upon us; and
lastly, how kind a Friend, and noble Benefactor he showed himself, and what
astonishing kindnesses he has done for us in all the Labors of his Life, but
especially and above all in his suffering a bloody Death for our sakes, which
purchased us the Forgiveness of our Sins, the Grace and Spirit of God, and
Eternal happiness. All this Faithful Teacher, and Gracious Governor, and
entire Friend, and noble Benefactor Christ is to us in the highest Measures,
and to all imaginable Degrees; and since he is so, he would have us to bear it
in mind, and oftentimes to think of it. And that we may be sure to do it, he
has instituted this Feast on purpose for it, and told us that our work is to
call to mind and remember him whenever we come to it.

And this way of having these things remembered, by appointing Feasts for the
Commemoration of them, has been very usual in the World. Thus the (...). Athen.
Deipn. l. 5. c. 1.

Diogenistae, Antipatristae, Panaetiastae appellati sunt, qui stato anni Die
Diogenis, Antipatri, and Panaetii nobilium Philosophorum memoriam celebrarent.
Is. Casaub. ad loc. Animad v. c. 1.


Disciples, in the several Sects of Philosophers at Athens, were wont to have a
set Feast and Collation in remembrance of their Founders. And it has been the
way of all the World to remember their Benefactors, and commemorate some great
Blessings, by Festivals. Thus at this day we commemorate the deliverance from
the Powder Treason, and the Kings happy Restoration, by a yearly Festival upon
that occasion. And the whole Christian Church has perpetuated the memory of
Christ's Nativity, Resurrection, and the Descent of the Holy Ghost, by the
yearly Feasts of Christmas, Easter, and Pentecost. And God himself in the old
Testement called men to a remembrance of the Creation of the World by the Feast
of the Seventh day Sabbath; and all the Jews to the commemoration of his
sparing all their Firstborn, when the destroying Angel slew all the Firstborn
of Egypt, by the yearly Festival of the Passover appointed for that very
purpose, Exodus 12.14.

This then is the first end of our eating Bread and drinking Wine at the Lords
Table, it is in remembrance of our Savior Christ, and of what he has done for
us. So that when we partake in this Feast of his appointment, we must seriously
reflect on him who has appointed it, and bethink our selves that he is our
Faithful Teacher, calling to mind his Revelations; our Sovereign Lord and
Master, remembering his Commandments; our entire Friend, Savior, and
Benefactor, who has done strange things for us, but above all, who has laid
down his own Life to purchase us the Pardon of our Sins, and Spiritual Grace,
and Eternal Happiness, upon our Repentance, Obedience, and Virtuous endeavors.
With these Thoughts he would have us entertain our minds, at the same time we
Feast our Bodies with the Creatures of Bread and Wine which he has prepared for
us: and if we would answer his end in it, and be welcome Guests at this Feast
when he calls to it, we must be sure so to do.

And as we must eat Bread and drink Wine at the Lords Table in remembrance of
our Savior Christ, and of his dying for us; so must we,

2ly, In Confirmation of the New Covenant, which his Death purchased and
procured us.

This Covenant is a mutual contract and engagement between God and us; and
consists of several Articles agreed to on Gods side, and several on ours. As
for Gods part, to all Believers, i. e. to all that believe the Scriptures, and
particularly that part of them, these his promises, without a belief whereof
they will have no lift or encouragement to set about the performance of the
Conditions required on their parts: to all Believers, I say, he promises three
Things, viz. the forgiveness of Sins, the assistance of the Spirit, and Eternal
happiness. And answerably on their Parts they promise three more, which three
indeed are all summed up in one, i. e. the last of them: and those are, to
Repent of all their Sins, to endeavor with his Grace, and to obey all his
Commandments.

He promises to forgive them all their Sins. For this is one Article of the New
Covenant, as the Apostle relates it, Heb. 8. This is the Covenant I will make
with them in those days, I will be merciful to their unrighteousness, and their
sins and iniquities will I remember no more, v. 10.12. But then at the same
time he expects, and accordingly they promise that they will Repent of them,
and forsake them. For he orders Repentance and Remission of Sins to be preached
both together, Luc. 24. That Repentance and Remission of sins should be
preached in his Name to all Nations, v. 47; and tells us expressly, that except
we repent we shall all perish, Luc. 13.3.

He promises them the assistance of his Spirit to enable them to do his will
and become obedient. For this also is reckoned as another Article of the
Covenant made with Abraham, that he would grant unto us the Power to serve him
in Holiness and Righteousness all the days of our Lives, Luc. 1.72, 73, 74, 75.
and the great Promise of the Gospel is, that God will give his Holy Spirit to
those that ask him, Luc. 11.13. But then he expects, and accordingly they
promise, that they will use and improve his Grace whenever it is entrusted
with them, and endeavor after all Virtues as they stand in need of them. God
works in us both to will and to do, says St. Paul, when we join with him, and
work out our own Salvation, Phil. 2.12, 13: and it is only to him that has,
says our Savior, i. e. to him that has improved the Talents bestowed on him,
as those Good Servants had done, who had gained the one v. 20.
five, the other v. 22.
two Talents with them, that more shall be given, and he shall have abundance;
but from him that has not, i. e. has not improved what he received, as the
wicked Servant had not done, who went and v. 25.
hid it, shall be taken away even that which he has, Mat. 25.29. And that this
is Gods ordinary Rule where he intrusts any thing, he expressly declares again
upon another occasion, Luc. 19.26.

He promises them, lastly, eternal Life and happiness. This, says St. John, is
the Promise which he has promised us, even Eternal Life, 1 John 2.25. But then
he expects, and at the same time we promise, that we will obey all his Laws,
and do every thing which he requires of us. For Christ is become the Author of
Eternal Salvation, says the Apostle, to those only that obey him, Heb. 5.9: and
blessed are they that do his Commandments, says St. John, for they only have
Right to the Tree of Life, Rev. 22.14.

So that the New Covenant is a mutual Contract and Engagement between God and
Men, wherein he promises to all that Believe, and accordingly they accept it,
that he will forgive them their Sins when they Repent of them, and help them to
any Graces when they concur with him and endeavor after them, and give them
Eternal Life after they have entirely obeyed him. He promises Pardon, Inward
Grace, and everlasting Happiness; but then they, having Faith or Belief
already, without an actual exercise whereof they would not seek after this
Covenant, nor, if they did, could be admitted to it, make Promise to him again
of Repentance, virtuous endeavors, and an entire obedience, which must confer
a claim, and give them right thereto.

This is the New Covenant, and this Christ's Bloody Death has purchased and
procured for us. God would not dispense with the First Covenant without a
Ransom that might remove all hindrances, by securing the Honor of his
Holiness, and utterly discouraging all future offenses, and satisfying all the
ends of Justice: and because that could not otherwise be so well effected, as
he thought fit it should, Christ himself became an expiatory Sacrifice, and, by
dying for it, obtained the Second. And for this cause it is called the New
Covenant in his Blood, i. e. that Covenant which was confirmed and purchased by
it. This, says he, is the New Testament, or rather, the New (...).
Covenant in my Blood, 1 Cor. 11.25.

Now this Covenant, which is the purchase of Christ's Death, and which is the
sum and substance of all that he has got for us, we all entered into at first
when we were Baptized. For Baptism is our Sealing of this Covenant, and
stipulating or engaging to make good these Terms to Almighty God; Baptism, says
St. 1 Pet. 3.21.
Peter, is the Answer, or (...),
Stipulation of a good Conscience toward God; i. e. it is the Federal Promise,
or undertaking of it, which every Person makes when he is Baptized. And this is
plain from that form of the Baptismal Vow which the Primitive Christians used,
and which we use now at present, wherein, if they are grown Persons, they
themselves, or if Children, their Godfathers and Godmothers in their Names do
expressly Covenant and engage for that Faith, Repentance or Renouncing of all
Sins, and Obedience to Gods Laws, which are required by it.

And as we first entered into this Covenant when we were Baptized; so are we
called to renew and confirm it every time we are invited to sup with our Lord
in this Holy Sacrament. When he Summons us to eat Bread, and drink Wine in
remembrance of his Death at this Feast; he calls us withal to confirm this New
Covenant, which his Death procured, and which was the price and purchase of it.
He invites us to receive engagements from God of his promised Mercies, and to
give him engagements of our Duty and Service: to be assured by him, that, if we
do believe the Scriptures, he will forgive us our Sins upon our Repentance, and
give his Grace and Spirit to our endeavors, and make us eternally happy upon
our obedience; and to assure him, that we do so believe, and are resolved so to
repent, endeavor, and obey, that so by virtue of his Gracious Promise we may
have right thereto. He intends our eating and drinking at his Table as a
Federal Rite, and for a Renewal and Ratification of this League of Love and
Friendship: So that at the same time we eat and drink in remembrance of Christ's
Death which procured the Covenant, we must solemnly give our Consent to it, and
expressly ratify and confirm it too.

This may fairly be presumed to be one end of the Holy Communion, because it is
the end of Baptism, which St. Peter calls a 1 Pet. 3.21.
Stipulation, and which, as we have seen, is our entrance into the
Gospel Covenant and Religion. And since it is so evidently the use of that, in
great likelihood it is of this too; for both the Sacraments were still held of
like Use, Nature, and Signification.

Nay, this was the end, not only of the Christian, but also of the Jewish
Sacraments, which shows it was not peculiar to any one, but runs through all of
them.

For as for Circumcision, it was a Federal Rite or Sign. It bound the Jews (as
before it had done the Patriarchs) to God, and God to them, in the Covenant
Moses gave them, by a mutual Obligation. For therein they promised to perform
all that the Law injoined -- He that is Circumcised, says St. Paul, is a Debtor
to keep the whole Law, Gal. 5.3. And thereby they were assured of the
Righteousness and Benefits God had promised -- Abraham received Circumcision as
a Seal of the Righteousness of Faith, says the same Apostle, i. e. as a Seal or
Confirmation of the Promises made to it, Romans 4.11. And because it was thus a
sign to both parts, and a Rite used at their engaging in it, Circumcision is
called the Covenant, i. e. the Solemn Ceremony and undertaking of it, Genesis
17.10. Act. 7.8.

And then as for the Passover, it also was a Covenanting Ceremony and Federal
Rite, as may sufficiently appear from its being a Feast on Sacrifice, which is
the most Solemn way of Covenanting with God. And this use of the Passover is of
the greater weight to conclude the same of the Lords Supper, because among us
this answers to it, and comes in stead of it. It answers to it, I say; for our
bleeding Lord was the Great thing which their Sacrificed Lamb signified, whence
he is called the 1 Pet. 1.19.
Lamb without Blemish and without Spot, the Rev. 13.8.
Lamb slain from the Foundation of the World, and the Joh. 1.29.
Lamb of God that takes away the sins of Mankind: and our Feasting upon his
body and blood is the same with their Feasting upon it, as St. Paul plainly
intimates, when he says Christ our Passover is Sacrificed for us, therefore let
us keep our Eucharistical Feast upon him in it, answerable to what they did
upon the Lamb in theirs, 1 Cor. 5.7, 8. And at the Institution of the Holy
Sacrament, our Savior intimated that the Passover was abolished, and that this
was henceforward to succeed and come in stead of it. For immediately before he
appointed his own Supper, he tells them he would not any more eat of the Lamb,
or drink of the Wine in the Passover; i. e. he would abolish this, so as we
should no more eat or drink of it; and substitute that in place of it, Luc.
22.16, 18.

And now since it is the general Nature of Sacraments, both among Jews and
Christians, to be Covenanting Rites; since Baptism plainly is, that goes hand
in hand with it; and since the Passover was, which preceded and answered to it,
this being substituted in place, and put instead of it: in all likelihood the
Sacrament of the Lords Supper is a Federal Feast, and a Covenanting Rite too.

But to prove this yet more particularly, That this Holy Sacrament is intended
for a Federal Rite, and for our Renewal and Ratification of the New Covenant,
will appear,

1 st, From the words of Institution, wherein the Cup is called the New
Covenant, and we are bid to drink of it, which is a Federal Rite; and the Bread
is called Christ's Body to the same intent as the Paschal Lamb was, which was a
Federal Conveyance of it.

2ly, From its being a Feast upon Sacrifice, which is a Federal Feast; for
Sacrifice is one way of Covenanting with God, and by Feasting on the Sacrifice
we join in and partake of it.

3ly, From all the particular Blessings of the Covenant being conveyed by it,
which otherwise than by Federal Promises or Performances are not to be had.

1 st, That o^r eating Bread and drinking Wine in the Holy Sacrament, is
intended for a Federal Rite, and for our Renewal and Ratification of the New
Covenant, appears from the words of Institution, wherein the Cup is called the
New Covenant, and we are bid to drink of it, which is a Covenanting Rite; and
the Bread is called Christ's Body to the same intent as the Pascal Lamb was,
which also was a Federal Conveyance of it.

1. In the words of Institution the Cup is called the New Covenant. This Cup,
says our Savior, is the New Testament, or (...).
Covenant, in my Blood, 1 Cor. 11.25.

And we are all bid to drink of it, which is a Federal Rite, and was then a
known Ceremony of confirming any Covenant. Drink ye all of it, says he to his
Disciples, Mat. 26.27.

This drinking of it, as it is an Application of it to our selves, and taking
it into our own Bodies, is a plain sign of our engaging in it, and adhering to
it; for thereby we show that we close with, and embrace it. But this is still
further evident, because anciently among the Jews, and other Eastern Nations,
eating and drinking were Federal Rites, whereby they were wont mutually to Seal
Leagues of friendship, and confirm Covenants with each other. For they used to
bind their Compacts by a Friendly Treat, and to consummate them in all
Hospitable Entertainment. Thus we read in the Story of Laban and Jacob: for
when Laban demands, Come thou, let us make a Covenant, I and thou; Genesis 31.44;
Jacob's Consent to it is expressed by this, -- he said unto his Brethren,
Gather stones; and they took stones, and made an heap, and did eat there upon
the heap; by that Note of Friendship answering the Demand, and confirming the
Covenant which was proposed, v. 46. And so Joshua's Covenanting, or making
Peace with the Gibeonites when they came to sue for it, is called his taking of
their victuals, Josh. 9. -- the men took of their victuals, and asked not
counsel of the Lord, and Joshua made Peace with them, and made a League with
them to let them live, Josh. 9.14, 15. And Obadiah mentions being in Covenant
with any one, and Eating Bread with him, as Words that signify the same Thing,
whereof the one is the others Explication. The men of thy Confederacy have
brought thee even to the border, says he, i. e. have almost quite bereft thee
of thy own Country; the men that are at Peace with thee, have deceived thee;
they that eat thy Bread, have laid a Wound under thee: in which Description of
the Enemies of Edom, though there be Variety in the Expression, yet is one and
the same Thing meant by them, Obad. v. 7. And the same might appear from other
Instances, both in the Scriptures, and in Profane Authors.

Since in the Words of Institution then our Savior tells his Disciples, the
Cup is the New Covenant, and bids them drink of it, which was well known among
them to be a Federal Rite; he plainly showed his meaning was, that they should
ratify and confirm the New Covenant by it.

2. In the Words of Institution the Bread is called Christ's Body to the same
intent, as the Paschal Lamb was in the Jewish Sacrament: and this also shows it
to be a Covenanting Rite, because that was a Federal Conveyance of it.

The Bread, I say, or rather the taking and eating of it, is called Christ's
Body to the same Intent, as the Paschal Lamb was in the Jewish Sacrament. Jesus
took bread, says St. Matthew, and brake it, and said, Take, eat, Not (...) in
the masculine, to agree with (...) bread; but (...), which, b^ing of a
different gender, cannot agree to (...), but to the whole Action.
this is my Body, Mat. 26.26. Which Words, This is my Body, relate to the
Paschal Lamb, that in the ordinary Phrase of the Doctors was called the Corpus
Paschatis, and Corpus Agni Paschalis. Vt Buxt. observe. e Talmud. and Maim.
Body of the Passover, and the Body of the Paschal Lamb, to show, that the
taking and eating of the Bread and Wine was to be his Body in the same sense
now, as the eating of the Paschal Lamb had been hitherto. Which Relation to the
Passover that he had then in hand, and to their manner of expressing it, I
think is one very obvious and natural Account of his calling this New Feast his
Body when he spoke of it.

And this also shows it to be a Covenant-Rite, because the eating of the
Paschal Lamb among the Jews was his Body in a Federal sense, as a Federal
Conveyance of it. For their Slain Lamb was a Figure of our Dying Lord, as has
been proved, and was accepted to all the purposes of his Blood: and their
Feasting on it, as in all other Sacrifices, was their Federal joining in, and
partaking of it. For to Feast on a Sacrifice, was to join in the Covenant made
by it, and to partake of the Blessings promised to it, as shall presently be
showed.

And since in the Words of Institution our Savior says of the Eating of the
Bread that it is his Body, to the same intent as the Eating of the Paschal Lamb
was in that Jewish Sacrament, which was so in a Federal sense, as a Federal
Conveyance of it: he plainly intimates his own Supper to be a Federal Feast,
and that we confirm the New Covenant by joining in it.

And as this appears from the Words of Institution, wherein the Cup is called
the New Covenant, and they are bid to eat and drink, which is a Federal Rite;
and the Eating of the Bread is called Christ's Body to the same intent as the
Paschal Lamb was, which was so in a Federal sense, as it Federally conveyed it:
So does it also,

2 ly, From its being a Feast upon Sacrifice, which is a Federal Feast; for
Sacrifice is one way of Covenanting with God; and by Feasting on the Sacrifice,
we join in, and partake of it.

The Lords Supper, I say, is a Feast upon Sacrifice. It was the way both among
Jews and Gentiles, that when they brought an Offering to God, they who offered
it were to come, and Feast on some part of it. Thus it was in the Worship of
the Golden Calf, and the Sacrifice which Aaron made to it, Exodus 32: He built
an Altar before it, and offered Burnt-offerings and Peace Offerings, and the
People sat down to Eat and to Drink, i. e. upon part of what they had offered,
v. 5, 6. And thus it was in the Sacrifice which Samuel blessed, 1 Samuel 9: The
People will not eat until he come, because he does bless the Sacrifice, and
afterward they eat that be bidden, v. 13. And to this Usage several Places of
the Scripture allude, as namely Psalm. 106.28. -- they joined themselves unto
Baal-P^or, and ate the Sacrifices of the Dead: And Exodus 34.15 -- lest thou do
Sacrifice unto their Gods, and one call thee, and thou eat of his Sacrifice:
And several others. And as it was thus in the Religious Feasts both of Jews and
Gentiles, so it is also in the Lords Supper. Our Savior gave his Body and
Blood a Sacrifice for our Sins, putting away Sin, as the Apostle says, by the
Sacrifice of himself, Heb. 9.26. And having thus made the Oblation, according
to what was in use both in the Jewish and Gentile Sacrifices, he institutes
this Treat of Bread and Wine, as a Feast upon it. This I suppose is aimed at,
when St. Paul brings in an Altar speaking of the Christian Feast, which
sufficiently intimates its relation to a Sacrifice, as a Treat upon it: We have
an Altar, says he, whereof they have no right to eat that serve the Tabernacle,
i. e. wherein the strict Judaizers may not partake; for Judaism excludes Men
from the Communion especially, and indeed from all Parts of the Christian
Worship, Heb. 13.10. And this he also shows concerning it, when he compares it
with the Jewish and Gentile Feasts on Sacrifices, making them answerable and
parallel to it, 1 Cor. 10.16, 18, 20, 21. And this he directly affirms of it,
when he says, Christ our Passover is sacrificed for us, therefore let us keep
the Eucharistical Feast, i. e. upon this Sacrificed Christ, 1 Cor. 5.7, 8.

And Feasts upon Sacrifice are Federal Feasts, i. e. Feasts that ratify and
confirm Covenants; for Sacrifice is one way of Covenanting with God, and
Feasting upon it is the way of participating or sharing in it.

Sacrifice, I say, is one way of Covenanting with God. When God would enter
into Articles, and bind himself in Covenants with Men, he chose to do it in
shedding the Blood of some Sacrifice, that Typified the Blood of Christ his
Son, which is the only thing that moves him to deal with us in any Concern
that either implies or tends to Friendship and Reconciliation. Thus he did with
Abraham when he promised him the Land of Canaan if he would continue Genesis 17.1,
2.
perfect, and walk before him; he ordered him to make a Sacrifice, that therein
he might covenant and engage it to him. Take an Heifer, says he, and a
she-Goat, and a Ram, etc. And Abraham took them, and divided them in the midst,
and when the Sun went down, behold a smoking Furnace, and a burning Lamp that
passed between those Pieces, wherein, it is like, God Consumed and Feasted on
Abraham's Sacrifice; and in that same day the Lord made a Covenant with
Abraham, saying, Unto thy Seed have I given this Land, etc: Genesis 15.8, 9, 10,
17, 18. And thus he did with the Jewish Nation, when he ratified that Covenant
with them, which Moses gave them; he chose the Blood of Burnt-offerings, that
therein he might seal it t^ them. For when Moses told the People all the words
of the Lord, and they answered with one voice, saying, We will do them; he
built an Altar of twelve Pillars, according to the twel^e Tribes, and offered
Burnt-offerings and Peace Offerings, and then recited the Book of the Covenant
in their ^ars, that they might give their Assent to it in the Solemnity of this
Sacrifice; the Blood whereof is therefore called the Blood of the Covenant,
because it was thus solemnly entered, and established by it, Exodus 24.3, 4, 5,
6, 7, 8. And thus he did in other Compacts, but particularly in all those
wherein he promised Pardon of Sin; for without shedding of Blood, i. e. of some
Sacrifice, says the Apostle, there is no Remission, Heb. 9.22. Thus did God, in
all Contracts of Pardon and Reconciliation, require the Blood of some
Sacrif^ce, that therein he might ratify and confirm them. And this was the
great Use whereto all Sacrifices of Exp^ation (such as our Savior Christ's is
in most signal manner, whereon we Feast in the Lords Supper) served among the
Jews: they were solemn Compacts and Stipulations, wherein he promised Pardon,
and they Amendment, after any Offenses. He engaged to accept the Life of the
sacrificed Beast in lieu of theirs, and to exempt them because it had suffered;
and they engaged to amend the Fault which they sought to have atoned, and never
more to repeat it. This it is plain they did, from that Form of Penitential
Confession in use among them, when they brought an Expiatory Sacrifice to the
Lord: Obsecro Domine, peccavi, deliqui, rebellavi, hoc aut illud feci, nunc
autem poenitentiam ago, sitque haec hostia expiatio mea. Vi. Episcop. Instit.
l. 3. c. 3. ad Praecep. 35. and Ouir. de Sacr. c. 15.
O Lord! I have sinned, and dealt wickedly, and rebelled against thee in doing
this or that; now I am sorry for it, and ashamed of it, and will never more
return to it; and therefore beg this Sacrifice may atone for it. And if they
had not thus repented of it, the Isa. 66.3.
Sacrifice would have been of no avail to the Forgiveness of it. For, to what
purpose is the multitude of your Sacrifices unto me, says the Lord, so long as
you show no Repentance with them? But wash you, make you clean, cease to do
evil, learn to do well: Come now, and let us reason together; though your Sins be
as Scarlet, they shall be as white as Snow, Isa. 1.11, 16, 17, 18. The
Sacrifices of God, says the Psalmist, are a broken Spirit, i. e. they must be
offered and presented with it; a broken and a contrite Heart, O God, thou will
not despise, Ps. 51.17.

Thus were Sacrifices a mutual Stipulation and Engagement, consisting of a
Promise of Pardon on Gods part, and a Promise of Repentance and Amendment on
Man's: so that they were in the nature of a virtual Contract and Covenant
between them. And this God plainly intimates concerning them, when he tells of
his Saints making a Covenant with him by Sacrifice: -- Gather my Saints, says
he, who have made a Covenant with me by Sacrifice, Ps. 50.5. and calls Salt,
wherewith every Oblation of Meat Offering was to be seasoned, the Salt of the
Covenant, because it was to season all those Sacrifices wherein the Covenant
was confirmed, Levit. 2.13.

And as Sacrifice is one way of Covenanting with God, so is Feasting upon it
the way of sharing and partaking in it. He who joined in the Feast, was looked
upon by God himself to join also in the Offering, to promise all the Duty which
it engaged, and to partake in all the Blessings which it procured for them.
They which eat of the Sacrifices, says St. Paul, are Partakers of the Altar, 1
Cor. 10.18. And therefore he forbids them to join in the Gentile Feasts, where
they sacrificed to Devils, because that were to partake and have Fellowship
with Devils, v. 20, 21.

And thus, from this also, viz. the Lords Supper being a Feast on Sacrifice, it
appears to be a Federal Rite, because Sacrifice is the great way of Covenanting
with God, and by Feasting on it, we join in and partake of it. In eating Bread
and drinking Wine at the Lords Table, agreeably to what the Jews and Gentiles
did at their Religious Feasts, we feed on the Sacrifice of Christ; and that
Sacrifice confirmed the New Covenant with Almighty God, that being, as he says,
sealed 1 Cor. 11.25.
in his Blood, so that by our Feasting on it we are made to share in it, and
give our full Consent thereto.

3 ly, That our Eating and Drinking at the Lord's Table is a Covenant-Rite,
appears from all the particular Blessings of the Covenant being conveyed by it,
which otherwise than by Federal Promises and Performances are not to be had.

The Particular Blessings promised in the Covenant, I say, are all conveyed by
it. Our Savior tells us of the Bread we eat, and of the Wine we drink, that
they are his Body and Blood: -- This is my Body, says he, and this is my Blood
of the New Testament, Mat. 26.26, 28. By which, although we are not to understand
that they are so in their Natures, yet the least we can understand is, that
they are so in their Effects, i. e. that they convey to us all those Blessings,
which the piercing of his Body, and the shedding of his Blood procured for us.
Those Blessings are contained in the New Covenant, and, as I said, are chiefly
these three, viz. the Forgiveness of Sins, the Assistance of Gods Spirit to aid
and strengthen us, and Eternal Life and Happiness: and all these the Eating of
Bread and Drinking Wine in the Holy Sacrament are designed to convey to us.

They convey to us Forgiveness of Sins, and assure us, when we perform them as
we ought, that God is in Favor and at Peace with us. Of this we have
sufficient Assurance, because we Feast upon a Sacrifice, which is Gods Meat,
and are entertained at his own Table, as his Guests whom he has invited: and
the least which that can mean is, that he admits us into a State of Love and
Friendliness, since we do not invite those we will not be Friends with to our
own Tables. When any one calls another to a Treat, it is a plain Sign he either
would be, or is, or at least makes show of being reconciled. It is a most
Natural Sign, and now every where is, and always was a Note of Friendship and
Endearment. And as such the Scriptures are wont to speak of it. When those whom
he had shut out, should knock at the door to be let in, and claim Acquaintance,
our Savior tells us, they will say to him, We have eaten and drunk in thy
presence, Luc. 13.25, 26. And when he shows his Apostles how high Favor, and
what great Interest they shall have with him, he tells them, they shall eat and
drink at his Table in his Kingdom, Luc. 22.29, 30. And when he declares how
kind he will be to those that hear his voice, and open unto him, he ^ays, he
will come in and sup with them, and they with him, Rev. 3.20. So that when God
entertains us at his own Table, and invites us to Feast with him, as he does in
the Holy Communion; we may be sure, if we come worthily as we ought, he is in
Friendship with us, and our Sins are forgiven. And this our Savior plainly
intimates, when he tells us at the giving of the Cup, that it is Mat. 26.28.
his Blood shed for the Remission of Sins, and bids us ver. 27.
drink of it, that so we may have it in our selves, and be assured we have
received the Atonement. And this, we must observe, is a Privilege which God
never vouchsafed to the Jews, no not to the Priests themselves: for in all
their Sacrifices he would never give them the Blood of Expiation, to assure
them of their Sins being atoned by it, (nay, nor the Flesh neither in the Great
Sacrifice of Expiation, which was burnt Lev. 16.27. Heb. 13.11.
without the Camp) but ordered it always to be poured out upon the Altar, or
the Ground, Exodus 29.12. Levit. 4.25, 30, 34. And to this, it is like, St. Paul
may have respect, when he tells the Hebrews, We have an Altar whereof they have
no right to eat, who serve the Tabernacle, Heb. 13.10, 11.

They convey to us also the Assistance of Gods Spirit and Grace to aid and
strengthen us. This is intimated by our Savior Christ, when he calls his
Flesh, which all must eat ( i. e. not in its Natural Substance, but in its
Effects, or those Blessings which were purchased by it) by the Name of Bread,
which is a thing that, as the Psalm. 104.15.
Psalmist says, strengthens man's heart, and gives Nourishment and Support to
us. I am the living Bread, says he, which came down from Heaven: If any man eat
of this Bread, he shall live for ever; and the Bread which I will give, is my
Flesh, which I will give for the Life of the World, Joh. 6.51. In the Sacrament
we are called to eat Christ's Flesh, and drink his Blood (not in their Natural
Substances, as I have hinted, but in their Effects:) and he that eats my
Flesh and drinks my Blood, says he, dwells in me, and I in him; and when
Christ dwells in any Man, his Spirit dwells there too, so that he cannot want
Grace sufficient to assist him, Joh. 6.56. And St. Paul alluding to the Power
of Wine, whose Natural Virtue is to enspirit and enliven Men, says, That in the
Eucharist we are all made to drink into one Spirit, i. e. we are all made to
share in the same Holy Spirit, which is the same to our Souls that a Draught of
Wine is to our Bodies, a Principle of New Life, Strength, and Vigor in us, 1
Cor. 12.13.

They convey to us, lastly, a Right and Title to Eternal Life and Happiness.
The Blessed Sacrament was thought anciently to have a peculiar Efficacy in
preparing our Bodies for an Immortal State. Thus Irenaeus says of it:
Quemadmodum enim qui est a terra panis percipiens invocationem Dei, jam non
Communis panis est, sed Eucharistia, ex duabus rebus constans, terrena and
coelesti: sic and corpora nostra percipientia Eucharistiam, jam non sunt
corruptibilia, spem resurrectionis habentia. Iren. l. 4. adv. Haer. c. 34.
As the Bread that springs from the Earth, after it is blessed is not Common
Bread, but the Eucharist, consisting of an Earthly and an Heavenly Part, i. e.
the Sensible Sign, and the Spiritual Thing signified; so our Bodies receiving
the Communion, are not now corruptible as they were before, but are put in hope
of a Resurrection. And St. Ignatius calls it (...). Ignat. Ep. ad Ephesians.
the Medicine of Immortality, which is an Antidote to preserve Men from Dying,
and give them a Life that is Everlasting. And to this, as it is not unlike, the
Prayer at the giving of the Bread and Wine refers, That they may preserve our
Souls and Bodies to everlasting Life, as it was long since in the Form of the
Western Church, and as it is still in use amongst us. But whatever becomes of
that Conceit, viz. its preparing our Bodies for it; it is plain, that a Right to
Life and Immortality is conferred by it. Whosoever eats my Flesh, and drinks my
Blood, says our Savior, has Eternal Life, and I will raise him up at the
last day, Joh. 6.54: and again, He that eats of this Bread shall live for
ever, v. 58. And if he had not in express Words declared it, in all Equity and
Reason this might most justly have been presumed: For since in this Sacrament
God gives us the Body and Blood of his own Son, than which nothing can be
dearer to him; we may justly argue as St. Paul does, and say, He that spared
not his own Son, but delivered him up, both for, and to us all, how shall he
not with him also freely give us all things? Romans 8.32.

Thus are all the Particular Blessings of the New Covenant, which Christ's Blood
has purchased, and which God has promised and made over in it, conveyed to us
in this Holy Sacrament. And since they are so, it must needs be a Federal Rite,
and a Solemn Ceremony of Covenantin^ with God, because otherwise than (...)
Federal Performances and Engagements (...) are not to be had. God has suspended
all these Benefits upon our Performance of certain Conditions; so that we
cannot have them conveyed to us on his part, otherwise than by undertaking at
the same time for these on our own. He will not forgive any Believers their
Sins, unless they repent of them; nor help them to any Graces, unless they
endeavor after them, nor reward them at last with Eternal Life, unless they
have entirely obeyed him, as we have already seen. And therefore wheresoever
those are bestowed, these are either performed, or sincerely promised too.

So that from this Reason also, it appears, that the Sacrament is a Federal
Rite, and a Ratification of the New Covenant, and of our Baptismal Engagement;
because all the Blessings of that Covenant are conveyed by it, which otherwise
than by Federal Performances or Engagements are not to be had.

And thus we see, upon all these accounts, that the Sacrament of the Lords
Supper is intended not only for a Remembrance of the Death of Christ, but also
for a Renewal and Ratification of the New Covenant which was purchased by it.
For so much the General Nature of Sacraments which are Covenant-Rites, of
Baptism which goes hand in hand with it, and of the Passover which preceded and
answered to it, do fairly intimate; and so much also the Words of Institution,
at the Blessing both the Bread and Wine declare, and its being a Feast on
Sacrifice infers, and its conveying all the Blessings of the Covenant proves
concerning it.

And this is the second End of our Eating Bread and Drinking Wine in the Holy
Sacrament; namely, to renew our Baptismal Vow, and in most solemn sort to
confirm the New Covenant with Almighty God. So that when we come to remember
our Savior Christ in this Feast, we must come also to give and receive
Engagements with our Blessed Lord, promising that we will believe all his
Words, and endeavor after all Virtues, and obey all his Laws, and repent of
all our Faults: and then hoping assuredly that his Mercy shall forgive us, his
Grace and Spirit assist us, and his Bounty reward us with Eternal Happiness
when we do.

But besides these Ends, of its being in Remembrance of Christ and his Dying
for us, and in confirmation of the New Covenant which his Death procured us;
there is yet another,

3 ly, And that is, in Ratification of a League of Love and Friendship with
those Brethren that Communicate with us, and with all others.

Eating and Drinking together at the same Table, and joining in the same Feast,
was always a Note of Friendship, and a Profession of Love and Kindness among
Men. It is the common way of the World to compose Differences, to keep up
Friendliness in Neighbourhoods, and to beget Endearment and mutual Love in all
Fraternities. And this our Savior intended it should be among us. He invites
us all to eat of the same Loaf, and to Feast at the same Table, that we may
embrace as Friends, and love as Brethren, and be knit together in the same
Fellowship and Communion. We being many, says St. Paul, are one Bread, and one
Body; for in the Sacrament we are all Partakers of that one Bread, which is a
firm Bond of Union to make us one also, 1 Cor. 10.17. It links us together by
the most Powerful Arguments of our being Servants of the same Lord, and Sharers
in the same Privileges, and Members of the same Body, which are all most strong
Motives to Peace and mutual Kindness; and besides all this, by our own Solemn
Covenant and Engagement also. For in coming to this Feast, we are not only
excited to it by mighty Reasons which suggest it; but are to Covenant and
Promise Love to all our Brethren, and to plight our Troth for it. And thus the
Primitive Christians understood it, and accordingly made use of it, whose
Judgment and Practice in this Point were so apparent, that the Heathens
themselves, who looked any thing into their Religion, took notice of it. For
Pliny in his Letter to the Emperor Trajan, wherein he gives an Account of the
Christians Meetings, reports their Communicating to be a Religious Compact and
Combination among themselves, to do no hurt to each other, but to love as
Brethren, and live as Friends together. Soliti stato die ante lucem convenire;
carmenque Christo, quasi Deo dicere secum invicem: Seque Sacramento non in
scelus aliquod obstringere, sed ne furta, ne latrocinia, ne Adulteria
committerent, ne fidem sallerent, ne depositum appellati abnegarent: quibus
peractis morem sibi discedendi fuisse, rursusque coeundi ad capescendum cibum,
promiscuum tamen and innoxium. Plin. ep. l. 10. ep. 97.
They assemble early in the morning, says he, and sing an Hymn to Christ as
God; and then bind themselves mutually in their Sacrament, which is a sacred
Oath, not to commit any wickedness like a pack of lewd Conspirators; but to be
no Thieves, Adulterers, Injurious, False and Perfidious Persons: and having
done these things, and given these Assurances of mutual Honesty and Kindnesses
to each other, they depart home, and meet again at a promiscuous and Friendly
Treat, where they innocently Feast together.

This then is a third End of our Eating Bread and Drinking Wine in the Holy
Sacrament, namely, to be a Solemn Profession of our Communion and Fellowship
with our Brethren, and an Engagement of mutual Love and Friendship to those who
Communicate with us, and to all others. So that when we come therein to
remember our Savior Christ, and to confirm the New Covenant with Almighty God,
we must enter into a League of Love with all our Brethren, and promise an
inviolable Friendship unto them too.

And thus we see what is the meaning of Eating Bread and Drinking Wine in the
Holy Communion, and what we must intend and understand by them, that we may, as
the Apostle says, 1 Cor. 11.29.
discern the Lords Body in them. When we Eat Bread and Drink Wine according to
Christ's appointment, we must fix our thoughts upon him, and remember what Love
and Friendship he had for us, what Lessons, as our faithful Guide and
Instructor, he has taught us; what Commands, as our Lord and Master, he has
left with us; and what inexpressible Things, as our most Precious Savior and
Benefactor, he has done for us, in being made Man, and leading a mean and
necessitous Life, but above all in dying a most ignominious and painful Death
for our sakes, and that he might purchase us the Favor of God, the Graces of
the Spirit, and Eternal Happiness. We must renew that Engagement which we made
when we were Baptized, and confirm again that New Covenant with Almighty God
which his Blood procured; professing that we do, and will believe his Word, and
repent of every Fault, and endeavor with his Spirit, and obey all, not
wilfully transgressing any Commandment; that so we may have Right to that
Forgiveness, Grace, and Happiness, which upon these Terms he has purchased. And
lastly, we must confirm a League of Love and Friendship with all our Brethren,
professing that we do and will forgive all that injure us, and be kind to all
about us, and never fall into Hatred or cause Difference with any Persons, but
be at Peace and live in Charity with all the World. The Bodily Eating is but
the outside, and the least part in this Feast; but the chief thing required is
this Spiritual Work and Business which is to accompany it. So that when our
Savior Christ calls us to Eat and Drink at his own Table, he calls us not
barely to Feast our Bodies, for that is the least thing that he intends; but
chiefly and principally to employ our Souls, in remembering him, his Laws and
Benefits, and among them, above all, that of his Dying for us; in confirming
the New Covenant with God, and a Covenant of Peace and Brotherly Love with his
Members throughout all Mankind.

CHAP. II. Of the Worthiness of Communicating in the Sacrament.
The Contents.
To Communicate Worthily, is to do it with such Tempers and Behavior as are
worthy of it, and becoming the Things which are meant by it. The First End was
to remember Christ, both, first, As our Lord and Master, which calls for Honor
and Reverence in our selves, and a Care to maintain his Honor among others.
For mindfulness of his Commands, and Resolutions of Obedience. 2. As our most
kind Friend and Benefactor, which calls for Love and an hearty Affection for
him. For Joy and Gladness in what we receive from him. For Thankfulness for all
his Kindnesses, particularly in Dying for us. And as this Death was a Sacrifice
for our Sins, the Remembrance of it calls for a deep sense of our own
Unworthiness. An utter Abhorrence of our Sins, which caused his Sufferings. A
Resignation of our selves to his Use, as thereby we are become his own
Purchase. The Second End was to confirm the New Covenant with God which his
Blood procured. This calls for Sincerity and Faithfulness. A Third End was to
confirm a League of Love and Friendship with all Christians. This calls for
Peace and Charity to all Persons, and particularly for Alms to the Necessitous.
A Summary Repetition of these Qualifications. A Belief of these Things, which
carries us on to these Tempers and Performances, is the Faith that makes us
Worthy Communicants.

HAving shown hitherto what is the meaning of Eating Bread and Drinking Wine in
the Blessed Sacrament, I proceed now, in the next place, to show wherein lies
the Worthiness of Doing it. And this had need be clearly stated, not only
because the most considerable Scruple against Communicating lies in it, but
also because really it is a Matter of great account, and there hangs a great
weight upon it. For he that eats and drinks unworthily, says the Apostle,
commits a Damning Sin, which will destroy him, unless he repent of it; he eats
and drinks Damnation to himself, 1 Cor. 11.29; and is guilty of the Body and
Blood of the Lord, v. 27.

Now to Do this Worthily, is to Do it with such Tempers and Dispositions as
become it, and are worthy of it. For this Eating and Drinking not being to
satisfy Hunger, but for Sacred Ends, it is fit we come to it with a suitable
and a Sacred Carriage, and in that consists the Worthiness of the Usage. Were
it only a Feast on Common Food, we should behave our selves worthily at it, by
thanking God for it, and being Temperate. But being a Feast wherein Religion is
concerned, and whereat we are to remember the Death of our Lord, and to Seal
the New Covenant with God, and a League of Love with all the Christian World;
to the doing this worthily, and as it is fit we should, there is more required.
For we deal very unworthily in remembering the Death of our Lord, if we are not
thankful for it; and in ratifying the New Covenant with God, if we are not
sincere in it; and in promising Love to all the Christian World, if we are in
enmity and hatred. These Religious Ends must be answered with a Religious
Temper, and a Devout Carriage, and then they are treated as they ought, and as
their Worth requires. This is signified by several Copies, which in 1 Cor.
11.27. read not barely, Whosoever shall eat this Bread and drink this Cup Not
merely (...), but (...), as several MSS. partic. Coll. Linc. Coll. Nov. read
the place. And this is followed by St. Ambrose, who reads thus -- biberit
Calicem Domini indigne Domino, v. 27. and St. Chrysostom, who reads thus --
(...), etc. v. 29.
OF THE LORD UNWORTHILY; but whosoever shall eat this Bread and drink this Cup
of the Lord UNWORTHILY OF THE LORD, i. e. in a way unworthy of him, which
clearly shows the Unworthiness to consist in the want of those Tempers
wherewith it is sit our Blessed Lord, who is commemorated in it, should be
treated. And this the Apostle plainly intimates, when he places the
unworthiness of Eating in not Discerning, or rather Discriminating the Lords
Body, and putting a difference between it and Common Food, by a different
Carriage and Behavior at it. He that eats and drinks unworthily, says he, eats
and drinks Damnation to himself for such unworthy usage, which lies in his not
discerning, or rather not (...).
discriminating the Lords Body, 1 Cor. 11.29.

Thus does a worthy Eating of the Sacrament consist in answering its Sacred
Ends with Sacred and suitable Carriage and Dispositions. And therefore that we
may see what Behavior is worthy of it, it is fit we run over those several
Ends, and inquire what Tempers every one of them requires of us.

Those Ends are Three.

1 st, To Remember Christ our Blessed Lord and Savior, and particularly his
Dying for us; which call for Love, Joy, Gratitude, Obedient Resolutions, and
such like Tempers.

2 ly, To Confirm the New Covenant with Almighty God; which is not worthily
done by us, unless we come to it in Sincerity and Faithfulness, and with full
Purpose and Performance of that Repentance and Obedience which we profess and
promise.

3 ly, To Confirm a League of Love and Friendship with all our Brethren and
Fellow Christians; which requires that we lay aside all Envy, Hatred, and
Malicious Thoughts, and come to it in Peace and Forgiveness of all that have
any ways offended us.

If we Believe all these things which Christ our Great Prophet has revealed to
us, and our Faith shows it self in these Tempers, and carries us on to these
Performances; we are Worthy Communicants, and have that Faith which will render
us welcome Guests at the Lords Table, and acceptable to him at all other times.

1 st, One End of our Eating Bread and Drinking Wine at the Lords Supper, is to
remember Christ, not only as our Prophet and Teacher (which I do not make a
Distinct Head now, because the Belief required to that is exercised through the
whole Action, and falls in at all the other) but as our Blessed Lord, Savior,
and Benefactor; and above all his Benefits, particularly to remember his Dying
for us: and this, to do it worthily, calls for Love, Joy, Gratitude,
Resolutions of Obedience, and other such like Tempers*

The Remembrance of any thing absent, and long since past, brings it back into
our Minds, and gives a sort of Presence to it. And therefore when things are
brought to our Remembrance, they should work upon us, and affect us, as if they
were before us. When we remember our Savior Christ then, we must bear the same
Mind toward him, as we should if we saw him, and were conversing with him: and
that will consist in these Things that follow. We must Honor him, and resolve
to Obey him, as he is our Lord and Master; and Love him, and Delight in him,
and give Thanks to him, as he is our Friend and Benefactor; and be humbled
under the sense of our own Unworthiness, and abhor our own Sins, as they
brought him to bleed and die for us; and resign up our selves, both Souls and
Bodies, to his Use, as we are bought with his Blood, and are thereby become his
own Purchase.

1 st, In Eating and Drinking in the Lords Supper, we are to remember Christ as
our Lord and Master; and to do that worthily, we must remember him with Honor
and Reverence, and with mindfulness of his Commands, and Resolutions of
Obedience, which are Duties we owe, and should pay to him, were he present with
us.

1 st, We ought to remember him our Lord and Master, with Honor and Reverence.

These Tempers Lordship and Authority always call for, whenever they are
lodged in any Persons. A Son honors his Father, says God, and a Servant his
Master: if then I be a Father, where is mine Honor? and if I be a Master,
where is my Fear? Mal. 1.6. Honor the King, says St. Peter, and Servants be
subject to your Masters with all fear, 1 Pet. 2.17, 18. And Render to all their
Dues, says St. Paul, as Fear or Reverence to whom Fear, Honor to whom Honor
is due, Romans 13.7.

But when this Authority is in the most absolute and full Degrees, and is
joined with the highest Excellencies, and tempered with the most Endearments,
and guided by the most surpassing Goodness, as it is in Christ Jesus, it calls
for them most especially. For he is every way wonderfully accomplished, and has
all those Endowments in their greatest Perfection, which of right can
challenge, or are fit to excite them. For he is boundless in knowledge, he Joh.
21.17.
understands all things; and infinitely Isa. 11.1, 2.
wise in Counsel, able to suit Means to every End, and bring about every
Purpose; and surpassing in Isa. 9.6. and Rev. 3.7.
Might, so that he may do what he pleases; and 1 John 3.5.
holy in all his ways; and Rev. 3.7.
faithful in all his Promises; and Isa. 9.7.
just and equitable in all his Dealings; and Glorious in his Divine Essence,
being the very Heb. 1.3.
Brightness of his Fathers Glory, and the express Image of his Person; and
Supereminent in Power, having all Mat. 28.18.
Authority in Heaven and Earth put into his hands: and yet in the midst of all
these Excellencies, and the height of all this Greatness, which are apt to puff
us up with Pride and Contempt of others, he is unspeakable in 1 John 3.16.
Love, and wonderful in Phil. 2.6, 7, 8.
Condescensions, vouchsafing to leave Heaven, where he was Equal to God, and be
made in fashion of a mean Man, for our sakes; and unwearied in Marc. 10.45.
Act. 10.38.
doing Services; and most prodigious^y free in Bounty and Kindness, giving his
own Joh. 6.51. Rev. 5.9.
Hearts Blood to purchase Heaven and Eternal Life for us: for all which Height
of Excellencies, and Plenitude of Power, and Depth of Love, he is most Rev.
5.11, 12, 13.
profoundly Reverenced, and dearly Prized, and highly Exalted by Glorified
Saints, and the pure and immortal Angels. All these adorable Excellencies are
in their utmost Perfection in our Lord and Master Christ Jesus; and their Merit
calls for all the Honor and Reverence which he can possibly receive from us.
And this accordingly God has expressly required of us. He has committed all
Judgment to the Son, that all should honor the Son, even as they honor the
Father, Joh. 5.22, 23; and highly exalting him, has given him a Name above
every Name, that at the Name of Jesus every Knee should bow, of things in
Heaven, and of things in Earth, Phil. 2.9, 10. He incomparably deserves our
utmost Worship and Reverence, and has a most absolute Claim to them; so that we
must needs treat him with the most submissive and respectful Carriage, and
should deal most unworthily by him, and do what utterly misbecomes us, if we
should do otherwise.

Thus must we Remember our Lord and Master Jesus Christ with Honor and
Veneration, if we would do it in such sort as is worthy of him.

Nay, we must not only Honor and Reverence him our selves, but, if we would
deal worthily by him, seek to make him Honorable, and promote his Honor among
others. We must be ready always to plead his Cause, and to vindicate his
Precepts, and to side with his Servants, and express a just Distaste against
those who transgress his Commands themselves (and much more against those who
set up for the Party of Disobedience, and seek to draw in others) who profane
his Ordinances, or lightly and irreverently use his Name, or any ways vilify
any Person or Thing which he ought to be Glorified and Honored in. And this we
shall be sure to do, if we have any high Esteem, and Zeal of Love, and
affectionate Concern for him. For when these are strong in them, every Servant
will perform this Office to his Master, and every Man to his Friend; they will
not sit still, and tamely hear his Name abused, or see his Commands slighted,
his Interest opposed, his Children or Dependents injured, his Appointments
disparaged, or his Person any way traduced or disgraced, without expressing a
Discreet and well-tempered Zeal in his Cause, and concerning themselves in a
sober and just Vindication. This, I say, they ordinarily will do, as I am sure
they always ought to do, when they have an high Esteem for any Man. And if,
through lowness of Spirit, or Cowardice of Temper, they draw back from the
Trouble or Hazard they are like to run in his Vindication; they are very much
wanting to their Friend or Lord, and deal unworthily by him. So that if we
would deal worthily by our Friend and Master Jesus Christ, we must neither
dishonor him our selves, nor, if we can help it, at least not without
expressing our dislike of it, suffer it to be done by others. And therefore to
make this Sacramental Remembrance worthy of him, it must not only be in
showing Honor and Reverence to him our selves, but in a readiness to maintain
his Honor, and promote his Interest among others also.

2 ly, We must Remember Christ our Lord and Master, with mindfulness of his
Commands, and Resolutions of Obedience.

This is another Temper, which Lordship and Authority over us call^ for. For
the most proper Duty of Subjects toward their Sovereigns, and of Servants
toward their Masters, is Obedience, or a Carefulness to perform whatsoever
they enjoin and require of them. Put them in mind, says the Apostle, to be
subject to Principalities and Powers, and to obey Magistrates, Tit. 3.1. And
Servants obey your Masters in all things, not with eye-service, but in
singleness of heart, fearing God, Col. 3.22. And Why call ye me Lord, Lord,
says our Savior, and do not the things which I say? Luc. 6.46.

Thus is Obedience the great Duty which we owe to all Masters and Governors
that have Authority over us. We must neither forget the Commands they have left
with us, nor knowingly transgress them, but carefully call them into our Minds,
and conscientiously practice them when we do.

And this we are then especially bound to, if they are not only our Masters,
but our Dearest Friends, and Noblest Benefactors also. For these are Names that
add new Bonds, and higher Obligations, which will have a great force so long as
there is any thing of Ingenuity left in us. And therefore since our Blessed
Master Jesus is not only our Rightful Lord and Governor, but withal our most
surpassing kind Friend and Benefactor, we ought in all Duty and Gratitude to be
mindful of what he desires, and to do any thing that he would have us; and we
deal most undutifully and unworthily by him, if we do otherwise. So that this
also is another Instance of the Worthiness of this Remembrance, to be mindful
of the Laws which he has given us, and to think of them with a Readiness and
firm Resolution to obey.

These are the things then which must render our Remembrance worthy of him
under this Relation. When we Eat and Drink in Commemoration of Christ our Lord
and King, we must Honor and Reverence him our selves, and be concerned to
maintain his Honor and promote his Interests among others, and be mindful of
the Commands he has left with us, and ready and resolved to obey them.

2 ly, In Eating Bread and Drinking Wine at the Lords Supper, we are to
remember Christ as our most kind Friend and Benefactor; and to do this
worthily, we must remember him with Love of him, and Delight in him, and
grateful Resentments and hearty Thanks for all the Kindnesses which we have
received from him.

1 st, We must remember him our most kind Friend and Benefactor with Love, and
an hearty Affection for him.

This is due to him as he is our Gracious Lord, and indeed in every Relation
that he stands in, since in all he is most wonderfully winning and obliging.
For even there he seeks our own Good in every thing he commands us, and treats
us with much gentleness, and encourages every thing that is well in us, and
pities our unavoidable Infirmities, and bears our many and high Provocations
with invincible Patience, and sends Messengers of Peace to entreat and sue for
a Reconciliation with us upon any Difference, tho it is not his Interest but
ours, and though not he but we are the Offenders; and, when he is forced to
punish, does it always with the greatest reluctance; but when he can take an
occasion to reward, does that with the greatest Joy and Cheerfulness; all which
are strangely engaging, and must needs constrain all ingenuous Tempers to be
heartily in Love with him.

But our Love is due to him more especially, as he is our most kind Friend,
that loves us as he does his own Life; and our most noble Benefactor, who has
so infinitely obliged us, and done such Kindnesses for us, as we are not able
to express.

He is our true Friend, who espouses our Interests as his own, and is sensible
of all our Wants, and pained in all our Afflictions, and rejoices in all our
Joys, and seeks to make us share in his own Happiness, and would part with any
thing he has to please us, nay, give his own Hearts Blood in any Case which
were worth the while to do us a Kindness.

He is our most noble Benefactor, who has done us such Kindnesses as are beyond
all Expressions, having procured for us the Favor of God, the Help of the
Spirit, and the assured Hope of Eternal Happiness, when all these seemed
irrevocably lost, and no ways attainable by us; and when he could not gain them
at a less Rate, than by laying down his own Life for the Purchase.

And these are Endearments which pass all Imagination; they are such Arguments
to a reciprocal Love and Kindness, as cannot be withstood by any Man. So that
having received all this Love from him, we musts needs return the small Tribute
of Love to him again, or else we should be the unworthiest of any Persons
living.

And this is one Temper which is necessary to a worthy Remembrance of so kind a
Friend, and so noble a Benefactor as we have of our Blessed Savior: We must
love the Thoughts of him, and be most kindly affected toward him, or else we
shall show our selves utterly unworthy of him.

2 ly, We must Remember him our most Noble Benefactor, and the Favors he has
done us, with Joy and Gladness.

This is a Temper very necessary in us, when we would worthily Commemorate the
Receipt of Benefits. For when we rejoice in them, we show what Rate we put upon
them, and how much we are pleased in them, and how happy we think our selves in
that Love which bestowed them on us. And this will make the Person that
conferred them think them well placed, and please himself in what he has done,
concluding, that we, who are so sensible of a Kindness when it is showed us, are
worthy to receive one. And therefore the Scripture calls all good Men, who have
received most ^nvaluable Benefits, to Joy and (...) Re^oyce in the Lord, O ye
Righteous, (...) the Psalmist, for Praise is comely for the Upright, Psalm. 33.1.

And this we all ought to show when we Commemorate those Blessings which our
Blessed Savior has conferred upon us. He has got all those things for us which
our Hearts can wish, no less than the pure and perfect Joys of Heaven, and
Eternal Happiness; and these he has taken the hardest Pains, and been at the
greatest Cost to compass, laying down his own Life for them, rather than he
would suffer us to go without them. And this we ought not at any time to think
of, without Joy and Gladness. When we reflect upon so great Love, and such
inestimable Benefits, it is most fit and reasonable we rejoice over them, that
thereby we may show forth how happy we think our selves in them. And our
Blessed Lord may well think he threw them away upon us, and repent that ever he
bestowed, or took such pains for them, if after all he sees us insensible of
what is done, and still as cold and unaffected as if we had received nothing.
So that if we would worthily Commemorate the Receipt of so great Happiness, we
must do it with joyful Hearts, and cheerful Looks, and an open show of
Gladness; as we are told the Disciples did in the first Days, who, as St. Luke
says, continued daily in the Temple, and breaking Bread, eating it with
Gladness of Heart, Act. 2.46.

3 ly, We must Remember him our most Noble Benefactor with grateful Resentments
and hearty Thanks for all his Kindnesses, particularly for that of his Dying
for us.

In Thankfulness are implied two things.

1 st, A grateful Acknowledgment of the Gift, and a Praising him that gave it.

2 ly, A Readiness and Endeavor according to our Power to requite it.

It implies a grateful Acknowledgment of the Gift, and a Praising of him that
gave it. For when we receive an undeserved Benefit, it is very fit that we let
the Donor know we are sensible of it, and understand very well both our own
Happiness in receiving, and his Kindness in bestowing it. We must give him the
Praise of his Beneficence, and express a Sense of our own Obligations: For if
we fail in this, we show either that we contemn his Gift, and set no value on
it; or that we think it only a Tribute to our own Desert, so as that we are
not beholding to him for it; or that we would be independent, and are too proud
to be obliged by it; all which, had they been known to him beforehand, would
have made him and all men judge us most unworthy to receive it.

It implies also a Readiness and Endeavor according to our Power to requite
it. For Love should engage Love, and the Kindnesses which are done us, oblige
us upon all Opportunities to do the same again. To encourage Benefits and
bestowing Favors, we ought to take care that they who gave them never have any
just cause to repent of them, and to let them see, that if we had the Power and
Opportunity, we would do as much for them. For Kindnesses should be a sort of
Loans, which, upon any fit occasion, are to be repaid back to him who showed
them, that so all Men may be encouraged to abound in them, and never be hindered
by a fear lest afterward they should be offended with themselves for having
bestowed them. And if any Man is either so stupid, or so proud, that he will
take no notice of them, nor endeavor afterward to requite them, by the
consent of all he is unfit to be dealt with in this generous way of Love, and
is utterly unworthy to receive them.

Thus does Thankfulness imply, both an affectionate Acknowledgment of the Gift,
and Praising him that gave it; and also a Readiness and Endeavor according to
our Power to requite it.

And this we owe in the highest Measure to our Savior Christ, and must be sure
always to pay him, when we Commemorate the inestimable Benefits which we have
received from him. We must not remember the great Things he has done for us, in
delivering us from Eternal Death, and gaining us the Favor of God, and the
Joys of Heaven, when it cost him no less than his own Hearts Blood for the
Purchase, without affectionate Resentments, and Mouths full of Praise, and a
fixed Readiness and Resolution of Mind to make what small requital we are able
in our Zeal for his Service, and our Kindness to his Brethren, whom he looks on
as his own Members, resenting any Good that is done to them, as if it were done
to himself, Mat. 25.40. And this Duty of Thankfulness is a most especial
Requisite to our worthy Commemoration of his Benefits in this Feast. For
Praising God is reckoned as one Particular of the Disciples Carriage in their
Breaking Bread, Act. 2. They continued daily breaking Bread, says St. Luke,
which they eat with gladness, praising God, v. 46, 47. Nay, so great a share
has Thanksgiving and Praise in this Business, that the whole Action is called
the Eucharist, i. e. the Giving of Thanks to God for those Benefits which are
therein Commemorated.

And these are the Things which must render our Remembrance worthy of him, when
we Commemorate him as our Friend and Benefactor in this Holy Supper. We must
love him for his Kindnesses, and delight in his Benefits, and be thankful for
all his Favors, particularly for that which is therein especially
Commemorated, his Dying upon our accounts, bursting out into grateful
Acknowledgments and Words of Praise, and being ready and resolved by our Zeal
in his Service, our Observance of his Laws, and our Kindness to his poor
Members, to make him all the small Requital we are able, so that he may never
have any cause to repent of what he has done for us.

But besides this Remembrance of his Friendship to us, and Benefits in general,
which require in us these forementioned Tempers; we are especially to
commemorate the Benefit of his Dying for us, which more particularly calls for
certain others.

In Eating Bread and Drinking Wine in the Lords Supper, I say, we are to
remember his Dying for us, and shedding his Blood a Ransom for our Sins. And to
do this worthily, we must be humbled under the sense of our own unworthiness,
and abhor our Sins which brought him to bleed and die for us, and resign up our
selves both Souls and Bodies to his use, as we are bought with his Blood, and
thereby become his own Purchase.

1 st, We must remember his Dying for us in an humble and deep sense of our own
unworthiness, and in an utter abhorrence of our Sins, which brought him to
these Sufferings.

We must remember it, I say, in an humble and deep sense of our own
unworthiness. His Death was not for any thing that he had done, but only for
our Sins; and this shows what vile Wretches we are, and how unworthy Persons.
It lets us see how hateful our Sins had made us unto God, and what they had
deserved at his Hands. For he would not let them pass without inflicting the
highest Shame, and the most exquisite Pain and Tortures. Yea, when his own
only Begotten Son would intercede for them, and b^ar the Burden of them in his
own ^^^son, so implacable was the (...) to them, and so indispensable ^he
R^^sons that constrain^d him to punis^ (...) that his most tender Love for him,
whom he valued as his own Right Eye, could not hinder but that he should bleed
and die for them. It lets us see also how troublesome they had made us to our
best Friends, and how shamefully burdensome and expensive to the Blessed Jesus.
For when he longed and labored to redeem us from them, he could not be our
Friend unless he would cease to be his own, nor do us any good at all, except
he would give his own Life a Ransom. And what Man now can ever think of this,
but he must hide his Face, and be quite buried in a shameful sense of his own
Unworthiness? He may see how vile he was, when God was so highly offended with
him, and thought no Punishment too heavy for him, and would not be reconciled
at the Intercession of his own Son, unless he would die in stead of him; and it
was so dangerous and costly a thing, no less than the laying down his own Life,
for his Savior to show himself a serviceable Friend to him. And if this Sight
does not work shame and self-abasement in him, he will be concluded by all to
be the basest Man alive, and utterly unworthy that ^ver any thing of all this
unparalleled Kindness should have been done him.

We must also remember his Dying for us with an utter abhorrence of our Sins,
which were the Causes of his Sufferings. For if we do not hate and abhor them,
when we consider what Tortures he endured for them, we show we are very little
concerned for his Ease, nor have any feeling of his Pains, nor any Zeal at all
against the Occasion of his Sorrows. And this is a very bad Requital of his
undergoing all those Pains for our sakes, and a most unworthy Usage. So that if
we would worthily Commemorate his Dying for us, we must be humbled and ashamed
of our selves, at the sense of our own Unworthiness, seeing we had deserved
such insupportable Punishments, and have put him to such exquisite and intense
Pains; and particularly we must turn our abhorrence on our Sins, which caused
all this Mischief, and made him, if he would befriend us, to undergo such heavy
Tortures.

2 ly, We must remember his Dying for us, with a Resignation of our selves,
both Souls and Bodies, to his use, as we are bought with his Blood, and thereby
become his own Purchase.

He died in our stead, and his Blood was given to God for a Ransom, to buy us
off from it, that we might not die also. The Son of Man, says he, is come to
give his Life a Ransom for many, Mat. 20.28. And since he has bought us, and
paid so dear for us, to deliver us from Hell Torments and Eternal Death, which
is not his, but our own Advantage; in all Equity and Reason he ought to have
the Use of us, and we should be wholly devoted to his Service. And this the
Scripture requires of us. The Love of God constrains us, says St. Paul, to
live to him, because we thus judge, that if one died for all, then were all
dead; and that he died for all, that they which live should not henceforth live
unto themselves, but unto him that died for them, 2 Cor. 5.14, 15. And again,
Ye are not your own, ye are bought with a Price; therefore glorify God in your
Body and in your Spirit, which are Gods, 1 Cor. 6.19, 20. And since his Dying
for us has made us his own Propriety, and acquired him an absolute Right over
us to his own use, which we had infinite Reason to desire, but he had no need
of; if we would remember it worthily, we must do it justly, by honestly
devoting our Souls and Bodies, and assigning them over to him, to be wholly at
his Service.

And these are the Things which must render our Remembrance worthy of him, when
in the Holy Sacrament we Commemorate his Dying for us, and shedding his most
precious Blood a Ransom for our Sins. We must be humbled with the sense of our
own Unworthiness, and abhor our Sins, which brought him to these Sufferings,
and resign up our selves, both Bodies and Souls, to be wholly at his use, and
employed where and in what he pleases, as thereby they are become his own
Purchase.

And thus it appears what Tempers are becoming us, and worthy of this first End
of Eating and Drinking in the Holy Sacrament, viz. the Remembrance of our Lord
and Savior Christ, and his Dying for us. We must remember him with Honor and
Reverence, with a careful Concern to maintain and promote his Honor among
others, with mindfulness of his Commands, and Resolutions of Obedience, as he
is Lord over us: with Love of him for his Kindness, and Delight in his
Benefits, and thankful Acknowledgments, and Words of Praise, and grateful
Returns, in any thing he can receive, or we can give, for all his Favors,
particularly his Dying on our account, as he has so highly befriended, and
infinitely obliged us; and with an humble sense of our own unworthiness, and an
utter abhorrence of all our Sins, which were the Causes of his Sufferings, and
an entire Resignation of our selves, both Souls and Bodies, to his use, to be
employed as his own Purchase in what he pleases, as his Death was a Sacrifice
for our Sins, wherewith he bought and redeemed us. All these are Duties, which,
were he now before us, and conversing with us, we ought to pay him; and which
therefore in our Remembrance of him, which makes him present to our Minds, we
must not deny him: and in them consists the Worthiness of this Remembrance and
Commemoration.

2 ly, A second End of our Eating Bread and Drinking Wine in the Lords Supper,
is to confirm the New Covenant with Almighty God which Christ's Death procured:
And to do this worthily, we must come to it in Sincerity and Faithfulness, and
with full purpose and performance of that Repentance and Obedience which
therein we solemnly profess and promise.

We must come to it, I say, in Sincerity and Faithfulness. The great
Qualification which is requisite in all Compacts, is Faithfulness. For they are
the great Means of Security among Men, and the great Thing which, in their
Expectations from each other, they have to depend upon: and therefore it is
both pretended, and expected by all that make them, that they will not prove
false and deceitful in them. Every Man that Covenants, expects those he
Contracts with should mean what they profess, and perform what they promise;
and makes show also himself, that he will do so likewise. And if he does not,
he is a very dishonest unworthy Man, such as the Gospel condemns, and will
sentence, unless he repent, to eternal destruction: Covenant-breakers being
ranked among those who in the Judgment of God are worthy of Death, Romans 1.31,
32.

And this Sincerity or Faithfulness consists in this, that we come in full
purpose and performance of that Repentance and Obedience which we profess and
make promise of. In this Covenant, to all us Believers, God offers at present a
Right to Pardon, his Holy Spirit, and Eternal Happiness; and we again profess,
and make offer to him of our Repentance and Obedience. And this Right he
promises still to continue to us upon the same Terms; and answerably we promise
to perform them upon that expectation for ever afterward. And both in these
Professions and Promises we must deal sincerely with him, and neither pretend a
present offer of them, when we want them; nor make Promises of them for the
time to come, when we have no fixed Design and well-weighed Resolution to
perform them.

When we come therefore to renew our Baptismal Engagement, and to confirm the
New Covenant with Almighty God, giving him both the Profession and the Promise
of these Duties, and receiving from him the Proffer and the Promise of these
Graces, we must be hearty and unfeigned with him. Our Souls must really be
acted by that Repentance which we profess, and fully intend to make good that
Obedience which we promise. And if we perform in both these, we are faithful
and sincere in this Business; but if we fail in either, we are Dissemblers and
Hypocrites, who act a Part, and go to impose upon Almighty God, which is a very
unworthy part of us.

And this Sincerity God expressly calls for at this Feast, and requires us to be
faithful with him when we come to confirm the New Covenant by partaking of it.
Christ our Passover, says St. Paul, is sacrificed for us, therefore let us keep
the Feast, not with the Leaven of Malice and Wickedness, by adhering still to
our former wicked ways, which therefore we are to repent of, but with the
unleavened Bread of Sincerity and Truth, 1 Cor. 5.7, 8. And as for Repentance
particularly, which is the great Condition of the Covenant renewed in it; it is
the great Qualification of all worthy Receivers, and is most indispensably
required in this Sacrament. It is the chief thing that is looked at in every
Confirmation of the Covenant, and therefore is so peremptorily Act. 2.38. Luc.
3.3.
called for when we are Baptized: it is the only thing that can Psalm. 51.17.
recommend a Sacrifice, and therefore the main point that must fit us for this
Feast upon it. And this the Ancient Church always thought of it; as it plainly
showed, when at the Celebration of it the Bishop cried out, (...). Constit.
Apost. l. 8. c. 13. p. 484. tom prim. Council. Ed. Par. Lab.
These Holy Things must be taken only by Holy Persons; and as St. Ambrose
clearly informs us, when he says, Ubique mysterii ordo servatur, ut prius per
remissionem Peccatorum vulneribus medicina tribuatur, postea alimoni^ mensae
Coelestis exuberet. S. Ambros. Comment. in Luc. l. 6. c. 9.
This is the Order of dispensing this Mystery which every Church observes, that
first upon their true Repentance their Sins may be forgiven them, and then this
Heavenly Food shall be administered and reached out to them.

As this Eating and Drinking then is a Federal Rite, and in Confirmation of the
New Covenant, it requires that we be Faithful and Sincere in doing it; and then
we come worthily, and partake of it as we ought, when we truly Repent of all
our Sins, as we profess; and are fully purposed, as we promise, at all times
after so to do.

3 ly, A third End of our Eating Bread and Drinking Wine in the Lords Supper,
is, to confirm a League of Love and Friendship with all Christians: and this
requires that we lay aside all Envy, Hatred, and Malicious Thoughts, and come
to it in Peace and Forgiveness of all that have any ways offended us.

We must not come to it in Envy, Hatred, and Malicious Thoughts; for that were
to give the Lie to our selves, and to contradict our own Professions. For when
we come there to partake of that one Bread, we profess our selves, as has been
shown, to be all one Body, and that we are all the Body of Christ, and Members
one of another. We solemnly declare, that we will be friends from that day
forwards with all persons, and fully reconciled even to our bitter Enemies, and
those who have given us the highest Provocations, though not for their own
sakes, yet for the sake of Christ, who has bore a thousand times more from us,
and deserves infinitely beyond what this comes to at our hands. We promise
mutually that we will lay aside all little Piques, not fall out into Quarrels
or Contentions, nor bear Ill Will, or be vexatious among our selves, nor seek
our own Pleasure, Honor, or Advantage at our Brethrens loss; but that we will
all have a compassionate sense of each others Infirmities, and a tender concern
and diligent care for each others welfare; that we will live as Members of the
same Body, which all feel what befalls any, and are all solaced with the same
Joys, and all languish in the same Sorrows, and all unite in the same Ends, and
all bear the Weaknesses, and supply the Needs, and seek the Good and Pleasure
of each other, as they do their own. All this Goodwill and Brotherly-kindness,
Peace and Forgiveness toward all Persons, we profess in eating together at
this Feast; and therefore it is most unworthy dealing if we want them, and are
even then acted by Hatred, Envy, and malicious Thoughts, which are most
opposite and contrary to them.

Thus is it necessary when we confirm this League of Love and Friendship to our
Brethren, that we lay aside all Envy and Ill Will, and have perfect Charity
toward all men. And this Charity must be shown, as in Prayers and Good wishes
at all times, and in Courteous Carriages and good Offices as often as we have
opportunity, toward all Persons; so particularly in giving Alms, and affording
Relief to such as want and are necessitous. For the League of Love whereinto we
are then to enter, and which Christ exacts of us, is not only to bestow fair
words, or compassionate looks, or faint wishes; but, if we are able, to relieve
as we have opportunity, and supply those who stand in need of our s^bstance. If
a Brother or a Sister be naked, says St. James, or destitute of daily Fo^d; and
one of you say unto them, Depart in Peace, be ye warmed or filled,
notwithstanding ye give them not those things which are necessary for the Body,
what does it profit? Jam. 2.15, 16. My little Children, says St. John, let us
not love in word only, neither in Tongue, but in deed and in Truth: And hereby,
i. e. by this useful operative Charity, we know that we are of the Truth, and
shall assure our hearts before him, 1 John 3.18, 19. And thus the Ancient
Christians constantly used to do in the Apostles times. For then at every Lords
Supper, they had another of their own, which they called a Love Feast, or Feast
of Charity, Jud. 12. This consisted of such Provision as every Communicant
brought along with him; they that were Rich brought in much, and the Poorer
sort less, but when it came, they all sat down in a Brotherly way, and shared
in common. Which when the Corinthians failed to do, every one eating as they
came without tarrying for their Brethren, and the Rich taking their own large
Portions to themselves, and leaving the Poor to blush at the scantiness of
theirs; the Apostle reproved them sharply, telling them how much they profaned
this Holy Feast by such corrupt usage. In eating, says he, at this Feast,
instead of joining all like loving Brethren at a common Supper, every one
takes before other his own Supper, or that which he brought for his own share,
and one, who brought little, is Hungary through his scarceness, and another,
who brought much, is Drunken with the excess of his. Shall I praise you in
this? I praise you not. 1 Cor. 11.21, 22. And when this way of being Charitable
to the Poor at this Feast, by reason of abuses crept into it, was laid aside;
another was still used, which to this day is practiced in many and the best of
our Churches, as it is fit it should in all, and that is, having offerings for
the poor at every Communion, which may afterward be distributed among them.
Which is a most proper way, and excellent opportunity, not only of exercising
that Charity which therein we profess to them; but also of expressing our
Thankfulness to our Blessed Savior, for the invaluable benefits we have
received from him. For in being thus kind to his poor Members, whom he is so
tenderly concerned for, we make some slight return and poor requital unto him,
who puts their Receipts upon his own score, taking what we do to them as done
to his own Person. In as much as ye have done it unto these my Brethren, ye
have done it unto me. Mat. 25.40.

And these are the things which must render our eating and drinking, as it is
in Confirmation of a League of Love and Friendship with all our Brethren,
worthy of that signification. We must lay aside all Envy and Malicious
Thoughts, and come to it in Forgiveness of all that have offended us, and in
Charity to all our Neighbors, which we must express, as in other things, so
particularly in giving Alms to such whose necessities require it of us.

And all these the Scripture it self marks out as necessary Qualifications in
all worthy Communicants. Let us keep the Feast, says the Apostle, not with the
Leaven of Malice, 1 Cor. 5.8. When ye come together into one place, says he
again, I hear there be Divisions among you: And, when there are so, this is not
to eat the Lords Supper, one End whereof is to unite you, 1 Cor. 11.18, 20. If
thou bring thy Gift to the Altar, says our Savior, and there remembrest that
thy Brother has ought against thee, leave thy Gift before the Altar, and go
and first be reconciled to thy Brother, and then come and offer thy Gift, Mat.
5.23, 24. And as for the Distribution of Alms at this time; that, as we saw,
was the Apostolical way in the Love Feasts, as also in the Collections for the
Poor as every Man had laid by him in store on the First day of the Week, (when
they always had a Sacrament) which St. Paul mention* 1 Cor. 16.2. And when
these Feasts sailed, yet these Collections and Offerings at the Lords Table
still continued, and do in very many Places, which in this respect are sit to
be Patterns to all others, unto this day.

And thus at last we see wherein consists the Worthiness of Eating and Drinking
in this Holy Feast, and what Tempers and Dispositions in us are worthy of all
those Ends which are signified and designed by it. We must Eat and Drink in
Remembrance of Christ, and of his Dying for us, with Honor and Reverence, with
a careful Concern to maintain and promote his Honor among others, with
mindfulness of his Commands, and Resolutions of Obedience, as he is Lord over
us: with Love of him for his Kindness, and Delight in his Benefits, and
thankful Acknowledgments, and grateful Returns for all his Favors,
particularly his Dying on our account, as he so highly befriended, and
infinitely obliged us: and with an humble sense of our own unworthiness, and an
utter abhorrence of all our Sins, which were the Causes of his Sufferings, and
an entire Resignation of our selves, both Souls and Bodies, to his use, to be
employed as his own Purchase in what he pleases, as his Death was a Sacrifice
for our Sins, wherewith he bought and redeemed us. We must Eat and Drink in
confirmation of the New Covenant, professing our hearty Consent to it, and
Resolution to stand by it, in all Sincerity and Faithfulness; coming to it with
that Repentance of all our Sins, and those obedient Hearts which we profess;
and with a full purpose afterward to make good all we promise. And, lastly, we
must Eat and Drink in confirmation of a League of Love and Friendship with all
our Brethren, laying aside all Envy and Malice toward them, and making
Restitution where we have wronged them, and forgiving heartily where we have
any Grudge against them, and giving Alms as our Ability and their Necessities
require them, and so being in perfect Peace and Charity with all Men.

And if we believe all these things, and are thereby carried on to all these
Tempers and Performances, we have that Faith which will render us Worthy
Communicants, and acceptable to God at all other times. If we believe Christ to
be our Lord and Master, and thereupon Reverence, Honor, and Obey him; if we
believe him to be our best Friend and Benefactor, and thereupon love him, and
delight in him, and are thankful to him; if we believe he shed his own Hearts
Blood for our Sins, and for the Redemption of our Souls, and thereupon are
humbled with the sense of our own unworthiness, and abhor our Sins which were
so mischievous, and resign up both our Souls and Bodies wholly to his use, as
they are his own Purchase; if we believe his Death procured us the Grace and
Blessings of the New Covenant, which promises all Believers Pardon upon
Repentance, and the Spirits Help upon their own Endeavors, and Eternal Life on
their entire Obedience; and thereupon heartily consent to it, and perform that
Repentance and Obedience which are the Condition of it, and are faithful and
sincere in our Promises and Resolutions to stand by it: and lastly, if we
believe he requires us to love, and live in peace with all the World, and
thereupon in this Sacrament confirm a League of Friendship with all our
Brethren, laying aside all Enmity and Hatred, and being in perfect Charity with
all Men: If we have all this Faith, I say, which, as appears, is thoroughly
exercised in this Sacrament; and can show all these Fruits of it, in these
Tempers and Performances being effected by it; we have that true, saving,
justifying Faith the Scripture speaks of, which purifies the Heart, Act. 15.9,
and works by Love, Gal. 5.6, and is lively in Good Works, Jam. 2.20, 26; and
this will make us Worthy Communicants at this Feast, and welcome to God at all
other times.

CHAP. III. A further Account of this Worthiness.
The Contents.
These recited Tempers are all necessary in the Person Communicating, but not
all necessary to be expressly exercised in the Time of Communion. A Direction in
which it may be fit to lay out our Devotion at that time. All these are
provided for in the Churches Prayers, so that we may exercise them worthily if
we go along devoutly at all the Parts of the Communion-Service.

IN the former Chapter I have reckoned up those Tempers which render us Worthy
Communicants, and fit us to be bidden Welcome at the Lords Supper whenever he
invites and calls us thither.

But of them I must observe, that although they are all necessary in the Person
Communicating; yet are they not all of necessity to be particularly and
expressly exercised in the Time of Communion.

They are all necessary, I say, in the Person Communicating, and he is not
worthy to remember such a Lord and Savior, to sign the New Covenant with
Almighty God, and a League of Amity and Friendship with all the Christian
World, who wants any of them. They are altogether due from us, as we have seen,
and may in all reason be expected of us, as we stand in these Relations, and
are admitted to these Employments: So that we act unworthily, and fail of our
Duty, if our Souls are not endowed with them, when we are in those Capacities,
and about those Performances, which do so justly challenge and call for them.

But they are not all necessary to be particularly and expressly exercised in
the Time of Communion. They will be all implied, it is true, and virtually
contained in what is then done; but they are not all necessary to be
particularly insisted on. And for this there is a very good Reason, because
that Time does not ordinarily allow sufficient Space for them. For most
Communicants are not of such active Minds and quick Apprehensions, as that they
can pursue so many Businesses, or work themselves up into an express Fervor of
so many particular Tempers at one Exercise. And those that are, choose rather
oftentimes to fix upon some few, that so, having the more time to stay upon
them, they may raise themselves up to greater Degrees, and act them over in
much higher Measures. And because, where all cannot be exercised, it is of
great use to know which are best and fittest to be singled out, I shall here
set down which of all those Tempers I conceive it were most proper to stir up
at that time, and vigorously to exert and heighten in our own Minds.

If any then, who come to the Holy Communion, find that they are either tired
out with the length, or distracted by the variety of many Particulars, and that
their Devotion in this Feast goes better on, and is more full and perfect when
they restrain it to a few; I think they may do well to lay it out in these that
follow.

In remembering our Savior Christ, who, as then we are to believe, died for us,
and purchased us the New Covenant by his Death, offering us the Pardon of our
Sins upon Repent^nce, and his Grace and Spirit to help ^ut our Endeavors, and
Eternal Life upon our entire Obedience: in remembering him, I say, we may do
well to show,

1. A joyful and affectionate Thankfulness for this his unspeakable Love and
Benefits, particularly for his Dying for us.

2. An entire Resignation of our selves, both Souls and Bodies, to his use, as
they are his own Purchase* In which two consists the main Worthiness of this
Part, they being the Things which are most becoming us in this Remembrance.

And in confirming the New Covenant with Almighty God, whereto we must believe
we are then invited, we may act,

3. Repentance of all our Sins, particularly of all those which we find are
most apt to win upon us; and make him Promises that in all the Instances of
Duty, but in them especially, we will join our Endeavors to his Grace, and
obey his Laws: and when we promise this, it must be with a sincere and faithful
Heart, and with full Intentions of Performance, which are the great Duty
incumbent on us in these Engagements.

And in confirming a League of Love and Friendship with all our Brethren, which
we must think we are then called to likewise, we may exercise,

4. Charity toward all Persons, forgiving all that have any ways offended us,
and laying aside all Envy, Strife, and malicious Thoughts, and resolving to
show Kindness both in Word and Deed to all about us, nay to all Men, as we have
ability and opportunity, but the Poor especially, who ought not to be forgotten
at such times; which is the Great Thing required of us, and becoming us in this
part of the Service.

So that when we come to the Holy Communion, where we are called to remember
Christ, particularly in his Death, to seal the New Covenant with God, and a
League of Friendship with our Brethren; we may do well to express our selves
joyfully and affectionately thankful for all his Kindness, especially that in
Dying for us, and resign up our selves, both Souls and Bodies, to his Service,
and repent of all our Sins, making him faithful and unfeigned Promises of
amending all our Faults, particularly those wherein we are most liable to do
amiss, and show our selves in Peace and perfect Charity with all Persons. By
these things we shall duly answer the Ends of this Feast, and in them lies the
great Worthiness of our Carriage at it. And this our Church has sufficiently
intimated to us in her Public Catechism, when in return to that Question, What
is required of them that come to the Lords Supper? It gives this Answer; To
repent them truly of all their Sins, steadfastly purposing to lead a new Life;
to have a lively Faith in Gods Mercy through Christ (which, as we have seen, is
thoroughly exercised from the beginning to the end of this Holy Sacrament) to
have a thankful Remembrance of his Death, and be in Charity with all Men.

When we come therefore to the Holy Sacrament, whilst the Minister himself is
Communicating, or whilst others are Receiving, we may lay out our selves on
these things, and spend the time in the Exercise of these Duties, acting them
in Devout Prayers and Holy Meditations in our own Hearts. Or if we are not able
of our selves, but need the Help of others to suggest Thoughts, and to go along
with us in this Service, let us join heartily in the Churches Prayers, which it
has appointed for this purpose. For in them we have an Exercise of all these
Virtues, and they have excellently provided for our Needs in this Case; so that
we may duly express these Tempers, if we are careful to join fervently with the
Minister in all the Parts of the Communion-Service. And because it may be of
use to some to see how all these Duties are exercised in it, that so, being
aware of it, they may particularly design them when they come to it; I will
show it of them all particularly.

1. It leads us on to an affectionate Thankfulness and joyful Praise, the first
great Qualification, in a strain which truly to me is most transporting. For
thus it helps us to give Thanks before Receiving. It is very meet, right, and
our bounden Duty, that we should at all Times, and in all Places, give Thanks
unto thee, O Lord, Holy Father, Almighty, Everlasting God: Therefore with
Angels, and Archangels, and all the Company of Heaven, we laud and magnify thy
Glorious Name, evermore praising thee, and saying, Holy, Holy, Holy, Lord God
of Hosts, Heaven and Earth are full of thy Glory: Glory be to thee, O Lord most
High.

And thus again after it:

Glory be to God on High, and in Earth Peace, and Good Will toward Men. We
praise thee, we bless thee, we worship thee, we glorify thee, we give Thanks
to thee for thy great Glory, O Lord God, Heavenly King, God the Father
Almighty.

O Lord the only Begotten Son Jesu Christ, O Lord God, Lamb of God, Son of the
Father, that take away the Sins of the World, have Mercy upon us. Thou that
take away the Sins of the World, have mercy upon us. Thou that take away
the Sins of the World, receive our Prayers. Thou that sit at the Right Hand
of God the Father, have mercy upon us.

For thou only art Holy, thou only art the Lord, thou only, O Christ, with the
Holy Ghost, art most high in the Glory of God the Father.

All which are words expressing joyful Praise and affectionate Thankfullness so
meltingly, that better, I think, have not yet been thought of.

2. It leads us also to resign up our selves, both Souls and Bodies, to his
Service, in the Prayer immediately after receiving in these words.

And here we offer and present unto thee, O Lord, our selves, our Souls and
Bodies, to be a reasonable, holy, and lively Sacrifice unto thee; humbly
beseeching thee, that all we who are partakers of this Holy Communion, may be
fullfill'd with thy Grace and Heavenly Benediction.

3. It leads us in professing an humble and hearty Repentance of all our sins,
and making God our Faithful Promises of new Obedience, in the invitation to
Communicate, and the Confession of Sin before receiving in these words.

Ye that do truly and earnestly Repent you of your Sins, and intend to lead a
new Life, following the Commandments of God, and walking from henceforth in his
Holy Ways; draw near with Faith, and take this Holy Sacrament to your Comfort,
and make your humble Confession to Almighty God, meekly kneeling upon your
Knees.

Almighty God, Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, etc. We acknowledge and bewail
our manifold sins and wickedness, which we from time to time most grievously
have committed, by Thought, Word, and Deed, against thy Divine Majesty, etc. We
do earnestly Repent, and are heartily sorry for these our mis-doings, etc.

And to prepare us for this profession of Repentance in this place of the
Service, I think it very advisable to take what time there is, whilst the
Bread and Wine are in preparing before the beginning of the Office, to
recollect our particular Sins which we are most liable to incur, and at every
one of them to make God promises, and six Resolutions of amending them in our
own minds; after which we may the better say in General we Repent of them, and
will no more Commit them, and thereupon beg Pardon for them, and receive
Absolution, as it is in this part of the Service.

4. And lastly, it leads us to act Peace and Charity to all men, when in the
Exhortation before receiving, it tells us we must be in perfect Charity with
all Men; and in the invitation, calls such as are in Love and Charity with all
their Neighbors: at which words our hearts may strike in with it, and
earnestly profess they at present are, and are fully resolved at all times
after so to be.

Thus does the Church it self in our Public Service, go before us, and lead us
on in these great Duties of joyful Praise and Thankfulness, of Resignation of
our selves, of Repentance and Faithful purposes and promises of Obedience, and
of Charity to all Persons, which are to render us welcome Guests, and worthy
Communicants. Nay, it does not only call us to, and bear us Company in these
chief Duties, wherein above all consists a Receivers worthiness: but also in
most others mentioned above, so that scarce any Duty is required in us at this
Feast, but, if our Hearts go along with it, it puts in act, and makes a place
for it.

It exercises our humble sense of our own unworthiness in the Prayer before
Consecration, in these words. We do not presume to come to this thy Table, O
merciful Lord, trusting in our own Righteousness, but in thy manifold and great
Mercies. We are not worthy so much as to gather up the Crumbs under thy Table.
And so again in the Prayer after receiving in these. Though we be unworthy,
through our manifold sins, to offer up unto thee any Sacrifice; yet humbly we
beseech thee accept this our bounden Duty and Service; not weighing our Merits,
but pardoning our Offenses, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

It exercises our hatred and abhorrence of our Sins, which caused Christ's
Sufferings, in the Confession of Repentance in these. The remembrance of our
mis-doings is grievous unto us, the burden of them is intolerable.

And it exercises our Love, and Reverence, and Honor to Christ, either in
words that express it, or in things that imply it, being real proofs and
effects of it, in every thing that is done through the whole Service.

If every Receiver therefore that has these Tempers, does but go along heartily
and affectionately with the Churches Prayers, and join with the Minister and
the Congregation in the Communion Service; he acts them over as he ought, and
does Honor to his Savior, and is a worthy Communicant. He shows all those
qualifications which God has required, and receives as a worthy Guest, if he
can do nothing more than go along, and strike in heartily at every part of the
Public Worship. Which I speak, not for the ease of those who, either by their
own invention, or the help of Books, can set their own Minds on work, and
employ their own Thoughts in meditating and acting over all these Tempers,
whilst the Minister is distributing the Sacrament: I speak it not, I say, for
the ease of these Persons, as if, beside what they do in the Churches Prayers,
they should not moreover do what they can otherwise. But for the sake of
others, who have not these abilities, that they may not be discouraged; and to
let them know, that, if they are good men, and have these Tempers, there is
exercise of them sufficient in the Public Prayers, were there nothing else
from the help of Books, or their own invention, to make them worthy
Communicants.

And thus we see wherein lies the worthiness of receiving, and what Virtues are
fit for him to exercise, who would be a welcome Guest at the Holy Communion.
When he remembers the Death of Christ, and confirms the New Covenant with God,
and a League of Love and Friendship with all the Christian World, by eating
Bread, and drinking Wine according to Christ's appointment; he must exercise
himself in joyful Praise, and affectionate Thanks, and Resignation of his whole
man, both Soul and Body, to Christ's Service, and in Repentance of all his Sins,
making God faithful Promises of New Obedience, and in Charity toward all
Persons: all which he may express in joining heartily with the Churches
Prayers, besides what he does, whilst the Bread and Wine are in preparing, or
whilst others are Communicating, in his own Meditations. And if he believes
these things, and is carried on by such belief to these Performances; he is
welcome to the Table of his Lord, and may justly esteem himself a worthy
Partaker of this Blessed Sacrament.

CHAP. IV. Worthy Receiving not extraordinary difficult, and of unworthiness to
Communicate.
The Contents.
To silence the Complaint of extraordinary difficulty in coming worthily to
this Sacrament, three things noted. 1. All the particulars of worthy Receiving,
are necessary parts of Duty, and of a good Man; so that no more is required to
fit us for receiving, than is required to fit us to dye, or to go to Heaven. 2.
They are all necessary Qualifications of an acceptable Prayer, Vow, or
Thanksgiving; so that no more is required to it, than to a worthy discharge of
all other Acts of Religion. 3. However they may be commended, yet are they not
necessarily required in more intense, and transporting degrees in it, than in
other instances of Devotion. The only unworthiness, which can put us by this
Ordinance, is Impenitence: if Repentance will ^o down with any man, nothing
else need stick with him. This Point of Worthy Communicating summed up.

HAving hitherto shown wherein lies the worthiness of receiving, and what those
Qualifications are which fit us for this Holy Feast: I shall now only note some
things that may silence all good men's Complaints about the hardship of it, and
show plainly who are unworthy to join in it, and what they must do to fit and
prepare themselves for it, and so conclude this Point.

1 st, I shall Note some things that may reconcile all good minds to this
Feast, and silence their Complaints of the hardship, and extraordinary
difficulty of coming worthily to partake in it. And this had need to be done,
and may prove of great use when once it is; because one chief thing, which
causes even good People to come so seldom, is the apprehended difficulty, and
extraordinary* solemnity of the worthy receiving.

Now to satisfy all good Souls in this point, and to remove these hard though^s
of it, I would suggest to them these three things.

1st, That all these Tempers, which are required to a worthy Communion, are
necessary parts of Duty, and of a good Man; so that no more is required of us
to sit our selves for receiving, than is required to fit us to dye, or to go to
Heaven.

2 ly, That they are all required to a worthy Prayer, Vow, or Thanksgiving; so
that no more Duties are required to our worthiness in it, than to our
worthiness in all other Acts of Religion.

3 ly, That however they may be commended, yet are they not necessarily
required, as some have imagined, in more intense and transporting degrees in
it, than in other instances of Devotion.

1 st, I say all the Tempers, which I have mentioned as necessary to a worthy
Communion, are necessary parts of Duty, and of a good Man; so that no more is
required of us to sit our selves for a worthy receiving, than is required to
sit us to Dye, or to go to Heaven.

They are all necessary parts of Duty, and of a good Man. It is necessarily
required of every good Man, who would serve God and be accepted with him, that
he Phil. 2.9, 10.
honor his Lord and Master Jesus Christ, and be careful to Luc. 6.46.
obey him; that he be J^m. 1.12.
affectionately sensible of all the kindnesses he has done, particularly in
dying for him, and most heartily E^h. 5.20.
thank him for them; that he be M^t. 5.3.
humbled under the sense of his own sins, and utterly ^^ov. 8.13.
abhor them; and resign up himself both 1 Cor. 6.19, 20.
Soul and Body, to his Saviors use, who by his own hearts blood has bought
him; that, having first Marc. 16.16.
Believed in Christ, he sincerely consent and enter into the New Covenant,
performing, and promising that Luc. 13.3.
Repentance, Phil. 2.12.
Good endeavors, and Heb. 5.9.
Obedience which are required by it, in expectation of that Forgiveness, Grace,
and Happiness which are proposed in it; and lastly, that he should Gal. 5.20,
21.
lay aside all envy, and malicious Thoughts, and Mat. 6.15.
forgive Injuries, Ezekiel. 33.14, 15.
repair Wrongs, be at Romans 12.18.
Peace, and live in Col. 3.14.
Charity with all the world. All these are Duties indispensably required by the
Gospel of Christ, as appears by the places referred to in the Margin; they are
no indifferent things, but absolutely necessary in every Christian, who would
secure his Peace with God, and be sure at last to go to Heaven. And they, as we
have seen, are the very things, which the Worthiness of Communicating consists
of. So so that to be personally worthy for the Communion, is nothing more, than
to be an acceptably Good and Religious man: To have all those Virtues which
constitute a Saint, and are necessary parts of that Obedience and Holy Living,
which must get us all an Interest in Christ, and secure our Title to Salvation.
And therefore if any man is contented with those Duties, which God exacts of
him to make him a good Man; he has no cause to complain of those, which are
necessary to a worthy Receiving. And if he does repine at them, and refrain
from the Lords Table, because he will not be at the pains to acquire them; it is
plain that it is not the hardship of the Sacrament, but of an Holy Life that he
is disturbed at; and the same difficulties that drive him from the Communion,
if he understand himself, must drive him also out of his Religion and the way
to Heaven.

2ly, These Duties, that are required to a Worthy Receiving, are required also
to every Worthy Prayer, Vow, and Thanksgiving; so that no more Duties are
required to our worthiness in it, than to our worthiness in all other Acts ^f
Religion. For unless a man Repents of all his Sins, and is in Love and Charity
with all his Neighbors, and Believes in Christ and all his Promises, and is
ready and resolved to obey all his Commandments; and, in one word, unless he is
a Good man, which fits him for a worthy receiving; he is not more worthy to say
his Prayers, to give Thanks, to make Vows to God, or seal Covenants, than he is
to join in the Holy Communion.

He is not more worthy to say his Prayers; for to the acceptance of them all
the same things are required of him. If I regard Iniquity in my heart, says the
Psalmist, i. e. if I do not Repent of it, and turn away from it, the Lord will
not hear me, Psalm. 66.18. And if men would pray as they ought, says St. Paul,
and as they may hope to be heard, they must have both Faith, Peace, and
Innocence to recommend their Petitions, or lift ^p ^^ly hands, without wrath,
and doubting, 1 Timothy 2.8. If you forgive not men their Trespasse^, says our
Savior, neither will your Hea^^^ly Father forgive your Trespasses So that when
ye pray say -- forgive us our (...), as we forgive our Debtors, Mat. 6.12, ^^.
God says the same of an ill man's (...) that he does of an ill man's (...),
namely, that he is most unworthy in (...), and shall receive a Curse instead of
a ^l^ssing. For as the Unworthy, i. e. as h^s been shown, the Wicked Receiver
(the Worthiness required being only that of a good man) eats and drink^ his own
Damnation, 1 Cor. 11.29. So is it said of the Unworthy, i. e. of the wicked
Petitioner too, that he who turns away his Ear from hearing the Law, even his
Prayer shall be an Abomination. Prove. 28.9. and 15.8.

Thus is every man, that is Unworthy to receive the Sacrament, Unworthy also to
pray to God, the same things being required to both of them: an Impenitent ill
man, being utterly unfit for both, but a truly Penitent Good Man, being such as
he accounts worthy, and most affectionately invites to them.

Nay he is not only unworthy to pray to God, but also whilst that impenitence
lasts, to give him Thanks, to make Vows, to Covenant with him, or to have any
Intercourse and Communication in any other actions of Religion. If he tells God
he is Thankful for his Mercies, whilst in the constant course of his Life he
disobeys him; his Actions plainly give the Lie to his Words, and proclaim him a
most Ungrateful Person. If he makes him Vows and Promises, and Covenants to
Repent of all his Sins, whilst he still lives Impenitent, and goes on in them;
he only speaks him fair, intending no such thing, and therefore does nothing
else but abuse and provoke him. He does nothing that Honors God as it should,
so long as he is an ungodly man, nor must hope in any Services or Religious
Performances to be owned and accepted by him. For God will have nothing to do
with ill men in any way, whilst they continue impenitent in their sins; Christ
has purchased no Reconciliation for such, nor will he, till they change that
course, have any Friendship for, or take any Complacence in them. He will hear
the Prayers, and accept the Thanks, and trust the Promises and Engagement of
those only, who are fully resolved to amend their Lives, and become Good men;
so that if any man persists impenitent, which unfits him for receiving, he is
also unfit for every thing else, and unworthy to perform any other Actions of
Religion.

As for this business of worthy Communicating then, there is no more cause of
Complaint against it, for the difficulty and hardship of it, than there is
against all Religion. The same Duties that are required to a worthy Receiving,
are no less required to make any of us a Good man, to confer a Right to Heaven,
to a worthy Prayer, Promise, or Thanksgiving. So that if any Man will not come
to the Sacrament, because he is wicked, and will not be at the pains to attain
those Virtues which are necessary to a worthy Communion: if he understand
himself, he must for the same reason keep back from Prayer, and Praises, and
all pretenses to Religion. For unless he will labor after these Duties, and
perform them, he is unmeet to come to God, and is very unworthy in all of them.
And therefore so long as he is unfit for the Sacrament, he is unfit for every
thing else, and, if he resolves to continue so, may as well resolve to renounce
his Baptism, and the whole Christian Profession.

And as these Tempers, which are required to a worthy Communion, are no more
than is required in every Good man, in every worthy Prayer, Praise, or other
act of Religion: So is it to be observed,

3 ly, That however they may be commended, yet are they not necessarily
required, as some have imagined, in more intense and transporting Degrees in
it, than in other instances of Devotion.

That which has deterred good People from the Sacrament, more than any thing
besides, is their too awful Sense and Veneration of it, and placing it at too
great a distance from other parts of Worship. They think no Virtues are worthy
of it, but what are expressed in Ecstasie and Transport; and that when it
requires the same Duties with other parts of Gods Service, it requires them in
much greater Perfection, and far higher Measures. So that they imagine they may
be worthy to Pray, and Praise God, though they are unworthy to Communicate; and
therefore they join in them ordinarily as there is occasion for them, when,
through the excess of Reverence, they scarce ever join in this at all.

But this is a great Mistake, which, though it be well meant, has a very ill
effect, and affrights good Souls from Performing this Duty and Service, and
paying this Honor to their Savior, when they have no cause to be afraid of
it. For although it be commendable and desirable when it can be had; yet is it
not absolutely necessary that so it should be.

It is very Commendable, I say, and much to be Desired, that we should exercise
these Tempers in a higher Degree in this Holy Sacrament, than in other Parts of
Worship. It will be very well if our Prayers are more fervent, and our Praises
more affectionate, and all the Virtues we have place to exercise, more full and
flagrant then, than at other times. For there we have Christ's Death
represented, with the hainousness of our sins which c^used it, and the
in^stimable Benefits that come by it; and we me^t on purpose, to f^x our
Thoughts and Contemplations on it. And that is the Consideration which gives
greatest Force, and adds most Strength to all our Duties; so that when we have
most of it, as we must have when we come for that very intent, it very well
becomes us for the Honor of it to excel in them. And upon this account it
will be very Commendable, and much to be Desired, that we should be more
vigorous in all our Virtues at this, than at any other Ordinance.

But although this be Commendable, and much to be Desired in us; yet is it not
necessary, or indispensably required of us, but that we may Communicate
worthily when it is otherwise. For if we have these Tempers in such a Degree, as
is necessary to our Eternal Happiness; we have so much of them as will render
us worthy and welcome Guests at this, as well as at every other Ordinance.

And this is plain from hence, because when we have them in a saving Degree,
which would procure our acceptance in other parts of Gods Service; they sit us
for the Communion of Christ, and Glorified Saints in Heaven; and so cannot
leave us unworthy to Communicate with him and them here on Earth. If we
savingly repent us of all our Sins, and are savingly thankful for all Christ's
Mercies, and are savingly in Charity with all our Neighbors, and have a saving
Faith in Christ's Promises; whether these Virtues be the pitch of the Strong, or
only of the Weak in Faith, we are accepted with him, since he accepts both. And
when once he accepts us, we may approach to him in any Place; when he allows of
the measure of our Graces, we may be welcome to show them forth, and offer a
Sacrifice of a sweet smell, when we send them up to him in any, or in all the
Parts of his Worship and Service.

Let a man come then to the Communion, though it be without any thing of
extraordinary and unwonted Transports, and only in that ordinary exercise of
these Virtues, which gains him acceptance in Prayer, or Praise, or other
Religious Actions; and then let him not doubt, but that, although more were
better, yet is this good, and will render him a worthy Partaker of the Lords
Supper.

And this we have great cause to believe the Ancient Christians thought,
because they made it not an extraordinary and separate thing, as we do now, but
an ordinary and constant part of the Christian Worship. It went usually along
with the other Parts of the Service, and they that came to Prayers, came also
to the Sacrament; the same Preparation, and the same Persons being admitted to
it. Thus in the Apostles times, they met to Communicate, as they met to pray
every Day; and breaking Bread, was no less constant a part, than Prayer, and
Praise, of their Communion and Fellowship. All the Disciples at Jerusalem, says
St. Luke, continued steadfastly in the Apostles Doctrine and Fellowship, and in
breaking of Bread, and in Prayers, Act. 2.42. And again, They continuing daily
with one accord in the Temple, and breaking Bread from house to house, did eat
their meat with gladness, and singleness of Heart, praising God, v. 46, 47. And
afterward, when their Members increased, and Stated Days were appointed for
the public Service of God; on the first day of the Week, when they met for
other Worship, the Communion always went along with it. Thus it is plain it was
in the Apostles Days, for then the Sunday Worship was expressed by breaking
Bread; which shows it was an ordinary and constant part of it. On the first day
of the Week, says St. Luke, when the Disciples came together to break Bread.
Act. 20.7. And thus also it continued for a good while afterward, as is
evident from the Ninth of the Apostolical Canons. And to show how fit they
esteemed all the Faithful, whether Weak or Strong in Faith, who were worthy to
join in other parts of Worship, to join also in this; that Apostolical Canon
requires all the Faithful, who come to the other Service, to stay the
Communion, and join in that also (...). Canon. 9. Can. Apostol.
. All the Faithful, that come to Church and hear the Scriptures, but stay not
to join in the Holy Communion and the Prayers for that Service, ought to be
separated and shut out from the Lords Table, as they that bring Confusion into
the Church. And the like is also enjoined in the Council of Antioch. (...).
Council. Antioch. Can. 2.
All that come to Church, say they, and hear the Scriptures, but do not
Communicate in the Peoples Prayers, but turn away disorderly from the
Eucharist, shall be Excommunicated and expelled the Church, and not received
again, till they confess their Fault, and show Repentance for it.

And thus we see, however Commendable it may be, that People come to this Holy
Sacrament with more Intense Acts, and higher Preparation, than would serve to
any other parts of Worship; yet is it not necessary they should do it. They may
be welcome and worthy Partakers in this Ordinance, who are worthy to partake in
others; so that they are fit for it, who are fit for any other Religious
Service. The same Virtues, and the same Degrees suffice to it. For they fit
them to Communicate with Christ and Glorified Saints in Heaven, and so must
needs fit them to Communicate with him, and them here on Earth. They fitted
Christians for it in the Apostles times, when the Eucharist was no
extraordinary and separate, but an ordinary constant part of the Christian
Worship. For then not only they whose Virtues were most high and perfect, but
all the Faithful were called upon to Communicate, and they who were judged fit
to meet at the Prayers and other Services, were thought worthy to meet at the
Lords Table too; and since they fitted them for it in those Days, it cannot be
thought but that they must needs fit us in ours also.

As for those then who have been wont to think more hardly of the Sacrament
than of other parts of Worship, and, how frequent soever they were in them, to
come but seldom unto it, by reason of the apprehended difficulty in a worthy
partaking of it: If they duly consider these three things, they will see cause
to change their mind, and forbear to complain any more against it. For the
Virtues that are required of us in a worthy Communion, are all necessary parts
of Duty, and of a Good Man; and are as much required to a worthy Prayer, Vow,
Thanksgiving, and every other act of Religion; and are not necessarily required
in more intense and transporting Degrees in it, than in other instances of
Devotion. So that no Good man has any cause at all to repine at it, or abstain
from it; it lies hard upon, and can be blamed by none but those, who, for the
same Reason, must blame every other Ordinance and part of Divine Service, which
requires as much of a worthy Worshipper as this; and who, at the same Rate, as
they cast off it, must renounce their Christianity, and throw aside all
Religion too.

And thus having noted some things, that may help to reconcile all Good minds
to this Blessed Sacrament, and silence the Complaints of hardship in a worthy
receiving it: I shall proceed now

2 ly, To show plainly who are unworthy of it, and what they must do to fit and
prepare themselves for it, and so conclude this Point.

Now these, in one word, are all that are impenitent, that have committed any
Damning Fault; and are not fully set and purposed to amend it. For all the
Virtues of worthy Receiving, as we have seen, are necessary parts of Duty, and
of a Good man; so that if any Person would Repent of all his breaches of them,
and take care thenceforward to endow his Soul with them, he would be worthy to
be entertained at this Feast, and fit to be bidden welcome. Besides, if
Repentance and forsaking all his Sins will go down with him, there is no man
who pretends to Religion, but may perform every thing else, which is required
to this Communion. For there would be no great difficulty in paying Christ
Honor and Reveverence, and following him with Love and Thankfulness, and
resigning our selves up to his use, and abhorring of our Sins, if Repentance
and Reformation were not annexed to them; men could Love Christ heartily, and
Thank him freely, and Honor him abundantly, and resign themselves up to him
wholly, and Believe in him cheerfully, if he would not peremptorily require
them to amend their ways, and forsake their sins, which are the things they
place their chiefest Pleasure and Delight in: So that if any man will not fit
himself for Receiving, it is not for the difficulty of other Duties, as if he
could not brook them, but only for the difficulty of Repentance, so that
Impenitence is truly at the bottom. He will not satisfy those who have
suffered by him, or forgive those who have injured him, or be at Peace and
Charity with all Men, or renounce that Injustice, Lasciviousness, Drunkenness,
or other known sin, which, in confirming the New Covenant, he must promise God
he will depart from: It is because his Heart sticks to some of these, or some
other such like Transgressions, and will not go off from them, that he is an
unfit and unworthy man; whereas, were it not for this, he could do all things
else that are required of him.

He therefore, that is unworthy to Communicate, and unfit to receive the
Sacrament, is plainly one that is impenitent; that is guilty of some Damning
Sin, and is not resolved to leave, but intends still to continue in it. He is
either a careless man, that lives at large in a constant course of Sensuality
and Worldliness, being wholly given to heap up Wealth, or aim at Honor, or
follow Pleasure without Conviction, or making any pretense to serious Religion:
Or, if he seems to look toward God, and is careful in many things to please
him, he serves him not in all points as he ought, but allows himself in some
known Sin, continuing unreclaimed in common Swearing, Drunkenness, Uncleanness,
Malice, Contentiousness, Fraud, Oppression, Slander, Censoriousness,
Evil-speaking, or some other Damning Crime, which he will not be at the pains
to leave for Christ's sake, or for any thing that he either has, or would do for
him.

Now if any of those, who read this Treatise, are such as these, and I put the
matter to their own Consciences; I confess they are not worthy to come to the
Sacrament till they turn away from such a known Fault, and Repent of it, and
would sin against this Holy Feast and their own Souls if they should do it. But
then I must tell them withal, that as they are not fit to come to this
Ordinance, so, whilst they continue in that Estate, neither are they fit to
come to any other, or to any thing else that looks toward God, and their own
Eternal Happiness. For so long as they thus espouse any Number, or any one Sin
against God, and daily repeat it when they have a Temptation to it,
notwithstanding their own Hearts are sensible he has forbid it, or at least
would have been sensible of it, unless they had been wilfully blinded, or by
long use hardened in it: So long, I say, as they are thus Impenitent in any
known Sin, they are not only unfit to come to the Communion, but also as unfit
to Dye, or to go to Heaven, to Pray to God, to utter Praise, to make Vows, or
to join in any other actions of Religion. For an Impenitent man, whilst he
continues such, is Gods Professed Enemy, and is welcome to him at no time but
when he Repents; so that till that is done, he is acceptable in no Service
which he pays him.

This then is the danger of their State, who lie Impenitent in many, or in few
known Sins: they are unworthy indeed to receive the Communion; but they are
equally unworthy to join in Prayers, to give Thanks, or make Vows, or dye in
Peace, or hope for Happiness, or do any thing else that shows them to be
Christians.

And if any man's Conscience tells him this is his State; his way is not to
think there is no harm, if he does but abstain from the Communion; for, as I
say, he is as unworthy in his Prayers, and Praises, and every thing else that
belongs to Religion: but forthwith to Repent, and amend that Fault which shuts
him out from the Sacrament, and every thing else that looks toward Heaven,
that so he may be a worthy and welcome Guest in it, and all of them. This
Repentance will restore him to the Favor of God, and gain him acceptance with
him; and then he is fit for this, and for every other part of Gods Worship, and
may worthily join in them.

And by this it appears who is unworthy of this Feast, and what he must do to
fit and prepare himself for it. Every man that is Impenitent, is an Unworthy
Communicant; but if he will Repent and Amend his ways, he will find no
difficulty in other Duties which make up a Believers worthiness, but may then
be a worthy and welcome Guest whenever he has a mind to come to it.

And thus I have done with the Second thing I proposed, namely to show wherein
lies the worthiness of Eating and Drinking at this Feast; which I have stayed
the longer upon, because both the irreverent approach of some men to it, and
the scrupulous abstaining of others from it, do both take rise from this head,
so that it well deserves to be carefully Explained and clearly Stated. And the
Result of all that I have said upon this Point is this:

When we come to Eat Bread and Drink Wine at the Lords Table, in remembrance
that Christ dyed for us, and in Confirmation of the New Covenant which his
Death procured us, and in Ratification of a League of Love and Friendship with
all our Neighbors; we must be careful devoutly to Exercise, and Act over these
Tempers. We must remember our Dying Lord, with Honor, and Love, and Joy, and
Thankfulness, and Resignation of our selves, both Souls and Bodies to his
Service, and humble Sense of our own unworthiness, and Detestation of our Sins
which caused his Sufferings. We must confirm the New Covenant which his Death
purchased, in consenting heartily to the Terms of it, Repenting of all our
Sins, and Faithfully promising that entire Obedience which is required in it,
and then Believing that for Christ's sake we shall be saved by it. And we must
Confirm a League of Love and Friendship with all the Christian World, in laying
aside all Envy and Hatred, and forgiving those that have injured us, and making
just amends to those who have been wronged by us, and giving Alms as our
Ability and our Brethrens necessity requires, and so being in Peace and Perfect
Charity with all Persons.

If we are able to grasp so many particulars in our minds, and to act them all
over duly, and as we ought, at this Exercise; it may be fit to Solemnize this
Feast in all these instances of Virtue. But if either our minds would be lost
and burdened, or our Devotions enfeebled by the Number of these particulars;
'twill yet be fit at least to express our selves Joyfully and affectionately
Thankful for his kindness, especially in Dying for us, and Resign up our selves
both Souls and Bodies to his Service, and Repent of all our Sins, making him
Faithful Promises that we will amend all our Faults, particularly those which
oftest win upon us, and show our selves in perfect Peace and Charity with all
Persons.

All these, whilst the Bread and Wine are in preparing, or whilst others are
Communicating, they who have Books to suggest Thoughts, or are able to supply
them out of their own minds, may exercise by themselves. And they who cannot,
as also they who can, may exercise them in joining fervently with the Churches
Prayers, all these Duties, as we have seen, being so well led on and
exemplified in the Communion Service. Wherein, because there will be some
interruption whilst others are Communicating, that that time may not lie idle
upon their hands, I think it very advisable for them to join heartily in the
Prayer which is made at the offering of the Bread and Wine to their Brethren,
(as they will be sure to do when it comes to their own turn) if their Devout
Zeal is not otherwise taken up by the Psalm, which, at their Pastors
Discretion, is wont to be Sung at that time for the employment of those who
have done Receiving.

These Virtues being in us, and, at the time of Receiving, being thus exercised
by us, both in our own private, or at least in our Devout Concurrence with the
Churches Prayers, make a worthy Communion.

And this no man who pretends to Religion ought to Complain of, or think an
hard Imposition. For all these Duties, which are necessary to a worthy
Communion, are as necessary to make every one of us a Good man, or fit to Dye,
or to go to Heaven; they are as necessary to a worthy Prayer, Thanksgiving,
Vow, or any other Act of true Religion; and are not necessarily required in
more intense Degrees and transporting Measures in this, than in other parts of
Worship and Devotion.

These things then are necessary to a worthy Receiving, and no Good man can
complain that they are so, since they are equally necessary to all acceptable
Goodness, to all comfortable Hopes, and to every other Ordinance, to all the
parts of Worship and Religion, and to Gods being pleased with us in every thing
that is either the Duty, or Privilege of a Christian.

And as the Presence, and Exercise of these Virtues makes us worthy of the
Communion; so does the absence of them, but especially of Repentance of all our
known Sins, (which is the thing, if any, that will be wanting, and which is the
cause why others are, Impenitence, as we saw, being at the bottom of all
Unworthiness) make us unworthy and most unwelcome. If we continue Impenitent in
many, or in any one known Sin, we are indeed unworthy to Communicate; but then
withal we are as unworthy to be thought Good men, to go to Heaven, to say our
Prayers, to make Vows, or to have any Dealings with God in any other Actions of
Religion. And the way for any Wise man in that Case, is not to take up with
abstaining from the Communion, for he ought as much to abstain from Prayer, and
Praise, and every other Office of a Christian, God being pleased with him in
none of them; but forthwith to Repent and Abandon such ill Course, that so he
may be a welcome Guest, and worthy to partake of them.

And thus having endeavored to give some help to all those who desire worthily
to Communicate, by showing what is the meaning of Eating Bread and Drinking
Wine in the Blessed Sacrament, and wherein lies the worthiness of doing it: I
shall proceed now in the third Place to exhort and press men on to it, by
showing them how much it is every good Christians Duty to frequent it, and how
great the Benefits are that come by it, which should make them seek to it of
themselves were it not commanded, of which in the next Part.

PART II.
CHAP. I. Of the Duty of Communicating.
The Contents.
To Communicate is a Duty incumbent on us, as appears, 1. From the obliging
import of the Command about it. This Command of Christ shown, and several Notes
added, which greatly recommend and enforce it. viz. It is such an Instance, as
best shows our peculiar Reverence and Love to him; the whole yoke of Jewish
Ceremonies is taken away, and only it, and Baptism, two cheap and easy Rites,
imposed instead of them; it was his last Command, he gave it the Night before
he suffered; in St. Paul's Commission to Preach the Gospel, it was particularly
specified; without greatest Danger to our selves it cannot be neglected, as
appears from our Saviors words Joh. 6.53. which are sh^wn to speak of it; and
from the Danger of Neglecting the Jewish Passover, which answered to it. 2.
From the obliging Nature of those things which are meant by it, viz. Because
therein we publicly own Christ and his Religion, and solemnly remember him,
and confirm the New Covenant with God, and a League of Friendship with our
Brethren, and are vouchsafed the highest Honor, and receive Tokens of greatest
Love, and enjoyment of present Graces, and pledges of future Glory from him:
all which no Good man ought, and no Ingenuous man will Decline, when he is
called to them. This Duty obliges those only who are of Age for it, and them
too only at such times as they have an Opportunity and a fit Occasion offered.
An Objection against its being a Duty from 1 Cor. 11.25, answered. The Neglect
of it is a great Sin. This God may excuse in thos^ good Souls, who through
Ignorance or Error are held back, and because of their over-high Veneration for
it think themselves unworthy to come to it, whilst in the honesty of their
Hearts they thus mistake it. But he will not excuse it in them when they are
better informed; and much less in others, who neglect it because they are
careless of it, or too Wicked and Impenitent to receive it.

THE worthy receiving of the Sacrament, which I have hitherto Described, is no
Indifferent thing, which may either be done, or let alone according to
Discretion; but an indispensable Duty, wherein God has straightly bound, and
which he has peremptorily required of every grown Christian.

And this will appear these two ways.

1 st, From the Expressness, and Obliging import of the Command about it.

2ly, From the Obliging Nature of those things which are meant by it.

1 st, That every Christian ought to frequent the Holy Sacrament, and come to
it when he is called and an opportunity is offered, appears from the
expressness, and obliging import of the Command about it. For our Blessed Lord
has given us his Command for it, and that with such particular Notes and
Circumstances, as shows he lays a great weight upon it, which must needs oblige
all, that have any regard to him, to frequent it.

He has given us, I say, his express Command for it. For thus St. Paul tells us
he injoined, when he ordained this Feast. He took Bread, says he, and when he
had given thanks, he brake it, and said, Take, eat, this is my Body which is
broken for you; this DO in Remembrance of me. And after the same manner he took
the Cup, saying, This Cup is the New Testament in my Blood; this DO ye, as
often as you Drink it, in remembrance of me. 1 Cor. 11.24, 25. And if we had
nothing more than this plain Command for it, it were enough to make every man,
who would please God and go to Heaven, to come to it when he is invited. For
then ye are my Friends, says Christ, when ye do whatsoever I Command you. Joh.
15.14. And he that shall break the least of my Commandments, and shall teach
men so, shall be least in the Kingdom of Heaven: i. e. he shall not enter, or
have any share at all there. Mat. 5.19.

But besides this express Command which he has given for it, we have other
Notes and Circumstances added, which greatly recommend it, and show that he
lays a particular weight upon it. For it is a thing, which is to be done purely
upon his account, and has only our Love of him to enforce it; so that if we
have any Love and Reverence for him, this is the best way to show it: it, and
Baptism, are the only positive Commands he has given us, in exchange for the
Numerous, and Expensive Jewish Ceremonies; so that in all Ingenuity and
Thankfulness for so great a Benefit we ought to observe it: it was his Dying
and last Command, he gave it the very Night before he Suffered; it was thought
by him a Command so material, that in St. Paul 's Commission to Preach the
Gospel it was not omitted, but particularly specified: And lastly, it is a
Command which, as the Scripture plainly intimates, without great danger to our
selves cannot either be unworthily kept, or neglected.

1 st, It is a thing which is to be done purely upon his account, having no
other Reason but his Command to bind and enforce it; so that if we have any
Love and Reverence for him, this is the best way to show it. As for the Duties
of Humility, Temperance, Justice, Faithfulness, Gratitude, Charity, Peace,
Prayers to God, and the like: Though Christ has told us of them, and expressly
enjoined them, as well as this; yet is not he alone in that, but they were
sufficiently proclaimed before he came, to the Jews by Moses and the Prophets,
and to the Gentile World by Natural Conscience. In declaring them, he had an
open way made for him, and the Consciences of all men ready to strike in with
him, which, among all good Minds, would much facilitate their Reception. But in
this Command, he stands alone; for Natural Reason knows nothing of it, nor will
the Conscience of any man, but a Christian, oblige him to it: So that here we
have no Light but his Word, no Motive but our Obedience to him to persuade it;
and therefore if we do it at all, must be purely for his sake, without any
other Inducement.

And this is a strong Bond upon all that Love their Lord, and have any
peculiarity of Respect for him, to observe it. It is the true Cause and Reason,
indeed, why some neglect it, who, because their own Conscience does not startle
at it, and check them so severely for absenting from this Feast, as for
Drunkenness, Whoredom, Lies, Cheating, etc. which have not only Christ's Laws,
but Natural Reason also to exclaim against them, go on securely in their
contempt of it. And if men have no Love for their Lord, no peculiar Regard for
any thing because he has enjoined it, or are not duly informed of his Command
about it, thus it will be. But if any that see he has made it their Duty, have
any peculiar Love, and Regard to him; they will greedily embrace this as the
best Opportunity of showing their Affection to his Service, since therein they
can be swayed by nothing else, and most readily Communicate, when he calls them
so to do.

2ly, It and Baptism, those two cheap and easy Things, are the only positive
Commands he has laid upon us, when he took off the heavy yoke of the Numerous,
Expensive, and Laborious Jewish Precepts; so that out of Natural Equity, and to
show our Thankfulness for such a gainful Exchange, we ought most readily to
observe it.

The Jews were loaded with a Number of Troublesome and Expensive Rites, which
had no Goodness discernable in themselves, nor any thing, but the Revelation
made by Moses, to recommend them to their Consciences: Such as the Lev. 11.7.
forbearing Swine, and several sorts of Flesh; the washing of their Bodies upon
their Number. 19.13.
touching of any Dead Persons, and upon any Lev. 15.
Corporal Uncleannesses; the bringing Offerings and Sacrifice of Fed Beasts at
return of Thanks, and for Propitiation upon any Offenses; and many other
cumbersome and costly Rites, which the Apostle calls the Law of Carnal
Commandments, Heb. 7.16. and 9.10, and weak and beggarly Elements, Gal. 4.9,
which were given them, not because the things deserved it, but only that they
might be kept employed, as useless Exercises are to Children to hinder them
from more hurtful Work; and so were suited only to the Infancy, and Nonage of
the World, Gal. 4.3.

But from all this Burden of Ceremonies, under which, as St. Peter says, they
and their Fathers groaned and were oppressed, Act. 15.10. by the coming of
Christ we are most graciously delivered. For he has abolished in his Flesh, i.
e. by his Death, wherein he gave his Body for us, the Law of Commandments
contained in Ordinances, Ephesians. 2.15. He has blotted out the handwriting of
Ordinances that was against us, which was contrary to us, (hedging in the
Church within the Jews, and excluding all us Gentiles) and took it out of the
way, nailing it to his Cross, Col. 2.14. All this Law of Jewish Ceremonies he
has abrogated, and procured us a complete liberty and exemption from it,
injoining us only th^se two cheap and easy Rites, of Baptism and the Lords
Supper, instead of it. And if any man has but Common Ingenuity, and will return
Equitably for what is done, and much more if he has any grateful Resentments
for so valuable an Exemption, he must needs submit with all Thankfulness to
this gainful Exchange and Imposition, and run to it with as much forwardness,
as any man would to pay Twelve pence in full Discharge of twenty pound.

3 ly, It was his Dying and last Command, he gave it the very Night before he
suffered. The same night, says St. Paul, in which he was betrayed, he took
Bread, and said, Take, eat this do in remembrance of me. 1 Cor. 11.23, 24. And
this, had it come only in the Nature of a Request, and not with the Authority
of a Command, must needs have made it of greatest Power with us. For it is
great Inhumanity, and shows an hard Heart, to deny the last Suit of a Dying
Person, though he were a Stranger to us; and base Ingratitude, and a
Falsification of all Friendship to throw back the last Request of a Dying
Friend, especially if he is before hand with us, and has done much more than
his Request comes to for our sakes; and the greatest aggravation of all
Disobedience to slight the last Will and Words of our Fathers, or Masters, or
others that have Right over us, and Power to Command us. And therefore since
our Blessed Lord, who came upon Earth for no other end but to do us Service,
yea even to lay down his Life for our sakes, after all the Pains and Cost he
has been at for us, left this as his last Will, and both entreated and enjoined
at parting, that we should eat and drink in Remembrance of him; if we have any
shame we cannot, and if we profess any Duty we dare not, and if we have any
Love for him we will not neglect it, but come to it out of mindfulness of our
gone Friend and Departed Lord, as often as we shall have opportunity so to do.

4 ly, It was thought by Christ a Command so material, that when St. Paul
received his Commission to Preach the Gospel, it was by name inserted, and
particularly specified; and this special Designation of it shows that he was
more than ordinarily concerned for it. I have received of the Lord, says he, or
by his Revelation, when I was called by him, that which I also delivered unto
you, as from him, namely, that the same night he was betrayed, he took Bread,
and said, Take, eat, this is my Body which is broken for you, this do in
remembrance of me, 1 Cor. 11.23, 24.

5 ly, It is a Command, which, as the Scripture plainly intimates, without
great danger to our selves cannot either be unworthily kept, or neglected.

Without very great and apparent danger to our selves, we cannot come
Unworthily to the Sacrament. For he that eats and drinks unworthily, says St.
Paul, eats and drinks Damnation to himself, 1 Cor. 11.29.

And without a like danger we cannot neglect, or keep back from it. Except ye
eat the Flesh of the Son of Man, says our Savior, and drink his Blood, ye have
no Life in you. Joh. 6.53. This the Ancient Church, as is well known,
understood generally of eating his Flesh in the Holy Sacrament; which is the
great Reason they give for that Practice so common among them, namely, why
Infants are to be Communicated. And of this there is great cause to understand
it. For it is hard to think of any thing, that can support such full
Expressions, as eating of his Body, and drinking of his Blood; besides eating
Bread, and drinking Wine in the Sacrament, which he calls his Body and his
Blood when he institutes it. Mat. 26.26, 27, 28. And besides, in this very
place he directs us to his Body Crucified, and given for the Life of the World;
to show the Eating relates to it as so represented, which is no where done but
in the Eucharist. I am the living Bread, says he, which whosoever eats shall live
for ever: and the Bread which I will give, i. e. to be eaten, is my Body
Crucified, which under that Notion is represented only in the Sacrament, or my
Flesh which I will give for the Life of the World. And except ye thus eat the
Flesh, and drink the Blood of the Son of Man, ye have no Life in you, Joh.
6.51, 52, 53.

This Discourse, indeed, of eating his Flesh in the Sacrament, was before the
Sacrament it self was instituted. But so was his Discourse of Baptism to
Nicodemus, before Baptism was appointed for the standing Rite, whereby all
Mankind should be Christened, Joh. 3.5. And so was his Discourse to the People,
of the Death he should dye, by being lifted up, before he was Crucified, Joh.
12.32, 33. And so was his Discourse of raising up the Temple of his Body after
it should be destroyed, before he was raised from the dead, Joh. 2.19.21. And
so in this very place was his Discourse of giving his Flesh for the Life of the
World, which they understood not before he suffered, more than they did this
Sacramental eating of it before the Sacrament was appointed, Joh. 6.51. Our
Savior spoke several things by Anticipation in sundry places, as, from this
last instance, it is plain he did in this, which though his Hearers did not at
that time fully understand, yet they would afterward: so that when other
Reasons evince him to have spoke in this place of the Sacramental eating of his
Body and Blood; the Sacrament's not being yet instituted, is no good Proof or
Argument against it.

Thus is this necessity of eating his Flesh, and drinking his Blood, as ever we
would hope for Eternal Life by it, spoke of the Lords Supper, wherein we Feast
upon it. And that it should be so, has no wonder in it: For it is no more than
is expressly spoke of Baptism, which is but of equal Rank with it, both being
alike Duties, and equally required. For of that it is said, He that Believes,
and is Baptized, shall be saved, Marc. 16.16. And except a man be born again of
Water, and the Spirit, he cannot enter into the Kingdom of God, Joh. 3.5.

But besides this Proof of the danger of neglecting the Sacrament, because our
Lord tells us we have no Life in us without it; it may also appear from the
danger of neglecting the Jewish Passover, which answered to it, and was the
same to them, as this Feast is to us, wherein 1 Cor. 5.7.
Christ our Passover is Sacrificed for us. And as for the danger of neglecting
that, it was great indeed, no less than of being cut off from Israel, which was
the punishment God had threatened to it. Whosoever, in the Feast of the
Passover, eats leavened Bread, from the First day to the Seventh day, that Soul
shall be cut off from Israel, Exodus 12.15.

Thus necessary is it for all men, who would please God, to frequent this
Ordinance, and to come to the Holy Sacrament when they are called to it. They
have Christ's express Command for it, who, by injoyning it, has required
Obedience in such an instance, as best shows their particular Reverence and
Love to him; and to engage them the more to it, has freed them from all the
load of Jewish Ceremonies, and imposed no heavier burden, than it and Baptism
instead of them; and to make it have the more effect, has left it among the
last words, which he spoke to them; and to show it was a matter of no small
moment, would have it expressly specified in St. Paul 's Commission; and tells
them, That unless they come therein to eat his Flesh, and drink his Blood, they
have no Life in them; and will punish the neglect, or abuse of it, as he did of
the Jewish Passover which answered to it, with Excision: All which show the
Greatness of the Duty, and how much it is every man's Concern, who would hope to
have the Favor of God, or go to Heaven.

And as this appears from the obliging Import, and Expressness of the Command
about it; so does it,

2 ly, From the obliging Nature of those things which are meant by it. For
therein we publicly own Christ and his Religion, and solemnly remember him,
and confirm the New Covenant with Almighty God, and a League of Friendship with
our Brethren, and are vouchsafed the highest Honor, and receive Tokens of the
greatest Love, and enjoyment of present Graces, and Pledges of future Glories
from him: all which no Ingenuous man will, and no Good man ought to refuse,
when he is called to them.

1 st, In the Sacrament, I say, we publicly own Christ, and profess his
Religion. This was always understood to be the meaning of Feasts on Sacrifices,
both among Jews and Gentiles; they that would eat of the Sacrifice offered to
any God or Idol, were looked on to have Fellowship and Communion with him, and
thereby to own their joining in that Worship and Service, which was paid to
him. Thus St. Paul tells us it was among the Jews, for they that ate of their
Sacrifices were partakers of their Altars. And thus he tells us it was among
the Gentiles, and that they who Feasted in the Idol-Temples on the Sacrifices
made to Devils, did thereby declare their Communion with them, and had
Fellowship with Devils. And the same is true of the Feast of the Lords Supper,
which upon this account, he makes parallel to, and compares with them. In
Israel after the Flesh, says he, they who eat of the Sacrifice are sharers in
the Worship, or Partakers of the Altar. And in the things which the Gentiles
Sacrifice to Devils, they who Feast on the Sacrifices, have Fellowship with
Devils. And therefore you that Feast with the Lord at his Table, and thereby
have Fellowship with him; must not mix Light and Darkness, Christ and Belial
together, and by Feasting with Devils at theirs, have Fellowship with them too.
You cannot drink the Cup of the Lord, and the Cup of Devils; you cannot be
partakers of the Lords Table, and the Table of Devils; since that were to unite
the most opposite Interests, by holding Fellowship, and professing your selves
to be the Servants of Christ, and of the Devil also, 1 Cor. 10.16, 18, 20, 21.
Our joining in the Holy Communion, is our avowed owning of Faith in our
Crucified Lord, and of our adherence to him. By eating at his Table of broken
Bread, and Wine poured out, which are the Representation of his Death; we tell
it out to all the World that we are the Servants of that Lord, and Worshippers
of that Jesus, who gave himself to be Crucified and to Dye for us. As often as
ye eat this Bread, and drink this Cup, says St. Paul, ye do show forth the
Lords Death till he come. Ye show forth his Death, i. e. ye (...).
tell it abroad, and profess to all the World, that he dyed for you, and is
Lord over you, and that you own him so to be, 1 Cor. 11.26.

Thus is our eating Bread, and drinking Wine at the Lords Table, an open
profession of his Religion, and a Token whereby we give out to all the World
who see what we do, that we belong to him. It is a most solemn sign of our
Relation to Christ, and a public Badge of our being Christians. And this sure
no man will decline when there is a fit occasion, who is not ashamed of his
Lord, nor Repents of his Profession: But if he is really a Follower of Christ,
and would be thought one; he will let all the World know it by joining in this
Feast, which is the most Solemn Badge, and Authentic Mark, which Christ has
appointed of it.

2 ly, In coming to the Holy Sacrament, according to our Lords appointment, we
solemnly remember him, and think of the Relation wherein we stand, and of the
benefits which we have received from him. Do this, says he, in remembrance of
me. 1 Cor. 11.24, 25.

And when he is called to remember his most precious Savior, who has both
lived and dyed to make God his Friend, and to do him Service; there is no man
sure, that has any thing of Shame, or Ingenuity left in him, who will show
backwardness, and begin to make excuses. For has not he done enough for us, to
deserve to be thought of? Do not all the inexpressible Favors he has gained,
and all the exquisite Pains he underwent for our sakes, most justly challenge
to be held in remembrance? He left unutterable Glories, and submitted to all
sorts of Earthly Calamities, and took unwearied Pains, and showed Invincible
Patience, and laid down at last his own Life to save our Souls: and must all
this be forgotten now it is done, and quite buried in silence? What man of any
Ingenuity, that has been happy in such a Friend, can be averse to remember him?
What man, that has been blessed in such a Savior, can ever decline the
Thoughts of him? Unless we will show our selves grossly stupid, or intolerably
proud, and both ways Monsters of Ingratitude; we must needs be ready to
Celebrate the memory of such a Person, when we are called to do that Honor to
him: and none that would be thought a man, much more a Christian, must ever
refuse to remember his Savior Christ, and give him Thanks, when in the
Sacrament he is called to it in Christ's own Name, and by his special
invitation.

3 ly, In eating Bread and drinking Wine at the Sacrament, we confirm the New
Covenant with Almighty God. In this Feast, as has been shown, we assure him
that we will Repent of every sin, as ever we hope that he will forgive us; and
will endeavor with his Grace after every Virtue, as ever we expect that he
should assist us; and obey every one of his Commandments, as ever we look that
he should Crown us with Eternal Happiness; and believe that, for Christ's sake,
we shall have this Pardon, Grace, and Eternal Life upon these Terms, and not
otherwise: for all these Duties we give him our Word and Promise; and, on that
Condition, for all these Blessings he gives us his Seal and Assurance back
again.

And what man is there, who pretends to the Name of a Christian, who will
refuse to do this when he has an Authentic Summons, nay, even a Friendly
Invitation? will he not Repent, that he may be forgiven? nor endeavor after
such Graces as he wants, that Gods Spirit may help him to them? nor obey all
his Saviors Laws, that he may be happy in Heaven? nor believe, that Christ has
purchased these Benefits for us at Gods hands, upon these Terms; but that
without performing them we shall never have them? If he will not do all this,
why does he make any pretense to Religion? If he is unresolved, and suspends
about any of these Particulars, why does he profess himself a Christian? For
these things are the very substance of Christianity, and the Life and Soul of
all Religion. No man can belong to Christ without them, and when he was
Baptized and came to him, he solemnly undertook and engaged for them. And
therefore if any man will refuse to make God his engagement of this Faith,
Repentance, and Obedience, when he is called to Promise and Profess them; he
revolts from his Baptismal Vow, and, if he persists in that mind, may as well
renounce his Profession, and turn his back on the whole Christian Religion.

4 ly, In eating Bread and drinking Wine at the Lords Supper, we confirm a
League of Love and Friendship with all our Brethren, this being one end, as I
have shown, of this meeting, to profess our selves in perfect Peace and Charity
with all men.

And who now, that owns himself a Christian, can seek shifts, and shun this
when God calls him? when his Savior, that dyed to make God Friends with him,
asks him to be Friends with all the World; can he refuse him? When he invites
him to be at Peace with all his Members, and to embrace them all as Brethren;
can he fly from him? If he shun this, he may as well shun every thing else, and
quit all claim to his Religion. For by this, says our Savior, shall all men
know that you are my Disciples, if ye have Love one to another. Joh. 13.35. And
unless ye forgive men their Trespasses, says he again, neither will your
heavenly Father forgive you yours. Mat. 6.15. And he that says he Loves God,
and yet hates his Brother, says St. John, is a Liar. 1 John 4.20. And if it be
possible, says St. Paul, and as much as in you lies, live peaceably with all
men. Romans 12.18. Love, and Peace, and mutual Friendship and Beneficence, are
the great Duties which Christ's Law prescribes, and which all his Followers must
be forward at all times to make profession of. And therefore if any man turns
away from declaring them, when God calls him to them; he turns his back of the
most Signal Duty of his Religion, and will not come to that, whereby, above all
things else, he should declare himself a Christian.

5 ly, In Feasting with God at the Holy Sacrament, we are vouchsafed the
highest Honor, and receive Tokens of highest Love, and enjoyment of present
Graces, and Pledges of future Glory from him; and these no man ought to refuse,
when he is called to them.

He vouchsafes us the greatest Honor. For he calls us to his own Table, and
tells us he is most glad to see us there, and that the oftener we come, the
welcomer shall we be to his Supper; he invites us as his own Guests, and
thereby seeks our Company and Acquaintance, and treats us as his Friends and
Confidents; which Honor is so high, that greater cannot be showed us.

He gives us the surest Tokens of highest Love. For he calls us to Feast upon
the Body and Blood of his own Son, i. e. upon those Blessings which the
breaking of his Body and shedding of his Blood procured for men; and shows us
plainly that he is still of the same mind, and is glad that for our sakes he
parted with him. For his inviting us to eat the Body, and drink the Blood of
Christ in this Holy Supper, imports as much as if he should say to us. Lo! here
my dear and only Son, whom I gave to shed his own hearts Blood a Ransom for
your Souls. When I did it, your sins were most provoking, and rendered you
utterly undeserving of it; and since you have received it, you have not been
affected as you ought, but have showed your selves most unthankful for it: but
yet all this does not make me Repent of what I have done, or grudge you the
Benefit of him. I am come here freely to present you with him, and invite you,
and exhort you, nay, entreat you to accept him. Eat his Body, and drink his
Blood, i. e. those Benefits and that Expiation which was purchased by it; I
freely give them without grudging, nay, I shall take it extremely ill if you
refuse them. For I would by all means have you receive the advantage of him. I
gave him once for you, and now again I give him to you; I am still of the same
mind, to part with my own dear Son for your sakes, and to bestow him on you. I
have nothing better wherewith to present you, but with him in this Holy Feast I
do; and what higher Tokens can I give of the unbounded Love I bear you?

He gives us present enjoyment of many invaluable Graces. For the Lords Supper
is a Treasury of Blessings, conveying to all those, who worthily partake of it,
the Pardon of their Sins, and Spiritual Assistances, and Heavenly Improvements,
and growth in all Virtues, and strength against all Temptations, as I shall
show under the next Head.

And lastly, He gives us the surest Pledges of future Glory. For when he offers
us his own Son, we may be sure he will not stick at any thing else, since he
has nothing that is in any comparable Degree so precious and dear to him, as he
is. This Gift is a Faithful Earnest, and certain Pledge of every thing else
which he can give us. For he that spared not his own Son, but delivered him up
for us all; how shall he not with him freely give us all things? says St. Paul,
Romans 8.32.

Thus in the Blessed Sacrament, are we vouchsafed the greatest Honor, and
receive Tokens of highest Love, and enjoyment of present Graces, and Pledges of
future Glories from Almighty God.

And what man now will refuse all these, when he is invited to them? Who can
turn his back upon that Ordinance, wherein God calls him, that he may give
Honor to him, and show by the highest Tokens how he Loves him, and confer upon
him present Graces, and give him Pledges of future Glories, and assure him what
Regard he has of him, and how happy he intends to make him? Common Ingenuity,
and Good manners, nay, every man's own private Interest and Self-advantage
oblige him most readily to embrace, and not to slight, or so much as slowly to
accept of such offers. So that if any Person really believes, that all this
Honor is shown, this Love expressed, these Graces given, or these Glories
assured to him in the Communion: he must needs think himself highly obliged to
come to it, and never cast about to seek shifts, and make excuses, or express a
backward and unwilling mind, when he has an Invitation and an Opportunity so to
do.

And thus we see, that not only our Lords express Command for it, but also the
obliging Nature of those things which are meant by, and of those employments
which are implied in it, are a strong and an indispensable Obligation on all
grown Christians, who are capable of it, to frequent the Holy Sacrament. For
therein they are called by their Savior Christ, publicly to profess his
Religion, and their Communion with him, and thankfully to remember him, and to
confirm the New Covenant with God, and a League of Love and Friendship with
their Brethren, and to receive Vouchsafements of highest Honor, and Tokens of
greatest Love, and enjoyment of present Graces, and Pledges of future Glories
from him: all which are things that no Christian man ought to stick at, or
decline, but with all forwardness to close with, as often as he has an
Opportunity, and sit occasion for them.

And thus it appears now much all the Disciples of Christ, who are grown up to
it, and understand it (for no Duty obliges an incapable Subject) are bound to
frequent this holy Sacrament. It is their Duty to come to the Communion, as it
is to come to Church, to be Chaste, Sober, Humble, Just, or to perform any other
Precept of their Religion. For they have their Savior Christ's express Command
for it, who by injoining it, has required Obedience in such an Instance, as
best shows their peculiar Reverence and Love to him; and to engage them the
more to it, has freed them from all the load of Jewish Ceremonies, and imposed
no heavier burden, than it and Baptism instead of them; and to make it take the
more effect, left it among the last words which he spoke to them; and to show
it was a matter of no small moment, would have it expressly specified in St.
Paul 's Commission; and tells them, That unless they come therein to eat his
Flesh and drink his Blood, they have no Life in them; and will punish the
neglect, or abuse of it, as he did the neglect of the Jewish Passover, which
answered to it, with Excision. And the Nature of those things which are meant
by it, and of those Employments which are to be exercised at it, most
straightly oblige them to it. For therein they show they have Fellowship with
Christ, and appertain to his Religion, and thankfully remember him, and Seal
the New Covenant with God, and a League of Love and Friendship with their
Brethren, and are vouchsafed the highest Honor, and receive Tokens of the
greatest Love, and enjoyment of present Graces, and Pledges of future Glories
from him: which are things that every Ingenuous man will, and every Good man
ought to do, and no man, when he is called to it, can honestly decline, that
professes himself a Christian.

Thus is it a necessary Duty in every man to come to the Sacrament, as it is to
come to Church, or to other parts of Worship: And when once we are of Age for
it, and have a fit opportunity and occasion offered; we are in strict Duty
engaged, and by a bond of many Cords, as we have seen, obliged so to do.

1 st, I say we are bound to it, when once we are of Age for it. The Duty of
this Holy Sacrament lies in such things, as suppose a competent Understanding,
and due Knowledge of Religion in those who must discharge them. For therein we
are to remember Christ, both what Commands he has left with us, and what he has
done and suffered for us; and this we cannot do, till first we have learnt
them. We must engage to be at Peace, to do Justice, and show kindness to all
our Brethren; and this supposes that we know first what Offices of Love, and
Acts of Justice are due to them. We must consent to the Terms of the New
Covenant, and this implies that first we should understand them. In Baptism,
indeed, we entered into it before we had any knowledge of it; but that was
because God, (who deals with us after the most favorable manner of Men, who
allow grown Persons to bear the Parts, and federally to undertake for Infants,
in things conducing to their Advantage,) admitted our Sponsors, that knew it
very well, to stand as our Representatives, and in way of Proxies to Covenant
and undertake for us. But the Sacrament of the Lords Supper is to be our own
Act, and an express assenting in our own Persons to what they undertook; and
this cannot be done till we are come to years, and are able of our selves to
judge of it.

Till we are grown up then to the Age of Competent knowledge in Spiritual
Affairs, we are not capable of discharging aright the Duty of this Sacrament.
And till we are so we are not obliged to it, since no Duty obliges an incapable
Subject. For it is in this Duty, as it is in that of making Peace, or giving good
Advice, or any others; they bind us not till we are grown up to them, and are
come to know rightly how to discharge them. For in all these Cases, God exacts
an account only of those Talents which he has entrusted with us, as we are told
in the Parable of the men who had received the Talents, Mat. 25. and his Rule
of proceeding is this, unto whomsoever much is given, of him shall much be
required; and to whom men have committed much, of him they will ask the more,
Luc. 12.48.

2 ly, When we are of Age for it, we are bound to it only when we have an
opportunity, and a fit occasion is offered. It is in the Communion at the
Sacrament, as it is in our Communion in Prayers, and other parts of Worship; we
are bound to join in them when they can be had, and we are not lawfully
hindered and diverted from it. But if either there is no place for them, or we
are justly hindered from attending on them; we have no obliging opportunity for
that time, but may without sin omit them. And thus it is when we are hindered by
some call of Providence, when at that time we are called away to do some
necessary Duty of Justice, or Charity, in another place. Or when we are
detained at home by some Disease, or bodily Indisposition, under which it is
not safe to go abroad, or venture out beyond our own Chambers; in which case
God, who prefers Mercy before Sacrifice, when they thwart and interfere, i. e.
Essential Duties before positive Precepts, will excuse us. Or, lastly, when our
minds are disturbed by great Grief, that cannot presently be cast off, or by
sudden Anger or Discontent occasioned hard before, (which though ordinarily it
be our own Fault, may yet sometimes be innocent;) at which time, since their
Discomposure unfits them for so Divine a Service, they may omit it as being
indisposed for it. This St. Peter intimates of Prayers, (and the Reason is the
same of this Ordinance) when he exhorts the Husband, by a discreet compliance,
and patient bearing of his Wives Infirmities, to prevent all Peevishness and
Domestic quarrels, that so they may have no need to omit or put by their
Devotions; which, it seems, they would, if their minds were acted at that time
by such undue Tempers. Ye Husbands, says he, dwell with your Wives according to
Knowledge; giving Honor to the Wives, or treating them with Lenity and Care,
as men do brittle Ware, because they are the Weaker Vessels, that your Prayers
be not hindered by those Heats and Animosities, which very likely might arise
otherwise, 1 Pet. 3.7. And this was once the case of St. (...). Palladius Dalog
de vit. Chrysostom. p. 128.
Chrysostom, who, at the time of Administering the Sacrament, being accidentally
much discomposed in mind, by an unseasonable demand of Justice made by Eusebius
against Antonine in the Synod then Assembled, went out, and desired one of the
Bishops then present to Officiate, declining the Communion at that Instant,
because he had some Trouble upon his Spirit.

If then we either are not come to years to understand it, or have no obliging
opportunity for it, or some just hindrance that would excuse it; this Duty of
the Sacrament may lawfully be omitted. It is like in it, as it is in our
joining in Prayers, or going to Church; it admits of the same Excuses, and
obliges in the same Cases. But where these rare Contingencies happen not, to
exempt from it; it is a strict Duty that is bound upon us, as we have seen, by
a Bond of many Cords, and a peremptory Commandment. So that when we have an
opportunity for it, and no just hindrance to put us by it, to Communicate is a
strict Precept, and in all Duty we are obliged so to do.

But against this expresness of the Command, and strictness of the Duty to
Communicate; some perhaps may urge the words of St. Paul, 1 Cor. 11. Do this,
as often as you drink it, in remembrance of me, v. 25. which words, as often,
seem to limit the precept only to the Remembrance of Christ when we do
Communicate, and to intimate, as if we had no Command to do this, and so with
out sin might omit it when we please, but only to remember him when we do.

Now in Answer to this, I observe,

1 st, These words, if we had no other proof of it, would not of themselves
prove it a Command, and strict Duty to Communicate. But,

2 ly, Neither do they infer the Contrary, and prove against it.

3 ly, There are other Places enough, which sufficiently evince it.

1 st, I say, these words, Do this, as often as ye drink it, in remembrance of
me, if we had no other proof for it, would not amount to an obliging Command,
and prove it a strict Duty to Communicate. For that which is plainly and
indisputably expressed in them, is not that we should Communicate, but that we
should Remember Christ when we do it, and they might have their full Sense, if
nothing more than this were intended.

But as of themselves they do not amount to such a Precept; so,

2ly, Neither do they infer the contrary, and prove against it. All that which
they express, is only that we must remember Christ when we do Communicate; and
this is done whether Communicating it self be a Duty, or whether it be not; and
suiting thus equally with any side, as it does not prove it a Duty to receive
the Sacrament, so neither does it prove there is no Duty in it. And of this we
have still a further Argument, because if these words, as often, etc. infer
there is no Duty to Communicate, the same may be inferred of Prayer, since in
another Place they are spoke of it, as here they are of the Sacrament. When, i.
e. as often as ye Pray, says our Savior, say, Our Father which art in Heaven,
etc. Luc. 11.2. So that if they prove we are not bound to Communicate, but only
to remember Christ when we do it; they will prove we are not bound to pray, but
only when we pray directed to use this Form in Prayer too.

Thus are these words, Do this, as often as ye drink it, etc. neither an
Argument that to Communicate is a Duty, nor an Argument against it. They are
indifferent, and equally incline both ways; so that when that is the Question,
of themselves they are no proof on any side, but other things must decide it.

And then,

3 ly, Although this place do not prove it an express Duty to Communicate, yet
there are other places enough that do sufficiently evince it. For in this very
Chapter, the words of our Lord at the eating of the Bread are absolute, and
imply an express Command for it: Do this, says he, i. e. Take and eat Bread as
now ye do, in remembrance of me; where not only the remembrance is injoined,
but also this particular way of doing it, viz. by eating Bread, wherein he is
to be remembered, 1 Cor. 11.24. And so it is also in St. Luc. 22.19.
Luke, where the Words are Peremptory for the Apostles administering, and so
answerably for the Peoples receiving it, without any intimation of the eating
it self being indifferent and uncommanded; which that Evangelist would not so
unwarily have expressed, if Christ had so intended it. And our Lord showed us,
not only that he has commanded this Sacramental eating, but that he has
commanded it as a necessary thing, when he tells his Hearers, that except they
thus eat the Flesh, and drink the Blood of the Son of Man, they have no Life in
them, Joh. 6.53. And this necessity of it is further manifested, from the
necessity of the Passover among the Jews, which answered to it; for at every
Return of it, they were to be cut off from Israel whosoever presumed to omit
it. Exodus 12.15. And if there were no express Command for it, yet are the
things we are called to in it all of that obliging Nature, and such necessary
Duties, that without Sin they cannot be declined. By all which, as we have
seen, this Sacramental eating and drinking is evidently proved to be a plain
Duty, and under a peremptory Commandment.

When therefore in this place the Apostle says of our drinking of the Cup, Do
this, as often as ye drink it, he does not intimate that we may do it as
seldom as we please, or as if it were under no Law, or express Precept. He
uses the words, as often, not because it is an Arbitrary Act and there is no
Duty in it; but because, though it be a Duty, we have not always opportunity
for it, and so cannot always be performing it. For, as has been shown, there is
a Command to Communicate, and that, as all other Affirmative Laws, binds us to
it at all times when a fit occasion is offered. When we eat and drink in the
Sacrament, we must remember Christ; and when we have an opportunity to eat and
drink in it, we are obliged to it; as the Jews, we saw, were to the Passover
which answered to it, who were to be cut off from Israel, when at any time they
omitted it: So that to Communicate is no Arbitrary Act, but an indispensable
Duty, and peremptory Command still.

And since it is thus necessary a Duty in every grown Christian to come to the
Holy Sacrament; it must needs be a great and dangerous Sin in any of us, when
we neglect and abstain from it. We must not think it an indifferent thing, but
make Conscience of keeping off from the Holy Communion, as we do of keeping off
from Prayers, of Swearing, doing Wrong, being Proud, Incontinent, or Drunken.
For it is expressly and straightly forbidden by God, as well as they, and we incur
his Anger, and, till we repent and do so no more, cannot regain his Favor,
when we are guilty of any of them.

A neglect of the Lords Table therefore is a Sin, which, although God may
excuse in those good Souls, who, because of their over-high Veneration for it,
and Fear of their own Unworthiness to partake in it, in the honesty of their
Hearts think they ought not to come to it: Yet will he not excuse in them when
they are better informed; and much less in others who neglect it, because they
are careless of it, or too Wicked and Impenitent to receive it.

He may excuse it, I say, in those Good Souls, who in the honesty of their
Hearts, through Ignorance or Error, were held back, and because of their
over-high Veneration for it, and fear of their Unworthiness to partake in it,
thought they ought not to come to it. An innocent Ignorance, or mistake of an
honest mind, may plead our excuse before God in this, as well as in other
Duties. For in all of them, Christ has such a Sense of our Infirmities, as that
he can have Compassion on the Ignorant, and those that err, or are out of the
way, Heb. 5.2. So that if after an upright endeavor to be rightly informed in
it, some Good Minds shall happen to mistake, their Error will not be imputed.
It may be through the loose Discourses of some, or the general Practice of the
World, who, by being so seldom at it, seem to set lightly by it; they think
themselves not obliged to it. Or again, through the extreme Rigidness of the
Discourses of others, who require such extraordinary things to it as very few
have attained, they think themselves always unworthy and unprepared for it, and
that they should sin, and eat their own Damnation in it. But if they fall into
these mistakes about it which make them abstain from it, after an honest
endeavor to be rightly informed about it; their Ignorance may plead their
Excuse, and make their Neglect to be connived at. God will not account it to
them as a sin, because they knew it not, but were mistaken. For in this, as
well as in all other Cases, to him that knows to do Good, and does it not, to
him it is Sin, Jam. 4.17.

But though God may bear with this neglect of the Sacrament in Good men, whilst
they are thus innocently misled: Yet will he not excuse it in them when they
are better informed; and much less in others, who neglect it because they are
careless of it, or too Impenitent to receive it.

He will not excuse it even in them when they are better informed. Their only
plea for their not doing of this Duty, is, that after the best search they
could make, they did not know they were bound to it, or that with safety they
could perform it: and when once their Understanding is enlightened, this plea is
removed, so that afterward they can find no relief at all from it. They
abstain then, when they know, if they are truly Penitent, they might, and ought
to come; and that abstinence is wilful, and, unless they repent of it and amend
it, will end in their Condemnation. For to him that knows to do Good, and
does it not, to him it is Sin, Jam. 5.17.

And much less will he excuse it in others, who are careless of it, and too
Impenitent to receive it. If they are hindered from the Lords Table out of
Slothfulness, or are unworthy of it by Reason of their Impenitence; those are
not their Excuse, but their own Damning Fault, and they must expect to bear the
punishment of it. To tell God I did not come to the Sacrament because I would
not Repent, is to tell him I would not come and promise to be Good, because I
was resolved to continue Wicked: and that is a very odd way of excusing it.
Impenitence is no excuse, but a most damning Sin; and therefore if we have no
other cause to give why we did not come, we must needs be liable to
Condemnation.

If any of you therefore who shall peruse this Treatise, have refused Gods
invitation formerly, and have kept back from this Feast: by what I have here
said you may see your Fault, and how nearly you are concerned, as you tender
your dear Saviors Honor, or the safety of your own most precious Souls, to
amend it. You have offended God in not coming to the Communion, as you would
offend him in not coming to Church, in not saying your Prayers, in not giving
Thanks for Mercies, in not being humble, honest, and upright in your dealings,
or in omitting any other Duties. So that you must not think all is well with
you when you keep away, as if you had done nothing. If the true Cause why you
abstained was your well meant mistake about it, and your not knowing, after all
the search you had opportunity to make, that every Good man, who Repents of all
his Sins, is worthy and fit for it: God will wink at your Ignorance whilst it
lasted; but that will be no excuse to you now you are better informed, so that
now you will be Guilty of a Damning Offense, if you still neglect it after you
are told of it. But if you have absented hitherto out of a careless Spirit,
which would not attend the times, or be at the pains to come to it; or because
you have an Impenitent Heart, which will not promise that Amendment and New
Life, that is to be undertaken for and engaged in it: Then has your Absenting
been your Damning Sin, which has provoked God against you, as all other Acts of
Disobedience and Irreligion. If this is your Case, you must look upon your
selves all this while to have been in a great Fault, which God will not forgive
till you Repent and amend it. For God will forgive you this Sin of neglecting
the Sacrament, upon the same condition whereon he will forgive all others,
namely, when you forsake it, and turn away from it, and, instead of absenting,
learn to frequent it. So that if you would keep a Good Conscience toward God,
and dye in Peace, and have no unrepented sins to answer for at the last
Judgment: Every one of you, that has sinfully slighted this Sacrament
hitherto, must come to it henceforward, and, according to your Savior Christ's
Commandment, readily partake in it, when you are called thereto.

CHAP. II. Of the Benefits of Communicating.
The Contents.
The Sacrament is full of Blessings, which make it not only our Duty, but our
Privilege. In the General, it is the most effectual means in all Religion to
recommend our Prayers, and make them powerful; and so is the likeliest way to
attain all Mercies. In particular, 1. It Seals to us the Pardon of our Sins for
the Peace of our Consciences. 2. It increases and Confirms in us all Graces.
Those are ordinarily such as we bring along with us. It confers Grace, 1. By
the Natural Virtue and Tendency of those Duties, which it both exercises and
excites in us. 2. By those inward Assistances, which it conveys to us. Since on
all these accounts it is so excellent a means of Grace and New Life, it is the
best Rule any Person can observe who would go on in the Work of Repentance. All
these Motives to Communicate, both from Duty and Interest, summed up.

HAving shown in the former Chapter how much it is every Christians Duty to
frequent the Holy Sacrament, who is of Age to come to it, and how greatly they
sin against God who neglect it, both from the obliging Nature of the thing, and
Christ's express Commandment: I proceed now in this,

4 ly, To show what great inducements we have to it, and how great the Benefits
are that come by it, which should make us press to it of our s^lve^ were it not
Commanded.

The Holy Sacrament has Blessings enough within it self to recommend it to our
choice, if God had not interposed his Authority, and laid that weight upon it
which he has. It is fully stored with Benefits, which make it, not only a
strict Duty, but an high Privilege to come to it, as the Christian Church has
always thought, whose great Penalty lay in a Separation, or Exclusion from it.
It is not only a matter of Honor to God, but also of highest Advantage to our
selves; so that in all Reason we ought to seek it, and heartily thank God that
we may be admitted to it, out of a care of our own Happiness and pure
Self-interest.

Of these Benefits I have mentioned some already, such as its being a
vouchsafement of highest Honor to us, and a token of Gods greatest Love for
us, and a certain pledge of our Future Glories, of all which I have Discoursed
in the last Chapter. But besides them, it is full of many other singular
Blessings and present Graces, which I shall now treat of in this. And those,
which I shall take notice of, are these.

1 st, In the General, It is the most effectual means in all Religion to
recommend our Prayers, and make them Powerful with God; so that it is the
likeliest way to obtain all Mercies.

2 ly, In Particular.

1 st, It Seals to us the Pardon of our Sins for the Peace of our Consciences.

2 ly, It increases and confirms in us all our Graces.

1 st, In the General, It is the most effectual means in all Religion to
recommend our Prayers, and make them Powerful with God; so that it is the
likeliest way to obtain all Mercies. And this it does, by being a Commemoration
unto him of the death of Christ, which is the only Argument that prevails with
him to bestow them on us.

It is the common way of all men when they sue for kindnesses from others, and
think they have not Interest enough themselves, to use such Intercessions, and
suggest such things, as have most Power with them, and are likeliest to incline
them to grant their Desires. And as it is thus in our Requests to men, so is it
in our Prayers to God too. We set those Considerations before his Eyes, and
suggest those things to his Remembrance, which are fittest to move his Pity,
and to make him favorable toward us. Thus the Holy men in the Old Testament
in their Prayers are frequently putting God in mind of his Psalm. 119.49.2
Chron. 6.42.
Covenant and Promise; and making mention of his Servant Psalm. 132.1.10.
David, or Deuteronomy. 9.27. and Exodus 32.13.
Abraham, or Isaac, or Israel, for whom they knew he had an especial kindness:
and with their Prayers they used to join Sacrifice, hoping to be the easier
heard when they came with their Atonement in their Hands, and that the Life of
the Beast being offered up in Commutation, and accepted instead of theirs, God
would be the easier appeased, and more inclined to hear their Supplications.
Upon which account, that their Prayers might have a Powerful Argument to
recommend them going along with them, they were careful to offer them up at the
hour of Sacrifice, as appears from the Prayer of Ezra 9.5.
Ezra, and of Psalm. 141.2.
David, at the Evening Sacrifice.

Now that which Powerfully intercedes with God for us, and which was shadowed
out by all the Jewish Sacrifices, is our Saviors Death. For it was his Blood
that merited so highly at Gods hands, as to make him think of showing Favor,
and being kind to us. It is the Blood of Propitiation, Romans 3.25; that makes
peace between God and Men, Col.1.20, and speaks better things than the Blood of
Abel, calling for Life and Salvation, as that did for Destruction, Heb. 12.24.
And it is the Representation of that Blood now in heavenly places, that gives
Christ himself such absolute Power with God, and makes him sure to prevail
whenever he intercedes for us. For by it he entered into the Holy Place,
where the Mercy-seat or Propitiatory was, Heb. 9.3, 5.12.24; and where he ever
lives to make intercession for us. Heb. 7.25. So that the great Argument, which
either Christ our high Priest now in Heaven offers for us, or which in our
Prayers we can plead for our selves, is his own Death and Sufferings.

Now this is set before God in every Prayer, and in all Acts of Religion; in
all which we use Christ's Name, and desire to be heard, and hope to prevail
through his Mediation. But in the Sacrament it is done more perfectly, and with
greater Solemnity, and that too by Gods own appointment. For one chief end of
the Holy Sacrament, is to Commemorate the Death of Christ; i. e. to set it out
in solemn show, and make mention of it, not only before men, but also to
Almighty God. This do in Remembrance or (...).
Commemoration of me, says our Savior, Luc. 22.19. And as often as ye do it,
says St. Paul, ye show forth the Lords Death, i. e. both to God and Men, till
he come. 1 Cor. 11.26.

Thus do we no where so livelily and advantageously set out this great Argument
of being heard, as in the Holy Sacrament: which we may justly hope will be the
more observed, and have the more effect, because it is not done of our own
heads, but by Gods own special Direction and Appointment. And where the
Argument is most advantageously set out, we may expect the better effect, and
greater force from it. And this the Ancient Christians thought, accounting
their Prayers were not like to be so Powerful at any time, as when this
Commemoration of Christ's Death, the only Plea for being heard, accompanied
them. And therefore at the Sacrament they Thus it is in the form prescribed
Constit. Apostol. l. 8. c. 13. and 15. p. 484, 485. tom. prim. Council. ed. Lab.
And this Eusebius testifies de vita Constant. l. 4. c. 45.
used to pray, not only for themselves, but also for all others, and to
recommend any Person or thing to God which was dear to them, thinking they
could never so advantageously, as at that time, sue for them.

Thus in the General, is the Holy Sacrament a most likely means to obtain for
us all Mercies, because it is the most effectual course in all Religion to
recommend our Prayers, which must procure them for us.

2 dly, In Particular,

1 st, It seals to us the Pardon of our Sins for the peace of our Consciences.

2 ly, It increases and confirms in us all our Graces.

1 st, It seals and confirms to us the Pardon of our Sins for the peace of our
Consciences. In the Holy Sacrament God calls us to give us a full Pardon, by
giving us that Blood which was Mat. 26.28.
shed for the remission of Sins, and which is the Blood of Expiation: and
having received that at his hand, if we are true Penitents, we need not doubt
but that our sins are expiated, and he is reconciled. The Sacrament it self, as
we have seen, is nothing less than a so^emn Confirmation of the New Covenant,
which promises Remission of Sin to all that truly repent of it. So that when
with Penitent Hearts we come to join in it, we come to stipulate and secure a
Pardon of all our Offenses, which will give us all the security of it that
Covenants and Promises can make us. Whenever we Repent, indeed, we have Gods
promise of Forgiveness, which may comfort our hearts after any Sin, not only in
the Communion, but in every Penitential Prayer and Confession. But in the
Sacrament this Promise is again repeated, and in most solemn manner Sealed and
Confirmed; to show us that God is still of the same mind, and to give us a
renewed and a sensible assurance of it. And when God has thus set his Seal to
it, and a Penitent Soul has just received his Word and Bond for it; it need not
question but he is reconciled, and, unless it starts back from these
penitential engagements, and falls afresh into new Provocations, will always
continue so to be.

And thus the Sacrament is the most effectual means, to calm the Fears, and
quiet the Consciences of all true penitents. If once they make sure of their
own Repentance after any Fault, it does that in an ordinary way, which an Angel
from Heaven, and a special Revelation would do in extraordinary, i. e. it lets
them know their Sins are Pardoned, and that God is their Friend. For therein
they receive from him the Blood of Expiation, a plain proof their Sins are
atoned for and forgiven: and therein there is an express agreement and solemn
Covenant of Peace and Reconciliation between God and them, which is confirmed
by this Feast of his own prescribing: and having this Instrument of his own
appointment, which they may look upon as his Hand and Seal to it, they may
cheerfully depend upon it, and rest satisfied in their own mind.

2 ly. It increases and confirms in us all our Graces.

These Graces are ordinarily such as we bring along with us, which we either
have already practiced, or are fully purposed and resolved so to do. For
therein God gives Grace only to the Worthy Communicants; and those Communicants
only are Worthy, who Repent of all their Sin^ and are wholly determined to lead
a New Life in Obedience to all his Commandments. It is not a Sacrament intended
to give strength in Grace, to those that have nothing of it; for it is our
Spiritual Meat and Bread, as our Savior calls it, Joh. 6.51, 55. the use
whereof is not to give Life to a Dead Person, but Strength and Nourishment to a
Living. It is not designed to turn an Impenitent Man into a true Penitent, or
to make an Ill man Good; for every impenitently ill man is an Unworthy
Receiver, and eats his own Damnation, which is a Curse and not a Blessing; so
that he is not the better, but the worse by it. But it is intended to make a
Good Man Better, to carry on Repentance in those that have begun it, and to
confirm and enlarge every Virtue in those who are already possessed of it. If
we come to it with Faith, or Belief of the Scriptures, particularly of Gods
promises to pardon our Sins for Christ's sake upon our Repentance, and to help
us to any Graces upon our endeavors, and to make us Eternally happy upon our
entire Obedience; it strengthens and assures it: if with Love of our dear Lord,
who dyed for us; it increases it: if with Thankfulness for his kindnesses,
particularly that of giving his own Life for ours; it makes us more sensible of
it: if with hearty Repentance, and full purpose of amending all our Sins; it
makes us more unmovable and settled in it: if with Peace, and Charity toward
all our Neighbors; it fills us with a greater abundance of it. It augments all
the Virtues of a Good man which he brings to it, making him more perfect in
them, and strong in Spirit to persevere and go through with them. But these
Effects it has not upon an ill man, nor produces this increase of Virtue in
those, who bring nothing of it along with them: So that it is no disparagement
to the Virtue of this Sacrament, if wicked Men find themselves wicked still,
and not at all amended by their Receipt of it, since it was not ordained for
their Improvement. It was not meant to give Grace to those that are Graceless,
or to give Repentance to Impenitent Persons: but to carry them through in their
Repentance who have fully set upon it, and to enable them to lead a New Life
who are resolved to do it, and to strengthen them to amend a Fault who are
wholly bent to strive against it, and to confer Grace on those that have it,
and make them more Gracious still.

And this the Holy Sacrament is to every worthy Communicant. It conveys Grace
into his Soul, and makes him stand more firm, and increase in every Virtue of a
Christian. It is an excellent means to make him a better man, and to carry him
on to improve in Duty and Holy living: So that every one who comes worthily,
will gain a great increase of Grace and Strength, and be much set on in
Spiritual growth by Receiving.

Now this it does two ways.

1 st, By the Natural Virtue and Tendency of those Duties, which it exercises
and excites in us.

2 ly, By those inward Assistances, which it conveys to us.

1 st, A worthy Receiving conveys Grace into our Souls, and confirms and
increases us in all Virtues, by the Natural Efficacy and Tendency of those
Duties, which it exercises, and excites in us. For it excites, and therein we
exercise several Duties, which help on a good Life, and set it forward; and
therein we bind our selves by solemn Vows and Engagements to go on in it: both
which are most powerful to effect and improve it.

1st, It excites, and therein we exercise several Duties, that help on a good
Life, and set it forward: All the Duties of worthy Receiving are instances of
an Holy Life, as we have seen, and parts of a Good man: but several of them are
not only particular Duties in themselves, but withal most powerful helps to
the performance of all others: So that in performing and improving them, we do
not only discharge and grow in some Virtues; but make a way for our easier
Discharge and fuller growth in all others also. And these are a fixed
Remembrance and firm Faith of Christ's wonderful kindness to us, especially in
Dying for us; an intense Love, and hearty Thankfulness, and entire Resignation
of our selves to his Service, and true Repentance and Abhorrence of all our
Sins; all which, as they are much improved in a worthy Communion, so are they
most Powerful in helping us to become Obedient and Good men.

1 st. I say these Duties are improved in us by the Holy Communion. And this
they are by being both exercised, and excited in us at that time.

They are all exercised in every Worthy Communicant at that time, because in
them, as we have seen, consists the worthiness of Receiving. And the more still
they are exercised, the more they are improved. For all Habits come by usage,
and Custom makes those things, which at first seemed strange, to become, not
only Easy, but Natural to us. So that in exercising them at the Sacrament, we
shall improve and add to them, and go away with a greater measure of them, than
we brought when* we came.

And this we shall more especially do, because therein they are not only
exercised, but mightily excited in us also. The Holy Sacrament suggests such
Powerful Motives to them, and presents us with such obliging Reasons for them,
as we cannot have any where else; so that we cannot take a better way, than by
coming to it, to improve them. For therein we most solemnly and attently
remember, how, when our sins had made us utter Enemies of God, and Heirs of
Destruction, Christ laid down his own Life in our stead, and by that Ransom
redeemed us from it. And this is not only the highest, but, in a manner, the
sum total of all those inducements which can engage us to these Virtues, or
possess us with them. For what can possibly raise so warm a Love of Christ in
an ingenuous Spirit, that is sensible of what is done to it, as to see how
infinitely he has Loved us, and, when we were his bitter Enemies, gave his own
Life in exchange for ours? What can ever engage us to so great. Thankfulness,
as to think that a Person so far above us, and that stood in no need of us, and
that was not sought to by us, and that was even th^n most highly disobliged and
had received the greatest Provocations from us, should most frankly give his
own self to do us a kindness? What can so powerfully move us to resign up our
selves to any one, as to see that he has bestowed himself on us first to buy us
off from our implacable Enemies, and that for no Self-Interests or By-Ends of
his own, but purely for our Eternal Happiness? What can work in us so hearty a
Repentance, and provoke us into so utter an Indignation and Abhorrence of all
our Sins, as to behold in our dear Lords Agonies what they deserved, and how
unmeasurably mischievous they proved, and what inexpressible Tortures they
brought on him, when he would put himself in our place, and undertake to answer
for us? These things are most livelily set out, and powerfully suggested to us
in this Blessed Sacrament, one chief business whereof is solemnly to
Commemorate and make mention of them: and they are the most effectual means to
raise in us a constant mindfulness, a zealous and intense Love of him that dyed
for us, and an hearty Thankfulness for all his kindnesses, and a sincere
Repentance and utter abhorrence of all our Sins, and an entire Resignation of
our selves to his Use an^ Service, that can be given us. And the Sacrament
being thus richly furnished with the most persuasive Motives, and thus vividly
suggesting to us the most Powerful Reasons for all these Virtues; it must needs
be the best Course to improve in them, and we cannot lay out our time upon them
better, or to more effect, in any other way.

Thus are the Duties of a fixed Remembrance and firm Faith of Christ's dying for
us, of an intense Love, and hearty Thankfulness, and Resignation of our selves
to his Service, and true Repentance and Abhorrence of all our Sins; very much
set on and improved in all worthy Receivers by the Holy Communion. They will be
heightened and increased by receiving, because they are both exercised, and, by
an objective Representation of most forcible inducements to them, powerfully
excited in them at that time.

And as these Duties are all improved by the Holy Communion; so are they,

2ly, Most Powerful in helping us to become Obedient and Good men. If we were
but perfect in these Virtues, and they had once got the Ascendant over us, and
ruled in our Hearts; they would have an Universal influence on all others, and
govern our whole Lives. For if, when we are temp^^d to any sin, our minds,
being familiarized to it, would at that instant readily suggest to us that
Christ dyed for it, and that it put him to all the pain and anguish he
suffered; we should not endure to come near it: If we have any true Love and
Zeal for him, we shall show no manner of Favor or Compliance with it; if we
are really Thankful for what he has done, for his sake we shall withstand it;
if we are resigned up to his use, we shall have nothing to do with it, because
he is against it; and if we abhor it for the pains it put him to when he
answered for it, and will at last put us to also if we continue in it, we shall
disdainfully reject and turn away from it. If we Believe and remember always,
as we have need, that Christ died for our Sins, and procured us Pardon for them
upon our Repentance, and Grace to get quit of them upon our best endeavors;
that Faith will make us Obedient, and carry us on to amend them. If we truly
Love Christ, that Love will make us do something for him, and cast to please
and Joh. 14.15.
obey him. If we are Thankful for what is done, we shall never despite him by
any Sin, which for all his Benefits were to return the greatest injuries again.
If we are resigned up to his use, we shall Faithfully serve him. If we are
heartily Penitent, and abhor our Sins, we shall forsake them. If we have this
lively Faith and Remembrance of Christ's dying for us, and this intense Love,
and hearty Thankfulness, and entire Resignation of our selves to his Service,
and sincere Repentance, and utter Abhorrence of all our Sins; If we have these
Virtues, I say, and in these prevailing measures, they will carry us on to an
Holy Life, and make us Obedient to all Gods Commandments. And therefore since
this Holy Sacrament, when it is worthily received, does so much improve these
Virtues in us; it must needs help us on, and improve us in all others, and in
the whole course of a good Life too.

Thus does a worthy receiving by its own Natural tendency confirm and increase
us in all good Living, by our exercising, and its exciting in us such Duties,
as help it on and set it forward: and so does it,

2 ly, By our binding our selves thereat in solemn Vows, and Engagements to go
on in it.

One chief end of our meeting at this Feast, and prime part of our Worthiness
in partaking of it, is to confirm the New Covenant, as we have seen, and to
make God our Faithful promises, that from that day we will amend all our
Faults, (...) so we may attain that Pardon and Happiness, which, upon our true
Repentance, he comes to offer and assure to us. And these solemn Vows and
Promises are a fast hank upon us to make us leave our Sins, and do all that he
requires of us. For every man ought, and thinks himself concerned to be as good
as his word, and to perform what he has promised; especially when it is to one,
who is too Wise to be deluded, and too Just and Powerful to suffer any abuses
of him to pass unrevenged, which all men, that understand any thing, believe of
Almighty God. When we Promise and Vow to him, we know that he cannot be
deceived, and that he will not be mocked; so that we must needs see it stands
us in stead, and is our highest concern to perform with him. And therefore,
since in the Sacrament we do in the most solemn manner Vow to amend our ways,
and promise an Holy Life to Almighty God; in Regard none that are honest will,
and none that are wise and serious dare be unmindful of such sacred and solemn
Compacts, it must needs be an excellent way to bind it fast upon our Souls, and
fix it in our minds, and so help very much to establish and imprint it in us.

And thus we see how a worthy receiving conveys Grace, and confirms and
increases in us all Virtues by the Natural tendency of those Duties, which it
exercises, and excites in us. For it powerfully excites, and therein we
exercise several Duties, which help on a Good Life, and set it forward; and
bind our selves by solemn Vows and Engagements to go on in it, both which are
most Powerful to improve and effect it.

And as it thus confirms and increases in us all Graces, by the Natural Virtue
and Tendency of those Duties, which it excites in us; so does it,

2 ly, By those inward Assistances, which it ministers and conveys to us.

This Sacrament does not only confer Grace by its Natural Tendency, as other
means; but moreover, by virtue of Gods Promise and especial Bounty to the
Worthy Receivers of it, as it is an Instrument in his hands. He tells us that
he will do great things at the presence of it, and be liberal in Spiritual
Blessings to all that duly partake in it: So that besides what they do from the
Virtues themselves, which are exercised thereat, they may promise themselves
much Spiritual Grace and Strength from his Free Gift, and immediate concurrence
with it. For in the Sacrament he offers them all that outward Grace and
Spiritual strength, which Christ's Death procured; and therefore, if they come
to it worthily, so as their own unworthiness is no bar against it, that offer
will be sure to take effect, and they shall undoubtedly receive it. And this is
plainly intimated to us, when our Savior tells us of his Flesh that it is
Bread, the true use and end whereof is for Psalm. 104.15.
support and nourishment, Joh. 6.51. And when St. Paul declares, that the Cup
of Blessing which we Bless, is the Communion, or (...).
Communicating to us the Blood of Christ, i. e. those Benefits his Blood
procured us: and that the Bread which we break, is the Communion, or
Communicating to us the Body of Christ, i. e. those Graces which the offering
of his Body obtained for us, amongst Gal. 3.13, 14.
which are these Spiritual Assistances, 1 Cor. 10.16. And when our Lord himself
tells us, that the Bread he gives us is his Body, and that the C^p he reaches
out to us is his Blood, Mat. 26.26, 28. By which, though he mean not that they
are his Body and Blood in their Natures, yet the least he can mean is, that
they are so in their Effects, so that when we receive them we receive all the
Blessings of his Bloodshedding, and all that Grace which his Death has
purchased for all Men.

And thus the Church of Christ has still thought concerning it. Ideo in
similitudinem quidem accipis Sacramentum, sed verae Naturae gratiam,
virtutemque consequeris. Ambros. de Sacram. l. 6. c. 1.
In the Sacrament, says St. Ambrose, thou receivest the similitude of the Body
of Christ, i. e. the Bread and Wine which r^pres^nt it: but, together with
that, all the Grace and Virtue which the true and real Body obtained. Sed
immortalitatis alimonia datur, a communibus cibis Differens, Corporalis
substantiae retinens speciem, sed virtutis Divinae invisibili efficientia
probans adesse praesentiam. Cyp. de Cona Them. sub in^t
This Sacramental Food, says St. Cyprian, or whoever was the Author of that
Tract, is in outward appearance a bodily Substance; but by invisible Efficiency
it works all the Effects of a Divine Power and Presence. -- (...). Clem. Alex.
Paedag. l. 2. c. 2. p. 151. Ed Par.
They that partake of the Eucharist by Faith, says St. Clement of Alexandria,
are sanctified thereby both in Body and Soul. And (...). Orig. cont. Cells. l.
8. p. Ed. Cant. 399.
we eat the Bread, says Origin, which by Prayer is made the Body of Christ,
Holy in it self, and making those Holy who feed on it with Resolutions of New
Life and Holy Purpose.

And this is another way, whereby the worthy Receiving of the Sacrament
confirms and Augments in us all Spiritual Graces; viz. As it is an Instrument
in Gods Hands, who, at the presence of it, ministers and conveys them to us.

And by this it appears that the Holy Sacrament confirms and increases us in
all Graces, both by the Natural Virtue and Tendency of those Duties, which it
excites and improves in us; and also by those inward Assistances and Spiritual
Aids, which it ministers and conveys to us.

And thus we see how the Holy Sacrament is full of Grace and a quickening
Spirit, and helps mightily to set us on in an Holy Life, and in the work of
Reformation and Amendment. And therefore when any Persons turn Penitents, and
resolve to lead new Lives; one of the best Rules that can be given them is to
frequent it. For it will carry them forward in their work, and, what by the
Natural Tendency of the Duties themselves that are exercised in it, what by the
Assistances that are conveyed by it, increase their Strength, and give them
Power to go through with it. It will perfect them in Obedience by exercising,
and exciting, and by both improving in them that Faith, Love, Thankfulness,
Resignation, and Repentance, which are the most Genuine Principle and Effectual
cause of it. It will bind it upon their Souls and engage them to it, by their
repeating every time they are at it, their solemn Vows and sacred Promises to
go on in it. And it will enable them to succeed in it, by bringing down from
God those inward Helps and Spiritual Assistances, which shall bear them through
it. So that if any man begins to look toward God, and longs to go forward with
the work of Reformation and Amendment: He ought in all Reason to seek out, and
press in to be admitted to the Holy Sacrament. For it is one of the best Rules
that can be prescribed in his Case, and serves his end above any thing: and
therefore he must not in any wise shun it, but lay out for it above all men
living. A man that will not Repent, indeed, whilst he continues in that mind,
must not come to it; for he would not receive Good, but hurt by it. But if he
resolves to amend his ways, and seeks out for help, and would make use of any
means which would do him most Service in effecting it: let him be constant at
the Lords Table, and frequently Communicate. It will quicken him when once he
is in the way to become Good, and amend his pace where he has need to be set
forward, and strengthen him in those Parts where he is weak and most liable to
be assaulted, as St. Ignatius told the Ephesians, when he advised them to be
fr^quent in it; saying, (...). Ignat. Ep. ad Ephesians. Ed. V^ss. p. 25.
Show haste to assemble often in the Eucharist; for the oftener you meet in it,
the more your standing is secured, and the Power of Satan is destroyed. It will
fortifye him in all Trials wherein he is like to be most endangered; enlivening
in him that Holy Zeal, and steady Purpose, and other Graces, which must bear
him through it; for which cause it was used anciently, and upon a like occasion
would be so still, as a Preparation for the greatest Trials, and to fit men to
Dye Martyrs for the Cause of Christ. Quos excitamus and hortamur ad prael^um,
^on inermes and nudas relinquamus, sed protectione Sanguinis, and Corporis
Christi muniamus: Et cum ad Loc fiat Eucharistia, ut possit accipientibus esse
tutela, quos tutos esse contra adversarium voluimus, munimento Dominicae
Saturitatis armemus. Cyp. and alii Episc in Epist. Synod. Eccles. Afr^c. ad
Eccles. Roman. Ep. 57. Ed. Oxon. 54. Pamel.
Those, says St. Cyprian and the other Africane Bishops, whom we would preserve
safe and invulnerable against the fiercest Darts of the Adversaries, we arm
first with the Lords Supper, wherewith they may be guarded as with a shield,
and wherein they may be secured as in an impregnable fortress. It is an
excellent means of confirming every Grace, and affording Spiritual Help and
Strength to all that want it: and that is inducement enough, were there no
Command for it, for every man, who desires to be entirely good and strong in
Spirit, to resort to it.

And thus at last it appears what those Blessings are which come by the
Sacrament, and which are sufficient to engage all good Souls to press to it of
themselves, though it had no where been commanded. For it is a most effectual
means to prevail with God in all their Prayers and thereby to obtain all
Mercies, it Seals to them the pardon of their sins for the Peace of their
Consciences, and Confirms and Augments in them all their Graces. So that if
they have, I will not say any Duty and Service for their Savior, but any Love
of themselves and care of their own Souls, they will seek to be admitted, and
come hastily when they are called thereto.

To conclude this point then, the sum of what I have said to engage men's
presence at this Feast, and to Communicate as often as an opportunity is
offered, amounts to this: It is their Duty to come to the Communion, as much as
it is to come to Church, to be Temperate, Humble, Just, or to perform any other
Precepts of their Religion. For they have Christ's express Command for it; who
by injoyning it, has required Obedience in such an Instance, as best shows
their peculiar Reverence and Love to him; and to engage them to it, has freed
them from all the load of Jewish Ceremonies, and imposed no heavier Burden,
than it, and Baptism, instead of them; and to make it take the more effect,
left it among the last Words which he sp^ke to them; and to show it is a matter
of no small moment, would have it expressly specified in St. Paul 's Commission;
and tells them, that unles^ they come therein to eat his Flesh and drink his
Blo^d, they have no Life in them; and will punish the neglect, or abuse of it,
as he (...) of the Jewish ^^ssover, which answered to it, with Excision. And
the Nature of those things which are meant by it, and wherein they are to
employ their minds when they are present at it, most straightly oblige them to
it. For therein they show they have Fellowship with Christ, and appertain to
his Religion, and thankfully remember him, and Seal the New Covenant with God,
and a League of Love and Friendship with their Brethren, and are vouchsafed the
highest Honor, and receive Tokens of the greatest Love, and enjoyment of
present Graces, and Pledges of Future Glories from him; which are things that
every Ingenuous man will, and every Good man ought to do when he is called to
them, and no man can honestly refuse or decline, who professes himself a
Christian. These things oblige all those who are of Age for it, and have an
opportunity and fit occasion offered, and have no lawful Let or Impediment, of
Providential hindrances, sickness, or other thing, which would excuse their
coming to Prayers or other Ordinances of Christ; they oblige all such, I say,
to come to this Feast when they are called to it. And, if after they are shown
how much it is their Duty to (...) in it, and how Repentance make them worthy
of it, through Carelessness, or Impenitence they stay away from it; they sin
against God, and are Guilty of a Damning Fault, which will not be forgiven them
till they Repent of it and amend it. But if there were no Guilt in the Neglect,
and to Communicate had not been thus required; yet would the Blessings of the
thing it self have engaged every Penitent Good Man to press in to be admitted.
For it is the most effectual course in all Religion to prevail with God, and to
be heard in all their Prayers; it Seals to them the Pardon of their Sins, for
the Peace of their Consciences; and Confirms and Augments in them all their
Graces; bringing down such help as may make them stand in all Trials, and
carrying them on, beyond any means that can be prescribed, in the course of
Repentance and new Obedience: which to all that love the ease of their own
Minds, and have any care of their own Souls, are invitation more than enough to
engage their presence at this Ordinance; and as for those that do not, they are
neither to be won by them, nor by any others.

And thus having shown what is the meaning of eating Bread and drinking Wine in
the Blessed Sacrament, and wherein lies the Worthiness of doing it, and how
much it is every Good Christians Duty to frequent it, and what great Benefits
there are that come by it, which should make us press to it of our selves were
it not Commanded: I shall proceed now,

5 ly, In the last Place, to consider those Excuses, and to take off those
Pleas, which are most usually made against it; of which in the next Part.

PART III. Of the Hindrances that keep men from the Communion.
CHAP. I. Two Hindrances from Communicating.
The Contents.
One most General Hindrance, that keeps men from the Sacrament, is a Fear of
their being Unworthy and Unfit to receive it. This Answered by showing, 1. The
Partiality of it, because they are not so scrupulous about Neglecting, as about
Unworthy Receiving, though there be the same cause for it. 2. That every true
Penitent is worthy of it: Yea, he that has only fully purposed Amendment,
though he has not had time to perform it. 3. Impenitence, which unfits them for
it, is no Excuse for the Neglect of it. 4. Impenitent men, who alone are unfit,
if they understand the danger of their State, cannot continue in it but amend
it, and then they may worthily Communicate. 2. A Second Hindrance is, because
an Unworthy Receiver eats his own Damnation, 1 Cor. 11.29. which makes not
Receivin^ seem the safer side. By Damnation is meant, 1. A Damning Sin, which
is deadly till we Repent of it; and such are both unworthy eating and sinful
abstaining, so that they are equal as to that point. 2. Temporal Penalties,
which were inflicted for their Intemperance at this Feast, and other Disorders
peculiar to those Times, and are not now usual in ours, so that the fear of
them need not discourage us from it.

SInce a worthy receiving of the Holy Sacrament is a Duty which our Blessed
Lord has so straightly enjoined, and from which we may all hope to reap so great
Benefit, as has been showed; it may well be expected, that all who would do
Service either to their Savior, or to themselves, should readily join in it
whenever an Opportunity is offered. And so, it is like, all that pretend to
serious Religion would, were it not that they have some Exceptions in their own
minds against it, which, till they are removed, make all Discourses of the Duty
or Usefulness of it fall without effect, and persuade them, that, however
necessary or advisable it may be to others, yet it is not so to them, who have
so just an hindrance to excuse or discourage them from being present at it.

To give this Duty as fast hold as I can therefore on the Consciences of all
those, who shall peruse this Treatise; having already set forth the
indispensable Obligations we have to it, I shall now proceed to remove those
Hindrances, and to take off those Pleas, which are offered to excuse, and keep
men back from complying with it. And as for them, the most weighty and
considerable, which I have been able to learn, or have had opportunity to meet
with, are such as follow.

Men are most ordinarily hindered from the Sacrament, notwithstanding it is so
much both their Duty and their Interest to frequent it, by one, or other of
these things.

1 st, Because they think themselves unworthy of it, and unfit to receive it.

2 ly, Because of the great danger of Unworthy Communicating, Damnation being
said to be eaten in it, which seems to make abstaining the safer side.

3 ly, Because therein they are to promise concerning every Sin they find
themselves guilty of, that they will no more commit it; and this Promise they
dare not make, because they fear they shall not keep it.

4 ly, Because of the great difficulty they apprehend to be in worthy
receiving, and their want of time and leisure to prepare for it.

5 ly, Because they see others, or have found themselves, to be no whit
bettered or improved by it; so that it is not worth their (...) to fi^
themselves for it.

6 ly, Because they have not that Charity for all the World, which is to be
professed in it.

7 ly, Because, though they be with others, yet (...) are not in Charity with
them; and therefore they fear they want that Peace which is required to it.

8 ly, Because it is a Presumption in us to approach it, and therefore an
humble man should abstain from it.

9 ly, Because many Good People are seldom^ or never seen at it, and therefore
they may be Good too, and have Good Company, if they keep away from it.

10 ly, Because others that are unworthy of it, are admitted to join in it.

11 ly, and Lastly, Because though they ought, and would come to the Sacrament;
yet they would not Kneel, which is the Posture appointed by the Church wherein
they are to receive it.

These are such things, as do most ordinarily hinder Good People from partaking
in this Ordinance; but indeed they ought in no case to be their hindrance from
doing their Savior, and their own Souls this Service, as will more fully
appear from treating of all the Particulars.

1 st, One Thing, that is the most general hindrance of all, and keeps back
very many from the Sacrament, who otherwise are desirous enough to partake in
it; is their thinking themselves unworthy of it, and unfit to receive it.

Now to silence this Plea, and to satisfy the minds of those that make it, so
as there may be no more cause for it; I shall observe,

1st, Their great Partiality in it; because they are not so Scrupul^^s about
neglecting, as about unworthy receiving it, though there be the same cause to
scruple it.

2ly, That every Penitent, who is resolved to leave his Sins, and has begun the
change, is really worthy; so that the thoughts of unworthiness (...) not to put
him by it.

3ly, (...) Imp^nitence, the only thing which unfits them for it, is no excuse
at (...) for their (...).

4ly, That Impenitent men, who are unworthy of it, if they understand the
danger and misery of their State, can by no means continue in it, but must
forthwith Repent and amend, and then this hindrance is gone, and they may
worthily approach to it.

1 st, I say, They show great Partiality in this Plea, because they are not so
Scrupulous about Neglecting, as about the unworthy Receiving it, though there
be the same cause to scruple it. They show all their niceness in doing what God
bids them, but none in letting of it alone; they are afraid of offending in
coming to the Sacrament, but have no Fear of giving Offense in staying away
from it: as if God had only forbid them to receive unworthily, but had no where
forbid them to absent themselves, and not receive at all.

But this, as I have already shown, is a very wrong Judgment. For God does as
straightly enjoin a Worthy, as he forbids an Unworthy Communicating. He has given
us his Command for it, and that too with such Notes and Circumstances
abovementioned, as show he lays a particular weight upon it, and highly
expects to be obeyed in it. So that if we would not bring Guilt upon our selves
by sinning against him, we must make Conscience of not coming to the Sacrament,
as well as of irreverent Treating and Profanation of it when we come.

This then is very Partial and Vnfair dealing, to be scrupulous only about the
manner of Performing this Duty, but to have no scruple at all about the
Omission of it: as if, when God Commands us to do a thing, not to do it at all,
were not as much a Fault as to do it wrong; and it were not equally
transgressed when we Neglect, as when we Profane it. And if all those, who are
full of Fear about Unworthy Receiving, would be but as Fearful of Sinful
abstaining; this equal Fear on both sides would make them diligent in seeking
satisfaction, and in carrying on the Work of Preparation: so that they might
neither offend by coming, nor by staying away, but worthily approach the Lords
Table, and be heartily welcome to it when they do.

2. Every Penitent, who is Resolved to leave his Sins, and has begun the
Change, is really worthy; so that the thoughts of unworthiness ought not to put
him by it.

He is a true Penitent, who considers of all Gods Laws, and is resolved to keep
them; and of all his own Sins, and is resolved to leave them: and so, changing
his former evil Course and Practice, becomes a New Man. And whosoever does
this, he is a fit Person, and worthy to come to the Holy Communion. For all the
particulars of worthy Receiving, are Instances of Duty, as has been observed,
and parts of a Good Man; so that every man, who turns Penitent and becomes
Good, will be endowed with all of them. Nay, if any man were to learn them,
there would be no difficulty in any thing else, if Repentance would go down
with him: So that any Person who Repents, may do every thing else which God
Requires of him. The great things expected of us at this Feast, as has been
said, are these; namely, That we give thanks for Christ's Death, and resign our
selves up to his Service, and Repent of all our Sins, and be in Love and
Charity with all Persons, and have Faith in Christ and his Merits: And all
these are easy, and create no great difficulty to a Penitent Person. For is it
not an easy thing for him to thank Christ, who verily believes he dyed for
him? And cannot he readily resign himself up to his use, who has already given
himself up to an Holy Life, which is all the use that he would make of him? And
is not he in Peace and Charity with all men, who has Repented of all his Sins,
and then surely of Malice and Vnpeaceableness among them? And does not he
believe in Christ, i. e. does not he believe those things which his Savior
Christ has declared to him, viz. That he dyed for us to purchase Terms of
Grace; and that now, for his sake, God will forgive us any Sins, when we Repent
of them, and help us by his Spirit to any Graces when we endeavor after them,
and give us Eternal Life in Heaven when we entirely obey him, but that
otherwise, than upon these Terms, he will not give us any of them; which are
those Declarations he makes to us in the Scriptures, and wherein he expects to
be trusted and believed by us: does not every Penitent man, I say, believe all
this, who is at the pains to live according to it, and Repents that he may be
pardoned, and endeavors that he may be assisted, and obeys that he may be
graciously rewarded for it? All this Faith, which is required to the Communion,
is necessary to Repentance, and is sh^wn in it; for we should not leave
Intemperance, Fraud, Malice, or any other sin that is strongly recommended to
us, unless we believed God had forbid it, and would now for Christ's sake freely
forgive, and eternally Reward those who Repent of it. And all this
Thankfulness, and Resignation, and Peace, and Charity toward all men, which
are likewise required, are not only easy after it, but are parts of it: for if
we are unthankful for Christ's Benefits, or unresigned to his use, or out of
Charity with any Persons, we have not yet Repented of all our sins, but, as to
these at least, are still Impenitent. So that where once Repentance of all our
sins is, there is or may be in us, every thing else, which God requires at this
Feast to fit us worthily to partake of it.

Thus is every true Penitent sit to eat at the Table of his Lord, and to be a
worthy Communicant. And therefore when any Persons do from their Hearts Repent
them of all their sins, and are fully purposed to lead new Lives
thence-forwards; let them not be afraid to come to the Sacrament, for they are
truly such as God accounts worthy of it. If they have not shaken hands with
their sins, indeed, but live still in them, and are ready to repeat them on the
next occasion; they will come unworthily whilst they are in that state, and not
be made the better, but the worse for it. But if they have broke loose from
them, and have been acted by Gods Fear, and led new Lives for some time; and
are still putting out more endeavors, and praying for more Grace to do this
yet more perfectly: they are the Persons whom God calls to this Feast, and may
justly expect to receive an hearty welcome at it.

Nay, if their Return to God has been so late, as that they have not yet had
time sufficient for well-doing, but only for holy purposing that they will do
well as often as they shall have occasion: yet, if out of a serious Conviction
of the detestableness of every sinful Course, they are resolved to leave it;
and after a due Consideration of every part of their Duty, they are fully, and
without all reserve resolved to practice it; I doubt not, but that this will
and purpose, before the time and opportunities for Practice come, will render
them welcome Guests, and worthy to Communicate. For what^ver Rigors afterward
came in, not from the Nature of the Sacrament it self, or the Necessity of the
thing, but only through the Discretionary Power of the Church, and the Rules of
Discipline, thus I think it is plain it did in the Apostles times. For the three
thousand Souls, whom St. Peter Converted at one Sermon, did not stay till they
had opportunities of performing; but were admitted that very day, upon their
inward change and resolution, to the Apostles Fellowship, and therein to the
Holy Sacrament, which was a part of it. They that gladly received his Word,
says St. Luke, were Baptized: and the same day there were added unto them about
three thousand Souls. And all these continued steadfastly in the Apostles
Doctrine and Fellowship, and in breaking of Bread, and in Prayers, Act. 2.41,
42. And when the Apostles went about to Convert the World, they admitted men
presently to Baptism and the Christian Worship, upon their Profession of Faith
in Christ and b^ing Penitent, without staying to see them practice what they
had promised, as appears in the Converts now mentioned, and the story of the
Act. 8.36, 37, 38.
Eunuch: and when they were admitted to the Christian Worship, they were
admitted to the Communion too, because in the Apostles Days, as I have Part 1.
Chap. 3.
shown, that was an ordinary part of it, and always went along with it.

If any Persons then have already left their sins, and do not willingly allow
themselves in any of them; if they have been striving long against them, and
are daily gaining ground, and making a more perfect conquest of them: Nay, if
they, who, since their return to God, have not had time to perform all this,
are yet fully and deliberately purposed, and without all Reserve resolved in
themselves so to do; they are the Persons whom God invites to this Feast, they
are worthy to come to it, and will be sure to meet with a kind and hearty
entertainment. God and they are fully agreed in their own Thoughts, and the
Terms of Reconciliation betwixt them are consented to on both sides: for he
proclaims Mercy upon Repentance, and they thankfully accept it; he offers to
return into Favor with every Sinner that will amend his Faults, and they are
glad of the joyful News, and fully resolve to do it. And since they are both
agreed upon the thing, what should hinder them from coming to the Sacrament,
which he has appointed for this very end, that therein they may give their
express consent to this Agreement, and mutually make this Declaration.

Thus is every man, who has left his sins, and begun to lead a New Life; or,
who is fully purposed in his own mind, and absolutely intends so to do; a
welcome Guest at this Feast, and worthy to Communicate: so that no
apprehensions of unworthiness ought to put him by it.

And as for those who neither have left all their sins, nor are determined in
their own hearts, and wholly bent upon it; they are plainly Impenitent, and
thereupon most unworthy to Communicate. But then,

3 ly, That Impenitence, which unfits them for it, is no excuse at all for the
neglect of it.

Impenitence will excuse a man in no act, but is it self a very great
aggravation of it. It is no extenuating Plea, but a Damning Fault; so that no
man must ever hope to escape the easier after he has omitted any Duty, by
giving it as the Reason for it. When God calls us to the Sacrament, to promise
him that we will amend our Faults, and lead new Lives thenceforward; if we
return Answer, that we come not because we are Impenitent, that is as much as
to say, we come not as he bids because we will not, which is certainly the
worst plea that ever was made for any offense, and can never render his Case
better, but much worse that uses it.

As for those then, who keep away because they are Impenitent; they are left
without all Plea, and have no excuse at all to make for their not coming to the
Holy Sacrament. The only thing that can stand them in stead, either as to it or
as to any thing else, is their Repentance and Amendment; which they will not
delay, if they consider in how great need they stand of it. For, as I said,

4 ly, Impenitent men, who are unworthy of it, if they understand the danger
and misery of their state, can by no means continue in it, but must forthwith
Repent and Amend, and then this hindrance is gone, and they may worthily
approach to it.

If they understand the danger and misery of their state, I say, they cannot
continue in it. For so long as they remain Impenitent in many, or in any one
known sin, they are not only unfit to receive the Sacrament, as I have shown,
but also to say their Prayers, to give Thanks, to make Vows, or to have any
thing to do with God in any other part of Religious Worship and Service. They
are shut out from all benefits of Religion, they have no Salvation by Christ,
nor any hopes of Heaven: if they happen to dye suddenly whilst they are in this
state, or are called away before the work of Reformation is finished, (as it is
greatly to be feared they may, if they put it off for the present, and as in
all likelihood they will if they delay it till their Deathbed, at which time
it is a very rare thing for any man to go through with it) they will go to Hell,
there to be tormented with the insupportable Anguish of a wounded Conscience,
and unsatisfied Appetites, and a Raging Fire, and all the Terrors and
Disconsolation of Darkness, and the utmost malice of Devils and Damned Spirits,
and the highest Shame and Confusion of Face; all which they must undergo
without any Eye to Pity, or Friend to Comfort them, or any one to refresh them,
or any Abatement, or Intermission, for evermore: And this is a state of such
Horror and Astonishment, as no man, that looks upon it, can abide in: it is a
condition of such extreme danger, as no one in his Wits can willingly endure.
So that if any of those, who are Impenitent, will but be at the pains to lay to
heart, and consider of the sadness of their state; they can by no means persist
in it, but will run with haste to Repent, and instantly set about the amendment
of their ways, that so they may be delivered from it.

And as soon as ever they do so, this hindrance is gone, and they are worthy to
come to the Holy Communion. For that which fits us for it, is not an high Pitch
and Perfection in saving Virtues, or Ecstatick Degrees and Transports in
Devotion, as I have shown; but such true Repentance and change of Life, either
in Deed, or at least in Will and Purpose, as makes us acceptable and honest
Christians; so that whatever we were before, whilst we continued impenitently
wicked, we are meet Partakers of this Holy Feast, now we have Repented, and are
fully resolved to become Obedient, and need not scrupulously draw back, but
come to it gladly when we are called, and expect a Friendly welcome when we do.

And thus I have considered this great, and most common plea, whereby so many
are kept back from the Holy Sacrament, viz. their thinking themselves unworthy
of it, and unfit to receive it; and shown plainly that no ill man can be
excused, and that no good man ought to be hindered by it. And the Result of it
is this. If any Person tells me he cannot come to this Feast, because he is
unworthy to join in it: I must tell him again, That he must not only be afraid
of unworthy coming to it, but also of unworthy abstaining from it; and that
unless he is impenitent, and still unresolved to leave all his Sins, he is
worthy of it; and that if such Impenitence is the cause of his not coming, it
is no excuse for it; and that he must consider of the danger and misery of that
state, and so Repent and get out of it; and when once that is done he will be
worthy, since every Penitent is welcome to it. If he is truly Penitent, he is
worthy; and if he has not Repented yet, he must instantly Repent that he may be
worthy; and then let him not hold off from this Heavenly Banquet, but
cheerfully approach to it when he is invited.

2 ly, Others, who cannot positively say they are unworthy of it, are yet kept
back from the Holy Sacrament, because of the great danger of unworthy
Communicating, Damnation being said to be eaten in it, which seems to make
abstaining from it the safer side. He that eats and drinks unworthily, says St.
Paul, eats and drinks Damnation to himself, 1 Cor. 11.29.

Now in Answer to this, I shall observe, that by Damnation is meant,

1. A Damning sin, which is deadly to any man till he Repent of it; and such
are both unworthy eating, and sinful abstaining, so that they are equal as to
that Point.

2. Temporal Death and Punishments, which were inflicted on the Corinthians for
their Intemperance at this Feast, and other Disorders which were peculiar to
those times, and are not usual now in ours; so that the Fear of them need not
discourage us from it.

1 st, I say, By eating his own Damnation, the Apostle means not that he shall
inevitably be damned for it; but only that he commits a Damning Sin, which will
prove deadly to him unless he Repent of it: and this is true, not only of
unworthy eating, but also of sinful abstaining, so that they are equal as to
that Point.

He means not, I say, that he shall inevitably be Damned for it. And this is
plain, because for Christ's sake, God has promised to forgive us all our sins
upon Repentance, and therefore this of unworthy receiving among the rest. Nay,
as for this their unworthy eating, the Apostle tells the Corinthians in that
very place, that when they are Judged or Condemned for it, it is not to consign
them to, but to deliver them from Eternal Torment. When we are Judged, says he,
or Condemned for this Fault, i. e. to be sick and weak, which God inflicted
because of it; we are not in Anger Punished, but in Mercy Chastned of the Lord
by present Sufferings, that we should not at the last day be Condemned with the
World to Eternal. 1 Cor. 11.30, 31.

But only that he commits a So St. Chrysostom. understands it. Vid. Chrysostom. in v.
32.34.
Damning Sin, which will prove deadly to him, unless he Repent of it. He that
eats this Bread, and drinks this Cup unworthily, says he, shall be guilty of
the Body and Blood of the Lord. i. e. Unless his Repentance, that Gospel Remedy
for all sin, prevents it, he shall be liable to be punished, not only for an
abuse in Meat and Drink, as if it were only Common Food; but for violating and
profaning the Body and Blood of Christ, which he should have discerned in it.
1 Cor. 11.27, 29.

And this is true, not only of unworthy eating, but also of sinful abstaining
from it. For that our Lord has expressly forbidden, as I have shown, and that
too in such sort as shows he lays a great weight upon it; so that we most
highly offend him in it, and cannot expect to regain his Favor till we Repent
and Amend it; and therefore they are both equal as to that Point. We shall be
Condemned, without Amendment, for unworthy eating, and so we shall too for
sinful abstaining; and therefore if the Fear of Damnation be of Force with us,
it must keep us off from both of them, and neither suffer us to neglect this
Feast, nor to profane it, but engage us to come to it worthily, i. e. with
Penitent Hearts, whenever we are called thereto.

2 ly, By Damnation the Apostle means Temporal Death and Punishments, which God
did then inflict on unworthy Communicants. And this was not for all
unworthiness, but particularly for their Intemperance at this Feast, and other
Disorders which were peculiar to th^se Times, and are not usual now in ours: so
that the Fear of them need not discourage us from it.

By Damnation, I say, he means Temporal Death and Punishments, which God did
then inflict on unworthy Communicants. This he plainly intimates, when he sets
down weakness, and sickness, and death, as the Penalties, whereto they were
Condemned for their unworthy usage. He that eats and drinks unworthily, says
he, eats and drinks Damnation to himself, whereof you have many sad Examples
now in Corinth, for for this very Cause of unworthy eatting, many now are weak
and sickly among you, and many sleep, 1 Cor. 11.29, 30.

And this God inflicted, not for all unworthiness, but particularly for some
high and heinous Disorders, such as their open Schisms, and gross Intemperance
crept in by occasion of their Love Feasts, which Prophanations were peculiar to
those times, and are not now usual, or any where to be seen in ours.

They came to the Sacrament in open Schisms, not eating all together when they
met in the same house, but Scandalously dividing into f^ctious Clans, and
separate Tables: When ye come together in the Church, and meet all in one
place, says the Apostle, I hear there be (...).
Schisms or Divisions among you, or that you bandy in Parties, and do not meet
all as one Body, 1 Cor. 11.18, 20.

They came to it also in a most scandalous Excess and gross Intemperance, which
Vice, though so confessedly loathsome in all other places, had yet, by occasion
of their Love Feasts, crept into this most solemn part of the Christian Worship
and Service. St. Jude seems to charge the Gnostics, those Sensual and
Luxurious Persons, with some such Fault. They are spots, says he, in your
Feasts of Charity, when they Feast with you, feeding themselves without Fear,
i. e. so freely, as shows they have no Fear of God, or of the Solemnity and
Religion of the Feast, Jude 12. And so does St. Peter more plainly in his
Description of the same men, 2 Pet. 2. They count it pleasure to riot in the
day time, says he, Spots they are and Blemishes, sporting themselves, or being
(...).
Luxurious with their own (...).
Deceivings, as we read it; but in some Manuscripts of greatest Authority,
particularly the Alexandrian, with which agrees the Translation of the It reads
Deliciis affluentes, not Fraudibus.
Vulgar Latin, it is being Luxurious in their (...).
Feasts of Charity when they Feast with you, v. 13. And with a like excess
Socrates charges the Egyptians a good while afterward. For (...). Sec. Hist.
Eccles. l. 5. c. 22. p. Ed. Val. 287.
they, says he, Communicate at Even after they are full fed, and have glutted
themselves at their Love-Feast with all the Varieties of a choice Banquet. And
because the Love Feasts minister'd occasion for such excess, and made way for
several abuses; they came in time to be wholly laid aside in Communions: and to
prevent that Intemperance which they had introduced, it was ordered generally
that men should receive Fasting, contrary to what our Lord did at first, which
was ratified by a Ut Sacramenta Altaris nonnisi a jejunis hominibus
celebrentur, excepto uno Die anniversario, quo coena Domini celebratur. Council.
Carth. 3. Can. 29. apud Bin. Vol. prim. Council. p. 711.
Decree in the Third Council of Carthage held near 400 years after the Birth of
our Savior Christ.

Now this Intemperance, which had crept into the Love Feasts, and so mixed with
the Holy Sacrament which always went along with them, was another most shameful
offense, which St. Paul reproved in the Corinthian Communions. They did not
only change this Ordinance of Union into a Factious meeting, by falling into
separate Gangs and Parties when they came to it: but also turned this Pure and
Holy Treat into a drunken Club, and a Riotous entertainment. In your eating,
says he, every one as he comes sooner, takes before other his own Supper, and
one, being poor, is hungry, through the smallness of his Provisions, and
another, being Rich, is Drunken through the excess of his, 1 Cor. 11.21. And
upon this Schismatical and intemperate eating, he lays the danger of that
Judgment or Condemnation, which God was wont in those days to inflict on them.
If any man pretend hunger, says he, for this Greediness and Intemperance, let
him eat at home, that so ye come not together at the Lords Supper, as now ye
do, to Condemnation* v. 34.

Now these scandalous Irregularities, but especially this Intemperance at the
Lords Table, for which God was so (...) upon the Corinthians, is no Crime in
the Communicants of our Days, when among all the Unworthy Receivers, none are
so by reason of excess; but was peculiar to theirs, when with the Sacrament
they always joined their Love Feasts, that were liable to be ab^sed to Gluttony
and Drunkenness. And as the Fault, so also the Punishment took place only among
them, but is not usual now with us, who do not see our unworthy Communicants
smitten by the hand of God, and struck down by Miracle into Death or Diseases.
And therefore the apprehension of this Judgment need not at all discourage us
from the Holy Sacrament; since, from our observation of the World, we have no
reason to expect, that, if indeed we come unworthily, we shall fall under it.

As for this Damnation then, which the Apostl. charges on ^^^^rthy eating, it
either signifies a (...) S^n, and that is true of willful abstai^^^g as well as
of unworthy receiving; or a Temporal Punishment miraculously inflicted for
their Drunkenness and Intemperance, wherewith at that time they polluted and
profaned it, which was a thing peculiar to those days, and is not now derived
down to ours, so that we have no just cause to be deterred by it.

Thus it is, if really we should come unworthily to the Sacrament, we only
commit a Damning sin, as we should do by willful abstaining, which will be
forgiven us afterward upon the same Terms whereon God forgives us all other
sins, i. e. our Repenting of it, and amending it. But if we are truly Penitent,
and have broke off all our evil ways, intending fully to lead new Lives
thenceforwards; then we may assure our selves that we are worthy and welcome
Guests, and are not concerned in this Damnation threatened to unworthy
Communicants at all.

CHAP. II. Of three other Hindrances from Receiving.
The Contents.
A Third Hindrance is, because therein they are to promise concerning every
sin, that they will no more commit it; which Promise some dare not make,
because they fear they shall not keep it. If this be sufficient to hinder any
man from the Communion, it ought also to hinder him from Prayers, and being
Baptized a Christian. But it must not hinder men from any of them. 1. Let them
Promise this Amendment, and keep it, and then the Doubt is answered. They ought
to make it. And by Gods Grace they may perform it, if they have a mind to it.
2. If after some time they happen to break it in any Instance, they have the
Benefit of Repentance afterward. A Fourth Hindrance is the great difficulty
supposed to be in it, and want of time and leisure to prepare for it. This lies
not more against the Communion, than against an Holy Life and all Religion. But
it must not put us by from any of them. For, 1. If it required all that time
and pains which is supposed, that would be no excuse for any of us to neglect
it. To true Penitents, the time and pains is not so great as is imagined. It
requires more of ill men, but less of Good, who may prepare for it in a less
time, yea, if used to Self-examinations, upon a few minutes warning. 3. The
poorest and most employed have time sufficient if they would use it to that
end: and where they have fewer helps, and less time, the less preparation is
accepted of them. A Fifth Hindrance is, because they see others, or have found
themselves to be no better by it; so that it is not worth their while to fit
themselves for it. If this have any Force, it is not to be restrained to the
Sacrament, but holds stronger against Prayers, and other parts of Worship. But
it ought not to hinder any Persons. For, 1. Where it is true there is no excuse
from it. 2. In all good men's case it is false, for they are really better by it;
many by improving in their goodness, all by continuing in it, for which it is
richly worth their pains to come to it. 3. Where they are not bettered at all,
or not so much as might be expected; that is purely through their own Fault, in
not using the means of improving by it: so let them amend that, and this
Hindrance is removed.

A Third thing that keeps back several from the Sacrament, though both in Duty
to their Savior, and in tenderness to their own Souls, they are most straightly
bound to frequent it, is because therein they are to promise concerning every
sin they find themselves guilty of, that they will no more commit it; and this
Promise they dare not make, because they fear they shall not keep it.

Now as for these Persons, I would desire them to consider, that if this be a
sufficient hindrance to keep them from this Ordinance, it is equally so to keep
them from their Prayers, nay, from their very Baptism, and being enrolled
Christians. For God will not hear their Prayers for the Pardon of any Sin till
they Repent of it, and resolve within themselves and make him Faithful promises
that they will never more commit it. Nor did he admit them to Baptism, to be
listed Members of his Church, till they had Renounced the Devil and all his
works, with all the sinful Lusts of the Flesh, and promised to keep his Holy
Will and Commandments, and walk in the same all the days of of their Lives. If
we stick at these Promises then, we must scruple saying our Prayers, and boggle
at all Religion, and, if we were yet unbaptized, upon this account refuse our
Baptism, since therein we did, and ought to make as large and express promises
of leaving all our sins, as we can, or are required to make in the Holy
Communion.

But to those, who are afraid of the Holy Sacrament upon this account, I have
these two things to add.

1. Promise this Amendment, and keep it, and then the Doubt is answered.

2. Though after some time they should forget themselves, and break it in some
instance, yet still have they the benefit of Repentance afterward.

1 st, I would advise them to promise this amendment, and keep it, and then the
Doubt is answered. When the Objection against promising, is only the danger of
performing, when they both can and ought to perform: it is an objection that
lies only against themselves, in a suspicion that they will be wanting to their
own bounden Duty and Service; and that is better removed by their care
faithfully to discharge it, than by any thing that I can say to it. They ought
to perform it, and if they will they may do it; and therefore let them be
careful to do that, and this difficulty is ended.

They ought, I say, to perform this Amendment which they promise to Almighty
God, and leave every sin which formerly they have committed. God will not
forgive us any Fault, whilst we persist Impenitent, and continue to repeat it;
but requires first, on our part, that we forsake and amend it. Sin no more,
says our Savior to the Woman taken in Adultery, and then will not I condemn
thee, Joh. 8.4.11. And let the Wicked man forsake his ways, says God by Isaiah,
and return unto the Lord, and then he will have mercy upon him, and abundantly
pardon. Is. 5.7. It is no indifferent matter that is left to our own choice,
whether we will leave our sins, or no; but the thing must of necessity be done,
if ever we hope to appease God, or go to Heaven: so that we must not be less
forward to promise, for that is our Duty, but more careful to perform.

And as they ought to perform this amendment, which they promise to Almighty
God; so by his Grace they may perform it, if they will and have a mind to it.
When at this Feast they say they will never commit this, or that sin any more,
as God has required; they say not that they will never be surprised into it,
but that they will never act it wilfully, i. e. when they see and are aware of
it; or, if at any time they do, that they will not persist in it, but amend it,
Repentance always going along from the beginning to the end of the Gospel
Covenant. And this by Gods help they all may do, if they make it their serious
business, and lay out their utmost care and pains upon it. For when a man's
Conscience tells him that the thing is sinful which he is about to act, or at
least he could readily see it, if he would direct his Eye to it: he need not go
on unless he will, but, if he please, may instantly turn away from it. This, I
say, he may do; for if he will not be wanting to himself, God will not be
wanting to him in it, but enable him effectually to abstain from it when he
duly endeavors it. If once we are careful to work out our own Salvation* St.
Paul assures us that he will work in us both to will, and to do, Phil. 2.12,
13. To him that has, i. e. imploys what he has, our Savior promises that
more shall still be given, Mat. 25.29: and elsewhere again, God will give the
Holy Spirit to those that ask him. Luc. 11.13.

And since they may p^rform this Am^ndment if they will, and ou^ht to perform
it if ever they hope to be accepted; let them but be careful so to do, and then
this hindrance will give them no more trouble, but be quite removed. They will
have no cause to be slow to promise, what they will be thus honestly careful to
perform.

2. Though afterward they should forget themselves, and break this promise in
some instance; yet is not their case desperate thereupon, but they have still
the benefit of Repentance afterward.

Indeed, if they break it as soon as ever they have made it, and run constant
changes in sinning and repenting, performing this time, and transgressing it
the next: that Repentance will be of no avail with God, because it rests only
in fair Words and Promises, or at best in some faint attempts, without any real
Reformation and Amendment. Nay, if they fall a Second time into some sins,
which lay waste the Conscience, such as Murder, Adultery, willful Perjury, and
the like, which few good men can ever incur at first, and fewer can afterward
Repeat, when once they have smarted for it: it may still give cause why the
sufficiency of their Repentance should be questioned. But if in sins which are
more ordinarily incurred, as Discontent, Pride, Revenge, Backbiting, Passion,
etc. which are generally meant by those who are kept back by this Impediment:
If after they have promised to leave these sins, I say, they go on for some due
time to make good their word, and avoid the fault in several opportunities that
lead them to it, but at last happen to forget themselves, and break it in some
Instance: yet does not that null their former Repentance, or make their Case
desperate thereupon; but they have still the benefit of Repentance afterward,
and by amending what they have done amiss, may be perfectly r^stored and made
whole again. For God will pardon us upon our Repentance, not only Once, or a
Second time, but as often as there is occasion. So that if after we have
promised in the Sacrament, that we will never more be guilty of any particular
sin, we yield to it at length, and are anew overcome: let us but Repent of
that Breach, and fully resolve against it a second time, and then we are made
whole as we were in our former station.

As for this Hindrance then, whereby some are kept back from the Sacrament,
viz. Their promising therein concerning every Fault that they will no more
commit it, which promise they d^^e not make, because they are afraid they shall
not keep it: it need not stick with them, nor ought to hinder any man that
pretends to Religion. For let them promise this Amendment, and keep it, and
then the Doubt is answered. Or, if after they have kept it for some time, they
happen to fail upon some occasion; let them Repent of that Breach, and make new
Promises and Resolutions, and then they are whole again. And all this has
nothing in it that can be avoided, or ought to be feared, but is all necessary
and desirable to be done: for it is their Duty thus to promise, and their Duty
to perform, and their great Privilege, that, if they fail in any instance
afterward, upon repeating their Repentance they shall receive a Pardon. It is
what every man must do, not only to be a worthy Communicant, but to be a
Christian. For the same things are promised in Prayer, and in Holy Baptism: so
that if any man draw back from them, and sticks to promise them; he must not
pray to God, nor pretend to Religion, nor, were he to choose again, be baptized
into the Christian Profession.

4. A Fourth thing which keeps back several from the Sacrament, Is the great
difficulty they apprehend to be in a worthy Receiving of it, and their want of
time and leisure to prepare for it. They fancy it is a very hard thing for any
man worthily to Communicate; and since it is hard, in must needs require much
time and application to prepare themselves for it: and as for their parts, they
have little leisure from their business, and are not made to master
Difficulties; so that they must be content, and hope they shall be excused, if
they abstain from it.

This objection many are ready to make against coming to the Communion. But
every Christian will be much ashamed of it, and slow to urge it a second time,
when once he considers, that it lies not more against it, than against an H^ly
Life, and all Religion. For all the particulars of worthy Communicating, as I
have shown, are equally parts of indispensable Duty, and a good man. God has
required no more Virtues in us at the time of Receiving, than he requires at
all other times to render us acceptable Christians, to fit us to say our
Prayers, or to give us any hopes of Eternal Happiness. So that if any man says
the work of the Sacrament is over-hard, and therefore he is not willing, or
wants time to fit himself for Receiving: he may as well say he is not willing,
or wants time to be a Christian, or to go to Heaven, and upon that Plea may
with equal Reason bid adieu to all Religion.

But to answer this more particularly, I must observe to them,

1. That if it did really require all this time and pains to prepare for it,
yet would that be no sufficient Reason or Excuse for any of us to Neglect it.

2. That to all true Penitents it is not so difficult, nor requires so much
time as is imagined; so that they have not so much as this Discouragement to
make them backward in it.

3. That all, even the poorest and most employed, have time sufficient, if they
will use it to that end; and that of those, who have less leisure and
abilities, so as that they cannot fit themselves in great Degrees, God expects
the less preparation, and accepts it at their hands.

1. I say, If it did really require all this time and pains to prepare for it
which is supposed, yet would that be no sufficient Reason or Excuse for any of
us to negl^ct it. For when God bids us do a thing, can any man think it a good
excuse to say, I would if it were not troublesome, or long a doing? Must we
perform those things only at his Command, which are easy, and soon over; but
neglect all others, which employ more care and pains, and require to be
attended longer? How we may like such Masters, I will not say, but I am sure
God will entertain no such Servants as will pick and choose with his Commands,
and obey them no further than their own ease and occasions will suffer them.
No, he expects we should do him Service, though it be with difficulty and loss
to our own selves. And this in all Reason he may very well require of us,
because we our selves, who can plead no such Deserts, nor make any such
Recompenses as he propose, do all look for it from our Servants, in any
business they are to do for us. For if we set them to any work, we shall think
it a very odd Answer, if they tell us they would do it for us, but that they
are unwilling to be at so much pains, or to spare so much time as it requires.

Although a worthy Communicating then would require much time and pains to
prepare for it, yet would not that be a just excuse for any Person to Neglect
it. For since God Commands it, nay, Commands it urgently, and lays a great
weight upon it; we are bound in all Duty to perform it, though it cost us both
time and pains so to do.

But,

2. To all true Penitents it is not so difficult, nor requires so much time as
is imagined; so that they have not so much as this Discouragement to make them
backward in it.

The Difficulty of worthy Receiving lies not in giving Christ Thanks, or
believing the Scripture and all its Promises, as I have shown; but only in
Repenting of all our Sins. And this, indeed, has more difficulty in it, and
requires more time to ill men, who are held Captives by them; but not very much
to good, who are already set free, and have broke off from them.

1. I say, Repentance of all their Sins, and amendment of their Lives, has more
difficulty in it, and requires more time to ill men. For they have many Lusts
to pare off which are very dear to them, and many things to set straight, which
cannot all be done upon the sudden. When they come to enter upon a good Life,
who as yet are strangers to it; they must consider particularly of all Gods
Laws which are the Rule of it, and examine their own Hearts at every one, to
see against which of them they have offended, and there make their particular
purposes, and full resolutions of Amendment. They must spend time and pains
upon this examination, to bring them to a Penitent purpose, and a deliberate
well-weighed Resolution: and when that is done, it will cost them more time and
pains still in frequent Trials, as in the course of Life and Business they meet
with opportunities to practice and perform what they have resolved upon. For,
when upon a strict Review of their whole Lives they find they have several sins
to amend, they must not think, after they have resolved against them, to get
perfectly quit of them on the sudden. But they must withstand the Temptations
to them once and again, and pass through frequent Trials, and exercise
themselves in many Conflicts, before they will have got the Conquest, and be
indeed reformed from them.

Thus will it require both much time and pains for an ill man to become good,
and not only to Resolve that he will amend all his ways, but to put in practice
and perf^^m it too.

It Is true, indeed, I cannot say the actual amendment of every Fault, and the
performance as well as purpose of obeying in every Commandment, is necessary to
a worthy Communicant. For a full Resolution of amendment, without staying for
time and opportunities to fulfill it, is sufficient to fit us for this Feast;
as I have observed it did in the Apostles Days, when, upon their first
Conversion and becoming Penitent, before they had time to perform what they had
promised, men were admitted to the Sacrament, as to other parts of Worship. So
that the Repentance required of us to a worthy Communion, will not take up all
that time, which is necessary to amend a whole Life, and to practice all the
Duties of a Good man.

But although it will not call for all that time which is necessary to a New
Life and Practice; yet will it require all that, which is necessary to beget
and actuate a New Heart and Purpose: and that will be much more in ^ll, than it
will be in good men. For when ill men examine themselves, to find out all their
Sins, that they may resolve against them: they have many more sins to Repent
of, and employ their minds upon; and are more Strangers to their own Hearts and
Lives, having never observed or looked into them, and so need the greater
Labor of Recollection; and more hardness of Heart and coldness of Spirit, so
that they do not so easily renounce them, nor can so readily and fully Resolve
against them, when they have discovered them, as good men can.

A^ for this Repentance of all their sins then, which consists not in an actual
amendment of them, but in full Purposes and Resol^tions never more to commit
them, which is sufficient to a worthy Communion: it has more difficulty in it,
and requires more time than ordinary to ill men who are held Captives by them.

But,

2. It does not require very much to good, who are set free, and have broke off
from them.

The great thing which they have to do, is to examine what are their Faults,
and to find out their own miscarriages: for if once they discover them, they
are so habitually set to amend every thing that is amiss, that they will
quickly resolve against them. And this discovery they will make much easier,
and sooner, than ill men can. For their Faults being fewer, are sooner run
over; and their Consciences being tender, and used to observe them, they do
better remember them, and are the readier, when they are asked, to give in an
Information of them, than the others are. Indeed, if they do not accustom
themselves to Self-examinations, they will find the more to do, and need a
longer time, when they come to them: But if they are much versed in them,
especially if they take an account of the Day past every Evening; having daily
discovered and acknowledged all their Faults, they will bear them still in
mind, and have an habitual sense of them; and so be able at any time, to tell
what acts they are to promise and resolve upon, at a few minutes warning; as we
may well suppose they did in the first times, when they Communicated every day,
and, under the pressing wants and distractions they conflicted with, could not
set apart whole hours for preparation.

Thus is the work of Preparation for the Communion, not so difficult to true
Penitents, nor requiring so much time as some have imagined. It may cost them
some time whilst they employ their Thoughts in actuating their Love, and
Thankfulness, and other Graces, before they come; but if they have little
leisure for it, this need not be long a doing; for most good minds are so
inclined and habituated to these Tempers, that they can express them, and that
too, answerable to the Degree of Warmth their Complexion* allows in other
things, with Fervor and Intension, upon any warning. But the great Work, which
may seem to have length and trouble in it, is Repentance of all their Sins; and
this will not be either long, or troublesome to them. For the only thing that
will give them trouble in it, is the Work of Self-Examination, to find out what
their sins have been; their Hearts being so good, that they can quickly resolve
against them, when once they have discovered them: and this they will not find
tedious, but may dispatch in convenient time. If they were yet to begin the
work of Reformation, indeed, they must spend more hours, or days upon it, and
be held to it so long, till they could run over all Gods Laws, and all their
own actions, and work themselves up into firm purposes of amendment at every
thing they find was done amiss through their whole Lives, which would be a more
tedious and painful business: So that when ill men come to prepare themselves
for the Sacrament, they must set out more time for it, and expect to pass
through greater hardship. But then they must remember not to charge this upon
the Communion, but upon a New Life and Regeneration; it not being for the work
of worthy Receiving, but of Repentance and Reformation, which they must go
through with whether they receive or no, that all this time is spent, and hard
pains taken. But if they have begun to Repent long ago, and have endeavored
carefully to become good men; a much less time will serve their turn: for they
will be able presently to resolve against a^y Fault they see, being habitually
set against all already; and also see all they have to repent of, upon a small
Examination. If they have not been used to frequent Examinations, so as to have
all their sins at hand before them; it may hold them a longer time: but if they
have examined often, especially if they have reviewed and acknowledged every
Night their every Days Transgressions, they will be able to do it at a few
minutes warning. So that if they should happen at any time to be surprised with
a Communion, which it is not decent for any good Christian to s^inch from,
though all would desire a more solemn preparation where they have time for it,
yet can they fit themselves for it in that strait, and know what sins to
resolve against upon a few moments Recollection.

But besides that it would be no sufficient excuse to any Person to neglect the
Holy Sacrament, though it required all that time and pains which is supposed;
and that to all true Penitents it is not so tedious, or difficult as some have
imagined, so that they have not so much as this discouragement in make them
backward in it: I proceed now,

3. To show that all, even the poorest and m^st impl^yed, have (...)
sufficient, if they will (...) it (...) that end; and that ^f those who have
less leisure and opp^rtunities, so as that they (...) fit themselves in great
Degrees, God expects the less preparation, and (...).

(...) employed, have time sufficient to prepare for the Communion, if they
would use it to that end.

That which makes them apprehend they have no time for it, is a persuasion,
that all preparation must be carried on in the Closet, when they are sequestered
from all worldly Affairs, and have set themselves apart for Devotion and
Religious Meditations. And for doing this, they who are full of business, who
must labor all the day long, till they have quite tired themselves, for
maintenance, or whose time is not at their own disposal, but at the will of
others, complain they have no leisure, or vacant time to spare.

But now, besides that no persons must pretend they can find no time for set
Devotions, and separate Thoughts, since the most employed of all can find it
sometimes to throw away on Vanity and Diversions: this conceit, that all
preparation ought to be carried on in the Closet, is a mistake; for, when any
Persons are so minded, it may go on whilst they are held at work, and engaged
in the course of their employment. For the great business of preparation, as
has been shown, lies in examining our own hearts, to find out what our sins
have been, and in resolving particularly against them. And this a man may carry
on in any place, where he has Liberty for thought and Recollection. He may call
to mind his own ways as he is on a Journey, or busy at his work; for thought
is free at all times, and every man may consider and reflect whenever he has
a mind to it. And so long as he can find time for this, he has time enough to
prepare himself, let his Condition be as Dependant, or his time as much taken
up, as it will.

And as for for those, who have less leisure and opportunities, so as that they
cannot fit themselves in great Degrees, God expects the less preparation, I
say, and accepts it at their hands.

Thus much he expects of every man, and that all may and must perform, viz.
That they examine themselves about all those things which they know are sinful,
and, wheresoever they find themselves Guilty, resolve steadfastly to do so no
more, and humbly ask his Pardon; and that they have an affectionate thankful
sense of Christ's Death, and of all that he has done for them. But as for the
Degrees of these Duties, how high they shall be in their Detestation of every
Sin, how ardent in their Acts of Resignation, how Passionate in their Love and
Thankful Affection; though he is well pleased with it where he finds it, yet he
exacts not the utmost height, as I have Part 1. Chap. 3.
observed, in those who are fitter for it; nor looks for more in any, than that
every man return according to the opportunities which he has given him. Some
have Naturally much flame, and great vehemence in all their Passions, and much
time in their own hands, and much help from good and inlivening books, or great
quickness of Wit and parts, which can readily and advantageously represent to
their own minds the motives to these Dispositions; and these Persons are able
to imprint an higher measure of them, and affect their own Hearts more deeply
with them, than others of cooler tempers, and less leisure, and fewer helps,
and slower understandings, can ever hope to do. But when men have less time and
abilities for them, God expects the less perfection and Degrees of them. For in
these Cases, his Rule is this: Unto whomsoever much is given, of him shall much
be required; and to whom men have committed much, of him they will ask the
more. Luc. 12.48.

And thus I have considered this Fourth Hindrance, and sh^wn that the
difficulty of the thing, or the want of time, can be no just Reason or Excuse
to keep any man from Receiving. And the sum of what I have suggested in this
bu^iness, is this: If it requir^d (...), that is no sufficient ground for any
person to neglect it; because when God commands us to do a thing, as he has
done most strictly in this Case, we must be willing to spend both time and
pains upon it. But in reality, it is neither so painful nor tedious to good
men, as is ordinarily imagined. It costs more, indeed, to ill men, because they
have more faults to examine after, and more backwardness to resolve against
them; but this expense of time and pains they must not impute to the Communion,
but to an Holy Life and Regeneration, which, whether they Communicate or no, if
they Love their own Souls they must labor and manfully endeavor in. But as
for Good men, their great work is Self-examination, it being an easy thing for
them to resolve against any sins when they see them; and this will not be long
or tedious to them: nay, if they have been used to examine often, and to call
themselves to an account every evening, if necessity so requires, it may be
dispatched at a few minutes warning. It is a thing which all men, even the poor
and most employed, may find time for, yea, when there is need of it, without
hindering or neglecting any other affair, if they are careful to use it to that
end; and when they have less leisure and abilities, so as that they cannot fit
themselves in great Degrees, there God expects the less preparation, and
accepts it at their hands. To Communicate, is a most necessary Duty, which will
not be excused; and a most equitable and easy one, which need not be declined;
so that no pretense of hardship, or of want of time ought ever to be urged, or
can ever be allowed to put us by it.

5. A Fifth thing, which hinders several from the Sacrament, and makes them
carelessly to neglect it, is because they see others, or have found themselves
to be no whit bettered or improved by it; so that it is not worth their while to
fit themselves for it.

This is a plea, which some, who are pretty constant in other Ordinances, are
wont to make for their great neglect of this. But if there be any weight in it,
they are much to blame in restraining it to the Sacrament, since it would hold
much stronger for their not coming to Prayers, or the public Assemblies, or
other parts of Worship. For these same persons that make this Complaint, of
being little bettered or improved by it, could say the same of them too if they
had a mind to it. For they are much more frequent in reading the Scriptures, in
saying their Prayers, in hearing Sermons, and in joining in all other parts of
Worship at the Public Assemblies, than they are at this Ordinance: so that if
they are no ways bettered under the means of Grace, that unfruitfulness ought
least of all to be charged upon the Sacrament, for alas! it is but very seldom
they are seen at it, but much more upon praying to God, and hearing the Word,
and other parts of Worship. And therefore if unfruitfulness under any Ordinance
be a Reason, not of using greater care in it that they may get profit by it,
but of a negligent abstaining from it; they are to blame in confining it to the
Communion, since it would serve much more to excuse them from Prayers, and
Sermons, and all other parts of Worship and Devotion.

But that none may be hindered by it from coming to this Feast, I shall observe,

1. That where it is true, there is no excuse from it.

2. That in all good men's case it is false, for they are really better by it.

3. That where they are not bettered at all, or not so much as might be
expected, that is purely through their own Fault, and they must mend it.

1. Where it is true that they are no better by the Sacrament, that is no excuse
for their neglect of it. And this is plain, because we are not bound to
Communicate only in Interest, so as when that ceases we might be free from it;
but in Duty too, our Lord having most expressly required and enjoined it. Had we
nothing but our own benefit to engage us to it, then indeed it would be a good
Reason not to trouble our selves with it, when we found we were no better by
it. But God has made it our Duty to come, as we have seen, by an express and
indispensable Commandment: And when there is Gods Law and Precept in the Case,
it is an ill excuse for any man who neglects it, to say he did so, because he
could not hope to be a gainer by it. If we refuse to do what he bids us, when
it brings in no Advantage to our selves, we cast off his Service, and begin to
be acted by other Principles; we do as good as tell him that we will do all
things out of Interest, and with an eye to our own profit, but nothing for his
Pleasure, and in obedience to his Commandment; which is as much as to say, we
will only serve our selves, but not serve him at all.

2. In all Good men's case it is false, for they are really made better by it.

They are not better perhaps in what they expect, because their expectations
are not right, but they look for such benefits from the Sacrament, as God never
intended by it; nay, such, it may be, as in this world he never means to convey
to them, either by it, or by any other Instrument. And thus it is when men
hope, after they have Communicated, to be filled with sensible joys and
transports, to be absolutely assured of Gods special Love and Kindness, to be
freed thenceforward from all further Fears and Doubtings, to have a removal of
some troublesome temptations, to get quit of all Thoughts and Desires, and the
very first motions to ill things, of all dullness and distraction in their
Devotions, of all sinful surprises and involuntary escapes, and such like.
These are benefits, which although God out of his abundant Grace and Indulgence
may sometimes allow to us, yet he has no where promised us, nor sees always fit
for us; nay, some of them in this Estate do not agreee to us, being Exemptions
from such infirmities as are inseparable from our Natures: and therefore, when
we come to the Sacrament, they are not to be expected in it. They are not of
the number of those blessings which are inseparably made over to it, or of
those effects which are always wrought by it; so that we have no Reason to
complain of its being a barren, and unfruitful Ordinance, because they are
withheld from us.

But although they are not benefited in these Respects, yet are they in others,
which make it richly worth their while to fit themselves for this Feast, and
are an abundant Recompense for all the pains they take in it. For, besides the
quieting of their Consciences, though not with an absolute Assurance, (a pitch
of hope that is very rarely found in any, even of the best Persons) yet with a
very comfortable sense of Gods Love and Friendship; which is an effect it will
have in those good minds, who consider that therein they confirmed the New
Covenant with God, wherein he promised them pardon if they would Repent, and
they professed to do it: Besides this effect, I say, of quieting their
Consciences, it benefits them further in their Graces and Virtuous indowments.
For, though some of them fear they are not, yet in reality all Good men* are
bettered by the Sacrament, some by improving, and all by continuing in their
Goodness, which they are to ascribe to it.

1. Some Good men, I say, (and those, I hope, the greatest Part) are bettered
in the Sacrament, by an Improvement of those Graces which they bring along to
it: They thank Christ more freely, and Love him more affectionately, and are
resigned to him more entirely, and watch against those Temptations which were
wont to win most upon them more carefully after every receiving, than they did
before. It spurs them on, where their pace was slackned; and makes them more
mindful of any Duty, when they had forgot it; and brings them back to it, when
they had strayed from it; and makes them Circumspect to discharge it, when they
had been more remiss and careless of it: it helps Husbands, to be more tender
and affectionate; Wives, to be more dutiful and observant; Children, to be more
respectful, towardly, and obedient; Servants, to be more Faithful, and
Diligent; and all men to be more concerned to Honor God, to be more Humble and
Temperate, True and Faithful, Just and Charitable, Meck and Peaceable, than
they were before they partook of it. All these Virtues, Tempers and
Dispositions, as there is need of them, and they can attend and apply their
minds to them, are quickened and set on by it. And though this Holy Flame, which
was kindled in their minds at the Altar, will burn dim, and grow cool again;
and this Religious bent of Heart will slacken and be more remiss in time: yet
being a fre^h inlivened and intended by a new approach to this Feast, the
former Ardors will be revived, and the same bent established, and so they will
be always advancing forward in a continual improvement.

This increase of their Graces, and Augmentation of all virtuous Dispositions,
especially of those wherein they are most defective, the Sacrament works in
many good persons, and it is very fit it should do it in all. And although I
dare not say they are unworthy of it, or unbetter'd and unfruitful under it;
yet I will say they are very much wanting to their own Souls, who are not
careful to carry on, and attain this improvement by it. And if they examine
their Growth in Grace and Goodness, by a growth in these points; I believe the
greatest part of careful and devout Receivers, will find they are really made
more perfect, and improved in Virtue by frequenting it.

Yea, I add further, they may be thus improved by it, though upon Examination
they themselves should not be able to point out Determinately in what, or make
a clear Discovery of it. For very few Persons do so strictly observe the
Degrees of their own Seize in any Virtues, with what ease they do them,
and how seldom they sin against them; as may enable them to compare exactly
the pitch of their present Graces, with the pitch of the same Graces sometime
afterward. And if they should very narrowly observe them, yet would they not
be able nicely to judge of every small increase; for little things are no more
discernable in Grace, than they are in Nature, nor can be easier seen in
growing Virtues, than in a growing man, or Tree, or other Natural improvements.
And besides, since the Grace which the Sacrament is to improve in us, is so
diffused, and extends to so many instances; when really we have gained and
advanced in it, yet may it be hard for us to recollect, and show determinately
in what, and specify it in the Particulars.

It is so I am sure in knowledge, which is another thing wherein the instances
are so infinitely numerous. For although it be very plain, that the longer any
man lives, the more ordinarily he understands and improves in Knowledge; yet if
most of us were asked how much we are wiser now than we were a Month or two
Months since, it might often puzzle us to answer it, and, though it be plain we
are improved, to particularize in what, as well as it is to particularize our
improvements by the Sacrament. So that not only those good men, whose growth is
apparent; but also several others, who have not particularly discovered it, are
bettered in Communicating, by an improvement of those Graces which they brought
along to it.

But if any Good men are not bettered in the Sacrament, by improving; yet are
they all,

2. By continuing in their Goodness, which they must ascribe to it, and for
which it is most richly worth their pains to frequent it.

It is one great Grace and Benefit to all Good men, that they can maintain
their present station in Goodness, and not Relapse and fall back into their
former sins again. Their Natural Lusts are only kept under, not quite
extinguished in them, and will grow bold, and strive for Mastery upon any fair
occasion. And they are daily in the way of manifold Temptations, which awaken
them, and give more strength and advantage to them. And they are many times
either wearied out with watchings, or lulled asleep in secure carelessness,
which makes them liable to become a prey to them. They are closely beset with
Powerful Enemies, and much endangered by continual Temptations, and oft-times
unguarded and fit to make but a very weak Defense; which are things that would
hinder them from standing where they are, as well as from improving and going
further. So that it is a very great benefit, and they are much the better by
it, if any thing can help them to keep what Grace they have got already, as
well as enable them to gain more. This continuance in Goodness, is less indeed
than Improvement; but yet it is a most valuable thing, and of so great account,
that, were there nothing more to be had by it, for its sake alone it were most
richly worth any man's while to come to the Holy Sacrament.

And this Benefit, which all good men hold, since they would cease to be good,
should they fall from it, all worthy Receivers ought to ascribe as much to the
Communion, as to any other thing. They owe it not to it alone, indeed, but to
other means also, viz. to hearing and reading the Word, and meditating upon it,
which puts them in mind of their Duty, and of the great motives to it; to
Self-examination, which shows them their Falls and Deviations from it; to
solemn Vows and Promises, which bind them to be careful in it; and to fervent
faithful Prayers, which bring down Gods Grace and Spirit that inables them to
perform it. All these, and others, are great means of securing their standing
in an Holy Course, amidst all their Temptations to depart from it; and
therefore to every one of them they they must in part ascribe it. But the
Sacrament contributes to it as much, at least, if not more than any thing
besides; so that in accounting whence they receive this great benefit, it ought
not in any wise to be excluded. For therein they remember and fix in mind the
Death of Christ, which is the highest motive to it; and exercise that Faith,
and Love, and Thankfulness, and Resignation, and Repentance, which are the best
means to set it forward; and make God solemn Vows and Promises, which are the
straitest bond to engage them to it; and put up many fervent Prayers, which are
the best course to make way for it; and receive those inward Graces and
Assistances, as I have shown, which enable them to discharge it. So that when
worthy Communicants continue after the Sacrament to hold their present pitch of
Goodness, and do not slide back again into their former sins; they must not say
they are no better by it, for this benefit of standing in a good state, they
receive from it. Though it does not improve and bring them forward, yet it
helps mightily to continue and keep them where they are.

Thus are all good People really bettered by the Sacrament. For, besides the
Peace of Conscience, which is thereby much settled in those Penitents, who
understand and consider, that therein they have sealed the Covenant of Pardon
with Almighty God: Besides this effect, I say, in those who rightly understand
it; the Graces of some are much improved, and the standing of all is greatly
maintained by it, which last, were there no other expectation from it, is a
most valuable benefit, and such, wherefore it is highly worth any man's labor
to frequent it.

3. Where they are not bettered at all by the Sacrament, or not so much as
might be expected, that is purely through their own Fault, and they must amend
it.

Where they are not bettered at all by the Sacrament, I say, or not so much as
might be expected, that is purely through their own Fault. If they examine
their own hearts about it, they will find that they have been wanting in those
things, which should have made it a lively means and help to their improvement.
It may be, after they have felt in their own Souls that they have renounced all
evil ways, which might fit them for it; they do not yet perceive any affecting
peace of mind, and comfortable sense of the Love of God to be wrought by it:
but then that is because they do not consider, how therein they confirmed a
League of Love, and received assurance of his Favor to the Penitent. Perhaps
they are not improved in an Holy Life, nor prevail more against their sins
after they have joined in it; but then that is because they are wanting in
those things, which are necessary to such Improvement. They did not inquire
what their particular sins were, and deliberately resolve against them before
they came to it: nor are careful to bear in mind what they have promised, and
to watch the opportunities of performing it, after they have been at it. Had
these things been done, and this care been shown, both before and after it;
they may be assured, as I have shown, both from the virtue of Gods Promise, and
the Nature of the thing, that they would have been the better by it. But when
these means are not used, but omitted, they cannot expect it should have its
effect in making them obedient. For the Sacrament helps us to grow in Grace and
Goodness, as a moral means, which works only in concurrence with our own care,
but not without it. It makes us leave our sins, by engaging us to examine after
them, and particularly to resolve against them, and to strive as the
opportunities come to get quit of them; and by bringing down such gracious
Assistances to us, as will serve our turn when we endeavor with them. But if
we will be wanting to our selves in these Self-Examinations, and particular
Resolutions, and after-care and good endeavors; then can it do us no good,
because we will not suffer it: and therefore, as we were before, so we shall
continue, the same unreform'd, and unimproved persons still.

Thus is the want of being bettered by the Sacrament, either at all, or so much
as might be expected, altogether our own Fault; namely, because we come not to
it with that particular sight and consideration of all our sins, and resolution
against them, nor are afterward so mindful of it, and show that care to
perform what we have resolved, which is necessary to our amendment: nor have
that consideration of its being a sealing of the Covenant of Peace and
Reconciliation, which is as necessary to our Comfort and Peace of mind from it.
So that whenever we fail of that benefit, which should accrue by it, it is
purely through our own Neglect, and we must thank our selves for it.

And since this want of being bettered, is wholly our own Fault; let all those
who are kept back by it, take care to amend that, and then this objection is
answered. When they receive no benefit from it, they themselves are to be
blamed for omitting those things which are necessary to it; and if they will
take care to use them the next time, they will be benefited by it: So that this
hindrance lasts no longer than they are pleased it should, and when they will,
need be no hindrance to them at all.

As for those then, that urge this for their not coming to the Sacrament, viz.
Their not being bettered or i^proved by it: My Answer to them in sum is this.
If there be any force in it, it will hold much stronger for their not coming to
Prayers, or the Public Assemblies, and ought not so much to hinder them from
this Feast, as from all other parts of Worship. But, indeed, it is no just
hindrance, nor is there any sufficient excuse at all from it. Where it is true,
there is no fair excuse in it; because we are not only bound in Interest, but
in strict Duty also to Communicate. But in the case of all good men it is false,
for they are really the better by it, though perhaps they do not think or
understand it. For it either improves them in their Goodness, as it is highly
fit it should and will do all, who are not wanting to themselves: or at least
it continues them in it, which, where there is nothing more, is of it self most
richly worth all the pains they bestow upon it. And where they are not bettered
at all, or not so much as might be expected; that is purely their own Fault,
and will hinder them no longer than they have a mind to it; for when they
please they may amend it. If they are good men, they are better by it; and if
they are ill, their being no better does not excuse their Neglect of it; and
they may be bettered the next time, if they will take that care which is
necessary to it: so that this ought not in any wise to be an Hindrance, and
keep them from it.

CHAP. III. Of want of Charity.
The Contents.
A Sixth Hindrance is a Fear lest they want that Charity, particularly toward
Enemies and those who have given them Provocations, which is required to it. An
account what Love is, and what is not due to such Persons. 1. We are bound to
show them all the Offices of general Charity, which are due to our Neighbor at
large, or to all others. This Love contains in it all the Particular Offices of
Justice, Charity, and Peace, which are due to all mankind: It is transgressed
by all the opposite Instances, but by nothing more than hard and uncandid
Censures and Suspicions. The common^ess, and sinfulness of this Carriage. The
want of this Charity unfits men for this Feast; but so it does for Prayers, and
all other Religious Worship. 2. We are not bound to show them all the Offices
of special Esteem, Trust, and Confidence, which are not fit to be placed on all
men, but on such only as are qualified for them. When they sufficiently show
Repentance of their Fault, they are to be readmitted to the same state of
Favor and Friendship. We must be Candid in Judging when their Repentance is
sufficiently evidenced. An humble Confession is ordinarily a sufficient Proof
of it for the first Fault; but not when it has been often repeated. Luc. 17.4,
which seems to affirm it, answered. Several Cases cleared, which are sometimes
thought by Pious Souls to be a breach of Charity toward Enemies, but in
reality are not. As, not forgetting Injuries or Unkindness, but still
retaining a Remembrance of them. Thinking the worse of those who offered them.
Being troubled at the sight of them, as that puts them in mind of the great
Losses they have sustained by them. Showing more reserve, and carrying a
greater distance in Conversing with them, than with other men. These are no
breach of Charity toward them, nor can be a just Hindrance from the Communion.

A Sixth Hindrance, which keeps back several from this Feast, is their fe^^
lest they want that Charity which is required to it. They have some professed
Enemies, that own Hatred and a mischievous inclination in all their Carriage;
or some false Friends and Confidents, who, though not out of Malice, yet to
serve a particular turn or interest, have proved very unfaithful or injurious;
or some imprudent and unwise Dependants, who, when they meant well, perhaps,
have done things very disadvantageous and displeasing to them in their
business. From the Malice of some, or the Falseness of others, or the folly of
a third sort, they have received those Provocations, which they cannot yet cast
out of their minds; and when they remember them, they feel their hearts are
much estranged from those who offered them; and whilst they are so, they fear
they love them not as they ought, nor have that Charity toward Enemies and
injurious Persons, which God requires in all Communicants.

And this want of Charity for Enemies and offensive Persons is urged, not only
by those, who either do, or wish ill to them, who indeed have just cause to say
they want it: but also by others who incur neither of them, and therefore have
no sufficient cause at all for it. For many Good People, who requite no
injuries to those who have provoked them, (...), Charity, and Peace, which God
requires of us toward all men, and which are all that is due to them: are yet
afraid that they have not so much Charity for them as the Law injoyns, because
they still remember their Injuries or Unkindness, or think the worse of their
Persons, or keep a greater distance from them in their Carriage, or forbear to
use them, as formerly they did, in the quality of particular Friends and
Confidents, or withold some other special Favors, which are not due to them,
nor are any breach at all of that Charity, which they ought to have for them.

This is a great cause of Scruple to many honest minds, who are really troubled
with it: and particularly it is a most common hindrance from the Holy
Sacrament; there being no Duty, I think, which the generality of men believe
more indispensably required, than Peace and Charity in every worthy
Communicant. And therefore that they who want this Love of Enemies, which
unfits them for this Feast, may quickly set about the attainment of it; and
that they who have it, may not be troubled, or held back from receiving as if
they had it not; I shall here endeavor to give a plain state of it, and show,
both what is, and what is not implied in it. And this I shall do in these two
particulars.

1. We are bound to show our Enemies, and any others who have provoked us, all
the Offices of general Charity, or all that Love which is due to our Neighbor
at large, and to all other Persons. So that whilst we allow ous selves in the
breach of this, we are unfit for this Feast, and must instantly amend that we
may be fitted for it.

But,

2. We are not bound to show them all the Offices of special Esteem, Trust, and
Confidence, which are not fit to be placed on all men, but on such only as are
qualified for them. So that when we fail only in these, we are in no Fault, nor
have any need to be troubled, or kept back by it.

1. I say, We are bound to show our Enemies, and any others, who, by their
unkind, indiscreet, or injurious carriage, have provoked us, all the Offices of
General Charity, or all that Love which is due to our Neighbor at large, and
to all other Persons: So that if we allow our selves in the breach of it, we
are unfit for this Feast, and must instantly amend that we may be fitted for it.

We are bound to show them all the Offices of general Charity, or to treat them
with all that Love which is due to our Neighbor at large, and to all other
Persons.

How hardly soever they might be treated either among Jews or Gentiles, yet in
Christianity our Enemies are Neighbors and Brethren, and ought to share in all
that Love, which God requires of us toward the promiscuous Multitude of other
men. For it takes off all that hatred and spiteful Resentment, which would
exclude them from all good Offices; and sets them in the Rank of Neighbors,
whom God commands us to treat with all those instances of Kindness, wherein
consists the loving our Neighbor as our selves. This is plain, from its not
permitting us to hate, as the Jewish Law did, but strictly injoyning us to Love
them, Mat. 5.44, 45; for where Love is, it naturally issues out in all of them
as there is occasion, upon which account it is called the fulfilling of the
Law, i. e. of that part of it which concerns us toward men, because working no
ill, as St. Paul says, to our Neighbor, it leads us into all of them, Romans
13.9, 10. Besides, that our Enemies are to share in all that Love which is due
to our Neighbors, our Savior plainly declares, when he singles out a most
bitter Enemy, and sets him forth as the Neighbor whom the Law mentions, making
the Samaritane a Neighbor even to a Jewish man, between whom there was the
most inveterate and inbred Enmity and Opposition. For when the Lawyer asked
him, who is my Neighbor; he tells him by the Parable of a Jewish man, who
being left wounded by the Thieves, found a Neighbor of the good Samaritane,
that it is any one he meets with, though a Stranger, though an Enemy, yea,
though of a Party and Profession in Religion most odious unto his, which
ordinarily causes the highest and most implacable Enmities, as it did between
the Jews and Samaritanes, who stood at so great a distance, as that they would
not give or ask so much as a Joh. 4.9.
Cup of Water of each other, or have any sort of intercourse together. This was
his Neighbor, says he, and so must thou be in a like Case, go, and do so
likewise, Luke 10. v. 29, to 38.

Thus are all we Christians bound to hold our Enemies, and those who have
provoked us, in the same promiscuous Rank with all others, and notwithstanding
all their unkindness, or injurious Carriage, to look upon them as our
Neighbors, whom we are to Love as we do our selves.

And that Love contains in it all the particular Offices of Justice, Charity,
and Peace, which we owe to Mankind at large, even to all Persons.

1. It contains in it all the Duties of Justice; as namely, that we be true to
them in all our Speeches, and faithful in all our Promises, and just and equal
in all our Dealings, never seizing, hurting, or detaining any thing which
belongs to them; nor any ways perverting, obstructing, or infringing any Right,
because it is theirs.

2. All the Duties of Charity, as that we honor them for their Virtues, and
pity them in their Miseries, and relieve them in their Wants; and, when they
will take it, not passionately and publicly (which shows not any Love of them,
but our Wrath and Spleen against them) but with great Privacy and Friendship,
reprove them for their Faults, and Congratulate with them in their Joys, and
conceal their Defects, and vindicate their injured Reputations, and be
Courteous and Condescensive, Meek and Gentle in our Carriage, Candid in putting
a good Interpretation upon all their Words and Actions, especially such as
relate to our own selves, placable or easy to be entreated after any Offenses,
and apt to forgive and requi^e them with lost Speech, fair Carriage, good
Offices, and the like.

3. All the Duties of Peace, in maintaining Unity and Quietness, and avoiding
all Strife and Variance, Clamor and Brawling with them, as with all Mankind.

All these, as I have Meas. of Christ. Ob^d. B. 2.
elsewhere particularly shown, are such Duties as we owe to our Neighbor at
large, and to all men: and then to our Enemies among them, since in
Christianity they are Brethren and Neighbors too, and have a claim to them.
And these, Love and Brotherly kindness, when once it is seated in us, will be
sure to effect, and make us pay them. For he that Loves another, as St. Paul
says, has fulfilled the Law. Because this, thou shall not commit Adultery,
thou shall not kill, thou shall not steal, thou shall not bear false Witness,
thou shall not covet; and if there be any other Commandment, i. e. respecting
others, it is briefly comprehended in this saying, Thou shall Love thy
Neighbor as thy self. Love works no ill to his Neighbor, therefore Love is
the fullfilling of the Law. Romans 13.8, 9, 10.

And since we are bound to Love our Enemies, in paying them all this Justice,
Charity, and Peace, which I have mentioned as due to all Persons: it is plain
that we fail of it, whenever we act against it in any of these Particulars.

1. We fail of it if at any time we do any wrong, or show any acts of Injustice
toward them. As if we falsify and lie to them, or break our Faith and Promise
with them, or raise Calumnies, or report false and slanderous Stories of them,
or bear false witness against them, or wrongfully withold what is due to
them, or oppress, cozen, or defraud them, or take away their Lives, or maim
their Bodies, by Secret Arts, or open Fight, or Assassination, or the like.

2. We fail of it, if in any instance we are uncharitable, or break the Peace
with them. As when we envy and r^pin^ at their good, or rejoice at their hurt,
or, when we could wipe them off, suffer false stains to stick upon them without
any Vindication, or speak all the ill we know of them, and backbite and revile
them, especially if we do it with Aggravation, Triumph, and Scorn, when any
fall of theirs has given us an occasion, or openly upbraid them with our
kindnesses, or reproach them with their own sins, or mock and deride them with
their Infirmities, or affront them in our Carriage, or are Passionate, and
burst out into bitterness and brawling, strife and debate upon any provocation,
or are unthankfully forgetful of their former favors, or implacable after
their injuries, or thirst after revenge, and are hasty to punish, or rigorous
in exactions, or such like.

All these are a Breach of that Love and Duty, which we ought to bear toward
our Enemies in common with all other persons, as might be proved, were there
any need of it, of every one of the particulars. And by reason they have
deserved ill of us, and given us great provocations; unless we are very
circumspect, and keep a strict Guard upon our selves, in all our Discourses and
Carriage toward them, we shall be in great danger to incur them.

But among all the instances of uncharitableness to our Enemies, there is none
whereto we are more obnoxious, and against which we ought to watch with greater
carefulness, as we tender the safety of our own Souls, than hard Censures and
Suspicions, or fancying the worst Designs, and putting the worst
Interpretations upon all their words and actions when they come before us.

This, God knows, is a most general and Reigning sin among all Adversaries, and
is daily seen, not only among the notoriously ill and irreligious, but also
among those, who are otherwise very sober and devoutly serious. For even the
generality of men, when the Actions of their Enemies come to be scanned before
them, are very apt to turn them to an ill sense, and to make the most of them
to their prejudice, and judge of them, not as indifferent and unconcerned
persons, but as they who desire to find Faults, and to pick out something which
they may accuse in them.

And this has been every where done, not only against particular persons, but,
on all hands, against whole Bodies and Parties of Men, who, in any thing
relating to the Times, are of different Persuasions, and either think or act
not after their Projects and Opinions. For how apt have, not only private men
been in the case of particular quarrels; but many also in the heat, and at the
top of all Parties, in judging of their opposites to mistrust ill Designs even
in their good Actions, and to impute all their ill to unmixt Malice, without
making any allowances of forgetfulness, oversight, impetuous heat, or other
humane Frailties; to take every thing by the wrong handle, and where it might,
and would b^ar a good, were there any Love to construe it, to fix upon it an
ill Sense, and to interpret it to their disadvantage. In arguing upon all their
words and actions, they sucked out nothing but the venom, and turned every
thing into a sore about them, and were strangely rash in bestowing opprobricus
and ill Names upon them, and laid about them at that rate, as if they fancied
they could not exceed, either in thinking, or in speaking evil of them. In all
which, instead of being checked with any Remorse for it, their Consciences
rather countenanced and encouraged it. For since, as they apprehended, the
cause they contended for was good in their own Party, and bad in the Party that
opposed it: This Carriage they called not wrath and spite, but Zeal, and
thought accordingly that God would own and accept it.

But this is a very sinful and unchristian Carriage. It is utterly contrary to
the Love of Enemies; for Love is always inclinable to think the best, and
leans, so far as the thing will bear, to the side of Favor, both in judging,
and speaking of all their A^tions. It is plainly contrary to our L^^ds Rule,
who warns us not to judge that we be not judged, i. e. not to be forward in
passing Sentence against others, that God may not pass Sentence against us: for
with what measure we mete in judging of their Actions, he will mete out to us
again, Mat. 7.1, 2. It is a direct Breach of that Charity which St. Paul
describes, and makes of absolute necessity to our immortal happiness. For
Charity, says he, thinks or surmizes no Evil, it believes all things, so far as
in any reason it may, to other men's advantage. And without this Charity, though
we have the spriteliest Zeal for the best Parties, (...) though we give our
Bodies to be burned (...) Martyrs, it profits us nothing, i. e. toward Gods
acceptance, 1 Cor. 13.3, 5, 7. Since it is a Zeal, which is not peaceable as
well as pure, since it is not full of Mercy and good Fruits, but issues out in
a bitter and envenomed Spirit, which turns all things to the worst, and is bent
in all points to the hurt of those who fall under it; it is plain it can never
come from God, who, being Mercy and Love it self, can never be the Author of so
much Cruelty and Hatred; but must be ascribed to our own Lusts, and the
infernal Spirits, as the true Parents and Abettors of it. And this St. James
expressly says of that bitter Zeal, which takes not a tender Heart, and bowels
of Love or Charity along with it. If it were that from above, says he, it
would first indeed be pure, but then it would next be peaceable, gentle, easy
to be entreated, full of Mercy and good Fruits. If God kindled it, since he is
Love it self, and requires us to Love our Enemies as our selves, these Fruits
of Love and Mercy would be sure to accompany it. But if all these are shut out,
and it dwells in an hurtful and imbittered Spirit; if that be a bitter envying
or (...).
Zeal, that dwells in your Hearts: then, adds he, glory not in it; for this
descends not from above, so as to have God for the Author of it, but is
sensual, i. e. arising from your own Passions, nay, Devilish, being set on by
the malicious Agency of Infernal Spirits, Jam. 3.14, 15, 16, 17.

And thus it appears when really we are out of Charity with any persons who
have provoked us, and fall short of that Love of Enemies, which Gods Law
requires of us: For then we Love them not as we ought, when we are any ways
unjust to them, or apt upon every little occasion to strive and contend with
them, or deal uncharitably by them in any Conversation, particularly in
malicious Surmizes and Suspicions, and uncandid Censures, which are so general
in all, but more abundant in our times, when the Nation is divided into
Parties, and men seem to have forgot that there is any Religion toward
Enemies, or any Love due to them who have given them personal Provocations, or
side with a Party opposite to what they espouse.

And if upon a survey of our Carriage in these particulars, we find this to be
our Case, and that we are thus out of Charity, and have not forgiven any who
have provoked us: it is very true, whilst that lasts we are unfit for the
Sacrament, since he that worthily joins in it, must come in Love, and have
freely forgiven all the World. But then we are also equally unfit to pray, or
ask the forgiveness of our own sins at Gods hands; since, if we pray in Wrath
and Enmity, he will not hear us. Nay, this not forgiving others turns all our
own Prayers into a Curse, and makes them a dreadful and downright Imprecation
against our selves. For when we say this Prayer -- forgive us our trespasses as
we forgive them that trespass against us, with malice in our Hearts: the plain
English of it is, that God would revenge our Trespasses on our heads, as we are
ready to revenge their Trespasses on theirs: which is so bold, and Foolhardy
an Address, as no man, I presume, will put up to God, who considers what he
says.

When really we are out of Charity therefore, and have not forgiven others; we
are not only unfit to Communicate, but to the full as unfit to make any
Prayers, or place any Hope in Almighty God. And when once he is sensible that
this is his State, there is no wise man will continue in it, but will forthwith
resolve to lay aside all his Resentments, and get out of it.

This he may find difficult, indeed, when he sets about it; but it is
absolutely necessary to be done, and unless he would incur the Wrath of God,
and (...) ^ternal pains of Hell, which (...) thousand times more difficul^,
(...) go through with it. But (...) considers how much he himself needs to be
forgiven, and how he has infini^ely more provoked God, than his Brother has
provoked him; he will find it no very hard matter to forgive him for Christ's
sake, though it might be hard to do it for his own. And besides, if he will not
dwell upon the injuries or unkindnesses which are so provoking, but cast them
out so soon as he perceives they are entered into his mind; it will yet be much
easier to him. He cannot quite forget them, it may be, so as that he shall
never think of them: but when without his leave they start up in his thoughts,
he can choose whether he will harbor and give way to them. And if he will be
careful to do that, the great difficulty of Forgiveness is removed. For it is
our dwelling upon an injury received, and hearkening to ill suggestions that
aggravate the deed, and the malice or unworthiness of him that offered it,
which heightens our Resentment of it to that Degree, that we have much ado
before we can bring our selves to be reconciled. So that if we would not
harbor and entertain the thoughts of it, the forgiveness of an injury would
have much more ease in it. And this Remedy St. Paul prescribes to prevent all
Wrath and Revengeful Carriage. Let not the Sun go down upon your Wrath, neither
give place to the Devil, or to a (...).
Calumniator and Accuser, i. e. to exasperating Thoughts and Insinuations,
whether suggested to us by our own minds, or by the whisperings of others, Ephesians.
4.26, 27.

And thus having proved that we are bound to show our Enemies, and those who
have provoked us, all the Offices of general Charity, or all that Love which is
due to our Neighbor at large, and to all other Persons; so that whilst we
allow our selves in the breach of them we are unfit for this Feast, and must
instantly amend, that we may be fitted for it: I proceed now,

2. To show that we are not bound to show them all the Offices of special
esteem, trust and confidence, which are not fit to be placed on all men, but on
such only as are qualified for them: so that when we fail only in these, we are
in no fault, nor have any need to be troubled, or kept back by it.

We are not bound to make an Enemy a familiar Companion, or a particular
Friend, a Partner of our Secrets, a Sharer of our Trust, or an Officer in our
business: but may be more afraid of him, and keep more at a distance from him,
and use more Caution and Reserve in conversing with him, than with other men.
As for all the instances of general Charity, indeed, they are due upon a Reason
which is common to our Enemies with others, i. e. their being Men and
Christians: so that they ought to share in them, and we fail of our Duty to
them, when at any time we withold them from them. But as for these marks of
special esteem and confidence; they are founded on particular reasons and
fitness of Persons, as likeness of humor, Fidelity of Affection, aptness for
our affairs, or the like; so that in them we are not bound to our Enemies, who
are plainly unfit through their professed Enmity, or treacherous falseness; nay,
nor to any one among others; but are left at Liberty to make such choice as
shall seem best to our Prudence. This Liberty must in all Equity and Reason be
allowed us, because upon a right choice of these Persons the innocence, ease,
and safety of our Lives, most nearly depends; and without being left to
discretion in it, we must unavoidably throw our selves into inextricable
Snares, and numberless Calamities. And that it is allowed, our Savior clearly
intimates, when he recommends to us the wisdom of Serpents, bidding us show all
the prudence we can devise, so long as no unrighteousness mixes with it, but it
is wholly guided by the Doves innocence, Mat. 10.16. And in this he has gone
before us in his own Practice. For though he loved those who believed on him,
Joh. 2. with all that Love which his Law requires, i. e. with a general
Affection: yet, as the Evangelist tells us, he did not trust or commit himself
to them, because he knew all men, v. 23, 24.

So long then as we requite no Injuries upon our Enemies, or others that have
offended us, nor are wanting to them in any point of Justice, Charity, or
Peace, which is due to all Persons; we are not uncharitable to them, in
thinking the worse of their persons, or carrying our selves toward them at a
greater (...), or forbearing to use them, as forme^^ we did, in the quality of
particular (...) and Confederates, or with (...) some other special Favors,
(...) Fault has justly forfeited, an^ (...) have no more claim to.

Indeed, if afterward they Repent of their Offense which makes the breach
between us, and amend that Fault which unfits them for our Business or
Converse, when only we our selves are concerned, and the thing is not of that
weight as that we may be jealous over it, and we have no other cause but that
offense to exclude them from it; it is a Christian Part, not only to retain them
in a general Charity in common with all other Persons, but also to re-admit
them to the same State, which formerly they held with us.

When the concern is not purely our own, but we are set to secure higher and
more public ends; there, it is true, we are not bound presently to re-admit to
the same state upon Repentance. And thus it is in the point of Discipline,
wherein the Sin is not presently pardoned so soon as the Criminal has Repented
of it: but the punishment is oft-times continued, (as it was in the lasting
Excommunications of the Primitive Christians) that the durableness of the smart
may both more terrify others from it, and amend themselves by begetting a more
lasting memory and abhorrence of it. And thus it is too in point of Public
Trust, when we act not for our selves, but pursuant to our care of others: for
there we may lay aside Penitents, because they have once sinned, thinking there
is more safety in those who have still stood firm, and been always innocent.
And thus St. Paul did with Mark, who had Act. 13.13.
once declined the toil and peril of Converting the Gentile World; for after he
had freely forgiven it, yet, says St. Luke, in the dispute betwixt Barnabas and
him, he thought not good to take him for a Companion, because he once deserted
them, and went not with them to the work; but preferred Silas, who had never
slinch'd from it, Act. 15.37, 38, 40.

But when only we our selves are concerned; and the thing is not of that weight
as that we may be jealous over it, (in which case, indeed, a greater Caution is
requisite;) and we have no other Cause but that Offense to exclude them from
it: (for if upon other accounts the choice at first was ill made, and either
already is, or may be altered to our Benefit, since the fixing on any man for a
Friend or Dependant is not a necessary Duty, but a discretionary free thing, we
are not blameworthy in correcting it:) when the Case, I say, is thus, it is a
Christian act to admit returning Penitents to the same state they held before
they offended us. For when once they have Repented of a Fault, they are as fit
for our Affairs or Friendship, as they were before they committed it. So that
if any marks of our displeasure remain still after that, which in the present
state of things might conveniently enough be altered, it is not their
unfitness, but our Resentment which is the cause of it. And when we go so to
ease our offended minds by their loss, this looks not like forgiving a
Trespass, but Revenging it. And this Readmission to their former state, is
according to St. Paul's Direction, Col. 3.13. to forgive others, even as Christ
forgives us; for he admits Penitents to the state of innocent Persons,
pardoning without upbraiding, and quite Heb. 8.12.
forgetting, as if the sin had never been done: and according to what he
prescribes, 1 Cor. 14.20. when he bids us in malice to be Children; for after
once they are made Friends, they forget all, and return to the same degree of
Love and Confidence again. The wise Son of Sirach says, indeed, that for four
things, viz. upbraiding, and Pride, and disclosing of Secrets, and a
Treacherous wound, every Friend will depart, and never more be reconciled,
Eccles. 22.22. But he speaks only of what ordinarily is done, or of what might
have been done among the Jews; not of what may now be done among us, of whom
God expects an higher forgiveness, after the manner of Children, and the
example of Christ Jesus. So that when once they have sufficiently Repented,
it is fit that we forgive them to as full purpose, as if they had never sinned
at all.

And in judging of this Repentance, we ought not to be strict and rigid in
standing upon exact proofs; but to be candid, and apt to interpret all signs of
it to the best Sense, leaning to the side of Love and easy Admittance. If they
take shame to themselves, and are so far humbled as penitently to confess it:
it is a great Argument of their being set against it, and, in the case of the
first offense especially, a strong Presumption that they will no more commit
it. Although, when once these Confessions become Customary, and are still made
and broke anew upon every fresh occasion: it is a sign only that they mean
well, and would amend if they could; but no Presumption that they will do it,
since their penitent Resolution plainly is too weak, and their Lusts prove
still too strong for it. And since these Confessions are manifestly an
incompetent proof of their having thoroughly R^pented; we cannot be bound to
believe them, or obliged thereupon to a return of Friendship.

Our Savior indeed tells us, That if our Brother Trespass against us seven
times in a day, and seven times in a day turn again, saying, I repent; we must
forgive him, Luc. 17.4. And here, if by forgiving, were meant restoring to the
same state of Favor and Affection; this would infer his Profession of
Repentance, though never so often broke, to be a sufficient Demonstration of it,
and a just Ground of his return to Friendship. But this, I suppose, speaks only
of such Forgiveness, as admits him, not to the same state which before he held
with us, but only to the state of a Neighbor at large, or of all other
Persons. And albeit this is due to him, whether he say, I Repent, or no; yet
does our Savior here injoin it upon his Rep^ntance, not because the thing
required it, but that he might more directly oppose the Jewish Doctrine in this
point, which was too scanty in forgiving even a returning Penitent. For this
they limited to a small number of times, it being a received Rule among the
Rabbis, that Dr. Lightf. Hor. Heb. in loc. e Jom.
after he has forgiven any Person thrice, he has gone as far as he needs, and
that no man is bound to forgive the fourth offense.

To forgive an injury then so far as not to return it, nor to be wanting in any
Neighbourly office toward him that offered it, is a plain Duty, upon his
saying he Repents of it: yea, as has been shown, whether he Repents or not. But
to the evidencing of such Repentance as would oblige us to confide in him
again, and leaves no imputation of unfitness in him, but only our Resentment
for a Reason of our distance from him: we may require more than his saying he
Repents, and giving us his bare word and promise, after they have several times
deceived us. For no wise man would trust to that which is oftener wrong than
right, as every such Persons word is, who hitherto has always failed in it: and
Christianity in no case forbids us to be wise in our own Concerns, but directs
us to be as subtle as Serpents, so long as we are careful withal to keep as
innocent as Doves, Mat. 10.16. It commends us for being prudent in business,
and seeing beforehand to prevent other men's sins, by cutting off from them all
opportunities; and it may be our own too, by putting by those Temptations,
which would always trouble and molest our Peace, and oftentimes endanger our
innocence. So that although we are to be very favorable in construing the
sufficiency of our Enemies Repentance; yet may we be discreet withal, and are
not to be foolishly blind and unreasonably easy in approving it. We must only
lean to the side of Favor, when there are such signs, as to a Wise man look
toward it; but not rashly conclude it, when there are no likely signs at all
of it. But the fault of men seldom lies on this side, of being over-easie to be
fully reconciled; so that the other, of being over-rigid, is that which the
generality of men ought to guard themselves against. And therefore in judging
of the sufficiency of their Repentance, this is the great Rule we are to take
along with us, viz. That as it is one part of Charity fully to forgive our
offending Brother, and re-admit him to our former favor on his Repentance: So
it is another to be favorable in judging whether he has sufficiently Repented,
and given such proofs of it as ought to be believed, or no.

As for these further effects of Love toward Enemies, and those who have
provoked us then, viz. our not barely retaining them in a general Charity and
Affection, as we do all other men, but re-admitting them to special Trust,
Familiarity and Friendship, which they had in their former Station; they are
not always due to them, nor are at all proper to be placed on them, but only
when they Repent and Amend those Faults which made them unfit for them. So that
whilst their Impenitence lasts, or that change does not sufficiently appear to
us, we are not obliged to express our Love in these at all.

And since we are not bound to them, nor are guilty of any sin in omitting
them; that omission can never unfit us for the Holy Communion. So that whilst
we show them all the Offices of general kindness, and are wanting in nothing
but special Favors, which belong not to them in their present Circumstances;
we have all the Charity for them which our Lord requires, and therefore, if we
have nothing else to hinder us, may readily join in this Feast of Love when God
invites us to it.

And this might serve for a sufficient Answer, to those supposed instances of
uncharitableness mentioned above, which hinder several fit and worthy Persons
from partaking in this Ordinance. But for their fuller satisfaction in these
points, I will add something concerning each of the Particulars.

1. They fear they have not that Charity for Enemies and offensive Persons,
which Gods Law requires, because they cannot forget as well as forgive, but
still remember their injuries or unkindnesses.

But did not our Savior himself, that perfect pattern of Forgiveness, remember
Jo. 21.15, 16, 17.
Peter's Denial of him after he had bitterly Repented of it? Did he not
sufficiently hint it to him, by questioning him three times about his Love of
him, answerable to his having three times denied him; that by calling it over
upon his Remembrance, he might increase his care and watchfulness against it
afterward? So that it is not the bare Remembrance, but remembering them to evil
purposes, which is to be blamed in us. When they bear in mind the ill they have
received then, let them consider whether they do it to any ill effect. Do they
think of it to upbraid them with it, or to do them a shame for it, and sit as
Spies upon their Actions only that they may find Faults, and aggravate
Miscarriages, or to return the ill to them again in transgressing any of those
instances of common Justice or Charity above recited? If their Remembrance of
it does not provoke them, into any of these sinful expressions of hatred and
ill will against them, they need not be troubled at it, for there is no hurt
done by it. It is not in their Power, it may be, perfectly to forget it; for
when the knowledge of things is once fixed in our minds, though we can forbear
to reflect on it, wherein lies the great danger of it, yet can we not lose it
when we have a mind to it. So that after we have received an Injury, we are not
to be blamed barely for remembering it; since we are no more able always wholly
to forget what has past, than we were at first to be wholly ignorant and
insensible of it. Nay, in many Cases, if we could, it is not advisable that we
should do it: for whilst the injurious Person is Impenitent, and ready to
repeat the same again, the Remembrance of it will do us good, in quickening our
care, and making us more wary and watchful to prevent it. But if once he has
Repented of what he did, so as that he ought to be admitted to his former
state; then, indeed, it may seem very desirable, that as much as in us lies, we
should forget it, by giving no entertainment or encouragement to the Thoughts
of it. For the Remembrance then can serve no good ends, but may prove a very
great snare to us, in making us backward in kindness, or fit to catch fire on
small Provocations, or uncandid in interpreting his words, or actions
afterward. It will not be our sin till these, or some other ill effects are
wrought by it; but it will be our Temptation, whereby it is very like, we shall
sometimes be much endangered; so that then it may be very fit to lay it aside,
for fear of receiving hurt by it.

2. They fear that, after an unkindness or injury received, they are not so
Charitable as they ought, because they think the worse of him that offered it.

Now if they are uncandid in judging of the injurious action, i. e. if they
impute it to the worst cause, and make not those Allowances of forgetfulness,
oversight, and the like, which it would well admit, and which Love would fix
upon it were it to construe it: it is true, they are so far wanting in it. This,
indeed, is hard for us always to avoid, and therefore we must be sure to take
the more care, and keep the stricter watch against it. And if after all,
through unwariness, through an Accusers laying out only the interpretations of
the ill side, or our own suspicious temper insensibly leaning toward it, we
are engaged in an uncandid Construction e're we can discover it; there our
inconsideration and unadvisedness will be our excuse for it. But so soon as
ever we can observe it, or are shown how the action is equally capable of a
favorable Sense, we must strike in with it, and correct our hasty Judgment. So
that if by thinking worse, they mean that they think worse than needs of the
Action, and incur an uncandid interpretation; this is the Sentence they are to
pass upon it. Either it was an innocently inconsiderate escape, and then their
haste and unadvisedness must excuse it: or it was a known sin, i. e. it either
was, or, had they not been grossly partial and evidently bent to think ill,
would have been committed with observation; and then their Repentance and
Amendment must atone for it.

But if by thinking worse, they mean, that, when the Fact is evidently ill,
they have a worse opinion of the Person; there is no want of Charity in that,
because they have just cause for it, and cannot in Reason think better of him.
They judge only according to the plain Truth of things, and that the best Souls
may safely do, and it is no uncharitable part in any of them. For thus our Lord
thought of Judas, when he most affectingly Luc. 22.48.
suggested to him the baseness of ^is B^tr^ying him, and that too with a Kiss,
the sign of Friendship and Affection. And thus the Apostles thought of the
Jews, whom they looked upon as Act. 2.23. and 7.52.
wicked Murderers for our Saviors Crucifixion. And thus St. Paul thought of
Peter, when he blamed him for his Gal. 2.11, 12, 13, 14.
sinful compliance and dissimulation. And thus God himself thinks of us upon
our miscarriages, for he sees them, and dislikes us for them, and thereby Luc.
6.35.
magnifies the Honor of his Patience and loving Kindness, in that he is good
even to the unthankful and the evil, and shows us Favor notwithstanding them.
And thus also may we very innocently, and charitably too think ill of any
others, when they have evidently deserved it, and given us just occasion for
it. For the work of Charity, or Love to others, is not to make us blind in a
plain Case, and see no Faults in them when they are clear before us. For this
is Love without Eyes, which is by no means the Love of wise men, or the Charity
of Christians. It is not always possible in Nature, nor could be shown if we
should attempt it; for, when others Faults are evident, there is no way of
being dark against the Sun, or shutting out the Light whilst our Eyes are
opened. But if it always could be done, yet is it not in any wise proper to be
advised: for if we must see no hurt in any Persons, it unavoidably destroys all
wise choice of Friends and Companions, Relations and Dependants; all seasonable
Counsel and Instruction, Reproof and Admonition; and so produces most sad
effects, both in Conversation and Religion. The work of Charity to others then,
is not to wink against a Fault when it is apparent; but not to be quick in
discerning, and forward in presuming it, when there is no just Cause for it. So
that if we would be Charitable to our Enemies, we must not believe ill of them,
till it is sufficiently made out to us; nor conclude them faulty in a doubtful
case, when there are Reasons on both sides, and they are as likely to be
otherwise; nor presume they had an ill design in that which lies as open to a
good, and might have no hurt at all in it. In these Cases, where their offense
is not clearly proved, it is uncharitableness in us to be hasty in believing
it. But when their Enmity is professed, and their Unkindness, or Injurious
dealing is evident; it is no Duty in any man to shut his Eyes against the Light,
nor any Uncharitableness at all to esteem them the less for it. We may think
him a Dishonest man, that has injured us; and him a False Friend, that has
betrayed our Secrets to our Prejudice, as our Savior Christ did Judas; and
that he is not so kind as he professes, who, when he might, refuses to do good
to us. When we judge of Persons, not from rash Surmises, but from clear
Evidence and Experience, we may judge as we find cause, and, if we judge ill of
them, it is not because we are inclined to it, but because they have deserved
it; so that our ill Opinion is owing purely to their Faults, and not to any
want of Charity in our selves.

3. Some Persons of Passionate Natures fear they have not that Charity for
Enemies, which is required of all Good men, because, when some have been most
mischievous to them, their hearts are troubled, and they are inwardly moved as
often as they see them; not with any Angry or Revengeful Passion, which would
do hurt to them; but only with a sad Remembrance of their own Losses, which
they have sustained by them.

Now where this is really the Case, (and they who are concerned must be
faithful to their own Souls in judging whether it be or no) if there be any
Fault in it, it is not want of Charity toward them, but want of Patience
toward God, and Contentment in their own Condition. They show no
uncharitableness toward them in it, since they have no wrathful intent to seek
their hurt, nor have the least desire to return the Injuries which they have
suffered. They are troubled at the sight of them, indeed; but that is only as
they put them in mind of their own Miseries, which they have occasioned. They
are grieved to see them, as they would be to see the Picture of a Departed
Friend, whose Death went very near to them; i. e. only as it calls into their
Thoughts that loss which is very afflicting. And this Grief, whatever it may be
with Impatience, is not chargeable with any Incharitableness toward our
Enemies. For it is no part of the Charity. we owe them, to be insensible of
what befalls our selves; so that they cannot complain of us for lamenting our
own miseries. Nor can they complain of us for doing it at their presence;
because they being the cause of all, the sight of them may well bring it to our
Remembrance: and if we may be sorry at all for our own unhappiness, we may be
allowed to grieve then especially, when we have those things before us, which
are most apt to represent and suggest it to us.

So long then as they are careful so to moderate their Grief for what is lost,
(and they must be watchful in this point) as that it does not make them
distrust God, nor repine at what he has ordered, nor settle into an habitual
Discontent, nor is otherwise sinful or intemperate; it need be no scruple to
their minds, nor hinder them from the Holy Sacrament. They may endeavor to
prevent it, both for their own ease and safety, that they may neither be pained
nor tempted with it: and to this end it may be very advisable to avoid the
Presence of the injurious Person, till they have so well digested their Loss,
as that they can look on him without being troubled. But if at any time they
meet, and their Hearts are sorrowful at the sight: so long as this Grief is not
in it self sinful or intemperate, nor has any angry motions and expressions of
Revenge accompanying it; they need not be put into doubts and scruples with i^,
since their state is not disturbed, nor their Souls at all endangered by it.

4. They are afraid they have not such Charity for their Enemies as they ought,
because they are not so free with them, nor repose the same Trust in them, but
carry themselves with more Reserve and at a greater distance from them, than
they used to do before the breach betwixt them.

But so long as their Enemies are Impenitent, all this has no hurt in it: So
that they ought not to be hindered from the Sacrament, or affrighted by it. For
this wariness in Conversing with our Enemies, is no more than Christ himself
showed in Conversing with the Jews: who would not walk openly among them,
because they sought to kill him, Jo. 7 1. and c. 11.53, 54. It is no more than
he taught his Disciples to use, when he sent them forth as Sheep in the midst
of Wolves; for then he bid them take to themselves all the many Wisdom and
prudent Care of Serpents, Mat. 10.16. Indeed, if any one that injures or of
sends us, expresses himself sorry for it, and sufficiently Repents of it; we
ought, as I have shown, to admit him to his former state, and to treat him, now
he is a Penitent, as God does us, or as Children do their Play-Fellows, i. e.
as if he had never sinned, but had kept always innocent. But till we see that,
we may very lawfully, and very wisely too, withdraw from him our particular
Familiarity, Trust, or Friendship. If we find a Person Dishonest once, till we
see him a New man, we are not bound to trust him a second time; for that were
to give him an opportunity of committing, and put us into the danger of
suffering the same again from him. If it is his Temper to fall foul upon us in
Discourse, or to be passionate or reproachful upon light occasions; till it
appears that he has learned to act otherwise, we are not bound to use his
Company and Acquaintance: for that were not only to throw away our own ease,
but to endanger our own Meekness, Peace, and other Virtues, by casting our
selves upon Temptations; whenas we ought to be so far from seeking them our
selves, that we are Mat. 6.13.
taught to pray daily against those, which Gods Providence might allot for us.
If he lays wait to overreach, or is industrious to vex, or is any ways
uneasy, or prejudicial to us in his Conversation, we may lawfully carry our
selves at a distance from him, till he has reformed those Vices, or corrected
those ill* Tempers which harm or annoy us, and showed us that now with safety
to our selves we may come nearer to him. This distance we may use toward any
Persons that offend against us, out of a Natural Love and Care for our own
selves; but if they are our Children or Servants, or any ways Subject and
Dependant on us, there is still a more obliging Reason for it, and that is
their Amendment and Reformation likewise. For when the Fault is great enough to
bear it, these marks of our Displeasure are a necessary part of Discipline, and
altogether fit to be used, to make them duly sensible of it, and afraid ever
after to repeat it. Which is so far from being an unkind part toward them,
that in reality it is the truest way of showing kindness, being the most proper
course to amend them, and to bring them back at once to their former state of
innocence, and all expressions of our Favor too.

And thus it appears, that so long as we are careful to show our Enemies all
that Justice, Charity, and Peace, which is due to our Neighbor at large, and
to all other Persons; we have as much Love for them as God requires, though we
still remember their Injuries, and Unkindness, or think the worse of their
Persons as we have just cause, or use more Reserve, and keep a greater distance
toward them in our Carriage, and the like, than we did before they had
provoked us. We show all the Love which is expected, when we are not wanting to
them in any Offices of common Charity and Neighborhood: this makes us accepted
with Almighty God, and so fits us for the Holy Sacrament; so that although we
do not admit them to our particular Esteem and Friendship, whilst they have not
sufficiently evidenced that Repentance which should qualify them for it; that
ought not to put us back, and hinder us from partaking in it.

As for these Hindrances then, which detain some good People from this Feast,
viz. their remembering injuries, or thinking the worse of their Enemies, or
carrying themselves toward them at a distance, or excluding them from all
particular Trust and Confidence, and the like; so long as they show them all
that Love which is due to all men out of Common Charity and Neighborhood, and
are ready to show them more when their Repentance fits them for it; they ought
not in any wise to put them by it. They are no Breach of that Charity which God
has required, and therefore do not unfit them for the Holy Sacrament; so that
when they are all their hindrance, they need not stay away, but may cheerfully
approach to it.

CHAP. IV. Of Lawsuits.
The Contents.
They are an Hindrance from the Communion, when there is sin in them. They are
not sinful in themselves, which is shown, 1. From the necessity of them. 2.
From the Magistrates Office being appointed for them. 3. From Gods taking Legal
Determinations upon himself, as if he were the Author of them. 4. From Courts
erected by consent in the Apostles Days, which ministered to them. These St.
Paul prescribed to the Corinthians, 1 Cor. 6. They are the Assemblies mentioned
Jam. 2.2. 5. From our Saviors, and St. Paul's Practice, who, in claiming the
Benefit of them, warranted and authorized them. An objection from Mat. 5.38,
39, 40. considered; which is shown not to condemn defending our selves in any
case when others implead us; nor moving Suits in all, but only in case of
lighter L^sses and Indignities, such as our Savior there mentions, or making
them minister to Revenge in any others. And 1 Cor. 6.7. answered, which makes
them not a Damning sin, but only, when some Virtuous ends do not require them,
a Defect and Diminution. But they are sinful, 1. When they are begun upon an
unjustifiable Ground. Such they always are, 1. When they are Vindictive, not
Reparative; as when we sue insolvent Persons; or others upon such Words or
Actions, for which, besides costs, no Damages that are valuable are like to be
allotted us. 2. When they are for Reparation of small things, which countervail
not the evil and hazard of a Suit, but ought to be a matter of Patience and
Forgiveness, and so be quietly put up without recourse to it. In judging of
this smallness, we must not estimate by our own Pride and Passions; but by the
reality of things, and the Judgment of indifferent, humble, and dispassionate
Persons. This is true, not only in case of Injuries to our own selves, but also
in case of Trust, when we have the charge of others. 2. Suits are sinful when
they are carried on by a sinful management: As they are, when they make us
Transgress any of those Duties toward our Adversaries, which oblige us toward
all Persons. To avoid all these in suing is an hard point: So we must be slow
in coming to it, and very circumspect when we are forced upon it. The Answer to
this Hindrance summed up.

BEsides those Particulars, which I have considered in the last Chapter, there
is another want of Charity, which may seem of greater weight, and which is most
commonly pleaded in Excuse of men's abstaining from the Holy Sacrament; and that
is the point of Lawsuits. For this is very frequently given as a Reason why
men dare not receive the Communion, because they have a Legal Controversy with
their Neighbors, and a Suit depending.

Now as to Lawsuits, when they have no sin in them, they are like all other
indifferent things, and need not hinder men: but when they are sinful, they are
like all other sins, i. e. they unfit us till we show Repentance, and ought to
hinder us so long as we continue in them. But as then they are an hindrance to
a worthy Receiving; so are they equally to a worthy Prayer, and to all just
hopes of Heaven. Whilst we go on with them, we cannot pray to God, or think to
have our sins pardoned, or, should we be snatched away to Judgment in this
state, expect to be happy in another World. And this is a state, wherein no
considerate man will persist for one moment; but when he sees his Suit is so
offensive to God, and brings his Eternal welfare into so great hazard, he will
either manage it more innocently, so as that there shall be no offense in it;
or break it off without delay, and instantly put an end to it. And when once he
has done this, or is fully purposed in his own mind so to do; he is again a
Friend of God, and fit to join in the Holy Sacrament, as well as in Prayers, or
in any other part of Worship.

Thus does the weight of this Hindrance from the Communion, lie in the
innocence or unlawfulness of the Suit which is depending. And therefore that
Persons at Law may know when they are unfit to Communicate till they have put a
stop to it, and when they may do it notwithstanding it; I shall here state the
case of Lawsuits, and show when a Trial is our Fault, and when it is innocent,
that so we may know when we need not, and when we ought to be hindered by it.

In pursuit of this, I shall endeavor to clear up these two Particulars.

1. A Suit at Law is not a thing unlawful in it self, but may be innocent, if
nothing else comes in to make a sin of it. But then,

2. It is our sin and a matter of our account, when it is either upon an
unjustifiable Ground, or carried on by a sinful management.

1. I say, a Suit at Law is not a thing unlawful in it self, but may be
innocent if nothing else comes in to make a sin of it.

It is no unlawful thing barely to dispute a Title, or to bring an Action; it
is in some Cases allowed, as well as in others it is prohibited: so that a man
may be Faultless that has a Suit, unless something more comes in to make him a
Transgressour in it. The offense lies not in the Nature of it, so as to be
inseparable from the Thing; but only in the Cause, or in the manner of Suing:
for as St. Paul said of the Law of God among the Jews, so may we of the Laws of
our several Countries, the Law is a good thing if a man use it lawfully, 1 Timothy
1.8; it is no sin to use it or take the benefit of it, but only to transgress
some other Precept, or join some other sin with it when we do.

Now this may appear,

1. From the necessity of it.

2. From the Magistrates Office being appointed for it.

3. From Gods taking a Legal Determination upon himself, as if he were the
Author of it.

4. From Courts being Erected by consent in the Apostles Days, to minister to
it.

5. From the Practice of our Blessed Savior, and St. Paul who claimed the
Benefit of it, and thereby plainly warranted and authorized it.

1. It appears, I say, from the necessity of it. A Trial at Law must needs be
innocent in it self when nothing else corrupts it, because it is a thing we
cannot want, and there is no living in the World without it. For take away Law,
which should secure innocent men's Properties, and bridle all Envious, Angry,
Spiteful, Covetous, Insolent, and Ambitious men's rapacious and encroaching
humors: and, since all places are fully stored with these injurious Tempers,
the Wicked being by far the greatest numbers, the Quiet and Conscientious must
flee into Woods and Deserts, or, if they stay to Associate with others, become
every where a Prey to their greedy and usurping Neighbors. If there were no
Laws to protect them, there were no living in this World for good men; and in
effect there would be none, if it were a sin in them to try a Title, or Right
themselves by them. For no man that had a mind to it, would be awed from doing
wrong by a Law that is always to be a Sword in a Scabbard, and must never be
pleaded against him, or executed upon him when he transgresses it. The use of
Law then in this World is absolutely necessary to all Society, to keep Peace
and Justice in all Converse, and to protect and encourage all such as desire to
serve God and to be Conscientious. And since there is that necessity of it for
Gods Service, and all Virtuous Ends; it cannot in its own Nature be a thing
offensive, and unlawful to us. It cannot be it self a Sin, which God has made
so absolutely necessary to keep all others out: it must needs be allowed by
him, since without it his own ends of Peace and Justice cannot be attained; it
is at least sure an innocent, if not a good thing, which gives the only
protection to all Goodness, and without which there is no living for Good men
in Societies, where they may do God public Service, and draw in others, nor
indeed any safe abode for them upon the Earth at all.

2. That a Suit at Law is not sinful in it self, but may sometimes be innocent,
appears from the Magistrates Office being appointed for it.

One part of the Magistrates Office lies, indeed, in protecting his Subjects
against all Foreign Force and Invasions. But his most ordinary and constant
work, is to administer Justice, and maintain Peace among themselves; which is
done by hearing Causes, and judging in all Controversies and Arraignments,
giving Sentence on the side which the Law favors, and where the Right Lies.
Thus is ^t the Magistrates Office to hear Causes or Suits at Law, and to decide
them. And this work he does not assume to himself, either without, or against
Gods liking; but according to his appointment, and altogether with his
approbation. For by me, says Wisdom, Kings Reign, and Princes Decree Justice,
Prove. 8.15. And the Powers that be, says St. Paul, are appointed of God, they
are Gods Ordinance, Romans 13.1, 2. And since God himself appoints them to hear
our Causes, we may well presume he will not look upon it as our sin to bring
them to their hearing. For God would never appoint an Ordinance to minister
only to Men's sins, and to put them in a way of multiplying Offenses; so that
since he has appointed Officers to hear it, a Suit at Law in it self must needs
be innocent, and capable to be carried on without any sin at all.

Nay, God has not only appointed the Magistaates Office for it: But moreover,

3. When a Legal Determination is given, he takes it upon himself, as if he
were the Author of it; which is still a further Evidence that we do not sin
barely in seeking to it.

He takes a Legal Determination, I say, upon himself, as if he were the Author
of it. In the Jewish State, God was their Political Prince and Sovereign, and
the Judges among them were as much his Deputies, and did represent his Person,
as now the Judges do the Person of their several Princes in all other Nations.
And therefore Moses told them when he appointed them, that the Judgment was
God's, and that they gave Sentence only as his Deputies, and judged not for
themselves, but for the Lord, Deuteronomy. 1.17.

Now, though other Nations cannot look upon God as their Secular King, and
State-Head in all those Points which the Jews could, for he gave them Laws in
Civil Affairs, and issued out Directions in State Exigencies, and the like: yet
as to this they can, that all their Governors are but Substitutes under him,
and that he owns what is legally and justly Determined by them. For the
Magistrate he looks upon as his Minister and Vicegerent, who does all things in
his Name and Stead; the Power, says St. Paul, is the Minister of God, Romans
13.4. And since he acts as his Servant, he takes his judicial Determination
upon himself, as if it were his own, and he were the Author of it. For this he
does plainly in Criminal Causes, and the Case is the same in all other Judicial
that are not Criminal. When any man is wronged, says he, let him not avenge
himself, for Vengeance is mine, I will repay it; i. e. by the Magistrate who is
my avenger to Execute Wrath, so that when he punishes, you may look upon it as
if I had done it, Romans 12.19. and 13.4.

And since a Legal Determination is owned by God himself as if he were the
Author of it, we may be sure, whilst all things else are right, that there is
no hurt barely in our seeking of it. It can be no sin to ask what God grants,
for he hears not Sinners in their Sins, Joh. 9.31; nor can it give any Offense
in a controverted Case, to appeal to his own Sentence. So that since in all
Legal Determinations it is God himself, who by his Ministers passes Judgment;
we may be assured that we do not displease him in applying our selves thereto,
when there is just cause for it.

4. That a Suit at Law and all Judicial Process is not in it self a Sin,
appears from Courts being Erected by consent in the Apostles days, for the
Management and Conduct of them.

Now that such Courts were then Erected, I shall show from two places; one of
St. Paul, wherein he prescribes them; and another of St. James, wherein he
makes mention of them.

1. It appears from one place in St. Paul, wherein he prescribes them; and that
is 1 Cor. 6. where he orders the Corinthians to appoint Courts of Judgment
among themselves, that so they might have no need to expose their Religion, by
impleading one another before the Heathen-Tribunals. Do not ye know, says he,
that the Saints shall judge the World? And if the World shall be judged by you,
are ye unworthy to judge the smallest matters, or unworthy of the smallest
(...).
Judicatures? If then ye have Judgment of things pertaining to this Life, or if
ye have recourse to (...).
secular Judicatures; go not before Unbelievers, but set some, yea, rather than
Infidels, those that are least esteemed, or (...).
set at naught in the Church, set them, I say, to judge, or in the (...).
Chair of Judgment, v. 2, 4.

Thus does he advise them to erect among themselves standing Courts by consent,
when, the Power being in Heathens hands, they could not otherwise be supplied
in their own Body with Seats of Judgment.

2. It appears also from another Place in St. James, wherein he makes mention
of them. And that is Jam. 2.2, 3, 4. If there come into your Assembly or (...).
Synagogue a man with a Gold Ring, etc. Into your Assembly, i. e. your Judicial
Court, where the respect of Persons was not to be permitted.

That the word here rendered (...).
Assembly or Synagogue, signifies sometimes more particularly Court Assemblies,
and Judicial Consistories, appears from Mat. 10.17. where our Savior tells his
Disciples of being delivered up to Consistories, and scourged in their (...).
Synagogues i. e. in their Judgment Halls. And so also Mat. 23.34.

And that it ought to signify such Consistories and Court Assemblies, (which
were then used both in Ecclesiastical and Civil Affairs) in this place, appears
both from the thing it self, and from several particulars here spoken of these
Assemblies which seem so to determine it.

The thing it self, I say, seems so to require it. For in these Assemblies St.
James condemns all Respect of Persons, and discrimination of Rich and Poor, by
giving Honor according to Peoples Qualities: which was unlawful only in
Judicatures, but is a Duty in Conversation and Common Carriage. For it is an
Apostolical Precept, to give Honor to whom Honor is due, Romans 13.7. And those
Servants, who have believing Masters, are forbid to withdraw any thing of
their Respect, presuming upon their Spiritual Kindred, or to Honor them the
less, because they are become their Brethren in being Believers, 1 Timothy 6.2. So
that although in Judgment-Seats, not men's Qualities, but Causes only ought to
be respected; yet in other Assemblies a regard may be given to their Persons,
and it is commendable so to do.

And several Particulars here spoken of these Assemblies seem so to determine
it. For the Offenders here taxed with Respecting Persons in them, are said to
have a Footstool, which belongs to Chairs of State and Judicatures; to give
Evil Judgment; to pass Sentence against the poor M^ns Cause, without
deliberating on it, or debating it; and to transgress the Law in making a
difference according to men's Qualities, particularly in bidding the Rich to
sit, and the poor to stand, which was expressly forbid by a Canon of the Jews to
all that sat in Judgment: all which show that Courts of Judicature are the
Assemblies here specified.

The Offenders here taxed, I say, for respecting Persons in these Assemblies,
are said to have a Footstool. For so the Apostle expresses himself, v. 3. Ye
have respect to him that wears the gay clothing, and say unto him, sit thou
here in a good Place; and say to the Poor, stand thou there, or sit here under
my Footstool. And this is a probable intimation of their Dignity and Authority
in the place where they sat; for Foot-stools ordinarily are Appendages only of
the Chairs of Great Persons, who have Power and Superiority over others, as of
Princes on their Thrones, and Judges upon Tribunals.

They are said to give Evil Judgment, i. e. to pass Sentence on the wrong side,
as he is like to do who tries not Things but Persons, and determines from
By-respects, not from the merits of the Cause which is to be decided. By this
respect of Persons, says he, ye are become Judges of Evil Thoughts, i. e. you
give Evil and Perverse Judgments, v. 4.

They are said to pass Sentence on the Poor man's Cause, without deliberating on
it, or debating it. Ye say to the Rich, says he, sit thou here, and to the
Poor stand that at a distance there: So the Greek is literally to be rendered
The words are (...), and ye have not disputed it among your selves, (...), are
ye not partial in yourselves? by way of Interrogation, as we translate it. For
(...) is w^nt to ask a question, only when it is (...) first, not w^^n it h^s
anoth^r (...) it, as (...) is here. And (...) in the (...) have made a
difference, or act (...), which is exp^ess^d by the Active (...) but ye have
not been in doubt or d^spute (...) that ordinarily agrees (...) Mat. 21.21.
Mar. 11.23. Romans 4.2. Jam. 1.6. and in other places.
and ye are not doubtful or debate his Cause in or (...).
among your selves, but are Judges of evil Thoughts, or give perverse
Judgments; for so the words are most naturally rendered, and not, as we do, are
ye not partial in your selves, and Judges of Evil Thoughts? v. 3, 4. And this
shows plainly that their respect of Persons was expressed in Judicial Process,
in giving rash Sentence in favor of the Rich, without ever staying to hear the
Plea, or weigh the Reasons of the Poors Cause.

They are said to transgress the Law in this regarding Persons, and treating
them differently according to the difference of their outward State and
Condition; when in this different carriage toward Rich and Poor, ye have
respect of Persons, says he, ye commit sin, and are convinced of the Law, which
plainly forbids such practice, as Transgressors, v. 3.9. And this seems
clearly to restrain it to their Court-Assemblies. For in Judgment there is a
Law forbidding all respect of Persons, Ye shall not respect Persons in
Judgment, but you shall hear the small as well as the great, Deuteronomy. 1.17. and
Levit. 19.15. But there is no Law that forbids it, yea, rather, since St. Paul
injoins us to give Honor where Honor is due, and directs Servants to pay
never the less, but rather more Reverence to their Masters, because they are
Believers, and would not have 1 Cor. 14.33.
Confusion introduced, but Order kept in the Church as well as in other places;
there may seem enough, not only to warrant, but to recommend it in all other
Cases. Besides, what is still a further Evidence of this point, they are said
particularly to transgress the Law in bidding the Rich to sit, and the Poor to
stand, v. 3, 9; which, as a Dr. Ham. Annot. in loc.
great man observes, was a thing expressly forbid by a Canon of the Jews to all
that sat in Judgment. For that required in all Suits and Judicial Trials
betwixt Rich and Poor, that either both should stand, or both should sit; which
is a thing, as he adds, that the Jews observe at this day in hearing Causes;
for then, if one presuming upon his quality take a Seat, the Judge presently
says to the other, sit thou down also.

And thus I think it appears, that the Assemblies, which in this intricate
place St. James mentions, are Court-Assemblies and Judicial Consistories; both
because the Nature of the thing seems to require it, since in them he forbids
all respect of Persons, which elsewhere is not prohibited; and also because
several particulars here spoken of them seem so to determine it. For they are
said to be such Assemblies, wherein is a Footstool, the usual Appendant to
Chairs of State and Seats of Judgment; wherein men were Judges of Evil
Thoughts, i. e. judged wrong, and gave perverse See^tnce; wherein they
Condemned the Poor man's Cause without deliberating on it, and debating it;
wherein to respect Persons, was against a plain Law forbidding it, as we find
there is a very express one in Judicial Proceedings, but none at all, nay,
rather the contrary in all other Cases; and, lastly, such wherein to bid a Rich
man sit, and a Poor man stand, was a transgression of a Precept, as in Court
Assemblies it plainly is, being against an express Canon of the Jews in
Judgment. By all which I suppose it may appear, that Judicial Consistories are
the Assemblies here intended.

Thus were Judicatures prescribed, and ordinarily used in the Apostles Days.
St. Paul appoints the Corinthians to ere^t them; and St. James makes mention of
them as of an ordinary thing among them; and that too without passing any mark
of dislike upon the Courts themselves, when he blames that partiality and
respect of Persons which they showed in them. These Judicatures, indeed, were
erected by their own consent among themselves; and were not imposed on them by
Power and Authority, as other Legal Tribunals are: but they served for the same
end of hearing Causes, and passing such Sentence as should take effect and put
an end to Controversies, as other Judgment-Seats; so that the same thing was
done by them in suing in their Courts, which is done by us in ours. In our
Judgment-Halls, it is true, where things are managed by Advocates, that
oftentimes seek Conquest and not Justice, and ransack all Reserves of Law to
support, as long as Craft can do it, an unrighteous Cause; there is more room
for ill Arts, which bring more sin into our Pleadings. But that is not a Fault
inseparable from Suits, but is the sin of Managers; it lies not naturally upon
the thing, but only upon the Contingent circumstances and manner of doing; so
that if we are careful to keep it free from them, a Suit in it self may still
be innocent, and carried on as lawfully in our Courts, as it was in those of
the Apostles Days.

And as this Lawfulness of Judicial Process appears from these Legal Courts
erected in the Apostles Days to minister to it: so does it yet further,

5. From the Practice of our Blessed Savior, and St. Paul, who claimed the
benefit of it, and thereby plainly warranted and authorized it.

Our Blessed Lord himself, I say, claimed the Benefit of it. For when the
Officer in the Highpriests presence struck him with the Palm of his Hand, he
openly complains of the illegality of the Act, and expostulates before him for
a redress of it. If I have spoken Evil, says he, testify against me, and bear
witness of the Evil: but if well, why smitest thou me? Joh. 18.22, 23.

And after him St. Paul was not afraid to plead his own Cause, and serve
himself of Law, when others went about to use him with Violence contrary to it.
For when the Chief Captain ordered him to be scourged uncondemned, he pleads
the Legal Privilege of a Roman, who ought not to be so treated, Act. 22.24,
25. And when the Magistrates of Philippi, contrary to all Law and Privilege,
had scourged him and Silas, without any hearing of their Cause; he threatens
them for it, and would not put it up, unless in Compensation they would come
themselves in Person to release them out of Prison, and do them Honor before
all the Multitude: Act. 16.36, 37, 38, 39. Nay, he uses all wise Arts of Law to
maintain a Righteous Cause, and when he was not like to have Justice done him
in one Court, protests against it, and claims the Benefit of appeal to another.
For when Festus willing to do the Jews a Pleasure, would have had him go up to
be judged before him at Jerusalem, in the way whereto the Jews designed to
murder him; he answered, I stand at Caesar's Judgment Seat, where I ought to be
judged; if I have committed any thing worthy of Death, I refuse not to die; but
if there be none of these things whereof these accuse me, as thou very well
know, the Law of the Empire is my Protection, and no Man may deliver me unto
them, I appeal unto Caesar, Acts 25.3, 9, 10, 11.

And thus from all these Considerations it appears, that a Suit at Law is not a
thing unalterably evil, and unlawful in it self; but may very innocently be
carried on, if no Sin mixes with it to turn it into a Transgression. It is a
thing which God has allowed when we have just cause for it, and are guilty of
no Vice in the Course and Conduct of it. For he himself has put us into a
necessity of it, and has appointed the Magistrates Office for it, and takes
upon himself the just Judgment which is given in it; and when Christians became
a distinct Body, Courts were set up by the Order of the Apostles themselves to
Minister to it; and, as it fell in their way, our Blessed Lord, and St. Paul
too have served their own turns by it: By all which it is plain that a course of
Law may sometimes innocently be used, since otherwise God and these Good Men,
could never have been thus concerned about it.

But against all this some may urge two places, which seem to take away all
Suits among Christians, and to forbid all legal Defense, by requiring a patient
Sufferance of all Losses and Indignities which should occasion them. One is,
Mat. 5.39. in point of Indignities; the other is, Mat. 5.40. and 1 Cor. 6.7. in
point of Losses and spoil of Goods: And if both these must be suffered with
Patience, without any Legal Defense or Righting of our selves; what is there
left to be matter of Civil Causes for us to Sue and Contend for?

These Pleas seem fair, and therefore it is fit they should have an Answer.

One Place seems to forbid all Suits and Legal Righting of our selves, in case
of Affronts and Indignities; and that is, Mat. 5.38, 39. Ye have heard, says
our Savior, that it has been said in the Law of Moses, an Eye for an Eye, and
a Tooth for a Tooth: i. e. When any one had offered these Violences to them,
they were allowed by judicial Process (this Law of Retaliation being directed
to the Judges, Exodus 21.23, 24.) to inflict the very same on them again. But in
opposition to this, I say unto you, resist not Evil, or the Evil (...).
Man, not only forcibly by Private Violence, but also legally by public
process, for so the (...).
word rendered Resist as, Jer. 49.19. who will appoint me the time, or, as it is
rendered in the Margin, convent me to plead; which the 70 express by (...); And
so again, Chap. 50.44.
sometimes signifies, and its opposition to these Legal Retaliations among the
Jews here imports. But whosoever shall smite thee on the right cheek, turn to
him the other. And so again in case of Losses and spoil of Goods, ver. 40. If
any Man will Sue thee at the Law, and take away thy Coat or (...).
inner Garment; rather than contend with him for that, hazard a further Loss,
and let him take thy (...).
Cloak or upper Garment also. Conformable whereto the Apostle tells the
Corinthians, that they are utterly in a fault, in not suffering themselves to
be Defrauded, but seeking Remedy by a Suit or going to Law at all, 1 Cor 6.7.

Now in Answer to these places, I observe,

1. That (...) are not meant literally and absolutely, (...) ^urning our Cheek
to all Smiters, or (...) our Goods to all ravenous Encroach^^s: ^ea, that they
do not forbid us at any time to serve our selves of Law, when others implead
us; nor at all times to seek unto Magistrates, and implead others.

2. That they are meant proverbially, and only forbid moving Suits in lighter
Losses and Indignities, such as our Lord there mentions, or making the Law the
Minister of Revenge in any others.

1. I say, they are not meant Literally and absolutely, of turning the Cheek to
all Smiters, or yielding our Goods to all ravenous Incroachers; nor forbid us
at any time to serve our selves of Law, when we are brought before Tribunals.
For this our Blessed Lord himself did, as we have seen, when the Officer struck
him before the High Priest; he offers not himself for another blow, but argues
against the illegality of what he had already received, Joh. 18.22, 23. And
this St. Paul did, when the Chief Captain would have scourged him uncondemned;
he pleads the privilege of a Roman, which ought to secure him from being so
hardly treated, Acts 22.25. And this he did again, when Festus would have sent
him to Jerusalem to be Tried; he appeals to Caesar, and claims the Benefit of
his Judgment Seat where he ought to be judged, Acts 25.9, 10, 11. They did not
invite fresh injuries, by laying themselves open to them; but stood upon their
own Defense, and Legally withstood them. So that these Precepts are not to be
taken in the Literal Compass, (in which sense St. Paul, yea, and Christ himself
too, would have been Transgressors,) nor so as to forbid us at any time to
serve our selves of Law when we are brought before Tribunals: since St. Paul,
who very well understood them, nay, our Blessed Lord, who to the height
fulfilled them, have taught and authorized us by their Example so to do.

Nay, they do not forbid us in all Cases to bring others before Magistrates,
and seek unto Judicatories to Right our selves. For St. Paul did something
toward this in his Contest with the Philippian Magistrates; where, though he
was an Offender against the Laws, yet in regard they had treated him illegally,
in scourging him and Silas uncondemned, against the Privilege of Romans; he
terrifies them with it, and would not put it up, till they Compounded with him
upon his own Terms, and brought him honorably out of Prison in the Eyes of all
the Citizens, Acts 16.36, 37, 38, 39. Besides, as I have already shown, that
this is sometimes lawful among Christians, is evident from the Law-Courts in
the Apostles Days, which were prescribed by the Apostles themselves for this
very purpose. It is clear from the necessity of it, since there is no living in
this World for honest and Conscientious Men without it: From Gods having
appointed an Officer on purpose, the Magistrate I mean, to take care of it; and
from his taking a just Law-Determination upon himself, a^ if he were the Author
of it: So that some seeking unto Courts, and judicial endeavors to Right our
selves, are still innocent; and therefore all cannot be here prohibited.

As for these Places then, they are not meant Literally and Absolutely of
turning our Cheek to all Smiters, or of yielding our Goods to all ravenous
Encroachers: They do not forbid us at any time to serve our selves of Law when
others unjustly implead us; nor at all times to seek unto Magistrates, and
implead others.

But,

2. They are meant Proverbially, and only forbid MOVING Suits in Lighter Losses
and Indignities, such as our Lord there mentions; or making Law the Minister of
Revenge in any others.

They require Patience, and forbid MOVING Suits in lighter Losses and
Indignities. To turn the Cheek to a Smiter, is a Proverbial Speech, which
denotes our calm endurance and patient bearing of injuries. And so the
Afflicted Man's Patient carriage is expressed, Lam. 3. -- he gives his Cheek to
him that smites him, v. 30. And to let him that Sues for the Coat, i. e. the
(...).
Shirt or inner Garment, take the Cloak also, is a Proverbial Phrase too, (for
in the truth of the Letter, a Shirt is no likely matter of a Lawsuit,) and
signifies an uncontesting sufferance of such small Losses, tho that may expose
us to bear some others, and those more weighty ones. So that when our Savior
bids us give the other Cheek to the Smiter, and the upper Garment to him that
has taken away the inner, i. e. to venture the inviting him to a second injury
by his success, rather than to engage in variance: His meaning is, that in
these, or such other light injuries, which either leave no permanent effect, or
only such as may be born without any great Prejudice; we should exercise our
Patience, and not go to Law, either to recompense the past, or to prevent
future sufferings. And therefore if in these smaller matters we enter Actions
and implead others, that indeed is our Sin; since here he enjoins us Charitably
and Patiently to bear, and not to Sue for them.

And as they forbid all Suits in these, so do they all Malice, and making Law
the instrument of Revenge in any others. Ye have heard, says our Savior, that
it has been said an Eye for an Eye, and a Tooth for a Tooth: i. e. they were
allowed in course of Law to return ill who had suffered it, when as in these
instances mentioned, they had no other benefit by it, but only the pleasure of
seeing him smart who had occasioned it; which is properly Revenging it, for to
Revenge an injury is in hatred to return it. But in opposition to this, I say
unto you, (so that Revenge being the thing there allowed, it must in the
opposition be here prohibited) resist not evil, i. e. in any kind of
Resistance, which is Revenging it as they might: But whosoever shall smite thee
on the right cheek, turn to him the other, etc. i. e. Be readier to suffer
another injury, than spitefully to commence a Suit, or in any sort to Revenge
what is received already, v. 38, 39, 40.

As for this place in St. Matthew then, it forbids us not to defend our selves
by Law in any case, nor in all to bring an Action and implead others: But it
only forbids Suits in lighter Losses and Indignities, such as our Lord there
mentions, and making the Law the instrument of Revenge in weightier matters.

But even in those Cases, where it is no Sin to use Law, and our Savior Christ
has not forbid it: Yet if it is only our own concern and no point of Trust, it
is a more noble thing, and a greater pitch of Christian Perfection, to abstain
from it.

When we are in trust for others, indeed this is not to be advised; for we must
not be Generous in Charities at their cost, nor affect heights in Patience when
they are to pay for it: lest whilst we aim at a great pitch of Passive Virtues,
and Love toward Offenders, we be found wanting in Justice and Faithfulness
toward our own Charge. And this is to be extended not only toward Strangers,
who are voluntarily committed to us; but also in due measure, to our own
Children and Families, for whom we ought to 2 Cor. 12.14.
provide convenient support, and whom God and Nature have entrusted to us.

But when the Loss is only to our selves, and does not any way Defraud others
of what they might in Reason claim from us, or, as in the Case of Pious or
Charitable Works, of what we had allotted them in our own Designs: tho without
Sin we might Sue for it, yet does it show more of that Charity which 1 Cor.
13.5.
seeks not her own, and is a nobler attainment in a Christian, Patiently to sit
down under it; as Athenagoras tells us the Christians in his time usually did,
who Their way is, (...). Athen. Legate. p. 12.
when their Goods were violently seized would not draw the injurious Persons
into Judgment. And this St. Paul affirms of it, 1 Cor. 6. There is utterly or
(...).
altogether a fault or a (...).
defect among you, because ye go to Law at all one with another. Why do ye not
rather take wrong? Why do you not rather suffer your selves to be defrauded? v.
7. He does not condemn it as a Sin; but only as a defect, or thing that
lessened them. Their Suing before unbelievers, he tells them was a sinful
Course; because as their Case stood, who impleaded each others, and that too
for injuries, it was a Scandal to their Enemies, and exposed the Christian
Cause, v. 1.6. But as for their bare going to Law it self, it was not so. For
he tacitly intimates they might do it before the Saints -- Dare any of you,
having a matter against another, go to Law before the unjust, says he, and not
before the Saints, much rather? v. 1. Nay he orders them that they should do
it, and erect Judicatures among themselves for that intent. Go not before
Infidels, says he, but set those who are least esteemed among your selves to
Judge, or set them in the Seat, or (...).
Chair of judgment, v. 4.2, 3. This was ordinarily done in other places, where
they had Judicial Assemblies, as I have shown from Jam. 2.2. Yea, and where
they had not, but must implead before a Gentile Judgment Seat, when the Scandal
that now accompanied their Case was not incurred, he himself had given
Countenance to it, and threatened Legally to Right himself before the Heathen
Magistrate, Acts 6.37, 38, 39. But although their Suits at Law in weightier Cases
were no Sin, yet he tells them they were their Lessening and Diminution: And
that albeit they might with a safe Conscience use them, yet would it show more
Contempt of Earthly Things and Mortified Passions, more Generous Charity, and
Stronger Patience, and a greater height of Christian Perfection, to retain. It
is, says he, altogether not a (...).
Sin, but a (...).
Lessening and Diminution to you, that you go to Law one with another. And
because there is only a Defect, but no Transgression in it; he does not
absolutely condemn, but only comparatively dissuade from it. Why do ye not
rather take wrong? Why do you not rather suffer your selves to be defrauded? 1
Cor. 6.7.

As for these places then, which seem to forbid Suits either on Losses or
Indignities, they do not forbid them absolutely, and in all Cases. They only
forbid us to fly to them in smaller matters, such as our Savior mentions; or
to make them a means of Revenge in Great ones; or say of Suits in General,
where a public end or some other Virtue does not require them, that they are,
although not our sin, yet our Defect and Diminution: So that whenever they
are sued at Law, the best men may serve themselves of it; and when they are
greatly injured, though 'twere better to let it alone, yet may they safely seek
to it, and, without any offense to God or wrong to a good Conscience, implead
others still.

And thus it appears that Suits at Law are not sinful in themselves, but may
lawfully be used, if there is no unlawfulness in the Ground, and way of
management. The thing it self has no sin in it, and so may be innocent if we
take care that no other sin adhere to it. So that barely to try a Title is no
matter of any man's account, nor has any offense at all in it.

But although Suits at Law are not thus unlawful in themselves, but may
sometimes be innocent; yet as I said,

2. They are our sin and a matter of our account, when they are either entered
upon an unjustifiable Ground, or are carried on by a sinful Management.

1. I say Suits at Law are our sin, and a matter of our account, when they are
begun upon an unjustifiable Ground.

It is not every cause that usually begets it, which can warrant before God,
and Justify a Lawsuit. For sometimes men are led on to it only by Revenge,
when they have no lasting Damage to be repaired, but seek only their Brothers
smart, and to be even with him who offered it: and then the Suit must needs be
unlawful, having a sin at the bottom of it. And at other times, when there is a
real Damage, yet is it so trivial as that the making of it up will not
countervail the Evils and Temptations of a Suit; and then it will be sinful
still, as wanting a Ground of so much weight, as can bear the burden of it. For
a Trial at Law, besides its being a costly and painful thing, is also a very
perilous State, and a dangerous Temptation. It will be sure to put him we sue
to much trouble and pains in Collecting and Examining Evidences, preparing
Witnesses, informing Advocates, and attending Courts, which is toil in it self,
and an hindrance to better business: and in the whole Course and Conduct of it,
it will put him to constant Charges and Expense. And it will be a State of
great Temptation, both to him and to our selves, insnaring us, unless we are
very circumspect to prevent it, into covetous Wishes, or delays of Justice, or
vexatious Arts, or uncharitable Surmizes, and revengeful Thoughts, or deceitful
Suggestions and Falsifications, Hypocritically disguising the weakness of our
own Cause, or unreasonably aggravating those of our Adversaries to our own
profit and his prejudice, and the like. These sins are ever before men whilst a
Suit is depending, they have constant opportunities for them, and are
perpetually provoked into them; and it must be a great Conduct, as well as a
great Care that must preserve them from being engaged in them. And since there
is so much Toil attending it, so great Charge occasioned by it, and so many
Temptations and great Dangers, both to our own Souls and our Brothers, laid in
the way of it: it must not be a light thing, but a weighty Cause indeed, which
can over-balance all these Considerations, and justly draw us to commence it.

But in this point to be more Particular. Suits are unlawfully entered when they
are begun, either,

1. For Revenge, and not for Reparation of Damages.

Or,

2. When for Reparation only of small things, which cannot countervail the evil
and hazard of a Suit, but ought to exercise our Patience and Forgiveness, and
so be put up without Recourse to it.

1st. I say, Suits are unlawfully entered, when they are Vindictive not
Reparative, and are begun only for Revenge, not for Repair of Damages. And this
they always are, when they are commenced either against insolvent Persons; or
upon such words and actions against others, for which, besides Costs, no
Damages that are valuable are like to be allowed us.

They are not Reparative, but Vindictive, when they are commenced against
insolvent Persons. When we sue a poor man, who cannot pay what he ows, or
recompense what he has wrongfully done to us, it is not that our own Sore may
be healed, but only that his Smart may be wrought by it. For the Law does not
make him Coin Money that has it not, but only forces him to pay it, who has it,
but will not part with it. To put a Beggar in Prison, and run him out at Law to
the utmost, is not the way to put Money in his Pocket; so that when we have to
do with such, it is only Revenge upon him, and not the Compensation of our own
Loss, which can be sought by it. If we go to right our selves by Law then upon
an insolvent man, we go only to return the hurt which he has done, and to be
even with him. And this is a great instance of an hard Heart, and a spiteful
Spirit; and is quite contrary to that Brotherly-kindness, Compassion, and
Forgiveness, which, how unworthy soever he may be of it, yet so long as the
misery of his case requires it, God has enjoined us to use toward him. It is
exactly to deal with him, as the wicked man did with his insolvent Brother in
the Parable, which provoked God to return the same Rigor upon his own head
again. For when he ought his Lord ten thousand Talents, he freely forgave him
that great Debt, because he was not able to pay it: But when his
Fellow Servants, who ought him only an hundred Pence, could not tender down that
small s^mm when he demanded it, he showed nothing of that Compassion toward
this poor man which God had shown to him, but laid hands on him, and cast him
into Prison till payment should be made. But when the Fellow Servants told this
to their Lord, he resolves to deal with him in his own way, and strictly exacts
that Debt, which otherwise he intended freely to have acquitted, delivering
him, as he had done his Brother, to the Tormentors, till all should be
discharged. And so likewise shall my Heavenly Father do to you, says our
Savior, if ye from your Hearts forgive not every one his Brother their
Trespasses, Mat. 18. v. 24. to c. 19.

But if they are commenced against responsible Persons, they are not Reparative
but Vindictive still, if they are upon such Words or Actions, for which,
besides Costs, no Damages that are valuable are like to be allowed us. A great
number of Suits are for abusive Words, or a Box on the Ear, or some other
trivial matters, which leave no Permanent ill effects, but if our Passions may
be withheld from estimating them, pass off without making. us the worse, or
doing us any Prejudice. And in all these, since there is no Damage sticks to
us, there is no need of any Reparations: so that if we begin Suits, it is not
to indemni^ie our selves, but to be vexations and afflict others who have
afflicted us, wherein consists the very Nature of Revenge.

And this is always unlawful, and most expressly forbidden to all us Christians.
To the Jews, indeed, it was allowed in the Old Testament: For they were
permitted to return ill for ill, and to demand an Eye for an Eye, and a Tooth
for a Tooth, when thereby their own lost Member was not restored, but only
their Adversaries sent after it, and, bating the Pleasure of Revenge, they
reaped no other Benefit by it, Mat. 5.38. But this is most strictly forbidden
to all us Christians in the New. For we are taught to recompense to no man Evil
for Evil, but to overcome Evil with Good, Romans 12.17, 20, 21: to forgive those
that Trespass against us, i. e. not to return their injurious, or hard usage,
as ever we expect forgiveness of our own Trespasses at Gods hands, Mat. 6.12,
14, 15. And particularly in opposition to this going to Law for Revenge, our
Savior forbids us Judicially to resist the Evil man, as has been shown, i. e.
in course of Law to return the Evil on him, as by Virtue of that Rule An Eye
for an Eye, etc. the Jews did; but in stead of that, by the Phrase of turning
one Cheek to him who has struck the other, requires that we patiently submit
and sit down under it, Mat. 5.38, 39, 40.

This then is the first thing which God requires to the Lawfulness of all
Judicial Trials; they must never be Vindictive, but Reparative, and we must not
Sue another in order to his Smart and Prejudice, but only to heal or secure our
own selves, either by holding the Goods which he cl^ims, or repairing the Loss,
which he has (...) us.

2. Suits for Reparation of Losses are unlawful, when the Reparations are only
of small things which cannot countervail the evil and hazard of a Suit, but
ought to exercise our Patience and Forgiveness, and so be quietly put up
without Recourse to it.

In the Course of secular Wisdom, indeed, which looks only to secure the
Concerns of this World, when men are Rich or Potent, and have Wealth or
Interest enough to go through with it, the smallest Affronts or infringement of
their just Power and Privilege, are oftentimes esteemed a sufficient occasion
of a Lawsuit. For thereby they think they stop the first Breach in their own
Right, which if it be suffered to be once made, as it is in the Breach of a
Water-Bank, or a fortified Wall, it is after that a much easier thing to widen
it; they cheek an incroaching (...) in the bud, before it has got Heart or
Ground enough to make a greater Contest; and they show the World they are not
of a yielding Temper that will be wronged or baffled, and thereby strike an
awe, which will keep all others from attempting them, and purchase their own
quiet. Upon these, or such like secular Maxims, when nothing but the interest
of this World guides them, they many times conclude the sleightest wrongs are
not to be put up, and therefore, when in any trivial thing their Right is
invaded, betake themselves to course of Law for Maintenance and Vindication of
it.

But in Religion the Case is altered. For that seeks not only what is fit to
secure our selves, and maintain our worldly Rights; but what is fit to maintain
an Universal innocence, and to show Charity toward others. Its main work lies
in lessening the Love of this World, and making us easy to part with any
enjoyment of this Life, when it is inconsistent with any Duty, and indangers
our Passage to a better. And therefore although secular wisdom would perhaps
sometimes advise us, yet will true Religion altogether forbid us to go to Law
for trivial Losses. For a Suit at Law, as I have noted, will put our Adversary
to great Cost and Pains; and since in Christianity he is our Neighbor and our
Brother, this we ought not to do for little things, whereby we shall not gain
near so much as he loses, for this is not according to the Mat. 22.39.
Commandment, to Love him as our selves. Nay, it will be a great snare, both to
his Virtue and ours; for although it be no state of direct sin, yet is it a
state of very dangerous Temptation, there being so many ways to offend whilst a
Suit is carrying on, and it being so very hard to avoid them without great
Conduct and Circumspection. And this also we ought not lightly to cast, either
in the way of our own Souls, or of our Brothers; yea, we shall not do it, if we
have any of that tender Love and Care for Souls which Christ has showed, and
which he requires us to show, when, upon a prospect of saving them, he commands
us, not only to bear a Reproach, or to part with our Substance; but even to lay
down our own Lives for others, 1 John 3.16.

Thus, when the Damages to be repaired are but of small account, and the
trouble and charges of the Suit will take much more from him, than we are like
to get by it: out of our tender care of all Persons, whom God commands us to
Love as we do our selves; and out of our Love to each others Souls, and desire
to keep, both our selves and them from dangerous Temptations, which would rob
us of our Innocence, a thing that ought not to be hazarded for trifling
Regards; we ought patiently to bear the Loss, and not seek out by Law to
redress it. And this, as I have intimated, is what our Savior expressly
commanded Mat. 5. If one smite thee on thy right Cheek, which is a tolerable
affront, turn to him the other also, or expose thy self to be smitten again,
rather than judicially resist it. And if any man sue thee at the Law, to take
away thy Coat, or inner Garment, a thing that may easily be spared, hazard an
higher Loss, and let him take thy Cloak also, rather than sue to regain it. v.
38, 39, 40. So that rather than sue to recover little matters, and enter
Actions for small Reparations, we must be content to want them, and sit down
without any Repairs at all.

And in rating when things are thus little and frivolous, we must not judge by
our own Pride and Passions, which count nothing little, but aggrandize every
affront or injury that is done to our own selves: but by the reality of things,
and according as we our selves should judge were we humble and dispassionate,
or as they would be judged of by other Holy and Indifferent Persons. Our own
Pride, and the Opinions of the World would whisper to us, that every Trespass
against us is intolerable, and deserves a Process; every imputation of a Lie, a
Stab; and every actionable Affront, a Suit at least, if not a Challenge. But
Pride, and Passion, and the Opinions of the World, must not be our Counselors:
for we renounced them at our Baptism, when we were first made Christians; and
if we would please God, they must not sway, but ought daily to be mortified and
subdued in us. And since they are so much our Sin, and so directly against our
Baptismal Vow and Profession: it will be no excuse for going to Law on little
Losses and Indignities, to say we thought them Great through their being our
Advisers. In judging then what are little things, we must not be governed by
our own Pride and Passions, but by the reality of things, and the Judgments of
dispassionate, humble Persons. And this our Lord plainly shows, by setting down
a Box on the Ear, (which in reality does no hurt, nor leaves any permanent
effect behind it) among those light Indignities which ought not to be a matter
of a Suit, though every where the Pride, and Passions of men, and particularly
at that (...), the haughtiness of the Jews, thought it a great thing, which
ought by all means to be recompensed. For this, as a Dr. Light^. Hor. Heb. in
Mat. 5.39.
Learned man observes, was their Rule about it. Does any Person give his
Neighbor a box on the Ear? let him give him a Shilling, yea, says Rabbi Judah,
a pound; or if it were upon the Cheek, let him give him 200 i. e. in English
^^in 6. l. 5^.
Zuzes to make amends for it. Nay, if he give him another Box, he ought to give
him 400 to recompense it. So great did they think the Indignity to a Jewish
man, esteeming all their own Nation, as he observes from Maimonides, even those
of the most beggarly condition, to be Gentlemen, because they were all the
Children of Abraham.

And thus it appears when a Suit is unlawful upon this first account, viz. its
entering upon an unjustifiable Ground. For such it is in all Cases, when we
bring an Action only for Revenge, and not for Reparation of Damages; or when
for the Reparation of such small things, as ought not to expose us to all the
Evils and Temptations of a judicial Process, but to Exercise our Patience and
Forgiveness: which smallness of things is to be rated, not by men's Pride and
Passions, which esteem no ill small that is done to themselves, but by the
reality of things, and the Judgment of Humble and Dispassionate persons.

And this holds true, not only in Losses and Indignities offered to our selves;
but also in the Case of Trust, when they are offered to others who are
committed to us. For when Suits are Sinful, as we have seen they are in the
Case of Revenge, and of lighter affronts and injuries, which Christ Commands us
not to redress by Law, but to bear with Patience: I see no difference, but an
equal unlawfulness, whether we Sue upon our own, or upon their Accounts. For
surely our taking of a Trust does not engage us to Disobey our Lord, or do any
evil thing; but only to do all that which we can, for those committed to us, as
Good Christians and Honest Men. And therefore in lighter matters when Suits are
sinful, we may no more Sue for them, than we can tell a Lie, or Swear an Oath,
or Overreach in their Cause, or be guilty of any other Transgression. If they
were come up to Act in their own Name, in these cases a Judicial Trial would
not be lawful, but a sin in them: And where they themselves could not Sue, we
must not think that we, who Act only as their Proxies and Representatives, may
do it for them. If these Losses and Indignities which are showed to them were
offered to our selves, we ought not to commence an Action, but to be patient
under them: And they have no Reason in the World to think us wanting either in
our Trust, or Friendship, when we do all that to the utmost in their Case,
which we durst do in our own.

So far then as Suits are Sinful, and to put up injuries without entering
Actions for repairs is a strict Duty, as it plainly is in case of lighter
Losses and Indignities; it equally obliges us in Trust for others, as in our
own Business. Where it is no Duty, indeed, and a Suit is not a Sin, but only a
Defect and Diminution, as it is in the Case of greater injuries, there is a
Difference, and tho it were commendable still to refrain in our own Case, yet
it is not in theirs. In the former Instances, to forbear is a necessary point,
having an express Precept for it; and necessary things may be done for them by
those that represent them, without their own consent and approbation. But in
these Cases where it is no sin, to forbear is no necessary Duty, but a voluntary
Act: And it is no part of our Trust to perform voluntary heights, and
unrequired Generosities at their cost: but if ever these be done, they must be
left to themselves, when, by making it a matter of their own choice, they
themselves may have the Virtue and the Reward of it. So far then as the putting
up an injury without a Suit is no Strict Duty, but only a Free Will Offering,
and a Voluntary Act, it must not be done in their Case, tho in our own it were
much to be commended. But when Patience is a Duty, and Suits are sinful,
whether it be their concern or ours it matters not, for both are equal. We must
be faithful to our Lord, and observe the Duties of Patience, Peace,
Forgiveness, and all other Laws of God, in acting for others as well as for our
selves; so that when there is no justifiable Ground of Suit, we must abstain
from it, whether it be for Public or for Private ends, whether our Charge or
we that are concerned in it. And this I have noted for the use of those, who, I
think, are greatly out in this point: For there are several, that would, or at
least pretend thy would bear much in their own Business, who will bear nothing
at all, and yet think they are not litigious in commencing Suits for every
trifle, when they are in Trust for others.

But as some Suits are thus unlawful, because they are upon an unjustifiable
Ground; so, when the Grounds are good, are others unlawful,

2. Because they are carried on by a sinful management.

A Suit at Law is a very dangerous state, and has strong Temptations to several
sins accompanying it: And if, when there is just Cause for it, any of these are
incurred in the management, it is our Sin still, and we shall be put to answer
for it.

To show what these are, and when Suits are unlawful upon this account, I
observe, that when we have an Action against any Man, we must for all that look
upon him as our Neighbor, and love him as our selves, paying him all that
Justice, Peace, and Charity, which is due to all Persons. And this is hard to
do when Men pursue any controversies wherein their Interest is concerned,
especially when they are Public, and if they do not succeed, the Eyes of the
World look on to see them worsted, as it is in Lawsuits. For then Conquest is
the end that is ordinarily sought, and in prosecution of that Men's Passions
generally are engaged; and both these are opposite to the Love of others, and
seek only to please our selves, and so push us on to transgress this great Law
of Charity in several instances. For where Conquest is the end, there is much
Emulation and Strife to gain it, and where Envy, or Emulation, (...).
and Strife is, says St. James, there is confusion and every evil work, Jam.
3.16. And where Passion is high, and Anger is once moved, there a Law of Love
is not like to be observed; for, as the same Apostle says, the Wrath of Man
works not the Righteousness of God, Jam. 1.20. And since Lawsuits generally
have both these attending them, they do too often lead the Litigants, God
knows, into many breaches of Justice, Peace, and Charity toward each other,
particularly into these following.

If their Cause is bad, they use delays to tire out their Adversaries; they
feign Pleas to gain time for themselves, and insist upon Punctili^s in his
Proceedings wholly foreign to the merits of the Cause, to make him begin all
afresh, and hunt out all Reserves of Law to prolong the Suit, and suspend the
Sentence. And this, besides its being most opposite to Love and
Brotherly-kindness, and being a course most uncharitable and vexatious, is also
a most unjust thing, being a doing wrong as far as in them lies, and
endeavoring, what they can, to put an hindrance and stop to Justice.

And whether it be good or bad, they generally incur many Sins in pursuit of
it, and fall into sundry instances of Injustice and Incharitableness to succeed
in it.

They have a longing desire to overcome, and to have the Verdict pass for them,
be it right or wrong; which is coveting other Men's Goods, against the Law of
the Tenth Commandment, Exodus 20.17. And this disposes them to Judge all in
Favor of their own Right, and to fret and murmur when they have lost the
Verdict, and to suspect (if not complain) of Injustice in the Judge and Jury,
who were concerned in it; against the plain Duty of Patience, Reverence to
Governors, and meek submission under Judgment.

They watch their opportunity to take Advantage of their Adversaries
oversight, or to bring the Trial on at a time when he does not expect, or is
unprepared for it: which is not only against the great Law of Charity, that, as
St. Paul says, seeks not her own at others Men's hurt, 1 Cor. 13.5; but also
against Justice, which forbids Defrauding or going beyond our Brother in any
matter, when we can Overreach and Out-wit him in it, 1 Thessalonians. 4.6.

They suggest False Pleas, or supply Circumstances out of their own Heads in
favor of their Cause, and when a little more would do it, stretch beyond the
Truth to each out an Evidence, and make the matter fall to serve their purpose;
which is clearly against the Duty of Simplicity, and speaking the plain Truth
with our Neighbor.

They have an inward hatred against their Adversaries, which makes them envious
when any good (especially in the Process of the Cause) befalls them; and glad
when any ill has happened to them, and apt to surmise ill things of them, and
defame them as often as they can find a fit occasion, and to watch all
opportunities of being Revenged on them, and to burst out into Anger and
exasperating Carriage, Strife and Variance, Clamor and bitter Words against
them, upon any the least Provocation: all which are directly contrary to the
Great Duty of Love and Charity, which Romans 12.15.
rejoices with them that do rejoice, and weeps with them that weep; which 1
Cor. 13.4, 5.
suffers long and is kind, which thinks no Evil, which Romans 12.17, 21.
renders Good for Evil; which Ephesians. 4.31.
puts away all Bitterness, and Wrath, and Anger, and Clamor, and
Evil-speaking, with all Malice; and ingages us, so far as it is Romans 12.1^.
possible, and as much as in us lies, to live peaceably with all men.

Lastly, They Love to be vexatious, and cut out work for their Adversaries,
deferring a Trial several Terms for no other end, but to make them throw away
both their Money and Pains in attending to prevent a Surprise; or putting them
to prove needless things, which influence not the merits of the Cause; or
insisting on every fetch of Law, that may be an hindrance in their way, though
it is no way necessary to the main business; or studying other mischievous Arts
of creating them trouble, and being vexatious; which is absolutely against the
Loving of our Neighbor as our selves, and having a Brotherly-kindness, and
Gal. 6.10.
doing Good as we have opportunity to all Persons; and is that very sin which
St. Paul mentions, and which he expresses by wickedness or mischievousness, i.
e. a studying to do mischief, and make (...), Suid.
work for others, Romans 1.29.

Thus, to mention no more, are all these Prolongations of Suits, and delays of
Justice, these Covetous Desires and Acts of Impatience, these Arts of
Circumvention and going beyond our Adversaries, these deceitful Suggestions and
Falsifications in Pleadings, these mischievous and vexatious ways, this Hatred,
Envy, Evil-speakings and Surmises, Anger, Bitterness, Strife, Clamor, Revenge,
etc. which are so ordinarily the Concomitants of Judicial Causes, most unlawful
and forbidden things; so that whenever we have any Suits depending, we sin in
them, if any of these intrude and mix with them. A Judicial Controversy that
is begun upon a Justifiable Ground, will not be innocent if it is carried on by
so unjustifiable a management. And therefore to clear our Consciences in all
Legal Trials, we must take care not only that, after all other means of
righting our selves have failed, the Suit be Commenced for a thing of weight,
which is a justifiable Ground; but also that it be pursued in all this Justice,
Charity, and Peace, which makes a justifiable management: For it is not enough
that the Cause be good, unless the manner of maintaining it be good too.

This, I must confess, is an hard Point, because in managing a Suit we are in
the way of so many sins, and meet at every turn with strong Temptations, which
must needs very much endanger us. For all the way these sins lie before us; so
that unless we have a constant care, we shall step into them. They generally
serve our ends, and set on the cause; so that we are still under a Temptation
to them. And, what through our own Interest and the desire of Conquest; what
through the opposition that is made; unless we are very Circumspect, our
Passions will be engaged; and then, more or less, we shall be hurried into the
Commission of them. So that if no Suit be innocent where the Ground is good,
except all these sins be avoided in the management; it will be a very hard
thing, may some say, to sue innocently, and appeal to Courts at all.

This, indeed, is very true, and I am ready to confess so too. For though some
even-temper'd men, who are endowed not only with great goodness, but also with
great Discretion and Government of themselves, may do it with some ease, and
not find it very difficult: yet are those men very few in Number, who are so
well set out and qualified for it. But ordinarily it is a very difficult task,
and there is great danger of offending God attending it. For I think there is
hardly any thing that shows more the Conduct and Goodness of a man, than to be
able to keep innocent whilst he is put upon contending, and so to manage a
Suit, or other Contest, as that, when he has done, his own Conscience shall
have no cause to accuse or condemn him for it. But then the effect of this can
be nothing else, but that men be very slow in coming to it, and very
Circumspect in all they do, when in a thing of weight, after other means have
been tried in vain, they cannot avoid it. It must make them slow in coming to
it, I say; and this, besides its quitting them of the hazard, will, I believe,
make also for their ease; for they will generally find less difficulty in
bearing Loss, than in keeping innocent, whilst they seek Judicially to repair
it. But when the thing is of so great weight, that a Suit cannot well be
avoided; it must make them very Circumspect and Watchful over themselves all
the time it is going on, lest they incur any of these sins in pursuit of it.
The greatness of their Care must answer to the greatness of the Danger, so that
they must resolve to set a strict Guard upon themselves in suing, or else not
venture to begin any Suit at all.

And thus it appears, that although in it self a Suit at Law be an innocent
thing, yet when it is either begun upon an unjustifiable Ground, or carried on
by a sinful management, it is not innocent, but defiles the Conscience of a
Christian. It is our sin, and we must account for it, when we seek Revenge by
it, or Reparation of a thing so small as cannot bear it, or of a weighty matter
by delays of Justice, Falsifications, Vexatious Arts, or any other Instances of
Injustice, or Incharitableness, which is a sinful way of managing it. When this
is the state of it, there is a great offense in it; and whilst that lasts, it
deprives us of the Favor of God, and ought to exclude us from the Holy
Sacrament: whereas, were it free of these, there would be no hurt in it, nor
any Cause at all why a good Soul should be hindered by it.

As for this Hindrance then, whereby Devout minds are oft-times withheld from
coming to this Feast, viz. their being engaged in a Lawsuit; we see now at
length what weight is to be laid upon it, and when indeed they ought to be
hindered by it. For if there are no Damages to be expected in the Cause, but we
sue only for Revenge; or if, when there are, they are so small as will not bear
a Suit, but ought to be a matter of Forgiveness; or if, when the Loss is of
that moment which would justify a Suit, we transgress any instances of Justice
or Charity in managing the Process: our Suit is our sin, which will not be
forgiven us till we show Repentance. When it is unlawful upon the
unjustifiableness of the Ground, we sin in it till we put an end to it; and
when upon some particular Injustice, or Vncharitablness in the way of
management, we sin in it till that particular is Corrected and Amended. And so
long as we are Impenitent in either of these, we are unfit for the Holy
Sacrament, since no man, who allows himself in any sin, is worthy to partake of
it. But then we are equally unfit to Pray, or perform any other Religious
Service, or hope for the Forgiveness of our Sins and Eternal Happiness;
because, as I have formerly observed, Justice, Peace, and Charity, and other
Virtues, are equally necessary in all these Cases. If our Suit then is either
upon an unwarrantable Ground, or sinful in the way of management; so long as
this sin lasts and is unamended, we are unworthy to Communicate. But then that
is not all, for so we are also to Dye, to Pray, or to have any Spiritual Peace
or Comfort. And this is a state which no wise man will persist in for one
moment, but, whenever he lays it to Heart, forthwith Repent and get out of
it; and when once that is done, this Hindrance is removed, and he may be
welcome to it. But if it is innocent in both these Respects, and none of these
sins adhere to it; if there is a weighty Loss to be repaired, or a weighty
Right to be got by it; and we are in all Points Just, Charitable, and Peaceable
in looking after it, or, when we fall in any instance, do in that, as in all
other slips of our daily Converse, watch better the next time, and immediately
Repent of it: then has a Suit no offense to God, nor any hurt at all in it; and
so unfits us not for any good thing, and then surely not for the Blessed
Sacrament. When this is our Case, a Trial at Law depending need no more hinder
us from Communicating, than from any other business; so that if there is
nothing else to discourage us, we may safely come to the Lords Table, and
expect to be kindly entertained by him when we do.

CHAP. V. Of three other Hindrances.
The Contents.
A Seventh Hindrance, is because others are not in Charity with them, so that
they are afraid they want that Peace which is required to it. As for other men's
uncharitableness, it is their sin, and so unfits them; but not being ours, it
unfits not us for Receiving. If that ought to exclude any from the Sacrament,
it had excluded Christ and his Apostles, and the Primitive Christians, since
none had ever such implacable Enemies as they had. Care to be taken that their
Enmity be not continued through our Fault; so that if we have given just
occasion, we must endeavor a Reconciliation; and if we gave none, be careful
not to hate them again. An Eighth Hindrance is, because it is a Presumption in
us to come to it, and therefore an Humble man ought in all modesty to abstain
from it. But, 1. It Is no Presumption to come when we are called, and to do what
we are bidden. 2. It Is a very great Presumption to stay away, and leave it
undone. 3. If the height of Privilege and Honor in it be sufficient to make
an humble man refuse the Communion; it will also carry him to renounce the
whole Christian Profession. A Ninth Hindrance is, because many good People are
seldom or never seen at it, so that they have good Company, and may be good
too, if they abstain from it. But, 1. In inquiring after our own Duty, we are
not to ask whether others practice it, but whether Christ has any where
enjoined it. 2. If any Good People keep from the Sacrament, that is no part of
their Goodness, so that therein they are not to be imitated. 3. Though they
might be acceptably Good, whilst through innocent Scruples and honest Ignorance
they were afraid to come to it: yet will it be a very great Fault even in them
to Neglect it after they are better informed, which will not be forgiven, but
upon their Amendment of it.

A Seventh Hindrance, which keeps back several Persons from the Holy Sacrament,
is, because, although they be with others, yet others are not in Charity with
them; and therefore they are afraid they want that Peace which is required to
it.

Now if this ought to hinder them from the Communion, it ought equally to be
their hindrance from Prayers, and all Devotion; since there is the same
necessity, as I have noted, of Peace and Mat. 5.23.24.
Reconcilation with our Brethren, in all of them.

But if this be really their Case, it need not hinder them. For if other men
will hate us, do what we can, that is our unhappiness indeed, whilst we suffer
under it; but it is not our Fault, nor renders us ever the worse in the Eyes of
Almighty God, since we have done nothing to deserve, nor is it in our Power to
help it. God commands us to Love our Enemies, so that if we hate them we sin,
and are justly kept back by our own uncharitableness: but he no where Commands
us to make our Enemies Love us, so that if after all they will still bear
Enmity toward us, that is only their own Sin, and therefore whatever it do
with them, ought not in any Reason to be our hindrance.

And indeed if it ought, it would much more have hindered our Savior Christ and
his Apostles from Communicating, than now it can any other Persons; because
none of those, who stick at this Impediment, have any Enemies so bitter and
implacable, as they found theirs. For the Jews hated him so far as to seek his
Life, and at last in most barbarous sort obtained their Purpose. And he tells
his Disciples, that the time was coming, when everyone that killed them would
think that therein he approved himself a Friend of Religion, and did God good
Service, Joh. 16.2. And this they all found by sad Experience, being accounted,
as St. Paul says, the very filth of the World, and the offscouring of all
things, i. e. Nuisances as necessary to be swept away, as Dirt out of the
Streets, 1 Cor. 4.13; and accordingly being Persecuted in every place, till
they had laid down their Lives for Christ's sake and the Gospels. Thus were they
reputed as Public Enemies of all Countries, and hated of all men as the vilest
Miscreants, that breathed Infection wheresoever they came, and were the common
Pest of all Places. And therefore if this be a sufficient Hindrance from the
Communion, that others hate us, it should always have hindered, and utterly
Excommunicated our Savior Christ, and his Apostles, and all the Christians of
the first Times, who, being always implacably hated, and most spitefully
Persecuted, upon this account ought always to have abstained, and not to have
received at all.

As for others being out of Charity with us therefore, that ought not to be our
hindrance. But then we must take care that we be in Charity with them, and that
their Hatred to us be not continued through any Offense or Fault of ours, else
shall we be kept back through our own Incharitableness. So that if we gave just
Cause for their Wrathful Indignation, by confessing our Fault, and repairing
the Wrong, we must endeavor a Reconciliation: or if we gave none, we must
still be careful to love them, though they will not be persuaded to love us,
and not harbor any Enmity or Hatred toward them again.

If we have given just Cause, I say, for their wrathful Indignation, through
any Injuries, or Offenses we have offered them; by confessing our Fault, and
repairing the wrong, we must endeavor a Reconciliation. When we have done any
thing whereat they are displeased, if they have no Reason for it, we must seek
to inform them better, and rectify their mistakes about it: but if they have,
we must give them all proper satisfaction, and make a just amends for it. If we
have given them just Offense, by Affronts, or contumelious Carriage; we must
acknowledge our Fault, and promise to do so no more, and ask Forgivegiveness:
and if we have injuriously prejudiced them in their Estates, Good Names, or
Business; we must, as far as in us lies, repair the loss which they have
sustained by us. And this God expects from us, before he will accept our
Offerings, or be pleased with us in any Ordinance. When thou bring thy Gift
to the Altar, says our Savior, and there remembrest that thy Brother has
ought against thee, go thy way, first be reconciled to thy Brother, and then
come and offer thy Gift. Mat. 5.23, 24.

But if they hate us when we gave no Cause for it, nor have in any wise
deserved it of them; yet must we still be careful to Love them, though they
will not be persuaded to Love us, and not harbor any Enmity, or Hatred toward
them again.

We must Love them, I say; not with that Degree of Love, indeed, wherewith we
embrace our particular Friends, and those who have better deserved of us; but
with that which we owe in common to all Persons. We must have so much affection
for them, as will restrain us both from doing and speaking Evil of them, and
make us exercise all that Justice, and show that kindness toward them in all
Conversation, which is due to the promiscuous multitude of other men. For all
these Instances of general Charity, are due to our very Enemies, as I have
already sh^wn: so that when they are unmovable in their Hatred, and persist in
their malicious ways; yet must not that provoke us into any spiteful Returns,
or chase us into any hard Speeches, or injurious or unkind Carriage toward
them again.

And thus it appears what is to be thought of this Hindrance, viz. the
implacableness of some ill Neighbors, and their unconquerable Enmity against
us. For when it is our hard hap to fall among such Persons, we must still Love
them, and be at Peace with them in our own minds, though we never gave them any
just Cause to be angered; and if we did, by confessing of our Fault, and
repairing of the Wrong which makes the Breach, we must endeavor after a
Reconcilement. But if after all, they are obstinate, and unmovable in their
hatred; that is their own Fault, which may justly hinder them, but ought not to
detain us from the Holy Sacrament. For although God requires a worthy Receiver
to Love his Enemies, yet he no where requires him to make his Enemies Love him;
and if no Person could Communicate worthily, whilst he has an unreconciled
Enemy, our Blessed Savior, and his Apostles, and all the first and best
Christians, had been most unworthy, and could never have received at all.

An Eighth hindrance, which holds back several Persons from coming to this
Feast, notwithstanding it is so much both their Duty and their Privilege, as I
have shown, to join in it; is because it lo^ks like an high Presumption in us
to Feast on the Body and Blood of our Sovereign Lord, and to eat at the same
Table with Almighty God; and therefore an humble man ought in all modesty to
abstain from it.

I have already considered that unworthiness which respects the manner of
receiving, and answered those who urge that they are unworthy to Communicate,
meaning thereby that they want that height of Virtuous and Devout Tempers,
which they apprehend God has required to it. But this unworthiness is not from
the want of such due Dispositions, or from the Indecency in the unsuitable
Receiving; but from the inaccessible height and greatness of the thing, which
they think is so far above us, that fit, or unfit, no Person is worthy of it,
but that it is boldness and presumption in any one to touch things so surpassing
high and excellent. But to satisfy these Persons, who think it a piece of
Arrogance and Presumption to come to this Holy Sacrament, when their Lord not
only Requests, but Commands it, I shall suggest to them these three things.

1. It is no Presumption to come when we are called, and to do what we are
bidden. But,

2. It is a very great boldness and presumption to stay away, and leave it
undone.

3. If the height of Privilege and Honor in it, be sufficient to make an
humble modest man refuse the Communion; it will not rest in that alone, but
carry him on equally to renounce the whole Christian Profession.

1. I say, It is no Presumption to come to this Feast when we are called, and
to do what we are bidden. If we should intrude of our own accord, and come
uninvited, we might be too bold, indeed, and very rudely Arrogant. But when we
are particularly sent to, and called to come, especially if there be, as in
this Case there is, great earnestness and importunity in the Invitation; it is
the part of an humble man to comply with it, and he is not Guilty of the least
show of Arrogance and Ill-breeding in so doing. There is Civility shown
sometimes in accepting, as well as in offering kindnesses, and it is Good
manners to receive what God would have us, yea, indeed, to accept any thing
from the hands of our Betters. So that in all Civility and inoffensive Carriage
we were bound to come, had we nothing more than a Friendly Invitation. But
besides that, God has expressly enjoined, as I have observed, and peremptorily
required it of us: So that now we must approach to it, not only out of Civility
and Respect, but also out of Obedience to his Commandment. And true Humility is
no hindrance, but the greatest furtherance in the World to such a Service, it
being not the part of a Presumptuous, but of a truly humble man to do what he
is bidden, and to please those whom he is bound in Duty to obey.

It is no Presumption then to come to the Sacrament when we are called, and to
do what we are bidden: but,

2. It is a very great Boldness and Presumption to stay away, and leave it
undone. He is no proud man who accepts a kindness when it is offered, and he is
earnestly invited to it: but he may show Pride and Haughtiness enough, who
slights and despises it. And he is no bold man, that does what he is Commanded;
but he shows Boldness and presumes indeed, that dare venture to Transgress it.
There are no men so bold and Presumptions with God, as they who will act what
he forbids, and refuse to do what he injoyns them: So that it is truly an high
Presumption to stay away, when he has expressly charged us, both upon our Duty
and our Love for him, to join in the Communion.

3. If the height of Privilege and Honor in it, be sufficient to make an
humble modest man refuse the Communion; since his whole Religion is made up of
high Characters and honorable Privileges, it will not rest in that alone, but
carry him on equally to renounce the whole Christian Profession. What thinks he
of Holy Baptism, wherein he was made not only a Servant, but a Child of God;
not only a Friend, but a Brother and Joint-heir with Christ; and an Inheritor,
not of a small Estate, but of a Kingdom, and that no cheap or fading one
neither, but of the Kingdom of Heaven? What thinks he of the happiness of
another Life, wherein God will fill us with unutterable Joys, and adorn us with
Crowns and Scepters, and take us, as our Savior Rev. 3.21.
says, into the same Throne with himself? What thinks he of his Redemption
being purchased at so dear a rate, which could not be obtained, unless Jesus
Christ, Gods only Son, would come down from Heaven, and be made man, and pay
down his own Life for it? Are not all these as superlatively high things, and
as much above us, as Feasting with God in the Communion is? Is it not as great
a Presumption in us to become Gods Sons, and to inherit Kingdoms, and to hope
for Crowns, and Thrones, and Scepters; as it is to sit down with him as his
Guests, and to eat and drink in his own Presence? Is it not as high Arrogance
to admit that Christ should dye for us, as it is to come and remember his
Death, and to accept those Benefits which are thereby conveyed to us? All these
things are infinitely above us, and we could not have had the Face to have
asked any of them, if God had referred it to our own choice, and bid us name
what we would for our own selves. But yet, since in his unbounded Love and
Kindness he has freely offered them, we must have the good manners in all
forward Thankfulness and Humility to accept, and not out of a show of Modesty
and unreasonable Self-abasement refuse them. When God calls us then to Feast
with him in the Holy Sacrament, and to feed upon the Body and Blood of our dear
Lord; we must not hold back because there is so eminent a Privilege, and high
an Honor in it. For we receive no greater Favor or higher Honor therein,
than in being made Gods Children, as we were in Holy Baptism; than in Christ's
Incarnation, Death and Suffering; than in the offers of Crowns, and Thrones,
and the other Glorious Privileges of our Religion: So that if the Fear of
receiving too much honor from God ought to put us by the Communion; it ought
as much to the full to pu^ us by our Baptism, and the whole Christian
Profession.

As for those then who are hindered from the Sacrament, by the fear of being too
Bold and Presumptuous with God in coming to a Feast, which has such height of
Privilege and Honor in it: they are hindered without any just Ground, and kept
back by what they ought not. For it is no Presumption, but the part of humble
men, to come when they are called, and to do what they are bidden; but it is a
very great Boldness and Presumption to stay away, and leave it undone; and if
the height of Privilege and Honor in it, be sufficient to keep back humble
Souls from this Feast, it must also keep them back from Baptism, wherein the
same Honors are conferred which are in it, and carry them in the same guise of
Modesty to refuse Christ's dying for them, and all the hopes of Heaven, and, in
a word, their Christianity and whole Religion too.

A Ninth Plea, whereby several Persons are wont to excuse their not coming to
the Sacrament, is because many Good People are seldom or never seen at it, and
therefore they may be good too, and have good Company, if they keep away from
it.

Now, as for those who urg^ this in excuse, I would desire them to consider,
that when they are inquiring after their own Duty in any matter, it is no right
way to ask whether others Practice it, but whether their Lord has any where
Commanded it. For men's Practice is not always fully answerable to their own
Duty, and so is a very false Rule whereby to judge of ours. All Persons have
their Faults, and though no Good man can continue in any willful ones, yet will
even they be subject to several Ignorant slips, and unadvised miscarriages. But
when at any time they either wilfully break any Commandment, or ignorantly
mistake it; that is no warranty for us to do so likewise. So that if we would
truly understand whether we are bound to Communicate, our way is not to inquire
whether others do it, but whether our Lord has any where enjoined it; for if he
has, we are certainly obliged to it whether others observe it or no.

But in more Particular Answer to this Plea, I must tell them,

1 st, That if any good People keep away from the Sacrament, that is no part of
their goodness, but their blemish, so that therein they are not to be imitated.

2 ly, That although they might be acceptably good, whilst through innocent
Scruples, and honest Ignorance, they were afraid to come to it; yet will it be
a very great Fault even in them to Neglect it, after they are better informed,
which will not be forgiven, but upon their amendment of it.

1. I say, If any Good People keep away from the Sacrament, that is no part of
their Goodness but their Blemish, so that therein they are not to be imitated.
For we have Gods express Command to come, and that we cannot slight without
being disob^dient, and guilty of a plain Transgression: We are called therein
to show our selves thankfully mindful of our Blessed Saviors Death, and of all
that he has done; and this Call we cannot deny, without proclaiming our selves
most shamefully unthankful toward him: We are summoned in to profess
Repentance and Amendment of all our sins, and this we cannot honestly decline,
if really we are resolved to leave them: We are invited to declare our selves
at Peace with all the Members of our Lord, and reconciled to all the Christian
World; and this Invitation no man can fairly refuse, who in very deed is in
Charity, and an hearty Friend to them Gods Law peremptorily injoyns, and the
things therein implied straightly oblige us to partake of the Sacrament when an
opportunity is offered; so that every man, who makes Conscience of his Duty,
and regards Obedience to his Lord, must be careful to join in it. And it is the
Greatest means of a good Life, and Obligation to Amendment that can be
prescribed; so that every one who has a just care of his own Soul, and is
earnestly desirous of Virtuous Improvements, will seek to be admitted to it. A
Good man's Duty binds him, and the care of his own Soul ingages him to
Communicate; so that there is neither Virtue nor Prudence shown in staying
away, nor is it any part of Goodness to Neglect it. And therefore if any
Persons otherwise Good are seldom seen at the Blessed Sacrament, that is no
part of their Goodness but their Fault, so that therein they are not to be
imitated.

2. Though they might be acceptably Good, whilst through innocent Scruples, and
hohonest Ignorance, they were afraid to receive it; yet will it be a very great
Fault even in them to Neglect it after they are better informed, which will not
be forgiven, but upon their Amendment of it.

A Good Man cannot indulge himself in any known Sin; for he ceases to be good
and acceptable to God, if he persists in any of them, after he is plainly told
of them, and his Duty is evidently set before him. The Wrath of God is revealed
from Heaven against all unrighteousness, says St. Paul, Romans 1.18. And he that
breaks one Law, says St. James, is guilty of all, i. e. of that Eternal
Punishment which is denounced, not barely to some one, but to all, Jam. 2.10.
So that when once this Great Duty of coming to the Sacrament is clearly laid
out, and his Conscience is inlighten'd and possessed with a Sense of it; he can
be no Good man who wilfully holds off still, and refrains to come to it.
Whilst he was perplexed with Doubts about it, indeed, and either through the
loose Discourses of some, thought himself not obliged; or, through the
unreasonable Rigor and Severity of others, after all his Repentance and full
purposes of Amendment, thought himself still unprepared to come to it: for the
pitiableness of his Ignorance and unwill'd mistake, so long as they lasted, his
Neglect of it may be excused and connived at. But if after all his Doubts have
been solved, and things have been set in a clearer Light, he continue still to
slight it; then he is Guilty of a very great Fault, which will not be forgiven
till he Repents and Amends it. To him that knows to do Good, and does it not,
says St. James, to him it is Sin, Jam. 4.17. And when any wilful sin stands
charged on our account, it will not be struck off till we forsake and turn away
from it. For to all such Sinners, Gods Declaration is this, Except you Repent,
you shall all perish, Luc. 13.3.

As for those then who urge this in excuse for their not coming to the
Sacrament, because several Good People are seldom, or never seen at it: My
Answer to them in sum is this. In judging what is our Duty, we must not take
our measures from other men's Practice, but from our Blessed Lords Commandments;
since, if they disobey any Precept, that is no excuse to us, nor gives us any
warranty for companies sake to disobey likewise. And as for the Sacrament in
particular, if any Good People keep away from it, that is no part of their
Goodness; so that therein they are not to be imitated. Nay, if they continue in
this Neglect, after their Consciences are rightly instructed and informed about
it; they cease to be Good and commit a Damning Fault, an Impenitent continuance
in any one known sin putting any Person out of a gracious State. Whilst they
were held back purely by Doubts and Scruples, and wart of Knowledge without
their own Fault; their Omission was fit to be connived at, and they might
continue acceptably Good notwithstanding it. But if still they persist in it,
after they know more, and are better instructed; they are Guilty of a very
criminal Neglect, which will not be passed over, but upon the same Terms as all
other known sins are, i. e. their Repentance of it. If they stay away out of
Ignorance and Mistake, all they can expect is to be pitied, but not to be
commended for it; and if out of willfulness after their Conscience has been set
right, they will be severely punished unless they are reclaimed from it: So
that no man must ever hope to justify himself in refraining the Lords Table
because he has good Company, and knows of several others, whom he takes to be
very Holy Persons, that are wont to refrain it too.

CHAP. VI. Of two more Hindrances.
The Contents.
A Tenth Hindrance is, because others who are unworthy of it, are admitted to
join in it. But, 1. They ought not to be forward in judging others unworthy,
lest they be mistaken in it. 2. When some, who, as they have great cause to
think, are unworthy, do receive, yet ought not that to hinder them from joining
in it. For if it be a sufficient Hindrance, it had equally hindered our Savior
Christ, and the Primitive Christians. It ought not only to hinder us from the
Communion, but also from being Members of the Christian Church and Profession;
but it is plainly of no Force for either of them, since one man shall not bear
another, but every man his own burden. 3. If still any are really offended at
the Communion of the Wicked, upon complaint made in the Congregation they are
to be suspended from the Holy Table, and denied the Sacrament. An Eleventh
Hindrance is the Gesture of Kneeling, which is required to it. When any are
absent upon this account, there is no excuse from it. Three things insisted on
to prevent their being hindered by it. 1. Kneeling is no unsuitable Posture in
receiving, so that if we were lest at Liberty, we might have enough to justify
our selves in making use of it. 2. It is appointed by our Governors, whom God
Commands us to obey in all lawful Things; so that every Good man ought to
observe it. But if it neither had Authority to enjoin, nor Reason to recommend
it, but another Posture might be better used: Yet, 3. Since it may lawfully,
though not so well, be used too, for the Sacraments sake, which is not
otherwise to be had, we should at least comply with it. No Hindrance to this
Compliance, because the Gesture of Kneeling is different from what our Savior
used. For so is sitting too, and therefore they and we are equally concerned to
answer it. The Posture he used was no part of the Institution, so that the
Institution is not broken when the Posture is altered. Neither it, nor any
other, has any Command of God for it; so that none is necessary, but all are
still indifferent. When a Posture, different from that at the first
Institution, was introduced in Sacraments, our Savior himself, and they too
have submitted to it. Again, no hindrance to it from the fear of worshipping the
Bread, or its being a Popish Rite. A conclusion of this point.

A Tenth Cause which many Persons are wont to Assign for their absenting from
this Feast, is, because others, who are unworthy of it, are admited to join in
it. Tho this be a very good thing, yet they fear they should give offense in
doing it with all Partners, and how worthy soever they may be in themselves,
would be defiled by the unworthiness of others; so that unless they can receive
in an unmixt Company, and only with the pure and true Believers, they think
best to stay away, and not receive at all.

But that they may not be kept back by this hindrance, I shall observe to them
these three things.

1. That they ought not to be forward in judging any others unworthy, lest they
be mistaken in it.

2. When some, who, as they have great cause to think, are unworthy, do
receive, yet ought not that to hinder them from it.

3. If it happen that any are really Scandalized at the sight of such as are
notoriously Wicked, or have done any wrong to their Neighbors, either in word
or deed; upon complaint made in the Congregation, they are to be suspended from
the Holy Table, and denied the Sacrament.

1. I say, they ought not to be forward in judging any others unworthy to
communicate, lest they be mistaken in it. For every Penitent Man, who is fully
Resolved to leave all his Sins, is really worthy to receive the Sacrament: and
whether the Person they think unworthy be so resolved or no, is very hard for
them to judge, since no Man can see into another Heart, and only God and his
own Soul are privy to it. When he comes to the Lords Table, every Communicant
professes to Repent, and promises to lead a New Life thenceforward: and when he
solemnly declares he is thus resolved, it is hard for another Person, who cannot
see into his Soul, to say he is not, but is still impenitent. Tho all Good Men
therefore may be free in judging of themselves, yet ought they to be very wary
how they pass a Judgment on the unworthiness of others: They must not be
forward to pronounce of it, because it is hard for them to know it; so that when
they give Sentence against their Brethren in this point, it is venturously done,
and they are liable to be deceived in it.

2. When some others, who, as they have great cause to think, are unworthy, do
Receive the Sacrament; yet ought not that to hinder them from joining in it.
Our Business should not be to move Questions and Disputes about the
preparedness of others, but to be careful duly to prepare our selves; and when
once we are sitly qualified for it, we ought to come whether they be so or no.
Their unworthiness will have all its effect upon themselves, but will not
hinder our acceptance, nor ought to put us by from doing both our Savior, and
our own Souls this Service.

To show this, I shall observe these three things.

1. If the company of ill and unworthy Persons be a sufficient hindrance, it
would equally have hindered our Savior Christ, and the Primitive Christians.

2. It ought not only to hinder us from the Communion, but also from being
Members of the Christian Church and Profession. But,

3. One shall not bear another, but every Man his own Burden; so that if not
we, but only they we unworthy, we are safe, and may freely come, and they alone
are to be debarred from Receiving.

1. If the Company of ill and unworthy Persons be a sufficient hindrance, it is
not so barely unto us, but would equally have hindered our Savior Christ, and
the Primitive Christians. For when our Lord eat hi^ own Supper, it was not with
a Select Company of worthy Receivers, but with a mixed multitude of Saints and
Sinners. Thus he found it in the Jewish Passover; for all the Congregation of
Israel, both good and bad, were to eat of it, and none but Foreiners and hired
Servants were excluded from it, Exodus 12.45, 47. And the like mixture of Guests
he allowed, when he instituted this Feast instead of it. For in great
likelihood Judas, who, as the Scripture says, was a Joh. 12.6.
Thief, and the Joh. 17.12.
Son of Perdition, was one of the twelve that Communicated with him, Mat.
26.20, 25, 26. Luc. 22.20, 21. And in the first times, all Christians, as I
have shown, who came together to pray to God, met also to receive the Holy
Sacrament, that being then a constant part of their Public Worship. The Number
of Communicants in those Days, was the same with the number of Christians or
Baptized Persons; for all Men then met in the Communion, who were made Members
of Christ's Mystical Body the Church by Baptism, and were not cut off again by
Excommunication: as St. Paul plainly intimates, when he says of all those many,
who make up the one Body, that they are all partakers of that one Bread, 1 Cor.
10.17; and of all those who have been Baptized into one Body, that they have
been all made to drink into one Spirit, 1 Cor. 12.13. So that their Communions,
as well as ours, were mixed Assemblies, which were made up of worthy and
unworthy Receivers; and therefore if other Men's unworthiness ought to be our
hindrance, it should also have hindered our Blessed Savior Christ, and his
Apostles, and the Primitive Christians, who, if this be a good Reason for it,
should all have forborne the Sacrament, because Judas, a lost man, and other
unprepared, and unworthy Persons, met also with them at the same time to
partake in it.

2. If the Company of unworthy Persons be a just impediment from the Communion,
it ought to hinder us also from being Members of the Christian Church and
Profession. For the Church it self is a mixed multitude of fit and unfit, of
holy and unholy Persons. It is compared to a Net, wherein Fish of all sorts are
caught, both good and bad, Mat 13.47, 48: to a Field, where both Wheat and
Tares spring up, and wherein both must grow together till the Harvest, v. 24,
25, 30. All Christians are not such as their Savior Christ was, and such as
their Religion requires they should be: and therefore if we refuse to share in
any holy thing whilst some unworthy Persons pretend to it, and will not join in
any Act or State wherein ill men participate; we must not only shun the
Communion, but cease also to be members of the Church, or Profess the Christian
Religion. Nay, I might add further, since all Communities have some Corrupt
Members, and in every Body of Men there are some Vicious as well as Godly
Persons; if we decline all Society and fellowship which has ill Men to partake
in it, we must not stop in avoiding the Communion, and leaping out of the
Christian Church and Profession, but, if we run on so far as this Principle
will lead us, become Outlaws to Families, Townships, Kingdoms, yea to all
Mankind.

3. One shall not bear another, but every Man his own Burden; so that if not
we, but only they are unworthy, we are safe, and may freely come, and they
alone are debarred from receiving. God will not punish one Soul for another
fault, or be angry at this, because that Person has deserved it. But every Man
shall stand or fall by his own Work, and either be approved or ^^ject^d as it
prepares him for it. Let every Man prove his own Work, says the Apostle, for
every Man shall bear his own Burden, Ephesians. 6.4, 5. So that if we take care to
come worthily our selves, we shall be kindly treated and accepted by him, and
not any ways prejudiced or frowned upon, for the unworthiness and undue
Preparation of other men.

Thus ought not the sight of some unworthy Persons joining in it, to strike any
Terror into us, or drive us from the Holy Sacrament. There is a great Sin, and
a great Danger in unworthy Receiveing, which is enough to discourage all
impenitent unworthy men from offering at it; and where the Censures of the
Church are held in any esteem, and are likely to gain their end through the Awe
and Reverence men have for them, the Governors of the Church, both out of
Compassion for their Souls, and concern for the honor of this Ordinance, may
see cause to remove them from it. But if neither the Danger of the thing, nor
any Affectionate and fair Warning, nor the enfeebled Hand of Discipline, when
it is become impotent, and of small account, through the Number of Offenders,
who are too strong for it, or through the multitude of Schisms and Divisions,
one party entertaining what another excludes, which cuts off all the Force of
it: If notwithstanding all these, I say, unworthy men will still press in, and
presume to Communicate; yet is their unworthiness only to themselves: but as
for others, who are truly worthy, they have no hurt at all by it; they shall
not suffer for their Brethrens sins, nor are incapacitated by their
unfitnesses; so that whilst they have no unworthiness in their own Souls, they
may approach the Holy Table, and cheerfully receive still.

But yet further.

3. If any should be really scandalized at the Presence of those who are
notoriously wicked, or who have done any wrong to their Neighbors, either in
word, or deed; upon Complaint made in the Congregation, they are to be
suspended from the Holy Table, and denied the Sacrament. For this Care our
Church has taken in this Case, to prevent all those, whose wickedness gives
public Scandal and Offense, from sharing in these Holy Mysteries. If any
Communicant, says the Rubric before the Communion-Service, be an open and
notorious evil liver, or have done any wrong to his Neighbor by Word or Deed,
so that the Congregation be thereby offended; the Curate having knowledge
thereof, shall call him, and advertise him, that in any wise he presume not to
come to the Lords Table, until he has openly declared himself to have truly
Repented and Amended his former naughty Life, that the Congregation may thereby
be satisfied, which before were offended; and that he has recompensed the
Parties to whom he has done wrong, or at least declare himself to be in full
purpose so to do as soon as conveniently he may.

As for those then who are kept back from this Feast, because they see some
unworthy Persons are admitted to it, my Answer to them in brief is this: That
they ought not to be forward in judging any others unworthy, because it is hard
for them to know it, and they are liable to be mistaken in it. And that when
they have great and plain cause to conclude others unworthy, yet ought not that
in any wise to hinder them, who are truly worthy, from coming to it. For if the
Company of unworthy Receivers were a just Hindrance, it would have hindered our
Blessed Lord and the Primitive Christians, since it lay in their way as well as
now it does in ours; it would not rest in withholding us from the Communion,
but serve equally to put us by from being Members of the Church, or professing
the Christian Religion; but it is plainly of no force for either of them, since
one man shall not bear another, but every one his own Burden. But if still any
are really scandalized by the Company of such as are notoriously wicked, that
offen^e may be removed when they have a mind to it; for upon complaint made,
those unworthy Persons are to be suspended from the Holy Table, and denied the
Sacrament.

An Eleventh Hindrance, whereby several persons are kept back from joining in
this Feast, is the Gesture which is required to it. For though right-gladly
they would be admitted to the Sacrament, yet they dare not Kneel, as the Church
appoints all men to do, when they receive it.

Now when any Persons refuse the Holy Sacrament upon this account, they have no
sufficient Plea, or just Excuse from it. When our Lord shall ask them at the
last Day, why they did not Communicate according to his appointment? It will be
but a bad Answer in them to say, it was because they could not sit, or use some
other Posture which they thought convenient: For since he has only required the
Thing, but has no where enjoined the Gesture we are to receive in; he will have
just Reason to reply to such Men, That then it seems they would not do what he
bid them, unless at the same time they could do that also which he had not
bidden, nor perform his will, unless withal they should be allowed to have
their own; which justly merits a severe Reproof, but is far from being a matter
of Commendation.

But that they may not inexcusably Neglect so great a Commandment, upon so weak
a Reason for it, I would offer to their Consideration these three things.

1. Kneeling is no unsuitable Posture in receiving the Holy Sacrament; so that
if we were left at Liberty, we might have enough to justify our selves in
making use of it.

2. It is appointed by our Governors, whom God Commands us to obey in all
Lawful things; so that every Good man, who is under Authority, ought to observe
it.

But if it were not our Duty when Authority has thus required the use of it,
and it had no Reasons from it self to recommend it, but it were much better
that some other Posture should be used: yet,

3. Since it lawfully may be used too, though not so well as another, if men have
any due value for, and desire of the Sacrament, for its sake, and rather than
miss of it, they should at least comply with it.

1. Kneeling is no unsuitable Posture in receiving the Holy Sacrament, so that
if we were left at Liberty, we might have enough to justify our selves in
making use of it. For the Sacrament, as I have already showed, is a Religious
Feast, wherein we are set in the Presence of, and are concerned with Almighty
God: and when we have to do with him, it is no ways unfit sure to use such
Posture as is Humble and Reverent. It is a Feast wherein we receive the
greatest Benefits, no less than our Savior Christ's Blessed Body and Blood, i.
e. those Benefits which his Bloody Death procured: and when we receive Gifts,
especially of that infinite Price, and from our Betters and Supreme Governors,
it cannot misbecome us to use such Carriage as expresses most Respect and
Thankfulness. It is a Feast whereat we confirm the New Covenant, and solemnly
give Thanks and Praise to Christ, and pour out many Prayers and Promises to our
Heavenly Lord: and when we are exercising Repentance, and uttering Praise, and
making solemn Prayers and Oblations, it is not certainly improper to use such
Gestures as best become Devotions. In the Sacrament we have to do with Almighty
God, and receive most noble Gifts, and act most humble Repentance in shamefully
confessing and renouncing of our sins, and give most hearty Thanks, and put up
most ardent Prayers: and therefore that Posture must needs suit well with it,
which becomes these Services; and that Kneeling will be allowed to do by all
Persons, since it has been ordinarily well liked in all times, nay, preferred
before others for the Posture of Devotions. As it is a Supper and a Feast, some
are apt to think sitting, which with us at least is the ordinary Table-Posture,
to be most convenient. But as this is not a common, but a Religious Feast,
wherein we have to do with God, and perform so many things whereto all inward
Reverence and Humility is required, there are Reasons enough that most justly
Authorize Kneeling too; so that if we direct our Eyes to them, we shall soon
see that it may very reasonably be used, and is in no wise unsuitable or
improper for it. And therefore if we were left at Liberty to receive it as we
pleased, we might have enough to justify our selves in making use of it.

2. Kneeling is appointed by our Governors, whom God commands us to obey in
all lawful things; so that every good man who is under Authority, ought to
observe it: God requires us to be subject to Principalities and Powers, and to
obey Magistrates, Tit. 3.1. and to obey them that have the Rule over us, and to
submit our selves; for they watch for our Souls, as they that must give an
account of them, Heb. 13.17. Now to obey, is to do what we are bidden; so that
when they command this Posture, we are bound in all Duty and Submission to
comply with them. Before they enjoined it, we were at Liberty to use either it,
or another, according to our own Discretion. But when once they have interposed
their Authority, St. Paul tells us, that Obedience in all Lawful things, such
as Kneeling is, is our Duty; so that although we think another might be better
used, and, were we left to our selves, would make use of it; yet when once they
have enjoined this, must we deny our selves, and submit to it.

But if Kneeling had neither any Authority effectually to enjoin, nor any
Reason from it self sufficient to recommend it; but that sitting, or some other
Posture were much fitter to be used: yet,

3. Since it may at least lawfully be used too, though not so well, if men have
any due value for, or desire of the Sacrament; for its sake, and rather than
miss of it, they should at least comply with it.

When we are hindered from the Sacrament by little things, and refuse to
Communicate unless we can have it ordered according to our own liking in all
Points, it is a sign we do not think we greatly need it, nor are very desirous
of it; for if we were, it is certain small matters would not put us by it. Were
we fully sensible how much it is both our Duty, and our Privilege to partake
in it, and thereupon did earnestly covet and long after it, we should be glad
to be admitted to it in any Posture, and, so we might join in the thing, submit
to any Gesture to receive in. If a man refuse a Present of a thousand Pound,
because it is brought to him in an homely Purse, that is course and much
decayed; or if he will throw back the conveyance of a fair Estate, because it is
sealed with a common Stamp, that wants a Coat of Arms to it; all the World
would say he would not be so curious, if he stood in any great need of it. And
if any Person should turn away from the most savoury and choicest meat, because
it is dish'd up on Pewter, not on Plate; the Bystanders would all conclude he
is full enough already, and has no great edge of Appetite. And the case is just
the same, when any of us show niceness about the Posture of the Holy Sacrament.
For did we really think we were in very great need of it, and had such an
ardent desire, as that we might be said to hunger and thirst after it; we
should be glad to have it in any Posture, as we could be allowed it. So that
although Kneeling were a Gesture whereto we were no ways obliged, nay, though
it were justly to be disliked, not as unlawful indeed, but as inconvenient; yet
when the Sacrament is not otherwise to be had, there is no man, who is duly
desirous to receive, but will comply with it. He had rather, it may be,
Communicate sitting, or standing, or after some other manner which he fancies
better, were it left to his own liking; but yet, if he desires it in such
measure as he ought, he will submit to receive Kneeling, rather than miss the
opportunity, and not receive at all.

And this is the great thing, which I would urge upon all those who are kept
back by this Hindrance; namely, that although for its own sake they would not
choose it, yet for the Sacraments sake, which is not otherwise to be had, they
would at least comply with it. In my Judgment it is their Duty to Kneel, since
their Governors require it; and the Posture is so suitable to the Feast, that
were it not required, they might have enough to justify themselves in making
use of it: and if, upon the Reasons I have here given, they are convinced of
these things, that clears the Case without more ado, and is the best Solution
of it. But if their prejudices stick still after all, and in those Points they
happen not to be of my mind, but think themselves free from it, and that
sitting is much better used: yet at least, since Kneeling may be used too, for
the Sacraments sake, which, if they value as they ought, they would gladly
accept, though in a Posture less convenient, let them condescend and submit to
it. Though they had rather receive sitting when they may be allowed, yet they
may receive kneeling when there is need of it; and they must needs think it
better to kneel to it, than, by stopping at a thing so innocent, though less
significant, to be quite put by, and go without it.

But against this Compliance they may, perhaps, object, and it is the fairest
thing which I know said against it, That they cannot comply with this
Injunction of Kneeling, because it is cross to our Saviors Institution; for as
he instituted the Holy Sacrament, so they think we ought to adhere to it.

But to clear this point, which I shall do as plainly as I can, because it
seems to have some weight in it, I shall observe,

1. That if using a Posture different from what our Savior did, be a breaking
his Institution, sitting no less than kneeling is a breach of it, so that they
and we are equally concerned to answer it.

2. The Posture he used was no part of the Institution, so that the Institution
is not broken when the Posture is altered: yea, neither it, nor any other has
any Command at all for it; so that no Posture is necessary, but all, both
theirs and ours, are still indifferent.

3. When a Posture different from that at the first Institution, was introduced
in Sacraments, our Savior himself, and they themselves too, have submitted to
it.

1. I say, If using a Posture different from what our Savior did, be a
breaking his Institution, sitting no less than kneeling is a breach of it; so
that they and we are equally concerned to answer it.

The Posture which our Savior used, was neither sitting nor kneeling, but
another different from both of them. In the Passover it is plain he used lying
or leaning down, which was the Banqueting Gesture of that time, when they used
to eat at their Feasts lying upon Couches. And thus the Evangelist expresses
it; When Even was come, says St. Matthew, he sat down, so according to the
custom of these Countries we render it, but the word is, he (...).
lay down with the twelve, Mat. 26. 20. And in the 21 of St. John's Gospel, St.
John is said to have leaned on Jesus Breast at Supper, according to the Fashion
of those Days, when at Meals they lay one within another, v. 20. And this
Posture in great likelihood he continued at his own Supper; for they were both
Religious Feasts, and there was no more Reason why it should be excluded from
the one than from the other. But if when he altered his Gesture, according to
the Jewish Custom, at giving Thanks, he continued in that all the time of his
own Supper, as some suppose; yet was not that either kneeling or sitting, but a
standing Posture. So that the Gesture our Savior used was as different from
sitting, as it is from kneeling; and therefore if the use of one different from
his be a breach of his Institution, it is equally broken on all sides, and one
cannot urge it against another, but both are alike in Fault, and equally
obliged to answer it.

And if any say, That albeit in sitting they do vary from the Posture he used,
yet is it still to another Table Gesture, which is of the same Nature, and may
be h^ld Equivalent: I desire them to consider, that then they are plainly gone
off, as well as we, from the Example of our Lord, and from the Mode he used,
since whereas he lay along, they sit upright, and only stick to such a Gesture
as agrees to the Nature of the Feast, and the Notion of the Communion being a
Supper and a Banquet. So that their sitting is not Authorized by our Lords
having used it at first, for that he never did, but by its being a
Table Gesture, which becomes a Feast, and is thereby suited to the Nature of
the Sacrament. And when once this Ground is admitted, it will make way for
kneeling too, since there is much also in the Nature of the thing to render it
very suitable and convenient. For, as upon the account of its being a Feast,
whilst they direct their Eye to that, they may be emboldened to sit down at it:
so also upon account of its being a most Venerable and Religious Feast, whereat
all inward Reverence and profound Humility is required, they may see just
Reason to use another more lowly mode, and kneel when they receive it. But if
still they should think sitting the more agreeable mode, and that, it being a
Table Gesture, a Supper is best suited by it: yet would this be no Reason why
they cannot comply with kneeling, but only why, if they were left to their own
Liberty, they would not make choice of it. For though they would not choose it,
yet are they at Liberty for all that to forbear sitting, and either to stand,
or lie, or kneel at a Feast when need so requires it; so that whatever it may
be to their own free choice of it, this can be no hindrance to their submission
and compliance with it.

But since both in their way and ours, the Gesture of our Lord, being now out
of date through the different usage of the World, is quite reilnquish'd; for a
full Vindication of them as well as of our selves in this Point, I observe,

2. That the Posture he used was no part of the Institution, so that the
Institution is not broken when the Posture is altered: yea, neither it, nor any
other, has any Precept or Command at all for it; so that no Posture is
necessary, but all, both theirs and ours, are still indifferent.

The Posture wherein it is first received, I say, is no part of the Institution
of a Sacrament, so that the Institution is not broken when the Posture is
altered. It is only the Thing which is appointed; but as for the Posture, or
the Time, or the Place, or the Company, they are lit^l matters that are
unworthy of a particular appointment, and are left at Liberty to be ordered as
men's Discretion shall judge most convenient. And, indeed, if the Gesture our
Lord used were any part of the Institution of this Holy Feast, the Time, and
Place, and other Circumstances would be so too; for they seem all of equal
weight, and were all equally used at first, which is all that the Gesture has
to plead for it. So that if it be a Part of the Institution to receive in the
leaning Posture, because our Lord used it; it is equally a Part of it to
receive after Supper, which is the time he chose for it; and in an upper Room,
which was the place wherein he Celebrated it; and only with m^n, who were the
Company he invited; and those no more than twelve, which was the Number he
selected. All these can plead the same Title for being parts of the
Institution, which the Gesture can, i. e. their being used at the first
appointment of it, which is all the claim it can make to it: and therefore
since the Time, and Place, and Number, and Persons are no part, but may be
altered without any breach of the Institution, as it is on all hands concluded
they may; the Posture is no part of it, but may be altered without any such
Infringement also.

And to show this more fully, it really has been done, and that too in the
Judgment of our Lord himself without any wrong to the Institution; and that was
in the Jewish Passover. For the Posture wherein it was first Celebrated, was in
that of Travelers, with their Loins girt, and their Staves in their hand, and
their Shoes on their Feet; yea, and what makes this Circumstance more
considerable in their Case, it was by Gods own Order and Appointment. For thus
shall you eat it, says God, with your Loins girded, and your Shoes on your
Feet, and your Staff in your Hand; and you shall eat it in haste, it is the
Lords Passover, Exodus 12.11. But afterward, in compliance with the course of
Times and the Custom of other Countries, this standing Posture of Travelers
was changed into the leaning or discumbing Postu^e of men at ease, which change
our Savior himself most evidently allowed, by his own usage and observance of
it. For when he ate the Passover with his Disciples, it was not in the
traveling Posture used at first, but in this Discumbing Posture, which was
then introduced instead of it. When even was come, Jesus sat, or rather (...).
lay down to Supper with the twelve, Mat. 26.20.

Thus is the Posture which our Blessed Lord used in the Sacrament, no part of
the Institution; so that the Institution is not broken, when it is altered. And
if it had been any part of it, his lying could no more be changed i^to sitting,
because it is another Table-Posture, than the Bread and Wine into any other
Food or Liquour, because they are a Table-Furniture; for the parts of the
Sacrament must be kept the same as our Savior left them, and we must not go
about to alter and put in others instead of them, lest we be thought to cancel
his, and institute a New Sacrament of our own.

Yea, neither it, nor any other, has any Command at all for it; so that no
Posture is necessary, but all, both theirs and ours, are still Indifferent. It
is not at all enjoined by our Savior Christ, for he only Commands the Thing,
bidding them take Bread and eat it, and Wine and drink it, Mat. 26.26, 27; and
to do this in Remembrance of him, Luc. 22.19; but says not a word prescribing
the Gesture, Time, or other Circumstances which they are to use in so doing.
Neither is it at all mentioned by St. Paul, who, as our Lord had done before,
commands only after the mention of the Bread, that we should do that in
remembrance of him; and after the mention of the Cup, that we should drink that
in remembrance of him; but gives no Command at all concerning Posture, or any
other such inconsiderable and outward thing, 1 Cor. 11.24, 25. And yet he
delivered all that to them, which he had received in command from Christ
relating to the Holy Communion: I have received of the Lord, says he, that
which I also have delivered unto you, v. 23. So that although God has most
strictly commanded the receiving of the Sacrament, yet has he no where
commanded any Posture to be used in it; and therefore none of them is
necessary, but all, both theirs and ours, are still indifferent.

Thus then is our Kneeling Posture at the Communion, as also others Standing,
or Sitting where that is the Fashion, no unlawful thing, nor any Breach of the
Institution, though our Savior used a different one. The Posture he Communicated
in, was no part of the Appointment; so that there is no Breach of it when that
is altered: and neither it, nor any other, has any Command for it; so that none
of them are either necessary or unlawful upon this account, but all may still
be used, as Public Authority or Private Prudence shall determine it.

And as the Posture used at first, without any Breach of the Institution, or of
any Law of Christ, may be altered, and a New one lawfully brought in, in stead
of it; so,

3ly, When a Posture different from that at the first Institution was
introduced in Sacraments, our Blessed Lord himself, and they themselves too*
have submitted to it.

As for our Blessed Lord, the matter is plain of him in the Case of the
Passover already mentioned. He found the Posture different from that which was
at first used in Egypt; for then, as I have noted, they stood, like Travelers;
but now they lay down, like Men at rest and ease. But since Common Usage and
Public Authority had altered the former Mode, and settled this later in stead
of it, he would not go to dispute, but readily conformed himself to it. For
when he came to eat the Passover, says St. Matthew, he sat, or rather lay down
with the twelve, Mat. 26.20.

And as for themselves, they do the same thing too, in Sitting where that is
the Posture Law or Custom has introduced among them. For Sitting is a Gesture
very different from what our Savior used, who did not sit, but lie down at the
Sacrament. But when the Assembly of Divines had brought in this Mode amongst
us, notwithstanding its being a Deviation from what was done at first, they did
then comply with it, and would still adhere to it.

If they will be guided therefore either by their Savior's Practice, or their
own, in this Point, when Use and Public Authority have settled any Posture of
Communicating* they must submit to it. The Gesture which they find among us, is
not more different from what our Savior used, than the Gesture he found in the
Passover, was from what the Jews first used in Egypt: But yet he made no
scruple of this Posture, so plainly novel and of a later date, but readily
complied with it. In conformity to which Example, the Apostle teaches us in
lesser things to make Common Usages our Rule, for the prevention of all
Disputes and Variance; -- If any man seem to be contentious, in the case of
Women's being unvailed in the Public Assemblies, we have no such custom, nor
the Church of God, 1 Cor. 11.16. And the Sitting which they think well of, is
as different from our Savior's Posture, as Kneeling is; but yet they readily
embraced it, when once the Assembly had directed it. So that if they are but
free to follow our Savior's Practice, and St. Paul's Rule in this Case; or if
they will go as far with the Churches Order, as formerly they did with the
Assemblies; since Common Usage and Public Authority have settled Kneeling at
the Sacrament among us, they ought not to stick out, but to submit to it.

And thus it appears that their Compliance with our Use of Kneeling in the
Communion, is not at all against our Savior's Institution; so that the fear of
wronging that, ought not to hinder any of them from it. It is, indeed, a
different Posture from what our Lord first used; but if that be a Breach of his
Institution, Sitting no less than Kneeling is a Breach of it: so that they and
we are equally concerned to answer it. But in behalf of both it is easily
answered, That the Posture he used was no Part of the Institution of the
Sacrament; so that the Institution is not broken, when the Posture is altered:
That neither it, nor any other, has any Precept for it; so that none of them is
necessary, but all indifferent, and lawful to be used, according as Men's own
private Judgment and Discretion, where they are left to it, shall direct, or
Public Authority and Custom shall any where prescribe it: and that when these
have in any Place introduced a Posture different from what he used, he himself,
by his own Practice in this very Case, and they too who make this Objection, by
theirs, have taught us to comply with it.

But against this Compliance it is by some still further urged, That Kneeling
in the Sacrament is Worshipping the Bread, and a Popish Rite, and therefore
they dare not yield and conform to it.

Now in Answer to its being a worshipping the Bread; I would observe to them,
that there is no fear of that, because we do not kneel to the Bread, nor have
any intent to worship it: and if really we did intend it, without which there
is no Adoration paid to it, we should worship it whether we kneel or sit; so
that their mode and ours are equally concerned, and it must be owned on all
sides, that not the Posture but the Intent is to be blamed for it.

1. In kneeling at the Sacrament, I say, there is no fear of worshipping the
Bread, because we do not kneel to it, nor have any intent to worship it. If we
should kneel down to the Bread, indeed, and, submitting our selves before it,
pay Divine Honor and Homage to it; this were really to worship it. And this
the Papists plainly do in that Reverence which they show toward it. For they
verily believe it to be Transubstantiated, i. e. that the substance of the
Bread after the words of Consecration is passed into the Natural Body and Blood
of Christ: and upon this Belief they fall down to it with a design to Reverence
it, and to give as much Adoration to it, as they would to Christ himself were
he visibly present. But although this be their intent, yet is it in no case
ours in kneeling at the Sacrament. For we kneel not to the Bread, to give any
Homage and Adoration unto it, as our It is hereby declared that thereby (^iz.
by kneeling) no Adoration is intended, or ought to be done, either unto the
Sacramental Bread and Wine there bodily received, or unto any Corporal presence
of Christ's Natural Flesh and Blood. For the Sacramental Bread and Wine remain
still in their Natural substances, and therefore may not be ado^ed (for that we
e^dola^ry, to be abhorred of all Faithful Christians) And the Natural Body and
Blood of our Savior Christ are in Heaven, and not here; it being against the
Truth of Christ's Natural Body to be at one time in more places than one. Rub.
at the end of the Commun. Service.
Church has most expressly declared in the Rubric; so that if any Persons
intend any such thing, they must not say they follow the Church in it, since in
the most earnest and express words it utterly disclaims, and warns us all
against it. But we use kneeling to a quite different end; viz. only as it is a
Reverential Which Order [of Kneeling] is well meant, for a signification of our
Humble and Grateful acknowledgement of the Benefits of Christ therein given to
all worthy Receivers. ib.
Humble Posture, wherein we may very decently receive Gifts, and make
Confession of our sins, and give Thanks, and pour out our Prayers to Almighty
God; So that our kneeling is only unto God, who is the proper object of our
worship, but not at all to the Bread, which is never intended to be served, nor
receives any Homage or Submission by it. This, I say, is all we do in kneeling
at the Sacrament, as the Church requires, and as our own Consciences bear us
witness, which are the only sure Judges in this Case, since they alone do
thoroughly understand, and are privy to our own Intents and Purposes. And when
both our Church and we do thus openly profess, that we kneel not to the Bread,
nor have any intent thereby to worship and submit our selves to it; there is
none sure will be so rash and unchristianly Censorious, as to charge us with
it. But if any do, they are thereby Guilty, not only of an open
uncharitableness, in imputing the worst things to us without any just Cause;
but also of great Presumption and high Arrogance, since therein they take upon
them to teach us our own thoughts, and to tell us our own Hearts and Intentions
better than we can tell our selves.

2. If in kneeling at the Sacrament we should have any such intent, without
which there is no Adoration paid to it; we should worship it whether we kneel
or sit; so that their Mode and ours are equally concerned in this doubt, and it
must be owned on all sides, that not the Posture, but the Intent is to be
blamed for it. For when we design worship to any Object, we can give it by a
bare inward Homage and submission of the Mind, without the help of any outward
act; or, if we would make it a worship of the Body too, that may be done by any
Posture wherein we design to express it. It may be done sitting, as well as in
a more humble mode; for though that seem to show more of Familiarity than
Respect, yet has it sometimes been used for the Posture of worship. Thus the
Gentiles worshipped their Gods, as Cum pe^inde (...) Nationes adoratis
Si^illaribus suis r^sid^ndo, vel propte^ea in nobis (...) mere^^r [ viz.
sitting at Prayers] quod apud ^^ola celebratur. Tertul. de Orat c. 12.
1 Samuel 9.13.22.
Tertullian tells us, -- the Nations, says he, worship their Images sitting:
And thus also the Jews sometimes worshipped in their Religious Feasts, when
they fed upon their Sacrifices: for so it was plainly in the worship of the
Golden Calf, where, after they had offered their Burnt-offerings and their
Peace Offerings, they sat down to eat and to drink upon what they had offered,
Exodus 32.6. So that if any of those that kneel are Guilty of worshipping the
Bread, their kneeling must not be accused for it, since, when giving worship is
their intent, they would be Guilty of the same thing if they sat; and
therefore it is not the Posture, which were very commendable were it directed
unto God, but the mis-applying it to the Bread, and using it with that
irreligious intent, which is to bear the blame of it.

As for those then who are afraid to kneel at the Sacrament, for fear lest
thereby with the Papists they should worship the Bread; my Answer in brief is
this. To worship the bread as the Papists do, is to kneel down to it, and to
pay Divine Honor and Adoration to it, because they believe Christ bodily
present in it; and this may be done in any Posture, either sitting or kneeling,
when any Persons so intend it; and without such intent, it is not done by
kneeling in the Holy Sacrament; and they are best able to tell themselves
whether in Receiving they intend any such thing or no, and, if they say they do
not, it is great Arrogance as well as Incharitableness in others to charge them
with it; and if they have any such design, they must not say it is to comply
with our Church, because it expressly declares against it, and warns them of the
danger of it: If they worship the Bread, their kneeling is no cause of it; and
they may use that Posture only to confess their Sins, and give Thanks, and make
Prayers, by all which they worship God, if they are so minded; and if still
they will worship the Bread by it, they go off from the Injunction of the
Church, which would de^er them from it: So that their Submission to the
Churches Order in this Case, can put them in no danger of worshipping the
Bread; and therefore in complying with her, they have no cause at all to be
afraid of it.

And then as for this Kneeling in the Sacrament being a Popish Rite, if they
mean that the Papists use it, they may call their own Sitting a Popish Rite
too, upon the same ground, because that also is sometimes used by them in
receiving. For the Benedictine Monks, as Hodie in Cathedralibus Ecclesiis and
Monasteriis Benedictinorum, in Die Coenae Domini ante Parasce^en, etc.
Evangelium Johannis a Diacono public praelegitur, and dulcissima illa
colloquia Christi, quae abiturus cum Discipulis habuit, recitantur: interim
ordine dispositis mensis, convivae assident, panem azymum frangentes, etc.
Didocla^. Alt. Damasc. c. 10. p. 746.
Didoclavius, a zealous Asserter of the Sitting Mode, has observed from
Bullinger, sit at the Communion sometimes. Nay, so does the Pope himself, as
William Thomas, an Eyewitness of it, in the Year 1547, says the Quench Coal,
p. 12.
Quench-Coal, in his History of Italy, plainly testifies; and as -- Summus
Pontifex ad sedem ascendens, ibique confidens, universis cernentibus, majorem
partem oblatae suscipit de Patena quam Subdiaconus apportaverat de Altari,
ipsamque Dentibus subdividens, unam particulam ejus sumit, and aliam in Calicem
mittit, etc. Durand. Ra^ion. Divin. Offic. l. 4. c. 54. Nu. 4. p. 203.
Durandus also clearly affirms; and as the -- Imperator retrahens se ad partem
dextram, stat usque quo Pontifex ad sedem eminentem communicaturus revertatur,
quem Imperator sequltur. Lib. Sacr. ^^rem. S. Romans Eccl. l. 1. sect. 5. c. 3.
p. 59.
Book of the Sacred Ceremonies sufficiently intimates in one Case, viz. at the
Coronation of the Emperors. Sitting and Kneeling then are both equal as to
this Point, that the Papists use them: but that need not make us throw them
away as Popish Rites, or be any Disparagement to either of them. For the
Papists have many harmless things, and many very good, as well as many bad
among them. They have the Scriptures, which are never the less the Word of God
because they read them; and the Creed, and the Lords Prayer, which none of us
will cast aside because they use them; and kneel at their Prayers, which yet we
ought not to disclaim for fear of symbolizing with them: So that both Sitting
and Kneeling may be good things among us, though both are used by them too.

But if by a Popish Rite, they mean that it is one of the Corruptions of
Popery, whereby they have depraved Christianity; that is a great Mistake, which
has no color of Reason or Ground at all for it. For Kneeling is not only a
very innocent, but a very decent Posture wherein to receive Gifts, and make
humble Confession of our Sins, and put up Prayers and Supplications to Almighty
God; all which we are to do in the Holy Sacrament. It is probably a much more
Ancient Rite, and either it, or some other Posture of Reverence and Adoration,
which is of the same account with it, was used in the Communion long before
Popery, i. e. the Popish Errors and Corruptions, which are a novel and upstart
Religion, had any Footing.

As for this Objection then against Complying with the Injunction of Kneeling
in the Sacrament, viz. its being a worshipping the Bread, and a Popish Rite;
there is really no weight in it. For they cannot worship the Bread in complying
with the Church, since it forbids it; nor do any thing that is truly and
culpably Popish, though the Papists use it, as indeed they do Sitting too, which
yet is never the worse for it, because it is no Corruption of Popery, but
either it, or some other Posture of Adoration which is of equal Danger with it,
was in use in Christianity before the Popish Errors were introduced. So that
although they cannot see Reason enough to desire it, nor would receive Kneeling
were another Posture allowed; yet since the Sacrament is not otherwise to be
had, they may very safely and wisely comply with, and submit to it still.

And thus I have considered this Impediment, whereby many good Minds, who are
sensible of the Duty of it, and are otherwise very well prepared for it, are
yet unhappily kept back from the Holy Sacrament. And the Result of all is this,
That when they stay away upon this account, because they will not kneel in
receiving it, they refrain upon a most unjustifiable Ground, which will afford
them no Excuse, nor ought in any reason to be their Hindrance. For Kneeling is
really no unsuitable, but a very decent Posture; so that if we were left at
liberty to receive how we would, we might have enough to justify our selves in
making use of it. And it is appointed us by our Governors, whom God commands
us to obey in all lawful things; so that in regard to their having prescribed
it, every good Man among us ought to observe it. And if neither Authority could
impose, nor it had any Reason from it self to recommend it, but that Sitting
were on all accounts much fitter to be used; yet since in their own ccount it
may lawfully be used too, and is only a less decent Mode, but has no Sin or
Offense in it, if they have any earnest desire for the Sacrament, which is not
otherwise to be had, for its sake they will at least comply with it. If they
rate things truly, since Authority has enjoined it, they will see themselves
obliged to use it; but however, since their Savior has laid no weight upon it,
but accepts a Devout Mind in any Posture, though they had rather use another, yet
is there nothing to hinder their Compliance and Submission to it: So that there
is no just pretense for any, upon this account, to refrain coming to the
Sacrament.

CHAP. VII. Of some other Hindrances.
The Contents.
An Account of some other Hindrances. One abstains because the day before he
was at a Feast. Another, because his Child is sick, or he himself is lighty
indisposed. A third, because his Wife or Husband cannot come along with him to
join in it. A fourth, because he has a Visit to make, or a Friend come in, who
in all civility must be attended. A fifth, because of a Shower of Rain, or a
sharp Air abroad, so that he must endure a piercing Blast, or wet his Foot, to
go out to it. These are no Excuse from it, but still Men are bound to
Communicate. Some Devout Meditations and Prayers to help them in a Worthy
Discharge of it. After they have received, they must be careful to make good
those holy Vows and Promises which they made to God in the Holy Sacrament.

HAving hitherto considered those Pleas which seem to be of most weight in
hindering Men from the Sacrament, and possess them either with a Scruple that
they dare not, or with an important Reason why they should not choose to come to
it; before I dismiss this Head, I shall take notice of some others, which, though
of less moment, may yet seem fit to be considered.

Men oft-times give such Reasons for their Neglect of the Sacrament, as are
Reasons to themselves for neglecting nothing else that is of half that moment.
The Vnseasonableness of the Weather, the Sickness of a Child, the paying a
Complement to a Friend, or the like, is thought a sufficient Hindrance from the
Communion: Whereas it would not hinder them from any Business which either
Friendship, their own Pleasure, or their Profit requires of them. For how
cogent soever they may account them in keeping them back from it, they would
not be with-h^ld by them from pursuing any Sport, or from driving an
advantageous Bargain, or carrying on any End or Interest, or serving their
Friend in any Business or Affair of moment. And can any Man now have the Face
to give that for a Reason to Almighty God, which he would be ashamed to offer
as a Reason to any one else? Can he expect to excuse the Neglect of a weighty
Duty unto him, by such trifling Apologies as would not excuse the Neglect of a
Bargain, nay of a Pastime to himself; nor of a Concern of weight, or, perhaps,
of a Complement to his Companions? Those Men are surely in a sad Case, who are
forced to seek shelter under such thin Pretenses; and rather than make such
trifling Pleas for any Act of Disobedience, it were by much their wiser course
to be wholly silent, and not seek to defend themselves at all.

When these Pleas are made then, there is no Excuse in them. And indeed they
would not be made by any Men, if once they were convinced how much it is both
their Duty and their Interest to come to the Communion. For when they are
detained by such frivolous Reasons as would not either be urged or admitted in
excuse for any other Business; they show only their great Indifference to it,
and how they esteem it less than any other Matters: and this they could not do,
if they held it either as a valuable Privilege, or as a Point of Conscience.
The best way therefore to remove these Hindrances from the Sacrament, is to
possess Men with a Belief that God has peremptorily enjoined it, and that it is
infinitely their own Interest and high Privilege to be admitted to it. And
having showed these very largely in the Second Part, I shall refer the Reader
unto that, as a very likely way, not only to answer these, but also to prevent
all other such like Pleas against it.

But that such Persons as are serious in these Hindrances, may not think
themselves slighted, besides this general Answer, I shall say something to the
Particulars.

1. One keeps away from the Sacrament because the day before either he himself
has made a Feast, or has been treated by his Neighbor at a Noble
Entertainment. But why, I pray, must this excuse it? For if at the Feast he was
guilty of any incapacitating Fault, or any ways intemperate; it is not the
Feast, but such Offense or Intemperance which is to be alleged for it. But if
the Entertainment was Friendly in the Design, Temperate at the Table, and every
way harmless and charitable, hurting no Man's Fame, nor disturbing any Man's
Quiet in the Conversation; wherein was his Lord offended, or his Soul unfitted
by it? The Primitive Christians received it as a Friendly Treat, for in those
days their Love Feasts always went along with it; so that an Hospitable
Entertainment the day before, yea or the same day, does not unfit Men to
Communicate; but if in all things else they are duly qualified, they may
worthily receive still.

2. Another abstains from this Holy Feast because his Child is sick, or because
he has taken Cold himself, or has some aching in his Head, or is otherwise
lightly indisposed.

But what if his Child is sick? Does he attend it? Or is it advisable for him
to be so far disturbed at it, till his Mind is unfit for those Religious
Tempers which he is to exercise at the Holy Sacrament? Perhaps his Child fares
the worse because of some Sin that he has committed; and will he not then
instantly repent of it, and come to the Lord's Table, there to have his Pardon
sealed, that so this Load being taken off, it might be eased by it? But whether
that be so or no, if he has any sense of Religion either in his Child's Case or
his own, he will be earnestly desirous to make God his Physician, and call out
to him for help; and that he cannot do so effectually, or prevail in it so
certainly at any other time, as I have showed, as in the Holy Sacrament. For
God is never more inclined to hear us, nor are we ever more likely to have our
Prayers granted for any thing that he sees fit for us, than when we send them
up along with this Solemn Commemoration of our Saviors Death, which is the
only Argument that has Authority and Power with him, to obtain any thing on our
behalf. So that if a wise man longs to have his Child recovered, he cannot do a
more unwise thing, than either to grieve so far till he is unfitted for this
Feast, or, when he might be fit for it, to neglect it; since his Prayers there
would a be most probable and prudent course to obtain it.

And then as for his own indisposition, if indeed it has brought upon him such
heaviness as unfits him for any Spiritual Act, or if it is in that Degree, that
it is not safe for him to stir abroad with it; God prefers Natural and Essential
Duties before Positive Institutions, and Mercy before Sacrifice, so that it
will be a just excuse for it. But if it cannot hinder him from looking after
business, and going among his Neighbors, or venturing out upon any appearance
of doing either himself or his Friend a kindness; why must it excuse him from
attending upon God, and doing him this Service; except that be thought
sufficient to excuse our attendance upon him which excuses nothing else, which
is a thing, I presume, they would be loath to own, who stay away by reason of
this hindrance.

2. Some again refrain the Holy Sacrament, because their Wife, or Husband
cannot bear them Company, and join in it. One of them is either accidentally
prevented that they cannot, or sinfully negligent and unprepared that they will
not come to it; and therefore in Compliance and for Companies sake the other
also keeps away at present, and defers it to another time when both together
can partake of it.

This I think is a popular, but it is a very weak excuse. For the receiving the
Communion is an indispensable Duty, concerning which every Person must give
account of themselves unto Almighty God; so that one near Relation can no more
talk of neglecting it for the others sake, than of neglecting to say their
Prayers and serve God because the other does it not, or of being irreligious to
symbolize with some dear Friends, and casting away their precious Souls out of
Complement. Nay, if he had not thus enjoined, but only Friendly invited us to
Communicate; yet would it be a very rude and disobliging thing to refuse his
Invitation upon this account, because some others, who are very dear to us,
have not either the opportunity, or good manners to accept it. For if an
Husband or a Wife will not receive, unless the other also will consent to join
it; it is a sign they come not so much for their Lords, as for each others
sake, so that they and not their Savior have the Service and the Honor of it:
and this is an odd account for any man to give to Christ of his neglecting this
Feast, when he is most affectionately and earnestly invited to it.

When any Persons stay away from the Sacrament then, because they cannot have
their Bosom-Friend to join in it: they are Guilty of a great sin, since they
are bound to it whether the other come or not, and pass a great affront and
dishonor upon their Lord; so that this is far from having any excuse in it.
Nay, instead of being a Reason why they should abstain from it, the neglect of
one dear Relation lays a greater obligation on the other to Communicate. For
when one cannot come, so that there must be a defect on that part, that is too
much already since neither ought to be wanting in it; and therefore there is
the more need the other should receive, not only to show their own Duty in it,
but also to supply their Friends defect as well as they can, and make amends
for it.

4. A Fourth absents himself from this Holy Feast, because that day he is to
visit a Friend abroad, or has a Friend accidentally come in to dine with him,
who must in all Civility be attended.

But why must our Respects to our Savior and our other Friends be made thus to
interfere, so that one must needs be a Temptation to omit the other? How comes
it, that of all the days in the month we fix upon that for visiting or
entertaining of our Friends, when our Blessed Lord invites us to his Table
there to entertain us? Or if by accident a Friend then breaks in upon us, why
must that detain us when Christ calls us? Is it any part of his Friendship to
make us disobey our Lord, or to put us by embracing this high honor and most
advantageous opportunity when it is offered? Or if he be Gods Friend too as well
as ours, is it not very fit that he should go also and join with us? When to
Communicate is a Duty in both of us, is it any wise Reasonable that he should
make us stay away, and not go himself along with us? But if it happen that a
Friend who is unwilling to Communicate falls in to be entertained, or a visit
at that time would be expected: Since our Savior and they cannot be attended
too, which ought in Reason to be preferred? Is there any to whom we owe more
Respect and Observance, than we do to Christ Jesus? should we Affect the
Company, or Court the Conversation of any Person, more than his? Are there any
who ought more highly to be valued by us, or have better deserved of us, or
whom we should study more to make our Friend, than him who has gained us
Eternal Life, and that by laying down his own Hearts Blood for the Purchase?
When more Honorable Persons, or better Friends invite us, let us turn our
backs upon his Table, and pay them Attendance: but since he can have no
Competitors in this Case, where is the Justice, the Honor and Respect to him,
when this is given as the Reason of our Absence?

5. A Fifth neglects the Holy Sacrament, because of a shower of Rain, or a sharp
Air abroad; so that he must endure a piercing blast, or we^ his Foot if he goes
out in it.

But is he thus tender of himself in any other matters? and would these
dreadful Scare-Crows put him by any other Concerns which frigh^ him from this
Ordinance? If they stood in the way of his Pleasures, would he r^frain them? If
they lay between him and his worldly Interests, would he be discouraged by
them? If they met him in the way as he were going to (...) Friend a kindness,
would they cause him to turn ba^k again? Though they would not just^fie it, yet
when they hinder him from th^se and such like matters, they may with more
color be pleaded in excuse of his absence from the Lords Supper. But are not
men much at a Loss for excuses to shift off this Duty, when such as this, so
full of palpable Contempt and a careless Spirit, must serve their turn, and be
thought sufficient? And have not we an hard task to Conduct them on to Eternal
happiness, which must* put them upon Fighting and Striving, and giving all
Diligence, and denying themselves, and taking up the Cross, and plucking out
right Eyes, and cutting off right Hands, etc. when they stumble thus at Straws,
and are beat back by the force of every Feather which is blown in their Faces;
and such trilles as these can discourage their going on in the most weighty
Duties, and make them recoyl again upon our Hands?

As for all these Excuses then, which careless men, who make no Conscience of
the Sacrament, give for their Absence from it; they will not stand them in any
stead, nay, they are such as no wise man dare own when once they are examined.
They show nothing else, but the dis-regard men have of Christ, their
unaffect^dness with all that he has done and suffer^d, their absolute
indifference to have it remembered, and their utter Contempt of this Duty which
he has commanded them. They are a good Evidence of their own careless,
undutiful, and irreverent mind, and manifest how little they set by their
Blessed Lord; so that the urging of them is a ready way to give more offense,
but not to make any excuse at all.

And thus I have done with all those Pleas, which are wont, I think, most
generally to keep men from the Communion, and would be most apt to hinder those
things which I have said about the Duty and Advantage of it in the second part,
from having their due effect upon them. Among these there are some, perhaps,
may seem to be little objections; but little as they are, they are an hindrance
to some minds; and since it is not below them to stop at them, I am far from
thinking it too trivial and low a thing for me to answer them. And upon the
whole matter it appears, that to Communicate is a great Duty, and a great
benefit, and that none of those Pleas which are ordinarily urged for it, can in
any just sort excuse their neglect of it. For neither their unworthiness to
partake in it, nor the danger of Damnation threatened to every unworthy
Communicant, nor the Fear of breaking that promise of New Life which is made in
it, nor the apprehended Difficulty and want of leisure to prepare for it, nor
their being unbettered and unimproved by it, nor the wan^ of that Charity which
is to be professed at it, nor the having some Enemies, after all their
Endeavors for Reconciliation, unreconciled, nor the seeming presumption of
joining in it, nor the Customary Absence of many good People from it, nor the
Admittance of Unworthy Receivers to it, nor the Imposition of Kneeling at it:
neither these, I say, nor any other Impediment whereby Men are apt to excuse it
to their own Minds, can justify and bear them out in absenting themselves*
when they are invited. No ill Man can be excused, and no good Man need to be
h^ndred by them; so that every Man, as he tenders our Blessed Lord's Command,
and his own Souls-Interest, must be careful reverently and devoutly to partake
in this Holy Feast, when he has an Opportunity, and is called so to do.

And now I have gone through all those Particulars which I proposed at first, and
which I thought most proper to be insisted on to engage Men to a Worthy
Reception of the Holy Sacrament. I have shown what is the meaning of Eating and
Drinking in this Feast, and wherein lies the Worthiness of doing it, and what
strict Obligati^ns us we have to it, and how great Benefits we are like to
receive by it, and answered th^se Pleas which are most generally given ^ut to
excuse the Neglect of it; and this with all honest Minds, who are desirous and
free to hear, and will have the patience to consider, may seem sufficient to
enforce a due Attendance on it. And when once Men are so disposed, and
seriously resolved to communicate, I shall add a few things to assist them in a
right Discharge of it, and so conclude this Subject.

When we come to the Holy Sacrament, to commemorate the Death of our Bleeding
Lord, whose Body there is represented as broken, and his most precious Blood as
shed, on our account; we are to show forth an affectionate and hearty
Thankfulness for so invaluable a Kindness, and an entire Resignation of our
selves to his Use, and Repentance of all our Sins, fully purposing to amend
them all thenceforwards, and an universal Peace and Charity toward all our
Neighbors; all which we must excite in our own Souls by due Considerations.

1. We must show forth an affectionate and hearty Thankfulness for so
invaluable a ^^ndness. And what Soul can be slow to (...) this, who considers
how infinitely our (...) Lord has deserved of us? For he has got us the most
precious and glorious things which Heaven it self could afford, that all our
Sins should be freely pardoned, and that the Holy Ghost, that Immense, Eternal,
and All-sufficient Spirit, should come in at all times to our help, and that we
should be in no less Quality than the Sons of God, and Heirs of a Kingdom, who
are assured of eternal Joys and Glories in another World: And ought not Gifts
so august and superlatively excellent to be most affectionately acknowledged?
He has bought all these, to bestow upon us, at the dearest Rate, not only
taking the most unwearied Pains, but also paying the highest Price, and laying
down his own most precious Blood for the Purchase. And must not such
astonishing Kindness, which was affrighted by no Hazards, nor stopped at any
Difficulties, nor declined any Sufferings, not the Suffering of Death it self,
for our sakes, be always held in a most thankful Remembrance? And in all this
he had no Ends of his own to serve of us, but was led on purely by the Pleasure
he takes in our Happiness; he was not won by our Deserts; for, alas! we were
his professed Enemies, who had nothing to show but highest Provocations; he was
not wearied out with the importunity of our Entreaties, for it came, as
undeserved, so altogether unasked, whatsoever he did for us: he was ^ot moved
by the Medi^ti^n of Friends; ^or whom, alas* had we to intercede for (...)* And
shall not such amazing Love and Goodness, so frankly showed, without any Eye at
(...) or Private Interests, without (...) or Deserts, nay, in spite of all
Disc^u^ag^me^ts and highest Provocations, be entertained with greatest Joy and
grateful Acclamations? He has been an infinitely endearing and entire Friend to
us, without any Inducement but his own most generous Kindness, and against all
Discouragements, and beyond all (...), and under the most frightful Hazards,
and at the highest Expenses, giving his own Soul even to Death, for a Ransom to
redeem ours: And whenever we hear or think of this, I am confident it will
not be difficult for any of us to embrace him with Hearts full of Love and high
Desires, and pay him most entire Thanks, and burst out into Songs of Praise,
and find it a most joyful Business so to do.

What am I, my dear Lord, will a devout Mind then say, that thou should
leave the Right Hand of God, and come to visit me? Hadji thou no Ease in thy
own Breast, so long as I lay plunged in Misery? And could not thou be Happy
in Heaven, nor enjoy thy self amidst all the Joys and Glories of that Blissful
Pla^^, unl^ss I were there too to b^ar th^^ Company? How ^arnest thou, being so
highly exalted, and the Eternal Son of God, to have any Affectionate Concern at
all for me? Was not I a def^rred, p^lluted Wretch, and thy professed Enemy? And
weren^t either of these enough to turn away thy Face from me? But if,
notwithstanding all this, thy overflowing Goodness would put the (...)
something for my sake, why must thou come thy self upon the Earth, nay, come to
bleed and die, to Redeem me? Am I dearer to thee than thy own Life, that thou
should part with it to save me? Do thou love me better than thou love
thy self, that thou will shed the last Drop of thy own Hearts Blood to make me
happy? Blessed Jesus! how unfa^^^mable is thy Grace, and what an unsearchable
Depth of Love is this which thou have opened to us! O how happy do I think my
self in it, and how does my Heart rejoice at the Remembrance of it! Lord! I
love thee dearly, and long to love thee more. Would I had the Heart^ of a
Seraphin, that I might be all over Love, and neither wish nor think of any
thing besides thee. Would I could feel my Soul affected to that degree which I
desire, and thou infinitely deservest of me. I wish no greater Pleasure, than
to be found perfect in thy Love, and to have thee so dear unto me, that I can
contemn all the gilded Vanities and Allurements of the World at the thoughts of
thee. O! do thou fill me with an Affection full and absolute, like thine own,
that I may love thee infinitely, as I am beloved by thee! Possess me with such
a Sense of thy Love, and such Thankfulness for all thy Favors, as is worthy of
thee; though should I offer the utmost Acknowledgments which the most affected
and enlarged Heart can pay, I should not give the thousandth part of what I owe
thee. Let all the Angels adore thy glorious Goodness, and all the Sons of* Men,
so long as they have a Tongue to speak, set forth thy Noble Praise: for thou, O
sweetest Jesu, art the Son of the Blessed, the Joy and Glory of the World, the
Lamb of God, and the Savior of Mankind, who wast slain for our sakes, and art
alive again, and sit now for ever at the Right Hand of Power, in the Glory
of the Father, that Angels may submit to thee, and all the World may worship
thee, sing of thee, and praise thy Goodness, Power, and Glory, to all Eternity.

2. We must show our selves reconciled to all who have any ways offended us,
and that we are in Peace and Charity with all Persons. And this we shall not
think much to do, if we consider how highly our dear Lord is concerned for
them, and how earnestly he sues in behalf of them; for then we shall be readily
brought to it on his account, tho we might be more averse to it on their own.
He has loved them so well, as to shed his precious Blood for them; and can we
find in our Hearts to hurt any Person, when we see him giving his own Life to
save him? He owns them as his Friends and Brethren; and is not that enough to
make us kind, to see that he is so near akin to them? He has made them Members
of his Body, and thereby Parts of his own self; and can we study Revenge
against them, when he comes in at last to bear the stroke, and i^ reached in so
doing? He becomes a Petitioner to us in their behalf, and entreats us by virtue
of all that he has done to be Friends again; and can we have the face to deny
him, who has so infinitely obliged us, and ought to command us in every thing?
Shall we refuse so small a Suit to him, who died for us? or stick to throw away
a sinful Resentment for his sake, who has parted with his own Hearts Blood for
ours? Though they are most unworthy to be pardoned, yet is he most worthy of it;
so that when he entreats, we must not be backward in it. Nay, we stand daily in
a thousand times more need of his Pardon, than they do of ours; so that we
block up the way to our own Forgiveness, if we refuse it. For what if they have
injured us? Have we been altogether innocent, and have offered him no Injuries?
What if they have most ungratefully abused us, after they had received the most
endearing Kindnesses? have we been duly thankful unto him, and never offended
against all his Mercies? Do not we owe him Mat. 18.24, 28.
Ten thousand Talents? whereas their Debt to us is but a Trifle of an hundred
Pence? And since we are daily asking him the Forgiveness of these vast Sums,
can we at the same time stick at his Instance to remit these smaller Matters to
our Neighbors? Have we the Face to ask Pardon, whilst we have not the Heart to
grant it? Or can we hope that Christ should give it us, for the most heinous
Sins, at our Request, when we deny it to our Brother, for the smallest
Trespasses, at his? Or rather, since he most frankly forgives us, and that too
without upbraiding us, shall not both our own Necessity, and the Example of his
Mercy, engage us to forgive our offending Neighbor also?

Lo! here, my Blessed Savior, will a Devout Heart then say, how I cast by all
angry Thoughts, and am Friends with all the World as thou requirest me! They
shall all be dear to me, because I see they are so to thee, who have given
thine own Life for their Ransom. Thou ownest them all as thy Brethren, and
therefore they shall evermore be mine; for I desire to have the same Friends,
and to go along with thee in every Relation. No Member of thine whom before I
had never seen shall ever be a Stranger to me, but I will embrace him as a part
of my own Body. Nay, even my bitterest Enemies shall have no hatred, or hard
usage at my hands, but I am Friends with all the World since thou will have it
so. Shall not I forgive other men, who am undone my self unless I be forgiven?
Shall not I have pity on their Souls, as thou, Blessed Jesus, have on mine; and
freely Pardon them, when thou becomest their Advocate to sue and intercede for
them? O! my Dearest Savior, I do from my heart forgive them, and will never
yield to return their Injuries or Unkindness upon them. Nay, I most humbly
beseech thee, and that by thy own most precious Blood, that thou would
forgive them also. Give them Grace to Repent of what they have done, and impute
not their Trespasses unto them, but receive them, I earnestly entreat thee,
into thy Favor, as here I do truly and unfeignedly into mine. Hear me, O
Blessed Jesu! both for my self and them, that we may all be one with thee, and
among our selves, being united to thee by a Spirit of Holiness, and to each
other by a Spirit of mutual Charity and Brotherly-kindness, that so all the
World may know we are thy Disciples by that Spirit of Love which thou have
given us.

3. We must Resign our selves up to our Saviors use, and Repent truly of all
our sins, promising him Faithfully that we will amend them all thenceforwards.

We must Resign our selves up to our Saviors use, that he may dispose of us as
he pleases. And what man can stick at this, who considers that he has bought
us, and would put us to no use but what is infinitely for our own Advantage?
Has any Person a better claim to us, than he who bought us with his Blood, and
gave his own Life for the Purchase? Should not he have the benefit of all our
Service, who has paid so dear for it, by dying himself instead of us? But if we
were at Liberty, and he had no Power over us; is there any better way to
dispose of our selves, or could we desire to be in other hands rather than in
his? Can we hope for more Wisdom in any one to direct, or more Power to bring
our Happiness about, than in him who knows and governs all things? Durst we
trust more to the Faithfulness and Affection of any Heart, than of that which
dyed for us? Or can we think our selves happier in any Hands than his, who is
in all things studious of our Advantage? For our Blessed Lord seeks no other
ends by us, but our own Eternal Happiness; he imposes no Duties on our
Consciences, but what he has done himself before us, nay, what, had we the
understanding to discern it, we should all have imposed upon our selves: So
that in committing our selves to his Conduct, we do not give but seek a
Benefit; and dispose of our selves in that way which is incomparably our
highest Interest. We are absolutely his own Right, and it is infinitely our own
Interest to be wholly given up to him, and governed according to his liking;
and therefore every considerate man will freely resign his Heart to Christ, and
never suffer the World, or his own Lusts to pull it back again.

Come then, my Dear and Rightful Lord, will a poor Soul say, and take
Possession of me. Thou have bought me with thine own Blood, a strange Price for
so despicable a Purchase; and here I come in all Humility to present thee with
what thou have so dearly got, and without all reserve to give up my self unto
thee. I know, O Lord, I am a Deformed, and Polluted Creature, most unworthy to
be offered to so excellent a Majesty. But gladly would I be thine that thou
may make me better, and so adorn me with thy Grace that I may be sitted for
thy self, and therefore I earnestly beseech thee to accept me. I humbly beg to
be delivered from my self, for I am my own most mortal Enemy. O! that thou
would give thine Holy Spirit Power over me, and not let my own Corrupt will
any longer govern me, nor my false heart any more deceive me, nor my unbridled
Passions any more to reign in me, which alas! have tyrannized too long already!
O! that thou would purge my understanding from all foolish Principles, and
all darkness and Ignorance of Holy Things; and cure my will and affections of
all their stubbornness, and opposition to thy Laws; that thou would first
take them as thine own Propriety, and then fit them for their Masters use, that
I may never hereafter live to my self, but unto thy Glory! will thou throw back
a Soul that would hang it self upon thee? will thou disdain an Heart that is
desirous after thee, and would fain be no longer its own, but thine, that thou
might use it as it may best serve and honor thee? O Blessed Jesu! do not
reject it, for it is the Purchase of thy Blood. Let not all that be thrown away
which thou have already done for it, for want of thy further Care and Conduct
of it. Accept me, Good Lord, who here unfeignedly devote my self unto thee,
that both my Soul and Body, and all I have, may be employed as thou see fit
to order me. I am nothing, I have nothing, and I desire nothing but to be with
thee, to be filled with thy Grace, and obey thee perfectly; that so I may have
nothing of my self, but do all things through Christ dwelling in me.

And when we thus Resign our selves to our Savior's Use, we must heartily
repent of all our Sins, faithfully promising never more to yield to them, but
to amend them all thenceforwards. To Repent particularly of all our Sins, we
must first discover them, by taking some Catalogue of Christian Duties, and
examining our own Hearts at every one, Whether we have consented to transgress
them? And where we find we have, there we must bemoan our selves, and fully
resolve, That if God will be pleased to pardon what is past, we will never
yield to do the like again. And what Man will not thus steadfastly resolve to
leave all his Sins, that has the patience to consider what will be the End of
his Continuance in them? For by that we shall infinitely offend our Savior
Christ, who gave his own Life for ours, and whom therefore we are bound to
please above all Persons; we shall certainly lose the Joys of Heaven, and
Eternal Happiness, a Loss which the whole World put together cannot recompense;
we shall unavoidably be d^^med to Hellfire and Eternal Torments, which is the
utmost height of Misery that can possibly befall us. This will infal^ibly be
the Effect of our Perseverance in any Sins we find our selves guilty of. And
now let us ask our own Souls, Whether we love them so well, that we will ^ndure
all this, rather than for^go them? Shall I prize my Sin to that degree, as for
its sake to act despite to my dearest Lord, who died for me? Must it be dearer
to me than his Love, that I should dishonor and offend him whenever it bids
me? Is this the Return I make to my tru^st, dearest Friend, to side with his
professed Enemy? Is this my Thankfulness for all his Kindness, to stick to a
Lust that aims at nothing but my Destruction, rather than to him who gave his
own Life to save mine? Thou love it dearly, O my Soul; but can thou value
it at such a Rate, as to part with Everlasting Life for it? Had thou rather
have it, than enjoy the Face of God, and be for ever Happy? Art thou content,
for the short and unsatisfying Pleasures it affords, to lose all the Joys and
Glories of a Blessed Eternity? Will thou die sooner than be divorced from it?
and accompany it even into the Flames of Hell, and the midst of Eternal
Torment? God forbid, will every May say whose Heart is thus particularly posed,
that ever I should be so desperately mad, and unaccountably wicked. I cannot
despite so dear a Lord, or throw away the Eternal Joys of the Heavenly State,
or endure the Smart of Hell, and the insupportable Load of Everlasting Torment.
No Man can bear it, and I stand amazed to think of it: And therefore since this
will be the Effect of my wicked ways, I am resolved from this Moment to
renounce them, and by the help of God will never return to them any more.

Thus let the Drunkard think with himself on his Cups, the S^^earer on his
Oaths, the unjust Man on his unlawful Gain, the Contentious on his Quarrels,
the unclean Person on his Fornication and forbidden Pleasures, the Revengeful
Man on his spiteful Carriage, the Slanderer and Evil-speaker on his reproachful
Words, Back-bitings, and Defamations, and every other Sinner on his particular
Sins: and when they seriously consider that this Savior must be lost, this
Happiness of Heaven forfeited, and this eternal Anguish and Extremity of Pain
endured, if they persist in it; they will instantly resolve to forsake it, and
never yield to be guilty of it again.

This may be used (...) a Penitential Confession of our Sins after
Self-examination.
O Blessed Lamb of God, who have redeemed me with thy Blood, will every
Contrite Heart then cry out, I am utterly ashamed to look thee in the Face,
considering all the cruel Usage I have brought upon thee. This Sentence may be
omitted, when this Confession is not before a Sacrament.
I scarce know how to think of Feasting on thy precious Blood, now I am most
earnestly invited to it, since mine own Sins have shed it. I am, alas! a most
polluted Creature, who have daily offended, in Thought, Word, and Deed, against
thy Divine Majesty. My Here mention your particular Sins.
Pride, and contempt of God, and Sensual Lusts, and Covetous Desires, and
uncharitable Practices, have cried aloud for Vengeance on me, and that Cry
would not be silenced, unless thou my dearest Savior would die in stead of
me. Of all these Offenses I am guilty, and the horror of that Guilt would
fright me from thee, were it not that thou freely call me to accept of
Mercy. I come, Lord, in obedience to thy Word, and with an humble and a
penitent Heart most earnestly entreat thee to have pity on me. I am sensible of
these, and all my Errors, and utterly ashamed that ever I committed them. I am
weary of them, and fully purposed by thy Gra^e to become a New Man, or else I
durst not ask to be forgiven. My Heart shall never more join with them, nor
will I ever hereafter yield to live in such ungrateful and wicked ways again.
They nailed thy tender Hands and Feet to the accursed Tree, and thrust the
Spear into thy Side; and can I then endure to see, or any longer side with
them? They made God, who is the Author of all I have and hope to enjoy, my
utter Enemy; and shall I then be still a Friend to them? They would bring me to
eternal Destruction both of Body and Soul; and whilst I consider this, is it
possible I should have any more to do with them? No, Blessed Lord, I hate them,
and am utterly resolved from this time forth for ever to abandon them. They
have been the Shame of my Life, and are now the Sorrow of my Heart, as, alas!
when thou enduredst such Anguish for them on the Cross, once they were of
thine. I loath my self by reason of them, and will never consent any more to
live in them; and with an humble and a contrite Heart beseech my Heavenly
Father, that through the Merits of thy Blood I may be forgiven. And wilt not
thou, O God, who sentest to seek after me whilst I was an open Rebel, now meet
me graciously, as thou did the Prodigal Son, when I return again to my Duty?
Wilt not thou, my sweetest Savior, who diedst for me whilst I was thine
unrelenting Foe, now intercede for me, when I come to serve thee? O speak Peace
unto my poor Heart, and let me know and feel that thou forgivest me! Send thy
Holy Spirit to take possession of it, to keep it true unto thy self, that it
may never more start back from thee. Thou have promised thy Grace to those that
ask it, and endeavor in expectation of it: O! I desire it, and will do what I
can to be assisted by it; and therefore humbly hope this Promise shall be made
good unto thy Servant. Whatsoever thou do in other things, deny me not this
Grace, O Heavenly Father, for Jesus's sake, who is infinitely dear to thee, and
who died for me. Amen.

Thus may we Discharge the Duties of this Feast, and excite and actuate in our
own minds that Faith, and Thankfullness, and Charity, and Resignation, and
Repentance, which are to render us fit and worthy of it. If any are destitute
of other helps, they may make use of these Meditations and Prayers to affect
their own Hearts, and to show forth these Virtues of worthy Receivers. They
will not always find room for all these Devotions whilst the Sacrament is
Administering; but they may go through with all of them before they come, for then
they may allot what space they please for them; and make use of such of them as
the time allows when they are receiving. And for a more actual adorning of
their Souls with them at that time, whilst the Minister himself, or others
before them are Receiving, they may express them all in one Continued Devotion,
by lifting up their Hearts to God in the words following.

O Blessed Jesu! who gave thy self to die for my sake; how near have I lain
to thy kind heart, when the precious Blood that streamed thence was not so dear
to it! I am utterly ashamed of my self, that ever I should put thee to part
with such a price, and to endure such exceeding smart and tortures to b^friend
me. I blush to think of it, and abhor my sins which brought thee to it. But
since my need required, and thy Boundless Love would make thee undergo what
thou did, in the utmost thankfulness of an humble heart, I gladly accept the
inestimable benefit; for which I love thee most Affectionately, and will serve
thee most Faithfully, and praise thee most joyfully, evermore extolling thy
boundless Goodness and glorious Excellencies, and endeavoring that all others
may do so too.

Thou have Bought me with thy Blood; and here with an unfeigned Heart I give up
my Soul and Body, my Goods, and all I have to be employed in thy Service, and
disposed of as thy Providence shall order me. Take Possession of me by thy
Spirit, that my Body may always be the Temple of the Holy Ghost, my Soul and
all its Faculties entirely Devoted to thy Behoof and Interest, and all (...)
worldly Goods acquired so inno^^ntly, enjoyed so thankfully, spent so
^^^perately, and laid out so charitabl^ ^s becomes thy Faithful Steward. I
(...) not hence forward call any things my own when once my Lord has need of
them, I freely resign all up unto thee, since thou have paid so dear for me.

I have grievously offended thee by many sins, particularly by Here name such
Sins as you know your selves most guilty of.
etc. I am perfectly ashamed of them, and sorry at my heart that ever I
committed them, and would never do it were they to do again; and faithfully
promise, that wittingly I will never more yield to them; and humbly beg, that
for Christ's sake, in whom thou offerest Pardon to every penitent Heart, thou
would forgive them.

Thou have purchased the Holy Spirit for all those who are ready to labor in
an Holy Life, and take pains with it; and offerest him to all such industrious
Souls in this Sacrament. I desire, O Lord, to amend all these Sins which I have
here acknowledged; I am fully bent upon it, and will endeavor what I can
toward it, and depend upon thy Grace and Aid to carry me through it: Be it
unto thy Servant according to thy Word.

I am at Peace, O Lord, with all Persons, and forgive all Offenders against me,
as I expect Forgiveness of my own Offenses at thy Hands, and am fully resolved
to be kind to all the World, but especially to all the Members of thy Mystical
Body, for thy sake, that by these Returns of Charity I may in some sort answer
that Infinite Love and Kindness I receive from thee.

Thy Blood, O Blessed Jesus, has procured; and thou, Holy Father, for Christ's
sake, have promised, Pardon of any Sin to every one who repents of it, and the
Assistance of thy Spirit to every one that endeavors with it, and Eternal Life
to all that are entirely Obedient; and call us to receive Assurance that
thou art still of the same mind, and wilt make all this good, in this Holy
Sacrament. Lord, I heartily repent me of all my Sins, for Christ's sake do thou
pardon me; I am fully resolved to show Care, and to labor in the Amendment of
all my Faults, let thy Grace and Holy Spirit come in to assist and enable me; I
am steadfastly purposed to keep thy Commandments, do thou then graciously accept
me for the sake of my Crucified Savior, whose Death I now most thankfully
commemorate, and who is here offered unto thee as our Atonement, on this Table.

Or shorter, thus:

O Blessed Jesus, who diedst for my sake, and daily still renewest thy
Kindness, by showing thy self well-pleased with what thou have done, and
calling me to meet thee in this joyful Commemoration of it: I come at thy
Command, to show my self humbly and thankfully mindful of so Infinite a
Benefit. Blessed, yea for ever Blessed be thy Love, which made thee think upon
when I lay in misery; nay, forget thy self, and throw away thy own Life, to
save mine. I humbly adore thy mavelous Goodness, which shall ever be the Joy
and Praise, the Wonder and Astonishment of Men and Angels. And O that I may
always love thee better than I do my Life, that so I may not flinch even to die
for thee, as thou have done for me, if ever thou shall call me to it for thy
Glory! I see in this Bread that is broken, and this Wine which is poured out,
what cruel Pains my Sins brought to my dearest Lord, Here name Particulars.
and how they stand guilty of his Body and Blood. I come with shame and a
troubled Heart to confess it; I utterly abhor them for what they have done, and
declare, since they have proved the ^ruel Enemies, they shall evermore be m^^e,
and that I will never from this day admit of a Reconciliation. I am here to
assure thee, that I will not live unto my self or them, but unto thee, and
freely devote all I have to thy use, since thou have bought me. I love all Men,
and will embrace them as my Brethren, because they are thine; and freely
forgive all the World, even as I desire to be forgiven. O Holy Jesus, according
to thy boundless Mercy accept of these small returns of thy poor Servant, which
though very mean, alas! are yet the best I have to offer thee, and supply me
with a more abundant measure of thy Grace, that I may be able to pay back
something more worthy of thee. Let this Holy Sacrament be the Comfort and
Refreshment of my Heart, conveying Pardon and Peace to it, and the Enriching
and Establishing of my Spirit with all the Benefits of thy Blood: make it a
great increase of present Grace to me, and a certain pledge of Immortality, to
assure me that I shall even live with thee, and be near to that Heart which
Dyed for me. Be it even so for thine own sake, Blessed Jesu! Amen.

In these, or such like words, may we act over all those Virtues which are to
render us worthy Communicants, before the Holy Mysteries are brought to us. And
at the receipt of them, we may lift up our Hearts to God in these or the like
Expressions.

After the Receiving of the Bread, we may say to our Dearest Lord with an
Affectionate Heart.

I Receive this, O! my Lord, in remembrance of thy Death, and thank thee most
entirely for laying down thine own Life for me. O! how I rejoice in thy
mavelous Love, and in this Remembrance of it! I will always live to thee, and
utterly renounce every sin whereby I have most ungratefully pierced thy
bleeding Heart, and am Friends with all the World for thy sake, and will extol
thy matchless Bounty whilst I have a Tongue to speak, giving all Honor, Glory,
and Praise to thee the Lamb of God, who wast slain, and now sit upon the
Throne for evermore.

And in like manner after the receiving of the Cup.

THe Remembrance of thy Bloodshedding, O! sweetest Savior, is dear to me; I
can never forget it, since it was altogether for my sake, and I owe my very
Life to it. In all the Affection of an infinitely obliged heart I humbly thank
thee for what thou have done, and gladly consent to those Terms of Life and
Mercy which were purchased by it, and will never wilfully yield to do any
thing that is unworthy of so great a Benefit, and embrace all my Brethren with
open Arms, since thou so requirest it, and desire after this sort to fulfill
thy will in all things, and adore thy Glorious Goodness, and show forth thy
boundless Praise to my Life's end.

O! keep me unalterable in this mind, may a Devout Soul then go on, and never
suffer my own Corrupt Lusts to turn me from it. I have now, O! Holy Savior,
taken thee into my Heart. O let thy Presence banish them away, that they may
never pretend to it again, since now it is Holy to the Lord, nor ever appear to
pollute that place wherein so Divine a Guest is lodged. Now thou art pleased to
enter under my Roof, have me always in thy keeping, for I am safe in no other
hands. Preserve the place thou have taken possession of, and let not thy
Enemies and mine any more invade it. Pour into my Heart all the Benefits of thy
Crucified Body and Blood, since now by thy wonderful Grace I am made Partaker
of them. Thy Blood was shed for the Remission of sins: O! let me know and feel
that mine are all forgiven. It obtained the Assistance of thy Spirit and Grace;
O! let me ever enjoy that as I stand in need of it! It was the Price thou
payedst down for Eternal Life; O! let that finally be my Lot, since thou have
paid so dear for it! Bid me hope assuredly, O Blessed Jesu! that all this shall
be made good unto thy Servant, because now thou have given thy self to me, and
fed me with thine own Body, whereby may thou ever dwell in me, and I in
thee. Amen.

And when this is done, whilst others are receiving, we may employ our selves
in some of the foregoing Devotions; or, when we have enough of them, join
heartily in the Prayer which is made at the Delivery of the Bread and Wine to
others; or strike in affectionately with the Psalm of Praise, which for the
ease and exercise of all, but of those particularly who have already received,
is wont at that time to be sung in most Places.

After this sort then may we lift up our Hearts to God, and discharge all those
Duties which are required in every worthy Communicant. When we have no other
helps, we may acceptably express them all in a Devout Concurrence with the
Churches Prayers; since in them, as I have Part ^. Chap. 3.
shown, there is an actual exercise of all these Duties. But when we can do
more, either by the help of Books or our own invention; we may act them over
still more fully in these or such like forms of Devotion.

And when all this is done, and this solemn Feast is concluded, we must not
think tho work of worthy Receiving is at an end; for one thing still remains
that must employ us always afterward, and that is a careful performance of all
those Promises which we made to God in this Holy Ordinance.

In the Sacrament, as has been showed, we seek not only a Pardon for what is
past, but also vow and promise Amendment for the Future, and these Promises
must be made good afterward, and it must be our care whilst we Live to fulfill
them.

This we are higly concerned to do, and it will greatly increase our Guilt and
Condemnation if we fall short of it. For if we return to our former sins again,
after we have thus solemnly vowed to forsake them: We are false to our Word,
and treacherous where we seem to be most sincere, and seek more especially to
be trusted. We break our Faith with God, and go about to delude his
Expectation, had he been capable to be imposed upon and believed as we would
have had him: which is as great an abuse as we can well put upon him. And this
doubles the sin which we commit, and sets God further off from being entreated;
for now we have not only the Fault it self to answer for, but also this
Perfidiousness, and breach of Vows, which adds a new one to it, and makes it
greater. So that after every Sacrament, if we still continue Impenitent, our
Guilt is aggravated, and our Souls more endangered, and we are greater sinners
than we were before.

Thus highly are we concerned to perform the Promises which we made at the
Table of our Lord.

And this we shall be very like to do, if we think often of them every day, for
some time especially, after we are gone from it. Indeed, if we forget all we
did, and all the Vows we made there to Almighty God; we are like to be the same
men still, and must not expect that it should amend us. For the Sacrament, as I
have shown, does not better us without our own Care, but by helping and
engaging us to Good endeavors after it is over. It works not as a Natural, but
as a Moral means, and improves none but such as remember what they did thereat,
and labor after their own Improvements. So that if we think all our work was
done at Church, and fall into a careless and secure state of mind when we get
home again; we shall be held still in the same sins, and the matter is not like
to be much mended with us by such Receiving. But if afterward we frequently
remember what we promised there; if we set our own Vows every day before our
Eyes, and call to mind our own engagements: that remembrance will give them
Force, and make them have their effect upon us. For the thought of our having
promised and solemnly undertook for any Duties, is the readiest way to have
them all performed.

To reap that Benefit then which God designed, and which we expect by it; we
must dwell much in our own Thoughts upon what passed there after the Feast is
ended. We must maintain that Acquaintance with our Blessed Lord which then we
begun, and look upon it, not as a transient Act, but as an entrance on a
lasting State, which ever after we are to continue in. We must bethink our
selves daily, that when last we were with our Savior, we cut out work for our
whole Lives, and in that hour made many Promises, which through all the
remainder of our days are most Religiously to be performed by us. This course
will render it an Ordinance full of Grace and Heavenly Benefits, which will set
us on mightily in our virtuous Seize. And when we reap this profit by it,
it will cure all our Indifferency and Aversation to it, and make us run to it
the next time with edge of Appetite, as we would to a most delicious and
enlivening entertainment. We shall no more account it a fruitless work, when
once we have tasted these sweet and wholesome effects of it; but desire to
share in it oftener as it can be had, and bless the time that ever we came
thereto.

The End.
HEADS OF SELF-EXAMINATION, FOR The Use of those who would find out what Sins
they have to Repent of, either before a Sacrament, or at any other Times.
The Particulars of Duty toward God and Men, as they are briefly summed up in
the Church-Catechism.
MY Duty toward God is, to Believe in him, i. e. to believe the Scriptures,
which are his Word, taking all the Laws of Humility, Charity, etc. there
recited, for his Laws; and the Promises of Pardon and Happiness to the
Penitent, etc. and the Threatenings of Eternal Death to all impenitent Sinners,
etc. for his Promises and Threatenings, which he will see fulfilled upon us: To
Fear him, as every Man does, who dare not do any Evil thing which he sees is
offensive to him: To Love him with all my heart, etc. as those Persons do, who
for his sake do every thing which he bids them: To Worship him, to give him
Thanks, to put my whole Trust in him, i. e. both in his Providence, for outward
Supplies, as I need them; in his Mercy, for Pardon of Sins, when I repent of
them; and in his Spirit, for Grace and inward Aid, when I endeavor together
with him: To Call upon him, to Honor his Holy Name and his Word, and to Serve
him truly all the days of my Life.

My Duty toward my Neighbor is, to Love him as my self, or to do to all Men
as I would have them do to me: To Love, Honor, and, when need is, Succor my
Father and Mother: To Honor and Obey the King, and all that are put in
Authority under him: To submit my self to all my Spiritual Pastors, and all my
Governors: To show Reverence to all my Betters: To bear no Malice or Hatred in
my Heart: To hurt no body by Word or Deed: To be True and Just in all my
Dealings: To keep my Hands from Picking and Stealing, and my Tongue from
Evil-speaking, Lying, and Slandering: To keep my Body in Temperance, Soberness,
and Chastity: Not to covet other Men's Goods: To be Diligent in my own Calling,
and do my Duty in that Relation, State, or way of Life, unto which it has
pleased God to call me.

A Particular Enumeration of Sins, whether against God, our Neighbor, or our
selves; taken out of the Measures of Christian Obedience, which are all there
explained in the Second Book.
SIns against our selves are Pride, i. e. too high a Conceit of our selves, and
Contempt of others: Arrogance, i. e. Assuming too much to our selves, in
setting off our own Praise: Vainglory, i. e. Intemperate Affectation of the
Praise of others: Ambition, i. e. A restless Pursuit of Honor and Great
Places: Haughtiness, in contemptuous, scornful Carriage: Imperiousness, i. e. A
Lordly way of Behavior, in commanding Men no way subject to us: Worldliness,
i. e. An over eager Care of Worldly things: Gluttony, Voluptuousness,
Drunkenness, Revelling, Inconvinence, Lasciviousness, Filthy or Obscene
Jestings, Uncleanness, Sodomy, Effeminateness, Adultery, Fornication, Inoest,
Rape, Covetousness, i. e. Unsatisfiedness with our own, and an impatient Desire
of more, or of what belongs to others: Refusing the Cross, i. e. Deserting a
Duty to avoid it: Idleness, Sensuality, i. e. An industrious Care to gratify
our Bodily Senses: Carnality, i. e. Subjection to our Fleshly Lusts and
Appetites.

Sins against God are, Atheism, Denying Providence, Blasphemy, Superstition,
Idolatry, Witchcraft, Foolishness, or gross Ignorance of our Duty, Unbelief,
Hating God, Want of Zeal, Distrusting him, Not praying to him, Unthankfulness,
Discontent in our present Condition, or Repining at his Ordering, Fearlesness,
or Venturing on any thing, though we know it will offend him; Common Swearing,
Perjury, Profaneness, Disobedience.

Sins against our Brethren at large, where are Sins of

Injustice; as, Murder, False-witness, Slander, i. e. Defaming them with False
things: Lying, Unfaithfulness, or Breach of Promise; Theft, Oppression, i. e.
Wronging one who cannot cope with us in Contention: Extortion, or Depressing in
Bargaining: Circumvention, or going beyond our Brethren.

Incharitableness; as, Wickedness, i. e. A Delight in doing Mischief, and
making others Work: Despising and hating them that are Good, Giving Scandal to
Weak Brethren, i. e. Laying in their way an Occasion of Sin: Envy, Rejoicing in
Evil, Incharitableness in Alms, Suffering false Stains to stick upon them, when
it is in our power to vindicate them: Evil-speaking, or Divulging any Ill we
hear or know by them: Censoriousness, i. e. A proneness to Blame or Condemn
them: Backbiting, Whispering, Railing, Vpbraiding them with our Kindnesses,
Reproaching them with their own Faults, Mocking them for their Infirmities,
Difficulty of Access, Affronting them, Vncourteousness, Vncondescention,
Vnhospitableness toward Strangers, Surliness, Malignity, or putting the worst
Sense on what is said or done by others: Unquietness, Unthankfulness, Anger,
Variance, Bitterness, Clamor, Hatred and Malice; Implacableness, or Difficulty
in being appeased after any Offenses: Revenge, or Returning Ill for Ill:
Cursing Enemies, Hastiness and Rigor in exacting Punishments.

Discord; as, Vnpeaceableness, Emulation, or Provoking one another:
Pragmaticalness, or being Busybodies: Talebearing, Not satisfying for
Injuries, Contentiousness, Division and Faction, Heresy, Schism, Tumult.

Sins against our Brethren in Particular Relations.

Sins against Sovereign Princes; as Dishonor, Irreverence, Speaking Evil of
Dignities, Refusing Tribute and Taxes, Traitorousness, Neglecting to pray for
Kings, Disobedience to them, Resistance and Rebellion.

Sins against Bishops and Ministers; as, Dishonor of them, especially for
their Works sake: Irreverence, Not providing for them, Sacrilege, or taking
away either by Force or Fraud those Just Dues which are given to God for their
Support: Not Praying for them, Disobedience.

Sins of Married Persons; as, Vnconcernedness in each others Condition, Not
bearing each others Infirmities, Provoking each other, Estrangedness,
Publishing each others Faults, Not praying for each other, Jealousy. Of the
Husband against the Wife; as, Not maintaining her with convenient Supplies, Not
protecting her from outward Annoyances, Imperiousness, or a harsh and
magisterial exercise of Commands: Vncompliance with her Reasonable Desires, and
Vncondescention to her Pitiable Weaknesses. Of the Wife against the Husband;
as, Dishonor in inward Esteem and Opinions, Irreverence in outward Carriage,
Vnobservance in not forecasting to do what may please him, Disobedience to his
just Commands, Casting off his Yoke, or Unsubjection.

Sins of Parents and Children; as, Want of Natural Affection, Not praying for
each other, Imprecation. Of the Parents against the Children; as, Not providing
for them, Irreligious and Evil Education, Provoking them to Anger by Imperious
Harshness, and needless Severity in Governing. Of the Children against the
Parents; as, Dishonor in their Minds, Irreverence in their Behavior, Being
ashamed of them, Mocking them, Speaking Evil of them, Stealing from them,
Disobedience to their Lawful Commands, Contumacy, or Casting off Subjection to
them.

Sins of Brothers and Sisters; as, Want of Natural Affection, Not providing for
our Brethren, Not praying for them, Praying against them.

Sins of Masters against their Servants; as, Not maintaining them, Not
Catechizing or Instructing them, Unequal Government, or Injustice shown in
requiring Unlawful, Wantonness in requiring Superfluous, and Rigor in
requiring Unmerciful things of them: Immoderate Threatening, Imperiousness, or
Contemptuous, haughty treating of them: Defrauding, or keeping back the Wages
of the Hireling. Of Servants against their Masters; as, Dishonor, Irreverence,
Publishing or aggravating their Master's Faults, Not clearing, when they can,
his injured Reputation, Unfaithfulness in what he intrusts with them, shown
either by their Wastefulness, i. e. Spending it for their Pleasure; or
Purloyning, i. e. Diverting it to their own Profit and secret Enrichment:
Disobedience, Non-observance, Answering again, Slothfulness, Eye-service,
Resistance, Not praying for him, Praying against him.

To all which, add two other Sins, which are peculiarly so among Christians,
viz. The Neglect of Baptism, and Absenting from the Lord's Supper.

When we are desirous to discover all our Sins, that we may truly repent of
them, we may examine our own Hearts in all these Particulars, trying our selves
either by the former Catalogue when we have less, or by this latter when we
have more Time, according to our own Discretion. We may ask our selves at every
one, Whether we ever wittingly yielded to it? and if we have, Whether since
that we have amended it? And noting all those whereof we stand guilty before
God, affect our own Hearts with a sorrowful sense of what we have done, from
such Considerations as are before laid down; and then renew our Vows, and make
God our humble Confession, and Engagements that we will never have more to do
with them. For which end, they who are not otherwise supplied, may make use of
the Devotion p. 448, which may serve as a Penitential Prayer and Confession.

A PRAYER Before the SACRAMENT.
O Father of Mercies, who have once given thy Son to die for me, and art now
ready in the Holy Sacrament to offer him to me again; I humbly adore, but am
utterly at a loss when I would duly prize so invaluable a Mercy. What am I,
poor wretched Creature, that I should sit down to eat with my Blessed Lord,
when the Glorious Angels at a distance adore and pay him Homage? Why should I
be called to feed upon his Sacred Body and Blood, when my Sins had a hand in
all he suffered, so that I deserve to be ranked among his Murderers, who were
guilty of that horrid Fact, which nothing but the Blood they shed could ever
expiate? But since it is thy Glorious Excellency, O Blessed Jesu! to love those
that hate thee, and to save their Lives who barbarously took away thine, and
accordingly to call to this Heavenly Feast so unworthy a Wretch as I am; I am
ready to come at thy Command, but would fain come Worthily, and leave all my
Sins behind me, seeing it is no Feast for them. Oh! I loath them, and would
never yield to commit them, were they to do again; and humbly entreat my
Heavenly Father, that for thy sake he would freely forgive me what is past, and
rid me of them for the time to come. Slay them, Good Lord, for they have slain
thee, and will slay me too in time, if they are suffered to reign in me. Meet
me in this Heavenly Banquet with a full Pardon of all mine Offenses, and a
perfect Cure of all mine Infirmities, that I may be cleansed by thy Blood, and
quickened by thy Spirit, and assured of that Eternal Life which for thy sake God
has promised to all his Elect ones.

All this thou art ready to do for me, if I come worthily; and therefore my
humble Request is, That thou would assist me acceptably to perform the Duties
of this Feast, that so I may enjoy all the Blessings of it, and feel it a
Communion of thy very Body and Blood. I would gladly remember thy Dying Love
with the most Devout Affections, with a Heart that is full of Thanks, and
entirely devoted to thy Service, and quite weary of my Sins, and most desirous
of thy Grace, and thoroughly prepared to seal a lasting Covenant of Repentance
and Reconciliation with thee and all my Neighbors. All this I desire to do,
and to do it fervently: But, alas! I cannot do it as I ought, unless thou will
graciously come and help me. My Apprehnsions of this amazing Love are very low;
O do thou exalt them. My Heart is still insensible of what thou have done for
me, and my Affections dull and heavy; O do thou quicken and inflame them. Make
me love thee as much as thou deservest, and desire thy Grace as highly as I
need it, and be set against every Sin as irreconcileably as there is cause for
it, and love all my Brethren as I am beloved, that I may be fit to receive the
abundant Communications of thy Grace in the approaching Sacrament. I earnestly
ask, and humbly hope for all this, O Good God, only because I infinitely need
it; and thy Grace is Infinite, which will not suffer thee to see the
Necessities of thy poor Servant unsupplied; and unworthy as I am, I am still
the Purchase of thy Sons Blood: O then do not despise me for thine own Mercies,
and thy Sons sake; in whose Holy Name and Words I further pray as he has
taught me.

Our Father which art in Heaven, etc.

A Prayer and Thanksgiving After the SACRAMENT.
I Thank thee most entirely, O! my God, for calling me this day to thy own
Table, to show me how thine only Son freely dyed in my stead, and to assure me
that now for his sake thou art fully Reconciled, and wilt live in me by thy
Grace now at present, and raise me up to be Eternally happy with thy Self at
last; of all which thou have given me the surest Pledges in his precious Body
and Blood. What can I render to thee, Holy Father, or to thee my dearest
Savior, for so incomprehensible a Benefit? I admire thy mavelous Love, and
magnify it above all things. Thy Praise shall ever be in my Mouth, and I will
tell out thy wondrous works with Gladness. And may all Hearts adore, and every
Tongue confess that thou, Holy Jesus, art the Savior of the World, and the Son
of the Father, whom Heaven and Earth must Honor, and call Blessed for evermore.

Pardon, O! Good God, the unaffectedness of my dull Heart, in the receipt of so
inestimable a Treasure; and fill me with Desires some way suitable to my needs,
and the richness of thy Mercies, that whenever this Cup of Blessings shall
again overflow, my Heart may run over with Joy and Thankfulness also. Let me
never forget the Love I have received, and the Peace I have Sealed, and the
Promises of New Life I have made this Day; but as thy Grace has helped me to
them, so keep me in a lively sense of them, and enable me always to fulfill the
same to my Lives end. Now thou have given me the Blood of Expiation to show we
are Friends; O! never let me be guilty of any thing to break the Peace, which
is now so solemnly ratified betwixt us. Now I have vowed Obedience to thy Laws,
to be Humble, Chaste, Temperate, Just, Charitable, Patient, Devout, Here mention
Virtues particularly Vowed at the Lords Table.
and entirely resigned to thy Will and Pleasure; O! let me not start back again
from these Holy Promises for ever! Now I have received my Blessed Lord, never
suffer me to do any thing unworthy of him; now I am Partaker of his Body and
Blood, let his Holy Spirit go along with them, and then I shall be what I ought
when I am in his keeping. My sins, which I have renounced, will return again,
except he chase them away; and my false Heart, which now seems fixed for God,
will revolt, unless he establish it. O! Sweetest Savior, let thy Body be my
Food, thy Strength my Guard, thy Spirit my Life, and the sense of thy Favor my
greatest Joy and Comfort. Go on Graciously to accomplish what thou have now
begun in me, and let me ever be secure and happy in thy Custody. Be it even so,
for thine own sake, Blessed Jesu!

And then, where there is time for it, or afterward, where the^^ is not, may
they go on, and say.

Give thy Grace, O Holy Jesu! to all the World, and let all who were Redeemed
by thy Blood acknowledge thee to be the Lord, and become thy Worshippers and
Faithful Servants. Make all Christians Conscientious Practisers of that
Holiness which they profess; and above all, inspire them with uniting
Principles and charitable Hearts, that by their loving one another, as thou
have loved us, all the World may know they are thy Disciples. Let all
Governors Rule with Wisdom and Justice, and Subjects obey with Love and
Cheerfulness: Let the Priests of the Lord be Exemplary in their Lives, and
Discreet and Diligent in their Labour^, having a most compassionate Love for
Souls; and let the People be Humble and Towardly, most desirous to hearken, and
fully bent to follow wise Instructions. Be a help at hand to all that need and
are afflicted. Send supplies to all that are in want, and assist them
contentedly to depend upon thee. Raise Friends to the Widow and Fatherless, the
Prisoners and Captives, and all that groan under Oppressors, who are thrown
upon thy Mercy. Give Repentance, Patience, and Resignation to all that are
sick, and Ease when thou see it convenient for them. Be a Comforter to all
troubled Consciences, helping them to an acceptable Holiness, and enlightening
their minds about all causeless Scruples, that they may not fear where no Fear
is. Succor all that are tempted, with such a measure of thy Grace, as may
enable them to stand in all their Trials. Think particularly on all my Friends,
who are especially indeared to me by their Kindnesses or Acquaintance; on all
my Relations in the Flesh; on all that Pray particularly for me, or desire my
Prayers. Teach us all to desire what thou approvest, and then grant us
whatsoever as desired: Prevent us in all our Actions, and Guard us against all
Dangers, and Relieve us in all Straights, and grant that we may always make
thee our Stay and Confidence, and take all things well which thou orderest for
us. Shorten all our Sorrows, and prevent all our Sins, and fit us all for that
Eternal Kingdom which thou have prepared for us, for Jesus's sake, in whose
Holy Name and Words I further pray unto thee.

Our Father, etc.

Being sensible how plain minds, who are ready to do it so far as they are
enabled, are oft-times at a Loss for their Daily Devotions; and not knowing but
this Treatise may fall into some such Hands; I have added two Prayers, which
such Persons may say Morning and Evening in their Families.

A Morning Prayer FOR A FAMILY.
O God, who art the Giver of all good Gifts, and the Father of Mercies; We
thine unworthy Servants entirely desire to praise thy Name for all the
Expressions of thy Bounty toward us. Blessed be thy Love, that gave thy Son to
die for our Sins, to put us in a way of being happy, if we would obey thee; and
after all our wilful Refusals of thy Grace, still have patience with us, and
have added this one Day more to all we have misspent already, to see if we
will finish the Work thou have set us to do, and fit our selves for Eternal
Glory. Pardon, Good Lord, all our former Sins, and all our Abuses of thy
Forbearance, for which now we are sorry at our Hearts; and give us Grace to
lead more holy Lives, and be more careful in improving all future
Opportunities. Make thy self present to our Minds, and let thy Love and Fear
rule in our Souls, in all those Places and Companies where our Occasions shall
lead us this Day. Keep us Chaste in all our Thoughts, Temperate in all our
Enjoyments, Humble in all our Opinions of our selves, Charitable in all our
Speeches of others, Meek and Peaceable under all Provocations, Sincere and
Faithful in all our Professions, and so Just and Upright in all our Dealings,
that no Necessity may force, nor Opportunity in any kind allure us to defraud
or go beyond our Neighbors. When thou bestowest Good on others, let not us
envy but rejoice in it; and when thou addest any to our selves, let us own thy
Mercy, and humbly thank thee for it. Afford us convenient Supplies in all our
reasonable Necessities, and protect us against the approach of all Dangers:
make us diligent in all our Business, and give such Success to our Endeavors
as thou see most expedient for us; and teach us contentedly to submit, and
not to repine at any thing that happens by the Allotment of thy Providence. In
all our Passage through this World, and our manifold Concerns in it, suffer not
our Hearts to be too much set upon it; but always fix our Eye upon the Blessed
Hope, that as we go along we may make all the Things of this World minister to
it, and be careful above all things to fit our Souls for that pure and perfect
Bliss, which thou have prepared for all that love and fear thee, in the Glories
of thy Kingdom.

Extend thy Grace, we further beseech thee, to all Men, in all Places;
especially to the Governors and Subjects, to all both High and Low, Rich and
Poor, that pray for it, or need it, in these Kingdoms. Bless all our Relations
who are near us in the Flesh, and all our Friends and Benefactors who are
endeared to us by their Kindnesses. Forgive all our Enemies, give them Hearts
to fear thee, and to be kind to us. And supply all us, and all others, with
whatsoever else thou see proper for us, for Christ his sake; in whose Blessed
Name and Words we still recommend our selves unto thee, saying,

Our Father, etc.

An Evening Prayer for a FAMILY.
O Most Gracious God, who daily multipliest upon us thy Mercies,
notwithstanding we every day renew our Provocations; Accept, we beseech thee,
of our most humble and hearty Thanks for thy unspeakable Kindness toward us.
Blessed be thy Goodness, which has this day supplied us with Food and
Necessaries, and preserved us in Health, the chiefest of all outward
Enjoyments, and prosper'd the Work of our Hands, and lent us our Friends to be
still a Support and Comfort to us. Adored be thy Love and Patience, which have
allowed us one Day more to amend our Ways, and assisted us by the Suggestions
of thy Spirit, and thy gracious Providence, to make up that Resignation,
Humility, Contentedness, Chastity, Sobriety, Meekness, Charity, and other
Virtues, which are yet wanting in our own Souls. We desire to show our selves
duly sensible of these endearing Benefits, by learning to depend upon thy
Providence, which has been so watchful over us; and to be contented with thy
Orderings, which are so wisely fitted to our own Advantage; and applying all
Opportunities to the increase of that Righteousness and Holy Living which thou
requirest at our Hands. We fain would do it, and are here sincerely resolved to
endeavor it; and thou have promised to aid all those who labor in so good a
Work: Be it then, O Lord, unto thy Servants according to thy Word, and enable
us by thy Grace and Holy Spirit so to do.

We are sensible, O God, how highly we have offended thee, although we stand thus
indebted for all we have or hope to enjoy, to thy Bounty. How many ways have we
dishonored our Profession, and revolted from the Vows we made in Baptism, by
Pride, and Envy, and Anger, and Discontent, and Evil-speaking, and serving
diverse Lusts, which then we utterly renounced, and promised never to live in
again? We are heartily grieved and ashamed for these and all other our
Misdoings, and are fully resolved by thy Grace hereafter to amend them: We
unfeignedly repent of them, and for Christ's sake humbly beg to be forgiven,
and that thy Grace and Holy Spirit may rid us of them for the time to come. Our
full purpose is to endeavor it, and thy Promise is to help us in it: O let
thine Arm be our Almighty Aid, and then we shall return to them no more.

Keep us in thy good Providence this Night, make our Sleep safe and refreshing
to us: Fit us for our great Change, that it may not surprise us unawares, but
that having led holy Lives, we may be happy in our Deaths, and have Comfort and
well-grounded Hope in thee.

Give all Men Grace to repent, and become thy Servants. Let all Christians live
up to the Laws of that Religion which they profess. Especially bless these
Kingdoms wherein we live. Let our Governors Rule with Justice, and our People
Obey with Cheerfulness: Make the Rich and Prosperous Temperate in Using, and
Charitable in Distributing of their Substance; and the Poor and Afflicted,
Patient and Contented under their Burdens: And cause us all to love as
Brethren, to be Pitiful and Tenderhearted toward all Men. Preserve our
Friends in their Souls and Bodies; forgive our Enemies, and make them kindly
affected toward us; and do whatsoever thou see fitting for us all, for the
sake of thy Son, our Advocate, Jesus Christ, who has taught us in his own Words
thus to pray.

Our Father, etc.

FINIS.
Books printed for Robert Kettlewell at the Hand and Scepter in Fleetstreet.
1. THe Measures of Christian Obedience: Or, A Discourse showing what Obedience
is indispensibly necessary to a Regenerate State, and what Defects are
consistent with it. For the Promotion of Piety, and the Peace of Troubled
Consciences. By John Kettlewell, Fellow of Lincoln-College in Oxford. In
Quarto. Price bound 8 s. 2. A Journey into Greece, by Sir George Wheeler, in
Company of Dr. Spon of Lions. In Six Books. Containing, 1. A Voyage from Venice
to Constantinople. 2. An Account of Constantinople, and the adjacent Places. 3.
A Voyage through the Lesser Asia. 4. A Voyage from Zant, through several Parts of
Greece, to Athens. 5. An Account of Athens. 6. Several Journeys from Athens,
into Attica, Corinth, Baeotia, etc. With Variety of Sculptures. In Folio. Price
bound 15 s. 3. A Vindication of the Primitive Christians, in Point of Obedience
to their Prince, against the Calumnies of a Book entitled, The Life of Julian,
written by Ecebolius the Sophist. As also, The Doctrine of Passive Obedience
cleared, in Defense of Dr. Hicks. Together with an Appendix, being a more full
and distinct Answer to Mr. Thomas Hunt's Preface and Postscript. Unto all which
is added, The Life of Julian, enlarged. In Octavo. Price bound 2 s. 6 d. 4. A
Sermon Preached at the Worcester-Feast, by George Walls Master of Arts, and
Student of Christ-Church, Oxon. Quarto. Price stitcht 6 d. 5. The Treasures of
the Sea. A Sermon Preached to the Mariners, by William Thomson. In Quarto.
Price st^itcht 6 d.

