Convivium Caeleste.

A plain and familiar DISCOURSE Concerning the LORDS SUPPER.

SHOWING At once the nature of that Sacrament: as also the right way of
preparing our selves for the receiving of it.

In which are also considered those Exceptions which men usually bring to
excuse their not partaking of it.

The Second Edition, with some Additions.

By RICHARD KIDDER, Rector of St. Martin Outwich, London.

LONDON, Printed by John Richardson, for Tho. Parkhurst, at the Bible and three
Crowns in Cheapside, near Mercers-Chappel. 1684.

The Epistle Dedicatory.
To my Ever Honored and very Good Lady, the Lady Dawes of Putney.
Madam,
THere are many Books already extant upon the Argument which the following
Discourse treats of: And those also so very good in themselves, and so very
happy in their Authors, that I cannot think that this which follows, will ever
deserve a name amongst them. For as it was at first drawn up for those whose
needs required all plainness of speech; so it now adventures abroad in the very
same dress in which it was at first composed and delivered. And therefore I
might well find great reason to dispute with my self whether or not I should
adventure this Discourse abroad.

But whatever demur these things might make, yet sure I am, I did not doubt to
whom I ought to address it, when I was once resolved to make it public. It Is
due to you, Madam, whatever it is, upon more scores than one. And though it be
unworthy of so good a name, as it will now bear; yet I am certain that it needs
it.

I shall not need to recommend to your Ladyship the subject of this following
Tract. You are already greatly in love with that part of your duty which is
here discoursed of. You are firmly resolved to lead a life of Religion, and to
give up your self to the obedience of the Laws of your Lord and Savior. Now
certainly you will find nothing a greater help to you than frequent and devout
Communions are. You will find great need in your pilgrimage toward Heaven of
such Spiritual repasts and viands. Nothing can be more welcome to a pious Soul
than to meet with these happy opportunities of becoming better. And they that
love their Lord must needs be very forward to celebrate the memory of his
death, and unspeakable kindness to them. The doing of this as we ought, will
redound greatly to our advantage. We shall by this means be reconciled to God,
and in perfect charity to one another: We shall be more fit to live, and more
prepared to die: We shall the better support under our sorrows, and be the more
strong against our temptations; our burden will be the lighter, and yet our
strength the greater: We shall here receive new strength and vigor to walk in
Gods ways: We shall think that easy which once we thought intolerable: We
shall lead at once an innocent and an useful life. The advantages of frequent
and devout Communions are not to be expressed. Here are joys which no man can
rob us of; Treasures more valuable than that of the Indies. Every pious Soul
will witness to this truth. And therefore, Madam, I doubt not but you will the
more favorably receive this treatise for the arguments sake which it
discourses of.

But still, Madam, I have farther reason upon my own account to make my
acknowledgements to your Ladyship. Your kindnesses to me have been very great,
and have laid a great obligation upon me to show my thankfulness to you. And as
an unfeigned testimony of my gratitude I am bold to present you with this
Discourse. It is indeed but a small tribute of thanks, which here I pay you;
but yet is such as I have, and your Ladyship will I hope, rather regard my mind
than the thing it self. However I shall be extremely glad if any thing that is
here offered may be of any use to your Ladyship in advancing your eternal
interest and concern.

You have made a good beginning, and a wise Choice in devoting your self to a
Religious Life. Continue, Madam, in this purpose. This will turn to your
account when all other things will fail you. There was never greater need of
regular and exemplary piety than now. Religion is now become the scoff and
derision of profane and foolish men. It is not now the mode to be severely
Pious. Pure Religion and undefiled is very rarely to be found. It is infinitely
sad to think that so excellent a Religion as ours is, should be almost every
where, either misunderstood, or spoken against. Your Constancy now will be more
rewardable than at other times. You will now see cause to show a great regard
to the Laws of your dearest Lord, when they are so commonly trampled upon.
Count it your honor to be truly good. And dare to own your Savior before men,
and he will confess you before his Heavenly Father.

We are concerned to refute the Atheists, and to defend the excellent Religion
which our Lord has left us against gainsayers. But there is not a more
effectual way of doing this than by an exemplary and pious life. This does more
than our most subtle and nervous reasoning, a great example of Piety does more
good than a learned Pen. This is the most likely way to prevail against those
that oppose themselves. Our enemies mouths are stopped if we take this course:
These Arguments are unanswerable, and will convert more to the Faith than our
Reasons are like to do. Now, Madam, you can thus defend your Religion against
contentious men. This is the way to restore us to what we should be.

I have great reason to believe that your Ladyship will be a great example of
real piety. That you will strongly pursue every virtuous and good thing. But
yet, Madam, you will pardon me that I put you in mind to persevere and to
abound in every good thing. This proceeds not from any distrust, but from a
great and sincere desire of your happiness. That the Almighty would keep your
Ladyship from every evil thing, and bless you with all the blessings of this
and a better Life, is the most hearty prayer of,

Madam, Your Ladyships most humble Servant, Richard Kidder*

The PREFACE.
HOW plain a Precept we have to partake of our Lords Supper; and how much it
would be for our advantage to do it; I shall not need to represent to the
Reader in this place. That is done in the following Discourse. And all that I
shall here trouble the Reader with, is;

First, that he would be pleased to understand that this Discourse was by the
Author designed for the use of those men who stand in need of the most plain
and easy directions: And therefore it is accordingly fitted for such men who
have not either the leisure, or the other advantages of perusing the more large
and elaborate Discourses upon this Subject.

Secondly, that the Authors lot is fallen among those who do very rarely
partake of this Sacrament, and that therefore he does the more insist upon the
necessity of the duty, as well as upon little objections which are brought
against it, which are so small that they might otherwise have been prudently
omitted. But so it is now that we are put upon the proof of those things which
our forefathers did not deny. And we have now a double task upon us: To prove
the truth of our Religion first, and then to persuade to the practice of it. It
might otherwise seem a strange thing that any man should be operose in proving
that it is our duty to partake of this Sacrament, when the command for it is so
plain.

I have this moreover to desire of the Reader, that he would (when he reads
this Discourse) be careful to lay aside all prejudice. It will be no hard
matter to find the truth, in the case here discoursed of, if we seek it
sincerely. The good God open our eyes, and lead us at once into the paths of
truth and peace: And grant that we may be reconciled to him, and to one another.

I have nothing farther to beg of the pious and Christian Reader, but this one
request, that he would pray to God for the Author, that his labors may not
always be in vain.

The CONTENTS.
CHAP. I. THE nature of this Sacrament: That is best known from the ends of its
institution; which were, First, to renew the Covenant which we made in Baptism.
Secondly, to preserve the memory of Christ's love in laying down his life.
Thirdly to unite us to each other in the strictest Bond of Charity. Fourthly,
to assure us of Gods readiness to pardon our sins. Page 1. CHAP. II. Several
practical Inferences drawn from the foregoing discourse. page 37. CHAP. III.
The danger of coming unprepared: That the doing so deprives us of the benefits
which are annexed to worthy Communicating, and involves us in a curse, etc. p.
48 CHAP. IV Concerning the preparation which we are to make; First, in general,
and then more particularly. p. 57. CHAP. V. Of Examination: And particularly of
searching after our sins: How this is to be done: Of the degrees and
circumstances which our sins are attended with. p. 65 CHAP. VI. An inquiry into
the nature of true Repentance: Of the necessity of restitution. p. 81. CHAP.
VII. Of resolutions of amendment of life. Of the way of judging of the
sincerity of these resolutions. p. 96. CHAP. VIII. Of a true and lively Faith:
Of the rules by which we are to judge whether or no we be endued with such a
Faith. That the bare assent to the Articles of the Christian Faith is not a
Faith sufficient to salvation. A consideration of those Scriptures which are
urged in this case. p. 106 CHAP. IX. Of Brotherly love, or Charity. The ways
by which we are to judge of the sincerity of this love. Of forgiveness of
enemies, and the necessity thereof. p. 139. CHAP. X. Some farther advice by way
of supply toward our better preparing our selves. What a man is to do in case
he doubt of his own fitness; what things are to fall under our consideration
when we do examine our selves: Of the right way of judging of our state toward
God. Of designing against our most prevailing sin. That we are to prepare as if
we were preparing for death. p. 154. CHAP. XI. Of our behavior when we do
Communicate. Of lifting up our hearts to God. How we ought to be affected, and
demean our selves when we approach to the Holy Table, and when we see the Bread
broken, and the Wine poured out, when we receive the Bread, and when we receive
the Cup. p. 163. CHAP. XII. Of our behavior after we have received: Of mercy
to the poor: Of After-Examination: Of Prayer and praise: Of the danger of
relapsing. p. 176. CHAP. XIII. Of the necessity of Communicating. This proved
by sundry arguments which are not to be answered. p. 182. CHAP. XIV. An answer
to several Objections by which men excuse themselves from Communicating. First,
that they are not worthy: This is answered, by showing wherein this worthiness
does consist, and how far it is from being a just excuse. Secondly, that
because there is danger in receiving unworthily, that therefore it is most
prudent not to receive at all: An answer to this objection, and the folly of it
exposed. Thirdly, against mixed Communions: This Objection fully answered.
Fourthly, am Objection against Kneeling: A particular answer to the whole force
of that Objection. p. 195. CHAP. XV. The Conclusion of this Treatise. p. 230.
To which are now subjoyned, The Heads of Self-Examination. A Prayer before the
Sacrament. Some Ejaculations at the receiving it, and afterward. A Prayer
after receiving. A Morning and Evening Prayer for a Family


A plain and familiar DISCOURSE Concerning the LORDS SUPPER; SHOWING At once
the Nature of that Sacrament, as also the right way of preparing our selves for
the receiving of it.
CHAP. I. The Nature and true Notion of this Sacrament.
IT is my intention in this following Discourse, not to trouble my Reader with
Questions and Controversies about the Sacrament of our Lords Supper (of which
there are too many in the World already) but to direct him how he may partake
worthily, as well as show him the danger in not partaking at all. And for the
better gaining of the first of these ends, I think it necessary to premise
something of the nature, and true notion of this Sacrament of the Lords Supper:
That so we may perform a reasonable service, and not give the Sacrifice of
Fools, who consider not that they do evil, Eccles. 5.1. And that we may not eat
and drink damnation to our selves, not discerning the Lords Body, 1 Cor. 11.29.

Now for the better understanding the nature of this Sacrament, it will be
necessary the great ends and purposes for which it was ordained by our Blessed
Savior, should be duly considered.

Now the ends of this Sacrament of the Lords Supper are these that follow.

I. The renewal of that Covenant which we entered into in our Baptism. The Vow
which we made in our Baptism we ought very seriously to reflect upon. By our
Baptism we were received into the Family and Church of Christ; and by the Vow
which we then made, we are obliged to obey all the commands of Christ. What the
Apostle says of Circumcision, I may truly say of Baptism, I testify to every
man, says he, that is Circumcised, that he is a debtor to the whole Law, Gal.
5.3. And by the same reason every man that is Baptized is obliged to obey all
the Precepts of the Gospel. (...). Theophyl. in loc.
The same Apostle tells us, That they that have been Baptized into Christ have
put on Christ, Gal. 3.27. That is surely, they are obliged to be as he was; to
be that by grace which he was by nature; to bear his image into whose name they
are Baptized. In Baptism we gave up our names to Christ, and by that Sacrament
listed our selves under him as the only Captain of our Salvation; we
acknowledged him in all his Offices, not only as our Priest, but as our only
Prophet, and our King: And did not only profess a belief of the Christian
Faith, but solemnly promise Obedience to the commands of God in opposition to
the Devil, the World and Flesh: This we did when we were Baptized, we made a
most solemn vow to become the Servants of Christ, and did receive a Sacrament
upon it; Budaeus in Pandect.
As amongst the Romans, the Soldiers that were listed took and Oath which was
called a Sacrament of Fidelity, after which they could not revolt without a
great shame, and making themselves liable to the severest penalty: So have we
done, we have taken this Sacrament of Fidelity, and by that, have most solemnly
obliged our selves to be the faithful Servants and Soldiers of Christ unto our
lives end. So that I may well tell the man that is Baptized, Quod maximum
vinculum est ad bonam mentem, promisistivirum bonum. Sacramento rogatus es.
Senec. Ep. 37.
that he is fast bound, and obliged to become a good man by his own promise,
and Sacrament of fidelity. But then because our infirmities are many, and we
are apt to forget our promise to God; and because Gods mercies are great, and
he is not willing we should perish, he has ordained another Sacrament that we
might not want a blessed opportunity to bewail our backslidings, and to renew
our Covenant.

Gods Mercy is so great, that he does not only bring us into his Family by
Baptism, but feed and preserve us there by this Sacrament of our Lords Supper.
He would have us saved, and therefore has ordained this Sacrament, that we
might be put upon a most serious Repentance for our past sins, and effectual
purposes of a new life, for the time to come. God would have us fasten the
first bond with a more firm and sure knot. Our Souls are like Clocks or
Watches, which though they be set right, and wound up, yet stand in need
quickly of being set right, and wound up again. This is that gracious
opportunity that God has given us, of setting all things right, and amending
the great disorders of our souls. We are now to renew that Covenant which we
made in Baptism; which because we have failed in, God has ordained this
Sacrament to restore us, and set us right: We are now to lift up the hands
which hang down, and the feeble knees: And make straight paths for our feet,
lest that which is lame be turned out of the way, but that it may rather be
healed. Now that this sacrament was ordained for this end that we might renew
our Covenant, which we made with God in Baptism, will appear, if we consider
the following severals.

(1.) The very eating and drinking at Gods Table is a faederal rite; they that
eat together are supposed to be Friends. It was a token of friendship of old,
as the Scriptures will teach us; Mine own familiar friend in whom I trusted,
which did eat of my bread, has lift up his heel against me, Psalm. 41.9. And
thus the men of thy peace, and of thy bread, are the same with confederates,
Obad. v. 7. vid. verse. Syriac in locum. When the Relatives of Job, who had kept
from him during his affliction, came to renew their friendship, and express
their kindness to him; the Text says, They did eat bread with him in his house,
Job 42.11. And certainly it was a sign of great kindness among the Children of
Job, that his Sons feasted in their houses, and called for their sisters to eat
and drink with them, Diogen. Laert. in vit. Pythag. and Greg. Gyrald. in
Pythag. Symbol.
Job 1.4. It is a known Precept of Pythagoras; that we should not (...), that
we should not break off our friendship, which by eating Bread together we made
a show of. For that is supposed to be his meaning, when he requires that we
should not break or divide the Bread of Friends, that we should not (...). That
we should not separate and divide that bond of kindness which holds friends
together. But eating Bread together was not only always esteemed a token of
kindness and friendship, and confederacy, but it was also anciently a rite that
was used when men made or renewed a Covenant with one another. This will also
appear from the Holy Scriptures, when the Gibeonites came to make a League with
Israel, they brought Bread with them as well as bottles of Wine: The Bread they
brought seemed to be designed for their Covenant, which they intended to make
with the men of Israel, of whom it is said, that when they consented to their
demands, that they took of their Victuals, and asked not Counsel at the Mouth
of the Lord, Josh. 9.14. That is, they made a Covenant with them, and did not
first ask counsel of God; for certainly those words they took of their
victuals, can have no other sense in this place. And so the Chaldee Paraphrast
seems to understand them, (...)
for he renders them thus, They hearkened unto their words: i. e. They
consented to enter into Covenant with the Gibeonites, and in token of that,
they took of their Victuals, which was a sign of their friendship to them.
Kimchi in Josh. 9.14.
So that the Gibeonites might be confident now that they were received into
favor, because the Israelites had taken of their victuals, and had by that
Ceremony declared themselves willing to make a League with them: And it follows
immediately upon this that Joshua made peace with them, and made a league with
them, etc. v. 15. So that it seems to be very plain, that those words, they
took of their victuals, do import no less, than that the Israelites yielded to
the request of the Men of Gibeon, and intended to take them into favor: And
the Giheonites might as well conclude so much from their so doing; as the Wife
of Manoah did infer Gods favor to be toward her and her Husband, because he
had received their burnt-offering, and their meat offering; If (says she) the
Lord were pleased to kill us, he would not have received a burnt-offering, and
a meat offering at our hands, Judge. 13.23.

Again, when Isaac makes a Covenant with Abimelech, the Text tells us, that he
made a feast, and they did eat and drink: Abravenel in loc. Fol. 93. Col. 3.
And then it is presently added, that they swear one to another, Genesis 26.30,
31. And when Jacob makes a Covenant with Laban, it is expressly said, that he
called his brethren to eat bread, Genesis 31.54. Eating of Bread together was so
sure a sign of accord, and a mutual kindness, that when Ishmael, with the men
that were with him, came to Mizpah with an intention to kill Gedaliah, that
they might not be suspected of any such design, they did eat bread with him in
Mizpah, Jer. 41.2.

And as eating together was a federal rite, and a token of kindness and
friendship, so not vouchsafing to eat together, has been also taken for an
argument of estrangedness, and a great difference. Thus we read that the
Egyptians might not eat bread with the Hebrews; for that is an abomination to
the Egyptians, Genesis 43.32. And the Apostle, when he would have the sincere
Christian not so much as to countenance the debaucht and lewd Professor of
Religion, he will not permit him so much as to eat with him, 1 Cor. 5.11.

By what has been said it does appear, that eating and drinking together has
been a mark of kindness, and has been used when Covenants and Agreements have
been made between men. Now when we partake of the Lords Supper we have
fellowship with God himself, 1 Cor. 10.20, 21. We eat at his Table, and do
become his guests. But because we can have no fellowship with him when we walk
in darkness, (1 John 1.6.) therefore we cannot partake aright of this Supper of
our Lord, unless we put away the evil of our doings, unless we put on the
Wedding Garment, and renew that Covenant which we did once make with God, and
which we have so greatly broken.

(2.) That this Sacrament was ordained for a renewal of our Covenant with God,
appears from the words of our Savior, when he did first institute and appoint
it. When he gave his Disciples the Cup, he adds, This is my blood of the New
Testament (or Covenant as that word signifies) which is shed for many, for the
remission of sins, Mat. 26.28. For the better understanding of which words, we
may remember that it was an ancient custom in the World, Tacit. Annal. l. 12.
when men entered into Covenant with one another, that they did it by shedding
of Blood; they did slay a beast and pour out its Blood, and thus they did
ferire faedu^, strike a Covenant with one another. In token I suppose, that he
that should fail of performing his part of the Covenant which they entered
into, should perish as the beast did which was slain before them. Nor was this
a custom among the Gentiles only, but also a custom that God made use of among
the Jews his own people. For so we read, that when God gave his Law to that
people, and that Law had been read in the audience of the people, and the
people had promised obedience to that Law, that they entered into Covenant by
blood: For it is added, that Moses took the blood and sprinkled it on the
people, and said, behold the Blood of the Covenant, which the Lord has made
with you concerning all these words, Exodus 24.8. This was the blood of that
Covenant which God made with that people. To these words our Savior may be
thought to allude, when he was ready to lay down his Life, and shed his Blood
for our Remission, he gives his Disciples the Cup, and tells them, This is my
Blood of the New Covenant, which is shed for many for the remission of sins.
That blood which Moses sprinkled was the blood of beasts, but this is the blood
of Jesus; that was the blood of a Covenant, but of the old, but this is the
blood of the new and better Covenant: That was shed for the Jews only, but this
is shed for many, for Jew and Gentile, for all that believe. The blood of the
Law of Moses did not expiate for all sins, but this blood is shed for the
Remission of sins, yea of those sins which could not be remitted by the Laws of
Moses. For by Jesus we have the forgiveness of sins; and by him all that
believe are justified from all things, from which they could not be justified
by the law of Moses, Act. 13.39.

So that as the Blood which Moses sprinkled, was the blood of that Covenant
which the Jews entered into, so is the blood of Jesus which he shed for us, the
blood of the New Covenant; and he that drinks of this blood renews his
Covenant, and does most solemnly take upon himself the observation of the Laws
of Christ. When Moses had read the Law to the people, and they had promised
Obedience, then does he sprinkle them with the blood of the Covenant, and by
that federal rite they are received into Covenant with God. And so when our
Blessed Savior had taught his Disciples the will of his Heavenly Father, and
was ready to shed his blood for our remission, he ordains this Sacrament of his
blood, which when we do partake of as we should, lays a strict obligation upon
us to obedience of the Laws of God which are made known to us in the Gospel.
When we drink of this Cup we renew our Covenant with God, and do most solemnly
bind our selves to a faithful and sincere Obedience; we do as it were take a
Sacramental Oath of Allegiance; and if we be treacherous and false, we are
perjured persons, and make our selves guilty of the blood of Jesus.

II. Another end of this Sacrament is, that we should remember the love of our
Lord Jesus Christ in laying down his life for us. This do in remembrance of me,
Luke 22.19. As often as ye eat this bread, and drink this cup, ye do show the
Lords death till he come, 1 Cor. 11.26. The Jewish Passover was appointed for a
memorial of their deliverance out of Egypt, Exodus 12.14. And this Christian
Passover was instituted for a memorial, but of a greater deliverance than from
the bondage of Egypt, of our Redemption from sin and death. So great a mercy as
the deliverance out of Egypt might not be forgotten, much less may this
Redemption which our Lord has wrought. And as the Passover was commanded that
they might not forget their freedom from Egypt, so is this Sacrament appointed
that we might never forget a greater freedom which our Lord has purchased for
us from the tyranny of sin, and the bitterness of death. There was a mercy in
that deliverance, but in this a miracle of mercy: God in that showed his love
to his people, but in this there are all the dimensions of love; here is
breadth, and length, and depth, and height, here is a love which passes
knowledge, Ephesians. 3.18, 19. Greater love has no man than this, that a man lay
down his life for his friends, Joh. 15.13. But our Saviors love has
out-stript this, and exceeded it greatly, for he died for his enemies. And God
commends his love toward us in that while we were yet sinners, Christ dyed
for us, Romans 5.8, Our Books tell us many stories of the great love that one
friend has showed another, Lucian. Toxarseu de Amicitia.
but none of them tell us of such a kindness to enemies, as what our Savior
showed in his Death. Here Is a love that out-strips not only all the Laws, but
all the examples of friendship; nay, a love that surpasses the love of Women.
Our Savior became poor that we might be rich; he died that we might live, he
became a son of man, that we might be made the sons of God, and left his glory
that he might show us the way to it. And by his sufferings and death. has
become the Author of Eternal salvation unto all them that obey him, Heb. 5.9.
Indeed God wrought many deliverances for his people the Jews by the hands of
his servants Moses and Joshuah, and the Judges and Kings of Israel; but all
these together, did not work so great a deliverance as our Blessed Savior did,
when he made his soul an offering for sin, when he despised the Cross, and the
shame of it, and wrought an Eternal Redemption for us. They delivered Gods
People from their ill Neighbors, our Savior has delivered us from our sins,
and from the evil men our selves. They delivered them from Tyrants, he has
delivered us from the power of the devil, and from an eternal slavery. They
saved their bodies from slavery and bondage. Our Savior saves our souls from
sin and death. They fought for their people, our Savior suffered and dyed.
They delivered them for a time, our Savior for ever. They saved the Jews, but
our Lord is the Savior of mankind. Jacob in his last words to his sons, tells
them what shall befall them in the last days; and when he comes to Dan, he
tells him, ^e shall be a serpent by the way, an Adder in the path, that biteth
the horse heels, so that his rider shall fall backward, Genesis 49.17: This the
Jews understand to be foretold of that great deliverance which Sampson of this
Tribe of Dan should be an instrument of; who wrought a great deliverance of his
people from the Philistines. V. Targ. Hierosol. and Jonath. in locum.
But then Jacob presently adds, in the next words, I have waited for thy
salvation, O Lord, v. 18. The meaning of which words according to the same
Jews, is this, as if Jacob when he had foreseen the deliverances which should
be wrought by Gideon and Sampson, had said thus, I do not expect the
deliverance of Gideon and Sampson, which will be but a temporal deliverance;
but thy salvation, O Lord, is that which I expect, for thine is an eternal
salvation. They were indeed deliverers of Gods people, but none of them could
do that which our Savior does, who saves his people from their sins, Mat.
1.21. And bl^sseth us in turning away every one of us from our iniquities, Acts
3.26.

So great a salvation has our Savior wrought for us; so great a love has he
showed in laying down his life for us, that it ought never to be forgotten as
long as the World endures. And that it might never be forgotten, our Savior
has appointed the Sacrament of the Lords Supper to be a standing memorial of
his great love in dying for us. Do this, says he, in remembrance of me. We are
indeed ready to receive mercies, and also very ready to forget that they are
bestowed upon us. And therefore God has taken this care that we might never
forget them. He did so with the Jews, who were a very unthankful people, and
very prone to forget him that had done so many kindnesses for them. Lest that
people should forget their Creator, God appointed the Sabbath Day to be
observed in memory of the Creation of the World, Exodus 20.11. When he brought
the Israelites out of Egypt, he ordains the Passe-over in memory of that
deliverance, Exodus 12. And besides that, he obliges them severely to observe
that feast, and frequently by his servants puts them in mind of that
deliverance, and over and above appoints the Sabbath Day also (which was at
first commanded upon another score) as a weekly remembrancer of that great
deliverance, Deuteronomy. 5.15. But he that delivered them out of Egypt did also carry
them through the Wilderness, and in memory of that mercy in redeeming them from
the travels and pilgrimage of the desert, he appoints an Anniversary feast,
viz. the feast of Tabernacles, Lev. 23.43. Other Festivals there were, and
diverse memorials of the mercies of God showed to that people, and to their
fathers. They who were so apt to forget Gods mercies were provided with such
services as should put them fairly in mind of them. God has done thus
mercifully with us also; He has not only given his Son to die for us (than
which there cannot be a greater mercy) but he has ordained this Sacrament as a
perpetual memorial of so great a love.

And as among the Jews those services which God required were very proper
remembrancers and monitors of the mercies they had received, so it is in the
case that is before us. Their Sabbath which did succeed their six days labor
put them in mind of Gods creating the World, and ceasing from those works.
Their Passover brought to their mind the mercies of God in their Redemption
from Egypt. Their feast of Tabernacles plainly showed them the estate of their
Fathers in the Wilderness. And so the Sacrament of the Lords Supper does after
a lively manner represent unto us the Death of our Blessed Savior. He died
indeed a great while since, and at a place far remote from us, there could be
but few that were eyewitnesses of what was then and there done; but few in
proportion with those that would be concerned in his death. And therefore God
out of his great mercy to us has ordained this service, that what we could not
see done at first, we might see repeated in the Sacrament afterward. Here we
have Christ crucified represented to us: The Bread and Wine put us in mind of
his Body and Blood. And when we see the Bread broken, and the Wine poured forth
we are taught to remember the Passion of our Lord; how his body was broken and
bruised, and his blood was shed for us. God would have us lift up our hearts
from these symbols and signs to that which is signified and represented by
them. And if we do so we may by our Faith see Christ crucified before our eyes.
And that which was done so long ago, and so far off will be anew represented
unto us. The Apostle tells his Galatians that before their eyes Jesus Christ
had been evidently set forth, and crucified among them, Gal. 3.1. Yet certain
it is that Jesus Christ was crucified at Jerusalem, a place very far remote
from the Country of the Galatians: But yet he that was crucified at Jerusalem
may well be said to have been evidently set forth before the eyes of the
Galatians, Verse. Syriac.
and crucified among them also, i. e. Jesus Christ crucified was as it were
painted and most lively represented unto them. They did not see him indeed
hanging on the Cross at Jerusalem, but yet by the preaching of the Gospel, and
celebration of this Sacrament they might behold Christ crucified, and that
which was done at so great a distance would by these means become as if it had
been done before their eyes.

But it is not a bare historical remembrance that will serve our turn neither.
It is no hard thing to be able to remember the history of the passion of our
Blessed Savior: But our remembrance of it must be,

(1.) Affectionate and vigorous, as we remember the death of a dear friend that
died, and died in our quarrel and defense, who at once shed his blood for us
and for the truth. How passionately can we rehearse the praises and preserve
the memory of such an one as this: 'Twas thus with our dearest Lord, he fell a
Sacrifice at once for the testimony of the truth, and for the sake of our
precious Souls. He died that he might rescue us from eternal misery and death.
And this we must remember when we do remember the death of our Blessed Lord.

(2.) With all thankfulness to God for so unspeakable a mercy. Let us awaken
our Psaltery and Harp, all our powers and faculties, and all that is within us
to praise his holy name. Let us have our hymn of praise, Matthew. 26.30. It Is an
heavenly feast we are going to, and who goes to a feast with a sad countenance
or heart? Let us be filled with the spirit: Speaking to our selves in Psalms
and Hymns, and spiritual Songs, and making melody in our hearts to the Lord,
Ephesians. 5.18, 19. We are Gods guests at this time, and God loves we should be
cheerful and rejoice. He would have the Jews so in their Festivals, Deuteronomy.
16.11, 14. And certainly we have more reason to be so than they, God having
provided some better thing for us, Heb. 11.40. This Sacrament is an Eucharist
or service of praise, and as such was observed by the first Christians, Who
breaking bread from house to house, did eat their meat with gladness and
singleness of heart, praising God and having favor with all the people, Act.
2.46, 47.

(3.) It must be such a remembrance as works in us a detestation against our
sins which put our Blessed Savior to death. Co^^^^ve you saw him hang upon the
Cross, and saw the nails pierce his hands and feet, that you heard him cry out,
My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? And that you saw the blood he sweat,
and the thorns he wore. That you saw the Sun darkened, the Dead arise, and the
rocky Earth rend in pieces; certainly if your hearts were not more hard than
the rocks, you would relent; especially when you consider that all this was for
your sins, and that he died that you might live. 'Twas thy Covetousness that
betrayed him. Thy Just that made him bleed. Thy unbelief and wickedness that
loaded Him with the Cross, that crowned Him with thorns, that nailed his hands,
and pierced his side, and filled his Soul with horror and amazement. This
should work in us a great indignation against our Sins, as that which crucified
our dearest Lord. Should a tender Mother lose a Child by a knife, or some other
instrument, that is but the occasion of its death, Surely she would not endure
to see that instrument in her sight. If we loved our Savior, we should hate
our sins which made him bleed and bow his head. Since it is a most certain truth
that he that commits sin does more displease; i. e. does that which is more
against the mind and will of Christ, than Judas that betrayed him, and those
that hanged him upon his Cross. And therefore as you pity your Savior add not
to his sorrows, as you have any compassion to Him add not to the bitterness of
his Soul. Bring not with you instruments of cr^^lty when you pretend to
remember his love ^e showed in his death. But think th^^ (...) that if God did
not spare his Son, that (...) might not go unpunished, that he will much less
spare you who go on in your sins, and love them.

III. Another great end of this Sacrament is that Christians might by it be
united together in the strictest bond of love and charity. It is indeed a feast
of love, and that which does not only join us to God, but firmly cements us
also to one another.

This indeed is the great Commandment of our Blessed Savior, that we should
love one another as He has loved us, John 15.12. Nay he has made this the
mark by which his followers shall be known from the rest of the World. By this
shall all men know that ye are my Disciples, if ye have love one to another,
Joh. 13.35. And in the early days of Christianity the Heathen. World took
notice how the Christians loved one another. Nay the Holy Scriptures tell us
that in the beginning of Christianity, The multitude of them that believed were
of one Heart and of one Soul, Act. 4.32. And they showed their love to one
another by making all things common, that there might be no lack and wants
among them, Acts 2.44, 45. But then it is added when it was that they loved one
another thus greatly, viz. While they continuing daily with one accord in the
Temple, and breaking bread from house to house, did eat their meat with
gladness and singleness of heart, verse. 46. Whiles there were frequent
Communions in the Church of God, there did remain a fervent Charity among
Christians. But when they were but seldom celebrated, Charity also grew cold.

For indeed this Sacrament was appointed for the keeping up a fervent charity
among the followers of Jesus. And very plain, methinks are the words of the
Apostle to this purpose, We being many are one bread, and one body, for we are
all partakers of that one bread, 1 Cor. 10.17. i. e. We that partake of this
Heavenly feast are by that made one, we are of one kind and (...), just as
Bread and Wine though they be made up of several grains and grapes, yet are
made up together into one similar body, all whose parts are homogeneous and of
the same sort or kind; so we that are Christians, tho as men we differ from one
another, and have our several affections and designs distinct from each other,
yet for all this by the death of our Savior, and by the participation of the
Sacrament of our Lords Supper we are made one; we are reconciled to the same
designs and interests, acted by the same Spirit and by this Sacrament united
into one Spiritual body. However we are other wise divided, it is the intention
of this Sacrament to make us One. And therefore the Ancients called the
Eucharist, (...), i. e. a Collection or gathering together into one those who
were otherwise divided. The partaking of this Feast makes the partakers of one
mind and heart where they do receive it worthily. What is said of Pilate and
Herod, when our Savior was about to suffer, That they were the same day made
friends together, who before had been at enmity between themselves, Luke 23.12.
The same is true of all true Christians that do aright partake of this
Sacrament of the death of Christ, they are now united and reconciled, and made
of one heart and mind.

And this seems to be the great design of the Eucharist to unite Christians
together in the closest bond of unity and love. When the Passe-over was
commanded among the Jews, they were most severely commanded to put away leaven
when they kept that Feast: when we keep this Feast we must be sure to lay aside
all malice and hatred; to that sense the Apostle expounds that passage to us.
Purge out therefore the old leaven, that ye may be a new lump, as ye are
unleavened; for even Christ our Passover is sacrificed for us. Therefore let us
keep the feast, not with old leaven, neither with the leaven of malice and
wickedness, but with the unleavened bread of sincerity and truth, 1 Cor. 5.7,
8. He that bears malice in his heart must stand away and not partake of these
holy mysteries. Such a man will not be welcome to this Table of the Lord. If we
like Cain, hate our brother, God will have no respect unto our offering, Genesis
4.5. God is pleased to see us at unity with one another, and till then our
sacrifice is an abomination unto the Lord. Therefore if thou bring thy gift to
the Altar, and there remembrest that thy brother has ought against thee; leave
there thy gift before the Altar, and go thy way, first be reconciled to thy
brother, and then come and offer thy gift, Matthew. 5.23, 24. God is willing to
stay for his offering till we are reconciled to one another.

And as we ought always to have our hearts clear from the malice and
bitterness which we are too apt to bear against our brother; so especially when
we keep this Feast, we ought to see to it that we be purged from the leaven.
For we do now keep in memory the death of Christ. And certainly Christ in his
death gave a great proof of his love to Mankind, and a great example also of
forgiveness of enemies. And methinks we should be ashamed to remember the death
of Christ, who died for sinners, and prayed for his enemies, when we retain our
hatred and ill will against our brother. For if we did but rightly consider it,
we shall find the death of Christ a very effectual means to destroy out of our
hearts all malice and ill will, and hatred to one another. Well may we forgive
one another when Christ forgave his greatest enemies, and prayed for his
Crucifiers, Father for give them, for they know not what they do. We may well
contain our selves and be quiet when we are reproached and falsely accused; when
our Savior, Who did no sin, neither was guile found in his mouth; yet when he
was reviled, reviled not again; when he suffered he threatened not; but
committed himself to him that judges righteously, 1 Pet. 2.22, 23. Methinks
when Christ has shown such a love to us, it should be no hard matter for us to
love one another. When Christ has paid so great a debt for us, we should not
readily pull our brother by the throat for every trespass. If we did but
reflect upon the death of Christ, as we ought to do, it would kill and destroy
that malice and hatred which lodges in our hearts. We should not find it so
hard a matter to forgive our enemy, to do good against evil, and to pray for
our persecuters and slanderers, if we did, as we ought to do, keep in mind the
death of our dear Lord and Savior.

But then they that eat of the same bread, and drink of the same cup, that
partake together at the Table of their Lord must needs think themselves obliged
to love one another. For if eating and drinking together have been thought an
argument of kindness and friendship, certainly then the partaking together of
these divine mysteries must needs call for the sincerest amity, and the most
fervent charity amongst those that do partake. Those that seed at the same
Table, that retain to the same Lord, that wear the same badg and livery that
shows to whom they do belong, and live by the same Laws, and must therefore
hope for the same reward, these men sure must needs think themselves obliged to
love one another. Their partaking together of these mysteries is a sure pledge
of that mutual kindness which is between them. When the Psalmist would describe
the greatest profession of friendship and intimacy between himself and his
professed friends he does it in these words, We took sweet counsel together,
and walked unto the house of God in Company, Psalm. 55.14. We profess our selves
Children of the same household and family when we do partake together of this
holy Feast. We declare that we are members of the same body when we eat of the
same Bread, and drink of the same Cup, which is that provision, that heavenly
aliment, which our Lord has provided for his Church. And therefore we ought to
be concerned for one another as members of the same body are. We ought to care
for the good and benefit each of other, and to show by our lives and actions
that we do believe these things to be true. We ought indeed to be in perfect
charity with all men; and as we have opportunity to do good unto all men too,
but more especially, are we obliged to do good unto the household of Faith.

The ancient Christians surely understood this very well. They showed a great
kindness to those who did communicate with them. When they received this holy
Sacrament they saluted one another with an holy kiss in token of that mutual
love and kindness that was betwixt them. And as they had their kiss of love, so
after the Celebration of this Sacrament they had their feast of love, where
they did eat together in common in testimony of the mutual kindness which was
between them. And again, they had their labor of love also. i. e. They made
collections for those that were poor among them, or in distress; they were not
only at peace with one another, but they had also a very great compassion for
all those that were afflicted.

But alas, we are not what they were; that which was to them the bond of unity
and love, we have made a bone of contention and quarrel. We dispute now, we do
not live; we are full of questions, and void of charity. We are not willing to
be so good as those Primitive Christians, though we desire to seem as wise as
they. We are greatly declined from that love and unity that then obtained. And
we are not willing to be restored to that zeal and fervor which was to be seen
in them. And now we are run into two great extremes; for either we receive this
Sacrament with the leaven of malice in our hearts, and when we are unprepared
for it, and then this holy Table becomes our snare: Or else we will not receive
it at all, lest we should be obliged severely to be that, which we are not
willing to become.

IV. Another great end of this Sacrament is that we might have a full assurance
of Gods readiness to bestow upon us a pardon of our sins, and the great mercies
of the Gospel which God has declared himself ready to bestow upon all those
who perform the conditions of the new Covenant. God is not only pleased to make
a Covenant with us, and plainly to declare his readiness to perform his part,
but also gives us his seal, and so does abundantly assure us of his own
stedfastness and constancy.

For such is our weakness, so great our unbelief that we need very great
supports, and an abundant assurance to buoy up our sinking and incredulous
hearts. And on the other hand so great is the meroy and condescension of our
gracious God that he is ready to consider our frame, and to give us the greater
security and assurance. He does not only promise us the pardon of our sins in
his New Covenant, but he also gives us his seal to it besides; That so by two
immutable things, in which it was impossible for God to lie, we might have a
strong consolation, who have fled for refuge to lay hold upon the hope set
before us, Heb. 2.18. Thus graciously does God deal with Mankind. He gives them
his Covenant and his Seal too. He not only gives out his decree in the
expresses of his will, but he signs and seals it also that we may be assured
that it is unalterable; as it is said the Law of the Medes and Persians in that
case was, Dan. 6.8. God makes a Covenant with Noah and his sons that he will no
more destroy the earth by a flood; but to give them still a greater assurance,
he sets his bow in the cloud as a token of this Covenant between himself and
them. ( Genesis 9.) And when God makes a Covenant with Abraham and with his seed,
he does command Circumcision as a token of this Covenant between himself and
them, Genesis 17.11. God does not only give us his Word, but his Sacrament the
token of his truth. This God does, because he is gracious, and because our
wretched unbelief is so great that we need the utmost assurance. And this
certainly is one great end of the Sacrament, that we might have always with us
a sure pledge of the favor and grace of God, that we might not miscarry
through our unbelief, that we might have a full assurance that God would pardon
our sins if we do on our part perform the condition of the New Covenant. Our
Saviors words are plain to this purpose, This is my blood of the New
Testament, which is shed for many for the remission of sins, Matthew. 28.26. This
Sacrament is the instrument of conveyance, the Seal that gives us right and
title to this great grace and mercy of God. We receive in this Sacrament the
Body and Blood of Christ, and the benefits of his Death: The pardon of our sin
is here made over to us; God has given us visible pledges of his readiness to
forgive our sins. And because we are very jealous and suspicious, very unapt to
believe that such wretches as we are should be received into Gods favor, he
has given us this abundant assurance. He receives us to his own Table, gives
us under the symbols of Bread and Wine, the Body and Blood of his Son, who died
for our sins, and entertains us with this food of heaven.

In that God has given us his Son, and given him up to death, and this death
he underwent for our sins, we have a great assurance that with him he will give
us all things, and that he is ready to pardon those sins for which our Lord
has shed his blood. But then this blessed Sacrament is greatly efficacious
toward the obtaining of this pardon, because it is the ministry of the Death
of Christ, by which our pardon was procured.

But then we must be careful that we do not think that our pardon is procured
by any inherent virtue of the outward elements of Bread and Wine, or that our
partaking of these alone will procure this remission of sins: For the pardon of
sin is procured by the blood of our Savior, and we attain not to it without a
lively faith, and a performing the conditions of the Gospel. But if we do this
we have good assurance of pardon when we partake of this Sacrament which is the
Ministry of the Death of Christ. But then we must have a faith in Christ; that
is, as we eat the outward Element of Bread, and drink the Wine, so must our
Souls receive our Lord Jesus Christ. They must entertain him with all his
precepts, and in all his offices. Our hearts must receive him as our Prophet to
instruct and teach us; as our Lord to rule and govern us, as well as our Priest
to make a satisfaction for us to the Divine Justice. And as we hunger and
thirst for our bodily food, so we must hunger after the Spiritual provisions
that Christ has made for our Souls. We must earnestly breathe after
righteousness, and purity of heart. There must be in our Souls an hunger and a
thirst, they must receive and feed, and not our bodies only. It is the spirit
that quickens, the flesh profits nothing, John 6.63. As our mouth eats the
outward element, so faith must eat too. And it is not a notion, not an empty
nothing that will feed a lively faith: It conveys as real a supply to the Soul
as the outward Elements do nourishment to the body. The body receives the
outward symbol, the Soul the inward grace. We eat and drink the Element, but
it is the Soul that feeds on the thing signified and represented.

And therefore let not the sinner who lives in his sin and loves it, think to
obtain his pardon by partaking of this Sacrament. This Sacrament will not avail
such a man as this is; for the death of Christ will profit him nothing if he
lives in his sins and loves them; and therefore this Sacrament can avail him
nothing, it being but the Annunciation of the Death of Christ; and therefore it
cannot save that sinner whom the death of his Lord does not avail. It is a vain
thing for such a sinner to take sanctuary here. If there be not in our souls a
principle of new Life it is not the outward Elements of Bread and Wine that
will help us. God is ready to forgive our sins, (and we may see it clearly in
this Sacrament) but while we love our sins we are incapable of this grace of
God. It Is the burdened and the ladened sinner that shall find this favor. It Is
he that hates his sin and strives against it. These are those whom Christ came
to seek and save. It Is not the outward work will save us if there be not in us
the grace of God. There is no pardon in the Gospel for the obdurate and
impenitent sinner, and therefore we may not look for it in any of the exterior
offices of Religion: And therefore let no man deceive himself in this matter.
He that comes in his sins out of hopes of a pardon will be so far deceived,
that instead of obtaining a pardon for his former guilt he will contract a
greater, and instead of preventing he will but increase and enhaunce his own
condemnation.

CHAP. II.
I Shall now mention some of those practical Inferences which the severals
beforenamed do suggest unto us.

1. If this Sacrament be intended for a renewal of that Covenant we entered
into in Baptism, we may see what great reason we have at this time to examine
our selves, and to bewail our misdeeds, and strengthen all purposes of
amendment of Life. The end of its institution does most severely and
indispensably require all this at our hands. We must prepare our selves to meet
the Lord that he may be sanctified by us when we draw nigh unto him. We read
that at the giving of the Law when the Israelites entered into Covenant with
God, how solemnly they were prepared for it, ( Exodus 19.14, 15.) lest their
uncleanness should render them unfit for so great a work. God is holy, and they
that make their approaches to him must be so likewise: We must purify and
cleanse our hearts, and cast out every thing which does defile before we are
fit to make so solemn an address to Almighty God. God will be sanctified in
them that come nigh him, Lev. 10.3. Certainly God is too wise to be imposed
upon and mocked; too holy to behold our iniquities, too just to clear and
absolve the obdurate and impenitent sinner. We must not come to this holy Table
before we have examined our own hearts, and bewailed our sins, and come we must
with full purposes of amendment of Life. If we cannot find that we are thus
prepared we must not dare to adventure. If we find that we love our sins and
are not willing to part with them we shall eat and drink damnation to our
selves when we eat of this bread and drink of this Cup.

2. Hence also we may see the great obligation that lies upon those which do
partake of these holy mysteries to lead holy lives for the time to come. It is
no small sin after we have been partakers of this ^^crament of the Lords Supper
to relapse ^^^o our former sins and misdeeds. It is ^^ngerous looking back
after we have so ^^^^mnly set our hand to the Plough. ^^en the unclean spirit
is gone out of a man, and after that his house is swept and garnished, if then
he shall return thither again, the last state of that man will be worse than
the first, Mat. 12.43, 44, 45. A relapse is many times of greater danger than
the first disease. It Is always so in spiritual things. He that commits the same
sin after he has communicated contracts a greater guilt. He does not only sin
against his Conscience, but against his most solemn Vow and promise. He sins
against greater grace, and with greater scandal; he offends them that
communicate with him, and opens the mouths of them that do not. He does by his
Savior as Judas did, he eats of his bread, and lifts up his heel against him,
Joh. 13.18. The sin of an unbeliever is great, but this is much greater still;
this is the highest treachery and falseness. We betray Christ when yet with
Judas we kiss him, and salute him with an Hail Master. Nothing can be more
detestable than this is. No wonder that the rule Soldiers and the Roman Pilate
should be unkind to our Savior, but that a Disciple should deny him, and
betray him, this is that which swells the sin to the greatest magnitude.

You then that eat of his body and drink his blood, have you a care that you
betray him not. (...). Chrysostom. in 1 Cor. 11.
For shame let not those hands minister to oppression or injustice that have
received the Body and Blood of Christ. Let not oaths, lies, and filthiness
proceed out of that mouth into which the Body of our Lord has entered. Let
those vessels be kept clean which have been the receptacles of these sacred
Mysteries. Let them be shut up, as the Gate in Ezekiel, against every evil
thing, because the Lord the God of Israel had entered in by it, Ezekiel. 44.2. Let
there be no passage for any thing which would defile the man, where thy Lord
has entered. You have taken Christ for your Lord, have a care now that sin do
not reign in your mortal bodies. Do not despise the Blood of Christ, who died
for all, that they which live should not henceforth live unto themselves, but
unto him which died for them, and rose again, 2 Cor. 5.15.

Know this that if you sin wilfully now, there remains no more sacrifice for
sin, but a certain fearful looking for of judgment, and fiery indignation,
which shall devour the adversaries, Heb. 10.26, 27. God will not be mocked by
those that trample on the Blood of his Son: It is a fearful thing to fall into
the hands of the living God. You run into an unspeakable danger whatever you
may think of it. You have entered into Covenant with God and you cannot fall
back without contracting a great guilt unto your selves. It was the ancient
manner that when a Covenant was made they did slay a beast, shed its blood, and
cut it asunder, Jer. 34.18, 19. in token that he that did not stand to his
Covenant should himself be obnoxious to the like severity. When God makes a
Covenant with us in the Gospel, he gives up his Son to death; the blood which
he shed is the blood of this Covenant. ( Heb. 13.20. and 10.19.) If now we
transgress and trample upon the blood of Jesus we are liable to all the wrath
of God which our Lord endured, and to bear it also to all eternity. And though
we may escape temporal plagues, yet will it be worse for us if we fall into
hardness of heart, blindness of mind and a reprobate sense. These are the surda
verbera, those secret and benumming strokes, those stupifying ones which do not
indeed so much amuse our senses, and render us examples to others of Gods
displeasure; but yet they are of as ill an Omen and presage, and of a worse
consequence by far than the heaviest and sorest afflictions that befall our
estates or bodies in this present world.

You then that have been cleansing and purifying your selves, have a care that
you do not defile your selves again. Let every such man rather say with the
spouse, I have put off my coat, how shall I put it on? I have washed my feet,
how shall I defile them? Cant. 5.3. Have a care you do not with the dog return
to your vomit, and with the sow that was washed to the wallowing in the mire, 2
Pet. 2.22. I shall conclude this particular with the words of Siracides, He
that washes himself after the touching of a dead body, if he touch it again
what avails his washing? So is it with a man that fasteth for his sins, and
goes again and does the same, who will hear his prayer, or what does his
humbling profit him, Eccles. 34.25, 26.

3. Hence we may see what great reason we have to give thanks to God that he is
pleased to make that our duty which is so much our interest and for our
advantage. He obliges us to renew our Covenant with himself, which it is our
greatest interest to do. He obliges us to that which tends to our own happiness
and welfare, and without which we could not but be miserable. He will have us
remember the death of our Savior, and his love he showed us. He will have us
partake of a Sacrament that does not only bring us nearer to himself, but also
unites us faster in the bond of love to one another. He would that we should
partake of these Mysteries, which are the seal of his Covenant, and give us
great assurance of his readiness to pardon our sins. That is, in one word, God
would have us be happy, and he does oblige us to be so. It Is our advantage that
he designs in all this. His love is without any interest but that of ours. Who
would not enter into Covenant with so good a God? who would not remember the
love of so dear a Lord? Who would not be knit fast to his brother in closest
bond of love? Who would not have assurance of the pardon of his sins? These are
the greatest blessings that we are capable of receiving; the greatest that
Heaven can bestow upon us. What can be more desirable than to be at peace with
God, and at unity among our selves? What more reasonable or more to be wished
for than that we should remember the love of our Savior, and receive a good
assurance of the pardon of our sins? And this is the design, as you have heard,
of this blessed Sacrament. It is appointed for such blessed purposes as these.
How suspicious or shy soever we be of it, this is the errand it comes about. It
has a design to make us more holy and more happy than we were. This is all the
plot which it has upon us; God has not only been pleased to give us his Son
to die for our ransom, but he gives him again in this Sacrament for our food
and nourishment. O the unspeakableness of Gods kindness to us! Methinks every
man should break forth into his praises; methinks he should say, Bless the
Lord, O my Soul, and forget not all his benefits, who forgiveth all thine
iniquities, who heals all thy diseases, who redeemeth thy life from
destruction, who crowns thee with loving kindness and tender mercies, who
satisfies thy mouth with good things, Psalm. 103.2, 3, 4, 5. Methinks our mouth
should be filled with praise and thanksgiving to God, for these his kindnesses
to our Souls.

4. Hence we may learn, what great reason we have to embrace so blessed an
opportunity of becoming better. Great are the benefits which would redound to
us from ^ frequent and a devout Communion. And certainly this service must
needs be welcome to that Soul that is weary of his sins, and heartily and
earnestly desires to be rid of them. For it lays a most severe obligation upon
us to search our hearts, and amend our ways, and set things straight between
God and our own Souls. This service obliges us to that which every pious Soul
would choose of it self. It binds us to be faithful servants of God, to be
hearty lovers of our brother, to be grateful acknowledgers of the love of
Christ, and diligent seekers after the pardon of our sins. Who would not
welcome such a blessed opportunity that loves his God and is weary of his sins?
Who is it that desires to lead a new life that would not be glad of so
excellent a service? It Is to be feared we are too much wedded to our sins, when
we refuse this service which would divorce them from us! It Is much to be feared
we have no great sense of the love of our dying Savior when we will not upon
his command, Do this in remembrance of him. Or that our sins are no burden to
us when we despise the evidence of our pardon. If we did but worthily partake
of this Sacrament, we should be more fit to live and more prepared to die. We
should be more fervent in our services to God, and more sincere in our love to
our brother; the love of Christ would constrain us to obedience, and his
Commandments would not be grievous to us. This would put an end to our
unnatural differences and quarrels, it would restore love and charity, it would
deliver us from our slavish and dreadful fear of death. In a word it would
change this Earth into a kind of Heaven; and him that is now a cold professor
of Religion, it would make this Sinner become a Saint, and a zealous doer of
the will of God.

Such a mighty change would a frequent and a worthy participation of these
mysteries introduce into the world. It would bring back the primitive spirit
into the hearts of Christians, when Communions were frequent and devout, then
did every holy and good thing obtain. And were they again restored, the Devils
Kingdom, which has now gotten ground, would not only shake but fall to the
ground. This would overturn his strongholds, as the barly-cake of Gideon did
the Tents of the men of Midian.

And therefore no wonder that he labors so greatly by his instruments to
prevent this, which would subvert his Kingdom. And this is so effectually done
that now the professors of Christianity either partake amiss or not at all.
This is the case of many, I wish I could not say of the most of Christians. Nay
and those that do not receive at all are grown witty too, they think they can
defend themselves from being guilty of a default. I shall not here examine what
they have to say for themselves; but yet this I shall say that the command of
our Savior for our Communicating is so plain, and the reason of it so great
that nothing can discharge us from it, but either the impossibility of doing it
for want of opportunity, (which we cannot plead) or a countermand from him that
gave us the law which we must never expect. Nothing else can discharge us, not
our common excuses, not our mistaken and scrupulous Consciences, which cannot
evacuate the Law of God; for hereafter we shall be judged not according to what
we ween or are of opinion in the case, but by a more sure and unerring rule,
the Word of God. I conclude this particular, only adding that if we diminish
or take from the Word of God, and deny that to be our duty which the Word of
God requires, we have too much reason to fear that God will take away our part
out of the book of life, Rev. 22.19.

CHAP. III.
I Shall now proceed to show how we may become worthy partakers of this
Sacrament of our Lords Supper, which was ordained for such great ends, and
conveys so great a blessing to all those that partake of it as they ought. For
there is something to be done by us before we can be prepared for so great a
service. Now before I proceed to show what we are to do toward the preparing
our selves, I shall show the necessity of a preparation in general, or the
danger of coming unprepared. And that I shall do in the following particulars.

1. He that comes unprepared loses all those benefits which are annexed to a
worthy partaking of this Sacrament. Certainly the blessings which we receive
when we come prepared are very many and very great. We receive the pardon of
our sins, and power against them; we have here a sense and experiment of the
love of Christ to us, and increase of our charity and love to one another. We
receive here the joys of pure Religion, and the foretasts of Heaven; an
increase of our love to God, and a demonstration also of the love of God to us.
This is a most excellent instrument, and very available to the killing of our
sins, and the reviving of our graces. It makes us more fit to live, and both
more ready, and more willing to die. We are here reconciled to God, and also
perfectly reconciled to one another. It Is the great instrument of pardon, and
peace, of love and joy, of faith and holiness. He that comes prepared finds it
both food and physic. It nourishes his graces, and it purges away his sins.
But whatever blessings he finds, the unprepared finds none. He receives no
pardon of his sin, nor yet any power against it. And it were well for the
unprepared if this were all, for he does not only not receive a blessing; but,

2. He that comes unprepared receives a very great curse; he contracts a very
great guilt and condemnation to himself. And if he would know how great a curse
it is let him consider the words of the Apostle, who tells him that he is
guilty of the body and blood of Christ, 1 Cor. 11.27, That he eats and
drinks damnation to himself, v. 29 Nor is this all neither, but he brings
upon himself bodily distempers, aye and death it self. The Apostle adds, for
this cause many are weak and sickly among you, and many sleep, ver. 30. We have
enough said to awaken us in these words if any thing be enough. Sickness and
death are the greatest plagues that we dread in the World; and these are
consequents of unworthy receiving; but these are the least still. He that comes
unprepared as he is guilty of the greatest sin, in that he is guilty of the
Body and Blood of Christ, so is he liable to the greatest severity and wrath of
God, in that he eats and drinks damnation to himself. If we would avoid
sickness, or an untimely death, if we would not be guilty of the Body and Blood
of Christ, and not be liable to damnation we must prepare our selves for this
service. We think Judas a wretched sinner that betrayed his Lord, and Pilate
that delivered him to death and the Jews that crucified him we esteem most
miserable sinners; what are we then if we do all this over again; if we
crucify our Lord afresh, and tread under foot the Son of God, and count the
blood of the Covenant an unholy thing; and all this we do if we come unprepared
and in our sins: And are so far from being less sinners than the Jews who
crucified our Lord, that we are indeed therefore greater than they, in that we
do this despite to him whom we know; but they, though they crucified him, yet
they did not know him to be the Lord of Glory.

The receiving of this Sacrament serves to some great purpose or other; it does
set us forward either to Heaven or Hell; it conveys a great blessing, or else
it brings upon us a great curse. And as the blessings, it brings are great to
them that are prepared, so are the curses to him that comes unfit. We either
receive Christ or else Satan enters into us. And all this is as we come fitted
and prepared.

Nor is it to be wondered that it should be so, for it is not the work done, but
the manner of the doing of it that turns to our account. God deals with us not
as with stocks and stones, but as with reasonable Creatures. We receive his
blessings as we are sitted for them. God waits that he may be gracious. He
waits on us till we sit our selves to receive his mercy. The Soul that is
unprepared is not sit for the blessings that are here bestowed. It Is our
unfitness to receive that makes us miss of the blessing. It Is so in all our
religious services. We receive no benefit because we are not fitted for them;
nay instead of a blessing we receive a curse. We do not profit by the preaching
of the Word, we say; The cause is because we are not prepared hearers. Do not
my words do good to him that walks uprightly? Micah 2.7. We are worse after
the Word we hear, and the Sacrament we partake of, because we are unprepared.
And that is the true cause of it. We have an Axiom in Logic, That every cause
does act according to the disposition of the subject; it is true in Spirituals I
am sure. That which is to one a great blessing turns to the mischief of
another. One man receives life when he eats of this bread and drinks of this
cup, another man through his own default eats and drinks damnation to himself.
The same heat of the Sun that dissolves the ice and melts the wax, yet hardens
the clay. The same herb or flower may afford honey to the Be, and poison to
the Spider. The Red Sea that gave a passage to the Israelites did for all that
drown the Egyptians.

Obruitur Pharaoh, patuit via libera Moysi. Prudent. It was the same seed was
sown ( Matthew. 13.) but not the same ground which received it.

Semen and Sator culpa vacant, terra damnanda est. We know the Ark of God was
the glory of Israel, and a great blessing to the House of Obed Edom, but yet
the Philistines found it an intolerable scourge to them. Nay Christ himself
that unspeakable gift who is to them that believe the power of God and the
wisdom of God, yet was he to the unbelieving Jews a stumbling block, and to the
Greeks foolishness, 1 Cor. 1.23, 24.

Signum caventi, non caventi scandalum,
Hunc sternit, illum dirigit.
So that it concerns us greatly to fit and prepare our selves for so great a
service. It will be unto us as we are prepared for it. Our unfitness will turn
life into death, and the greatest blessing that God has to bestow into the
greatest curse. There is a great danger before us as well as a great benefit.

And the effect of this consideration should be that we be very diligent in
fitting and preparing our selves. We are apt to make an ill use of it, and that
is this, that because there is danger in coming unworthily, therefore it is the
safest course not to come at all. But certainly we never learnt this from the
Apostle, for he after he had told his Corinthians of the danger of unworthy
receiving (1 Cor. 11.27.) presently puts them upon examining themselves and
then upon eating this Bread, and drinking this cup, ver. 28. We may die by a
famine as well as by a surfeit; by not partaking at all as well as by partaking
amiss. He in the parable that came to the Marriage Feast without the
Wedding Garment was cast into outer darkness, Matthew. 22.13. But then for those
that were invited and would not come at all, the Lord said that none of those
men should taste of his Supper, Luke 14.24. He that comes unworthily runs into
a great danger, and so does he that does not come at all. There is but one way
of escaping the danger, and that is by calling in Gods help, and a diligent
preparing and fitting our selves. Which we have great reason to do now.

3. Because we do at this time make a very solemn approach to God. We are going
to his Table, to be his guests, to eat and drink with him. And certainly we had
need prepare our selves most diligently did we but rightly consider this. When
we go to the Table of a great man we do trim and spruce up our selves. It will
well become us to come hither with clean hearts, when we consider that God has
an all-seeing eye, and that he cannot endure to behold iniquity, God will be
sanctified by us or upon us. It is no trifling and small matter that we are now
about; We make a very near approach unto God, and had need therefore purge our
hearts of our uncleanness lest God make a breach upon us. We had need prepare
to meet the Lord, and sanctify him in our hearts. Let us not dare to trifle in
a matter of so great weight, nor to go about to mock God, and impose upon him
before whom all things are naked and open. Nor let us by any means dare to
serve God at all adventures, and do such a work as this is negligently and
deceitfully. If we do God will be very far from accepting us or our service.

Wherefore draw nigh to God and he will draw nigh to you. Cleanse your hands ye
sinners, and purify your hearts ye double-minded, Jam. 4.8. Here is before us
life and death, let us quit our selves like men, girding up the Joins of our
mind, and imploring the aid of Heaven that our Souls may live. No less than the
life of our precious Souls is concerned in this matter. As we do order this
affair we may either live or die. Now certainly these things that have been
named above will be sufficient to awaken us and provoke us to diligence, if
they be but believed and considered thoroughly. Having showed the necessity of
preparing our selves I come now to show how this must be done. And first I
shall show what preparations we are to make before we do partake: Secondly what
behavior will become us when we do receive: Thirdly what we must do after we
have received.

CHAP. IV.
I Shall now show what preparations we are to make in order to our worthy
receiving of this Sacrament.

And here I might premise, that in general and holy life is a very good
preparative to this service. Were our whole life a life of Religion we should
be always in a good readiness for this service. That which fits us to die fits
us to receive this Sacrament of the Lords Supper. And certainly and holy life
is the best preparative for death, and therefore it must needs be very useful
and necessary to our worthy partaking of the Body and Blood of Christ. He that
is fit to receive the Sacrament is fit to die; and he that is fit to die is fit
to receive the Sacrament; one and the same preparation serves for both And if
an holy life be a good preparative to death, it must be so for the blessed
Sacrament also. But then though an holy life make a man habitually prepared for
death, yet there are for all that several things advisable to the dying man
upon his sickbed in order to his actual preparation for his departure hence.
And so it is in this Sacrament, though an holy life be a good preparative, yet
it is but an habitual one; and it is requisite that he that leads an holy life
should notwithstanding that, make an actual preparation before he make his
approach to this holy Table. And what we are to do in order to that I shall now
show.

1. It is very requisite we should set some time apart for this work; that we
should sequester selves from our worldly affairs and business, and be at
leisure to attend upon the great concernment of our Souls. But when we are
alone we must be greatly careful that our worldly thoughts do not thrust in
upon us and divert or distract us. We must do as Abraham did when he
sacrificed, and the fowls came down upon his Sacrifice, he drove them away,
Genesis 15.11. We must send away our worldly thoughts and cares at this time that
they may not disturb and hinder us, but that we may altogether attend upon that
more weighty concern which we are about. If we do not this, we may when we are
alone be as much in the World as we are at any other time. And therefore we
shall do well not only to set some time apart from our worldly occasions; but
when we have done that we must obstinately resolve that no worldly thought
shall get entrance into our hearts at that time. We shall be sure to be
solicited by our vain thoughts then, but we must call in the aid of God, and
use our utmost diligence to keep them out. We must empty our selves of these
buyers and sellers, we must overturn their Tables of exchange, and with a great
zeal whip these thieves out of Gods Temple.

This perhaps we may think a matter of some difficulty; but there is nothing
greatly difficult to him that is resolved; nothing can be so to him that humbly
and fervently implores the grace and aid of God. Besides it is for the life of
our Souls that we do this: And if we loved our Souls as well as we do our
Estates or Bodies, and (I might say) our sins, we should not find any
difficulty in this matter. For, for the sake of these things we can spend many
days and not complain; and therefore have no reason to think much of spending
now and then a day in consulting the interest of our immortal Souls. And sure I
am there are no portions of our time better spent than those we spend in the
diligent service of God, and about the securing the eternal interest of our
Souls. We shall one day wish that some of those hours which now we carelessly
spend in doing nothing, or in doing amiss, which we spend in impertinent
visits, or in riot and drunkenness had been spent in our Closets, in fervent
prayer to Almighty God, and in caring for our precious Souls. If ever we would
have our Souls do well we must sometimes be alone and set apart some portion of
our time for our service of our God. We have our Saviors example for this,
though he were much called upon and greatly employed, and that always in doing
good to Mankind, yet he finds time to be alone. And rather than neglect it he
will defraud himself of his Rest. Thus we are told that he rises a great while
before day and departs into a solitary place, and there prays, Mark 1.35. He
continues in prayer all night, Luke 6.12. And when his Disciples were asleep we
find him praying upon his knees, Luke 22.41. and praying more earnestly, ver.
44. So that no man may now think himself excused through the multiplicity of
his affairs from his holy solitudes and retirements. Our Blessed Lord found
time for these things, though he were so much called upon to heal the sick, and
help the needy. We must then separate our selves from the world and from all
its cares and pleasures, and devote our selves and our time to the service of
God. And as it is advisable that we should do this often, so is it more
especially that we should do it before we approach to the Table of our Lord,
that we may be at leisure to fit our selves for so great and so excellent a
service.

2. It is very necessary that we should examine and try our selves, Let a
manexamine himself and so let him eat, etc. 1 Cor. 11.28. We must descend into
our own souls, and try what we are. This is the duty of every man lest he bring
destruction upon himself. No man is to be too confident of himself; he must
bring himself to the rule, and measure himself by that.

We are very apt to think too well of our selves. For we are too forward to
judge of our selves by an imperfect rule and measure; to think our selves good
because we are not so bad as the worst; or to judge well of our selves because
other men judge well of us; or to acquit our selves because our Conscience does
not condemn us; or perhaps we judge our selves in a safe condition because we
are innocent as to some things, and give an hearty obedience to some of the
Laws of God. Or else it may be, that we think our selves in a safe condition
because we mean well though we do not always do as we should do. We are ready
to call our great sins little ones, and our little ones none at all. Or else we
think our selves safe because we are, as we think, of an orthodox belief, or of
a more refined sect or party of men. A great many ways there are by which we
may deceive our selves, and miscarry eternally. And therefore we had need use a
most severe scrutiny and search. For our hearts are deceitful and desperately
wicked, and do easily impose upon us. 'Twas a wise speech of one of the Jews,
That a man should not put any trust in himself as long as he lives. Hillel.
Avoth. c. 2. S. 4.
And King Solomon tells us, that all the ways of a man are clean in his own
eyes, but the Lord weighs the Spirits, Prove. 16.2. We do easily absolve our
selves; for we are partial, and greatly favorable to our own side. We are
often heard to say, that indeed we are great Sinners, but then we add that we
repent. That we do not keep the Law we do confess, but then we profess to
believe the Gospel. We have done amiss we say, but then we do declare that we
will be more heedful for the time to come: We have quarreled with our
Neighbors indeed, but yet we do give out that we forgive them. We have not
done as we should, but yet we affirm that we desire to be better. But all this
while it is a great question whether our Repentance, and Faith, our Charity,
and purposes of amendment, and desires of becoming better be sincere or not.

For all this while we are supposed not to have examined our selves; for when
we come to do that by the unalterable Law of God we may perhaps find our sins
great, and Repentance less than now we conceive it to be. If we try our
purposes of amendment, our Charity and Faith, and desires of becoming better,
we may not find them to be that which we would have them be thought to be. It
will be well for us therefore that we examine and prove our selves, as the
Apostle requires we should, lest we deceive our selves for ever when we take up
with that which is counterfeit and insincere. We are easily persuaded to do
this when our Estates or Lives are concerned; In that case we love to take a
sure course, and to search into the bottom of the thing. 'Twere well for us we
were as curious where our Souls are so nearly concerned. We shall find it worth
our while to examine and try our selves. And I shall show what things they are
which we are to examine in order to the fitting our selves for the Supper of
the Lord; and the right understanding what will become us in so weighty an
affair.

CHAP. V.
THE first thing that we are to examine is what we have done amiss, and what we
have omitted. We are obliged to consider our ways and to look back upon our
lives and conversations, and observe wherein we have transgressed the holy laws
of God. We must make a diligent search into our hearts and most carefully
reflect upon our lives past. And for the better success of this work we may
take these following rules.

1. We must be greatly careful that we be not remiss and careless in this
search: That we do not search for our sins as some negligent officers search
for offenders, whom they have no mind to find out. But as the Jews were very
curious in searching for leaven, and as the Priest was obliged to be very exact
in searching after the Leprosy that did arise in a man or house, so must we
be. We must search narrowly, as the faithful Physician does by his Patient
whose health he does consult. He does curiously observe the nature of his
disease, all the moments of its rise and growth, its symptoms, and its types,
that he may know how to help nature, and counterwork the disease. Or as a
faithful and skilful workman that would uphold a decaying house, he searches
diligently into its several parts, examines the foundation, considers its sides
and superstructures, that he may obviate and prevent its fall. So must we do,
we must descend into every corner of our hearts, look very diligently over our
lives, and well consider our ways that we may find out what is amiss in us.
The interest of our Souls is greatly concerned, if we leave any sin which we
might have found out, our condition is full of danger. A little leaven leavens
the whole lump; and therefore it concerns us highly to be very exact in our
search.

2. We must be careful that we make this search by the light of Gods Law. The
Jews require when men search for leaven against the Passover, Pesach. c. 1. S.
1.
that they should do it by the light of a Candle. We had not need be in the
dark when we go about such a work as this is, and we had need have a clearer
light than that of our own Consciences is. The Law of God is an unerring rule;
by this we must try and search our selves. And therefore we had need know this
Law or else we shall not be able to judge our selves by it, and consequently
very unfit to approach unto the Table of our Lord. By this Law we may find out
what we have done amiss. This glass will discover our spots. And though we may
think our selves very innocent, yet upon our trial we shall find many things
amiss.

For the Commandment is exceeding broad; we are very apt to say with the man in
the Gospel, all these things have we kept from our youth up, Matthew. 19.20. But
we consider not how far the Law of God extends and reaches. We are commanded to
have no other gods before the Lord our God. We perhaps are ready to think that
we do not break this Law till we fall down and worship some new Deity. But we
are much deceived in this. For by this precept we are obliged to love God above
all things, to pray to him, fear him, trust in him, give him thanks, and in all
things to prefer him above all the things of this present World. And therefore
if we find our selves devoid of the love of God, or (which is all one) full of
the love of this World and of our sins; if we find we love or fear, or trust in
any thing more than in him; that we do not give him hearty thanks for his
mercies, nor yet heartily pray for his grace and assistance, we may certainly
conclude that we are offenders against the Law of God. We are commanded that we
should not kill: Now not only he that sheds his brothers blood but he that
hates him, and censures him is guilty of a breach of this Law. He that hates
his brother is a murderer, 1 John 3.15. Again, when we are forbidden Adultery
we are guilty when we look on a Woman to lust after her.

For the Law as was said before, is exceeding broad. It does not only oblige the
outward but the inward man; It does not only forbid us to do but also to think
any evil. When it commands a duty it must be supposed to require all those
things which are the means that lead us to it. And when it forbids a sin it
must be thought to forbid whatever would induce us to it. We have reason to
think our selves guilty not only when we do directly break the letter of the
Law, but when we transgress against the inward and spiritual meaning of it. We
are guilty not only when we commit a sin our selves but when we make others to
sin, nay when we do not reprove and hinder others when we can. There are many
ways by which we become transgressors. And there is no better way to find out
our iniquity than by comparing our lives with the Law of God.

If those men did but carefully do this, who now pride themselves as better
than their neighbors, they might find very foul spots where as now they think
all their ways clean. This would show them those faults which their pride and
lust will not now let them see. Our Conscience is many times but an imperfect
light, and is always so when it is not enlightened from the Law of God. It Is that
Rule by which we are to measure our selves. And therefore if we would find our
sin let us take this light to direct and guide us in our search.

3. We must be very particular in this search. That we are sinners we may
easily find, but we must not satisfy our selves in this, but must find out our
particular sins which we are guilty of. For if in order to our pardon we must
confess and forsake our sins, we had need find them out; if we do not do this
it is not like we should confess them and forsake them. For how can we be
thought to confess and forsake those sins which we are ignorant of? And if we
do not this what hopes can we have of pardon?

Indeed where we cannot by our utmost search find out every sin, we may yet
hope for pardon if we humbly and penitently beg it with the Psalmist, who prays
to God to cleanse him from his secret faults, Psalm. 19.12. But this we may hope
when we cannot find out our particular sin; when we can do that, we must know
it is our duty to do it in order to our confession and our parton. In which the
Reader may be assisted by the heads of self-examination at the close of the
Book called the Whole duty of Man.
And a thing very advisable it is, that we should have ready by us at such
times as this a most particular Catalogue of our sins, and that we do in our
private prayers as particularly confess them to God. It is very easy and
common to confess our selves sinners to God, but there is a great cheat in that
general confession, and if we would have pardon we must be more particular.

4. We must not only make a particular search after our sins, but we must also
well consider of the degrees and aggravations of them. For all sins are not
alike. There are many circumstances that do increase our guilt, and therefore
if we would not hide our fault, we must search after these things.

Now there are several things which do greatly enhance our guilt, and make our
sins more exceeding sinful, that give them a deeper dye and stain. Now every
sin is a transgression against the Law of God, but yet there are some sins
which are more heinous than others;

1. As for example, when our sin is such as is not only against the Law of God
but against our own Conscience also; when we know the Law and our Conscience
does make a faithful report of it, and yet we will commit it. He that knows his
Masters will and does it not shall be beaten with many stripes. This is no
small aggravation of our guilt when we rebel against the light. This rebellion
is as the sin of witchcraft. We have no manner of excuse left us in this case,
and therefore ought to humble our selves greatly under such sins as these are.

2. Again when we are vincibly and culpably ignorant, and bribe or blind our
Consciences, our guilt is also greatly aggravated. Perhaps we will not know our
duty that we may not be though obliged to do it. Or we have certain arts to
bribe our Consciences, or have found out ways to stop their sentence. This is a
most heinous aggravation of our guilt, and comes up very near to that which was
named last. He is not only a very wicked servant that refuses to do what he
hears his Master command him, but he is also very wicked that stops his ears,
and will give no heed to what he does command him. The one rebels against the
light, and the other shuts it out. The one will not admit the truth, when the
other will not obey it, but detains it in unrighteousness. There are no men so
deplorably blind as they that will not see. It Is to be feared there is too much
of this abroad in the World. Men are afraid of the light and therefore they run
away from it. And are therefore like the old Turk we read of, who being
conscious that by his Law he ought not to drink any Wine was yet resolved to
drink it, and so he did, but before he drank he gave some great shouts; which
he did, as he said, to give his Conscience warning that it might stand away,
Busbequii Legate. Turc. Ep. 1.
and not behold his wickedness, nor be guilty of it. Certainly too many men
take this course or else they could never do what now they do. They dismiss
their Consciences when they would interpose. And find out ways either to keep
them from speaking, or else from being heard. But whoever has used these arts
has contracted a great guilt.

3. Another great aggravation of our guilt is that we have sinned after Vows of
better obedience. And there is something of this to be found in every sin we
commit; for it is committed against our Baptismal Vow when we did most solemnly
devote our selves to the service of God in opposition to the Devil, the World,
and the Flesh. And many of us have made the same Vow again upon a bed of
sickness, in times of danger, or when we did partake of the Supper of our Lord.
And to relapse after all this does greatly increase our guilt. We are very
wretched sinners if we break these bands asunder, and cast away these cords
from us.

4. But still our sins are again the greater when they are committed and
continued in after the singular and eminent mercies of God toward us, which
lead us to Repentance, Romans 2.4. For now we add the greatest ingratitude to our
other guilt, and do by that fill up the measure of our iniquity. And there is
no man living but may easily find this aggravation in his sins. For certain it
is, however we complain of our miseries and needs, we are encompassed about
with the mercies of Heaven. And there is no man living so miserable or wretched
but if he would but consider and reflect, would easily find this to be a truth.
Certainly the hopes that we still have of Heaven, and the means of grace are
most unspeakable mercies. But besides, if we look back, we may find many other
singular mercies of God toward us which do upbraid us for our great
unthankfulness. He has many times kept our Souls from death, our eyes from
tears, and our feet from falling. He has long waited for our return, who might
long ago have placed us among the dead and damned; which is a plain
demonstration that God has been greatly kind unto us, and so far from desiring
our death that he showed himself (when we did choose the paths that lead to
death) desirous that we should turn and live.

5. That our sins are committed under the means of grace is still a farther
aggravation of our guilt. The Gospel has provided us sufficient help and
assistance to do the will of God. If we do amiss it is because we will not use
the means which God has offered us that we might become better. There is a
sufficient aid at hand if we will make use of it. The Gospel does not only
require our obedience but also enables us to obey. If we do but humbly beg the
holy Spirit of God, and do it but as earnestly as the hungry child will beg
bread of his Father, we shall as certainly receive this heavenly aid, Luke
11.13. This Spirit will help our infirmities, Romans 8.26. And if he dwell in our
hearts we shall find him that is in us greater than he that is in the world, 1 John 4.4. Now certainly we are very fond of our sins, if we will not do our
utmost to get rid of them. The way is easy and plain before us; we may be
better if we will not make light of the aid and assistance of Heaven. Our
freedom from sin is purchased by our Lord, and offered us in the Gospel, if we
accept it not upon such easy terms we deserve to be slaves for ever. 'Twill be
but just we should be used as the servant under the Law, who might have his
liberty and refused it; he was made a public shame for his great folly in
refusing to go free, when his freedom was offered him: (For that is thought to
be the meaning of what followed upon his refusal), for his Master carried him
away to the Judges, and at the gate of the house or court of Justice, he bored
through his ear with an awl, and he was at once marked and condemned to be a
servant for ever, Exodus 21.6. It is no little aggravation of our crime that we
do amiss when we have such advantages of being and doing better.

6. That we continue in our sins notwithstanding the very severe afflictions
which God has sent upon us to wean us from them is another consideration that
does heighten our guilt. Nay we many times commit our sin when Gods hand is
striking us, we little regard the discipline of Heaven; when his judgments are
upon us yet we will not learn Righteousness. There is a mark set upon Ahaz for
this, In the time of his distress did he yet trespass more against the Lord.
This is that King Ahaz, 2 Chronicles. 28.22. This was a most heinous impiety, and
that which very greatly increased his crimes.

7. Again, another thing which adds a weight to our guilt is this, when we
relapse frequently into those very sins which we have formerly confessed to
God, and begged his pardon for. When we do confess and sin again, and keep in
this black circle of the Devil. In this we do mock Almighty God, and may well
be ashamed to lift up our eyes to Heaven if we well consider it. In our
dealings with one another we esteem that man void of all ingenuity that begs
our pardon, that he has offended us, and yet holds on to do us the same
despites and injuries. How horribly disingenuous are we then when we daily put
affronts these upon God himself, when we do often confess but never forsake our
sins.

8. Another aggravation of our guilt is when we continue in those sins which we
have no temptation to commit, and might most easily avoid. Such are generally
the sins of the tongue; there is no natural desire that is gratified by
swearing, or by evil speaking, and slandering one another. These are indeed
most heinous offenses against Almighty God; and their guilt is the greater
because there is nothing of temptation to commit them, and they are most easily
avoided whatever the sinner may plead for himself. Certain it is a man may as
easily bless God as take his name in vain. To speak well of our neighbor is as
soon done as to speak amiss. A good word costs us no more pains than a bad one.
And what wretched sinners are we who choose to do amiss when it is as easy for
us to do well; and certainly so it is in many cases.

9. Another aggravation of our sin is when we have not only sinned our selves
but caused others to sin too. This brand was upon Jeroboam that he did not only
sin himself, but also caused Israel to sin. Certainly our own scores will be
great enough, we shall not need have the sins of others to account for besides.
It will well become us to consider of this when we search into our hearts and
lives; whether we have not by our counsel or example, by our neglect and
unfaithfulness caused others to go astray; who might have been preserved from
the error of their way had we been faithful to them in our reproofs and
exhortations.

10. Lastly, another degree of our sin is when it is come to an habit or
custom. And this does still make our sin the greater; for now our sin is grown
up to a full measure and to the highest stature and pitch, and then we may well
reckon our selves to be not only sinners; but workers of iniquity.

It is very advisable that we should consider of these Agrravations of our sins
in order to the more full humiliation of our Souls before God. It is very
needful that those things which do greatly increase our guilt should be
particularly confessed and lamented in the sight of God. Now it is very evident
that the particular abovenamed do very much heighten and increase our guilt.

Indeed every sinner, does transgress the Law of God, that Law which is holy,
just, and good, for sin is the Transgression of the Law. But then he that sins
against the clear dictates of his own Conscience also, contracts a double
guilt; he that sins after his solemn vows of obedience, adds treachery to his
other guilt; and he that sins after many mercies, adds ingratitude to his other
sins; every sin makes us obnoxious to Gods displeasure, but yet are there many
degrees in our sins which do greatly aggravate our fault, and introduce a new
and greater guilt upon us. And certainly to abound in sin under the greatest
means of grace; to continue in our folly when the rod of God lies heavy upon
us; to commit the sin which it is so very easy to avoid; to repeat our sin
when we have confessed and bewailed it, to sin and to cause others to sin also;
to contract habits and customs of evil doing; these are things which are by no
means to be forgotten in our search because they do import so much of guilt,
and so great a degree of wickedness.

But all that has been said is but relative to something else; we are not fit
to receive the Sacrament as soon as we have found out our sins. The Jews were
not only obliged to search for their Leaven at the Passover, but also to purge
it out. And their search was in order to their putting it away. They might not
leave it where they found it, but were obliged to put it from them; we must do
so by our sins too; and therefore we must now consider what we are obliged to
do in the next place.

CHAP. VI.
WHen we are gone thus far, and have found out our sins we must then put them
away by a true and hearty Repentance. Unless we do this we shall eat and drink
Damnation to our selves. Now because, though Repentance be very commonly
pretended to, yet we do often mistake our selves in it, and take that for it
which comes far short of it; therefore it is very necessary we should examine
our Repentance, and very carefully try whether it be such as is never to be
repented of. For as it is very common with men to think they have not sinned
when they have, so it is very common with men to think they have not sinned
when they have, so it is also as usual a thing with them to conceit that they
have repented when indeed they have not. For we are too apt to think Repentance
no more but a calling to God for mercy, or a general confession that we are
sinners, or some sudden purposes of amendment of Life, or at most the actual
abstaining from our sin. Therefore it will be worth our while that we examine
our Repentance, and that we may do by the following Rules.

1. He that Repents is greatly sorrowful for his sin. He is inwardly grieved
that he should offend God by his sins; and would rather choose any loss or
trouble than commit his sin again. His sorrow is very hearty and unfeigned; he
is grieved in earnest, and his grief is great according to the measure and
proportion of his sin and folly. He is vile and base in his own eyes, and is
greatly afflicted for his wickedness. Indeed the sincerity of his sorrow is not
altogether to be measured by his tears which he sheds: For though tears be
reputed the expression of our grief, yet are they but the expression of it:
Grief does many times break out this way; But yet a man may be greatly
forrowful when the greatness of his grief cannot be gathered from the multitude
of his tears. Some there are who do easily weep, a very trifling matter will
draw forth plenty of tears. But there are others who grieve more and yet weep
less. But then it is still an ill sign if when we have tears for every little
trouble, we have none for ou^ sins. We read of one Alexander Pheraeus that he
was ready to weep at the acting a Tragedy, Plutarch. Pelopidas.
and that he left the Stage that the Spectators might not behold his tears: But
then we also read of the same man that he shed the blood of many Thessalian
Nobles with dry cheeks. Such false tears had that Tyrant at his command.
Certainly we may well suspect our selves when we can find none at all for our
heinous offenses against God. For it may be reasonably thought, that if our
grief were hearty and pungent which we have for our sins, it would break out at
the same vent which it is wont to find upon all other occasions. Certain it is
however that the true Penitent is a very sorrowful man; and though his temper
may not give way to plenty of tears, yet his real grief is not the less. Though
he do not weep so plentifully, yet he grieves as heartily as he that does. He
does afflict himself for his sin, he judges and condemns himself, and feels as
much pain in his Soul, and as cordial a sorrow as he that weeps bitterly.

2. He that truly repents does confess his sins unto God. And this he must do
in order to his pardon, If we confess our sins he is faithful and just to
forgive us our sins, etc, 1 John 1.9. But then this confession alone does not
bring us nearer our pardon, we must confess them with shame and sorrow; we must
judge and condemn our selves; and after the most humble manner debase our
selves, and beg pardon from God. Our confession must be very humble and very
full. We must be particular in it, and not content our selves that we confess
our selves to be sinners in general, but we must confess our particular sins
unto God. We must confess all the sins we can find, all that we can remember:
And then for those which we cannot find, or do not remember, it will be needful
that we should pray also for the pardon of them as the Psalmist does, Cleanse
thou me from secret faults, Psalm. 19.12. And as we must confess our sins, so we
must also confess the degrees and the aggravations of them; for these do
greatly inhance our guilt and swell our sins into a very great measure. But all
this while we must be very greatly careful that our confession be the result of
our real sorrow and trouble of heart. God will not be put off with a parcel of
good words. If we do not abhor our sins it will not avail us that we do confess
them. God knows our sins already, nor is he pleased to hear us repeat them to
him unless we hate them, and be really pressed with the burden of them. It Is
the burdened sinner whom God has a respect unto: He that is full of his sorrow
for his sin, it is he that confesses his sin as he ought; such a man finds the
advantage of an humble confession of his sin unto God. For this gives a great
ease to his Soul, which would have been overcharged if he should have kept
silence. This the Psalmist tells us, When I kept silence, says he, my bones
waxed old, -- and my mosture is turned into the drought of summer. But then he
adds, I acknowledged my sin unto thee, and mine iniquity have I not hid. I
said, I will confess my transgressions unto the Lord; and thou forgavest the
iniquity of my sin. And then we find him greatly at ease and quiet, Psalm. 32.3,
4, 5, 6, 7.

3. He that truly repents does forsake his sins and lead a new life: He does
not only purpose but he really does that good which he did intend to do. He
does not lead such a life as he did before. He abstains from the sin which he
formerly loved and followed. Nor does he only abstain from it, but he does
abhor it, and so he does every sin whatever; and gives up himself to an
universal obedience to all the Laws of God. We have no reason to think we have
repented till we lead a new and an holy Life. It Is this which compleats our
Repentance, and nothing short of this can give us any assurance that we have
Repented, and that we are in the state of Grace. It is a vain thing to think
that we are the better for purposes of amendment when we do not amend. If we
purpose never so much to do well and yet continue in our evil doing we shall be
reputed amongst the workers of iniquity. Repentance imports a change both of
heart and life. It requires a new life and conversation, and where there is
this grace there is this change to be found. The Holy Scriptures annex our
pardon to our Repentance, but then they require such a Repentance as does
import no less than a new life and conversation. Thus we find in the Prophet
how the Repentance of a Sinner is expressed, If he turn from his sin, and do
that which is lawful and right; if the wicked restore the pledge, give again
that he had robbed, walk in the statutes of life without committing iniquity;
he shall surely live he shall not die, Ezekiel. 33.14, 15. Again, If the wicked
will turn from all his sins that he has committed, and keep all my statutes,
and do that which is lawful and right, he shall surely live and not die, Chap.
18. ver. 21. And when the sinner is called upon to repent we find it thus
expressed, Seek the Lord while he may be found, call ye upon him while he is
near; let the wicked forsake his way, and the unrighteous man his thoughts, and
let him return unto the Lord, Isa. 55.6, 7. By which it is evident that
Repentance implies a change of Life, and so indeed it does. That man that
resolves to do well and does not do it, does at once mock God and cheat his own
Soul.

4. He that truly repents, his Repentance does arise from his love to God, and
an hatred to his sins because they are an offense to God. This is the root from
whence Repentance does spring.

The love of God constrains the Sinner to Repentance; and his love to God it is
that makes his Repentance of the right kind and stamp. It is very possible that
a man may be greatly sorrowful upon the account of his sins, and that he may
make a particular confession of them to God, and when he has done that he may
forsake his sins too, and yet not have the grace of true Repentance all this
while. And that because this change does not arise from a love to God and an
hatred of his sin as it is an offense against God. A man may be very sorrowful
for his sins because they have brought a great misery upon him, and do besides
expose him to the justice of God. Such a man is sorrowful for the ill
consequence of his sin rather than for its obliquity and immorality. And
perhaps he forsakes his sin too and yet is no true Penitent. For he may leave
his sin for many reasons and yet not repent of it. A bare abstaining from sin
is no sufficient argument that he has repented of it. A man may forbear his
sin and abstain from it because he cannot follow it, or has not the liberty to
enjoy it any longer, and yet his mind remains unchanged still; or else perhaps
he exchanges one sin for another, and chooses a sin which he judges most
expedient. But the true Penitent abtains from his sin because he loves his God.
Nay, he does not only abstain from his sin but he hates it also.

The reason why he leaves his sin is because he is himself changed in his mind
and affections: He now hates what he loved before, and flies from that which
before he did pursue. He sees his folly as well as his misery, and leaves his
sin, not only because God is just, and will severely punish the wicked, but
because he is good and holy, and cannot endure to behold iniquity. He abstains
from his sin not only because it is forbidden fruit, but because it is contrary
to his nature. He that is not in the state of Grace may abstain from his sin as
a sick man does from salt meats (which yet he greatly loves) because his
Physician and his interest severely forbid him: But the true Penitent forbears
his sin because he finds in his Soul an antipathy against it; and not only
because it is forbidden.

Such a Repentance as this must we find in our Souls before we can be fit to
partake of these holy Mysteries. And well it will become us to be greatly
humbled for our sins, and to abhor them when we do commemorate the death of our
Lord and Savior. For he died for sin, and endured the shame and sorrow of the
Cross that he might no longer abide in us. And if we come with our sins to this
holy Table we do crucify our Lord afresh, we do trample upon his precious
blood, and count it a common and unholy thing.

5. To what has been said this must be added, that when by our sin we have not
only offended God but also injured and wronged our neighbor, we are strictly
and indispensably obliged to make him restitution, as well as to beg the
forgiveness of God. We can expect no pardon from God if we do not make amends
to our neighbor whom we have wronged. If the wicked restore the pledge, and
give again that he had robbed, etc, he shall surely live and not die, Ezekiel.
33.15. But then if he do not this (or sincerely resolve to do it as soon as he
is able to do it) he shall surely die and not live. And his partaking of this
holy Table shall be so far from saving him from the anger of God, that it will
increase his guilt and add to his sin. Let no man think that God will hear him
if he do not make his brother amends for the wrong he has done him. Herodot.
Clio.
We have a story in our Books of one Halyattes, that his Soldiers did set on
fire the Corn of the Milesians, and that the fire by the violence of the wind
caught hold of the Temple of Minerva and burnt it down. It happened sometime
after this that Halyattes falls sick, and sends to the Oracle to know what
would be the success of his disease; but the Messengers were told by the
Oracle, that they must not expect any answer till the Temple which they had
burnt were first repaired. Most certain it is that we shall have no return of
our prayers from Heaven, when we confess and beg the pardon of our sin, unless
we do first make restitution where we have wronged our brother. It cannot be
thought we have repented if we do not restore. There is no sacrifice will
expiate our crime if we do not also make restitution. Under the Law of Moses he
that had wronged his brother was obliged indeed to bring a sacrifice for his
atonement; but then at the same time he was obliged to make a full restitution
to his neighbor whom he had wronged; and to add also a fifth part to the
principal before he could be forgiven Levit. 6. He that wronged his neighbor
was by that Law sometimes liable to restore double, v. Maimon. Hal. Shevuoth,
c. 8.
Exodus 22.4.9. Sometimes times four and five fold, ver. 1. where the Trespasser
was convicted: But then where the offender became penitent, and confessed his
sin; v. L' empereur in Bava Kam. C. 7. S. 1.
yet in this case he was obliged to make restitution, to add a fifth part, v.
Jomd. c. 8. Mishn. 9. Shulchan. Aruch. H. Jom. Kippu.
and to bring his offering, Numb. 5.7. His Repentance, nor his offering would
not serve his turn unless he also made amends to his neighbor whom he had
wronged. Nay the day of expiation (as the Jews teach us) would not avail to
take away the guilt which we contracted by doing wrong to our brother.

And we must remember that we are obliged to make restitution not only where we
have done an open and forcible injury: As the robber and thief, and violent
oppressor are bound to restore what they have wronged their brother of by their
violent injustice. But we are also obliged to restore what we have by any means
unjustly got the possession of. And there are more ways than one by which we
may become guilty of injustice. He that overreaches, and out-wits his brother
in a bargain, he that in his trading deals fraudulently and insincerely, he
that hides and conceals from his neighbor his just rights and dues, such men
as these are obliged to make restitution as well as open the robber and the
thief. There are indeed very many things which the Laws of the Land do not take
notice of, which yet we are obliged to in the Court of Conscience. And we are
before we do receive this Sacrament, very severely to examine our own
Consciences; Whether in our dealings with men we have done as we would be done
by, and have not detained and withheld our neighbors due from him. Indeed we
are come to that pass that we are not afraid of doing an unjust action if we
can but do it cautelously and slily. Nay we are ready to rejoice when we have
cunningly circumvented our brother, and men look upon it as but a little fault,
if any at all, when they do craftily circumvent even him that attends upon holy
things. But certain it is, whoever does wrong his brother and him that
Ministers at Gods Altar, he deceives himself most, and must never look for
pardon from God till he have repented of his sin and made restitution for the
wrong he has done.

And what has been said hitherto of the necessity of making restitution must
not only be understood of the wrong we have done to our neighbor as to his
goods and estate, but of all other wrongs whatsoever. And particularly of that
wrong we have done to his name and credit. We ought to judge the best of all
men, and to make the most charitable construction of all the actions of our
neighbor: And therefore if we have done otherwise we are obliged to
Repentance, and to restitution for the wrong which we have done. If we have
openly slandered our brother, or more closely and slily undermined his credit
and good name, we are obliged in this case to make as far as we are able a
reparation. That is, we are obliged to unsay what we have said, and by our
words do him honor as we have endeavored before to do him a discredit. In a
word, we are bound to make him such an amends as we are able, or such as may
satisfy him to whom we have done the wrong. And when we have done this we must
humble our selves greatly in the sight of God for this sin, and be very careful
that we sin no more.

Thus must we cleanse and purge our Souls before we dare to come to this holy
Table. We must purge out our old leaven that we may be a new lump: Otherwise we
shall meet with death there where we might else have found Life. And we ought
therefore to be very careful and solicitous, lest we should by our remisness
and hypocrisy expose our selves to the greatest curse. As we love our Souls
then we must not only find out our sin, but we must put it away also; and
before we presume to eat of this Bread and drink of this Cup, we must find in
our Souls such a repentance as is never to be repented of.

CHAP. VII.
BUT as we must come to this Sacrament with a sincere and hearty Repentance for
our past sins, so we must also come with full purposes and resolutions of
Amendment of Life for the time to come. Now because our Resolution like our
Repentance, is many times weak and insignificant, it will therefore well become
us to examine these purposes, and resolutions of newness of life, which we so
frequently pretend, when we make our approaches to this holy Table. For it is
very evident that there are very many men that give good words, and make fair
promises of Amendment of Life, upon the bed of sickness, or at the approach of
this Sacrament, who yet are so far from making their words good, that they do
sometimes run into a greater excess of folly and wickedness than they were
guilty of before. We shall therefore do well to try our purposes and
resolutions, and narrowly to examine them whether they be such as are like to
hold or not, and to that purpose we may consider the following Severals.

1. We have little reason to give credit to rash and sudden purposes of
Amendment of Life. The sinner does now and then resolve vehemently against his
sin; but it is when he has newly surfeited upon his folly, and defiled himself
with his sin; then indeed he is sick of it for a while, and resolves to lay it
aside. Or perhaps some great and amazing affliction falls upon him, and this
brings his sin to remembrance, and he suddenly resolves he will put away his
sin and lead a new life; but when this tempest of sorrow is over, and his
appetite returns anew upon him, he does easily embrace his folly again, and is
as much the child of Satan as he was before. Such a man is troubled at the
mischief which his folly has betrayed him to, and is sick of his sin for a
while because he has tasted of the bitterness which did attend it. But when he
has forgotten the trouble and the pain his sin has put him to, then he
returns to it again. There are those in the world that do frequently resolve
against their sins, and yet do as constantly commit those very sins which they
so passionately resolve against; and that because it was not their sins which
gave them so much trouble but the evil effects and consequents which did follow
upon them. For when their sin courts them and smiles upon them, when it follows
them officiously, and pleads for a reconcilement they readily yield themselves
up to their slavery again.

2. We have little reason to trust to that resolution which we have formerly
found so very ineffectual. If we find that we have often resolved as much as
now we do against our sins, and yet that for all that when the solemnity has
been over we have forfeited our good promises, we have very little reason to
trust our selves. That man who has been often a partaker of this Sacrament,
and has as often made his resolves to become better, and as often broken them,
has no reason to believe himself, nor to communicate again till he find a
change in himself. For it is to be suspected that such a man's resolutions of
Amendment are but formal and of course; and that he is only overawed with the
greatness of the approaching Solemnity, and not truly out of love with his sins
which he pretends at this time a defiance to. The best evidence of the
sincerity of our Resolutions is this that we do as we have resolved: Unless we
do this there can be nothing more insignificant than our Resolutions are. And
sure it is in every thing else we judge thus. Not he that resolves but he that
fights courageously gets the victory. Our resolving does not alone set forward
any work, it is the putting our Resolutions into practice which does avail us.

3. He that resolves as he ought to do must resolve not only upon the end but
also upon the means which lead to it. We are forward to resolve for Heaven at
large, but consider not of the way and means which will bring us thither. We
are generally willing to be happy but yet we do readily excuse our selves from
the difficulties and severities of an holy life. He that resolves to be
temperate must also resolve to avoid his evil Company that drew him to that
excess, to pass by the door where he is wont to be drawn in. He that resolves
to be chaste must also resolve to decline the house of a whorish Woman, and to
set a watch upon himself that he be not ensnared with her enticements. He that
resolves against his sin must resolve also against every thing which leads him
to it; and he will show himself sincere in his Resolutions by his use of such
means as would gain his end. There is nothing more ridiculous than our
Resolution if we resolve upon the end, and not upon the means also which lead
unto it. We think so in other things; we do not think we shall ever be rich by
a resolving only to be so. We must be provident and frugal as well as resolute
before we can attain our end. It Is not Resolution makes a man learned unless he
add endeavors to his Resolution. We may resolve what we will, but we shall be
never the nearer to our end unless we use the means as well as resolve upon the
end. We never heard of any man that gained his end by resolving upon it, unless
he used means for the accomplishing his intention. Resolution does us no good
when it is alone. It sets us forward greatly when we use proper means, but
unless we do that we are not at all advanced by it.

4. He that resolves as he should do places before his eyes the difficulties
and inconveniences which he is like to meet with in his way. Like a wise
builder he does forecast his charge before he begin his work; or like a prudent
Commander he does well consider his number, and strength before he fall upon
the army of his adversaries, Luke 14.28. He that resolves to part with his sin
must resolve to be for ever deaf to its allurements for the time to come, to
subdue all his affections to it, to bid it an eternal farewell. And he may do
well to think beforehand what difficulties and labors this will expose him
to. He will do well to think that he cannot do it unless he be always upon his
watch, and denying the cravings of the sensual life. He must be content to
cross his own impetuous desires, to displease his companions and familiars, to
be houted and laughed at as fool and coward; He must resolve to persevere in an
holy life although he displease his greatest friends, although he lose his
worldly goods, aye and his life also. He that resolves as he should do, must
set before his own eyes all the difficulties which he is to pass through.
Unless he do this it is not to be thought but he will be unprovided for his
Christian warfare. And he must do this after the most lively manner that can
be, as if he were just ready to be put upon the trial. Let him conceive that he
may presently be put to it whether he will displease God or forfeit his worldly
ease and wealth: Whether he will suffer or sin; whether he will choose to lose
his life or Gods favor. He ought not to look upon these things at a great
distance, but to suppose them near at hand and ready to be offered to him. This
he must do if he will resolve as he ought, and so as his purposes may hold. We
resolve rashly and at ventures, and that is the reason that our Resolution
comes to no good effect. We do as the Kinsman of Naomi did who when he was
asked, Whether he would redeem the land of Elimelech? presently says, I will
redeem it; but then when he is told that he must also buy it of Ruth; he
answers that he cannot redeem it, Ruth. 4. We do just so, we do readily resolve
for Heaven very often, but yet when we see what it is like to cost us we do as
frequently revoke our word. The man in the Gospel would needs know of our
Savior what he should do that he might have eternal Life: But when he
understands what it will cost him he goes away sorrowful, Matthew. 19. We do very
easily resolve to be happy, but we are not willing to take pains to attain our
desires. We are very willing to have our hire but not willing to bear the heat
and burden of the day. He that resolves to become a new man must arm himself
with the whole armor of God: He must resolve to be hardy and courageous
against all the shocks and encounters he is like to meet with in this present
evil World. He may expect to meet with many troubles in his way, and therefore
must resolve very steadfastly not to alter his mind whatever rubs or obstacles
shall lie in his way.

5. He that resolves as he ought to do does earnestly implore the grace and
assistance of Almighty God. He is very distrustful of himself, and therefore
does betake himself to the Divine aid and help. He knows that he stands in need
of Gods aid, and that without him he can do nothing as he ought to do. He does
not rely upon his own strength and abilities, but then he thinks himself only
safe when he flies to God for help in the time of need. This is that upon which
he does alone rest and rely. He easily foresees many storms arising upon him,
he can easily discern that his strength is small, and that his enemies are
subtle and strong; and therefore he has recourse to him who is infinitely wise
and strong. He knows not how to fight against his subtle and his potent
enemies, but yet he flies to him that can teach his hands to war, and his
fingers to fight. He promises nothing from himself but all things from God: He
knows not how he shall bear a severe persecution, and a fiery trial, but yet he
knows in whom he has believed, and dares trust him who is always able to
support him under the greatest trouble, or deliver him from it. And therefore
he does not greatly disquiet himself how he shall be able to bear the sorrows
which he is like to meet with, but puts his sole trust in him who can do more
than he is able to think. He well remembers that he goes forth in Gods
strength, and that God who does enable him to do his will, is able to give him
strength to suffer it also. And therefore his eye and his heart is always
lifted up to Heaven, and he is full of hope because the Lord is with him. He
knows God will not fail him of his aid, and in this confidence it is that he
resolves. We are not like to succeed when we leave God out. We may project
indeed but it is God who does dispose and succeed our endeavors. We may
resolve what we will, but yet shall need the aid of Heaven to bring our
purposes to effect. He that would bring his thoughts to pass, must humbly
implore the Grace of God; without him nothing is wise, nothing strong. We
therefore fall because we trust to our own strength, we then do foolishly when
we trust to our own wisdom; we then miscarry when we want Gods grace and
assistance. He resolves well that resolves in the Lord, and that does humbly
address himself to him for strength. For as without his leave we could never
have been, so it is most certain that without his grace and help we are not
able to think a good thought, much less are we able to do any which is good and
acceptable in his sight.

CHAP. VIII.
BUt before we come to this Holy Sacrament we must also be endued with a true
and a lively Faith. And we must examine carefully whether or not our Faith be
unfeigned and without hypocrisy. Which we have the greater reason to do,
because we shall find, even amongst the professors of Christianity, a very
false notion of Faith. For as it is sometimes explained it is so far from
making us better than we were before, and more fit to approach to God, that it
does indeed either not at all advance us in a divine and holy life, or else
obstruct and retard us. And for our further help in this we may try our Faith
by the following Rules.

1. It is not enough to denominate us Believers, that we do strongly believe
that our sins are pardoned, and our persons justified in the sight of God. For
as there may be a true Faith where there is not this belief, so there may be
such a strong belief as this where there is no Faith that is saving. This
belief, if it be well-grounded does presuppose a true Faith, and therefore
cannot be that Faith it self. There are those that are confident of Gods favor
that are yet none of his friends. And if this belief of our good condition be
not upon good grounds it is a foolish fancy, not an unfeigned Faith. We do
very naturally love our selves, and are very prone to think our selves the
favorites of Heaven when we are indeed the heirs of Hell. We easily grow big
with an overweening opinion of our own good estate. But how well soever we
believe of our selves, if we do not all this while make a right judgment, we
have not a Faith of the right stamp.

2. We may not say we have a saving Faith, because we do confidently expect the
pardon of our sins from our Lord Jesus Christ. It is not our bare casting our
selves upon Christ for pardon that will entitle us to a true Faith. If all that
were required of us were this, that we should sit still, and without any more
to do rely upon Christ for pardon and for life, for righteousness and eternal
glory, certainly would be no very hard thing to believe; and the world would
not be so so full of unbelievers as now it is. Who would not be saved from the
wrath to come! Who would not be glad to have his sins forgiven him! Christ was
never yet unwelcome to any man upon this score. And if this were Faith, Christ
may always find great store of Faith upon Earth. The vilest sinner who loves
his folly is yet willing to have it pardoned, and that by Christ also. The
Adulterer and the Drunkard love their sin indeed but not the guilt and penalty.
None are so fond of Hell but they will readily that Christ should redeem them
from it. Nor do they desire to betake themselves to any other Savior to redeem
them from that horror and those pains. The blood of Jesus they do readily fly
to for Sanctuary against the destroyer. However men are fond of their sin, yet
sure no man is fond of the sting and plague which it leaves behind it. Such a
recumbency and relying upon Christ as this is not enough to show that we have
saving Faith. We shall infinitely deceive our selves if we have no other Faith
but this. The way to Heaven were very easy if such a Faith as this would bring
us thither. Our sins would be no obstacle to us if this were all that were
required. Our greatest sins and such a Faith as this might easily consist with
each other. We shall not need much labor to persuade men to believe if this
were all that is meant by it. We are very willing to be saved at so cheap a
rate. We are ready enough to receive the pardon which the Gospel brings us the
tidings of. We are content that Jesus should save us from our sins, that is,
from the punishment and guilt of them. And we are very forward to believe this
was the main, if not the only end of his coming into the World.

3. Nor will the bare assent to the history of the Gospel be enough to entitle
us to a saving Faith. We may believe the truth of what we there find and yet be
very far from the Kingdom of God. Indeed unless we do this we cannot have a
saving Faith; but it is not our bare believing all this which is a sufficient
argument of such a Faith. For saving Faith is that which implys more than the
assent of the mind to the truth of that which is revealed and made known. For
we are not justified by this assent of our understanding. There are great
arguments to evict the truth of Christianity; so great and so powerful that if
we apprehend them aright, we cannot but assent to the truth of what they do
infer, and it is not in our power to resist so great an evidence. For we cannot
believe what we please, but must needs assent to what is evident to our
understanding. And to do this is so far from being a saving Faith that it may
belong to those who are not in a state of Salvation. There have been many that
have believed the History of the Gospel, and made profession of this belief
also, who yet have turned Apostates. It is very possible that a man's reason
may be satisfied in the truth of Christianity, and yet still he may remain in a
very dangerous estate as to his own Salvation; we find that many believed in
the name of Christ, when they saw the miracles which he did. That is, they were
convinced by the works which Jesus did, that he came from God, and consequently
must needs believe what he said to be true. But this Faith in the name of Jesus
does not seem to be such as our Savior thought sufficient; for it is presently
added, That Jesus did not commit himself unto them, because he knew all men,
Joh. 2.23, 24. Our Savior would not trust them who yet believed on his name,
when they saw the Miracles which he did. And we read of others who are said to
believe on him; who for all that are called by our Savior the Children of the
Devil, Joh. 8.30, 31, 44. We may see great reason to believe the truth of the
Gospel (the belief of which we cannot resist) and yet not be endued with a
Faith that is saving, if we go no farther.

Indeed the Scripture sometimes speaks as if the assent to the articles of
Christianity were sufficient to our Salvation: If thou shall confess with thy
mouth the Lord Jesus, and shall believe in thine heart that God has raised him
from the dead, thou shall be saved. For with the heart man believes unto
righteousness, and with the mouth confession is made unto Salvation, Romans 10.9,
10. Again, Whosoever believes that Jesus is the Christ, is born of God, 1 John
5.1. And again, Hereby know ye the Spirit of God, every spirit that confesses
that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh, is of God, Chap. 4. ver. 2. Again, No
man can say that Jesus is the Lord but by the Holy Ghost, 1 Cor. 12.3. Which
expressions seem to intimate that there is no more required to make our Faith
saving but this that we do heartily believe, and also profess the articles of
the Christian Religion.

But certain it is (however we misunderstand our selves, and mistake the
meaning of these places) such a Faith as this (though it be enough to leave us
without excuse) will not save our Souls.

And therefore as to the words of Scripture which are brought to this purpose,
there are these two things to be considered.

First, the time in which these words were spoken, and that was in the early
days of Christianity, when there was danger in professing the Religion of
Christ. In the beginning of Christian Religion, he that made a profession of it
exposed himself to the fury of Jew and Gentile. The Jews had agreed (while
Jesus was alive) that if any man did confess that he was Christ he should be
put out of the Synagogue. And the man that was restored to his sight we find
cast out by the Jews for pleading that Jesus must needs be from God, Joh. 9.22,
34. And we read afterward how very furiously the Jews did persecute them who
did profess the Faith of Christ. And they who did profess Christ among the
Gentiles, were not only derided for the sake of their crucified Savior, but
also persecuted for his names sake. And when they were so it was no easy thing
to profess Christianity. Indeed as things are now we do very easily profess our
Religion; It Is that which agrees well with the Laws of the Country, and the
custom of the place we live in. It puts us now to no expense to profess Jesus
to be the Christ. We can do it without the fear of the Jew, or any other. There
is no man suffers among us because he is a Christian. We may profess that Jesus
is risen from the dead, and that he is the Christ without any molestation. And
therefore this profession is no argument now that we have a saving Faith. But
were it now with us as it was with the first Christians, it would be indeed an
argument of our sincerity. If it would cost us our lives or estates to confess
the Faith of Christ, then we might hope well of our selves if we retained our
confidence unto the end. This would argue us to be the faithful and genuine
followers of our Lord. It is an easy thing to profess the Faith when we lose
nothing by this profession: But we cannot be his Disciples till we do prefer
him before our Houses and Lands, and our Life it self. This was that which the
first Martyrs or Witnesses of the Resurrection did. They durst own Jesus to be
the Christ though they paid their blood, and sacrificed their lives for him. No
terrors, or torments could make them deny the Lord that bought them. The Faith
of the Gospel was dearer to them than all the best things of this present life.
They that did this were indeed born of God. And their patient sufferings for
Christ were an evident argument of the sincerity of their Faith.

Secondly, it is very certain (and this follows from what was said before) that
the confessing of Christ, the saying that he is the Lord, the believing that
Jesus is the Christ, and confessing that he is come in the flesh, do imply a
life agreeable to such a profession, 1 John 5: 4, 5. If the belief of these
things have an influence upon our lives, if it regulate and form them to a due
and proportionable obedience, then indeed we are born of God and shall be
saved. If we believe that Christ is risen, and do (which such a belief should
teach us to do) also rise with him to newness of life: If we believe Jesus to
be the Christ, and accordingly submit to him in all his offices; if we call him
Lord, and then do whatsoever he commands; then indeed we are Gods Children, and
shall be saved. It is very evident that no less than this can be meant by those
expressions, which are before named; we cannot imagine that it is enough to
call him Lord though we obey him not. To believe that he rose from the dead
when we lie in the grave of our sin and filthiness. Certainly these expressions
import the belief and profession of these truths, and a life answerable to such
a belief. Were it not so it would be a most easy thing to be a Christian, and
our Faith were very reconcilable with our evil lives. And therefore I add,

4. A true and saving Faith is productive of a good life. We must not only
believe that what God has revealed is true, but we must consent to it, and
yield our selves obedient. The Gospel may be looked upon either as an History
of things that were done and said; or as a tendry and offer of mercy upon terms
and conditions which are therein specified and propounded. And accordingly he
that believes to Salvation does not only assent to what is therein revealed and
made known, but also consent to embrace the mercy that is there offered upon
those terms upon which it is propounded. For a man may believe what is revealed
to be true and to have come from God, and yet refuse to give up himself to the
obedience of those precepts and rules which are there enjoined him in order to
his eternal Salvation. The holy Scriptures require of us such a belief as is
accompanied with obedience. And when it commands us the belief of the Gospel,
it requires that we should show by our actions that we do believe it. That is,
that we should so behave our selves as we do in other things which we do
believe, and how we do in other things it is easy to observe. If men do upon
rational grounds believe that they may attain their ends, be it riches or
honor, etc. by using such or such a method and course, they do diligently set
themselves to work that they may accomplish their designs. Nay a very small
assurance will set men to work in these cases. The Merchant out of the
uncertain hope of wealth will venture himself, and what he has, upon a rough
and a doubtful Sea. The Ambitious man of Wars, for the hope of a victory and a
triumph, will adventure his life upon the chance of battle. The Husbandman that
believes he shall fill his Barns and Coffers by his labor, and pains, will
rise up early, and sit up late, and eat the bread of carefulness. He will spare
nor cost nor pains; he will not be dismayed with the burden of the Summers
heat, nor the keenness of the Winters cold; he will do and he will suffer, no
pains or care are thought too much that he may obtain his end. Men do this when
they have no assurance of success, and when the thing which they aim at is not
worth their while. Yet these pains they take because they believe their success
is possible, and that their labor may not be lost. If men did believe the
Gospel at this rate what would they not do that they might lay hold of eternal
life? Here Is a sure word of promise, and here is a great promise too; here is all
the encouragement that can be imagined; here is eternal life before us, that
unspeakable gift; and the greatest assurance of it upon the terms offered; God
himself who cannot lie or repent, has promised; if we did believe this as much
as we do other things (which we have not such reason to believe) we should not be
idle and lazy, but we should give all diligence, we should always abound in the
work of the Lord, knowing that our labor would not be in vain in the Lord.
Certainly thus it would be with us if our Faith were as it should be, if it
were genuine and of the right stamp. But if we sit still and be unconcerned in
the great affair of our Souls; if we be lazy, and without devotion, we may
indeed boast of a Faith, but it is a dead Faith; and we may please our selves
with a good opinion of our estate, but sure it is we are not risen with Christ,
but we are dead in our trespasses and sins.

Then we do indeed savingly believe the Gospel when this belief of it begets in
us a good life. Unless it have this effect upon us we are infidels and
unbelievers. For we cannot think our selves better then the Heathens for our
Faith, if our works be not better than theirs. If we know these things and do
not do them we are worse than they who know them not. He believes as he should
do that lives as he does believe. The Gospel tells us that without holiness no
man shall see God, Heb. 12.14. Who can imagine that the man believes this, who
does confidently expect to go to Heaven, and yet takes no care to p^^ge and
cleanse his heart. He that believes it as he ought endeavors to be holy as God
is holy. Again, the Gospel tells us that we must not swear at all, Matthew. 5.34.
Nay more than that, that we shall give an account at the day of judgment for
every idle word we speak, Matthew. 12.36. Now certain it is that there are many
who swear in their ordinary conversation, and others also who forswear
themselves, and whose mouths are full of cursing and bitterness. And who can
think that such men as these are, do believe the Gospel as they should do? He
believes aright who does practice those precepts which he professes the belief
of. He that does not that is an unbeliever. He may profess that he knows God
but in works he denies him, Tit. 1.16. and they that do so the Apostle reckons
among the unbelieving, ver. 15. Our Savior tells us that he that believes on
the Son, has everlasting life, i. e. he that obeys the Son; (...).
for he presently adds he that believes not the Son, or he that obeys not
the Son (as those words may well be rendered) shall not see life, Joh. 3.36. And
when the Apostle tells us that God swear to some that they should not enter
into his rest, he adds that it was to them who believed not; so we render the
words, but they might be rendered, to them who obeyed not. (...).
And then he presently infers, we see that they could not enter in because of
unbelief, Heb. 3.18, 19.

To believe on the name of Christ is to receive him, Joh. 1.12. But if we
receive him, as we should, we must receive him and acknowledge him in all his
Offices, as our Prophet, Priest and King. That is, we must believe the truth of
his Doctrine as he is our great Prophet, and that Teacher who came from God;
and then we must obey his Precepts as he is our Lord and our King; as well as
expect pardon from him as he is our Priest; and our Atonement. We must receive
him as he is offered to us in the Gospel, and not only confidently expect our
pardon from him; but we must receive him as God has sent him, and God has
sent him to bless you in turning away every one of you from his iniquities,
Act. 3.26. Now that it is such a Faith in Christ, as I have been speaking of,
which the Scriptures require of us in order to our eternal Salvation, will
appear.

1. If we consider the great end of the manifestation of Jesus Christ, or the
great purpose for which he was sent into the World. Now we must not think that
Christ came into the world, and did and suffered those great things which we
read of him, only to procure our pardon and indemnity; we must not think that
the only end of all this was that we might be delivered from the evil effects
and bad consequents of our sins; he would be certainly a welcome Savior to the
worst of mankind upon this score. For provided we may enjoy our sins, we are
content that he should suffer for them. We are very willing that he should bear
the blame, provided we may but have the liberty to commit the fault. Though we
love our sins well yet are we not fond of the sorrows which they bring with
them. We are willing enough that Christ should pay our scores; and well pleased
to live in our sins, and take it kindly that Christ would die for them. But
certain it is that Christ appeared and suffered for us too that he might
deliver us from the power and dominion as well as from the guilt of our sins.
He did not die for sin that we might live in it. He never came to discharge us
from our duty; we think unworthily of our Savior, and of our Religion if we
think thus. He came to plant the divine life in our hearts, to make us better
and more like unto God. Let the holy Scriptures speak in this matter. His name
is called Jesus, because he should save his people from their sins, Matthew.
1.21. It is ridiculous to say that by sins is meant no more than the punishment
of them. Nor can we think that Christ came into the world for no other end. He
would then have taken away the effect and left the cause remaining: This would
be to remove the less evil and to let the greater continue; as if a Physician
should only project how to remove or abate the symptom, and take no care to
suppress the disease, and remove the morbifick matter which is the cause of it.
Certainly we think meanly of our Saviors design if we think this was all his
business in the World. He came to save us from our sins, and they are a greater
evil sure than the effects of them. This is a nobler conquest than to deliver
us from death. And this sure was the great purpose of our blessed Savior. When
God promised the Messiah, no less blessing was contained in that promise than
this, that we might serve him without fear in holiness and righteousness before
him all the days of our Life, Luke 1.74, 75. The Apostle certainly understood
the great end for which Christ appeared: He tells us that for this purpose the
Son of God was manifested that he might destroy the works of the Devil, 1 John
3.8. And that this was one great end why our Lord laid down his life, no man
can deny that gives any credit to the Holy Scriptures. There we are told that
he gave himself for us, that he might redeem us from all iniquity, and purify
unto himself a peculiar people zealous of good works, Tit. 2.14. Again it is
said that, he gave himself, for our sins, that he might deliver us from this
present evil World, Gal. 1.4. And, that he dyed for all, that they which live
should not henceforth live unto themselves, but unto him which dyed for them,
and rose again, 2 Cor. 5.15. He dyed for his Church indeed, but then he gave
himself for it; that he might sanctify and cleanse it with the washing of
water, by the word, that he might present it to himself a glorious Church, not
having spot or wrinkle, or any such thing, but that it should be Holy, and
without blemish, Ephesians. 5.25, 26, 27. The same Apostle tells his Colossians that
Christ has reconciled them, in the body of his flesh through death, to present
them holy and unblamable, and unreprovable in his sight, Col. 1.21, 22. Besides
what has been said, we are from the death of Christ exhorted to an Holy Life,
1 Pet. 4.1, 2. Romans 6.3, 4. 1 Cor. 5.7, 8. Which certainly we could not so
effectually have been, had our Savior only dyed for our Indemnity, and to
procure our pardon. But since he dyed for sin, that we might not live in it,
well may we from his death be exhorted to an Holy Life and Conversation. Which
if we do not lead, we do then frustrate and make void the great end and purpose
for which our Lord was sent into the world. Now this makes it evident, that
where there is a saving Faith in Christ it is accompanied with an Holy Life:
And that we do but pretend to be Believers of the Gospel, if we do not obey its
Precepts, and perform those Conditions which it does require at our hands. For
we then do believe the Gospel, when we believe all the parts of it. Now certain
it is that the Gospel does not only bring us the tidings of pardon, but it
makes known the conditions upon which this Grace and Favor is offered. And it
will avail us nothing that we accept the pardon, if we do refuse the condition
upon which it is offered unto us; for this is but to believe the Gospel in
part, and to be but almost Christians. The Gospel does not only contain an
History of what was said and done, and suffered by our Lord; but also promises,
precepts, and threats; and he does fully believe this Gospel, who not only
believes the truth of what is there related, but obeys its Precepts, submits to
the condition of its promises, and reveres its threats. We do easily believe
that Christ dyed for our sins, but this is but part of what the Gospel tells
us: We must also believe that therefore we are not to live in them: And that he
did not only dye to redeem us from wrath but from our vain Conversations also.
We believe that Christ is our Atonement: It Is well, but then we must believe
that he is our Lawgiver, and our Lord; and must own him for our King, as well
as for our Priest. And if we believe that he dyed for this end, that he might
be our propitiation, and our ransom, we must also believe that to this end
Christ both dyed, and rose, and revived, that he might be Lord both of the dead
and living, Romans 14.9. And certainly if we think it an act of Faith to
acknowledge him for our Priest, and consequently to rest upon him for our
Salvation; we must needs think it an act of Faith to acknowledge him for our
King and Lord, and consequently to obey his commands. And unless we do obey him
we do but mock him when we call him Lord: Why call ye me Lord, Lord, and do not
the things which (...) say? Luke 6.46. If Christ be our Redeemer he is our Lord
too; and if he came to procure our pardon, he also came to amend our hearts and
lives for the time to come. And methinks the words of St. Peter are very plain,
and yet very Emphatical also to the purpose in hand: He tells the Jews that God
had exalted Jesus with his right hand, and for what end he had exalted him, he
adds in the next words, to be a Prince and a Savior, for to give Repentance to
Israel, and forgiveness of sins, Act. 5.31. So that if we believe him to be our
Savior, yet we must believe him to be our Prince, and when we hope for
forgiveness of sins, we must be first endued with repentance in order to it.
Our Savior he is, but then he is our Lord first. He is the Author of Eternal
Salvation; but to whom is he so? it is to them that obey him, Heb. 5.9. He came
to save sinners; it is true, but he came to save them from their sins. They must
be divorced from their sins, or else may not expect to be saved. He was not
obedient that we might have leave to rebel; he did not suffer for sin, that we
might live in it without control. He did not do his Fathers will that we might
do our own. He did not come only to dispossess the Devil out of Temples and
Oracles, or the bodies of men, but to drive him also out of men's hearts and
lives. He came to set us at liberty from our sins, and from the evil effects of
them. And we may not think we have gained the end of our Saviors being
manifested, till we are set free from the slavery of our sins. And that Faith
which lets us spare our sins, and suffers us to live in a contradiction to the
commands of Christ, will never save our Souls.

2. This will farther appear to be a great Truth, that a true and saving Faith
is productive of a good life, and that the Gospel does not require a less Faith
than this, if we do consider the Faith of Abraham, who is the Father of the
faithful: His Faith is much spoken of in the New Testament, and seems to be set
there as the pattern of our Faith. And therefore it will be worth our while to
consider what kind of Faith that is, which the Holy Scriptures take so great
notice of Abraham for. Now there are two things very remarkable in this Faith
of Abraham.

1. That he did believe that God would make good his promise which he had made
to him. And this he did firmly believe notwithstanding the great unlikelihood
of the thing promised, had he consulted with flesh and blood. He had a great
assurance that God would make his word good unto him, though it seemed to
contradict the ordinary course of nature, and the common reasonings of Mankind.
He knew not how the thing could come to pass, but yet he judged him faithful
and able to do it, who had made the promise to him. 'Being not weak in faith he
considered not his own body now dead, when hs was about an hundred years old,
neither yet the deadness of Sarahs Womb: He staggered not at the promise of God
through unbelief; but was strong in faith, giving glory to God; and being fully
persuaded that what he had promised, he was able also to perform, Romans 4.19,
20, 11. Thus did Abraham against hope, believe in hope, v. 18. He could have no
natural hopes that this promise should be verified, but yet he believed it
would because God had made the promise; upon this it is that he rests and stays
himself. He does not dispute either Gods Veracity or Power. Now then our Faith
is like that of Abraham, when we do believe, what God has revealed and
promised, though the thing revealed should in it self seem very mysterious and
strange to our reason, and the thing promised very unlikely in it self to come
to pass. We ought to believe that which God says; for his revealing of it
makes it evidently credible, though the thing it self be not in it self
evidently true. We have sufficient reason to believe, when yet this reason does
not stand upon the evidence of the thing, but upon the veracity of him who
makes it known to us. Then we do believe as Abraham did, when we acquiesce in
Gods Veracity and Power. He that has a true Faith does believe what God has
revealed, and doubts not but God will make his promise good. He does entirely
trust in God in whom he has believed: And he will neither reject an Article of
Faith, because his reason cannot comprehend it, nor yet will he distrust Gods
All Sufficiency and Veracity when he is in straits and difficulties. He that
believes as he should when trouble comes, is not dismayed, for his heart is
fixed trusting in the Lord. He well knows that God is faithful, and therefore
he quiets himself when the greatest storms arise.

2. Abraham did yield himself obedient to Gods commands also, how cross soever
they were to flesh and blood. And his doing that was an act of that Faith,
which he is celebrated for in the Holy Scriptures. When God commands him to
leave his Country, his kindred and his Fathers house, Genesis 12.1. He readily
departs, ver. 4. And obeys God who had commanded him though the thing it self
were so very difficult. For it is no easy thing at such an age to leave ones
Country, our kindred and fathers house, and go to a land which we know not of.
But this Abraham did, and it was an act of his Faith also. By faith Abraham,
when he was called to go out into a place which he should after receive for an
inheritance, obeyed; and he went out not knowing whither he went, Heb. 11.8.
Again, when God had given him a Son, a Son of all his hopes, and of his old
age, a Son whom he loved, and his only Son too, a Son of the promise, and of
the free Woman: yet when God who gave him requires him of him, he is not only
willing to part with him, but with his own hands to sacrifice him where God
appoints him, Genesis 22. And this was an act of his Faith also, for so we read:
By faith Abraham when he was tried, offered up Isaac; and he that received the
promises, offered up his only begotten Son; of whom it was said, that in Isaac
shall thy seed be called, Heb. 11.17, 18. Such a Faith had this Father of the
Faithful; and such a Faith as this must we have also if we would be the
Children of Abraham. He has the Faith of Abraham, and he only that does his
works. If our Faith be saving we shall yield our selves obedient to all the
Laws of God. Nothing will be so dear to us as the words of Gods mouth: We shall
part with every thing quietly which God commands away from us. We shall obey
his Precepts as well as believe his promises, if our Faith be of the right
stamp. We shall be at Gods dispose if we be such Believers as we ought to be.
And our great care will be this that we resign up our will to the will of God.
We do but pretend to Faith if we be void of good works. And then we may only be
thought to be the Children of Abraham when we do his works. Abraham showed his
faith by his works, and so must we do also. For as the body without the spirit
is dead, so faith without works is dead also, Jam. 2.26.

3. It will farther appear that a saving Faith is productive of a good life if
we do but diligently consider what great things the Holy Scriptures speak of
Faith. For it is greatly magnified in the holy writ, and such things are said
of it as do greatly advance it above that lazy and ineffectual faith which we
please our selves with. Very many and very excellent things are said to have
been done by Faith, Heb. 11. This made the Sacrifice of Abel more excellent in
Gods sight than that of Cain. 'Twas by Faith that Enoch pleased God, and was
translated: This puts Noah upon making the Ark in which a remnant of of the
World were saved. By Faith Moses contemns the riches and pleasures of the
Egyptian Court, and rather chooses to suffer affliction with Gods people. This
carried the Israclites through the Red Sea, this threw down the Walls of
Jericho and saved Rahab from that common destruction. Faith subdued Kingdoms,
wrought Righteousness, obtained Promises, stopped the mouths of Lions, overcame
fire and sword, made weakness strong, turned armies to flight. This put courage
and resolution into the weak, and prevailed against that which did oppose it.
Great are the works which a true and saving Faith has done.

It enables both to do and suffer for the name of Christ. It enables us to
perform the hardest tasks of Religion: It will enable us to forgive our
offending brother, Luke 17.5. And to cleanse our hearts of our filthiness, Act.
15.9. Aye, and beside all this the Apostle tells us, that this is the vistory
that overcomes the World even our faith, 1 John 5.4. And when the Apostle
exhorts us to put on the whole armor of God, he bids us, above all to take the
shield of faith, wherewith we shall be able to quench all the fiery darts of
the wicked, Ephesians. 6.16. So that it is the great engine against the Devil, the
World, and the Flesh. It vanquishes our Spiritual enemies, and triumphs over
them. It works miraculously where it is. It subdues our lusts, and enables us
to conquer our greatest enemies. And certainly then, the Faith which the
Scriptures speak thus greatly of is not a sluggish and lazy Faith, but it does
produce in us a great change of Heart and Life.

Our Savior tells his Disciples that if they had faith as a grain of
mustard seed, they might say to a mountain remove hence to yonder place, and it
shall remove, and nothing should be impossible unto them, Mat. 17.20. It is
true indeed the first Preachers of the Gospel had the power of doing Miracles
bestowed upon them; such a faith had they but we have it not: But yet we have a
Faith still, if we be the genuine followers of Christ, that does enable us to
do works that are miraculous also, though not in the same kind with theirs.
Indeed they had power to do great Miracles and wonderful works in the World for
the confirming that Gospel which was but newly planted among men. This power is
now ceased with the reason of it. vid. Chrysostom. vol. 5. p. 274. Edit. Savil.
But yet a true Faith does very mighty works, and such as are as pleasing to
God, and of themselves more advantageous to us than that power of working
Miracles would have been. They cast out Devils, and could easily dispossess
them from the bodies of men; but then our Faith enables us to cast him out of
our hearts; They cured diseases that were bodily, our Faith cleanses our Souls.
They could raise the dead, our Faith raises us from the death of sin to the
life of Righteousness. They could heal Lepers, give sight to the Blind, restore
the Lame, and destroy the obstinate offenders. Our saving Faith cures our
leprosy of Sin, opens our blind eyes, enables us to walk in Gods ways, and
throws down the obstacles that lie in our way. What was done by the first
Preachers of the Gospel is done daily by every sincere Christian. If they
destroyed the Devil, so does he. They turned him out of his Temples, he out of
his heart. The works of Faith now are as momentous as that of Miracles: He that
overcomes the world, and vanquishes his lusts, he that despises riches and
conquers himself, does works as pleasing to God, and as profitable to himself,
as he that removed Mountains and cast them into the Sea. Nay such works as
these are better for us; and more acceptable to God than the power of doing the
greatest Miracles. He that lives well does more than he that wrought Miracles.
It was not the power of doing Wonders that made men Christians. Their
Christianity did consist in the obedience of there lives. He that obeys the
Gospel (and our Faith teaches us to do so) receives the grace and mercy which it
offers. If we could do wonders and yet remained void of the love and image of
God we would not be in the state of Salvation. The lives of the Apostles made
them dear to God, and not their miracles. And St. Luke when he writes the story
of what the Apostles did, does not give his Book the title of the Miracles of
the Apostles, but the Acts or Practices of the Apostles is the title which it
bears. Our Savior bids the Disciples not to rejoice that the spirits are
subject to them; but rather, says he, rejoice because your names are written in
Heaven, Luke 10.20. Our obedience does entitle us to Gods favor, but so does
not our power to do wonderful works. If we work iniquity it is not the gift of
working Miracles that shall stand us in stead. Many, says Christ, will say to
me in that day, Lord, Lord, have not we prophesied in thy name? And in thy name
have cast out Devils? And in thy name done many wonderful works? And then will
I profess unto them, I never knew you, depart from me ye that work iniquity,
Matthew. 7.22, 23. That Faith which wrought Miracles endured but for a time, but
the Faith which works righteousness is to abide for ever. If our Faith cleanse
and purify our hearts we shall not need be troubled that it does not remove
Mountains. If we be condemned at that great day, it shall not be because we did
not work Miracles, but because we did not feed the hungered, and cloth the
naked, etc. Matthew. 25. Jam. 2.15, 16. It Is our sincere obedience to the Gospel
which God requires and will reward hereafter. We must show our Faith by our
works as Abraham did, or else we shall have no reason to judge Faith saving. If
it be such a Faith as cleanses our hearts, if it enable us to forgive our
enemies, if it help us to overcome the World; if it make us strong against
Temptations, patient under Afflictions, constant under Trials, and careful to
obey God, then it is such a Faith as God requires of us. But if on the other
hand it be but a lazy belief of the truth of the Gospel, and a confident
expectation however of grace and pardon, it is not such a Faith that will save
our Souls: And let us never so much vaunt our selves that we magnify the free
Grace of God, when we profess a recumbency upon Christ, and a resting upon him
for Salvation; yet if we remain idle and disobedient this Faith will not avail
us. He does savingly believe that does assent to the truth of what God has
revealed, and is so far in love with it also that he does sincerely and
heartily give himself up to the obedience of it. And he that does this as he
ought, is so far from depressing the freeness of Gods Grace, and exalting
himself, that when he has done all that he can, and which is commanded, he can
say from the bottom of his heart that he is an unprofitable Servant, and has
done that which was his duty to do, Luke 17.10.

CHAP. IX.
BUT as we must examine our Faith toward God, so we must try our love toward
one another. For the Eucharist is a feast of love, and a Sacrament of Charity.
And was not only designed for our renewing our most solemn Covenant with God,
but also for the maintaining a fervent Charity with one another, as has been
showed before. Now as we are too forward to profess a Faith which we have not,
so it is to be feared, we do commonly profess a Charity when we are devoid of
it. And therefore it will very highly concern us to enquire diligently, whether
or no we have a fervent Charity and Love to one another. For the Holy
Scriptures commend to us a Love without dissimulation, Romans 12.9. a Love that
is fervent, and with a pure heart, 1 Pet. 1.22. A Love which does not lie in
Word and in Tongue, but in Deed and in Truth, 1 John 3.18. Now though we do
make pretenses of Love to one another, yet it is much to be feared that we do
frequently but pretend it, and that under this great pretense of kindness there
does frequently lurk a secret root of bitterness. Now notwithstanding Charity
be a most extensive Grace, yet I shall consider it at this time as it does
import these two things.

First, a readiness to do our Neighbor good.

Secondly, to forgive evil: For where there is a true Love we shall be ready to
give, and forgive; to do all the good we can, and forgive all the evil which is
done against us. These two will make our love to one another like the love of
God to us, who does not only forgive our offenses, but does also load us daily
with his benefits.

First, we shall be ready to do our Neighbor all the good we can if we do love
him as we should. And if we would make a right judgment of the sincerity of
this love which we bear our Neighbor, we must judge of it by that love which
we bear our selves; for we are strictly obliged to Love our Neighbor, as we
love our selves, Mat. 22.39. Now before we can be said to do this we must.

(1.) Wish our Neighbor the same good which we wish to our selves: We must
have the same sincere affection to our Neighbor, which we have to our selves.
This must be the standard by which we are to measure our love. And as it is
very easy to discern that we do very sincerely wish well to our selves, so
must we do by our Neighbor also before we can be said to love him as we love
our selves. And this must be understood in the greatest latitude. Certain it is
that we wish well in the general to our own souls, to our Bodies, our Credit
and Estate, though we many times use not the means which tend to their welfare;
we must do thus as sincerely by our Neighbor also. And

(2.) We must in all our actions do by him as we in the like case should, or
may reasonably desire that he should do by us. This we must inviolably observe
before we can be said to love our Neighbor as we do love our selves. And it is
a very plain case that we would not that our Neighbor should invade our just
rights, and therefore if we love him as we love our selves, we shall be as
careful not to invade his. If we are in misery or want, we shall be glad of our
Neighbors compassion and relief; and when we love him as our selves we shall
as readily afford him ours. We shall be very ready to preserve our Neighbors
credit, to put a fair interpretation upon his actions, to relieve his wants, to
bewail his misery, to farther the Eternal welfare of his Soul, if we do love
him as our selves. And indeed it will not avail us, that we do pretend to love
our Neighbor, if we do not help him, and do him good. If a Brother or Sister
be naked, and destitute of daily Food; and one of you say unto them, depart in
peace; be you warmed and filled; notwithstanding ye give them not those things
which are needful to the Body; what does it profit? Jam. 2.15, ^6. Certainly we
are devoid of love to Our Neighbor, if we do him not good as we have an
opportunity. Whose has this Worlds good, and sees his Brother have need, and
shuts up his Bowels of compassion from him, how dwells the love of God in
him? 1 John 3.17. If we love our Neighbor we shall most readily do him good,
and we shall always stand ready to do good offices to all with whom we shall
converse. And,

Secondly, we must forgive the evil which our Neighbor does to us. This we
must also heartily do before we can worthily partake of this Holy Sacrament.
And I shall show (1.) what it is to forgive, and (2.) what great reason we have
to do it, when we partake of this Sacrament.


First, what it is to forgive, or what kind of forgiveness the Gospel requires
of us; and of this I shall speak, 1. Negatively; 2. Positively.


Negatively.

1. Forgiveness implies more than a bare profession of kindness: This is a very
common thing, and may well be supposed to take place amongst those that yet
remain very great enemies: It is common to make great protestations of an
hearty reconcilement. Our Savior requires that we forgive one another from our
hearts, Mat. 18.35.

2. Forgiveness implies more than a bare abstaining from making spiteful
returns: There may be a secret malice where there is no visible injury done: We
are obliged to love our enemy, it is not enough that we do him no harm.

3. Forgiveness implies more than doing kindnesses to our Brother. It does
indeed require a readiness to do this, but yet the doing kindnesses to our
enemy is no certain argument that we have forgiven him. We may be bountiful and
liberal, and yet devoid of Charity, 1 Cor. 13.1. We may give, and yet not
forgive. And perhaps we may do our enemy a kindness out of pride and
vainglory, or else we triumph over his misery, and rejoice that he who was
before the object of our envy, is now become the object of our pity.

Positively.

1. He that forgives a right does it universally. That is, he forgives every
man, and every Trespass, and at every time. We easily forgive little offenders,
and the smaller faults of our Neighbor: But the sincere Christian does more
than this; he forgives not only a professed enemy, but a treacherous and false
friend; not only him that despises him, but the most curseing Shimei that
reproaches him to the face. His Charity bears all things, 1 Cor. 13.7.

2. He is so far from taking revenge that his mind is free from all the
intention of it. The leaven of malice is quite purged out of his heart; he is
so far from watching an opportunity of mischief that he desires it not. And so
far from doing evil that such is his Charity, he thinks no evil, 1 Cor. 13.5.

3. He does heartily pity his Enemy, and pray for him: And in this is a
follower of the Precept, and of the example of his Blessed Savior, Mat. 5.44.
Luke 23.34. He does not only not requite his enemies with evil, but he returns
him good; As for me when they were sick, my clothing was sackcloth; I humbled
my Soul with fasting, and my Prayer returned into mine own bosom: I behaved my
self as though he had been my Friend, or Brother: I bowed down heavily as one
that mourns for his Mother, Psalm. 35.13, 14.

4. He does not only forgive but forget. He is most willing to let the
remembrance of the injuries he has received pass away. And as a proof of this,
he is most ready to do his enemy a kindness, and that out of no other design at
all but a sense of his duty, and a real Love which he finds in himself toward
him. He does not do it out of ostentation, nor with a purpose to upbraid him
with ingratitude, or enhance his guilt, but merely because he loves him, and
desires his welfare with no less sincerity than he does his own. And still as a
farther demonstration that he forgets the injury received, he is most ready to
restore his enemy to the same degree of Love which he had before he did the
wrong: He is willing to admit him to the same kindness which he enjoyed before;
aye, and to the same trust and confidence also upon his Repentance, or the
probable indications of it. In one word he does not retain any thing of malice
or ill will, but on the other hand finds in himself a most sincere love and
good will, and by all his actions does show the great sincerity of it.

No less than such a forgiveness does the Gospel require, no less does the true
Christian find in himself: And certainly it cannot be any thing short of this:
For we must forgive as we desire God to forgive: And sure I am we desire from
Heaven no less than such a forgiveness, and must therefore think our selves
obliged to do no otherwise by our Brother, than we would that God should do by
us. For in this matter that is the Rule we are to go by, we are to imitate God,
to forgive our offending Brother, Even as God for Christ's sake has forgiven
us, Ephesians. 4.32.

Secondly, I come to show what great reason we have to forgive our brother,
when we come to this Sacrament. Now that I shall show in the following Severals.

1. Because in this Sacrament we keep in remembrance the death of Christ. This
was one great end of its Institution, and this does strongly oblige us to
forgive our brother: Whether we consider the death of Christ.

(1.) In it self, as obliging us to put away all our sins for which he dyed. It
is but reason we should put away our sins which put our Lord to death. And if
he dyed for sin, then ought we by no means to live in it. If we do, we crucify
our Lord afresh, and are more cruel to him than Judas or Pontius Pilate. We
make his pains of no effect, and show our selves void of all pity to our
bleeding Savior. They were our sins that put him to his shame, and to his
sorrow; and if we retain them we do but trample upon his precious blood, we are
very wretched Creatures if we maintain his enemies, and add to his sorrows. He
did not dye for sins that we might live in them, but that we might dye to them.
His Death is a very forcible argument against the life of our lusts, and a
great motive to obedience. We little regard our dying Lord if we at once
remember his Death, and break his Laws.

(2.) Again, our Lord at his Death gave us a very great example of forgiveness
of enemies; and therefore when we remember his death, we have very great reason
to forgive our offending brother. Our blessed Lord met with great enemies, and
such as had the greatest reason to be his friends. He that eat of his bread
lift up his heel against him. He was betrayed by his own Disciple, delivered to
death by him that pronounced him innocent, scourged and mocked by a rude and
heady multitude. He is numbered among Transgressors who had committed no sin. He
was hanged on the Tree who had never tasted the forbidden Fruit. He was put to
death by those whom he came to seek, and to save: He had done them many
kindnesses whilst he was among them. He healed their sick, fed their hungry,
restored their blind, dispossessed their Daemoniacks, and raised their dead. He
offended none of their Laws. He paid Caesar his Tribute, took care the Priest
should have his Offering, observed their customs, went to their Festivals, and
was so far from profaning their Temple, that he showed a great zeal for
defending it from common uses. There could be nothing said against his
Doctrine, nothing against his Life. His enemies that bare witness against him
could not agree, and it was infinitely plain that he was innocent: And yet his
Countrymen thirst after his blood, and prefer a Murderer before him. They want
patience when our Lord wanted none: They cry out, Crucify him, crucify him:
And what does our Lord do? he cries out too, but not for Vengeance, but for
Mercy, Father forgive them for they know not what they do, Luke 23.34.
Certainly then we should be ashamed to remember these things with malice in our
hearts; well may we forgive our enemies when our Lord has forgiven his. We
must not dare to remember the Death of Christ, and to remember our Neighbors
unkindness together. We may not think of revenge when our Lord showed so much
mercy. We cannot rightly remember Christ's Death, when we do not imitate his
example. He taught us what we should do by what he did himself. We shall look
very unlike our Lord, if we retain our malice and ill will.

(3.) If we consider that Christ's Death was not only for sins, but also for our
sins, we shall still find a greater obligation upon us to forgive one another.
God gave his Son to dye, than which there cannot be a greater miracle of Love,
and if God so loved us, we also ought to love one another, 1 John 4.11. It was
for us our Savior laid down his life, and who are we! Had we deserved this
love! were we his friends, that he was at this pains and cost! No surely, but
we were sinners and enemies, and yet he laid down his life for us, Romans 5.8,
10. If then Christ dyed for his enemies, we ought to forgive ours, and then
especially we are obliged to do it, when we pretend to remember the Death of
Christ: How can we now pull our brother by the throat for a few pence, when our
Lord has forgiven us so many Talents? We are very ungrateful for our Lords
kindness, if we are unkind to one another. Did we but consider Gods mercies to
us we should think our selves obliged to be merciful to one another. And
methinks it should be easy for us to forgive our Neighbor, if we did but
consider how very much we need Gods forgiveness, and how far we are from
deserving it. If our Lords eye have been so good to us, why should ours be evil
to one another! what miserable wretches should we be if Gods mercies to us had
not been greater than ours is to one another! He has forgiven us our great
scores, let us not retain then our grudges to our brother. For shame then let
us purge out this leaven of malice when we keep this Feast. Let us show our
selves kind to each other when we do remember the kindness of our Blessed
Savior. Besides, our brothers offenses against us are small in respect to ours
against God. We offend against an infinite Majesty, we transgress the Eternal
Laws of Reason. How coldly do we pray to him for the greatest Blessings! How
insensible are we of his many mercies! How very stupid and incorrigible under
his severest judgments! How void of the love of him, who has loved us so much!
If he should mark iniquities how should we be able to stand! We are not able to
answer for one of a thousand: But yet we hope for Mercy upon our Repentance and
our Faith: We expect pardon from God for all these amisses: And had we not this
hope we should be of all men the most miserable. We have then very great reason
to be reconciled to our brother, when we stand in so great need that God should
be reconciled unto us; and when we hope for the pardon of our sins from God,
which we do from Christ's death, and at this time when we do commemorate it, we
have a sufficient motive to forgive our brother. Especially our Savior having
said, If you forgive men their trespasses your Heavenly Father will aso forgive
you. But if ye forgive not men their Trespasses, neither will your Father
forgive your trespasses, Mat. 6.14, 15.

2. Another great end of this Sacrament is that Christians may be knit together
in the strictest bond of Love and Charity. It is as I showed you before, a
Feast of Love: It was designed to bring us together, and to make us all of one
heart. And a very effectual instrument it is, were it rightly understood and
used, to that end and purpose. It would soon make us one again: It would bring
together those who now are separated from one another. When Communions were
frequent in the Church Christians loved one another, and kept together: But
when they became more seldom selemnized, then the feuds among the professors of
Christianity grew also: For indeed this Sacrament was intended to maintain us
in Love and Charity. And therefore if we do not heartily forgive our brother,
we do destroy also this end of its Institution. It is very indecent to see men
at odds that eat and drink at the same common Table. But it is a great
wickedness to come to this Holy Table with malice and ill will to our brother
in our hearts. We must not keep this feast of love, with the leaven of malice.
We cannot partake of this Sacrament but we must profess a kindness to our
brother; and if we mean it not we are like Judas, that gave his Master good
words when he was ready to betray him; and shall be miserable as he was, into
whom the Devil and the morsel entered at once. We shall find Death here, if we
do not cleanse our hearts from malice and ill will. More might be said to show
what reason we have to forgive our brother, before we partake of this
Sacrament, but I shall say no more, only adding the words of our Savior.
Therefore if thou bring thy gift to the Altar, and there remembrest that thy
brother has ought against thee; leave there thy gift before the Altar, and go
thy way, first be reconciled to thy brother, and then come and offer thy gift,
Mat. 5.23, 24.

CHAP. X.
I Should now proceed to show how we are to behave our selves when we do
Communicate, when we have first examined the state and condition of our Souls.
But yet before I do proceed to that, because we may stand in need of some
farther supplies before we do actually Communicate, I shall not omit to add
something for our assistance that way.

1. Perhaps a man after the perusal of what has been said before may not be
able to determine whether he be fit to receive or not: And in case he doubt of
himself it may be asked what he is to do in that case: If he proceed under his
doubt he may involve himself in a farther perplexity; and if he do not receive,
he may fear that he neglects his duty toward God in letting slip so excellent
an opportunity of becoming better, and omitting so great a precept of the
Gospel. In this case then it is very advisable that he should make use of a
Spiritual guide for his farther direction. This will be his safest course
certainly; and well it would be if this course were taken more frequently than
it is. It might prevent many of those miscarriages which men now fall into. It
is of great advantage to the Souls of men not to conceal their doubts and
scruples. The hiding of them tends to their great trouble, if not many times,
to their eternal ruin. God has provided us with the Ministers of his Word to
conduct and guide us in the way to Heaven. This is the great end for which they
are sent, and we ought accordingly to make use of them. We do very readily
consult the Physician and the Lawyer, where our Lives or Estates are in any
danger. And certainly were our Souls as precious to us as our Bodies and our
Wealth, we should as readily take advice for them as we do for these. Our way
to Heaven would not be so perplexed would we use the means which the mercy of
God has provided for us. Now certain it is that God gave Apostles, Prophets,
Evangelists, and some Pastors and Teachers; for the perfecting of the Saints,
for the work of the Ministry, for the edifying of the body of Christ, Ephesians.
4.11, 12. If we love our Souls we shall do well to show our utmost care of
them; which we cannot be said to do if we suffer our doubts to remain, and do
not use those appointments which God has so plentifully furnished us withal.

2. We must be careful that when we examine our selves, we take accounts of our
selves for those amisses which are not punishable by any Laws of men. We are
not to absolve and acquit our selves because the severest Laws of Men cannot
censure us. We do greatly amiss when yet the best Laws of Men cannot punish us
for doing so. We ought to consider how we spend our time, to examine whether we
spend it either idly or unprofitably: We are also to enquire how we spend our
Estates whether in works of mercy and necessity, or upon vain and gaudy things.
We are to remember, that we must hereafter account for every talent which we
have received of our Lord: and though we may so live that the best Laws of men
cannot condemn us, nor yet the best men justly censure us; yet however we may
be liable to a greater and more impartial Judge. We are at such a time to
examine and search into all the secrets of our hearts. We must indeed be
favorable in our judgment of others, but it becomes us very severely to judge
our selves. And we must not only abstain from evil but from all appearance of
it; not only from things that are in themselves evil, but that are of evil
report. Such things as these are frequenting of Taverns, very gaudy and
fantastic attire, great merriments and jollities, costly feasts and
entertainments, spending beyond our income and revenue as well as above our
rank: Spending great portions of our time in Drollery and mirth, setting off
our beauty with artifice and curiosity; an extraordinary niceness in our dress,
and a great forwardness in following the mode and fashion. Such things as these
are must come under our Examination, for it is very much to be feared that in
them we do transgress, and that our hearts may go astray from God. Indeed we
are by no means to condemn one another; we may not too hastily judge our
brother in this case; but yet it will well become us to examine our own hearts,
and to be very jealous and suspicious of our selves.

3. In making a Judgment of our selves we ought not only to consider what we
are when we are dressed up for the Solemnity, but what we are in our ordinary
conversation. There are few men so profane, but they will put on a demure
countenance, and a fair outside when they are going to the Table of the Lord:
But we are not to measure our selves by that, but to consider what we are at
other times. The best way to judge of our selves is to do it by what we are in
our ordinary conversation. There is a Mechanical Religion, and that is, when
our devotion is raised by the ringing of a Bell, the return of a Solemnity, or
else the menaces of death: but when these things are over we return to our old
wonts, and are but what we were before. When a Sacrament draws nigh we look
like Saints, we abstain from our grosser sins, we put up some cold prayers to
God, we are for a day or two before very reserved and sober, and we fast it may
be upon the vespers of the Festival, and carry our selves very reverently when
we do communicate: But yet all this while our hearts are not changed, and our
lives are the same, or worse than they were before. And therefore we are not to
judge of our selves by such fits and pangs of devotion, but by the general
course and tenor of our lives. Were we to choose the picture of a friend or
wife (that I may use a Simile of one of our Divines upon this argument) if we
would have a true picture we would have it drawn as she uses to look in the
ordinary management of her huswifery, not as she looked when she was dressed up
with all the advantages and tricks of Art. We must do so by our selves, let us
(if we would take a just estimate) reflect what we ordinarily are. The worst of
men at some times seem to be very good. There are but few men so stupid but
something or other does awaken them to a sense of things, and yet these men
remain very bad and senseless still. We call that man a lunatic or madman who
yet has many lucid intervals when he can use his reason: And him we judge a
Fool or Natural (as we call them) who is generally so in all his words and
actions, tho sometimes he may speak good sense, and make very smart replies
upon us. A Fever retains its name though it do sometimes intermit and be not
one continual paroxysm. There must be a great change in the blood before it be
quite removed. It Is so in the case that is before us; there must not only be an
intermission of our sins and sinful affections, but an extinction of them
before we can be said to be new Creatures. And that we are which we are most
generally in the course of our conversations.

4. It is therefore advisable that before we do Communicate we make some
experiments upon our selves. Let us try how we can resist a temptation, and how
we can overcome it. Let us inure our selves by degrees to overcome our
inordinate affections. Suppose that we are given to some excess of anger or
intemperance or the like: Let us try our selves sometime before how we can
master our selves. And it will not be hard to do it if we do it gradually, and
always call in to our assistance the Divine aid. If we be given to anger and
impatience, let us try first how we can bear the evils and disappointments of a
day; which it will be no hard matter to do. Then let us take out a greater time
and use our selves by degrees to bear the yoke. If we find that we get the
mastery then may we expect a very great aid by communicating, as well as a
great encouragement to communicate frequently. The Jews we commanded to keep
the day of expiation, Joina c. 8. Mi^hm. 4. cum notis Bartenor.
then they were to afflict their Souls, and thought themselves obliged to fast;
but yet they tell us that they did not withold meat and drink from little
Children all at once, but they did by degrees wont them to the observation of
that solemnity; so that the child that was wont to eat at the fourth hour
received his meat at the fifth or sixth, according to his strength, and thus*
they did use them for a year or two before they took upon them the observation
of this and the other precepts. And this course we shall do well to take with
our Souls: Who may do well by degrees to wont them to obedience; and not to
venture upon Communicating (whereby we are most solemnly obliged to obey all
the precepts of Christ) before we have had some proof of our obedience.

5. It is also very advisable that at this time we do more particularly design
the destroying that lust which does most constantly annoy us, and easily beset
us. We have our peculiar lusts and follies to which we are addicted: Some sins
there are that are frequent temptations to us and do greatly molest and trouble
us. It will be wisdom at this time to set our selves mainly against that sin.
Where we are weakest we shall do well to set the strongest guard and watch. Our
bodies are not more naturally prone to their peculiar distempers than our Souls
are to their particular follies. And certainly if we can destroy these fiercer
enemies we shall not need fear the other assailants. And therefore let us
especially set our selves against those lusts that do very often solicit and
importune us. For as it is great wisdom to consider where we are weak and
easily overcome, so is it no less wisdom to raise up all our force and strength
to defend our selves against those spiritual enemies which do most easily
prevail upon us.

6. Let us endeavor to put our selves into such a preparation as we would be
found in when we are to die. For certainly we are not fit to Communicate if we
are not fit to dye. The same preparation is required for a Communion which is
for our death. And many devout persons have very wisely at once disposed
themselves for the receiving this Sacrament and their dissolution also. v.
Calvin. Epist. 99.
Now certain it is that though we trifle in our lives yet we become serious
when we come to die. Then we do recollect our selves, and very severely examine
our own Consciences. Then we pray very earnestly, give very earnest attention
to Gods word, and very seriously heed what we are about. And did we as verily
believe that we should forthwith resign up our Souls unto God, we should be
very careful to put them in a readiness for so great a change. It will well
become us at this time to consider in what condition we would be found when our
Lord calls us hence; and then to endeavor to our utmost that we may with no
less diligence dispose our selves for this service than if we were presently to
give up the ghost. Thus if we do we shall not trifle in our preparations, but
shall most carefully examine our hearts, and most earnestly call in the Divine
aid and assistance.

CHAP. XI.
I Proceed now to show how we are to behave our selves when we do Communicate:
And of that I shall speak in the following Severals.

1. First of all, we are to take care that our hearts be lifted up to the Lord,
as we are exhorted by the man of God. Let us not suffer our thoughts to remain
upon low and earthly things. Forget your worldly concerns and interests.
Remember what an holy and solemn service you are about. Attend now upon this
very thing. When your worldly and trifling thoughts would thrust in upon you
presently repel and beat them back. Tell them you are employed about greater
matters, that they must stand off now while you worship your Lord; that your
Souls are the houses of prayer, and not a den of such thieves. Suffer not these
busy intruders to have any entrance or countenance from you. By no means yield
to any of their importunities. Your Souls must ascend up to Heaven now, and
forget all earthly things. Your otherwise lawful thoughts you must now account
profane. They must by no means come near when you are thus employed. We must do
now as was done at the giving of the Law, bounds were set that nothing might
approach the Mount under the severest penalty, Exodus 19. We must do so now we
make this solemn approach unto God; we must be greatly careful that no evil or
earthly thought draw nigh, and if they do we must severely chastise them and
beat them back. And as then 'twas forbidden to suffer either man or beast to
touch that Mount, so we must here beware not only of our beastly and carnal
thoughts, but also of all other thoughts (though at another time not unbecoming
mankind) which would disturb our devotion, and draw us aside from the
contemplation of what we are about. We had need use our utmost care that we may
attend upon God without distraction; else will our hearts before we are aware
slide into vain or impertinent entertainments. And when they are once let loose
we shall not so very easily recollect them and bring them back. They will soon
run into the ends of the earth, and if we be not watchful and resolute, they
will leave nothing but our bodies for so great a service as this: Our hearts
are treacherous, and our thoughts are like the servant of the Prophet who
secretly run after the Syrian for a talent of Silver, and two changes of
raiment, without the leave of his master; and if we call them not in they will
contract a more dismal leprosy than that servant did. We cannot let them gad
abroad without a great loss at such a time as this. We may be assured they will
fare as Dinah did, they will return defiled home. And therefore let us be sure
to set a strict watch upon our selves, lest our spiritual enemies steal away
our hearts at such a time as this. Let us lift them up to God, and there let
them be kept whiles we worship his holy name.

2. When you approach to the Table of the Lord, endeavor to raise up your
heart to the greatest thankfulness to Almighty God for his undeserved love to
thee. O consider how gracious thy Lord is unto thee a wretched sinner: That he
should not only give thee his Son to die, but also give thee his flesh to eat.
Not only receive thee to pardon but also entertain thee at his own Table as his
guest and friend. Say within thy self. Lord, what am I, that thou should not
only show me pity, but do me so great a favor to receive me as thy friend.
What a love is this that thou art pleased to show to my Soul, when there are so
many that have not heard of these thy mercies, so many that have foregone them.
I may well wonder that thy mercy lets me live, that I have bread to eat, or thy
air to breathe in; and yet thou art pleased to give me Angels food, and to feed
me with bread from Heaven. I am not worthy of the least of thy mercies, but
then this miracle of love may well overwhelm me. Who has ever heard of such a
love, of so great a condescension! Bless the Lord, O my Soul, and all that is
within me bless his holy name: Let me never forget so great a mercy, never be
ungrateful after such a condescension of Heaven. What shall I render unto the
Lord for such an unspeakable love as this, that he should spread me a Table,
and fill my Cup, who am unworthy of the crumbs that fall from his Table. Oh the
height and depth, the length and breadth of this love which passes knowledge!

It well becomes us thus to raise up our hearts to all thankfulness to God when
we do approach to this Feast. For we do here commemorate the greatest mercy
that was ever showed to Mankind. And it requires of us the greatest praise and
thanksgiving. This is a service of praise; and therefore it is called the
Eucharist. And certainly if we think our selves obliged to commemorate our
Benefactors and Friends, which we frequently do; we must think our selves much
more obliged with all thankfulness to remember the love of our dearest Lord,
who dyed that we might live.

3. When we see the Bread broken, and the Wine poured out, let us meditate at
once upon the Passion of our Lord, and the heinous nature of our sins that put
him to that pain. Think you saw your dearest Savior hang upon the Cross, that
you were eyewitnesses of the shame and sorrow that he underwent. O think you
saw the blood that he shed running down his Body; that you saw the Spear and
the Nails that pierced his Hands, his Feet and Side. Call to mind the Agony
that he was in, the sorrows that he underwent: Have some pity and regard to
thy bleeding Lord; pass not by, but see and behold that there is no sorrow like
to his sorrow. Thy heart is very hard sure if thou do not now relent. Thou
art very devoid of pity if thou have no compassion for thy bleeding Lord. But
then remember what it was that brought upon him all this sorrow and shame that
thou see him in. Not any fault of his own, but thy sins were the cause of it.
They nailed him to his Cross, they pierced his Side, they Crowned him with
Thorns, and gave him Gall and Vinegar to drink, they did him the despite and
the affronts which he endured. They were the Judas, the Pilate, the false
Witnesses, the chief Priests that contrived and accomplished his sorrows.
'Twas thy Covetousness that betrayed him, thy unbelief and wickedness that
brought him to his Cross, and caused him to cry out, My God, my God, why have
thou forsaken me? Raise up then a great indignation against thy sins, as thou
have any love or pity for thy dying Lord. Say thus to thine own heart: Shall I
not be ashamed of those sins which put my Lord to so much shame! shall I not
mourn for those sins which put him to so much pain! may not they well break my
heart which have so deeply wounded and pierced my blessed Savior! If he dyed
for sin well may I be ashamed to live in it. If my sins made him cry out, and
bow the head, how shall I then give them any entertainment! Well may they be
heavy on me which were so great a burden to my Lord. How have I made a sport of
that (vile wretch as I am) which made my Savior sweat drops of blood! Did my
Savior suffer such pains that he might destroy sin, and have not I harbored
it? I have taken part with the most implacable enemies of my dying Lord. Alas,
I have not considered the sorrows of my Savior, but like a vile wretch, I
have Crucified him afresh, I have trampled on his Blood, and done him open
despite and shame. Methinks I see him hang on the Cross, and methinks I hear
him cry out to me, and bid me see whether there were ever such a sorrow, and
also, that I should not be ungrateful to forget his love. What an hard heart
have I had that have had no more regard to him! Oh, that mine eyes were a
fountain of tears, that I might mourn for my sins that have Crucified my Lord.
Sure my heart is very hard, if I do not mourn now for mine iniquities, when I
behold my bleeding and dying Savior. I have tears for other things, have I
none for my sins, none for my Lord! I have sometimes wept when I have thought
of a dying Friend. Have I no tears for my dying Savior, who dies that I may
live! O my God smite this rocky heart of mine, that I may weep when I look upon
him whom I have Crucified. Look upon me, my Lord, as thou did once upon thy
Disciple who denied thee, that I may be able to weep bitterly as he did.

It will well become us, when we commemorate the death of our Savior, to be
very deeply humbled for our sins, which put him to death.

4. When thou receivest the Bread, renew your Covenant with God. Consent
heartily to receive thy Savior in all his Offices, of Prophet, Priest and
King. Desire earnestly to be joined to thy Lord in the strictest bond. Resolve
to give thy self up entirely to the obedience of his Holy Laws: Beg of him that
he would dwell in thine heart; give him the full possession of thy self. Tell
him thou art his for the time to come, and that thou do willingly give him
entrance and possession of thy whole heart. Say to him, Lord I do heartily and
joyfully entertain thee. And though I am unworthy that thou should come
under my roof; yet since it is thy condescension to visit me a poor sinner, I
do most joyfully receive thee. Grant that I, who eat of thy Bread, may never
lift up my heel against thee. And that though many Lords have ruled in me, I
may henceforth only make mention of thy name. Strengthen my feeble Soul that I
may perform my Vows: Help me that I may now be thine, and that I may continue
in thy love. Be thou that to my Soul which bread is to my mortal and frail
Body. Grant that my Soul and Body may be separate, and for ever set apart to
thy service; suffer me not to profane, and unhallow what is thus solemnly
consecrated to thee. I offer thee my heart; Lord, unite it to thy fear and
service. Grant it may no more run astray from thee, that it may not be seduced
by the deceitfulness of sin, by the allurements and blandishments of this
wicked world, but continue constant and steadfast in thy Covenant. Create in me
a clean heart, O God, and renew a right (or constant) spirit within me, Psalm.
51.10.

5. When we receive the Cup, let us again renew our consent that Christ shall
rule over us And let us particularly meditate upon the great danger of
revolting and sliding back: This is the blood of the New Covenant, the blood of
the immaculate Lamb of God, which was shed for us. It was an ancient custom of
entering into League and Covenants by slaying of beasts, and shedding their
blood; this was in token that he that failed to perform his part did devote
himself to the like destruction. Oh consider then what a wrath hangs over thy
head, if thou trample upon the blood of Jesus! There will remain nothing but a
certain fearful looking for of judgment and fiery indignation. And therefore
consider well, how greatly dangerous it will be for thee to disobey thy Lord
for the time to come. Say thus within thy self: I am now renewing my Covenant
with God, I do now undertake to obey the Laws of Christ, and make him a solemn
promise of Obedience for the time to come. And that I may bind my self the
faster to my Lord, I take the Sacrament upon it, I drink of this blood of the
new Covenant. So that I am now bound in a stricter bond than ever; I have
professed a service to him a great while, I have now listed my self, and as it
were taken a Sacramental Oath that I will be faithful. This blood of my Savior
will witness against me if I fall back, and so the blood of Jesus will be upon
me if I prove unfaithful. And therefore, O my Lord, look in Mercy upon me.
Grant that I may not after all my other sins, be guilty of the blood of Christ.
That I may never have the blood of my Savior to answer for. Then will my case
be worse than that of the Jews who Crucified him, but yet knew him not to be
the Lord of Glory. But I know him, and am dedicated to his service. My sin for
the future will be of a deeper dye. Grant Lord that I may not be guilty of the
blood of Christ, that I may not put him to death that came to save my life,
that his innocent blood may not cry to Heaven against me, and be laid to my
charge. What a wretched Creature shall I be if my Savior shall be my Accuser.
Thus may we meditate when we receive the Cup.

And indeed it will be a very seasonable meditation; we shall be very wicked
indeed if we do now return to our sins and evil wonts, when we have not only
eat the flesh but drank the blood of Christ. The blood of Christ was shed for
our remission and our pardon, but how sad will it be with us if it be laid to
our charge; if that blood from whence we expect our pardon shall cry for
vengeance against us! There is a saying among the Jews, Vi. Buxtorf. Lexicon
Talmud. in voce (...)
which is used proverbially, Woe be to that man whose advocate becomes his
accuser. And it is very applicable to the matter in hand. Our Lord is our
Advocate, (1 John 2.1.) but if we refuse to obey his Precepts he becomes our
Accuser and our Judge. The blood of Jesus pleads for us if we continue obedient
to his Precepts, but if we trample on his blood it will speak no better things
than the blood of Abel; and certain it is that Abels blood called to Heaven
against him that shed it. And how miserable is that man who instead of
receiving pardon from Christ's blood, receives a greater guilt from it, and
falls under that curse which the Jews called on themselves, when they said, His
blood be upon us and our children.

6. This will be a very fit season to intercede with God for others; we shall
do well to pray at this time for the whole Church of God, and particularly for
that part of it which is planted among us, especially for all Christian Kings
and Governors who do greatly need our Prayers, and may very justly expect them
also. And here we shall do well while we are attending upon this service, to
pray for our friends and relatives, and for those who have desired our prayers.
This is a Feast of love, and a greater expression of our love to our brother we
cannot give than to intercede earnestly for his Soul; and as we are always
obliged to do it, so are we more particularly bound to do it at this time when
we commemorate the great love of our dying Savior, which he expressed to the
Souls of men. And we shall do well at this time to send up Ejaculations to God
for them: Nor must we forget to pray for those who are our enemies without a
cause. This our Savior did when he was upon the Cross, and when we remember
his Agonies we must not forget to do as he did. Let us heartily pray for them
that God would forgive their sins, and that he would turn their hearts. We are
obliged to this both by the precept, and by the example of our dearest Lord:
Nor may we expect pardon for our offenses, if we do not from our hearts forgive
our brother his. Our hearts must be perfectly cleared of all the leaven of
malice before we can, as we ought, keep this Feast.

CHAP. XII.
I Come now to show how we must behave our selves after we have been partakers
of this Table of our Lord. And that I shall do in the following Severals.

1. Let us out of gratitude for so great a favor from Gods hands, show mercy
to the poor. This the Jews did upon a festival, Jom. Toff. c. 1,
and they give particular rules about it. It well becomes us when God has
vouchsafed to entertain us at his Table, to entertain the poor at ours. We can
make no amends to God for his mercy to us, but yet we may show our gratitude by
showing mercy to our poor brethren who bear his image. God has substituted
them to receive our grateful acknowledgements. This we shall cheerfully do if
we have upon our minds a lively sense of the mercies of God to us, and of our
unworthiness of the least of them. We read to this purpose what the first
Christians did. That they brake their bread, i. e. received the Lords Supper
from house to house, and did eat their meat with gladness and singleness of
heart, or liberality, praising God, and having favor with all the people,
(...). Vid. Dr. Hammond in loc.
or (as it has been thought those words do import) exercising mercy and
showing kindness to those that wanted. We shall do well to imitate this
example; and when God shows us so much mercy, let us not be without compassion
to one another. For verily if our hearts be hardened against our poor brother,
we have great reason to think our selves void of the love of God.

2. Let us use an after examination. Let us presently reflect and consider what
was amiss in us when we were waiting upon our Lord, and humble our selves for
it forthwith. Otherwise it is to be feared we shall soon relapse to our wonts,
and be so far from being better that we shall be much worse. If we do not
rebuke our selves quickly we shall soon return to our vain Conversation again.

3. Let us by all means sequester our selves from our worldly divertisements
and concerns, and employ our time in prayer and praises. It is very advisable
that we should be alone, that we should for some time separate our selves from
our worldly employments, and spend our time in our private devotions. Our
Savior after he had kept this Supper with his Disciples, and sung an Hymn or
Psalm of Praise after it, with-draws from his Disciples, and betakes himself to
prayer unto God. And this he does three several times. The world will be very
ready to thrust in upon us, and to make us forget our vows and good
resolutions; we shall be in great danger if we be not very cautelous. And
therefore we must pertinaciously resolve to watch over our hearts; and when our
Souls are clean we must be greatly careful that we be not defiled again. We
must do here as Physicians advise us to do when we use their prescriptions, we
must also take care that we use them cum regimine, we must not take cold, nor
commit any other error, which will make their rules become ineffectual. When
our house is swept and garnished we must take care that an unclean Spirit do
not re-enter, lest our latter end be worse than our be ginning.

4. Let us be very careful that we do not relapse and fall back into an evil
course of life. Certain it is that it stands us in hand to use our utmost care
to this purpose. We must do as the Spouse did, when she had found him whom her
Soul loved, she held him and would not let him go, Cant. 3.4. We must not only
receive our Lord Jesus but we must also walk in him. We must for the time to
come devote our selves to the service of our Lord. We must set our selves upon
the obedience of all his precepts, and upon the mortifying all our evil and
corrupt affections. We must inure our selves to the works of Religion, and the
labors of a pious life: We must use our selves to bear the Cross, to forgive
injuries, to bridle our anger, to cross our carnal desires and appetites, and
contradict the cravings of the Animal life. If we presently return to our sins
again, we show that we have but played the part of hypocrites and dissemblers,
and shall pay dear for our hypocrisy. Our condition will be very sad if we now
return to our vomit. Let us therefore renew our purposes of a new life, and be
greatly careful that we return no more to folly. We may reason thus with our
selves when we are retired into our Closets: I have now once more renewed my
Covenant with God: I have promised him solemnly that I will be his servant: I
have, to bind my self the faster, taken the body and blood of my Lord. I am now
fast bound to be constant and faithful to him. Sure I am that God with whom I
have had to do, is a God that will not be mocked. I may deceive others, him I
cannot deceive. What a wretched creature shall I be if I should now prove
false! What cords will hold me if I break this! How can I think that God will
ever trust me, or how can I ever trust my self if I now relapse! The blood of
Christ will call for vengeance against me if I now run on in my former courses.
My sins were great before, but now they will be aggravated. Woe is me if I now
run on in my excess of folly. Shall I suffer any corrupt speech to proceed out
of that mouth which has received my Lord? Shall I abuse my body to
intemperance which my Lord has entered into! How shall I ever look my Lord in
the face if I should now betray him or deny him! Good God, look upon thy
servant, and whatever plagues I meet with in this world suffer me not to
forsake thee: Have pity upon me O God, and let me not start aside from thy
precepts. Let me die rather than I should deny thee. Suffer me not so far to
dishonor thy name, and wrong my own Soul: Let thy grace be sufficient for me;
do thou give me power that I may keep thy statutes at all times.

Thus may we reason with our selves when we come to our Closets, after we have
received the Body and Blood of our Lord. And we shall find it very needful to
awaken our selves to a new obedience, as we would avoid the greatest
indignation of Heaven. For certain it is if we wilfully return to our follies
again, we shall bring great wrath upon our selves. And though perhaps we may
not be punished with sickness and sudden death, as the Corinthians, were for
the abuse of this Sacrament, (1 Cor. 11.30.) yet are there more dismal plagues
than these, which will overtake us; such are hardness of heart, blindness of
mind, a reprobate sense, and a seared Conscience: These are indeed deaf
strokes, and such as make not a noise, and strike not our senses; but yet, if
we consider the effect and consequence of them, they are more formidable and
dismal than the raging pestilence, or the loudest claps of thunder. Let us then
resolve, as we love our Souls or fear the wrath of God, to sin no more lest the
worst of things come upon us. But let us thus judge that Christ died for all,
that they which live should not henceforth live unto themselves, but unto him
which died for them and rose again, 2 Cor. 5.15. The Body and Blood of Christ
will not save us whiles we continue in our sins. Nor may we think that this
Sacrament will secure us if we return to our follies. I shall end this
particular with the words of Syracides, He that washes himself after the
touching of a dead body, if he touch it again what avails his washing? So is
it with a man that fasteth for his sins, and goes again and does the same; who
will hear his prayer, or what does his humbling profit him? Ecclus. 34.25, 26.

CHAP. XIII.
HAving showed you how you must fit your selves for this Sacrament, I shall now
also let you know the necessity that lies upon us, after this Preparation to
partake of it: And that I shall do in the following severals.

1. This duty stands upon the same authority which the other precepts of
Christianity do. He that commands us to Pray, to search the Scriptures, to hear
Gods Word, and to take heed how we hear, has as plainly commanded us to do
this. We are no more left at liberty here than we are in the other precepts of
Christianity. And certainly it is an argument of great insincerity, to pick and
choose which of Christ's commands we will obey. Besides, by breaking one command
we make our selves guilty of all, because we do despise the authority on which
the rest stand. For whosoever shall keep the whole Law, and yet offend in one
point is guilty of all: For he that said, do not commit Adultery; said also do
not kill. Now if thou commit no Adultery, yet if thou kill thou art become a
transgressor of the Law, Jam. 2.10, 11. I am sure the command is very plain and
evident, Do this, Luke 22.19. 1 Cor. 11.24, 25. and verse 28. Let a man examine
himself, and so let him eat of this bread and drink of this cup. To examine our
selves is a confessed duty, and therefore by a just consequence so it is to eat
of this Bread and Drink of this Cup. That duty is relative to this: If we do
that we are bound to do this also. And though we should neglect that, yet will
not that excuse our neglect of this, any more than one fault is a just excuse
for the committing of another. I doubt not but that we do diverse things, and
think our selves obliged to do them also from the Laws of Christ, for which we
have no such clear command from the Laws of Christ as we have for this. And
therefore certainly if we do not this it is not for want of plain Scripture
that requires it, but for some other cause best known to God and our own
Consciences. But in the mean time we may be ashamed to call Christ, Lord, Lord;
and he may justly upbraid us for it, when we refuse to do whatsoever he
commands us, Luke 6.46. Let us not for shame call our selves Christians when we
will not obey the Laws of Christ. Ye are my friends if ye do whatsoever I
command you, Joh. 15.14. It is not a partial obedience to the Laws of Christ,
will be sufficient to make us the genuine Disciples of our Lord and Savior. If
we would be thought to belong to him we must obey him in all his commands.
Unless we do so we cannot be secure. For though we do some of those duties
which Christ has commanded, yet, if we do neglect him in others, we are not
such Christians as we ought to be. There are those indeed who think themselves
obliged by the Moral precepts of the Gospel, and are in great measure careful
that they transgress not those Laws, which are indeed the Laws of Nature, as
well as the Laws of Christ; but yet these men neglect this institution of
Christ, and are not much concerned in the mean time; and that because they do
not transgress the Law of Nature though they do transgress the positive Law of
Christ. But these men ought to consider that the Law of Nature is not the
adaequate and full rule of their Conscience: They must also attend to the
Divine Revelation, and to the institutions of Christ. This precept of partaking
of the Communion is peculiarly the Law of Christ. And to do this is the mark
and badg of Christians. By doing it we show whose followers we are. And we are
particularly obliged to do it as we do profess our selves Christians. And the
same Authority that obliges us to the observance of any other Law of Christ,
does oblige us to do this also. And therefore if we think our selves bound to
any Christian duties, we judge very much amiss if we think our selves
unconcerned in this.

2. This duty is built upon as great a reason, if we consider the end of its
institution, as any other of the same nature is. I say as great a reason, I
shall not need to say a greater. It was appointed in remembrance of the death
of Christ, that miracle of mercy and love. As often as ye eat this bread and
drink this Cup, ye do show the Lords death till he come, 1 Cor. 11.26. It is to
keep in mind our Lords death for which this Sacrament was appointed; this
methinks we should be ready to do who expect such benefits from his death, and
know that he died that we might live. We easily fulfill the desires of a dying
friend: But if our friend died in our quarrel and defense we know not how to
forget him; and he that does forget such a friend is reputed justly a most
ungrateful wretch: How then can we forget the dear love of our dying Lord? We
keep in memory our Temporal victories and deliverances, and we think we do well
in it also: How much greater reason have we to keep in mind this deliverance
from eternal death and slavery? This is never to be forgotten certainly, but
ought to be kept in memory as long as this world endures. But then our dying
Savior, who might have required of us some more burdensome service if he had
pleased, has commanded us to do this, and to do it in remembrance of him: he
would have us remember his love to us, and he lets us know how he would have us
remember his love, Do this in remembrance of me.

3. It Is a duty the practice whereof is as advantageous to our Souls, if we
consider our own necessities, as any whatsoever. We have need of such helps and
viands in our pilgrimage toward Heaven. This repast will give us new strength
and vigor. And we greatly need that our strength should be renewed. This is a
blessed opportunity of renewing our Covenant with God, and reconciling our
selves to one another, and dressing up our disordered Souls for another World.
This puts us upon exciting all our Graces, and strengthening all our good
purposes and intentions: This awakens our repentance, inflames our charity,
augments our hope, confirms our faith, and puts us into a condition that makes
us more fit to live, and more prepared to dye. We are like Clocks and Watches
that frequently stand in need of winding up, and setting right: Or else like
trees that are apt to be pulled back by suckers, and burdened with luxuriant
branches: This blessed Sacrament puts us upon amending all our amisses, it puts
us upon cutting off, and paring away our excrescencies and superfluities. How
glad should we be then of such an excellent opportunity, that does oblige us
upon pain of death to become new creatures; and we are offered strength and
grace to be so. Who need persuade the hungry man to eat, or the thirsty to
drink! If we understand our needs they will put us forward. When our Souls grow
disordered we should be glad of an opportunity of setting them right: When our
sins grow upon us, and our Charity grows cold, we should be glad of an occasion
to renew our Repentance, and inflame our Charity. Here Is a blessed occasion
that puts us upon all this: This calls upon us to break off our wont of sin, to
kindle our dying charity, to forget our quarrels and contentions, and to put
our selves in a posture for a better life than this. Here is a great grace
offered, and conferred to them that come prepared.

So that we see what great necessity lies upon us to do this. We have a plain
and peremptory command to do it; a great reason also to enforce the Precept;
and after all this, our own interest and advantage does loudly require it of
us. So plain a Precept we may not neglect without open rebellion against our
Lord. Nor can we resist the reason of it without being guilty of great
ingratitude: And after this, if we are not persuaded to it by our own interest
we are false to our own souls. Methinks any of these are strong enough: And it
will be very strange if all of them together should not draw us. If the command
of Christ, and the sense of his dear love, and our own interest besides will
not draw us, certainly our hearts are very hard.

4. To what has been said I add this, that the Jew was most strictly obliged
to keep the Passover, and he that did neglect it was liable to the severest
penalty. And we have therefore great reason to think, the neglecter of this
Precept of our Lords makes himself obnoxious to the wrath of God, by reason of
this neglect. For the Passover, we know that every Israelite was obliged to
keep it, Exodus 12.47. And because it might happen that some of them might be by
reason of their legal defilement unfit; or else by reason of some journey from
home, unable to keep it in that place where it was commanded to be kept;
therefore it was provided in the Law that the second Month should be observed,
and in it the second Passover kept, for the sake of such men as these that were
unavoidably hindered from keeping it in the first month. But this Passover was
only substituted in the case abovenamed. For every Israelite was obliged to
keep the first Passover, if he were clean and not in a journey, and made
himself greatly obnoxious if he did not. Thus we read, the man that is clean,
and is not in a journey, and forbeareth to keep the Passover; even the same
Soul shall be cut off from his people, because he brought not the offering of
the Lord in his appointed season: That man shall bear his sin, Numb. 9.13. And
in case he were in a journey or unclean yet did not this excuse him; he was
however obliged to keep the Passover unto the Lord, v. 10. And that he might do
so the second Passover was instituted, Numb. 9. The Israelites were severely
obliged to keep the Passover, and to keep it aright. He that did not keep that
Feast was to be cut off from Gods people, and he that eat leavened bread during
that Feast, was likewise liable to the same penalty. Exodus 12.15. So that it
was commanded to be kept, and to be kept as was appointed upon pain of the
greatest curse. The Israelite was tied up very strait; he must keep this Feast,
and he must keep it without leaven, and according to all its ordinances and
constitutions. There was danger if he did not keep it as he should, and danger
if he did not keep it at all: If he either keep it not, or kept it amiss, he
rendered himself liable to the curse of the Law; and that none of the smaller
neither, but he was liable to be cut off from among his people for it. And
though I shall not now examine the different opinions about what is meant by
that expression of being cut off from their people; yet I shall tell you that
it does import a very great severity: And therefore we find it annexed to such
sins as the Law of Moses allowed no expiation for. There was no Sacrifice
admitted to make atonement for that offense to which this excision did belong.
The sin of ignorance might be expiated by a Sacrifice, but there was no atoning
such a sin as has this penalty annexed to it. The Soul that sinned
presumptuously was to be cut off from among his people: Numb. 15. 28, 30. Such
a man was reserved to the punishment of God, though he were exempt from the
sword of the Magistrate. It is said of him that would not obey the Messiah that
God will require it of him, Deuteronomy. 18.17. But when St. Peter cites this passage
he expresses it in other words; viz. that such a man shall be destroyed from
among the people, Act. 3.23. Or cut off from the people, for he uses the same
Greek word by which this cutting off is expressed by the Septuagint, Numb.
15.30. By which it appears to be a very heinous offense which is thus denounced
against, and an offense of that nature that God reserves the punishment of it
to himself, and which he allowed no expiation for under the Law of Moses. Thus
it was with the Passover. Every Jew was bound to keep it, or else must be
liable for his neglect to the greatest curse. And this curse was unavoidable
too, for God took upon himself the execution of it, who would not let him
escape that might otherwise have avoided the severity of the Magistrate.

Can we then imagine that we shall escape, if we neglect to eat of this Bread,
and drink of this Cup? Let us not deceive ourselves, we shall not escape: God
will require it of us. Certainly, the Passover was in remembrance of their
Deliverance from Egypt, but our Sacrament is in remembrance of a greater
deliverance by the death of Jesus, who was our Passover that was sacrificed for
us. If they did not escape, how shall we escape? We may indeed escape the
Magistrates sword, but not Gods anger. We may avoid the censures of our
Superiors, but we shall not avoid the wrath of the Almighty. We are greatly
mistaken if we think we may safely omit this duty, or that we take a secure
course to avoid the danger of unworthy Communicating, when we choose not to
Communicate at all: We do in so doing but run out of one danger into another.
The Jew that kept the Passover, and eat leavened bread, was under the curse of
the Law; and so was he that did not keep the Feast at all: There is a great
danger on either side; we run upon our ruin on which hand soever we err.

Indeed the Apostle tells us the danger of our unworthy partaking of this
Sacrament: He tells us that the unworthy Communicant eats and drinks damnation
to himself, and that for this cause many are weak and sickly, and many sleep, 1
Cor. 11.29, 30. This makes us afraid, and well indeed it may awaken us. But
then we should consider also the danger of not partaking at all. This is that
we are not much aware of: And perhaps one reason is, because we do not find the
Apostle tell us of the danger of not partaking at all, even when he does tell
us the danger of not receiving as we ought. But it is very easy to tell the
reason why the Apostle does not speak of that: And the reason is this, because
the first Christians did not only eat of this bread, and drink of this cup, but
they did it frequently also. The Corinthians did Communicate, but they did it
not as they ought: This the Apostle had a fair occasion to reprove them for,
and he does it, and also shows them the danger of what they did. They did not
as we do, wholly neglect to partake of the Sacrament, but they were too
negligent in their Preparation for it, too careless and remiss in so holy and
solemn a service. The first Christians Communicated frequently, they did not so
easily forget the Precept, and the dear Love of their dying Lord, as we do. But
then so it was that what was so frequently done, was not done so devoutly as it
should have been; and the Lords-Table was esteemed too common, and they did not
eat of that Bread, and drink of that Cup, with that difference and
discrimination, which well became so great a service. This is a thing too
incident to our frail nature, that we are too indevout in those services and
offices of Religion, which do frequently entertain us. This was the fault of
these Corinthians, they were not guilty of a neglect of the duty it self, but
did not perform it as became them, and the excellent service which they did
perform.

CHAP. XIV.
By what has been said it appears to be our duty and our interest also to
partake of this Sacrament of the Lords Supper; what it is that keeps us back it
is not easy to say. Certain it is that the Law is not repealed, nor yet does
the reason of it cease. There is the same precept, and as great a reason to
enforce it, and our needs are as great, and the danger of its neglect as great
also as ever. And we are very weak if we do imagine that when he that does
partake of this Sacrament amiss, makes himself obnoxious to Gods wrath, he
shall escape that does not partake at all: But yet because we are very apt to
make excuses when we are invited to this Feast, and please our selves too that
we do it justly, I shall severally consider those common and popular pretenses
which we make use of in this case. And,

Object. 1. First, some men say, when they are invited, that they are not
worthy. And this is thought a just excuse because the Apostle tells us, that he
that eats and drinks unworthily, eats and drinks damnation to himself,
1 Cor. 11.29.

Answ. In answer to this it is necessary we should know what is meant by not
being worthy, which is pretended here as an excuse why we do not partake of
this Sacrament. If by it we mean that we do not deserve to be entertained at
Gods Table, what we say indeed is a great truth, but yet it is not pertinent,
nor is it such a worthiness which is required of us. But if by not being worthy
we mean that we are not fit and rightly prepared to partake of this holy Table
of our Lord, then we may not indeed partake; but then this will not be a just
excuse, it will not clear us and absolve us from our duty.

Certain it is that that worthiness which we must come with, does not imply our
merit or desert, but it only imports such a fitness and preparation of Soul as
is required, and God will accept. For though indeed the word (...), worthy does
sometimes import desert or merit: Thus the labourer is worthy of his hire; i.
e. he deserves his wages; yet it does not always signify so, nor yet in this
case we are speaking of. The word (...) we translate meet, 1 Cor. 16.4.2 These.
1.3. we are obliged to walk (...), worthy of God, i. e. becoming our profession
of him, and the Mercies we receive from him, 1 These. 2.12. And we must walk
worthy of our vocation, Ephesians. 4.1. Aye, and (...) worthy of the Gospel, or as it
becomes the Gospel, as we well translate it, Phil. 1.27. And he does receive
this Sacrament worthily, who does it as is required, and with a clean and pure
heart.

For otherwise this command of partaking of this Sacrament were unpracticable.
If none might receive it but they who deserved this Heavenly Food, we might not
approach, who are unworthy of the common mercies which we do enjoy: Now it is a
very great error to affirm, that our Lord has commanded us to do what is
impossible to be done. And we have the least reason to affirm it of this
service that it is not practicable. For certainly this is one of the easier
Precepts of the Gospel. And though we should think our Savior required a very
hard task of us, when he bids us deny our selves, and take up our Cross, and
follow him; yet we cannot think so when he only bids to do this in remembrance
of him. This is a service of praise and thanksgiving, and such services are not
burdensome to those who have not forfeited their gratitude and ingenuity. And
did we love our dearest Lord as we should do, or as he loved us, we should not
think much of any thing that he should require at our hands; much less should
we boggle at so easy and reasonable a service as this is. It was great folly
in Naaman, that he refused to wash and be clean, according to the advice which
the man of God gave him. And his servants spoke wisely to him when they said,
My father, if the Prophet had bid thee do some great thing, would thou not
have done it? How much rather then when he says to thee, wash and be clean? 2
King. 5.13. If there be any thing hard and difficult which our Savior has
commanded (for he tells us, that his yoke is easy, and his burden is light,)
yet sure I am this is not. So far is it from being impossible, that it is
indeed not difficult to him that is a sincere and diligent Disciple of our Lord
and Savior.

What has been said makes it evident. that that worthiness which is required
in the Communicant does not imply merit or desert, but only such a fitness, and
sincere and holy disposition of Soul, as God does require and will accept. And
we may be worthy partakers of this Table when we are very sensible of our own
demerits. And indeed to think meanly of our selves, does very much dispose us
to receive the benefits of this Sacrament. And therefore when we say we are not
worthy, and make this excuse, our meaning must be, that we are not fit and
prepared for this Holy Table. Now if this be all we have to say, that we are
not fit, and prepared, and therefore we do not approach to this Table, we shall
find that this is no just excuse.

For if it were, we might with the same case excuse our selves from the
practice of the other Laws of Christ. Whereas we are commanded to give to the
poor, we might by the same reason excuse our obedience, and say, that we cannot
do that, because we are not charitable; and besides that, we cannot give alms
as we ought, because we are proud, and love to be seen of men, and to receive
their praise, and therefore rather than do it amiss we will not do it all. Thus
may we excuse our selves from works of mercy, from acts of piety, and the
services of Religion. We may by this method excuse our selves from serving God,
and doing good to our Neighbor. We are not willing our servants should do by
us as we do by God. We expect they should do as we bid them, nor shall it serve
their turns to say that they are not disposed to do what we command. We justly
look that they be ready to obey us, and that they do not indulge themselves in
their sloth, and contumacy. We may be ashamed to serve God at that rate which
we should not accept from our servants. The Jew might easily have avoided the
Passover, if this slender excuse would have served his turn. But God commands
him to keep it, and he must take care to do it as he ought. If he fail in
either of them, he is liable to be cut off from among his people. There was no
such excuse to be admitted.

Again, when you say you are not fit, let me ask you whether or no you have
done all you possibly can to fit your selves. I wish you would put this
question home to your Consciences, and deal sincerely in it. Have you labored
greatly to fit your selves? have you to that purpose set aside some time in
order to the examining of your Consciences? Have you earnestly prayed to God
for his aid and assistance? Have you done it frequently? Have you advised with
your spiritual guides about this weighty matter? Have you used as great a care
as men are wont to use in clearing their title to their Estates and worldly
Possessions? Do you do as much for your Souls, as you do for your Bodies and
Estates? You are not fit to receive the Sacrament you say; but have you
labored greatly that you might be fit? Have you done all you can possibly do:
And after all this, is it the grief of your heart that you are not fit? and do
you continue to labor that ye may? Consider whether it be thus or no with you.
Do not dare to mock God, nor think that you shall be able to deceive him. Have
a care how you dissemble with the God of Heaven and Earth. If you are not fit,
nor yet striving to become so, you are indeed in a very miserable condition. He
that commands you to partake of this Table, commands you to be fit to do it
also. We are not only required to eat of this Bread, and drink of this Cup, but
in order to that, to examine our selves. If we neglect to fit our selves, that
will not excuse us from neglecting the receiving of this Sacrament, unless we
think one fault will excuse another.

Again, we shall do well to consider what it is that renders us unfit. Have we
not some secret sin which we are not willing to part with? We know the danger
to be great, if we bring with us a love to our sins; then indeed we eat and
drink our own Death. Let us then cast our eyes inward, and see what that sin is
which we are so fond of. I doubt not but men may many times easily find where
the true reason lies which renders them unfit. Perhaps we are not willing to
forgive our Enemy, or else we are not ready to make restitution to our
neighbor whom we have injured; or we live a profane and ungodly life, and are
not reconciled to the ways of piety and holiness. It may be that we are not
willing to part with our sensual and worldly lusts, and we are afraid of being
too severely and strictly bound up to a life of Religion and Mortification:
This is much to be suspected; for certainly if we loved our Religion; and hated
our sins, we should be very glad of any opportunity that would engage us more
strictly to do well, and to depart from evil. Sure I am that to him that is
truly good, and labors sincerely to be better, the tidings of this Sacrament
is welcome news: He does gladly embrace this blessed opportunity of becoming
good. For the truth of what I say I dare appeal to the Conscience of devout and
religious persons. And therefore it is much to be feared that the cause which
makes us unfit is this, because we love our sins more than we love our God. And
if it be thus I would wish such people to consider,

How unfit they are to dye. For in this case that which makes them unfit to
receive this Sacrament renders them unfit to dye also. Now his condition is
very dismally dangerous who dares to live in that state of things in which he
would be afraid to dye. We may indeed refuse to Communicate when we have an
opportunity offered us, but we shall not be able to put by the stroke of death.
When God calls us out of this World (and how soon we may be called we cannot
tell) we must go not only whether we be willing but also whether we be fit to
go out or not, we shall not find that any of our excuses will be then taken.
And methinks we should be persuaded to fit our selves for death, it being so
much our interest to be prepared for it. And though we cannot be persuaded to
receive the Sacrament, yet sure we cannot but judge it our duty, and our
interest also, to make our selves fit for it. He that is fit to dye is fit to
receive also, and who would not labor hard to be fit to die, that knows his
time here cannot be long, but may be exceeding short: Be not then so cruel to
your own souls as to be unprepared for death; this makes you liable to not only
a great sorrow but an everlasting sorrow also.

Before I leave this matter, I would know of him, that makes this excuse that
he is not fit, whether he speak as he think. Do you really judge your selves
unfit? For it is possible that a man may make this excuse, and yet have a great
opinion of himself, and judge better of himself than other men, who do receive
this Sacrament, and do it as they should. And therefore let me put it to thy
Conscience, do thou really judge thy self to be unfit? If thou do, then
tell me what effect this has upon thee? Art thou greatly humbled under this
condition? Do thou strive whatever thou can to prepare thy self? Is it that
which you greatly labor for? Are you willing to take as much pains in the case
as you do for your bodies or estates? If you do not strive to become better,
when do you think you shall be fit? Put these things home to your Consciences:
And I doubt not but that if you be sincere and do not dissemble with God, you
may be fitted and prepared for this service.

Object. 2. Secondly, there are others excuse themselves from this service upon
a prudential account, as they esteem it. And thus it is; they understand by the
Apostle, that they eat and drink damnation to themselves if they do it
unworthily, and therefore they conclude it the safer course not to receive it
at all. By this means they think they avoid the danger of unworthy receiving,
and take the most secure course in not receiving at all. This I fear is the
ground that too many rest upon who do forbear to eat of this Bread and drink of
this Cup.

In answer to this pretense I shall not need to say much, especially if what
has been said before be duly considered: But yet something I shall say to it:
And,

Answ. First, I must tell you that though this may be thought a safe and
prudential course, yet it is far from being so. For what prudence is it to run
from one extreme to another, and to neglect the mean which we ought to aim at?
We shall not need to forbear, nor yet to receive unworthily: Why do we not
prepare our selves and receive as we ought! Shall we call it a prudential
course to run away from the Laws of Christ? Or shall he be thought a wise man
that runs from one danger into another that is as great? This is as if a Man
should flee from a Lion, and a Bear should meet him, or a Serpent bite him,
that I may use the words of the Prophet, Amos 5.19. It Is like the prudence of
the sinner in other things: He is apt to run into extremes: Thus he does
frequently do. When he should possess himself of a well-grounded hope, he
either presumes, or else despairs; when he should be patient, he is stupid and
senseless, or else he is querulous and murmuring: When he should do good with
his riches, and relieve the poor, he either profusely spends them upon his
lusts, or else is penurious and covetous. And when he should hear the word of
God and keep it; he either will not hear it, or will not keep it. And as he
shows great folly in all these things so he does in the case before us; For
whereas he is required to receive this Sacrament worthily, he instead of that
either receives it amiss, or else will not receive at all. Which is so far from
being prudently done that it is indeed an argument of great folly; and he that
takes such a course is far from being safe: He that does thus, runs indeed from
a great mischief, but he runs into another. There is a rock on each hand that
he may split upon; he dies if he eat unworthily, and so he does if he carelessly
neglect to eat at all. He that eats and drinks unworthily eats and drinks
damnation to himself. There Is death there; but then we are told by truth it
self, Except ye eat the flesh of the son of man, and drink his blood ye have no
life in you, Joh. 6.53. There Is a death that meets us also. We may meet with
death from a surfeit, and so we may from a famine, and too long an abstinence.
He were a very ridiculous man who because he is forbidden meat by his Physician
in a Paroxysm of his Fever, or under the operation of a Purgative Medicine
should thereupon resolve to eat no more. By this means he will not only starve
his disease, but starve himself also.

Besides, at this rate we might avoid the other precepts of Religion as well as
this. The Jew might have eluded Gods commands that obliged him to obedience
under this pretext that he feared he should not do what God required aright.
There is danger in hearing Gods Word carelessly, shall we therefore choose not to
hear it all? We may displease God in our prayers, if we pray not as we should,
shall we therefore fore not pray at all? We may give alms amiss; shall we
therefore shut our bowels upon the poor? We may keep a fast for evil ends,
shall we therefore keep none at all? There are some that come to Church and do
it from an ill principle, and do thereby increase their condemnation, shall we
therefore stay at home? Some preach Christ out of ill will, shall I not
therefore preach any more? Sure, whatever we may judge, here is little prudence
shown.

For all this while it ought to be considered, that we do not contract our
guilt by receiving but by receiving unworthily. And therefore if we showed our
selves wise we should do it by making our selves fit for this service, and not
by forbearing it altogether. If we took this course we should avoid all the
danger, and not only that, but greatly advantage our own Souls: Whereas now we
run our selves upon a great curfe. If we come, and are unfit, we are accursed;
and so we are if we do not come at all: I shall end that which I had to say to
this pretense with the words of a late Writer, Mr. Daniel Rogers Treat. of the
Sacraments part. 2. page 211.
who was well known, not long since, in these parts. And his words upon this
occasion are these. If scanty coming be a sin, what a fearful praemunire then
run they into, that refuse at all to come? And presently afterward he
denounces terror to all profane Esau's (as he calls them) who being out of love
with the Sacrament through loathing of examination of their woeful profane lives
make it their constant practice to abandon all Sacraments. And when they are
cut off by men's censures for this their contempt, they are content so to live,
and are no whit troubled; a man knows not whether the disease or remedy do
worse with them; I might compare them to Cain, save that I should wrong him by
so unjust a comparison: Cain because he had villainously and sacrilegiously
defiled the Ordinances which Abel and he joined in, was debarred of them, and
for ever cast out of Gods presence: But as cursed as he was he could lay it to
heart, and say it was too great for me to bear. But these Atheists and Swine
are so far from that, that they willingly content themselves to be cast out,
and think it a good bar to keep them from that, which they are glad to be rid
of. If ye ask why they do thus, they say they have business to do, and cannot
skill of this new doctrine of trial, or cannot be reconciled with their
enemies: But oh monsters in the shape of men! -- Surely ye shall pay double for
your contempt, both of the means and the duty it self. -- Oh! But if they come
not they shall not eat (say they) and drink their own damnation! Answ. Yet they
escape not; let them tell me whether of these sentences be more easy, viz.
They eat and drink their own condemnation by coming; Or, take him and bind him,
cast him into utter darkness, where there is wailing, weeping and gnashing of
teeth for not coming? If there be any odds much good do them with it: But their
deep Logic cannot help them to any. Thus he.

And thus much in answer to this pretense: I now proceed.

Object. 3. Thirdly there are others who perhaps are afraid of Communicating
with profane and wicked men. And this is that which keeps them back. They say
they dare not Communicate with the wicked.

It is supposed that they who make this pretense do not make the former. For it
might seem very strange that the same man should use both this and the other
also; that he should at one time pretend he dares not Communicate because he is
not fit to do it; and at another time pretend that he dares not do it because
he looks upon other men to be unfit to receive with him. For by the first he
would seem to insinuate that he has a very mean opinion of himself, and by
this that he thinks very well of himself, how ill soever he judges of his
brother. Having premised this I answer,

Answ. First, that we ought to be very careful that we be not too censorious;
that we do not too boldly take upon our selves the office of a Judge which
belongs not to us. Let us have a care that we be not too rash.

Secondly, suppose it as it is pretended; yet is there no reason we should
suffer for another man's fault. Will not you do your duty because another man
neglects his? You may not come unless you be fit, and will you not come till
your brother be fit too? Shall another man's fault discharge you from your duty?
Christ commands thee to do this; thy duty is plain and determined: He did not
put in this exception, and how then do you dare to do it? Another man's neglect
will not be charged upon thy score. It is a very unreasonable pretense that you
must not come till you are satisfied that other men are fit as well as you. Thy
own sins must keep thee back, but must another man's do so too? It would be very
strange that when you are fit it should be then in the power of another man to
render you unfit. The Apostle says, let a man examine himself, and so let him
eat; but he no where puts this in that we must examine others also. You would
have an hard task of it indeed, if you might not proceed till you were
satisfied in other men as well as in your selves. You are never like to
Communicate if this be a sufficient objection. Have a care you do not think
Christ has commanded you that which is unpracticable. We know not when we may
Communicate if we may not do it till others are prepared as well as we. It Is
very unreasonable to think that we shall be thus easily excused.

Thirdly, We may by no means separate from our brother till he have been
admonished and reproved, and he be found incorrigible, Matthew. 18.15. Our
Savior has taught us our duty in this plainly. Have thou reproved thy brother
for his offense as Christ does direct? How know thou but that thou may by
that means gain him? Thou may not separate from him till he appear to be
incorrigible, and then indeed when the Church has cast him out thou art to
withdraw. But then still it belongs not to every private Christian to exclude
an offender from the Communion. It is no part of our duty, nor are we by any
means fit for it. We should be too forward to use this power amiss, and not to
go that Christian way which our Savior does oblige us to, Matthew. 18. We know
that among the Corinthians there were evil men that were carnal, 1 Cor. 3.3.
others that were injurious and that went to Law with one another before
infidels, Chap. 6. There was fornication and incest among them, chap. 5.1. And
those there were that did behave themselves unchristianly at the Lords Table,
chap. 11. Yet we find not that the censure of Excommucation is sent out against
any but the incestuous: From whence it is easy to conclude that to Communicate
with such is not unlawful in a Christian Church. To which I may add that when
the Apostle reproves them for their unworthy receiving this Sacrament, it is
their own proper negligence he reproves, and not their joining together in the
service.

Fourthly, our communicating with an evil man does not make us partakers of his
sin. For that which we communicate with him in is the profession of
Christianity, and the service of God. And certainly I may join in the
profession of my Religion with him who is no more than a bare professor. This
is not to join with him in his sin, but indeed in doing my duty to Almighty
God. Sin is not caught as infectious diseases are by standing near one another;
we then are infected by an evil man when we imitate his bad example. It is very
evident that Judas received this Sacrament among the other Disciples, our
Savior did not send him away (and yet he knew his wickedness) lest he should
infect the other Disciples. We are required to have no fellowship with the
unfruitful works of darkness, Ephesians. 5.11. The sin we must avoid and reprove, but
we cannot always avoid the sinner. I confess we ought as much as we can to
avoid the evil doer; we ought not to choose his company unless it be out of a
design to reclaim him, and bring him back; this will well become us to
endeavor. And where we cannot avoid the sinner we may shun his evil works, and
by declaring against his sin, we may take off the suspicion of our approving
his evil ways.

What I have said hitherto must not be so understood as if I would encourage
those men to Communicate who are not fit to do it. I have not said any thing
which can be reasonably judged to import any such thing. He that is not fit
will eat and drink damnation to himself. And therefore every man is obliged
very severely to examine his own Conscience. But yet certain it is that there
may be those who are unfit, whom yet I cannot by any law of God or man exclude
from it. And as certain it is that we may very lawfully communicate with those
who are yet very unfit to communicate themselves. And when the Apostle (1 Cor.
11.) blames those who did not Communicate as they should do, yet he does not
blame either those who ministered to them, or those that did Communicate with
them. And therefore those that do receive this Sacrament ought to be very
severe in the examination of themselves. They may be such whom we cannot
lawfully exclude, nor yet can you lawfully separate from them, and yet not be
such as God will accept.

And therefore such men ought not to think themselves fit because the Ministers
of Souls cannot exclude them as unfit, and because the best Christians cannot
lawfully withdraw from them. For it is very certain that there are many things
may render us unfit to Communicate, which yet do not make us liable to the
censures of the Church. Though we may not justly be rejected as Criminals, yet
we may for all that be such in the eyes of God. And therefore it will well
become every one of us to set about the examining our Consciences with fear and
trembling: Let us not think our condition good because the Church does not
exclude us from these holy Mysteries. We may be very evil men, and yet not be
liable to the censure of the purest Church. But it will become us to judge our
selves where our Superiors do not, and indeed cannot judge us. We shall do well
to erect a tribunal in our own breast, and to condemn our selves for those
follies and impieties which other men cannot condemn us for. And there being
now among us at once so great a decay both of piety and discipline also, the
best advice that can be given in the case is that we would take severe accounts
of our selves, and conduct our repentance by the continual advices and
ministry of a Spiritual guide. For by this alone, or principally (as a very
excellent person tells us) was the Primitive piety and repentances advanced to
the excellency which we often admire but seldom imitate; and the event will be,
that, besides we shall be guided in the ways of holiness in general, we shall
be at peace as to the times and manner of receiving the holy Sacrament. -- And
we shall not so frequently feel the effects of the Divine anger upon our
persons as a reproach of our folly, and thepunishment of ourunworthy receiving
the divine Mysteries. And this (says he) was earnestly advised and pressed upon
their people by the holy Fathers, who had as great experience in their conduct,
as they had zeal for the good of Souls.

Fourthly, there are others who do grant it to be their duty to receive, but
yet notwithstanding refuse to do it; and that because they may not be admitted
to do it after such a manner as they would, and as they think they ought to do
it. And perhaps these men do particularly except against kneeling when they do
receive it, and because this is required by the Law, and they account it a sin
to yield obedience to it, therefore they refuse to receive at all. Now I shall
particularly consider those Objections which are or may be brought against
kneeling: And,

Obj. First, it may be objected that kneeling is not agreeable to our Saviors
example when he did institute this Blessed Sacrament, and therefore it is
unlawful. The Disciples of our Lord did not receive it kneeling, and therefore
we may not.

Answ. In answer to this I shall not put the Objector upon proving either what
the posture was, or that it was not that of kneeling, in which the Disciples
did receive this Sacrament with our Lord, but I will suppose that they did not
kneel, but that they used that gesture which was commonly used at their meals;
that is, that they did lie along upon beds, which is said to be the gesture
used at meals in those times, and in that place; yet I shall show
notwithstanding this that we may not refuse to receive the Sacrament upon our
knees. For,

1. It is not to be thought that we are more obliged to follow the example of
Christ and his Apostles in their gesture (which is but a circumstance of an
action) than we are in the other circumstances of time, Vid. Dr. Sanderson de
obligat. Consepraetict. 3.
and place, and habit. Now those that make this Objection do themselves depart
from Christ's example in the other circumstances of time, and place, and habit,
and think it no sin to do it, and are therefore by the same reason at liberty
in the other. Our Savior gave the Sacrament in a private house, and in an
upper room: He gave it also in the Evening and after Supper; and when he gave
it he gave it in a Coat without a seam, yet for all this these men that make
this objection do not in these things follow the example of Christ, nor yet
require other men to do it: I know no reason can be given why we are not as
much obliged to one circumstance as another. It Is not certainly to be believed
that we should be only obliged to the posture, and not also to the time and
place. If we must do it in the same gesture, why do we not also do it at the
same time and place? And if we use our liberty in the time and place it is
strange we should make so great a stir about the gesture.

2. It is very certain that if our Savior and his Disciples did lie along upon
Beds when this Sacrament was instituted, that who ever does sit or stand when
he receives the Sacrament does deviate from Christ's example as well as he that
kneels. For none of these are the gesture which our Savior and his Disciples
are supposed to have used. And if on behalf of sitting it be pleaded that that
being our Table Gesture, ought to succeed to that which our Savior used. I
answer, (1.) That we are not by any law of Christ forbid to receive the
Sacrament unless we can receive it in such a gesture as is commonly used by men
at their Tables; nor have we any such command that does oblige us to use any
certain gesture. (2.) That then it must be granted that if it had been the
custom to eat our meals upon our knees it would have been very lawful for us to
have kneeled at the receiving the Sacrament. From whence it will follow that it
is not evil in it self to do it and so far from that that it would have been
our duty had it but happened to have been the custom of the Country to have
eaten our meat upon our knees. And then, (3.) It will be very strange that the
Laws of our just Superiors should not have as great an influence upon us as
the casual customs of the place where welive; especially when we are so often
called upon to obey our Superiors, and required to obey every ordinance of man
for the Lords sake. We have very plain Scripture that commands us to obey the
King, and all in Authority. But we have none at all that forbids us to kneel,
or commands us to sit when we receive the Sacrament. And our being determined
to our Table Gesture is not from any Law of Christ. (4.) It will also follow
from hence that it will be unlawful to stand as well as to kneel, neither of
them being agreeable to the example of our Savior, nay, nor the gestures which
are commonly used when we eat at our Tables. Nay, (5.) After this manner of
reasoning we should sin if we should receive the Sacrament lying along as the
Disciples are supposed to have done, because it is not our Table-posture; and
so we should contract a guilt when we did most closely follow the example of
our Blessed Savior.


3. To what has been said this may be added, that the Jews were obliged to
keep the Passover, and to keep it according as God had appointed; and we know
that the Law of Moses is very particular and precise in setting down the manner
how God would be served. And it does descend to very minute matters, and
prescribe how the service must be performed. And thus it was in the Passover;
they were determined to the time, and place, when and where this service must
be solemnized, and its particular rites are set down by Moses. But yet
notwithstanding all this, the gesture in which they were to eat this Passover
is not expressed by Moses; he is silent in this particular, and though he lets
them know that they must keep the Passover, yet he does not tell them whether
they must eat their Paschal Lamb, sitting or standing, etc. Now in this case
the Jew was undetermined by any part of Moses Law, as much as we are in the
matter of the Sacrament, what gesture we shall receive it in, by the Laws of
Christ. Indeed if the example of those who kept the first Passover might
determine them, Vid. Bochart. De Animal. Scriptur. in Synops. Crit.
they must eat it as they did: And it is thought most probable that they did
eat it standing. For they were expressly required to eat it with their loins
girded, their shoos on their feet, and their staff in their hand: And to eat it
in have, Exodus 12.11. But yet however we find not that the Jews observed any
such posture afterward, nor did they think themselves obliged to imitate the
example of those who kept the first Passover. And our Savior himself (who did
observe the Law of Moses) keeps the Passover indeed with his Disciples, but not
standing, but sitting, or lying along; which was a posture that was not
enjoined the Israelites by the Law of Moses, nor yet warranted by the example
of the first eaters of the Passover, however it were introduced by the general
consent of the Nation, or the command of their Superiors. For there being no
Law in the case given by Moses, they did not think themselves obliged to
imitate the example of those who in Egypt eat the Passover, but did rather
choose to comply with the custom of their Country, or Law of their Superiors in
this matter, it being not repugnant to any Law of God given by Moses. And
therefore the Jews do frequently tell us of sundry things wherein the (...)
Passover of Egypt differed from the (...) Passover of after times; Vid. Pesach.
C. 9. M. 5.
Maimon. Hal. Pes. C. 10.
and amongst other things they tell us, Targum. Jonath. and Aben Ezra in Exodus
12.11.
that whereas they in Egypt were obliged to eat that Passover in have, Exodus
12.11. For their loins were to be girded, their shoes on their feet, and their
staff in their hands; which seems to import that they eat it standing, and
ready for their marching out of Egypt; yet they tell us that they were not
obliged by this example of the Israelites to do so in after times: Nor do we
ever find that they did it, or that ever they were reproved for not following
this example. Nay, besides what has been said, we find that the Jews had their
(...) or Hymn at the Passover, which was never commanded them by any of the
Laws of Moses, and yet were they not therefore guilty of Will Worship, or
adding to the Word of God. Nay our Savior himself is thought to have complied
with them in this custom of theirs, when he did keep the Passover, Mat. 26.30.

And therefore certainly we have no reason to doubt but that we may lawfully
receive the Sacrament of the Lords Supper upon our knees: It being not against
any Law of Christ; and it is the Law of Christ, which in this case must
determine us: If we be not determined by his Law we are left free, and
therefore may very lawfully use this gesture. But then when our just Superior
commands us, we are bound to obey even by the Laws of Christ, which oblige us
to be subject to the higher powers. When we kneel at the receiving this
Sacrament, we do nothing contrary to Christ's Law: But if we refuse to receive
at all, because we will not kneel, then it is most certain that we break the
Laws of Christ, and that very greatly also; both as we refuse to do this as he
commands us, and as we disobey our just Superiors whom God has set over us.

Object. But others perhaps will except against Kneeling, as that which will
involve us in Idolatry, it being supposed that when we kneel at our receiving
the Sacrament, we do thereby worship the Bread and Wine, or at least by them,
as by an Image we worship Christ.

Ans. 1. Whether by Kneeling when we receive the Sacrament, we may justly be
thought to pay Religious Worship to the Creatures of Bread and Wine, will best
be known by considering the intention of those that do require Kneeling at our
hands. Now it is very certain that our Church which requires we should kneel,
does openly disallow that Doctrine of the Church of Rome, which puts them upon
adoration of the outward Elements. And therefore whatever the Church of Rome is
guilty of, yet it is certain that we believe the Bread and Wine to be
Creatures, and not in their nature altered, nor changed in substance from what
they were. And consequently it cannot be imagined that our Church should
require Kneeling, with an intention that we should worship the Elements of
Bread and Wine, when she has always taught a Doctrine that does contradict any
such practice. And this might suffice in answer to this Objection. But yet I
add,

2. That this might be put out of all doubt, the Church of England has farther
declared her meaning in this matter: So that hereafter whoever shall charge her
as guilty of Idolatry in requiring Kneeling at the Sacrament, as if thereby she
intended we should adore the Bread and Wine, will show himself either
profoundly ignorant; or greatly malicious. What our Church declares to this
purpose may be found in the Book of Common Prayer, at the end of the Rubric,
after the Communion-Service, in these words: Whereas it is ordained in this
Office for the Administration of the Lords Supper, that the Communicants should
receive the same Kneeling; (which order is well meant for a signification of
our humble and grateful acknowledgment of the benefits of Christ, therein given
to all worthy Receivers, and for the avoiding of such profanation, and disorder
in the. Holy Communion, as might otherwise ensue) yet, lest the same Kneeling
should by any persons, either out of ignorance and infirmity, or out of malice
and obstinacy be misconstrued and depraved; It is here declared, that thereby
no Adoration is intended, or ought to be done, either unto the Sacramental
Bread and Wine, there bodily received, or unto any Corporal presence of Christ's
natural Flesh and Blood. For the Sacramental Bread and Wine remain still in
their very natural substances, and therefore may not be adored, (for that were
Idolatry to be abhorred of all faithful Christians) and the natural Body and
Blood of our Savior Christ are in Heaven, and not here: It being against the
truth of Christ's natural body to be at one time in more places than one.

Thus plainly are we taught the Churches sense in the case before us: Nor may
we now imagine that by our Kneeling we are obliged to worship the Creature
instead of the Creator.

3. The Sacrament is delivered to us with a Prayer, and certainly it is not
only lawful to Kneel when we pray, but it is also very agreeable to the example
of our Blessed Savior, Luke 22.41. And if we are bound to pray always, I am
sure it well becomes us to do it then. And there cannot possibly be any danger
of Idolatry in bowing our Knees to the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ.
If we may lawfully pray at all times, and in all places, we may very lawfully
Kneel when we do it. And sure no man in his wits can deny, but I may lawfully
pray to God in the very act of receiving the Sacrament; and if I may do that,
it is very evident that I may use that gesture which our Savior did, when he
prayed a little before his Agony and Death.

What has been said I hope is enough to satisfy those men who desire to find
the truth. There are those whom nothing will quiet, Some men will not be
convinced though we should bring them beams of light. However I shall not
mention any other Objections which men are wont to bring for their excuse: Not
that I have named all that might be found, but because I have named the more
general and material. Nor do I know any other that are worth the naming. I pray
God grant that we may not refuse the Truth wherever we find it. We are in a
very miserable condition, if we suffer our selves to be swayed by our
prejudices, rather than guided by the truth: If we shall withstand the clearest
evidence, because it stands not with our occasions. It will well become us in
the fear of God (who will not be mocked) narrowly to search into our Hearts and
Consciences. If we love the truth we may find it. God will search us ere it be
long; it will then appear whether or no we have done our utmost to be rightly
informed. We shall then find it had been much better to have done our Lords
will, than to have disputed wittily. All our disguises must then be pulled off,
and we shall be judged then by the unerring Law of God. The good God awaken us
to a serious diligence about our Souls, and lead us at once into the paths of
Peace and Truth. We shall have an heavy account to make, if upon light and
insufficient grounds we separate from our brother, and omit so excellent a
service as our dying Lord has required of us. And surely those grounds must be
very light, which have no more weight than the pretenses abovenamed. I shall
end with the words of that pious Father upon this occasion: Quod neque etc.
That what is enjoined, Augustine. Tom. 2. Ep. 118. ad Jan. and ad Casulanum Ep.
86.
and is neither against faith or good manners, is not to be refused, but
according to the place where we are, and do converse, is to be observed.

CHAP. XV.
FRom what has been said before, we may see how much we do amiss, if we
altogether neglect so excellent a service as this, or if we do it not as
frequently as we can: For he that does it but seldom, when he has the
opportunities of doing it frequently, is reprovable as well as he that does
omit it quite. And indeed we are self-condemned, if we do omit and let slip
sundry of those opportunities which God has given us; and only make use of
them sparingly. For whereas by doing it at all we do acknowledge it to be our
duty to do this in remembrance of our Lord, by choosing to do it but seldom, we
do avoid the paying our duty to our Lord, and the disposing our selves for so
excellent and holy a service. It is to be feared that such men are not much
affected with their Lords death, who decline the often remembrance of it. Were
our hearts enlarged we should be willing to be always praising our dearest
Lord. We are not stinted by the Laws of Christ to do this, but so many times in
a year; and we know the first Christians did it very frequently; all that we
are obliged to in the case is that, as often as we do it we should do it in
remembrance of Christ. We may justly suspect our selves not much taken with the
kindness of our Savior, when we do readily neglect so excellent an opportunity
of keeping up the memory of it. It is a sign that our hunger is not great when
we can easily neglect our food that is prepared for us. We are afraid sure that
the interest of Religion should prevail too far upon us, when we will not
accept every opportunity of becoming better: Certainly if we have tasted that
the Lord is gracious, we shall be willing to draw nigh to him, and to do it
frequently also. It is to be feared (as one says well) that they who never
repent till they dye. If we love our Lord greatly, and have upon our minds a
great sense of his kindness we shall be glad to pay him our acknowledgments of
Praise and Thanksgiving: But if we do this as seldom as we can, it is a sign
that we do it rather out of fear than love, that we do it rather because it is
the custom of the Country, than because it was the command of our dearest Lord.
For it is most certain, that if we loved our Savior much we should delight to
remember him frequently. It is so I am sure in all things else which we love:
We take a pleasure in remembering our dearest Friends and Relatives, we
frequently mention those things which have given us a pleasure or profit.

But doubtless we might be persuaded to do this frequently, if we were once
wrought upon to do it an all, and as we should. For the very same reason that
moves the devout Soul to do it once, will also move him to do it frequently.
And that we who profess Christianity should not do it at all, that we should
dare to omit so plain a precept, is to me one of the strangest and most
unaccountable things.

Indeed, where men have no mind to do their duty, they are apt to cavil, and
dispute, and make excuses. Thus do those men do, who had rather dispute wittily
than live well. We please our selves with little arguments, and great
prejudices; and are not only content to neglect our duty, but (which is much
worse) we go about to justify our neglect. Thus do we slide from one error to
another.

But all this while we do but deceive our selves and others; God is not mocked.
We shall be judged hereafter by the unerring Law of God. It is not our mistaken
Conscience that shall absolve us, if Gods Law condemn us. We shall be judged by
what is written, and not by what we ween and think in the case. This
consideration if it had but its due weight with us, would be of great moment to
move us to the most diligent and impartial search after truth. And then
certainly we should not be so easily prevailed upon by weak arguments, and by
the carnal and sensual delights of this world, to neglect so plain and
excellent a duty. Whereas now we have some little Objections against our duty,
or else we have our Farms, and Merchandise, or Yokes of Oxen that hinder us
from doing it. I shall end all with the words of a late pious and learned
Writer upon this occasion.

By this time I hope you see, that it is good for you to draw near to God, at
his Holy Table; if you have any desire to be good Christians, or any savor of
spiritual pleasures. You must whol^^ cast away all remembrance of your duty,
and be lost to all sense of rational satisfaction, or else be strongly inclined
(considering what has been said) to take the pains to prepare your selves, or
rather to keep your selves in a constant Preparation, for frequent Communion
there with our Blessed Savior: An innocent, holy and useful life cannot but
commend it self to you, if it be but on this score, that you may be entertained
with such a comfort as to know the love of God in Christ to you; and be fit to
be feasted continually with such delightful pledges of it. How is it possible
for any considerate persons to despise or neglect such means of their
contentment? The Table of the Lord, methinks, should be more acceptable to them
than a Stage; and they should run more greedily to this Divine Feast, than they
do to the Theaters: He should have more guests, and a greater crowd to attend
upon him than those so much frequented places. For what do they see represented
there, but some of the follies of Mankind; the passions and misfortunes of a
miserable Lover; the wiles and subtle contrivances of some ingenious person; or
such like things, some of which never were? But here is represented the great
wisdom of Almighty God; the manifold wisdom of our Creator, into which the
Angels desired to look, and of which they are gladsom Spectators: The
incomparable kindness of our Blessed Savior; that ardent love which offered
him up to God upon the Cross, and which he still continues now that he is in
the Heavens; as we see by these remembrances which he has left us of it: The
rare method of our Salvation: The wonderful way which Heaven has contrived to
bring lost Souls again thither; the glorious conquest which the Savior of the
World has made over Sin, the Grave and Hell; all which we here behold, his
Captives, and our selves the prize which he desires to win, by all his labors.
Do not men then extremely betray their infidelity? is it not plain that
Christian piety lies languishing and dying; when such numbers will spend a
great deal of time to prepare and dress themselves to be seen in the Theater,
and we cannot prevail in some places, with any considerable company to meet us
at this glorious representation, which we make at the Table of the Lord? They
that will be at the pains to go to the former every day, content themselves,
nay think it a great trouble, to put their Souls into a posture to come to this
holy place once in a whole year. And God knows how many there are, that will
not put themselves to that pains neither: who rarely appear before God at this
Holy Solemnity, and whose faces are scarce ever seen in the presence of our
Savior, O shameful ingratitude! which you that read these things, if you are
believers, can never endure. I think to be guilty of. If you give any credit to
this History of the love of God in Christ Jesus, recorded in the Gospel, you
will spend some time sure to dispose your selves to make frequent
acknowledgments to him, by receiving these holy Mysteries. You will be ashamed
that so much time should be consumed in triming up your selves to see, and to
be seen in other places; and little or none that you may come before God, and
behold the great things that he has done for your Souls. For the love of God
consider at what charge he has furnished this Table for you; how often he has
invited you to it; how desirous he is that you would show him so much love, as
not to refuse him your company there. Think how ill he must needs take it, if
you will not accept of his singular kindness; nay, that you your selves will
not be pleased, when you reflect and consider, of how much joy you have
deprived your Souls, by denying him so much of your duty. For there is no
compare between all the jollities in the world, and this one single pleasure,
of giving hearty thanks to God, for his unspeakable mercy to us in Christ
Jesus. Do but come and see. Satisfy your selves by waiting on him at his
Table, with such thoughts as become his presence. If you have the least spark
of goodness; you will find it shine and glow, and spread it self to your
infinite joy and contentment of heart. Among all the various degrees and
conditions of Christian people, there will none be found that come hither with
sincere affection to do this in remembrance of their Savior, but may go away
rejoicing, loaded with many Divine benefits.

Heads of Self-Examination, by which we may be directed to find out what sins
we are particularly to repent of either before the Sacrament, or at any other
time which we set apart for Repentance and Humiliation of our selves. Wherein
are laid before us the several duties we owe to God, our Neighbor, and our
Selves.
To God. FAith, or belief of his Word: A well grounded Hope in his Mercy. Love
and Fear of Him above all. Trust in him. Submission to Him. Honor to His Holy
Name, Word, Appointments. Thankfulness, Worship, Repentance:

To our Neighbor in General. Justice, which requires a doing by him in all
respects as we would be done by: and forbids all injury, whether it be by
drawing him into Sin, endangering his Life, depriving him of his Peace,
invading his Bed, his Goods, or good Name; and forbids all Envy, and Malice,
and Covetous desires of what belongs to Him; and Charity by which we wish well
to him, and are disposed to assist and help him.

In Particular. To our Superiors, Reverence, and hearty Obdience, and
Submission to our Equals; unfeigned Friendship and Kindness: To our Inferiors;
Gentleness, Mercy, and a great care of their Souls.

To our Selves. Humility, Meekness, Consideration, Content, Diligence, and
Watchfulness over our Selves; Chastity, or purity of Heart and Life: Temperance
in Eating and Drinking; Moderation in our Sleep or Rest, and Recreations, and
in our Garb and Expenses.

Hy these Heads we may examine our selves. And we must particularly confess
wherein we have failed; and we must not onl confess the sin but the
circumstances of aggravation with which it was attended: Of which see the first
chapter of this Book. And, as we must confess with shame and sorrow, so we must
come to the Sacrament with express resolutions to forsake these sins for the
time to come.

A Prayer before the Sacrament.
O Most Glorious, and for ever Blessed Lord God, Thou art and there is none
like unto thee in Heaven or in Earth; thy Wisdom is infinite, thy Power
irresistible, and thou art of purer eyes than to behold the least iniquity with
approbation. It is of thy unspeakable Mercy that I am not long ago consumed.

I blush and am ashamed when I lift up my eyes unto thy Divine Majesty: I do in
all humble reverence prostrate my self before thee, and implore thy gracious
favor in the name and Mediation of Jesus Christ the Righteous, who ever lives
to make intercession for those who come unto God by him.

I do acknowledge thy many mercies toward me. I received my being and my
breath from thee: I have ever since I came into being been sustained by thee.
Thou have preserved mine eyes from tears, my feet from falling, and my Soul
from death. My Life and Health, my Liberty, and all the comforts of my life are
entirely owing to thy gracious goodness and bounty.

But above all thou art to be acknowledged for thine inestimable Love in the
Redemption of the World by our Lord Jesus Christ, for the means of Grace, and
hope of Glory. Thou have given thy Son to dye for me, revealed thy gentle and
holy Laws to direct and guide me, promised thy Spirit to assist me, propounded
Eternal Life to encourage my endeavors. I have been received into thy Church
by Baptism, and promised and professed obedience to thy holy Laws.

But notwithstanding all these obligations to sincere and universal obedience,
I have many ways offended against thy Divine Majesty. I have not honored thee
as my Creator, nor loved thee as my Father, nor obeyed thee as my Sovereign
Lord and Master. And whereas I have been very sensible of the kindness showed
my by my fellow Creatures, I have had but very little sense of the innumerable
and underserved favors which thou have heaped upon me from time to time.

I have sinned against thee in thought, word, and deed: I have sinned greatly
and deserve the death which by my wickedness I have pursued -- I am guilty
after the clearest light and knowledge; Here make a particular confession of
sin.
after the most indearing mercies and favors; after the most solemn Vows and
promises of obedience, and the most awakening Judgments; I have sinned under
sufficient means of Grace, and after many experiences of the evil of departing
from thee. I have contemned and despised thy divine Majesty, and suffered my
self by an easy and small temptation to be drawn away from thee the fountain
of my Life and Happiness, and the great lover of Souls.

O Lord look down from heaven with an eye of pity and compassion upon me a
wretched sinner: I am less then the least of thy mercies, and am vile in my own
eyes: I beg thy pardon and forgiveness for Christ his sake, who came into the
World to seek and save that which was lost.

In a deep sense of the wickedness of my former life, and the heinous nature of
my offenses I approach unto thy Divine Majesty with full purpose of amendment
of Life: I trust in thy mercy, O Lord, through Christ Jesus; and do with all
possible thankfulness keep in memory his precious death. And being very
sensible how much I stand in need of thy mercy and forgiveness of all my sins,
and the circumstances of aggravation, which have attended them, I do declare
that I do forgive all my Enemies, and that I come before thee with sincere and
universal Charity to all mankind.

Search me O Lord; and try my heart, and lead me into the way Everlasting.

I am coming to thy Holy Table to renew the Covenant with thee which I have
broken. I am unworthy of the Crumbs which fall from thence. But most gracious
Lord look upon me in Christ Jesus. Help me that I may attend upon thee without
distraction. Work in me all those holy and heavenly dispositions which may
render me fit for this service. Grant that I may come before thee with lowly
thoughts of my self, and the most raised apprehensions of thy love in Christ
Jesus; strengthen my weak Faith, perfect my Repentance, confirm my resolutions
of amendment, and enlarge my Charity; grant that I may receive Christ Jesus my
Lord, and that I may walk in him: That I may partake of the benefits of his
death, and of the fruits of his intercession at thy right hand.

I most humbly beseech thee not only to pardon all my past sins, and to speak
peace to my Soul, but that thou would renew my nature and write thy laws
upon my heart. Englighten my dark mind, rectify my crooked will, sanctify my
depraved affections, and purify all the thoughts and intentions of my Heart,
and grant that for the time to come I may forsake every evil way and purify my
self as thou art pure.

Keep me, O Lord, for the time to come from every thing that is hurtful to me,
and displeasing to thee. From the excesses both of care, and fear; from snares
and great perplexities; from carnal desires and brutish inclinations; from
covetousness and hatred, from envy and pride, from vanity and dissimulation;
murmuring and discontent. And make me steadfast in justice and charity, in
humility, and meekness; in purity of heart and heavenly mindedness, and sincere
devotion.

And to these Holy ends vouch safe me the presence of thy Spirit, and power of
thy grace, and endue me with heavenly Wisdom, and all this I beg for the sake
and in the Mediation of Jesus Christ.

Our Father which art, etc.

Ejaculations to be used at the Lords Supper.
THE Lord has done great things for me, whereof I am glad.

If thou, Lord, should mark iniquities; O Lord, who shall stand?

But there is forgiveness with thee, that thou may be feared.

He that spared not his own Son but delivered him up for us all, how shall he
not with him also freely give us all things?

O wretched man that I am who shall deliver me from the body of this death!

I thank God through Jesus Christ our Lord.

God commends his love toward us, in that while we were yet sinners, Christ
died for us.

Much more then being now justified by his blood, we shall be saved from wrath
through him.

For if when we were Enemies, we were reconciled to God, by the death of his
Son: Much more being reconciled we shall be saved by his Life.

At the Receiving of the Bread.
THou have said, O Blessed Jesus, I am the living Bread, which came down from
heaven: If any man eat of this Bread, he shall live for ever. Be it unto thy
Servant according to thy Word, in which thou have caused me to trust.

Surely goodness and mercy shall follow me all the days of my Life, and I will
dwell in the house of the Lord for ever.

Many, O Lord my God, are thy wonderful works, which thou have done, and thy
thoughts which are to us ward: They cannot be reckoned up in order unto thee:
If I would declare and speak of them they are more than can be numbered.

I am thine O Lord, I devote my self to thee, O save thy Servant who trusts
in thee.

I have inclined my heart to perform thy statutes always, even unto the end.

Depart from me ye evil doers, for I will keep the Commandments of my God.

At the Receiving of the Cup.
O Blessed Savior let thy Blood purge my Conscience from dead works to serve
the living God.

Worthy is the Lamb that was slain to receive Power, and Riches, and Wisdom,
and Strength, and Honor, and Glory, and Blessing; who has loved us and washed
us from our sins in his own Blood.

I will not henceforth live unto my self but unto him who dyed for me and rose
again.

Blessed be the Lord my God, who only does wondrous things.

And blessed be his glorious name for ever, and let the whole Earth be filled
with his Glory. Amen and Amen.

After Receiving.
BLessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, which according to his
abundant Mercy, has begotten us again unto a lively hope by the Resurrection
of Jesus Christ from the dead: To an inheritance uncorruptible and undefiled
and that fades not away.

Bless the Lord O my Soul and forget not all his benefits.

Perfect that which concerns me and forsake not the work of thine own hands.

I entreat thy favor with my whole heart:

Be merciful unto me according to thy word.

I have sworn and am steadfastly purposed to keep thy righteous Judgments.

O hold thou up my goings in thy paths, that my footsteps slip not.

A Prayer after the Receiving the Sacrament.
BLessed be thy glorious name, O Lord, for all thy unspeakable mercies to me
and to all the World. I adore and magnify thee for thy great goodness in
giving thy Son to dye for me, and making me partaker of his most precious Body
and Blood. O Lord what is man that thou thus regardest him! And what am I (a
vile and wretched sinner) that thou should be thus favorable to me?

Thou have been pleased to admit me to renew that Covenant with thee which I
had broken, and to give me assurance of thy readiness to pardon so vile and
great a sinner as I have been, I have received the pledges of thy love, and
been admitted to thy holy Table. I have there devoted my self again unto thee,
my Soul and Body, all my powers and faculties. I have vowed obedience to thee,
and after the most solemn manner consecrated my self to thy service.

Thou art a God that know the heart, and art not to be mocked: I tremble
when I consider thy infinite power, wisdom, and holiness. Let these thoughts
beget in my Soul a great fear of thy Holy name, a great care to do thy will.
Grant I may not for the future turn the grace of thee my God into wantonness,
and that I may not receive the Grace of God in vain.

There is nothing hid from thee. Thou know my weakness and infirmities, and
the temptations with which I am assaulted, and to which I have too often
yielded. I am surrounded with snares, and my spiritual Enemies are powerful and
active. O Lord help thy Servant, and grant that I may both resist and vanquish
them by the aid of thy Holy Spirit. Keep the possession of my Soul which I have
unfeignedly surrendered up unto thee:

Unite my heart O Lord to fear thy name, and grant that I may spend the
remainder of my time in obedience to thee, and in acts of Charity to my
brethren.

Create a clean heart, O Lord, and renew a right Spirit within me. Forsake me
not O Lord, if thou leave me I perish. Guide me by thy Counsel and at last
receive me to thy glory.

I do greatly desire the Salvation of mankind, and humbly commend to thee this
Church and Kingdom, the Kings Majesty and all our Superiors in Church and
State, humbly entreating thee to direct and guide them all into those holy
ways that are pleasing to thee and beneficial to those who are under their
charge and influence.

And work in the minds of all Christians an unfeigned Charity, a peaceable
temper, patience and exemplary meekness, and all the other fruits of thy Holy
Spirit.

And grant me thy heavenly grace that I may so use things temporal that I may
not miss of thy Eternal Bliss for the sake of Jesus Christ my only Mediator
and Advocate.

Amen.
A Morning Prayer for a Family.
O Almighty and Eternal Lord God, the great Creator of Heaven and Earth, and
the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, look down from Heaven with pity
and compassion upon thy servants, who humbly cast ourselves down before thee,
in a great sense of thy mercies, and our own misery.

There is an infinite distance between Thy Glorious Majesty, and us thy
Creatures, the work of thy hands. Between thy infinite power and our weakness,
thy Wisdom and our Folly, thy Eternal Being, and our Mortal Frame.

But Lord, we have set our selves at a greater distance from thee by our sin
and wickedness. We do humbly acknowledge the corruption of our nature, and the
many rebellions of our lives. We have sinned against Heaven, and before thee in
thought, word and deed. We have been profane Contemners of thy Majesty, and of
thy Holy Laws.

We have also sinned against our Brother, and our own Souls, by omitting what
we ought to have done, and committing what we ought not. We have rebelled
against light, despised thy Mercies and thy Judgments, broken our own vows and
promises, neglected thy means of grace, and opportunities of becoming better.
Our iniquities are multiplied, and our sins are very great.

We confess them, O Lord, with shame and with sorrow, with detestation and
loathing. We are vile in our own eyes, as we have rendered our selves vile in
thine. We pray thee to be merciful unto us in the free pardon of our sins, for
the sake of thy Dear Son, and our alone Savior Jesus Christ, who came not to
call the righteous, but sinners to Repentance.

And we pray thee to renew our natures, and to write thy Laws upon our hearts.
Help us to live righteously, soberly, and Godly in this present World. Make us
humble and meek, patient and contented, and work in us all the graces of thy
Holy Spirit.

Preserve in us a sense of our dependence upon thee, and of our great
Obligations to thee. Help us that we may love thee with all our heart, and that
we may universally obey, and cheerfully submit to thy holy will.

Save and defend us from all sin and danger, from malice and ill will, from
covetousness and sensuality, from pride and vanity, and from all the deceits of
the world, the crafts of the Devil, and lusts of the Flesh.

Direct us, O Lord, in all our difficulties, supply our wants, support us under
our troubles, enable us against our temptations; prosper our honest endeavors,
and above all things purify and cleanse our thoughts.

Prepare us for death and judgment, and let the thoughts thereof awaken us to a
great care and study, to approve our selves unto thee in well doing.

Bless thy whole Church, these Kingdoms to which we belong: And bless with thy
choicest Blessings our Sovereign Lord the King: Defend him against all his
enemies; Let his days be many, and his Reign prosperous: Bless him in his
Royal Relations, in his Counselors, and his Counsels. Bless all the Governors
and Teachers of thy Church; grant them such a measure of thy Grace and Divine
Wisdom that they may by their Doctrine, and by their examples, gain many souls
unto thee. Help all that are in trouble, sorrow, need, sickness, or any other
adversity: Give them patience under their troubles, a sanctified use of them,
and in thy good time a deliverance from them.

Be merciful to our Friends, and forgive our Enemies; and accept or our humble
acknowledgment for thy preservations of us this last night, and for all thy
mercies to us. And we pray thee to take us into thy protection this day, and to
keep us in perfect peace, and all we beg for the sake of Jesus Christ, who has
taught us to say,

Our Father, etc.
An Evening Prayer for a Family.
MOst gracious and merciful Lord God, from whom descends every good and
perfect gift, and our most merciful Father in Jesus Christ; we offer up to thy
Divine Majesty our unfeigned Praise and Thanksgiving for all thy mercies
toward us. Thou did make us at first, and have ever since sustained the work
of thine own hands: Thou have given us thy Son to dye for us, and have admitted
us into thy Church, and given us assurance of pardon upon our Repentance and
sincere obedience of thy holy precepts. Thou art pleased to lengthen out to us
the time of Repentance, and to move us to it by thy word, and by thy Spirit, by
thy mercies and thy judgments.

Out of a deep sense of thy mercies, and our own unworthiness, we appear before
thee at this time: We are ashamed of our vile ingratitude: We have sinned, O
Lord, and done very wickedly: Be merciful unto us, O Lord, and pardon us for
Jesus Christ his sake.

Instruct us, O Lord, in all the particulars of our duty, and give us true
wisdom, who have promised to give wisdom, and upbraidest not. Be with us under
every Trial and temptation, and suffer us not to be tempted above what we shall
be able.

Take care we pray thee of our affairs, and more and more direct us into thy
truth. Defend us against all our Enemies, but especially against our spiritual
ones. Suffer us not to be drawn away from thee by the blandishments of the
world, by carnal desires, the cunning of the Devil, or the deceitfulness of sin.

Work in us thy good will and pleasure, and discharge our minds of all things
that are displeasing to thee, of all ill will and discontent, wrath and
bitterness, pride and vain conceits of our selves, and render us charitable,
holy, pure in heart, patient and Heavenly minded.

Be with us at the hour of death, dispose us for it, and deliver us from the
slavish fear of it, and make us all willing and fit to dye, when ever thou
shall call us hence.

Bless, O Lord, all the race of Mankind; let the world be filled with the
knowledge of thee, and thy Son Christ, as the waters cover the Sea. Be gracious
to thy whole Church, and especially to that part of it, planted in these
Kingdoms.

Bless the Kings Majesty, and let his Crown flourish upon his Head, and let no
weapon formed against him prosper: Bless all his Relations, and teach his
Senators wisdom: And bless all that are to govern and teach thy Church, make
them successful in their labors, and grant they may consider the account they
must one day give. Pity the sick and weak, the poor and needy, the Widows and
Fatherless, and all that mourn or are broken in heart. Be merciful unto them
according to their several necessities.

Bless our Friends, and grant us Grace to forgive our enemies, as heartily as
we do desire forgiveness of thee our Heavenly Father.

We pray thee to defend us this night from every thing that is evil, and do
more for us than we can ask or think, for Jesus Christ his sake, in whose name
and words we continue to Pray,

Our Father, etc.
FINIS.

