THE Lybeller Carracterizd, OR A Hue and Cry Sent after Him. Some of his Works
made Public: with Observations thereupon.
WHereas some envious Person, or Persons in or about London (as is supposed)
have of late abused several honest Men in several Countries, by sending great
Packets by the POST; and thereby not only putting them to considerable Charges,
but also abusing several with scurrilous Language and Falsehood; which have been
born with until it became frequent; and then several have refused to receive
them; so they have been returned upon the Postmaster again. The Handwriting
being compared, seems much alike; and the Seal, sometimes the Anchor, and
sometimes the Ship, etc. and Printed Books writ upon between the Lines, and
wrapped up in a blank piece of Paper, charged 14, and 18 d. for Postage; and some
less: And inasmuch as such Practice is very unjust, and a Work of
Unrighteousness: it is the duty of all honest men fearing God, not only to
disown, but publicly to testify against such a Practice.

It was, and is at this day, a certain Truth, That he that does Evil hates the
Light: neither will he bring his Deeds to it, least it should reprove him. And
doubtless, the Nameless Author of those Packets loved Darkness rather than the
Light, because he was afraid to put his Name to what he has writ: but his Work
discovers him to be a Night Wanderer: and though he would seem (it may be) to
be Religious; yet how vain is it for him so to do, that has not a Bridle to
his Tongue; but will accuse, and not prove, and ask Questions to no purpose,
except to slander and abuse men; and is yet to learn that Lesson which our
Savior taught his Followers, Viz. Whatsoever ye would that Men should do unto
you, that do unto them.

This Nameless Author of the Packets, seems as if he had authority (or at least
assumes it) to judge of Men's Properties, and question the printing of Books,
that are not Licensed by such nameless Persons as himself: and in particular,
he quarrels, and seems to be offended with a small Book written concerning that
Honorable Woman Loveday Hambly, deceased; and several other Books, that have
been wrote by Persons of good Repute, Men fearing God, and abhorring such idle
Practices as the Author of the Lybel is found in.

In short, the Author of those Packets makes it his Business to abuse honest
men, and endeavors as much as in him lies, to take away their good Name, by
bespattering them with bad Names, and in particular, has bent his Arrows of
Envy and Hatred against that Servant of God J. S. deceased, and J. W. and
others: but seeing he is such a Night-Wanderer, and will not tell his Name,
what he writes is the less taken notice of, or credited amongst men of
Understanding.

Now if this Lybeller will come forth, and own his Work, he shall have a fair
Hearing; and if he be found guilty, let him repent and do so no more; but if he
does persist in this wicked Work to abuse and cheat men, as before mentioned;
which is little less than picking their Pockets. This is to give notice, that
whosoever can give certain intelligence of his Name, and place of his Residence
or Habitation, shall have reasonable Satisfacton for their pains. Written by a
Lover of Truth and Honesty, but a Witness against the Contrary.

Reading, the 5 th. of 1 st. Mo. 1683/4. Benj. Coals.

And have no Fellowship with the Unfruitful Works of Darkness, but rather
reprove them: for it is a shame even to speak of those things which are done of
them in secret. Ephesians. 5. 11, 12.
HEre is the work of a formal Apostate manifested, and some Observations and
Queries made public, that was long since delivered to some of the Formal
Preachers in Reading, but no Answer given to them; or an Hue and Cry after a
nameless Author, that has made it his business to send great Packets by Post,
from London to Reading, and to many other Places in the Nation, whereby honest
men have been put to great Charge, and much abused by one that would seem to be
Religious and very Zealous, for the setting up of Outward Things, as may be
seen by his own words, as they were sent to two Persons in Reading, set down
verbatim: also a short Postscript.

First Query. Was not Peoples going from the Light and Spirit in their own
Particulars many Ages since, the Cause why so many Forms of Prayers were made
to be said by the Church of England.

2 dly. And did not their compelling and using Violence to those that were
otherwise minded, proceed from the Spirit that made the Form?

3 dly. Did not the Presbyterians with their Church-Faith and Directory that
they had made, do like the Church of England, when they had power;
Excommunicate and cast into Prison, such as could not bow to their Image, which
they had set up?

4 thly. 'Did not the Baptists with their Form which they did cry up, do like
the former? And has not all the Lo here is, and the Lo there is arisen, when the
People in every Generation have gone from the Spirit's Teaching?

5 thly. 'And has it not been so with all other Sects, when they have erred
from the Spirit, which was given to be for a Leader, and have run into the
setting up of Outward Things; which has proved a Snare in all Ages; read and
see how it was with Israel of old, when they forsook the Lord; how did their
Enemies prevail over them? Let it be a warning to all in our days.

6 thly. And now it is come to the Formal Quakers turn; and are not they, with
all their strength and might they can get in most places, a setting up the Form
that they have made, and giving it higher Names than any that has gone before:
and some has had the Confidence to say, and preach openly (that what they had
set up) was to keep things sweet and clean; notwithstanding many things have
happened amongst them in many Places, which is a stink and a shame to mention;
yet calling them Holy Orders, and such like N^m^s as they in their imaginary
Minds could think on; too much like the Golden Image that was set up in the
days of Daniel, which the Lord did and will Confound.

7 thly. And does not many of the Formal Preachers sit with their Hats on, when
many of the Lord's Servants are moved to pray.

8 thly. And does not many others imitate them in that ungodly Practice; so
that it may be said as it was in times past, like Priest, like People: which is
a trouble to many, and a stumbling Block to the Weak that beholds it; and may
it not be said now as in Times past; The Teachers of the people have caused
them to err.

9 thly. And do not some of you, Formal Preachers, send great Packets by the
Post, directed to honest men in the Country without any Name to them, on
purpose to put them to Charge, witness Reading, where four were sent to two
Persons in eight days time, and charged 3 s. 8 d. to be paid by them they were
sent to; and many more have come to this Town since, besides what have been
sent to other Places.

10 thly. And are these the Fruits of a Christian Spirit? or from them that are
Apostatized from it? Let any that have any understanding of the Things of God,
Judge.

11 thly. And have not you, according to your Power, been like them before
mentioned, considering your standing, in giving bad Names, both in your
Prayers, and also Preaching; calling such dark Spirits (that could not join
with you about your Forms) and that they were gone in the way of Cain: and many
such like Expressions; and have you not endeavored to make the People believe
it; when you know in your Consciences, that many that you so brand, are
blameless, both in Life, Conversation, and Doctrine.

12 thly. And was it not the Elders of Israel in days that are past, that gave
unrighteous Judgment, and did condemn the Innocent? And has it not been so in
our days? Witness the Paper that was signed by 66 against their innocent
Brethren in the North? And may not the same Cry be sounded in this our day, as
was then, in the Ears of many, Return, return to the place of Judgment. Even to
that Principle that was first preached, which was the first, and will be the
last.

13 thly. When David kept to the Spirits teaching, did not he say, O Lord, thou
have made me wiser than all my Teachers, and thy Word is a Light to my Feet,
and Lanthorn to my Paths. And this teach't him to order his Conversation
aright: and it is the same at this day, and will remain for ever.

14thly. And is not the Lord God, who has an All-seeing Eye, appeared, and
made known himself in this our day, for this very end, according to his
Promise, to gather a People to himself, from all the Lo-heres and the
Lo-theres, as has appeared, and is bringing them to wait upon him; who is
feeding all that do truly hunger after him, with that Bread that does truly
satisfy their longing Souls, and all such, as they abide under his Teaching,
need go no more forth, blessed and praised be his everlasting Name for ever.

26 th. 11 th. Mo. 1683. L. K.

Here follows the words of the Nameless Author written in the Title Page of the
Relation of Loveday Hambly, deceased, and sent to B. C. Viz.

Ben. Coal, Here is a Paper of thine, where thou applauds, with many frothy
Expressions, L. H. and says, Her Table was plentifully spread. It is like so,
makes thee so to applaud her: has she not given thee some great Legacy for thy
Funeral Sermon? Had thou, or you Authority to Print M. D. and F. S's Letters?
Ye tell of her good Works and Charity, and is that the Cause that ye do so so
applaud her? the Papists will do the same: But are you in the Spirit of Good
Works and Charity, or Evil? Have thou not cried Peace to such as put in thy
mouth, and oppose such as stand against thy wilful, peevish Spirit for want of
Charity; but thou would appear to be somebody, and to make a noise in Print,
with thy tinckling Cymbals and sounding Brass, as thou do in Meetings: Why
did not you Print, how you shut the Women's Quarterly Meeting out of their
Meeting House, and shut the Quarterly Men's-Meeting out of the house at
Blewberry, and they were fain to meet at an Inn, and A. Estmead nailed up their
Meeting House Door at Calne, and they were fain to meet in the Street, and the
Women fain to meet in a Malt-House. Is this your Liberty of Conscience, and
Works of Charity, to keep People out of their Property, or the Persecuting
Spirit of the World cloakt with Liberty? Has J. S. and J. W. taught you this
Doctrine? Is this as it was in the Beginning? He that sits in Heaven will
break your Bands in sunder, and laugh you to scorn, whose Babel and Folly is
manifest to all men that know you, and will be rewarded according to your
Works. Isai. 48. 8. I knew thee, that thou would deal treacherously.

Observe, B. C. gave a short Testimony with some others in Print relating to
the Life and Death of his old Mistress L H. and spoke something of her Praise,
whom he knew to be worthy thereof, living a Servant with her some years, as
appears more at large in that Paper given forth on her behalf; which the Reader
may do well to see, and then may better take notice of the Envy and Malice
that has appeared by the Nameless Author of the Packets: he says, Here is a
Payer of thine, where thou applandest with many frothy Expressions L. H. Which
is wrong in this Formal Apostate, so to say: and for B. C's saying, Her Table
was plentifully spread; he said no more than he knew; see the Paper, and Judge:
and if she had given him a Legacy, as he scoffingly says, he had better
deserved it than some others that used to be frequent at her Table; and they
can do no less but say, if they speak true; as B. C. has done; although what
he has said, could not be for any great Legacy, or for her Funeral Sermon, as
the Nameless Author scoffingly says, for he wrote nothing as I know of, till
she was dead, a^^ if she gave him any thing, it could not be for that, for she
knew not (...)

Observe, This Lybeller seems to be offended, and says, Had (...) or you
Authority to Print M. D's and T. S's Letters. Answer There is no Question to be
made of that; but the Reader may observe, th^^ what was Printed, was not
stamped by the Second-days Meeting; and some may be so foolish as to say, It
was out of the Unity; and did not this make him to compare it with the Papists:
But I think many of them will hardly do as he has done, in sending great
Packets by P^st, to put honest men to Charge, and conceal their Names, as he
has done his; and must needs be talking of Charity, and tells of Tinkling
Cymbals and Sounding Brass: but what this Formal Apostate has done, makes but
a bad Sound. And why did you not print (says he) how you shut the Women's
Meeting out of their Meeting House, and shut the Quarterly Mens-Meeting out of
the House at Blewberry, and they were (...) to meet at an Inn. Answer. If it
were so, the Friends at Blewberry can give the best account why it was so. It
is a sign they were a (...) of such Company that use to frequent such Meetings
of late days which made it their Business to brawl and contend against honest
Men, (...) had been, and are serviceable in their day: too much of this I have
seen, and do not speak by Hearsay. This Nameless Author says (...) Estmead
nailed up their Meeting House Doors at Calre; but (...) was so or no, I shall
have it, it being without the Compass of my knowledge but do wish he had not as
much ground for what he did, as they had at Blewberry, if it be as is said, and
what is all that to B. C.

Observe. The Nameless Author says, That the Women were (...) meet in a
Malt-House. I confess, that was hardly well taken by (...) that came from
Londong, and other Places, to help to settle the Gov^^^m^nt of the Women's
Meetings; but he need not be so much offended with the Malt-House, for is is no
such inferior Place to sit in at (...) And he further says, Is this your
Liberty of Conscience. Ans. Surely the Women in the Malt-house in Reading,
there met and assembled together, might have brought forth as good an Edict as
they did that met at Barbados. And says the Nameless Author, Has J. S. and J.
H. taught you this Doctrine? Ans. I am sure they never taught any to do as he
has done and then conceal his Name, they were men of more Integrity, and did
abhor such a Practice as he is found in; but his Reward will be according to
his Work: How are the hidden things of Esau searched out! The Nameless Author
cites Isai. 48. 8. I knew thee that thou would deal treacherously. Ans. Very
proper for himself. And it may be said of him as once the Prophet of the Lord
said concerning Edom, The pride of thy heart has deceived thee, thou that
dwillest in the Clefts of the Rock, whose Habitation is high; that says in his
heart, who shall bring me down to the ground? Tho thou exalt thy self as the
Eagle, and tho thou set thy Nest among the Stars, thence will I bring thee
down, says the Lord.

Here follows the words of the Nameless Author, to Tho. Curtis in one of the
Packets, Viz. You may take your fawning, flattering Funeral Sermon home again,
and spread not such things abroad least they be turned home again with shame;
had you not, nor do you not expect some great Legacy for your Work? and is not
this crying up one, as you did J. S. and crying down others, like Carnal men,
building of Babel, whom God will confound; and some of her Neighbors reproved
the Madness and Folly of such Prophets, when they saw those flattering frothy
Expressions concerning L. H. which more manifests a puffed up Spirit than
Humility, but no better Fruits can be expected. T. C. read it over again, and
it may happen thou may better consider thy Folly, if Envy and Passion has
not blinded thee; and thou have made a great Boast what thou have done in this
Book; but the Truth has tried it, and has a sense of the Work and Spirit to
be conceited and Lofty, etc. There is no peace, says the Lord to the Wicked.
Their Liberty of Conscience you may read, 1 Pet. 2. 16. Isai. 48. 22. and in
Jude.

The Reader may take notice, that T. C. was one of them that gave a testimony
forth concerning his old Friend L. H. with whom he had been conversant, and
made serviceable in the hand of the Lord, as appears more at large, by what he
has wrote on her behalf; and I know no reason why this Nameless Author should
be so much offended at it as he is, except it was, because it was not sent to
be approved of by the Second, Days Meeting, as if he had power to Bind and
Loose: he says, the Truth has tried it, and has a sense of the Work and
Spirit.

Observe. So many as have an Eye to him, that are zealous for the Form, and
oftentimes sit with their hats on in time of Prayer, will be ready to say, It
is out of the Unity, as they used to do by that Innocent Man J. S. Which the
Formal Apostate cites: he talks of Crying up one, and crying down others, like
Carnal Men, building of Babel. Who will cry up thee, thou treacherous person,
that art ashamed to put thy Name to thy Work? What can be more like Babel than
what thou have done. The Lybeller says, That some of her Neighbors reproved
the Madness and Folly of such Prophets, etc. Observe, They are as nameless as
this Author, and I may say to him as the Psalmist once said, What shall be done
unto thee, thou false tongue? And does not this manifest more a puffed up Spirit
than Humility, let his own words answer him; but no better Fruits can be
expected from one that is ashamed of his Name,

Obs. He says flatteringly, Read it over again, and it may happen thou may
better consider thy Folly, if Envy and Passion has not blinded thee. Ans. If
Envy, Madness and Folly had not blinded this Formal Apostate, he would never
have done as he has done, to put honest men to such unnecessary Charge, as he
did in eight days time, and concealing his Name. Surely none will own his Work
nor he, unless he give forth a Paper of Condemnation; for such things go a
great way in our days; especially among such as are ready to pin their Faith on
other Folks Sleeves.

Observe. He says, There is no peace to the wicked. Ans. Very true, therefore
it will concern this Person to look back and repent of this ungodly Work that
he has been found in, and not like Lucifer, think to make his Nest amongst the
Stars, for the Lord God in his own day and time will bring him down, and all
that so do.

The Nameless Author talks of Liberty of Conscience, and cites 1 Pet. 2. 16.
Isai. 48. 2. and in Jude. So the Reader is desired to search the Scriptures
before cited, and compare what they say with his Practice. It was said by the
Prophet, The Remnant of Israel shall not do Iniquity, nor speak Lies, neither
shall a deceitful tongue be found in their Mouth.

POSTSCRIPT.
Te Nameless Author before mentioned seems to be a Person, by his own words, as
if he had Intelligence from many Places in the Country; which may make many
think he is one that frequents the Second day's Meeting, and doubtless, does
account himself one of the Faithful, and would seem to have the Care of the
Churches upon him, or, as if he had been some great Instrument in Setting up
the Women's Meetings, separate from the Men. So here is a short Description
given of him, and it is left to some, that have made a great talk of their
Inward sense, to make a further Discovery of this Nameless Author, that so
honest Men in the Country may no longer be abused by him.

Reading 2 d. of the 2 d. Month, 1684. Written by a Lover of the Truth, Leonard
Key.


