SECOND DIALO^^^ Between a New Catholic Convert AND A PROTESTANT.

Showing why he cannot believe the Doctrine of Transubstantiation, Though he do
firmly believe the Doctrine Of the Trinity.

LONDON, Printed for B. Aylmer, at the Three Pigeons against the Royal Exchange
in Cornhill. 1687.

IMPRIMATUR.

December. 3. 1686. Guil. Needham.

A Second Dialogue Between a new CATHOLIC CONVERT AND A Protestant, etc.
A. SIR, I much rejoice to meet you thus happily, and I hope I find you at
leisure.


B. I am not only at leisure, but very much disposed to discourse with you
farther of that matter which you commended to my consideration when we were
last together.


A. And I hope you have duly considered it; if you have done so, I make no
doubt but you are of my mind.


B. I do not find in my self any inclination so prevailing as that which I have
toward truth; and you will believe me when I tell you that in matters of this
nature I am not likely to be drawn from it by any worldly interest. I have the
indifference of a Traveller, and desire nothing but to find the right way to
Heaven.


A. This persuasion I have had of you always; and as this disposition to
embrace the truth, where ever it is, well becomes an honest mind, so I do not
fear but you are by this time convinced, that when you believe the Doctrine of
the Holy Trinity, you cannot reject the belief of the Doctrine of
Transubstantiation; For you remember that this is the question that we disputed
on when we met last.


B. You are very right when you say that was the question between us. And I do
very well remember that you used these very words; As these two Doctrines have
equal ground from Scripture, Page 2.
Reason and Tradition; so is there the same obligation of your receiving the
one as well as the other. I do freely own that I believe the H. Trinity, and
that I do not believe the Doctrine of Transubstantiation; and therefore do not
think my self obliged to believe the one because I believe the other. And, if
you please to give me the hearing, I will frankly tell you why I cannot believe
the Doctrine of Transubstantiation true, and then I Will give you my reasons why,
though I do believe the Holy Trinity, I do not think my self obliged for the
same reason to believe your Doctrine of Transubstantiation.


A. As to the first of these you may I conceive spare your pains. I desire not
to hear your reasons against that Doctrine of the Catholic Church. It Is the
other matter you are most concerned in, viz. to give good reason why you do not
believe the one as well as the other. But I give you liberty to proceed in your
own way.


B. I shall be very brief as to the first of these, and only touch upon some
things that do absolutely hinder me from believing this Doctrine of
Transubstantiation. Nothing is more certain than that this Doctrine destroys
the evidence of Sense, and consequently subverts our whole Religion. We cannot
be certain of the truth of the Miracles which Jesus did, nor of his
Resurrection, if our senses are not to be credited even then when the object of
them is at a due distance, and the medium and organ rightly disposed, and all
other requisites in due order. And by the very same r^^^^^ I believe this
Doctrine true I may suspect the rest (...) Religion. In a word, it seems to me
to be a (...) falsehood, and nothing can be more evidently (...) ^^nifestly true
than this is manifestly false: And you will in vain attempt to prove any of
your Doctrines from the Bible, when, according to this Doctrine I may not trust
my Eyes, and may as well deny that there is any such place of Scripture which
you allege, as you can affirm the truth of this Doctrine, against the evidence
of sense. Besides it labors with difficulties and absurdities that are
insupportable.


A. But we are not to reject a Doctrine because it is attended with some
considerable difficulties, for then we may reject that of the Holy Trinity, and
of the Incarnation, and Resurrection of our Bodies. And there are great
difficulties in the account of the genealogy of Jesus by St. Matthew and St.
Luke, and yet I presume you believe these Doctrines, and do not question the
truth of either Evangelist how inconsistent soever they may seem to be one with
another.


B. Mistake me not, Sir, I am far from thinking that we are to reject those
Doctrines which are attended with great difficulties: But yet we are certain
that Doctrine cannot be true, which if it were allowed so to be, would subvert
the whole Religion, and leave nothing certain or true but it self; nor leave us
any evidence that it self is true.


A. Let me entreat you to speak to the main point, that is, give me your
reasons why when you believe the Doctrine of the Holy Trinity you should reject
this of Transubstantiation; for if this be attended with great difficulties, so
is the other.


B. This I will readily do, but must tell you again that I do not reject any
Doctrine because of the difficulties attending on it.


A. Assign then the reasons why when you do believe the Trinity, you deny that
Doctrine which has Equal Ground for it from Scripture, Reason and Tradition.


B. I can by no means grant that it has Equal Ground: And I will therefore
give you the reasons which you demand. And

First, The Doctrine of the Trinity is revealed in the Scripture, in this both
sides are agreed: The other Doctrine is not revealed, so the Protestants with
one consent affirm: Salmeron To. 9. tract. 16.
And indeed those of your Church grant that the Doctrine of Transubstantiation
is not evidently revealed in Holy Writ. Bellarmin. de Euchar. l. 3. cap. 23.
Scotus affirms, as Bellarmin confesses (and thinks his opinion not altogether
improbable) that Transubstantiation cannot be evidently proved from any express
Scripture. Now the Fathers of the Council of Nice urge the Text of H. Writ
against the Arians. But the Church of Rome maintains their Doctrine upon
another bottom, and that is the authority and declaration of the Church.


A. But do we not bring Texts of Scripture for the proof of this Doctrine?


B. That you do frequently, but then the greater and wiser of your Divines will
not lay the stress of the cause upon Scripture. I except out of this number Mr.
Sclater of Putney, Consens. vet. page 20.
who is for the literal sense of those words, This is my Body, because the
nature of a last Will and Testament requires it should be so. But, alas! he
considers not what follows, where it is said in these words of this last Will
and Testament, that the Cup is the New Testament of his Blood, where he will be
forced to acknowledge a figure or two. But he that can prove Transubstantiation
from the Rabbias, may be allowed a greater liberty than other men think fit to
take.


A. Have you a^y other reason to allege why you do not, when you believe the
Trinity, bel^^^^ (...) Doctrine also?


B. I have, and having showed that your Doctrine has not equal ground from
Scripture, I add

Secondly, That it has not equal ground from Reason. It Is certain, and has
been abundantly made good that your Doctrine contradicts right Reason: It
involves a heap of contradictions: it supposes a change of substance when the
accidents remain, that these accidents should nourish, or destroy: That the
same body should be in many places at once, broken and whole at the same time;
that a whole body should be in a point; that every wafer should be the whole
body, and yet the body be but one. That a thing can be divided into wholes. I
forbear to name much more to the same purpose. The Doctrine of the Trinity is
indeed above our reason and comprehension, but you will not say it is against
it. Besides it is revealed, and it is reasonable to believe what God says.
Besides we are better able to judge the nature of bodies (upon which account we
reject your Doctrine as manifestly false) than of the spiritual and
incomprehensible nature of God. We reject not what our reason does not
comprehend. But shall we therefore believe what is a contradiction to all the
reason of mankind? And because we do not comprehend the sublime nature of God,
may we not rely upon our senses when they are employed on their proper objects?


A. Have you any other reason why you reject Transubstantiation, when you
believe the Trinity?


B. Having showed that your Doctrine has not Equal Ground from Scripture and
Reason, I add, that it has not,

Thirdly, Equal ground from Authority. Indeed you produced none at all, and
therefore I need not cite any (...), that (...) the (...)
in the Doctri^e of Transubstantiation, as they are in^ M^^^ery of the Holy
Trinity. It will be hard to re^e this concession with what you affirmed a
little above, that these two Doctrines have Equal ground from Tradition. But he
that believes the Doctrine it self, need n^^ ^ggle to say, that not half so
much is yet Eq^al ground. It Is true you pretend to give a good reason why the
Fathers are not half so ex^ress in the one as in the other. Because
Transubstantiation has not been a Doctrine so long in dispute, and it is not
Customary for men to argue unquestionable truths. I do easily believe it has
not been so long in dispute; no such thing being heard of in the primitive and
best times. And it is easier to suppose it an unquestionable truth than to prove
it to have been professed at all. But this is to beg and not to prove the
question.

I will add no more reasons, though I might easily do it, because I am for
brevity as well as you. I have abundantly showed that these two Doctrines have
not Equal ground from Scripture, Reason and Tradition, and that there is not
the same obligation to receive one as the other.

And thus, Sir, though I cannot acquiesce in what you say, yet I heartily thank
you for your good Prayer, and beg you would join with me in repeating it in
behalf of all Christians. God give us his Holy Spirit to instruct us.


FINIS.

