AN OFFICE FOR PRISONERS FOR Crimes, Together with Another for PRISONERS FOR
Debt.

CONTAINING both Proper Directions, and Proper Prayers and Devotions.

For Each of their Needs and Circumstances.

By John Kettlewell, late a Presbyter of the CHURCH of England.

LONDON, Printed by A. and J. Churchill, at the Black Swan in Paternoster Row,
1697.

AN Advertisement TO THE READER.
IT is thought necessary to assure the Public, that the following Treatise is
a genuine Piece of that reverend Author, whose name it bears; 'twas left
finished under his own hand, and may serve as a fresh proof of that true
Christian Zeal which inflamed his Mind, and extended his Concern, to the
necessities of those miserable Wretches, who are confined to Prisons for CRIMES
and Debt.

Such afflicting Circumstances, naturally incline Men to Consideration, the
want whereof is for the most part the true cause of all their Misfortunes; but
since it is as impossible to make that undone, that is once done, as it is to
call back Time; the only remedy that is left for the returning Sinner, is to
make all those Reparations to God and Man, which his particular case will admit
off: Now to this Purpose he is here furnished with variety of Directions both
how to begin and complete his Repentance, and with variety of Devotions to
implore the assistance of that Grace, which is so necessary in order to his
recovery.

There has been so little writ upon this important Subject, that I persuade my
Self the Publication of it; will be very grateful to all good Men, who rejoice
at any means that are used to rescue captives from the Slavery of Satan:
Besides the accurate Management of the Argument, will recommend it to the
Approbation of the most judicious.

Composures of Devotion, when perfect in their kind, I think may very well be
ranked among some of the difficult performances in Divinity; since they require
not only propriety and decency of Expression, but a mature Judgment;
spiritualized Affections; and a most comprehensive knowledge of all Christian
Duties, to render them Complete; that while the mind is stored with rules to
make a sound Judgment, the will may be determined to the choice of what is
just, and all the faculties winged to the swiftest prosecution of it.

How far this Devout Office answers that Character, must be left to the world
to Judge, but the talent our Pious and Learned Author had that way is so well
known, that I need say no more to satisfy the Reader, than to assure him this
is of a piece with what he has already published in that kind.

God grant that it may Attain that End which he Aimed at in this and all his
other Writings, which was the Service of his Blessed Master, and the Salvation
of those Souls which were redeemed by his most precious Blood; that they may
both perceive and know those things which they ought to do, and may have Grace
and Power faithfully to fulfill the same, AMEN.

8 th March, 1696/7. Blackheath. Nelson.

TO THE READER.
Reader,
THE Case of Poor Prisoners, both for Crimes, and also for Debt, is very
lamentable, and uncomfortable, with Relation to their Bodies; but more with
Relation to their most Precious Souls. And I think it a Good Piece of Charity
to Direct them, how in their most Dangerous Circumstances they may, however,
set their Souls Safe, and also Provide for their Bodily Straights; making them
as easy and advantageous to them, yea, and I add really as safe too, as their
Case admits to make them.

But when such Helps are provided for them, these miserable Persons are neither
like to inquire after them, nor be at any Charge to buy them for themselves.
And therefore another Sort of Charity will still be wanting to their Releif,
and that is, the Charity of some Pious Persons to Distribute such Helps among
Prisoners, and put them into their hands. And when Compassionate and Charitable
Persons, do not Visit Prisons themselves, methinks such of them as are of
Ability, should not think much to send such Visitants and Companions as these
among them.

I have Prepared this little Piece to be sent Abroad, both to Furnish them with
Particular Directions, and also with Particular Prayers, for their several
Needs and hard Circumstances. And I hope God will from Time to Time stir (...)
of some or other of (...) and Charitable Servants in Several Counties, to send
some of these Pieces (or others which they like better) to be Distributed some
Due Time before the Assizes in their Neighboring Prisons. By Gods Blessing
they may Help to Save many Souls by this Means; at least they will greatly
Benefit, and Recommend their own to his Mercy, who sets not so much by any
Charity, as by that of Converting Sinners, from the Error of their ways.

Brief Directions FOR PRISONERS FOR CRIMES, AND FOR PRISONERS FOR DEBT.
I. Special Directions, for Prisoners for Crimes.
CHAP. I.
How to Behave and Employ themselves, after Commitment, and before the Trial.
I. AS soon as you are Committed to the Prison, begin seriously to Consider,
and Resolve within your Self, how to spend your Time there.

Do not once fancy, that you must lie shut out there from all Business, and
Condemned to a State of Idleness. But set your Self with all your might, to
mind the one thing necessary, viz. The Great Work of Repentance, and making
your Peace with Almighty God: And know assuredly, that this will cut out Work
enough for you, and of more Comfort and Profit to your Soul, than any other
Employments which you have formerly been used to.

And do not think of leaving this most necessary and important Work for an
after-Game, and that it will be time enough to fall to it after you have
received Sentence of Condemnation. For this shows, that you do not yet think
Repentance to be the Work of a Living, but only of a Condemned and Dying
Person, and that if you could have any Hopes to live on, you would Reserve your
Self and are Resolved to Sin on. And when you come to it with this Mind, you
are never like to do much Good in the way of Repentance; nor is it like to do
much Good to you. Besides, the Review and Amendment of a whole Life, and making
your Peace with God and Men after a long course of Provocations against both,
if it be done as it should be, is a Work of more Time, and Difficulty, and
Thoughtfulness, than you are aware of. And after Sentence is once passed upon
them, the wretched Criminals often times are either so Dejected with their
Misfortunes, or so Distracted with Terrors, that their Minds are not Capable,
to be any thing near so composed, Intent, and Thoughtful, as the Work of
Repentance Requires; or to make half so much use as they should of that little
Time which is left them. Not to put them in mind likewise, that Considerable
parts even of that little Time will be snatched away from this Grand Business,
to be taken up in Farewell Visits, some of Business, others of Love and
Kindness, and in other Avocations and Interruptions, which both the Noisy and
Incommodious State of Prisoners, and the Condition of Persons taking a
Deliberate Leave of this World, must expect to meet with.

As soon therefore as you are shut up from others, fall to Converse with your
Self, and Call your own Heart and Ways to Remembrance. And apply your Self with
Seriousness to think of leaving this World, and of Giving a Strict Account to
the Dreadful Judge of Heaven and Earth, of all the Good or Evil which you did
whilst you lived in it, and of the many Things which you need to amend, and
have to do, to make your Peace with God, before you leave it.

First, fix your Thoughts on Heaven and Hell, and look upon them as most Real
and Certain Things, and as States of utmost Joy or Grief, and of Endless
Continuance. They who will not Believe that there is an Hell, shall surely feel
it: And when, by feeling the most Exquisite Pains thereof, they come to be
Convinced to their Cost that there is One; they shall be for ever incapable,
either to bear it, or to get out of it. Who can abide the Rageing Torture of
Fire and Flames, and Isa. 33. 14.
Dwell with everlasting Burnings? Who can Endure to be perpetually gnawed, and
pierced to the quick, with the Worm of Conscience, always accusing and
tormenting him, and eating through his Spirit? To lie down in a Bed of Sorrow,
yea, and which he has madly Chosen, and obstinately Sought out for himself:
Where there is nothing, but Anguish without abatement, and Horror without hope;
and wherein there neither is, nor can be the least Glimps of the Divine Mercy,
but inexorable Justice comes Armed with Power, to heap on such Plagues, as an
Almighty God can inflict, and an immortal Sinner can suffer, for evermore.

And assure your Self, that this will surely be the just Wages of the Crime for
which you are made a Prisoner, and the unavoidable end of your misspent Life,
unless you Employ that little space of Time, which you have yet remaining, to
prevent the same, by true Repentance, and making of your Peace with God before
you dye.

Being therefore without delay to Survey your past Life, and to Repent of all
that needs Repentance.

Read over your Baptismal Vow in the Church-Catechism, upon the engagement and
undertaking whereof, God admitted you to the Hopes of his Mercy and Eternal
Life in Christ Jesus; and attently bethink your self how you have kept it. And
read over your Duty to God and to your Neighbor, and at every particular of
each of them, propose to your self, and Consider how you have Performed the
same. And this will show you what Commandments you have Broken, and what Sins
you have to bewail and amend, that you may Recover Gods Favor, and Prevent the
Torments of Eternal Fire.

And having thus Discovered what your Sins and Offenses are, which expose you
to Gods wrath, set your Self instantly to humble your Soul for them before him,
that so you may be fit for his Mercy. With hearty Self-abasement, and
Condemnation of your Self for the same, acknowledge before him, your own
Baseness, and abominable Unthankfulness, and Wretched Folly therein. And fix in
your Heart the Firmest Purposes of Amendment thereof, as seeing assuredly, that
there is no other way, either of showing your Duty, your Love, or Thankfulness
to God, or of saving your Self from Everlasting misery.

And having thus Considerately, and fully Purposed this Amendment within your
Self, and that of all the several Sins which you find you have been Guilty of,
Faithfully Promise him, that by his Help you will Amend them. And beg his Grace
to fix you in this Purpose, and to Enable you, as occasion is offered, to
perform it. And then humbly and earnestly beg his Pardon for all your Sins, for
Jesus Christ's Sake. And every Day afterward, as it comes, apply your Self
with utmost Care and Diligence, to make Good your Work, and Perform these
Promises, Considering, that it is the honest keepers of Promises, who are to
Claim the Benefits of them; and therefore in all the Opportunities you meet
with afterward, you must be strictly mindful according to your Promise to do
better, in all those Points wherein you had done amiss before.

And as for all Wrong and Damage, which you have done to any by your
Transgressions, especially by this for which you are now a Prisoner; Resolve
within your Self, to make them full Satisfaction if you are able; or else, to
make them as much Satisfaction as you can, and to beg their Pardon, and their
Prayers to God to Pardon you, for the Rest. And contrive how to do this, and
have things in a readiness, that it may be done effectually and without delay,
as soon as ever it may be Prudent and Convenient to do it; providing at the
same time against Casualties, that whatever happens to you, it may not be
finally dropped and be undone. And give out such General Intimations before, of
your true Repentance and fixed Intentions, of doing justice according to your
Ability, to all who have suffered by you, as may be safe for you, and something
of Satisfaction to them, in the mean time. And look on this Reparation for
Wrongs, as a thing that must take Place of any Provisions, which you would
desire to make for your Self, or your Family, out of your worldly Goods; and
that it is a necessary Course, to prevent Gods Future Wrath, and to Clear your
Conscience.

In this Great Work, of posing, and purging of your Conscience, and perfecting
the Course of your Restitution and Repentance, and expressing your Heart
thereupon to Almighty God, you will have great need of, and may receive much
comfortable assistance and benefit, from Godly Directions, and Forms of Prayers
fitted for this purpose. And if you are not otherwise provided therewith, your
needs herein may be supplied by a small Book, entitled A Companion for the
Penitent, wherein is An Office for the Penitent to Carry on their
Reconciliation with God: And a Trial or Judgment of the Soul, to Discover the
Safety of their Spiritual Estate, etc. lately Printed.

And during all the Time, which God shall spare you after your Commitment, to
attend this Grand Business, make Pious Books your Companions, which you may
Converse with as often, and as much as you please, and always with great
Comfort and Advantage to your Self; And Discreet and Religious Friends
likewise, if you have any such who will come at you. For their Discourses and
Devout Breathings, will be like gentle Blowing on dying Embers, and help to
kindle any sparks of Virtue and Goodness that lie Dormant in you. They will
call forth your Penitential Relentings, and increase them, and bring you by use
to take Comfort therein, and Direct you how to carry on the same. Especially if
you have a Wise and Faithful Guide of Souls for your Friend, prize his Visits,
and make the most of them, and prepare your Self still to receive both
Direction and Warmth from his Lips. And be free in opening your Self to him,
and in begging his Judgment and Direction, upon all the great Passages of your
Life, and the present Conduct of your Repentance, how you are to order it so,
as that you may be most sure of making your Peace with Almighty God. And be
careful to receive his Directions with Thankfulness, and to follow them with
Care.

And this way of spending your Time, in transacting and perfecting your
Repentance and Peace with God, let me again beseech you to look upon, not only
as an incident, to fall in now and then, but as your Work and Business in
Prison. And be sure to keep your Self to it, as much as your Spirit will bear.
Remembering, that you have a Great Work to do, and no Time to throw away. That
if you fail or fall short therein, you are irreparably undone for ever. And
that there is Great Danger of your Failing, unless you show such an early, a
watchful, and incessant care, as I advise you to. That you have been
desperately Foolish, as well as Wicked, in throwing away the former Days of
your Life, and therefore should now seek to redeem them, and to be double
diligent in the good Husbanding and Religious Improvement of that small shred
thereof which still remains.

Take not therefore more than needs of your Precious Time, especially not any
great Portions, from this most necessary and salutary Employment, to attend
unprofitable Visits, or to throw away in Idleness. But by no means spend any
Portions thereof, in that Cure and Diversion of Cares, which alas! Is too
often the Refuge of Imprisoned Malefactors, viz. Wine, and Jollity and Profane
and Loose Conversation. Go no more into such Society, than you would into an
Infected Room: But Shun it as you would do the Plague, or as you would do
Persons who are throwing Fireballs among Combustible Stuff, and spreading
Endless Ruin.

And in this Course, wait for the Sessions or Assizes, and continue thus to
Employ your Self till your Trial comes.

CHAP. II.
How to Behave and Employ themselves, in order to, and at, their Trial.
AND then in the next Place, as to what Concerns your Trial, look up to God as
your only Deliverer to bring you off there. All Trials in Human Courts, are of
uncertain Issue. Even the Innocent have Cause to Fear, and the Guilty much
more. For there Men stand or fall, by the Understanding and Dispositions of
Judges and Juries. And their Hearts and Minds are in no Hand but Gods, who
Turns and Governs them as he pleases. Their Verdicts and Sentences in Trials,
are influenced and determined, either in Favor of the Prisoners or Against
them, according as some things are offered in Evidence, or others Omitted,
which are apt most to affect them in their several ways of Reasoning and
Believing, and sway most with them. And though these Particular Suggestions or
Omissions in Evidence, whereon the Judgment thereof is like to turn, seem
accidents to us, and were not foreseen nor dreamed of by the Prisoners; yet are
they all Wise Orderings and Providence in God, so that in the Verdict brought
in thereupon, we have what he pleases.

If you do Escape therefore at all, lay down this beforehand within your self,
and be both attent and fixed in the belief thereof, that it is he alone who must
send you Deliverance. And if your Deliverance must come from thence, Direct
your Eyes to him from whom your Help Comes, and place all your Confidence in
his kind and watchful Providence: And when you trust to him for Deliverance,
seek for it with earnest Prayers, and beg a longer Respite in this World if he
pleases. But withal, seek this with Resignation to his Holy Will, humbly
submiting to his Justice, if he think fit to bring you to Deserved Punishment
for this Offense, for an Example to terrify others; and Praying, that whatever
Vengeance he Exacts for your Crimes here, he would by no means Extend his Wrath
further, but for Christ Jesus' s sake spare your Soul hereafter.

And thus you see, that the Religious Spending of your Time, which I have
advised you to, is really the best way you can take to prepare for your Trial,
and to deliver you from the Sentence of Death here, as well as of Damnation
hereafter. For if God, and his most undeserved Care and kind Providence, must
be your Deliverer; these Religious Exercises, which are the surest way to gain
God, must be the surest ways of Deliverance, and they have most Hope to escape
the Danger, who have done most and taken the best care to secure his Favor.

If you have any Matters to Order relating to this World, do them, as much as
you are able, before your Trial comes on, and leave them not to be cared after
Sentence of Condemnation is past upon you. For all your Time after that, will
have Care and Work enough of its own, and should therefore be kept as free from
all other interruptions as it can.

When you are going to your Trial, go first to you Prayers, and put your Self
into Gods Hands, and beg his Assistance. Desire that his Grace and Holy Spirit,
may govern all your Carriage, and all your Answers there, and prepare your
Heart to express your Self with Wisdom, and Uprightness, and the Hearts of
Judges and Juries to receive the same with Favor and Tenderness. Remembering,
that both the Preparations of the Heart in him who needs and asks Favor, and
the Answer of the Tongue in those who are either to Grant or Deny it, is from
the Lord. Prove. 16. 1.

When you are brought upon your Trial, I think you may safely make the Legal
Plea of not Guilty: For tho you are Guilty in reality, yet you are not Guilty
in the Eye of the Law, till you are Legally found to be so. And when the Law
asks you this, I conceive you may answer, not according to your Real, but your
Legal Guiltiness, being innocent in Legal Estimate till you are Convicted. For
it is the Humanity and Equity of our Law, as I take it, not to require
Criminals, Especially in Capital Cases, to Accuse themselves, which would be
very unnatural, and casting off all Tenderness and due Regard to Human
Weakness. But whatever they are in Truth, it allows them to put their Guilt
upon the Proof, by Pleading not Guilty, that where they can not voluntary
publish themselves, and glory in a Fact as Confessors, they may be Convicted
thereof by due Proof as Criminals, and brought to suffer Punishment for the
same, as common Humanity allows punishments should be suffered, against their
Wills. Yea, further to manifest its moderation and disposition to Clemency in
this Case, after they have thus put their Guiltiness upon the Proof, the Form
and Voice of the Court is, to pray them a Good Deliverance.

And having put your Self upon the Trial of this Plea, you may say such things
in your own Favor, as you can say truly. But seek not for Safety in Lies, and
Falsification of things against your own knowledge; denying what you know to be
True to save your Self, or possitively Affirming what really you do not know,
or perhaps know to be otherwise. Much less seek it in Mischeivous Lies, to cast
your Faults on others, and either bring Innocent Men under Suspicion, and into
Dangers, or make other Guilty Persons Guilty of more than really they are: For
this is to give God fresh Provocations, and back an old Sin by a new one, and
to forsake him when you stand in the greatest need of him, which is the
readiest way to forfeit both his Peace hereafter and his Preservation here, and
utterly to lose both Him and your Self too.

Trust your Life therefore in his Hands, by keeping your Defense thereof within
the Bounds of Truth and Justice: This is a Great Trial of your Faith. But it is
a Trial which you have wickedly brought your self into. And under the same, it
is necessary for you thus to approve your Faith, in his mercy and care of you.
You have no Faith in him left, or none that he will accept of, if you forsake
him and his ways in this difficult case, and fly to Sin to save your Self. But
if you can trust wholly to his Providence and not at all to evil ways, and have
Faith to contain your Self within your Duty under the hazard of your Life, this
noble Faith will be a mighty Endearment, and of Great Account in his Eyes;
nothing ever recommending poor Sinners more to God, than Faith does, when it
keeps them innocent and obedient in such hard Trials.

And therefore set your Self resolutely to act this Great, and most concerning
Part well, and to approve your Faith in him when it is Tried. And look upon
this trusting of your Self to him, to be the wisest way of saving your Life, as
well as of preserving your Innocence. For if you are Preserved at all, as I
say, you must owe your Preservation above all things to his watchful Care and
kind Providence. And if you must receive your Life from his Hand, seek to him
for it, and trust him with it; and by no means leave him, to seek out other
unlawful Helps, which will be like to Deceive you in this World, and are
certainly the way to Destroy you afterward, in that which is to come.

And when you have heard your Accusers, and have been heard to make as wise a
Defense as you could make for your Self with Truth and Justice, lift up your
Heart to God when you are taken from the Bar, and humbly and devoutly Commit
the Event of all to him. And Pray that he will be pleased to Order it in Favor
to you, waiting with Patience and Resignation of Spirit, to see how he will
Dispose the Hearts of Judges and Juries to deal with you.

If you are Acquitted, give him the Praise thereof, and Receive it with utmost
Devotion and Thankfulness. But if you are brought in Guilty and Condemned,
humbly Submit your Self, and own the Justice of your Sentence: And give Glory
to God, by justifying his Providence, which has recompensed your high Crimes
with a deserved Vengeance; and by justifying his lawful Ministers, who bear the
Sword in his Place, and use it at any time upon such Criminals as you are,
confessing freely that it is used now in your Case, for the Punishment and
Terror of evildoers.

CHAP. III.
How to Behave and Employ themselves after Sentence of Condemnation, and at the
Time of Execution.
AND after you have received Sentence, set your Self to lose none of those
precious moments of Time which are left you, but to make the Wisest and
Carefullest Use thereof which you can, in preparing for Death. You are to
Discharge this Great and last Part of Dying but Once, Oh! Therefore take care
to do it well. You can rectify or amend nothing after, Oh! Then labor as much
as in you lies to make all sure, and set all straight before. Finish all your
intended Acts of Restitution, and Repeat anew all your former Acts of
Repentance, and add Earnestness and Vigor to them, and Perfect what is
Defective therein, and send them up to God in continual Strains and Breathings
of Devotion, either short and occasional Ejaculations, or more set and solemn
Prayers. And to Consummate your Repentance, and to Comfort up your Spirit with
the Pledges of Gods Love and Peace, take care before you dye to receive the
Holy Communion, after you have endeavored the best you can to fit your Self
for it, and to Satisfy the Holy Man who Administers it to you, of your Fitness
for the same. And if you can often have the Blessing of a Prudent and Pious
Ministers Direction in that disconsolate time, prize it highly, and improve it
diligently, and take such further ways for the Securing of your Peace and
Quieting of your Conscience, as in his Discretion he shall Direct you to.

And when you are brought from Prison to Execution, own the justice of your
Sentence: Profess your abhorence and true Repentance of the Crime which you Dye
for, and of all your other Sins. Declare the Satisfaction you have made, or
would make, were you able, to all you have wronged. Beg all Persons to forgive
you, who have suffered by you in any kind, and all who have ever learnt any ill
from your Acquaintance and Example. Declare that you do from your Heart,
forgive all Persons, and that you bear not the least ill will against any of
your Prosecutors, or the Judges and Juries who were concerned in bringing you
to Justice. And when you make this Protestation of Forgiveness and Good Will to
them, be sure nothing fall from you, that may bring the Sincerity thereof into
Question. And therefore take Diligent Care, not to show uneasy Remembrance and
Resentment, of the Evils or Injuries which you have suffered, but only of those
which you your Self have done: And to keep your last Breath from being an
hurtful Blast upon any Persons, and your Dying Words from casting out Darts and
leaving a Sting in your Enemies, Remembering, that you are to leave the World
and come to Execution, not as a wild Beast, fighting with your Foes, and
pushing and goreing; but as a Lamb, meekly submitting, as your Blessed Savior
did, tho he had no Real Guilt but was perfectly Innocent, who suffered the
worst things without aggravating them or being angry at them, and on the Cross
spoke nothing of his bitter Enemies, but to Excuse them, and Pray for them.

And having thus testified your Godly Sorrow for your Sins, desire all the
Bystanders to learn of you Repentance (tho by no means to delay it so long as
you have done) and to be horribly afraid of the sad end of evil doers, and of
the Vengeance of God, which is oft-times swift, but when it is most slow, will
be sure at last, and utterly insupportable to all those, who will not take care
in time to appease him by amendment of Life. Beg all that need it, to take
warning by your punishment, that your most just and lamentable Death, may
terrify more from Continuing in their Sins, than the Example of your Evil Life
had lead into Sin.

Likewise, if you can do Right to any Persons falsely accused, or wrongfully
suspected, fail not to Do it the best you can, before your Breath is stopped.

Profess also your Faith, whereinto you were Baptized, devoutly and audibly;
repeating the Apostle's Creed, and declare the Religion, wherein you Dye; and
lament the Dishonor, which you have brought upon them by your wickedness, and
declare your earnest Desires to Do some Right to them now by your Repentance.

And when by all these ways, you have expressed before them all, how truly
penitent you are for your Sins, then humbly profess your lowly Hope in Gods
free Mercy and most Gracious Promises, who for the Death and Merits sake of our
most Blessed Savior Jesus Christ is ready to pardon, even the Greatest
Sinners, such as you are, upon their true Repentance.

After this, beg the Prayers of all the Beholders, and the Prayers of all Good
People. And then fall to your own Private Devotions, praying earnestly for your
self, and for them. Then Pray with the Minister, who stands ready to perform
this last Office of Charity for Dying Men; and desire all present to help you
by their affectionate and fervent concurrence therein.

Then take a kind and decent Leave of all the Company, and pray God to make
them all the better by the Sadness of this Sight. Thank them all heartily for
their Pity, and their Prayers, and Desire the Continuance thereof to assist you
in your last Agonies. Then turn your self to take a fitting Farewell of your
particular Friends or Relations, if any are there present, and after that
commit your self to the Mercy of God through Jesus Christ, and with continued
and earnest Prayers and Ejaculations, wait till the Executioner or Minister of
Justice stops your Breath.

To remember all these Points at the Place of Execution, may be thought hard
for the Poor Prisoner. But he may have this little Book in his Eye, for his
Remembrancer. And however he may express himself on as many of them, as he can
think of; and then satisfy his own mind, that although he has not done so much as
he Desires, yet he has done the best he could do.

Brief Directions FOR PRISONERS FOR DEBT. II. Special Directions for Prisoners
for Debt.
WHEN you are made a Prisoner for Debt, it first concerns you to consider how
you came in Debt. And if you are made Poor and Disabled from paying your Debts,
merely by the Hand of Providence, you deserve Pity from all, and Patience and
Forgiveness from your Creditors. They loose nothing by you, that you have
squandered, but only what God has taken away. But if rigorous and unchristian
Creditors will still be hard upon you, you must do them all the Justice you
can, and when that is done, bear the Rest with Resignation, and conform your
Will to the Will of God, who calls you hereby to the Patience, Religious Trust,
and Dependence of an hard Condition, remembering all the while to your comfort,
that you have not sought this afflicted State to your self, but may receive it
as a State of Gods choosing for you, who knows best what is fittest for us all,
and as a Visitation of his sending.

But if you can charge your self with any great wickedness, and have highly
offended God, to bring these Losses and Impoverishment upon you, as a Judgment;
or if you have run your self in Debt, by riotous and luxurious Living, by the
Expensiveness of Riot, Pride* Gaming, or by Idleness and Neglect of Business;
then you must humble your self, and be heartily sorry for these Sins, for which
you suffer, and bear the confinement you have brought upon your self patiently,
and set your self to learn Repentance thereby. And for working this Repentance,
you may have recourse to the foregoing Directions about the same for the
Prisoner for Crimes, Chap. 1.

But which way soever your Debt comes, when you are their Prisoner, be sure to
deal heartily and openly with your Creditors. If you cannot fully satisfy them,
lay your condition truly before them, and show your self disposed to do Right
to all as far as you can. Do not pretend ways of raising Money for them, which
are not true; nor promise payments, which you cannot perform. It Is your Duty to
be sincere and plain with them, and plain-dealing may mollify and engage them;
but it will be your Sin, and may double their Resentment, if you abuse and
delude their expectation.

And let them be first served out of your Estate, so far as it will go; unless
in compassion to your needs, they are willing to allow you some part of it. But
think not first of saving maintenance (whether they will allow of it or no) for
your self, or for your Family, and then of letting them take what remains. For
your Duty is first to be just to all Men, and not live your self, nor maintain
your Dependants, upon other Men's Goods kept from them against their Wills;
which is to live upon withholding Right, and perverting Justice.

Much less think of forcing them to abatements and scanty compositions, to
reserve and raise a good Estate for your self, or for your Heirs, out of their
Purses Nor choose to endure the tediousness and hardships of a Jayl for your
Life, to supersede all Legal Remedy against your Heir, for your Debts, which he
cannot be sued for a second time, after you have dyed a Prisoner for them. For
this is paying very dear for doing wrong, and denying Men their own; and is
certainly the way to carry off a very unrighteous and guilty Conscience with
you, and to leave the Curse of ill Reserved Goods and of unpaid Debts, to your
Heirs who survive you.

And seek not to Tricks, or any dishonest Fetches and Misuse of the Law, to set
aside Debts, or put them off and postpone them, instead of paying them. Nor
spend any of your Money, in defrauding, or hindering your Creditors of their
just Right, which is all little enough, it may be too little, toward the
honest Satisfaction of it.

And if by your Insolvency, any of your Creditors are brought against their
wills to abate Part rather than lose all, look on that Part as respited not
remitted, and pay it afterward (if God enable you) in the Sum it self, or (if
you cannot do that) be studious to make it up in Good Offices and Grateful
Services, and for the rest have Recourse to God by Prayers in their behalf. And
what after-Recompences you make them, do the same with Good Will, cheerfully,
and diligently; and thank them heartily for their Patience and Kindness, in
being Content to want it so long as they have done, when you do at last pay
them the sum it self, or, when you cannot do that, in accepting your services
in lieu thereof.

And having first taken this upright care of your Creditors, and of their
Payments, then look to your self, and provide the best you can for your own
Maintenance. If you have any thing of your own left, after your Creditors are
satisfied, live frugally and thankfully upon it. If you have not, then you are
called to get your Livelihood still as you need it, and in the way of Honest
Industry look up to God to give you day by day your daily bread. If he has
enabled you to seek this, by earning it for your self in any lawful Labor or
Business, look on that as the best way, and plie it with Diligence and
Contentedness. But if through disability, or the numerousness of your Family, or
otherwise, you need to be helped out by Gifts of Charity, humble your self to
your state, and represent your necessities modestly, and receive an Alms with
Thankfulness. First represent your wants to your near Relations, who are more
especially bound to relieve the needs of their own House; 1 Timothy 5. 4, 8.
and then to any other Charitable Persons, as your Case requires.

And whether you Live by Alms, or by taking Pains, bear always in your mind,
that you are called to act the Part, and discharge the Duties, of a poor
Estate: And let it be your daily study, to bring your mind to it, and to think
only of having such accomodations, as are fit for a Poor Man; not such as you
had whilst you were in a wealthier condition.

Brief Directions FOR BOTH. III. General Directions for both.
BUT when Men are Prisoners, whether for Debt or for Crimes, they will be like
to groan especially where they are kept long in Prison, under the burden of
Solitude, or Want, or both. They are shut up from their Friends and
Acquaintance; and are much straightened for Conveniences, or it may be for
Necessaries. And for a Conclusion of these Advices, I shall give them some
Brief Directions for their due Reception thereof, and for their Carriage and
Improvement under each of these bitter Ingredients, and sorrowful Appendages of
the State of poor Prisoners.

And first as for Solitude, that indeed is a punishment as coming to them
against their wills, as their imprisonment is; but nothing is more fit to be
their Choice, if they will make Repentance their Business. For he must retire
from the World, who would fall in earnest to converse with God, and to look
(...) himself. The greatest Saints fall to this at certain times, as the best
means of evening their Accounts with God, and perfecting their Repentance. And
all Men have Reason enough to wish for some such thing, before their Deaths!
Especially if these dying Persons are but young Penitents. For when Men at
first enter upon the great work of Repentance, it is extremely advisable, and
more than ordinarily needful for them, to retire from the Noise, and Business,
and Diversions of the World, that they may have little else to do, but to
attend it. And that they may keep out of the way, of their former evil courses,
till they have unlearnt them; and of their corrupt Acquaintance and Companions,
till they can withstand and deny their Solicitations; and of those Temptations
of the World, which have ordinarily been too hard for them hitherto, till they
have considerately formed, and fixed and fortified their Holy Resolutions to
such a Degree, as may be able to overcome them.

Let the Prisoners therefore make Repentance their Work and Business in Prison,
as I have advised them in the foregoing Directions, and then they may Thank
their Prosecutors for the Benefit of their Solitude and Melancholy Retirement,
and make it their own hearty desire and free choice. If they employ it to
converse with God, and to know and amend themselves, which they may do if they
please, and will do if they are wise to do well for themselves, their
Confinement will be as good to them in a Jayl, as it is to a Devoto in his
Cell, and may be as welcome to them when put upon them by others, as his is to
him when he seeks it for himself. And thus, what God sends to punish your Sins,
O, ye poor Prisoners, by your wise use thereof, you will turn to cure them. And
this alone will change that Confinement! Which may come upon you as a Curse,
into the greatest blessing.

And to make that Confinement easy to you in the Practice, which this way will
be so blessed and beneficial in the Effects, keep your Fancy from running out
after the Noise, the Diversions, and busy Occupations and Entertainments of the
World. Discontent and roving Desires abroad, are the greatest sting in being
shut up. But keep your Mind at home, and your Desires within bounds, and the
want of those Liberties abroad which you Covet not, and which you daily see do
hurt to others, and have formerly done very much to your self, will sit light
upon you.

And Consider, that as you are hereby kept out of the Enjoyment and Affairs; so
are you likewise out of the Temptations, and, if you please, may be out of the
Cares of this World. And ordinarily the Temptations of Liberty have more of
Danger, and of the Cares of Trouble and Sorrow, than the Enjoyments thereof can
fairly recompense.

And if you are shut up from your Friends, you are shut up also from your
Enemies. For a Prison is a Guard against all other Wrongs, and you are safe
there in Stirrs and Tumults, in Public and in Private Dangers. And though it
be hard to be without the Company of those that Love us, yet is it no
despicable Recompense, if thereby we are secured from the Envious and
Malicious, and from the further attempts of all that hate us. For ordinarily we
are not to promise our Selves so great Effects from the kindness of our
Friends, as we have reason to apprehend from the malice of our Enemies; Spite
and Envy being usually more industrious and watchful of opportunities to show
it self, and eager to do it to the full, than Love is.

Perhaps you Fancy, that now you are as one taken almost out of the World. But
what if you be? You have seen Evil enough, and Done too much in it, to be fond
of it; and this Recess from the World, affords you great advantages of making
your Self ten thousand times more happy in another World. And if imprisonment
is bidding adieu to the World, Consider, that this Time of your Commitment to
Prison, is not the first Time of your Renouncing the World. For every Christian
does this, when he is Baptized. They all Profess to be as Persons out of this
World, and to keep Hearts free and loose from it, and to live above it: And if
People are really of this mind, it will not affect them much, wheresoever God
calls them to make their abode in it.

You are restrained also to one Place, and must move but in a narrow Compass.
But if by Gods blessing, you can have your Health, and be easy and quiet under
this Confinement to one Place, may you not well be contented not to change
whilst you are well, and whilst the will of God is so, rest satisfied without
trying new Places. And if it please God to send sickness, though you were at
Home, sickness would tie you to your own House, or it may be to your Bed, which
is a narrower Compass than a Prison is. It Is worse being Prisoner to a Disease
than to the Keepers of Common Prisons. And Diseases, as the worst of Jaylors,
bring their Prisoners into such a close Custody, as is much more irksome and
afflictive, than any other is. For under others, you are shut up, indeed, but
that is to sit at Ease and Rest. But under a Disease, you are shut up too, and
likely closer confined, and that to have constant Pain and Sorrow with it.

But whatever Restraints you are under in Prison, as to your Body; yet
remember, that even there your Mind is Free. Your Thoughts may go abroad, and
run over all the great Occurrences of your Life, and fetch in Matter enough to
busy your self withal, even all those things through all your Life, which you
should be sensible were done ill, and which you have yet space before you dye,
to correct and make better, You have liberty to think as much as you please, of
God, and of your Self, of the Joys of Heaven, and the Terrors of Hell, and the
Vanity of this World, and of all things else, which may either direct or
comfort you, and be of use either to your Soul or Body. Nay, the more your Body
is restrained, and the less you have left to mind of other things, the more
liberty you have for these thoughts. And therefore if spiritual things and
employments are your design, instead of being a place of Encumbrance and
Restraint, your Prison is a place of Leisure and Freedom. Take away the Name of
Prison, as Tertullian advises, and Call it a Recess; and that is no Let, but
the Greatest Opportunity and advantage to true Penitents, and Spiritually and
Heavenly minded Persons.

And then Secondly, as for the other embitterment of Want and Poverty; when God
is pleased to send it too, be patient under it, and set your selves to gain as
much as you can by it. And if you please, you may gain abundance more thereby
in spiritual Exercises and Improvements, than your bearing all its temporal
hardships and inconveniences will amount to.

When you are brought therefore to a poor Estate, be sure you take Care to be
poor in Spirit, or to have no^ (...) Thoughts or Desires as I hinted before,
after the Fineries and Satisfactions o^ this World, but what are suited to your
Poverty. Do not let your Desire run, or your Fancy please it self with the
Thoughts of what Table yo^ kept, what Servants you retained, what Garments you
wore, what Conveniences you had, or Respects you received once. But look now
only for such things, as are fit for a Person in your present want, and poor
estate, to desire and think of.

As a poor man then, be Content if you are reduced to a course and frugal Diet,
and a mean Habit, and an hard Bed. Be Content if you have nothing else but
Necessaries, which God provides for all his Creatures, even the Beasts of the
Field, and the Birds of the Air, Mat. 6. 26.
who, as our Lord observes, have no Contrivance to lay up Stores for
themselves. Nay, esteem and own your Self unworthy, even of these necessary
Provisions, and think it not enough to be contented with them, but be Thankful
for them. And seek them without Solicitude, or Mistrusts of Providence: But
after a cheerful Care spent in the best ways you have to compass them, quietly
rely on God; and trust him for them. Do what you can, to have them of your own;
if that succeeds not, ask of them, who are like to Pity and Relieve you, and if
one denies you, try others; but if that misses too, God will send it, and put
it into the Hearts of those to give whom you do not ask, and send it to you,
you know not how.

And in your Poverty, be sure you be Humble. Be willing and contented to be
maintained what way God pleases. And if he brings your State to need an Alms,
let not your Spirit be above it. Think not your self too good, to receive, nor
if need be modestly to ask it. And be Patient where you meet with Repulses, and
Thankful for all that is given you, whether it be little or much; yea, even for
good words and compassionate answers where you receive nothing else. And if
under a poor estate, you can, by Gods Grace, arrive to this true Poverty of
Spirit, you are a very Rich Poor Man; you are Poor in this World, but Rich in
Faith and Good Works, as our Blessed Savior Christ, and his Apostles, and
earliest Saints for the most part were; and may comfortaby hope through his Grace,
to have your humble, holy, and obedient Poverty rewarded at last together with
theirs, with unspeakable Riches, Honor, and Happiness in his Heavenly Kingdom.

And having after this sort Received, and Improved, both your Poverty, and your
Solitude, look upon them again, with a discerning and impartial Eye, and then
tell me what Cause you have to Repine, or Complain of them. Judge of them, not
by the Opinions which other People pass, but by the good Use which you your
Self make of them. They are certainly Good, exceeding Good to you, when you
Receive and Improve them after this manner; and therefore are things, not only
for you to bear, but to Bless God, and be Heartily Thankful unto Him for.

AN OFFICE FOR PRISONERS FOR CRIMES.
Scriptures for Prisoners for Crimes.
Psalm. 51. Ezekiel. 18. v. 10. to the end. Ps. 25. v. 7. to v. 20. Romans 1. v. 28.
to Chap. 2. v. 8. I.
THEY that plow iniquity, and sow wickedness, reap the same. Job. 4. 8.

His own iniquities shall take the wicked himself, and he shall be holden with
the Cords of his Sins: Prove. 5. 22.

Bloody and Deceitful Men shall not live out half their days.

My Heart is sore painted within me, and the Terrors of Death, are fallen upon
me.

Fearfulness and Trembling are come upon me, and Horror has overwhelmed me.
Psalm. 55. 4, 5, 23:

What Glory is it, if when ye be buffeted for your Faults, you shall take it
patiently? 1 Pet. 2. 20.

My Son, Give, I Pray thee, Glory to the Lord God of Israel, and make
Confession unto him; and tell me now what thou have done.

And Achan answered Joshua, and said, indeed I have sinned against the Lord God
of Israel, and thus have I done. Josh. 7. 19, 20.

We indeed suffer justly, for we receive the due reward of our deeds. Luke 23.
41.

II.
Fools, because of their Transgression, and becuse of their Iniquities, are
afflicted.

Then they cry unto the Lord in their Trouble, and he delivers them out of
their Distresses. Psalm. 107. 17, 19.

Oh! Let the sorrowful sighing of the Prisoner come before thee, according to
the greatness of thy power; preserve thou those that are appointed to dye.
Psalm. 79. 11.

The Lord has looked down from the height of his sanctuary; from Heaven did he
behold the earth.

To hear the groaning of the Prisoner: To loose those that are appointed to
death. Psalm 102. 19, 20.

III.
If our heart condemn us not; God is greater than our heart, and knows all
things. 1 Jo. 3. 20.

The Law is not made for a Righteous man, but for the Lawless and Disobedient,
for the Ungodly and for Sinners, for Unholy and Profane, for Murderers of
Fathers, and Murderers of Mothers, for Man-Slayers.

For Whore-mongers, for them that Defile themselves with Mankind, for
Men-Stealers, for Liars, for Perjured Persons, and if there be any other Thing,
that is contrary to sound Doctrine. 1 Timothy 1. 9, 10.

Without are Sorcerers, and Whoremongers, and Murderers, and Idolaters, and
whosoever Loves and makes a Lie. Rev. 22. 15.

Know ye not, that the Unrighteous shall not inherit the Kingdom of God?
Neither Fornicators, nor Adulterers, nor Abusers of themselves with Mankind,
nor Thieves, nor Drunkards, shall inherit the Kingdom of God.

Such were some of you: But ye are washed, but ye are sanctified, but ye are
justified in the Name of the Lord Jesus, and by the Spirit of our God. 1 Cor.
6. 9, 10, 11.

The Lord has sent me to Proclaim Liberty to the Captives, and the opening of
the Prison to them that are bound. Isa. 61. 2.

They that be whole, have no need of the Physician, but the sick. I came not to
call the Righteous, but Sinners to Repentance. Mar. 2. 17.

If the wicked restore the Pledge, give again that he had robbed, walk in the
Statutes of Life without committing iniquity, he shall surely live, he shall
not die. Ezekiel. 33. 15.

Zacheus stood, and said unto the Lord, behold! The half of my Goods I give to
the Poor: And if I have taken any thing from any Man by False Accusation, I
restore him fourfold. Luke 19. 8.

Father, I have Sinned against Heaven and before thee, and am no more worthy to
be called thy Son. Luke 15. 18, 19.

God be merciful, unto me a Sinner. Luke 18. 13.

PRAYERS FOR PRISONERS FOR CRIMES.
I. A general Prayer for all Prisoners, taken out of the Companion for the
Persecuted. page 135.
O! Almighty and Everlasting God, thou see the Streights and Sorrows which I
endure in this Place, and how unable I am to help my self, or to bring about my
own Deliverance. But the less Hope and Support I have in my self, the more I
look up unto thee, and place my Trust in thy Mercy. And when my own Care can
avail the least, let thine, O! Thou blessed Helper of the Helpless, appear the
most for me.

Give me a Body, O! My God, fit to bear the Inconveniences of this close Place,
and Grace to be content therewith; whilst I lie up here, let me not want
necessary Provisions, nor repine at the meaness thereof. Suit the Lowness of my
Desires, to the hardship of my Circumstances, and let the greatness of my Study
and Care be [to do To indemnify and content my Crediter when for Debt.
Justice] and show temperance and selfdenials, not to please my self, or to
gratify my own Carnal Ease and Appetites.

Whilst I am here kept a part from my former acquaintance, Grant, O! Lord, that
I may carefully retire into my self, and call my own ways to remembrance. And,
Oh! That I may amend* whatsoever is amiss there, and set all so straight with
thee, that I may delight to look into my own Heart, and to search out my own
Spirit. Lord! Now thou have left me nothing else to do, make me apply my self
to the one thing necessary: To grow in Holy Reverence and Devotion of Spirit,
in the Study of dealing justly and fairly with all, who are any way Concerned
with me; in Humility and Mortified Affections, in Patience and Contentedness,
Oh! Plant and fill my Soul with all Heavenly Virtues, and make bright all the
cloudy and dark parts thereof, with the Rays of thy Divine Image. And then, O!
My God, I shall see something of thee, as often as I look into my self, and learn
to be pleased with my own Company, though others are kept from me.

And in whatsoever want I am of other Comforts, Grant, O! Father of Mercies,
that both here and ever hereafter, I may have the Comfort of thy Presence. When
all else are taken from me, do not thou forsake me. Though I dwell in a
disconsolate Room, let thy Spirit dwell with me. Let thy Law at all times
direct me, and let the Sense of thy Love Comfort me. And after thou have
graciously improved this Melancholy Restraint, to wean me from vain and carnal
delights, to set my Soul free; in thy good time, O! My refuge and strength,
deliver me out of this Prison, and set my Body too at liberty, for my dear Lord
and Savior Jesus Christ's sake. Amen.

And for the more Particular Necessities OF Imprisoned Criminals, They may use
these Prayers following:
A Particular Prayer FOR PRISONERS for CRIMES.
I. For deliverance from his Sins and Sorrows.
O! Blessed Lord, who art the comforter of all sad and sin-sick Souls, comfort
me, I humbly entreat thee, in this height of my Fears and Sorrows. But first
convert me, and then comfort me. I am over-laden with Sins, which overload me
with Sorrows. And do thou, O God, rid me of my Sins, that I may get rid of my
Sorrows. Nay, rid me of my Sins, tho, for my just Punishment in this World,
thou leavest me under my Sorrows. Whatever befall my Body, for just Punishment
of my grievous* Or Crimes.
Crime, for which I am here in Custody; let true Repentance set my Soul safe,
and secure it of thy everlasting Mercy, for the Merits of thy dear Son, and of
my sweetest Savior, Jesus Christ, Amen.

Our Father, etc.

PRAYERS FOR PRISONERS FOR CRIMES.
II. The Prisoners Confession of God's Justice in his sad Circumstances.
I am come into this Prison, O! Most Holy and Righteous Lord, laden with Sins
and Sorrows; and am here shut up for the Curse and Shame of an untimely end,
which my Heinous Wickednesses have most justly deserved. I am terribly afraid
of my earthly Judge, and of that heavy Sentence which my Crimes make me justly
liable to receive from him. But infinitely more afraid, of that far more heavy
and eternal Doom, which I am liable to receive for the same at thy Righteous
Bar.

Now Fear and Trembling have seized upon me, Psalm. 55. 5.
and an horrible Dread has overwhelmed me. Without, is the prospect of Death
and Disgrace; and within, Psalm. 38. 8. 10.
is Guilt and Anguish. My Spirit is broken within me, and I am even at my wits
end, Psalm. u^. 1.
and my Heart fails me: And tho my Burden is Intolerable, yet O! Almighty
Lord, I cannot say, but it is infinitely just. It Is a most reasonable, and
righteous Return, for my daring Provocations of thy justice: And much more, for
my vile Abuses of thy Mercy and Patience. I must needs acquit, and justify
thee; and have none to accuse, but mine own Self, for all my present Fears and
Misery.

I am Prove. 11. 6.
taken, O! just Lord, in mine own Naughtiness, and am only left to lie down in
that Bed of Guilt and Sorrow, which I have been long a making for my self. All
my life, I have been Job. 4. 8.
Sowing wickedness, and am now brought to Reap the Fruit thereof. I have Job.
15. 16.
Drunk up iniquity like Water, and tho, to my mad and distempered Fancy, it
seemed to yield a slight and short Pleasure, while it slid along the Palate;
yet now I find it leaves an immovable Bitterness, and is nothing but Gall and
Wormwood, when it is got into the Belly. I have Drunk it up with Greediness,
and filled up the measure of my sins, till I perceive now, alas! That there is
like to be no measure of my Sufferings, and I am in danger to be swallowed up,
and utterly to sink under the Number and Weight of them.

Thus, Oh thou Righteous Avenger of all ungodly and incorrigible wretches, has
thy Justice at last overtaken me. And although thy vengeance is often times slow;
yet to my Grief, and thy Glory, I find it is sure, and, when it comes,
insupportable. I can in no wise bear my Load, tho I have not the least
exception against the Reasonableness, and Justice of it. Only my Hope is in thy
Mercy, which thou art wont to remember even when thou take upon thee to show
Judgment. And as thou art the Avenger of Sinners; so remember, Gracious Lord,
that thou art also the Savior of them. Oh save me, the Chiefest, and most
wretched of Sinners: And show Favor unto me, not according to my Deserts, but
according to thine own boundless Mercyes, for our dearest Lord and Savior
Jesus Christ's sake, Amen.

PRAYERS FOR PRISONERS FOR CRIMES.
III. His Profession of Repentance under the same.
I have sinned, O Almighty Lord, and sinned Grievously, and have continued
irreclaimable in the same for many years. But now, by the Alarm of mine own
Dangers, and by the Help of thy Grace, I am made sensible of mine iniquities,
and am made truly sorry for my sins. I sadly lament, all the wicked wast of my
time and strength, and all my long and heinous Course of Ungodliness, and abuse
of thy Patience, which has provoked thee to give me up to this great sin, for
which I am now most deservedly made a Prisoner, and may be called to answer
shortly with my Blood.

I am touched to the quick, and sorely afflicted, O! Righteous God, with the
Trouble and Sorrow, which this Crime has brought upon my Self. But more with
the Offense, which it has given thee; and the greatest Care I have upon me, is
to have thee forgive me. Lord! I do from the bottom of my Heart, repent of all
my Sins, but especially of this great Here you may name the sin.
One. I am greivously Troubled for what is past, and am fully bent against
falling any more into it for the Time to come, and am ready to take shame to my
self for the same, I am vile in mine own eyes, and am content to be so in the
eyes of other Persons. I am truly willing to make any submissions, where I have
given just Offense, and, as far as I am able, to repair the wrong which I have
done thereby. And Oh! That thou would ever keep me most ready to do this
fully and faithfully; and then direct me to do it prudently, and in such sort,
as may not be more prejudicial than needs to my worldly safety.

Though thou look upon me therefore, O! Almighty Lord, as a Sinner, yea, as
one of the greatest of Sinners: Yet for Christ's sake, look upon me as a
penitent Sinner. And though my sins are Great, my dearest Savior shed his Blood
for the greatest Sins; and through the Merits of that Blood, true Repentance is
accepted by thee, O! Merciful God, from the greatest Sinners. Oh! For his sake,
spare thy sinful, but repenting Creature, and though Justice be exacted of me for
my crimes here, yet admit me to some comfortable and well-grounded hopes of thy
Mercy for the same hereafter, through the Merits of my dearest Savior and
Redeemer, Jesus Christ. Amen.

Our Father, etc.

PRAYERS FOR PRISONERS FOR CRIMES.
IV. Prayers for Learning Righteousness, and Improvement of remaining Moments
of Life.
I.
THY Rod, O! Blesse^ Father, which is lifted u^ in justice, to punish our
Iniqu^ties; is used also by thy Grace to cure them. Oh! Let this my most
deserved Affliction teach m^ Wisdom. Make my Goal, my school wherein I may
learn Righteousness; and let my chains be preachers of Repentance. Now I feel
the smart and punishment thereof, give me grace to be fully sensible of the
wretchedness and folly, of an ungodly and misspent Life. Let me loath the Sin,
as well as the Sorrow; and be duly affected with the injury and dishonor which
I have thereby done to thee, as well as with the danger and distress which I
have thereby brought upon my self; that my contrition being truly for my sins
against thee, I may be duly qualified for thy most gracious Pardon of the same,
through the Merits of my blessed Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. Amen.

II.
And Help me, O! Gracious God, carefully to improve all my remaining moments,
and to employ all the time which I have now to Live, in minding the true work
and business of Life. Habituate my heart to thy fear, to humility and patience,
temperance and self-denials, fasting and prayers. Teach me to prize and set a
great value upon all helps and opportunities, of instruction and improvements
in the way of Godliness. To be desirous above all things of thy Grace; and of
the Company of good People whose discourse and carriage may affect my heart
therewith; and of their Prayers, since I am most unworthy through the multitude of
my heinous offenses, to pray unto thee for my Self, or to present unto thee any
Petitions from my polluted Lips.

Let not my corrupt Lusts, O! God, run at Liberty, whilst my body is under
Guards and Custody. And let me by no means resort to the company of desperate
Sinners, to keep off Remorse for my own Guilts; nor seek to drown the agonies
of my Mind, in excess of Wine, nor to divert them by vain Conversation. But
what space thou shall graciously spare me, Oh! That I may carefully employ, and
lay out with utmost diligence, to make my peace with thee, and to prepare for
eternity.

Lord! Help me to true Repentance, that with all my Heart I may return unto
thee. Do thou help me, now I call unto thee. help me, O! God of mercy, for none
else can help me. Help thou me, or I shall dye eternally. Make my Repentance
true and acceptable in thy sight, that if I dye, I may depart in thy Peace; or,
if by thy Grace, I be spared to live on still longer, I may return from all my
former Errors to a Life of Holiness, and devote all the remainder of my Days to
thy Glory, through our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. Amen.

Our Father, etc.

PRAYERS FOR PRISONERS FOR CRIMES.
V. Prayers for Acceptance of Repentance, tho late, and for the sincerity and
integrity thereof.
I.
THESE good thoughts of Mine, O! Most merciful God, I know are late Purposes in
one drawing toward the end of his Days. And Purposes, of one affrighted with
the near approach of Death; who whilst he was at ease and liberty, was wont
most wretchedly to slight thy Calls, and to abuse thy Grace.

But O! Father, accept me, tho I return late into thy service; and Mat. 20. 9.
have tarryed till it is the last hour of the day. Accept me, tho it is the Rod
that has given Repentance, and Affliction that has made me Wise. Be graciously
pleased, O! Good Lord, with any thing, and at any time, that shall bring me
back to thy Self. And despise not my Repentance, although it is the Repentance of
a Malefactor in agonies; more than thou did despise that, Luke 23 42, 43.
of the Penitent Theif upon the Cross. But make me find that true Repentance is
welcome to thee at all times, and that in this world it is never too late to
grow Wise, nor will ever be in vain to return with our whole heart to thy
Service, through Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen.

II.
And, Oh! Merciful God, by the Power of thy Grace, make my Repentance True, and
my Return entire, that it may be acceptable in thy sight through the Blood of my
dearest Lord. What good Purposes I have begun, through Fear of this World;
carry me on to perfect, by the considerations of the next world. Improve my
Horror of Pain, into an Hatred of Sin; and my Sorrow for the Dangers, which I
have brought upon my Self, into a Godly sense of the dishonor which I have done
to thee. Oh! Cut me not off from my Sins, till thou have cured me of them, and
finished the Work of Grace upon my poor Soul. That I may have all my Punishment
in this Life, but Peace with thee, and Rest after Death, in the Joys of
Paradise, for my dear Saviors sake, who died to save Sinners; yea, to save
such capital offenders, as I am, and as suffered with him, when he hung upon
the Cross between two Thieves, Amen. Our Father, etc.

PRAYERS FOR PRISONERS FOR CRIMES.
VI. For Respite, and longer Time in this world; and against the day of Trial.
I.
LOrd! If it be thy good pleasure, spare me a little longer, and let me escape
that untimely end, which my Crimes have deserved. I would fain live on some
time, to make proof of my good purposes; and having abused so much time to
contract evil Habits, I should be most glad and thankful to have a little more,
to wear them off again. Tho I have many worldly Reasons for this Respite; yet
O! Great and Righteous Judge, I desire it not so much upon any other account,
as of Redeeming my former years of Vice, and of growing more Perfect in thy
service, and of being better fitted than alas! I am at present, to appear
before thy Judgment Seat. Hear me, O! Lord, for thy mercys, and thy Dear Son
and my only Savior Jesus Christ's sake, Amen.

II.
Oh! Thou God of Patience and long-sufferance, show thy accustomed Forbearance
unto thy wretched Servant. Save me from that* Pit of Destructions, which I have
Dug for my self; and from the sentence of Death, which I am* horribly
afraid to hear from the mouth of my earthly Judge.

But let this deliverance be brought about, O! My God, only by the wise
Ordering of thy good Providence, not by any Falsehood of mine, or other unlawful
Arts. I fear Death, O! Righteous God. But that which makes me most afraid of
it, is, because I have sinned. And I Desire to fear sining, more than dying.

O! Therefore, gracious Father, suffer me not to yield to any new wickedness,
tho it be to save my Life. Make me diligent, in all innocent ways, and means,
for my Preservation, and direct me to the wisest. But let me resort to none
that is ill, nor say or do any thing for my own Defense at my Trial here, which
will rise up against me, and be Matter of Accusation, when I come to be tried
again at thy dreadful Bar. And the less care I may seem capable hereby, to take
of my self; the more do thou care for me, O! My God. And when my Cause comes to
be heard, so order things by thy Mercy, that there may not be a full evidence
produced against me; and that neither the Judge, nor Jury, may be disposed to
stretch things to my Prejudice; that so thy Servant may escape.

But if in thy Justice, thou have determined, to cut me off untimely for this
offense: Thy Blessed, and most Righteous Will be done. But then, gracious Lord,
perfect my Repentance, before I go hence, and for the voice and merits of thy
dear Sons most precious Blood, pardon my Sins. I am more concerned for thy
Favor, than how to come off here. I am content to suffer, what thou please in
this world; so thou will let me go off in thy Peace, and admit me among the
meanest of thy Servants in the world to come, for our Lord Jesus-Christs sake,
Amen.

Our Father, etc.

EJACULATIONS FOR THE PRISONER FOR CRIMES, At his TRIAL.
LORD, Hear the Cry of the Prisoners, and Deliver thou those who are appointed
unto death, Amen.

Here the cry of my wants for Mercy, not of my sins for Justice, Amen.

Help me, O! Lord, for I have none but thee to look unto: My defense lies not
in my own Innocence, but only in thy mere Mercy and tender Providence, Amen.

EJACULATIONS After his TRIAL, if Acquitted.
LORD, thou redeemest me from the Grave, and this Acquittal of me, is as Life
from the Dead. Blessed, yea, for ever blessed be thy most endearing Mercy, Amen.

Lord, the Life which here thou have given me, I do most humbly and entirely
give back, and devote to thee. Oh! Accept me, and let me have nothing more to
do with Sin and Vanity, Amen.

Oh! Let me never forget this inestimable Mercy, nor fail to make the best use
of this remainder of Life, which out of thine abundant Goodness, thou have now
lent me, Amen.

If Condemned.
LORD, I meekly receive this Sentence, as my just Punishment: I have the due
reward of my Deeds.

But as my Sin brings this untimely and shameful Death; Oh! Let my true
Repentance, through my dear Lord and Saviors Merits, secure the forgiveness of my
Sins, and bring me to everlasting Life, Amen.

PRAYERS FOR PRISONERS FOR CRIMES.
VII. Prayers after Sentence of Condemnation, or any time before Execution, and
at Execution, only making the Changes as they are noted in the Margin.
O! Almighty, and most righteous Judge, to thee it belongs to take vengeance,
and to me to suffer it. I must clear thy justice, and confess I have my
deserts, and have none but my Self to blame for this heavy [ At Execution
instead of Sentence, say and shameful Death,
Sentence.]

But now, O! Lord, when the Sword of vengeance is unsheathed, and is come to
the stroke, do thou stand by me, and Comfort me. Deal not with me, as I have
done with thee; but tho I have basely, and wretchedly forsaken thee all my
Life; yet leave me not, I humbly entreat thee, in add this at execution
my last Hour.

[ now for when at execution.
When] the justice of man lays my Blood upon my own Head, let thy Mercy, O!
Blessed Jesu, lay thy Blood upon it too, to expiate the guilt of mine. Let that
purge me from all my sins, that although I Dye Stained therewith here, I may
appear without spot before the Tribunal of my Heavenly Father, Amen.

II.
Sweet Jesu! Thou disdainedst not to Cast an eye upon the Luke 23. 43.
Penitent Thief on the Cross. Oh! Despise not me, who am now to for when I at
execution.
[when I] suffer in like case, as he did; and I hope truly repent me of my
sins, and fix all my Hopes in thee under my distress, as he did in his. Thou
once hungest upon a Tree thy self, for the sins of others. Oh! By the Blood of
thy Cross, Save me, who [ at execution say a^^ now.
stand justly condemned] to suffer the same for mine own sins. Save me, O!
Lord, a great and wretched, but a penitent contrite Sinner. In thy merits, Do I
trust, Luk 23. 46
Into thy merciful Hands do I commend my Spirit. I Believe, that thou, O! Lamb
of God, art 1. Tim. 1. 15.
the Savior of sinners: Oh! Save me, who am Chief among Sinners, and rescue my
trembling and departing Soul from eternal Misery. I Freely, and from my Heart,
forgive all mine Enemies; Oh! Do thou, in the abundant Riches of thy Mercy,
forgive me. Accept of such recompense, as I am able to make to those, who have
sufferd by me, and make up the wrongs, which I have done to any, and which now
I am no longer able to repair. Supply all that to them, and their Families, by
thy mercy, which they have lost by my wickedness, that they may neither be
tempted nor burdened by the loss, nor I tormented by the punishment accruing
thereby.

Give me strength, O! Almighty and most merciful Lord, under Add these at
execut.
my last Agonies. Help me, to bear all patiently, and to resign my self holy to
thy Mercy. Let the example of my Fall, be a warning to others, that the
prevention of their Crimes may make some reparation for the grievous Scandal,
which I have given by mine. And tho I taste thy Justice in my ignominious Death,
yet, O! Gracious Father, let me find the sweetness of thy mercy after it, for
my dearest Lord and Savior Jesus Christ's sake, Amen.

III.
Lord, save me, for I flee unto thee for safety. Save me, or else I perish
everlastingly. Save me a wretched Sinner, O! Jesu, thou Savior of Sinners. I
have been a lost Sinner, but thou Luke 19. 10.
Came to seek and save that which was lost. And after all my woeful and
wretched course of Sins, my own most deserved afflictions, and thy most
undeserved Grace, I hope have brought me now at last to true Repentance; and
thou have Ordered Luke 24. 47.
Repentance and remission of Sins, to be Preached to all Sinners. Oh! Save me a
penitent Sinner, and as thou did with Luke 23. 43.
The Theif upon the Cross, receive and comfort me in this may last Hour, Amen.

Our Father, etc.

EJACULATIONS For him at the time of Execution.
INTO thy Hands, O! Lord, I commend my Spirit, Amen.

I return thee a Spirit, alas! loaded with Sins: But washed I humbly hope with
the tears and sorrows of true Repentance.

Lord graciously accept my Repentance, and pardon my Sins, for the Merits of
that most Precious Blood, which was shed to wash away the sins of all truly and
penitent Sinners, Amen.

PRAYERS FOR PRISONERS FOR CRIMES.
VIII. A Thanksgiving for deliverance out of Prison, whither they had been
justly committed for capital Crimes.
I.
O! Almighty Lord, who art the blessed Author of all Life and Happiness, with a
most thankful Heart, I humbly adore and praise thy Mercy, which has now lent
me my life anew, and rescued me out of the jaws of Death. My Sins, had set a
snare for my own Life, and I had dug a pit for mine own Soul. Yea, my
ungodly ways, had most heinously injured thee, at the same time they threatened
to destroy my self: And yet, neither my own madness in seeking misery; nor the
resentment of the grievous wrongs thereby done to thee, could put by thy Love,
O! Father of Mercies, and God of all Comforts, from showing mercy unto me. I
called out to thee, and was helped; I put my Trust in thee, and was not
confounded. I sought thee earnestly, and thou wast found of me. The snare is
broken, and I am delivered. The Pit is covered, and to the glory of thy free
Mercy, and tende^ Care of me, I have happily escaped: For which all praise an^
thanks be ever ascribed to the^ through Jesus Christ my Lord. Ame^

II.
And Lord, keep, the memory of this surpassing Mercy always fresh upon my
Spirit, and let me ever be praising thee for the same, with joyful Lips. Never
suffer me to forget the vows, which I made in my distress; but let my whole
life be one acceptable Sacrifice to thee my Redeemer, and make all my actions
to show forth thy Praise. When I was in Trouble, O! Blessed Lord, it was not so
much out of the love of Life, as out of the love of innocence, that I desire to
be Respited. Oh! Grant me Grace now to employ my Life, as I then designed to do
and to make good now, what I did then pretend. Fix me unalterable in all the
ways of Godliness, which I have begun. Preserve me from Repeating any of my
former wickednesses, especially this Great one, which was so like to bring down
vengeance on my Head for all the Rest.

Tho I am cleared thereof before men, yet I know, O! Righteous Lord, that I
shall ever stand Guilty of it before thee, unless I show true amendment of the
same, and make Restitution for all the wrongs done to any thereby, in the best
sort I can. Oh! Keep me ever ready to do that fully, whatever it cost me; and
carefully to slip no opportunities of doing the same. And make me so watchful,
to spend all the remainder of my Days, in all holy and Thankful obedience, that
I may not only have the Purposes and Promises of Repentance, which, alas! was a
great part of what I had to show before, but the Proofs thereof to produce, and
to comfort my heart withal on any new Alarm. And then* O! Gracious God, when
thou shall bring me to fear Death a second Time, thy blessed will be done, and
by thy Grace I shall be able, and in condition to bid it welcome, through the
merits of my blessed Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, Amen.

III.
Once more Blessed, yea, for ever Blessed be thy Great and Glorious Name, O!
Almighty Father, for bringing me into this Distress, as well as for bringing me
out of it. I reverence thy Justice, for bringing it upon me. But at the same
time, I most thankfully own thy Mercy, which, when all other ways sailed, would
order this to reduce me to thy Self, and to make me break off my wicked Courses.

And ever deal with me, O! blessed Lord and Savior, in this manner. Distress
my Body, when thou see that is necessary to save my Soul. My Flesh is very
desirous of ease; but my Heart, O! My God, through the help of thy Grace, is more
desirous of Innocence: And whatever else I am given up to feel, let me not lie
hardened and past feeling in my Sins. Spare not the Rod of Discipline toward
me, when thou see there is need thereof to make me wise; and let me pass, tho
it be through present Misery, if that alone can keep me in the way to thine
eternal Mercy. Which Grant, O! Almighty, and most Gracious Lord, that I may
here comfortably hope for, and at last enjoy, for our Blessed Savior and
Redeemer Jesus Christ's sake, Amen.

Our Father, etc.

AN OFFICE FOR PRISONERS FOR DEBT.
I. Scriptures for Prisoners for Debt.
Psalm. 142. Lev. 19. v. 11. to v. 16. Luke 12. v. 22. to v. 32. Psalm. 130.
Deuteronomy. 24. v. 10. to v. 16. Chap. 15. v. 7. to v. 12. I.
THE Lord executes judgment for the oppressed, the Lord loses the Prisoners.
Psalm. 146. 7.

I have sent forth thy Prisoners out of the Pit, wherein is no Water.

Turn ye to the strong hold, ye Prisoners of hope. Zech. 9. 11, 12.

I give thee for a Covenant to the People, that thou may say to the
Prisoners, go forth; to them that are in darkness, show your selves. Isa. 49.
8, 9.

The Lord hears the Poor, and despises not his Prisoners. Psalm. 69. 33.

He satisfies the longing Soul, and fills the hungry Soul with goodness.

Such as sit in darkness, and the shadow of Death, being bound in Affliction
and Iron.

Because they rebelled against the Words of God, and contemned the Council of
the most High.

Therefore he brought down their Heart with Labor, they fell, and there was
none to help.

Then they cried unto the Lord in their Trouble; and he saved them out of their
Distresses.

He brought them out of Darkness, and the shadow of Death, and brake their
Bands in sunder. Psalm. 107. 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14.

II.
The wicked borrows, and pays not again. Psalm. 37. 21.

Defraud not one another in any matter. 1. These. 4. 6.

For he that does wrong, shall receive for the wrong which he has done, and
there is no Respect of Persons. Col. 3. 25.

Render to all their dues. Owe no man any thing, but to Love one another. Romans
13. 7, 8.

Have Patience with me, and I will pay thee all. Mat. 18. 26.

III.
Forgive us our Debts, as we Forgive our debtors. Mat. 6. 12.

A servant was brought unto his Lord, who ought him ten Thousand Talents.

And for as much as he had not to pay, he desired Forbearance: And the Lord was
moved with Compassion, and loosed him, and forgave him the Debt.

But the same Servant went out to his fellow servant, which ought him an
hundred Pence. And he would Grant him no Forbearance, but laid Hands on him,
and cast him into Prison till he should pay the Debt.

Then his Lord called him, and said unto him Oh! thou wicked Servant, I forgave
thee all that Debt, because thou desiredst me:

Should not thou also have had Compassion on thy Fellow Servants, even as I
had Pity on thee?

And his Lord was wrath, and delivered him to the Tormentors, till he should
pay all that was due unto him.

So likewise shall my Heavenly Father do also unto you, if ye from your Hearts
forgive not every one his Brother their Trespasses. Mat. 18. 24, to 36.

To whom much is forgiven, the same loves much. Luke 7. 47.

IV.
Has not God chosen the Poor of this World, rich in Faith, and Heirs of the
Kingdom, which he has promised to them that Love him? Jam. 2. 5.

Blessed are the Poor in Spirit, for theirs is the Kingdom of Heaven. Mat. 5. 3.

I am instructed, both to be full, and to be hungry; both to abound, and to
suffer need. Phil. 4. 12.

As having nothing, and yet possessing all things. 2 Cor. 6. 10.

Glory be to the Father, etc.

PRAYERS FOR PRISONERS FOR DEBT.
I. The General Prayers for Prisoners, which the Prisoner for Debt,
may find for his use in the foregoing OFFICE. And For the more particular
necessities of imprisoned Debtors, these Prayers following may be made use of.

II. Particular Prayers for Prisoners for Debt.
I. The indebted Prisoners Prayer, for clearing the store of his Sins.
O! Almighty and most Righteous Lord, my worst Debts are my Sins, which are
many and grievous, and which are all to be accounted for to thy Justice. And
Ps. 130. 3.
who may abide, should thou be extreme to mark what we do amiss? Much less
could I abide, who have done amiss extremely, and have [ This, when the Debts
are Contracted by our own Faults, in Luxury or Mispence. But if through innocent
Misfortune, and mere Hand of Providence; instead of, brought not only, etc.
say, Deserved, not only to be made a Prisoner for the same, in this
uncomfortable Place, but to be committed among the lost Angels, to Chains of
everlasting Darkness, till the Terrible Judgment of the great Day.
brought, not only the fear of thy future Wrath, but my present restraint and
sorrows upon mine own Head, by my own evil Doings.]

But O! Gracious Lord, I am sensible of my wickedness, and am truly Contrite
and Sorry for my Sins. And although this sense of my Sin and Folly, comes too late
to prevent this my uncomfortable Restraint, and worldly Misery: Yet it is not
too late, to move thy pardoning Mercy. Oh! For Christ's sake, strike off these
Scores, that they may neither sink my Soul, nor terrify my Conscience. [ In
Case of (...) contracted by mere Hand of Providence, omit this within the Hooks.
Particularly, O! Gracious Father, strike off the Score of all those Sins, and
expensive Vices; and of all my unlawful, or unwise and self-willed Projects;
and of all my impoverishing Neglects, or Mismanagements; which have drawn all
these streights and hardships upon my self, and have brought all this damage
and trouble to my Creditors.] Cleanse me of all the guilt of these Sins, Good
Lord, that my Soul may not hereafter be made a Prisoner, or arraigned again for
the same, at thy dreadful Bar. And when once thou have blotted out thine
account against me, I shall the better bear to have mine earthly Creditors
exact theirs; and patiently endure their Rigors, in hopes of thy free Mercy and
Forgiveness, through the merits and satisfaction of my Blessed Lord and Savior,
Jesus Christ, Amen.

Our Father, etc.

PRAYERS FOR PRISONERS FOR DEBT.
II. A Prayer for Mercy from his Creditors.
O! Father of Mercies, move the Hearts of all, who have sent me hither, and who
have it in their Power to set me Free, to have pity on me. Touch their Humanity
and good Nature, with a compassionate feeling of what I suffer. Let a sight of
my necessity, pierce their Souls and move their Compassion; yea, moreover, make
their consciences Sensible, O! Lord, how for their own Souls sake, they are
indispensably obliged to show Charity toward such Debtors, as are sincerely
willing and desirous to pay them what they owe them, but cannot do it. Show
them, that all sinners are Debtors; and that they are thy Debtors, as well as I
am theirs; and that for infinitely greater sums than mine is. Yea, and that
they are no more able to pay thee, O! God, than I am able to pay them.

Oh! then, that their own Necessity may make them wary, and prompt them to show
Mercy. That they may have patience with me, till I can raise as much as I am
able, toward the discharge of their Debt; and mercifully forgive the rest,
when I can raise no more. Oh! That they may not be rigorous, in exacting the
Hundred Pence, which I am not able to pay them; because then thou Mat. 18. 28,
etc.
declarest, that thou likewise wilt exact the many thousand of Talents, which
they are as unable to pay thee. And that thus, by mutually showing Mercy, we
may all be prepared to receive it at thy hands, for thy dear Son, our most
blessed Lord and Savior, Jesus Christ's sake, Amen.

Our Father; etc.

PRAYERS FOR PRISONERS FOR DEBT.
III. Prayers for an Heart, to be Honest to his Creditors.
I.
O! Almighty Lord, who Ps. 45. 7. and Ps. 11. 7.
love Righteousness, but hate Iniquity; let me not take up with a Prison,
as an Art of Defrauding; nor choose to rest thus uncomfortably confined in mine
own Person, to leave the guilt and curse of ill gotten Goods, and of unpaid
Debts, to my Family. Make me willing, O! God, to do justice to all who are any
way concerned with me, to the utmost of that worldly estate, which I have to
dispose of: And ready to give every man what I owe him, though I keep nothing to
my self, but am left thereby to live upon thy good Providence. If want must be
my share, Oh! Let me want the Conveniences, or even the necessaries of Life,
rather than the innocence thereof. And grant good Lord, that the place of my
wanting, may be here in this world, where my wants will soon have an end; not
hereafter in the next world, where they will know no end, for Jesus Christ's
sake, Amen.

II.
Enable me, O! Blessed Lord, if thou please, by thy good Providence, and put
me again into a Condition, fully to discharge and clear my Accounts with all my
Creditors. Let none of them, O! My God, be losers in the end by me. But bless
me in my ways, that I may have enough wherewithal to satisfy all their just
Demands, and give me an Heart to pay it out accordingly, and that with
thankfulness for their Forbearance, and without unnecessary delays. And dispose
them to have patience with me, till this can be done. And suffer not me in the
least to abuse that Patience; but make me apply my self diligently, to raise it
for them, as fast as I can, and honestly to pay it to them as fast as I can
raise it for them.

But if I am not able to pay them all that I owe them, grant them the Heart to
forgive me what I cannot pay. And since what is thus given to me, is given to
the Poor; look upon it, O! Lord, as Prove. 19. 17.
lent to thee, and be thou their Play Master. As they very charitably consider
my Necessities, do thou carefully prevent theirs: And whatsoever they abate to
me of my Scores, do thou make up abundantly to them and theirs by thy good
Providence.

And after they have forgiven me, tho I am no longer answerable to them in Law,
yet make me ever sensible, O! God, that I still owe the same to them in Equity.
And give me always the heart to repay, whatsoever they Acquit, if ever thou
shall put me in a Capacity, either by proper Payments, or by grateful Offices,
so to do. And by living always in this inward readiness and preparation of
Mind, to do them all exact justice; though I can never fully clear my Debts, yet
by thy Grace I shall clear my Conscience, and be fit, not only for their
Charity, but also for thine eternal Mercy, through the merits and mediation of my
blessed Lord and Savior, Jesus Christ, Amen.

PRAYERS FOR PRISONERS FOR DEBT.
IV. A Thanksgiving for a Prisoner for Debt, on his Release from Prison.
I.
O! Father of Mercies, and God of all Consolations, Psalm. 79. 11.
the sighings of the Prisoners have come before thee, and thou have graciously
heard my Prayer, and set my feet at Liberty. To thee, O! Blessed Lord, do I owe
this comfortable Freedom, which I have now obtained; and to thy Boundless and
undeserved Mercy, will I ever thankfully ascribe it. And, Oh! That in all my
Life, and through the whole course of my Conversation, I may ever remember, that I
am thy Freeman. O! That I may always adore and praise thy Goodness, for my
Deliverance, and walk so humbly, and thankfully, and obediently toward thee,
as may show that I am never unmindful, that thou gracious God, have given me my
Liberty, and that I am ever to improve and spend it to thy Glory, through Jesus
Christ my Lord, Amen.

II.
And Lord, let me never lose those good Thoughts and Purposes, nor forget those
Vows, which I made to thee when I was in Trouble. Give me a mind suited in all
things to my Circumstances, and Grace to deny my self, and to study to the
utmost of my Ability to do justice to all my Creditors. Never suffer me, to
forget their kindness in my Release, nor to give them any just Cause to Repent
of it: Nor do thou ever forget it, O! Merciful God, but remember it always for
their good. Keep me thankfully Sensible of all the kindness of my Friends and
Neighbors, of all who did me any good Offices, who showed me Countenance, or
supplied my Necessity, in the days of my Adversity. Oh! Do thou make each of
them that Requital, which I ought to do; and keep me always willing and ready
to requite them, after the best manner I can; and, when I am able to do no
more, to pray earnestly to thee, that thou would make up for me whatever
returns of kindness I fall short in.

Remember also, I humbly entreat thee, O! Most merciful Father, all those poor
Prisoners, who are still under their uncomfortable Restraints, and in thy good
Time, do the same for them, which in thy Mercy thou have now done for me. Oh!
That Heb. 4. 15.
having felt the same in my self, I may ever have a most compassionate Sense,
and tender Feeling of their Afflictions, and may joyfully embrace all
opportunities of recommending them to the pity of others, especially of those
Persons, from whose Charity they are to hope for their Release, but above all,
O! Blessed God, of Recommending them to thine everlasting Mercy; which Grant,
that both they, and I, and all thy faithful People, may ever earnestly Seek,
and succesfully Find, for the sake of our only Savior and Redeemer, Jesus
Christ, AMEN.

FINIS.
THE CONTENTS. OF THE Office for Prisoners for Crimes.
I. Directions for Prisoners for CRIMES.
Chap. I. HOW to Behave and Employ themselves, after Commitment, and before the
Trial. page 1 Chap. II. How to Behave and Employ themselves, in order, to and
at, their Trial p. 12 Chap. III. How to Behave and Employ themselves after
Sentence of Gondemnation, and at the Time of Execution. p. 20 II. Special
Directions for Prisoners for Debt. p. 27 III. General Directions for Both. p.
33 Scriptures for Prisoners for Crimes. p. 44 I. A general Prayer for all
Prisoners, taken out of the Companion for the Persecuted.
Particular Prayers for Prisoners for CRIMES.
I. For deliverance from their Sins and Sorrows. p. 55 II. The Prisoners
Confession of God's Justice in his sad Circumstances. p. 57 III. His Profession
of Repentance under the same. p. 62 IV. Prayers for Learning Righteousness, and
Improvement of remaining Moments of Life. p. 66 V. Prayers for Acceptance of
Repentance, tho late, and for the sincerity and integrity thereof. p. 70 VI.
For Respite, and longer Time in this world; and against the day of Trial. p. 74
EJACULATIONS.
Ejaculations at his TRIAL. p. 78 Ejaculations after his Trial if Acquitted. p.
79 If CONDEMNED. p. 80 VII. Prayers after Sentence of Condemnation, or any time
before Execution, and at Execution, only making the Changes as they are noted
in the Margin. p. 81 Ejaculations for him at the time of Execution. p. 86 VIII.
A Thanksgiving for deliverance out of Prison, whither they had been justly
committed for capital Crimes. p. 87 Scriptures for Prisoners for Debt. p. 93
Particular Prayers for Prisoners for DEBT.
I. The indebted Prisoners Prayers, for clearing the Score of his Sins. p. 98
II. A Prayer for Mercy from his Creditors. p. 101 III. Prayers for an Heart to
be Honest to his Creditors. p. 103 IV. A Thanksgiving for a Prisoner for Debt,
on his Release from Prison. p. 107
The End.

