A SERMON Preached at Coles-Hill in Warwickshire, January 24. 1685. On occasion
of the DEATH OF THE Right Honorable SIMON Lord DIGBY, Baron DIGBY OF Geashil
in Ireland. Who deceased at COLES-HALL, Jan. 19. 1685. On Heb. 6. 12. By JOHN
KETTLEWELL Minister of Coles-Hill in Warwickshire.

Imprimatur.

Hen. Maurice Rno P. and D. Wilhelmo Archiep. Cant. a Sacris.
April. 17. 1686.


LONDON, Printed for Robert Kettlewell at the Hand and Scepter over against St.
Dunstan's Church in Fleet Street. 1686.

TO THE Right Honorable WILLIAM Lord DIGBY, BARON DIGBY OF Geashil in Ireland.
My Lord,
WHen I Preached this Sermon to my own Parish, I had no Design to make it more
public. But since your Lordship desires it should come abroad, I readily
submit to it. For, besides the just and great Regard I have to your Lordship's
Request, I would not be wanting in any thing, that may serve, though in a very
small measure, to do Honor to that most dear, and exemplary Saint, your
deceased Brother. I am conscious that the Draught I have made of him is very
imperfect: but such as it is, it sets out many things most worthy to be
imitated, which may render it no lost Labor to the World. To do Right indeed
to the Subject, I should speak in Proportion to what he deserved: but to do
service among those that survive, the saying any thing almost of him is
sufficient, since it must needs be worth Men's while to hear any Particulars
remarqued upon, where almost all are excellent. And so long as his Character
may benefit others, were he on Earth again, he, whose studied care it was to do
good, and shun the praise of it, would readily pardon all the well-meant Errors
and Defects of the Compiler, which make it wanting to his own Honor. And I am
well assured your Lordship, who succeeds him in his Virtues, as well as in his
Estate and Honor, will do so too.

In particular, my Lord, I hope your Lordship will reap Benefit by these
Papers. For to your own Stock of an excellent good Nature, and Religious
Principles, you have made the discreet Choice of his admirable Example to
improve both, and have already transcribed it, in some choice and commendable
Methods. God grant your Lordship a lasting Continuance, and daily increase of
those Noble Endowments, which make you Brothers in Virtue as well as in Blood,
that you may not only equal, but exceed him in all those Excellencies and Pious
Qualities, which set him out for a rare Pattern, and enjoy a much longer Life,
wherein to display, and do good to the World with them. This, my Lord, is, and
always must be the most hearty Prayer of,

Your Lordship's in most Affectionate Duty and Service, John Kettlewell.
Coles-Hill Mar. 30. 1686.
A SERMON Preached at Coles-Hill in Warwickshire, January 24. 1685. On occasion
of the DEATH OF THE Right Honorable SIMON Lord DIGBY, On Heb. 6. 12.
That ye be not slothful, but followers of them, who through Faith and Patience
inherit the Promises.
ONE of the best Encouragements to act, especially in difficult and perilous
Undertakings, is other Men's Examples. And the Argument, which is like to have
most force, and prevail most in Examples, is their good Events, when we see
others, under the same Disadvantages and Hardships we suffer, to enjoy the same
Divine Aids whereon we rest, and meet at last with the same success which we
hope for. And this Argument the Apostle uses in this place, to persuade the
Hebrew Converts, to Constancy and Perseverance in the Faith. We desire, says
he, that as hitherto ye have shown love toward God's Name in a free Profession
of Religion, and ministered to the Saints, who suffer for him, (thereby openly
owning and avowing both him and them) so ye would still continue to show the
same diligence to the full assurance of your Hope unto the end. That ye be not
slothful and (...).
faint-hearted, like those cowardly Apostates mentioned v. 6. whose case is
desperate, but followers of them, who through Faith and Patience inherit the
Promises.

That which he particularly notes in these Examples, is their Faith, and
Patience. Their Faith, that is their firm trust in God, and belief of his
Promises, relying on his Word under all Trials. And their Patience, that is,
their perseverance in this Trust and expectation under all Delays, and constant
adherence to him under all Difficulties. These two the Apostle singles out from
among many others, because they particularly serve his Purpofe, which is to
press Perseverance in the Faith, neither totally abjuring and falling off from
Christ, as some had done v. 6; nor forsaking the Public Assemblies in perilous
Times as Heb. 10. 25.
others did, which would shortly end in it: which Perseverance is best secured
by these two Virtues. But good Examples give instances of many other Virtues
wherein they are to be followed; and are equally serviceable to all other
Duties as well as these: and in that latitude I shall consider them in the
ensuing Discourse.

This Text excites the Hebrews to diligence in good Works, from the Examples of
deceased Saints, who are now reaping the Reward of all their former Pains, and
inherit the Promises. And in treating on it, I shall

1. Show what use we are to make of Pious Men's Examples.

2. Propose one to your imitation.

1. I shall show what use we are to make of Pious Men's Examples.

A good Example is both a very instructive, and engaging thing. And the
Examples of deceased Saints, have more Power and Efficacy than the Examples of
the living. For nothing gives us so just an Estimate of any Excellencies, as
the loss of them. And when once good Men are gone, there is no more Emulation,
to make those that survive detract from what was imitable and praiseworthy in
them. And after their Deaths, we look upon them not only as Good, but as
Blessed, and so are apt to be influenced the more by their Virtues, because of
our Veneration for their Persons and Memories. And these the Apostle here
proposes, directing us to look up to those, who are now no longer Candidates
and Expectants, but inherit the Promises.

Now the use we are to make of their Examples, is both for a Lesson to direct
and teach, and also for a Motive to hearten and excite us to an imitation of
their Virtues.

1. We must use the Examples of Good Men for a Lesson, to direct and guide us
in the way of Goodness. Examples are more plainly instructive than Precepts.
For Precepts prescribe Virtue in general Terms, which afterward needs farther
Reasoning to supply Circumstances, and accommodate them to particular
Occasions. But Examples show it in particular instances, attired in all its
various Forms and Circumstances, and fitted for Practice; so that when they are
in sight, we have nothing left to do, but to follow what we see before us. And
this use our Savior directs us to make of his Example, to look upon his Life
as a Sermon, and make his Practice our instruction. Learn of me, for I am meek
and lowly Matt. 11. 29.

But in this use, of learning our duty from Good Examples, we must take care to
choose such acts of Good Men for our imitation, as had a law of God to direct
them. Good Men's examples are no warranty to our Consciences, when they are
alone. They make our duty plainer by illustrating Gods Laws; so that they help
our understanding of what is good, when there is a Law with them. But they do
not make any thing a duty without a Law, and much less can they authorize any
action which is against a Law of God: so that we must not think it enough to
justify us in any action, that any good Men have done the same.

1. We may not imitate all the Actions of Good Men; because no Men are
perfectly good in this World, but have a mixture of Good and Evil in them. They
have not only Virtues to be followed, but over-sights and Humane Passions to be
pityed and avoided. And these being faults and blemishes in them, can give no
security in following them.

2. We may not imitate all such acts of theirs, as the Scripture recites
without blaming. Such is Jacob and Rebekkah's fraud, in making blind Isaac go
out of his way, and Stealing away Esau's blessing. Genesis 27. And Holy David's
putting his friend Jonathan, to excuse his not attending upon Saul at the Feast
of the New Moon, by making a feigned Story for him, 1. Sam. 20, 5, 6. And by
such another fiction getting the Shewbread and Goliah's Sword from Ahimelech,
which occasioned the death of fourscore and five of the Priests, and of all the
inhabitants, not only Men, but also Women and Children in the City of Nob. 1.
Sam. 2^. etc. 22 These, with other such like actions of Good Men, the Scripture
relates by way of bare History and Narrative, without making descants and
reflections, or passing any censure on them. But the silence of the Holy
Penmen in this Point, is no sign of their Approbation. God has plainly enough
laid down the Rules, whereby Men ought to act in these cases, and from which we
are to judge of their actions. And therefore having related the facts which
were done, they leave others to bring them to the Rules, and see whether they
are according to them. When any Good man's action then is related in Scripture,
it is no sufficient justification of it to say it is not censured, unless it can
be shown moreover that it is not liable to censure; that is, that it is against
no Law of God, which both the Holy Penmen and we are to censure and judge of
all Actions by.

Nay further,

3. We may not imitate all such Actions, as we find justified and commended in
the Scriptures. The Reason of this is, because the Scriptures commend, not only
purely virtuous, but also mixed actions, which are only justifiable on some
accounts, but culpable on others. Thus the Lord in the Parable does by his
needy Steward, who at his going off provides for his future subsistence among
his Lords Tenants, by a false Stating of his Masters accounts: he commended the
unjust Steward that he had done wisely. Luke 16. 8. Where, though the Lord
commends his foresight, that he acted Providently, yet, had he designed to
speak to it, he would as much have blamed his fraud and dishonesty. And thus
our Savior does by David, when he speaks of his eating the Shewbread: he
justifies his eating of it, though it were appropriated to the Priests, and was
Holy, because all that was superseded by his Hunger and necessity. Matt. 12. 3,
4. But although he there maintains his eating of the Holy Bread, yet are we not
thence to conclude he would also have defended that falsehood whereby he
procured it. 1 Samuel 21. 2. Thus St. Paul, among his other Worthies, praises
Gideon, and Samson, and Jephtha, Heb. 11. 3^. But that which he would recommend
to imitation among us from their Practice, is only their faith, not their
Hostilities and Warlike invasions. And the like judgment we may reasonably pass
upon the Commendation given to the Egyptian Midwives, who with their Pious
Charity in saving the lives of poor Innocents, joined falsehood to their own
Prince, to whom, when they replied any thing at all, they ought not to have
given a false answer in their examinations. Therefore, says Moses, God dealt
well with the Midwives, and made them Houses, thereby not approving their
insincerity, but only rewarding their Pious Charity. Exodus 1. v. 16. to v. 22.
In these, and the like instances, when the Good part in a mixed action is the
most eminent, as in the case of the Midwives; or when the ill part happened
through a pityable fear, and great temptation to it, as in the case both of
them, and David: God, who is much more prone to approve than to spy faults, and
had rather observe what may make for us, than what would make against us, is
pleased oft-times to take notice of the virtues of his servants, which are to
their Praise, without mentioning the defects intermixed, which would be to their
disparagement. But because in these mixed actions God commends what he likes, we
must not think that he also approves what his Law forbids and punishes. The ill
part of good men's Actions, their faults and defects, are no ground of his
commendation, and so can give no warranty for our imitation of them.

One example, indeed, there is, which is perfectly without sin, and that is the
example of our Blessed Savior, who did no sin, neither was guile found in his
Mouth. 1 Pet. 2. 22. But although we are secure, that in his example nothing
justly deserved blame, yet must we not draw even it as a Rule in all Points for
our imitation. For he was a Person of a most peculiar office and station, and
many things which he did were in virtue of that, which are not compatible to us
that follow him. He Mat. 4. 2.
fasted forty days and forty nights, at his entrance upon the office of being a
Lawgiver to the Church, as Exodus 34. 28.
Moses had done before him. He whipped the buyers and sellers out of the Temple,
and overthrew the Tables of the Money Changers, without any visible authority of
a public Character or warrant from the Magistrate, but only as he was the Joh.
2. 16, 17.
Son of God, and because the Spirit of Zele was upon him. He Mat. 23.
freely and openly reproved the Scribes and Pharisees, those great Rules among
the Jews, and called King Herod Luke 13. 32.
Fox, by virtue of his Prophetical Commission. These, and several other things
he acted, not as an ordinary person, by his pattern to lead on other Men: but
as being acted by an extraordinary Spirit, and in pursuit of his mediatory
office and undertaking, which is a thing wherein we must not pretend to imitate
him.

It Is true, our Lord's example is a Rule to direct us in our duty, and he
intended it should be so, calling us to be his followers by treading in the
same steps, and to be meek and lowly, as we saw he was. But in taking Measures
of our duty from it, we must not conclude any thing a duty barely from his
Pattern, but only where his Laws say the same. For not to be minute in all the
particulars, wherein our Blessed Savior's example may instruct us, the safest
and easiest argument from his actions in this case, is when they are instances
and illustrations of his own Precepts. It is not his practice, but his command
that makes any thing a duty, and when he practices according to it, that
exemplifies the commandment in its lively forms and circumstances, and is a
more sensible manifestation of the duty enjoined by it. The adding of his
practice, where he has given a Precept, serves for a clearer illustration of
it: but if there be no precept, his practice alone does not bind, nor make any
thing become a duty which before was not one. And accordingly those instances,
wherein the Scriptures recommend his example to us, are things enjoined by his
own Laws. As when we are bid to be me^k and lowly, as he was, Matt. 11. 29; to
inherit the virtue of Blessing our Persecutors and Slanderers from his
practice, 1 Pet. 3. 9; to follow his steps in a Patient Resigned endurance of
unjust sufferings, without railing or wrathful returns, 1 Pet. 2. 20, 21, 23.
and the like.

And as this is true of the example of Christ, so likewise of the Examples of
other Holy Persons recorded in Scripture. For even their unmixt Actions, which
were not blameable in them, are sometimes unfit for our imitation, being
performed in pursuit of peculiar offices, or authorized by such circumstances
of things and other special inducements, as they had at that time, and which do
not agree to us in common with them.

1. Several of their Actions, which the Scripture justif^es were by virtue of
immediate divine warranty and commission, which would have fallen under a just
censure, but for that reason. Thus the Israelites Exodus 11. 2, 3.
borrowed of the Egyptians, and paid not again, because God, the supreme
Disposer of all men's Goods, had given them that express Direction. Number. 25. 7,
8.
Phineas, though a private Man, did a Public act of justice upon a Malefactor,
without expecting the forms of Law and the Magistrates order for it, because he
had a Particular Divine impulse (a thing sometimes vouchsafed under the Jewish
dispensation) and the Spirit of Zele was upon him. 2 King. 9.
Jehu took Arms against the House of Ahab, and slew his Master Joram by a
particular command of God, which would have been a most detestable Treason and
Rebellion without it. The Holy Prophets are most public and plain in their
reproofs, both of Princes and Priests, calling them Is. 1. 10 23.
Companions of Thieves, Rulers of Sodom, Is. 56. 10, 11.
Blind Watchmen, Dumb Dogs, greedy Dogs, and the like, because there were such
Profligate Powers then, and though they were in Authority, this was no criminal
speaking evil of dignities, because the Prophets spoke not of themselves, but
only delivered Gods Message, which he had put into their Mouths. These bold and
open reprehensions of higher Powers were good in them, because the Lord had
bidden them. But this is no justification at all to the black-mouthed Quakers,
and other railing Rabshekah's of our time, who have neither the like just
occasion, nor, if they had, can reasonably pretend to any such prophetical
office and commission.

2. Other of their Actions were commendable upon their suitableness to the
present circumstances and particular state of things at that time, which would
have deserved no praise, but rather reproof at another season. Such was David's
eating the Shewbread in the pressing necessity of his Hunger, and when he
could have no other; which had been unjustifiable and blameworthy out of that
circumstance, and at any time when common Bread was to be had* Such also was
St. Paul's Act. 16. 1^, 3.
circumcising Timothy, when he chose him out to gather Jewish Converts, because
that would help him to gain upon the Jews, who at that time having a great
devotion to the Law of Moses, would not only be slow to receive instruction
from, but also to give access and converse freely with an uncircumcised person.
But because he did it in this advantageous circumstance, we must not conclude
it may be done indifferently in any others, or to comply with their error, who
press the necessity of circumcision and the Law of Moses: in which alteration
of the case, the Apostle himself was so far from doing the same again, that he
inflexibly refused to circumcise Titus when the necessity of it was urged upon
him by the false Brethren and Judaizers. Gal. 2. 3, 4, 5. Such again was the
practice of Act. 4. 34, 35.
having all things common at Jerusalem, when the necessities of the poor Saints
could not otherwise be supplied, and the confiscations coming upon the Church
for Christ's sake, would let no Christian there call any thing his own long.
And the Apostolical Rules of 2 Thessalonians. 3. 6. 14. and 1 Cor. 5. 11.
holding no acquaintance or commerce with stubborn contemners of Church-orders,
and notorious evil livers, which, whilst the Church was encompassed with
Heathens, so that its own members would seek shelter from it, and the offenders
were fewer in Number, and so unable to protect themselves, was like to reduce
them. These practices were good then because prudent in their circumstances,
and proper for that season: but would not deserve the like approbation in
those, who should go to imitate them unseasonably at another time.

3. Lastly, Some Actions of good Men, particularly under the Old Testament,
were justifiable whilst that Dispensation stood, which would be criminal in us
now, who are under a Law more perfect. Such was 2 King. 1. 10, 12.
Elias's calling down Fire from Heaven upon his Adversaries, which agreed well
enough with that State. But when the Disciples James and John went about to do
the like, and pleaded his Example in justification of it, Jesus rebuked them,
and told them his Dispensation required another manner of Spirit, Luke 9. 54,
55. Such also are the Liberties, of having many Wives, of putting away their
Wives for every cause and dislike, of cursing Enemies and praying down
Judgments upon their Heads, which no good Christian must presume to do, because
he finds it done Psalm. 35, 36, 80.
often by holy David in the Psalms, Psalm. 109.
and by Ier. 18. 21.
others of the holy Prophets, since our Savior has out-stripp'd Moses, and
raised our Duty higher in these Points.

As to this use then of good Men's Examples, viz. taking the information and
measures of our Duty from them; their Examples are not sufficient to warrant
our Consciences when they are alone, but only when we see the Law and Rule too
which they went upon. It is not enough to justify us in any Action, that they
did it, unless it may appear that they did well in it, and that it is according
to Law, which shows what they ought to do. Their practice is not to give Laws,
but is it self to be ruled and judged by them, as ours is. If they act against
any Law of God, that Law condemns them, and so will never justify us for
following them in an unlawful thing. But if they acted according to it, we may
safely follow them: but that is not upon the authority of their Pattern, but of
God's Law, which justifies both us and them. They are only his Laws, not other
Men's Practice, which at last must judge us. God shall judge the World according
to my Gospel, says St. Paul, Romans 2. 16. and my Word shall judge Men at the
last day, says our Savior, Joh. 12. 48. And if Laws must govern our Sentence,
bare Examples without Laws can never be sufficient to guide and authorize our
practice. So that in learning our Duty from good Examples, we must seek to
understand a Command more fully and usefully by seeing it exemplified, but not
think bare Examples make Virtues, and authorize Actions where there are no
Commands at all. And this I have insisted the longer on, because in judging of
their Duty, Men are generally prone to build too much upon the Examples of
such, as have been eminent for the Practice of it. They find it easier to
follow what they see others do, than to enquire what they ought to do: and so
by an indiscriminate imitation, sometimes turn those Pious Examples, which were
intended for the Souls most wholesome Food, into its Poison.

2. The second use we are to make of Pious Examples, is for a Motive, to
hearten and excite us to an imitation of their Virtues.

This is the most proper use of Examples, when Laws have made Duties, and
established the goodness of Actions, to be an argument and incitement to the
Practice of them. This end they serve, by working upon that natural Emulation
which is in Men, who care not to be outdone in an advantageous or
praiseworthy thing, and seeing others reap Honor or Happiness from any
Performances, are thereby much incited to attempt the same. Now the Example of
Pious Persons spurs us on to an imitation of their Virtues, both as it shows
the Performance of our Duty to be very desirable, and fairly possible.

1. As it shows it very desirable, and inflames us with a noble eagerness, and
earnest longing to do as they have done. That which principally does this in
Examples, is the honorable end, and happy event of them: for the Glory and
Greatness of the Rewards shows the desirableness of any Service, and is fittest
to work upon our Emulation. And this the Scripture particularly directs us to
look to in the Examples of Holy Men. Ye have heard of the Patience of Job, and
have seen the end of the Lord, how bountifully he rewarded him for it, says St.
James to the Jewish Converts, when he exhorted them to bear Affliction
patiently as he did, Jam. 5. 10, 11. In running our hard Race with Patience,
says St. Paul, let us look unto Jesus, who endured much worse; and is now set
down for it at the right hand of God, Heb. 12. 1, 2. Be ye followers of them,
says the Apostle in the same Text, who through Faith and Patience inherit the
Promises. And remember them, who have spoken to you the Word of God, whose
Faith follow, considering the end of their Conversation, and what Eternal Bliss
they got by it, Heb. 13. 7. Thus does the Scripture propose the end of their
Services, their purchased Glories and Rewards, as the most Powerful Argument to
enkindle noble Desires in others, and gain Followers. So that if we would give
our selves the Benefit of Deceased Saints Examples, we must consider the
Blissful End of them, and often reflect, how their Piety has placed them in a
state of most pure, perfect, and endless Happiness, where they are at absolute
Rest from all their Labors, and eternally exempt from all Sorrows, Fears, and
Cares; where they enjoy all their Hearts can desire, and live always in the
Presence, and about the Throne of God, whence they daily receive Communications
ineffable, and Glories incomparable, and such ravishing Delights, and inward
Satisfactions, as no Fancy can reach till we come to feel them, all which they
are to enjoy for evermore. This is the incomparable Reward of all the good they
did, and a due and serious Consideration of it will inflame in us an Emulous
Desire, and mightily engage us to do the same.

2. Their Example encourages us to imitate their Virtues, as it shows such
imitation fairly possible. They were Men of like Passions, Over-sights, and
Infirmities; and subject to like Trials and Temptations with our selves. And
since notwithstanding all these Difficulties and Discouragements, they were
successful in their virtuous Attempts, we may justly take Heart, and hope to be
so too. For our Discouragements are no greater than theirs were, and our
Assistances from the Spirit and good Providence of God will be no less. He will
be the same in all Times, to all that labor in expectation of his Aid, and
Faith of his Gracious Promises. So that if we will imitate their Labors, we
may promise our selves to experiment their Success, and to prosper and be
victorious as they have been before us. And this use also the Scripture makes
of good Examples. St. Paul endeavors to support the Faith and Patience of the
Corinthians, by telling them there has no Temptation taken them, but such as
is common to Man, 1 Cor. 10. 13. and St. Peter bids the persecuted Christians
be steadfast in the Faith, knowing that the same Afflictions are accomplished in
their Brethren, which are in the World, 1 Pet. 5. 9: and St. Paul exhorting the
Hebrews to Patience in their Race, sets before them the Cloud of Witnesses, who
were Glorious in their Successes, though of like Passions and Trials with
themselves, Heb. 12. 1. Thus to strengthen his Faith in God's mercy, the
Psalmist says he will remember his wonders of old, and talk of his doings for
others, which would encourage him to hope for the same himself, Psalm. 77, 11,
12. And St. Paul tells the Corinthians, that whether he be afflicted, or
comforted, it is for their Consolation and Salvation; and is effectual in their
enduring of the same Sufferings which he suffers; they having thereby, not only
God's Promise, but also his Experience to assure them of the same support in
their Afflictions, which he found in his, 2 Cor. 1. 6. Thus was one great
Benefit they designed Men in proposing good Examples to them, the overcoming
their Diffidence, either of God, or of themselves, and possessing them with
good Hopes of Success in their Attempts after any Virtues. And therefore if we
would give our selves a just Advantage from the Examples of Deceased Saints, we
must duly consider their Discouragements and Assistances, and that as they were
of like Passions and Temptations with us, so shall we find like Grace and
Success with them, if we Heb. 12. 3.
saint not in a holy Undertaking.

Having thus shown what use we are to make of Pious Men's Examples, and how fit
they are, either to be Guides and Directions to our Consciences, or a Spur and
incitement to our Practice: I proceed now

2. To propose one to your imitation.

It has pleased the All-wise God to take from us an excellent Person, who
whilst he lived was a bright Example, and a public Good, whose Life could
credit an Holy Religion, and whose Rank and Quality in the World afford
Interest and Support to it. He was a clear Instance of many noble Virtues, and
both a discreet and zealous Stickler in promoting them. As for his Funeral, he
desired it might be Private, without Splendour and Ceremony, wherewith his
Friends would otherwise have begun to pay Honor to his Memory. And this he did
out of a Generous Contempt of worldly Show and Pomp, and a fixed inclination of
expressing his Liberality, which indeed was Great, in Pious and Charitable
Works, which are things of solid use: Choosing such Methods of Expense, as were
like to bring most Glory to God, and Good to Men, not such as were only empty
and unprofitable signs of Honor to himself. This way of Carrying him to his
Grave, occasioned no Public Meeting at his Funeral, which superseded such
Accounts, as might otherwise have been expected of him at that time. But I
think an Example, from which so much is to be learnt, ought not to pass without
some Remarques upon it. And although I do not intend a just and full
Description of him, yet that you of this Place, who have been Eyewitnesses of
his Conversation, may not lose the Benefit of such a Pattern, I shall draw him
out in some rude Lines for your imitation. And if we can be so wise and careful
as to imitate him, that will make a Recompense for our Loss, and in part supply
the want we must all expect to find of him.

He was a Person of good understanding, without haughty opinions and conceit of
his own knowledge, which is the greatest hindrance to any man's gaining more,
and growing wiser. He was of a quick, and clear apprehension; of a temper very
sedate and calm, free to hear, and patient to consider of such reasons, as were
offered to him; of sagacity to direct his thoughts to the right mark, where the
stress lay in any point; and of a well poys'd judgment, in discerning which was
the right side. He did not affect to hear himself talk, and ingross the
discourse, but was industriously careful to appear, as one that desired rather
to learn than to teach, and to be free to hear other men's sense, as well as to
give his own. But what he took occasion to speak, was pertinent and proper,
with such insight into things, and judicious consideration of them, as made it
well worth the Hearing. He had a very good talent of Reason, and was careful so
to employ it, as might enable him to give the best and most unblameable account
of it, that is, in understanding himself and his own duty, in bringing Honor
to God, and doing Good to Men, and fitting himself to be serviceable to his
friends, and to his Country.

As for Religion, that was the height of all his aims, and the most open of all
his Professions, wherein he endeavored most to be a Good Proficient himself,
and which he most sought to Propagate among others. Of which, for your godly
imitation, I shall give these following accounts

He was a person of true tenderness of conscience, very impressive, and soon
touched with any thing, that had true goodness in it. But although he was thus
justly tender, yet he was not of a scrupulous temper, i. e. apt to run away
from trifles, and startle at such things, as have in them no illness, or hurt
at all. And to prevent being misled into doubts and Perplexities, by any
unnecessary Rigors or unwary expressions, which sometimes occur in Good Books,
he was studiously careful to get distinct notions, and to discern what things
recommended in them were matters of necessary duty, and what only of Prudent
advice and Godly direction: which thing if it had been more remarqued by some
that have written good Books, as well as by those that read them, several
laudable directions, that have occasioned much trouble to some Pious minds,
would have proved only Profitable Helps to men's Practice, without engendring
doubts and scruples, or any ways insnaring of their Consciences.

Next to this true tenderness, and entire sense of Duty, which I think is the
first, and must always be the leading excellence in any Good Man, since our
Practice of any duties must follow upon our opinions of them: I shall recommend
to you his entire care and regard to observe all. This indeed, was the Sum of
all his Prayers, of his studies, and endeavors, to be an upright and entire
Man; i. e. to have an eye to all the commandments, and observe God in every
thing he had required of him. To keep up a constant sense of his weaknesses and
miscarriages, he took daily accounts of his daily practice, besides what he did
with more care and exactness at set times. And his examinations of himself
stood not only in the most notorious and weighty duties, but also in such
others, as though Christ has equally enjoined, yet in the Practice, and too
often in the opinion of the World, are least observed. He judged himself for
his uncharitable Surmises, and hard censures, for his unwary propagating and
reproachful falsehoods he had heard of his Brethren, nay for his unnecessary
utterance of any real miscarriages he knew by them, for his omissions to
discourage an ill thing, or to embrace and promote a Good one when it lay
before him. These, and such other less observed errors of the Tongue, and sins
of conversation, and other less noted breaches of duty, for which, though
Christ at last will judge us all, yet so many otherwise serious neglect to
judge and reform themselves, were the matter of his accounts and confessions.

And when he had confessed them, his care, like a Good Christian, was to amend
them, and to be more watchful to prevent the like again. The plain truth is, he
carefully studied this Art, as one that greatly desired, and wisely intended to
be expert in it. And among all the Methods he took for this end, the principal
were these.

The chief cause why Men, who in the General aim and bent of their minds are
set upon their duty, are yet for all that liable to transgress it, is because
it is slipped out of their thoughts, and they want a present sense of it when
they should be governed by it. To prevent this, his first care was what in him
lay to familiarize all particular duties to his mind. In order to this, one way
he chose, was out of Books to extract a scheme, containing all particulars in a
short compass, which might easily be inured to His thoughts: another was, to
have all the sins he needed to confess, and the graces he was to beg of God,
set down as particularly, as might be, in his daily devotions. His great desire
and care was to make his Prayers serve for lessons and instructions, that his
confessions of Sin might show him what he was to shun, and his Prayers for
Grace be monitors to his practice, and his daily Petitions to Almighty God,
become Rules to himself. And intending thus to live according to his Prayers,
he desired in them to be very particular in the Points of Practice, that in his
daily devotion, he might not only have the Benefit of a supplication, but
withal the daily use and admonition of a Sermon.

Having taken this care to maintain in himself a present lively sense of all
duties, his next care was to study, what were the most expedite, easy, and
useful Rules of practicing them. And after he had wisely chosen, and proposed
these Rules to himself, he was careful to observe them, and took account of
himself how he swerved from them: remembering in the mean time, that many of
these rules were not necessary duties, but only prudent means, and such as he
had set himself, but God had not prescribed him. These Rules, with the sins,
which by Nature or custom, or the course of temptation, he was most exposed to,
and which they were designed to cure, he set down in writing. And that both his
dangers, and his remedies, might be kept fresh and familiar upon his mind, his
Method was to have two fixed days in every week, to peruse and consider of them,
that so, if he did forget himself, it should be but for a short time, and that
within a very few days, he might return to his former Guard again.

In Sum, the course of his repentance was plainly a most studied and contrived
thing. He forethought ways, how to carry on good motions; how to prevent
surprises; or, when at any time he fell, how to recover himself by an immediate
repentance; how to prepare for the temptations of any day, or business; how to
maintain a constant liveliness of Heavenly Affections, by sending up Divine
Breathings and Ejaculations, not only every day, but almost every hour more or
less. So that repentance was the Art he studied, and was as truly his daily
business, as some men's Trades and occupations, others vices, and the vanities
and Diversions of a third sort are theirs.

This was his care of good living in the general, but I shall expose it still
nearer to your view and Godly imitation in some particulars.

To begin with the Piety and Devotion of his Spirit, he had a Prosound Honor
and Reverence for Almighty God, and Love for Religion, which without the
extremes, either of fear, or Affectation, he would openly profess and own in a
licentious and profane Age, that thought such pretenses to Religion to bewray
want of Spirit or Breeding. He did not only take care of the Practice, but
espouse the party of true godliness: he would bravely and wis^ly plead for it,
and labor to gain Profelytes to it. He had a compassionate sense of the
difficulties and temptations that attend Men of Quality, through the Worlds
adopting many wicked Practices into Rules of Good breeding, and fixing such
things into Laws of Honor, as are not only a most open Breach of the plainest
and most important Precepts of Religion, but the grossest absurdities to any
sober reason and common discretion. And having wisely considered and prepared
his own mind against them, where he could, he was glad to convince and
strengthen others, and where he could not, he pitied and grieved for them;
lamenting to see some, in other respects very wise and sober Men, too deeply
tainted with the commonness of the infection. To engage his friends to a
serious and powerful sense of Religion, he would follow them with Good
Counsels, which he would manage discreetly, and time seasonably, laying wait
for them in their most impressive Moods, especially after any great dangers, or
in the time of sickness, and wherein he would reason clearly, endeavoring to
convince and persuade them, both from the cogent Reason of things, and from the
more affecting argument of his own experience. Whilst he lived, he would urge
them by advice and importunities, and at his death, by the most affectionate
Messages and dying Entreaties. In Pursuit of this end he would stoop to any
thing, and sometimes make himself a companion of mean Persons, not only sending
Books or Instructors to them, but making repeated Personal Addresses, and
becoming a Preacher to them himself. And as for his Servants and Dependants,
with the care of whom he knew God had particularly entrusted him, he was more
especially careful to have them told their Duty, and observant how they
practiced it, teaching them to honor the Name of God, to attend duly upon his
worship in the Church, and particularly upon that highest instance of it, the
Holy Sacrament, to be constant at Prayers in his own family, and frequently
taking Notice of such as neglected them, declaring that his business should not
be admitted as their hindrance and excuse. Thus was he resolved, so far as
either his Persuasions, Example, or Authority would prevail with them, that
they who served him, should fear and serve his Lord and Master too.

And then as for his Prayers and Devotions, which are the very vital Breath of
a Religious Spirit, as in his Closet, so in Public, he gave an example most
worthy to be imitated, showing both much Zeal, and discretion in them.

He was, as you all know, a Careful and constant Attender upon Gods Public
worship, and so desirous to bring others to do the same, that when for the
convenience of the family, he has on any festivals first had the service of God
at home, to induce others by his example, he has several times gone presently
after to Church to have it there again. And in this he was not content to
attend by halves, but was careful to come to the beginning of the service:
sincerely desiring rather to come before the time, and with Patience wait the
Beginning of the Prayers, than lose any part of them. For he thought it argued
a great coldness, and want of Zeal for God, as indeed it does, to use delays in
paying him attendance, and though they be as forward as any in expecting of a
Blessing from him, yet to be among the hindmost when any Honor and service is
to be paid to him: wherein I hope those among you, who are too remiss in this
Point, will learn to follow him. And as for the Holy Sacrament, though he was
laborious in recollection, and much in devotion against that time, yet were the
returns of it, whereat he was always a devout attendant, so far from being a
Burden to him, that he several times desired they might be more often.

Thus careful and constant an Attender was he upon the Public Worship and
Service of God. And whilst he was at Church, we all know the Gravity, the
Reverence and Devoutness of his carriage.

His Behavior there was grave and composed, and a Habit of seriousness visibly
dwelt upon his Spirit; which testified a mind duly sensible, that there he was
in the more especial presence of Almighty God, and negotiating Affairs of
greatest moment, which require the utmost intention of mind, and are not to be
undertaken by a Light and trifling, a remiss and stupid, a desultory and
careless Spirit.

It was also very Reverent, and in Decent show of Profound Humility and
Submission of Spirit, to his aweful apprehensions of God, adding humble and
respectful Postres, and praying always upon his Knees. For which he had so
Conscientious a Regard himself, that as he has told me, he was really
scandalized to see the careless, neglectful, and misbecoming Gestures some
others would use at Church in their Prayers: being uneasy in himself to see
men, even when they professed to honor and pray to God, to do it in such
careless Postures as showed not Honor but Neglect, and wherein, though they
presume to pray to God, yet they dare not come to Petition any Powerful, or
Great man.

And as for the Devotion of his Heart, when he appeared among you in any
Public Worship, how easily might you observe a Spirit Greatly and Piously
affected? How humble, and hearty was he in his Confessions, how fervent in Holy
Desires, how affectionate in Praises and Thanksgivings? In a word, he
discovered a profound sense of God's Majesty and adorable Excellencies, a full
Conviction of his own Meanness and Sinfulness, and an high Esteem and ardent
Desires of the Favor of God, and of the Mercies of another World. All which
Devout Tempers and Apprehensions were livelily drawn out in his outward Mien,
and yet without appearance of Vanity and Ostentation.

This was the Religious Behavior of this Pious and excellent Person toward
Almighty God. And as for his Carriage among Men, it was such as became a Heart
so piously and devoutly affected.

He was a Person remarkably Temperate. His Quality and Fortune would have
supplied him with any thing, to gratify and caress any Sense and Appetite: But
in the midst of all these, he chose rather to deny himself, and triumph over
them. The Power of abstaining from what Meat, and Sensual Delight he pleased,
was a Point of Virtue he particularly affected: and this made him so far from
indulging the Body, that he burdened it with more Severity than his Friends
thought it could well bear. And as for his Sobriety in a Temperate use of
Drink, to say he would not exceed himself, is but a small part of his Praise,
who, so far as he could help it, would by no means suffer it in others. He
would lay no Snares to draw in others to excess, nor suffer it to be done by
those, that depended on him. Nay, if any Persons were inclinable to over-load
themselves, his Conscience would not allow him to seek the Reputation of being
Hospitable, by ministering to their Excess. For he thought, and he thought
truly, that to minister to any Vice, is to partake in other Men's Sins. And that
a Man may as innocently furnish out Opportunities and Supplies, to those who
are seeking to gratify their unclean Lusts, or greedy Rapine, as set out
excessive Stores of Wine to those, who are playing Prizes in Excess, and
contest like Professed Champions in Debauchery. He ministers to other Men's Sins
in both these Cases, only in the two former he helps them to sin against their
Brethren, but in this last against their own selves.

He was very sincere, and plain-hearted in his Speeches and Professions, making
this his Rule, never to promise any thing, but what he intended exactly to
keep, and to mark down what he had promised, lest he should forget it. Nay,
even in Civilities and Ceremonious Addresses, wherein the World are most
subject to transgress, the Measure whereby he governed himself was, that he
might safely speak less, but never profess more than he meant, nor tell a Lie
even in Complement.

In his Dealings he would be just, not daring, I will not say to Cozen by
Downright Fraud and Falseness, but even to prey on others by overreach of Wit
and Skill, in Play, or Business: or if at any time he forgot himself in this
Point, he durst not rest, without finding out some way to make Restitution of
it. Nay, in his Pastimes, he was Conscientiously careful, not only of the
Honesty and Fairness, of his getting, but also of the Ability of others losing
to him. And some Men of mean Estates, being forward to mix themselves with
Persons of Quality in their Diversions, when, by their forwardness to Wage with
him, he has fairly won what he thought their Family at Home would find a want
of, he has taken Care secretly to convey it back to the Wife and Children,
without the Profuse Husband's knowing any thing of it. This charitable Care and
Christian Tenderness, was very agreeable with that Rule he had set himself in
his Diversions, which was to be no gainer by any Games, but what he lost should
go as the Price of his own Pleasure, but what he won should accrue to the Poor,
and the Needy should be his Receivers.

As his Justice was Exemplary and Great, so his Charity was Noble and Eminent.
He would do generous and noble Things, and these he loved, so far as he could,
to steal in upon the World, and carry so private, that unless the Deed
proclaimed it self, there should be no expectation raised, nor noise made of
it; hoping thereby to secure a greater Purity of Intention in the Good he did,
and entitle it the more to his Reward, who sees what is done in secret. In
distributing his Alms, his Rule was first to distinguish between Objects, that
he might give wisely, to supply real Wants, not to support Idleness, and then
to give freely and liberally, with all secrecy. In pursuance of his
compassionate Sense of poor Peoples Necessities, he would sometimes take
occasion privately to visit them, and give them Relief. And being more
especially sensible of the great Miseries they suffer in Sickness, which by a
little Physic seasonably administered would oftentimes soon be ended, and
thereby they be both eased of their uncomfortable Distempers, and enabled more
speedily to return to their Employments to maintain themselves and their
Families: He agreed with a Physician for a yearly Pension to take care of all
the Sick Poor of his own Parish, and ply them with Remedies proper for their
Distempers, requiring him to say nothing of this his Exemplary, and wisely
chosen because most wanted Charity, being careful only to secure to himself the
Virtue of the Act, and then let who would have the Praise and Honor of it. Out
of his sincere Zeal for the Honor of God, and the Beauty of his House and
Worship, he has adorned the Quire of this Church, and nobly augmented our
Furniture of Communion-Plate. Upon the Death of his excellent Lady, besides his
Liberality to every adjacent Parish for a present Distribution, he allotted a
considerable Sum to the use of the Poor for a perpetual Settlement. And now at
his own Death, he has given a much greater for the use of the Poor of this
Parish, and restored two Impropriations, one whereof is very considerable, to
the Church; viz. the Impropriate Tithes of this Parish of Coles-Hill, and of
the Parish of Vpper-Whitacre, to those two respective Churches. The Bestowing
of the two Impropriations, was a thing he had fully designed in the time of his
Health. For as for Vpper-Whitacre, he had purchased it with a Design of
annexing it, the Summer before he died. And as for Coles-Hill, by a solemn
Paper left Signed with his own Hand, to provide against all Casualties, lest he
should die before he had accomplished what he intended, he took care to tell
his surviving Relations, how upon mature Study and Deliberation, he was also
fully and Religiously resolved to restore it, which, as he words it, belonging
to the Church by several Titles, ought not to be withheld. These are noble
instances of an extraordinary Piety toward God, and Generous affection to the
Church of England, for whose encouragement he designed them, for which God, I
doubt not, has rewarded him, and all future Ages shall celebrate his memory and
call him Blessed, whilst this Church and State shall stand.

This was the Charity of his Purse. And as for all the other instances of
Charity in conversation, as long-suffering, civility in carriage, mercifulness,
candor in passing interpretations, Patience upon Indignities, and the like,
without which, as St. Paul 1 Cor. 13. 3.
says, giving all our Goods to feed the Poor will signify nothing: he had an
equal Regard, and conscientious care of them too. His Religion did not sour
into moroseness, nor his severities to himself render him peevish and uneasy
toward others. To set him out to your imitation in all the virtues of
Conversation, I shall not describe his carriage in all the Particulars, which
would take up too much time, but rather choose to set down the Rules whereby he
governed himself, which will be, as the more compendious, so I hope as
profitable a way for those, who are disposed to follow him. Those Rules, as
they appear in his own Papers, were such as these; viz. to cross himself in any
eager desire, and in things most to his own Humor; to prefer others ease
before his own; not to neglect, or over look the meanest Person; to stoop to
the meanest offices to do others kindnesses; not to be high in his expectations
from others (one of the best Securities against being exceptious) to own the
least kindness he had received, and be really inclined to return it; to forget
all injuries done to him, and stifle all thoughts of resenting them; not to
speak at a venture, without thinking; whenever he proposed any Reasons, to do
it with a modest deference; not to mention any thing to his own Praise; nor to
discommend others; nor to strive to outdo, or vie in the least matters. These,
and such like, were the Maxims, he proposed to live by in conversing with
others, and whereby he judged himself in his retirements and self examinations.
And the Effect of them was answerable, in a truly humble, courteous, and
obliging carriage. He was careful not to pass unjust censures, nor show any
unchristian violence which might cause just offense, even to his enemies, and
to those he most opposed in interests and opinions: making it his frequent
Prayer, to help it the better into his daily Practice, that with just Zeal
against their Errors, he might still preserve all due Charity for their
Persons, and never use any sinful means and unlawful expedients, in opposing
the worst things, or pursuing the most Pious, Public, and generous ends in the
World.

As he was thus careful to practice this excellent virtue of charity himself,
so was he very Studious to maintain it among others. He sought to deserve the
title of a Peacemaker, and when he heard of differences ready to flame out,
would interpose himself a protector of the oppressed Parties, and hear
complaints and pleadings, and compose and adjust differences, and if the
Authority of Reason and Religion would not do, make use of the Power he had
over his Tenants and Dependants, not allowing them to commence Suits for
Redress, till they had first complained to him, and seen what Redress he could
make them.

In sum, he was a well-studied, and improved Christian, able to plead for
Virtue and Goodness, with such Reason and Argument, as might become a Preacher,
and careful to practice it with such exactness, as might adorn a Cloister. He
was a Person of very sincere and warm Devotion, a most Religious Honourer of
God, and of the Clergy for God's and their Function's sake, an affectionate
admirer of true Virtue and Worth wheresoever he found it, a sincere and zealous
Son of the Church of England, in whose Communion he lived and died, desiring
above all things in his last Extremities, to receive the Holy Sacrament and
Priestly Absolution according to its order and appointment, and a faithful and
serviceable Subject to the King. He was strict in his Trusts, faithful and
active in his Friendships, a dutiful Son, a discreet and loving Husband, a good
and careful Master to his Servants, and in the inclination of his Mind, and
according to the opportunities of his Life, an universal Friend and Benefactor
unto all.

This is such an Account, as I thought fit to give you of this Place, of this
truly Pious and Exemplary Soul. And I have chose to give it, not so much from
general Characters of his Person, as particular Relations of his Practice, both
because this is most Honorable to him, there being no way so advantageous of
drawing out excellent Persons, as by showing the Draught they have made of
themselves, their own Praiseworthy Deeds making them more truly illustrious,
than all the Paint and Varnish of abstracted Eloquence: and especially because
this is of more use, and a better help to imitation. For however some Persons
may hear general Characters with more approbation and applause, as thinking
they show more of Fancy and Wit than plain Narratives of Fact: yet the exposing
of their particular Performances, of the Rules they observed in governing
themselves, and of their wise and worthy Actions, is that which is like to gain
most Followers, and turns most to Profit in all great Examples. This goes
before Men in the way, and marks out the very steps they have trodden, and so
plainly shows and assures the Path to all that have a Mind to follow after
them. God grant us all the Grace to imitate these, and other his Virtues after
his Death, which we had so just Reason to admire, and bless God for in his
Life; and then we need not fear at last to inherit those great Rewards and
glorious Promises, which we have reasonable Grounds to believe he is now an
happy Sharer of.

FINIS.
Books lately Printed for Robert Kettlewell at the Hand and Scepter in
Fleet Street.
1. THe Measures of Christian Obedience: Or, A Discourse showing what Obedience
is indispensably necessary to a Regenerate State, and what Defects are
consistent with it, for the Promotion of Piety, and the Peace of Troubled
Consciences. By John Kettlewell, Vicar of Coles-Hill in Warwickshire, the
second Edition. In Quarto, Price bound 8 s.

2. A Journey into Greece by Sir George Wheeler, in company of Dr. Spon of
Lions, in six Books. Containing, 1. A Voyage from Venice to Constantinople. 2.
An Account of Constantinople, and the adjacent Places. 3. A Voyage through the
Lesser Asia. 4. A Voyage from Zant through several parts of Greece, to Athens.
5. An Account of Athens. 6. Several Journeys from Athens into Attica, Corinth,
Boeotia, etc. With Variety of Sculptures. In Folio, Price bound 15. s.

3. A Vindication of the Primitive Christians, in Point of Obedience to their
Prince, against the Calumnies of a Book, entitled, The Life of Julian, written
by Ecebolius the Sophist. As also, The Doctrine of Passive Obedience cleared,
in Defense of Dr. Hicks; Together with an Appendix, being a more full and
distinct Answer to Mr. Thomas Hunt's Preface and Postscript. Unto all which is
added, The Life of Julian, enlarged. In Oct. price bound 2 s. 6 d.

4. A Sermon Preached at the Worcester-Feast, by George Walls Master of Arts,
and Student of Christ-Church, Oxon. Quarto, price stitcht 6. d.

5. The Treasures of the Sea, A Sermon preached to the Mariners, by William
Thompson. In Quarto, price stitcht 6. d.

6. An Help and Exhortation to worthy Communicating: Or, a Treatise describing
the Meaning, Worthy Reception, Duty and Benefits of the Holy Sacrament, and
answering the Doubts of Conscience, and other Reasons, which most generally
detain Men from it; together with Suitable Devotions added. By John Kettlewell,
Vicar of Coles-Hill in Warwickshire. In Twelves, price bound 3 s.

7. Two hundred Queries Moderately propounded, concerning the Doctrine of the
Revolution of Humane Souls, and its Conformity to the Truths of Christianity.
In Octvo, price bound 1 s. 6 d.

8. A Sermon preached at the Church of St. Bridget, on Easter-Tuesday, being
the first of April 1684. Before the Right Honorable Sir Henry Tulse Mayor of
London. By George Hicks D. D. Dean of Worcester, and Chaplain in ordinary to
his Majesty. In Quarto, price stitcht 6 d.

9. A Spelling Book for Children. In twenty fours, price bound 6. d.

10. A good Subject: Or, the right Test of Religion and Loyalty. In a Sermon,
preached July the 17th at the last Summer Assizes held at Buckingham, for the
County of Buckingham. Before the Lord Chief Baron Mountague, and Sir Richard
Holloway Knight, John Culling Esquire High Sheriff. By Lewis Atterbury, D. D.

11. A Dissertation concerning the Pre-existency of Souls: Wherein the state of
the Question is briefly ununfolded, and diverse Arguments and Objections on both
sides alleged and answered; and a free Judgment concerning the Sum of the
Controversy allowed to every one. Being Originally written in the Latin
Tongue, several years since, by the Learned C. P. and now made English by D. F.
D. P. upon the recommendation of F. M. H. their Friend. In Twelves, price 1 s.

12. The History of Isuf Bassa Captain General of the Ottoman Army at the
Invasion of Candia. In Octavo, price bound 1 s. 6 d.

13. Animadversions on Dr. Burnet's History of the Rights of Princes in the
Disposing of Ecclesiastical Benefices and Church Lands. In a Letter to a
Friend. In Quarto, price 3 d.

14. A Discourse Explaining the Nature of Edification. Both of particular
Persons in private Graces, and of the Church in Unity and Peace. And showing
that we must not break Unity and public Peace, for supposed Means of better
Edifying in private Virtues. In a Visitation Sermon at Coventry, May 7. 1684.
By John Kettlewell Vicar of Coles-Hill in Warwickshire. In Quarto, price 6 d.

15. A Funeral Sermon for the Right Honorable, the Lady Frances Digby, who
deceased at Coles-Hall in Warwickshire, on the 29 of September. 1684. By John
Kettlewell, Vicar of Coles-Hill in Warwickshire. In Quarto, price 6. d.

16. The Paradoxical Discourses of F. M. Van Helmont, concerning the Macrocosm
and Microcosm of the Greater and Lesser World, and their Union. Set down in
Writing by I. B. and now published. In Octavo, price bound 3 s. 6 d.

17. A Discourse on Persecution, or Suffering for Christ's sake. Clearing the
Notion of it; And making a Discrimination of Just from Unjust Pretensions to
it. And passionately recommending True Christian Suffering to all those who
shall be called thereto. Occasionally Representing the Folly and Sinfulness of
Illegal, Arbitrary Courses for the Prevention of it, and the Security of our
Church. By John Howel, A. M. Rector of Radnor Nova in the County of Radnor.

The Religious Loyalist: Or, a good Christian taught how to be a Faithful
Servant both to God and the King. In a Visitation Sermon Preached at Coles-Hill
in Warwickshire, Aug. 28. 1685. At the Triennial Visitation of my Lord's Grace
of Canterbury, during the Suspension of the Bishop of Lichfield and Coventry.
By John Kettlewell, Vicar of Coles-Hill.


