THE Ax laid to the Root: CONTAINING An EXPOSITION of that Metaphorical Text of
Holy Scripture, MAT. 3.10.

PART II.

WHEREIN Mr. John Flavel's last Grand Arguments in his Vindiciarum Vindex, to
prove Circumcision a Gospel Covenant, are answered.

Also a brief Reply To Mr. Rothwell's late Treatise, Entitled, Paedo-Baptismus
vindicatus; as to what seems most material.

To which is Added ^ome short Reflections by way of Confutation of a Book Newly
published by Mr. Joshua Exell, Minister of the Gospel -- Entitled; A Serious
Enquiry into, and certain producing of plain and express Proofs, that John
Baptist, did as certainly baptize Infants as the Adult.

JOB 6.25. How forcible are right words, but what does your arguing reprove?

^^ndon, Printed for the Author, and are to be s^^^ ^y John Harris at the
Harrow in the Poultrey ^^^^

ERRATA.
Page 2 line 39. r. disprove. p. 4. line 26 for ordinal r. original. p. 4. l.
32. for the Law r. this. p. 11. l. 12. for (12.) r. 2. p. 13. l. 14. for Rite
r. Right. in p. 29. l. 33. for Circumcision r. Commission. p. 13. l. 28. for
usurb'd r. absurd. p. 16. l. 2. blot out against. p. 20. l. 12. a false point.
r. Covenant-Holy: blot out the Interrogation Point, and put a Colon after Holy:
p. 24. l. 29. for Abraham r. God. p. 34. l. 12. for Rite r. Right. p. 34. l.
34. for Rite r. Right. p. 38 l. 10. for rom r. from. p. 39. l. 10. for weighty
r. mighty. p. 41. l. 39. for profaned r. profane. p. 39. l. 40. for profaned
r. profane. p. 43. l. 5. for penitent r. penitents. p. 43. l. 6 for must r.
might. p. 46. l. 25. for internals r. internal. p. 47. l. 37. blot out Truth.
p. 48. l. 26* blot out the.

THE Ax laid to the Root, etc.
Sermon III. PART. II.
MAT. III. ver. 10. And now also the Ax is laid to the Root of the Trees, every
Tree therefore that brings not forth good Fruit; is hewn down and cast into
the Fire.


Beloved,
I Have already opened the Scope and Coherence of this Place of Holy Scripture,
as also the Parts and Terms, and then took notice of one or two Points of
Doctrine.

That which I have largely Prosecuted, is this, viz.

Doct. Now the Dispensation is changed, to be of the Natural Root, viz. Of the
National Church of the Jews, the Seed of Abraham, or Children of Believers,
according to the Flesh, is no Ground for Church Membership, it is no Argument to
be admitted into the Gospel Church, or to Gospel-Baptism.

We have proved, that there were Two Covenants made with Abraham, ^ne with him
and his natural Seed as such, signified by Agar, the Bond^oman; the other made
with him and his spiritual Seed as such, signified (...) Sarah, the Free woman;
and also, have clearly made it appear, That ^^e Covenant of Circumcision did
not appertain to the Covenant of ^race, but that it was a Rite of the Legal
Covenant.

We shall now proceed to Answer the other Objections, having the last Day only
insisted upon One.

2. Obj. Circumcision was the Type of Baptism.

1. Answ. If the Circumcision of the Heart was the Antitype of Circumcision in
the Flesh, then certainly Baptism was not, could not be the Antitype thereof;
but this the Holy Ghost fully intimates, was the Antitype of it, see 1 Col.
2.12.13. Romans 2.29. See Dr. Tailor, as recited in Rector Rectified, p. 9, 10,
11.

2. If Baptism, and Circumcision were both in Force together for some time,
then Baptism is not the Antitype of, nor did it come in the room of
Circumcision, but that they were both in Force together for some time, I showed
before. John, and the Disciples of Christ, Baptized. Ioh. 4.1, 2. sometime
before Circumcision was nailed to the Cross, or did cease. Can one thing come
in the room, or place of another, till the other is actually, and legally
removed, and took away? Why, now since these Two Rites had a Being together, I
affirm (as I have formerly done) one could not be the Type of the other. A Type
can abide no longer, then till the Antitype is come; therefore Circumcision was
not the Type of Baptism.

3 dly, and lastly, (As to this) I see not indeed, how one Thing, that was a
Figure, could be the proper Shadow, or Type of a Figure; sure no Wise Man has
Reason so to think; all may see, that Baptism it self, is called a Figure, 1
Pet. 3.21. And this is sufficient to remove the Second Objection.

3. Obj. The Third Objection I mentioned, is this, viz. Infants were once in
Covenant, and never cast out, therefore they are in still: See Mr. Rothwell's
Paedo-Baptism.

Answ. I Answer, Though Infants were in Covenant under the Law, in the Legal
Church of the Jews, and that by God's Appointment. Genesis 17.7. which is not
denied: Yet, what of this? their being once Members of the Jewish Church, does
not prove them to be Members of the Gospel Church: They had then many outward
Privileges, which we, under the Gospel, have not; they went all off when the Ax
was laid to the Root, i. e. When the Old Covenant was ab^ogated, and the Old
Church State cut down, then their Old Church Members fell likewise: The
Branches cannot stand, when the Tree is cut down, or rooted up.

2. We have proved the Covenant; for in Covenanting of Infants, under the Law,
was no Gospel Covenant; and therefore this Objection hat^ nothing in it to hurt
us, unless it can be proved, they were taken anew into the Gospel Church, or
Gospel Covenant, which we positively deny and they cannot disprove: For,
according to that Maxim, Omnis Privati intimat babitum, (you know) that every
Dispossession; implies a Possess^^on: Infants therefore, cannot be cast out of
the Gospel Covenant, or Go^^pel Church, unless they had been first received
into it; therefore they mu^^ prove, if they can, they are in the Time of the
Gospel, taken in as Me^^bers; if so, I will not undertake to prove them cast
out, but I am sure at the Dissolution of the National Church of the Jews, they
lost their Right of Church Membership; and God has not constituted another
National Church, under the Gospel, to bring in the carnal Seed again, but the
Church is now purely Congregational. God's Spiritual Temple, is built up with
spiritual, and lively Stones, 1 Pet. 2.4, 5. Ye also, as lively stones, are
built up a spiritual house, an holy Priesthood, to offer up spiritual
sacrifices acceptable to God, by Jesus Christ.

Obj. 4. Circumcision was part of the Ceremonial Law. Thus I find Mr. John
Flavel, expresses himself in his Vindiciarum Vindex (in Answer to Mr. Philip
Carry) page 214. viz. If Circumcision be part of the Ceremonial Law, and the
Ceremonial Law was dedicated by Blood, and whatsoever is so dedicated, is by
you confessed no part of the Covenant of Works, then Circumcision can be no
part of the Covenant of Works, etc. But it is so, Ergo.

Answ. 1. I Answer, It argues these Men are hard put to it, since they are
forced to fly to such an Argument as this, to prove Circumcision to be a Gospel
Covenant, I shall not now enter upon the Debate, Whether the Ceremonial Law,
was a part of the Covenant of Works, or not? though I must say, I judge it was an
Appendix to it; and that it appertained to the First Covenant, the Apostle
affirms, Heb. 9.1. They are to clear up this, viz. How the Ceremonial Law is
part of the First Covenant, and yet no part of the Covenant of Works.

2. Yet their Work lies not so much in that neither, as it does in this
Respect, viz. They are to prove, That the Ceremonial Law was part of the
Covenant of Grace, which, as yet none of them (that I ever heard of) have
attempted to do (though we grant it was a Shadow of it) when they have proved,
that they have in the

3. Third Place, another Task, viz. To prove, that Circumcision was ^ part of
the Ceremonial Law; for though it was a Figure, or a Sign, yet it may be doubted
of, Whether it was a part of that Law, or not -- Yet

4. It might be a part of, or appertain unto the Sinai Covenant: for (1) it is
called a Covenant, that is evident; but, Where is the Ceremonial Law ^o called?
(2.) It gave the Children of Israel an Assurance of the Sinai ^ovenant, and
that the Apostle calls, The great, and chiefest Adv^ntage ^hey had by it. (3.)
It also was of the same nature and quality, and had ^e like Promises annexed to
it, upon their Obedience, and the same ^hreatning upon their Disobedience. (4.)
It obliged those, who were Cir^umcised, to keep the said Law. Gal. 5.3. It was,
I have proved, of the ^^me Nature and Quality, i. e. a Conditional Covenant,
and like Promise ^f Earthly Blessings, and like Threatenings annexed to it.

Secondly, Was not the Ceremonial Law, a Part of that Law St. Paul ^alls, The
Handwriting of Ordinances that was against us, which was contrary (...) us,
and took it out of the way, nailing it to his Cross? Col. 2.14. If Cir^^mcision
was part of this Law, sure it did not appertain to the Gospel, or ^ew Covenant,
much less the Seal of it; for then it could not be against us, but for us, not
contrary to us, but agreeable to us, as a Choice Blessing.

2. And if the Covenant of Circumcision was a Part of the Ceremonial Law, it is
evident that Covenant is abolished; and if the Covenant be cancelled, or
abolished, What good will the Seal do them?

3. That the Ceremonial Law was part of the First Covenant, it is evident, Heb.
9.1, 2. Then verily, the First Covenant had also Ordinances of Divine Service,
and Worldly Sanctuary. The Old Covenant comprehended not only the Sinai
ministration, as a Covenant of Works, ( do this, and live) but also the whole
Mosaical Economy, and Aronical Priesthood, Sacrifices, and all manner of
shadowing Rites and Ordinances whatsoever, amongst which Old Covenant Rites, or
Legal Ordinances, Circumcision was one of the chief; so that this makes against
them.

4. All the Holiness and Sanctification of the Ceremonial Law, only appertained
to the Flesh, and therefore, no part of the New Covenant, Heb. 9.13. What though
it was dedicated by Blood, it was but Typical Blood, Blood of Bulls, and Goats,
that could not take away Sin, purge the Conscience, nor make any thing perfect.

Mr. Elton on Colossians, speaking of Col. 2. ver. 14. puts forth this
Question, viz.

Quest. How were the Legal Ceremonies of the Jews a Handwriting of Ordinances.

Answ. I answer ( says he) they were so, in regard of their Use to the Jews,
who, in using them (as it were) Subscribed to their own Guiltiness of Death and
Damnation. -- In using Circumcision, they made known they had ordinal Sin, and
were guilty of it; their Washings showed, they were exceeding filthy in God's
sight, and so guilty of the Curse of the Law, and so did their Sacrifices.
Hence God, in infinite Mercy, sent his Son to pay our Debts; and he has
satisfied Divine Justice, and so has cancelled this Handwriting, that
witnessed our Guiltiness, and bound us over to Punishment. -- What good will it
do them, to grant That Circumcision was part of the Law, I know not, these
Things considered.

For they, evident it is, were bound exactly to keep all the Laws, Statutes and
Ordinances, of that Law; (which, I think a Learned Man says were more then 300)
nay, and if they continued not in doing all these Things, they were Cursed when
they sat down, and when they rose up, when they went abroad, and when they
came home: see Deuteronomy, 27.20, to 26. Gal. ^^ 10. Cursed is he that continues not
in all things that are written in the Book of t^^ Law to do them. Mind it well,
all Things in the whole Book of the Law^ not only the Ten Precepts, but all
things contained in the Ceremonial La^ also.

6. Therefore, though the Blood of Bulls, Goats, and Heifers, are called, the
Blood of the Covenant, yet it was not the Blood of the New Covenan^ but of the
Old; neither the First Covenant was dedicated without Blood, Heb. 9.18. True,
the Blood of the Old Covenant, figured the Blood of the New, yet that does no
more prove the Ceremonial Law, was part of the New Covenant, then the Shadow
can be proved to be the Substance; and therefore, though those Sacrifices pointed
to Christ, yet that Law was part of the Covenant of Works, i. e. no Life by it:
In those Sacrifices, God's Soul had no Pleasure.

7. Nor could they see, or look beyond those things, which are abolished: see 2
Cor. 3.13. From hence I argue, If the Ceremonial Law, was a Handwriting, i. e.
a Bond, or Obligation of Conviction, Accusation, and Condemnation to the Jews,
binding them farther to the Curse of the Moral Law, it was no part of the
Covenant of Grace; but the former is true, Ergo, Therefore, whatever gracious
Design God had in it, or however useful to the Elect, yet in it self, it was a
Law of Works, though given in Subserviency to the Gospel Law, as the Sinai Law
was.

6. Obj. God gave himself to Abraham to be his God, and the God of his Seed, in
the Covenant of Circumcision, or made over himself by way of special Interest
to them in it; (so Mr. Flavell positively affirms.) Therefore it was the
Covenant of Grace.

Answ. I Answer, This I am persuaded, is the grand Cause of their great
boldness and mistake, in affirming the Covenant of Circumcision was the
Covenant of Grace; and therefore, ought the more carefully to be Examined,
Considered, and Answered; for if Mr. Flavel, and the rest of our Brethren, are
right in this Assertion, i. e. That God gave himself in Circumcision to
Abraham, and to all his Seed, to be their God, by way of special Interest, they
say a great deal, but this we deny.

1. As to Abraham, God gave himself to him to be his God, yea, gave him special
Interest in himself; but it was before he gave him the Covenant of
Circumcision. This they cannot deny, nay, and not only to himself, but to be
the God of all his true spiritual Seed, and that also, before he entered into
the said Covenant of Circumcision with him, and his natural Seed; see Genesis
12.3. Genesis 15.1. I am thy shield, and thy exceeding great Reward; see ver. 5.
and then it is said, he believed in the Lord, and it was accounted to him for
righteousness, ver. 6. -- Therefore,

2 dly, It Is for ever to be noted, that this special Interest in God, he
obtained through Faith, in the Free Promise (which is the Covenant of Grace God
made with him) And the Apostle plainly shows, in Romans 4.9, 10. That this
Blessedness, he (in the Negative) received not in the Covenant of Circumcision,
but in Uncircumcision. How was it then reckoned, when he was in circumcision,
or in uncircumcision? Not in circumcision, but in uncircumcision, ver. 10. I
cannot but wonder at the darkness of those Men, who affirm, That Abraham
received special Interest in God, in the Covenant of Circumcision; whereas the
Holy Ghost positively denies it, or affirms the contrary. His main Business
being there to take them off of Circumcision, and so to distinguish between
Circumcison, and the Covenant of Faith; but, in direct Opposition to the
Apostle's Design, these Men go about to magnify Circumcision by ascribing it
to that.

3. And let it also be noted, That the same Apostle excludes Abraham's natural
Seed as such, (with whom the Covenant of Circumcision was made) from this
special Blessing of special Interest in God, in Romans 9.5. Not as though the
word of God has taken none effect, for they are not all Israel, which are of
Israel; neither, because they are the seed of Abraham, are they all Children:
(that is, by way of special Interest in God, so as to have God to be their God,
by virtue of the Covenant of Grace made with Abraham) But in Isaac shall thy
seed be called, ver. 7. That is, they which are the children of the flesh,
these are not the children of God; but the children of the promise, are counted
for the seed, ver. 8. None can deny, but that those, whom the Apostle calls the
Children of the Flesh (whom he denies to have any Interest in God as such) the
Covenant of Circumcision did belong unto, and was made with, as well as it was
made with the true spiritual Seed; therefore I may from hence, with the
greatest boldness imaginable, affirm, That in the Covenant of Circumcision, God
did not make over himself to be Abraham's God, so as to give him, or to his
Seed, special Interest in himself.

Obj. But it is positively said, That God did promise in the Covenant of
Circumcision, to be a God to him, and to his seed after him, in their
Generations, when he promised them the Land of Canaan, Genesis 17.8, 9, 10.

Answ. I do not deny it, but not by way of special Interest (that is, the thing
we differ in) so he was not the God of his Seed as such, according to the
Nature of the Covenant of Grace, and that for the Reasons before urged;
therefore it behooves us to consider, in what respect we are to understand the
Holy Ghost. I do not say neither, that ever God made himself over to Men, to be
their God, by way of special Interest, upon the Terms of the Sinai Covenant,
that was impossible for them to Answer, (nor can I believe, notwithstanding
what Mr. Flavel has affirmed, that my Reverend Brother, Mr. Philip Carry, will
assert any such thing) the Inheritance was not by the Law.

1. Therefore we are to consider, That God may be said to be the God of a
People, in a Covenant way, Two manner of ways.

1 st. By the Free Promise, or Covenant of Grace in a spiritual Gospel Sense,
which gives special and Soul-saving Interest in him, as all Abraham's Spiritual
Seed, i. e. True Believers have; or, 2 d. God may be said to be the God of a
People, by entering into an external, legal Covenant with them: And thus he
gave himself to be the God of Abraham, and his natural, or fleshly Seed, i. e.
He took them into a visible external Covenant Church State, and separated them
from all other People and Nations in the World, to be a peculiar People (in
that Covenant) unto himself; and, in this sense, he was said Foederally, or by
Covenant, to be married to the whole House of Israel, as so considered, and to
be an Husband to them: See Ier. 21.31. God there makes a Promise to Israel and
Judah, that he would make a New Covenant, Not according to the covenant I made
with their fathers in the day that I took them by the hand, to bring them out
of the land of Egypt (which covenant they break, although I was an husband to
them says the Lord) ver. 32 In this Covenant God gave them their Church State,
and many external or earthly Blessings, Laws and Ordinances, and they formerly
struck Hands (as I may so say) with God, and promised Obedience, Exodus 24.3, 7,
8. And he took the book of the Covenant, and read in the audience of the
people, and they said, all that the Lord has said, will we do and be obedient:
And thus God became as an Husband to them, i. e. He fed them, and took special
care of them, and to lead them with great Bowels in the Wilderness, and
bestowed the Land of Canaan upon them, with other Temporal Blessings, according
as it was promised to them in the Covenant of Circumcision: Like as a Husband
cares for, and provides for the Wife, so did God care and provide for them and
preserved them, so long as that Law (I mean the Law of their Husband) did
continue: But that Law is now dead, Romans 7.4. and God now is no longer such a
Husband to them, nor has he Married in that Sense any other external Nation,
or People of the World; but now God, in the Gospel Covenant, is an Husband
indeed; to them he was but a Typical Husband, and their God in an external
Faedoral Relation: And thus he was the God of all Abraham's natural Offspring;
for, in him, he first espoused them as a National Church, and People, and gave
them the Covenant of Circumcision, as the Sign, or Token thereof, with many
Ecclesiastical and Civil Rites. And this is further confirmed by a Reverend and
Learned Writer: Howbeit from the strict Connection of this 7th. verse with the
6th. and the Assurance here given, that God will establish his Covenant with
Abraham's Seed, to be their God: It is evident ( says he) that the Number of
Abraham's carnal Seed and the Grandeur of their Civil State, is not all that is
promised, nor yet the Principal Blessing bestowed on them therein, but rather
the forming them into a Church State, with the establishing of the Ordinances
of public Worship among them, wherein they should walk in Covenant Relation to
God, as his peculiar People: Understand it still ( says he) of the Old
Covenant, wherein they had their peculiar Right and Privilege, no less can be
intended in this, I will be a God unto them, in their Generations; and it is
also made more evident by the following Account that is given of this
Transaction, with respect to Isaac and Ishmael, Genesis 17.18, 21. When the Lord
had promised unto Abraham a Son, by Sarah, whose Name should be called Isaac,
he thus prayed, O that Ishmael might live before thee! which the Chaldee
Paraphraseth thus, i. e. Might live and worship before thee. No doubt, his
Prayer was, that Ishmael might also be an Heir of the Blessing of this
Covenant; but that was not granted to him; for the Lord would have his Covenant
Seed called by Isaac only: With him God would establish his Covenant, having
appointed and chosen him alone, to be the Heir thereof, who was to be the Child
of the Promise, and Son of the Free woman; and yet for Ishmael, in special
Favor with Abraham, whose Seed he was: Thus much he obtained, i. e. That he
should be made Fruitful, and multiply exceedingly, Twelve Princes, or Heads of
great Families, should spring of him; which imports some Analogy to the Twelve
Tribes of Israel after the Flesh, and God would make him a great Nation; and
yet, all this fell short of the Blessings of Abraham's natural Offspring, by
Isaac, from which Ishmael was now excluded: It is plain therefore, that the
Privilege of the Ecclesiastical, as well as the flourishing of the Civil States
of Israel, did arise unto them out of the Covenant of Circumcision.
We conclude therefore ( says he) That notwithstanding the carnal Seed of
Abraham, could not as such, claim a Right in the spiritual and eternal
Blessings of the New Covenant, because of their Interest in the Covenant of
Circumcision, yet their Privileges, and Advantages in their Church State, though
immediately consisting in things outward and typical, were of far greater Value
and Use, than any mere Worldly, or Earthly Blessings, as to giving them choice
means of the Knowledge of God, and setting them nearer to him, than any Nation
in the World besides. Thus far this Learned Author.

Dr. Bates also, in his Sermon preached at Mr. Baxter's Funeral, shows, That
God may be said to be the God of a People, several manner of ways. 1. Upon the
Account of Creation: Thus he is our God and Father O Lord thou art our father,
we are the clay, and thou art our potter, and we all are the work of thy hands,
Isa. 64.8

2. Upon the Account of external Calling, and Profession, there is an
intercurrent Relation of the Father and Son, between God and his People: Thus
the Posterity of Seth, are called, the Sons of God, Genesis 6. and the entire
Nation of the Jews are so styled: When Israel was young, I called my son from
Egypt, Hos. 11. And all that have received Baptism, the Seal of the Holy
Covenant, and profess Christianity, in this general Sense, may be called the
Children of God.

Thus he clearly confirms what I have said; but observe, in this Sense, God is
not said to be the God of a People by way of special Interest.

But it is not ( says he) the outward Dedication, entitles Men to saving
Interest in God, unless they live according to that Dedication. There are
Baptized Infidels, as well as Unbaptised, etc. Then say I, some Infants
Baptized, are in his Opinion, but in an external Covenant with God, and so have
no special Inte^est. -- Moreover

Sure none can deny, but, by gross Idolatry, the Israelites broke this
Covenant; and yet, when they, in Ezekiel's time, became guilty of vile
Abominations, the Lord still claimed an Interest in their Children, by virtue
of this Covenant. Moreover, thou have taken thy sons and thy daughters, whom
thou have born unto me, and these have thou sacrificed unto them to be
devoured: Is this of thy whoredoms a small matter, That thou have slain my
children, Ezekiel. 16.20, 12. The Children they begat in a natural way, when by
cursed Idolatry, they had Apostatized from God, (by virtue of this Covenant)
God calls his Children, which could not have been, if their Covenant Interest
had been as our Brethren affirm, i. e. suspended on the good abearing, or Faith
of immediate Parents: But, as the Apostasy of Parents could not hinder their
Children from that external Covenant Interest they had in God, and God in them,
so the Faith and Holiness of Parents, could not Interest their Children in the
special Blessings of the Covenant of Grace.

Lastly, It Is remarkable, that when God gave the Sinai Covenant, Exodus 20.1, 2.
where he pleads Interest in them as his People, he mentions expressly, upon what
account he so owned them; read the Text, I am the Lord thy God, which brought
thee out of the land of Egypt, out of the House of Bondage, Thou shall have no
other Gods before me. I am Jehovah, and thy God, having chosen you to be a
People to my self above all People; as it is said elsewhere, not that as they
were thus his People, and a chosen Nation, they had special Interest in God by
eternal Election, and peculiar Adoption, no, but a few of them (as it appears)
were in that sense, his People: But their God, by virtue of that legal and
external Covenant he made with their Fathers, and now again with them, and so
bestowed temporal Blessings upon them; therefore it is added, That brought thee
out of the land of Egypt, not Land of spiritual Darkness, nor house of
spiritual Bondage, but literal Bondage, etc.

In the Covenant of Works, (says Reverend Mr. Cotton) the Lord offered
himself, upon a Condition of Works; he bid them obey his Voice, and provoke him
not; for I will not pardon your Transgressions. -- But, in the Covenant of
Grace, he will do this, but not in the Covenant of Works; all is given upon
Condition of Obedience. The Lord giving himself, etc. though it be but to work,
yet he is pleased to receive them into some kind of relative Union expressed,
Ier. 32.32. Which my Covenant they break, as though I was an Husband unto them.
He was married to them in Church Covenant; he was their God, and they were his
peculiar People, and yet the Lord cast them off from this Marriage-Covenant,
from this Union. Thus Mr. Cotton on the Covenant. P. 39.40. So much shall serve
to the answering this grand Objection.

Obj. 6. Sixthly, Circumcision was a Seal of the Righteousness of Faith. If
Circumcision was the Seal of the Righteousness of Faith (says Mr. Flavell) it
did not appertain to the Covenant of Works: For the Righteousness of Faith and
Works, are opposite; but Circumcision was the Seal of the Righteousness of
Faith, Romans 4.11. Ergo, page 220.

1 Answ. We Answer first, That the Text they bring, does not call Circumcision
the Seal of the Righteousness of Faith: As it is such, or in common to all that
were Circumcised, pray let us read the Words; And he received the sign of
circumcision, a seal of the righteousness of the faith, which he had them yet
being uncircumcised: that he might be the father of all men that believe,
though they be not circumcised; that righteousness might be imputed to them
also: Romans 4.11.

First, Observe Circumcision is directly, here called a Sign, and so it was in
it self: 1. A Sign, or Token of God's making good his Covenant to Abraham's
natural Seed, that from his Loins Christ should come by Isaac. 2. A Sign, or
Token, that the promise of all these Blessings granted to them, either
Ecclesiastical, respecting their National Church State, and Civil State, and
Temporal Blessings, with their Possessing of the Land of Canaan. 3. Of the
Circumcision of the Heart, for that it was a Sign of.


2. But it is not called any more a Seal to Abraham, of the Righteousness of
that Faith, he had before he was Circumcised, then it was of his being the
Father of all them that believe Now since it was principally called a Seal to
him, of that peculiar Privilege, and Prerogative, of being the Father of all
True Believers, which none had ever granted to them besides himself, Why should
they suppose, that Circumcision is here called, a Seal of the Righteousness of
Faith to all, as well as to Abraham himself? I desire this may be considered;
for Mr. Flavel passes it by in silence, and speaks nothing to it.

3. But Thirdly, To put the Matter out of doubt, it could be a Seal to no other
Person, or Persons, but to Abraham only. Because it was a Seal of that
Righteousness Abraham had, being yet Uncircumcised, and such a Righteousness,
none of his Seed ever had actually, as he had it; (neither of his fleshly, nor
spiritual Seed) for first, Isaac had no such Faith before he was Circumcised,
because Circumcised when but Eight Days old, and so were generally all his
Seed, except you will mention such, who neglected to Circumcise their Children,
and so Transgressed the Command of God, or mention Adult Proselites.

But that will not help the Matter; they must carry it to be a Seal to all that
the Covenant of Circumcision belonged to, or else to none but to Abraham only:
but to all, it could not be a Seal, as it was to Abraham, it being positively
said, not to be a Seal of the Righteousness of their Faith, they should have
after Circumcised, but of that Faith Abraham particularly had, being yet
Uncircumcised.

4. The Scope and Drift of the Holy Ghost, proves it to be thus as we say; for
else, there is no need for the Apostle to mention it, as a Seal of that
Righteousness of Faith, he had before Circumcision, if others might have it in
Circumcision, viz. The Righteousness of God, as it is contained in the Covenant
of Grace: (for that they must say, or they say nothing) And it farther appears
by what the Apostle speaks, viz. That he might be the Father of them that
believe, that were not Circumcised. If it had been in Circumcision, or after
Circumcision, What Argument would there have been in the Case, i. e. That
Abraham should be the Father of those that believe, that are not Circumcised.

Therefore, in direct Opposition to what Dr. Ames speaks, as cited by Mr.
Flavel, I must say, The main Drift and Scope of the Apostle's Argument from the
Coherence of the Text, is to take off the Jews from seeking any spiritual
Benefit from Circumcision, or the Law, but by Faith, only seeing; Abraham was
Justified, and received the Righteousness of Christ, by Faith, before he was
Circumcised, or without Circumcision; and his receiving Circumcision, sealed
not only the Righteousness of Faith to him, which he had, being Uncircumcised,
(and so to none else) but also, his being the Father of all that Believe,
whether Circumcised, or not Circumcised.

5. But again, it must be granted to belong to Abraham, only as a Seal, because
St. Paul, speaking of Circumcision, Romans 3.12. says, The chief Advantage, or
Privilege, they had thereby, was, because that unto them was committed the
Oracles of God. Certainly, he would not have called that the Chief, if
Circumcision had been given in common, as a Seal of the Righteousness of Faith:
However, when he is a treating of the Privileges that come by Circumcision,
surely he could not have forgotten this, viz. that it was a Seal of the
Righteousness of Faith.

6. Let not Men mistake themselves any more, for evident it is, that
Circumcision, as it is called a Seal to Abraham, so it did not seal to him
something, which he then had not, but might have; but it did seal, really, and
truly, the Righteousness of that Faith, which he at that time had: If therefore
you Baptize Children, who before they are Baptized, do truly believe; no body
will be dispeased with you, or if you can prove, your Infants have really and
truly such a Faith as Abraham had, and that their Baptism does seal that Faith
to them for Righteousness, which Circumcision sealed to Abraham, you do your
business: But Sirs, pray what Blessings of the Covenant of Grace, does Baptism
now seal to your Infants? O, says one, the Covenant is theirs, it belongs to
them, and shall we deny them the Seal? what, not let them have a bit of Wax?
But stay a little, you must first prove the Covenant of Grace, does indeed
belong to Believers Children as such, before you talk at such a rate as you do.
A Seal, all Men know, makes firm and sure all the Blessings to the Person, to
whom it is sealed, which are contained in the same Covenant, to which it is
fixed: Therefore, take heed you do not blind the Minds of People, and deceive
them, by making them think they are in Covenant, when indeed it may be no such
thing.

7. Besides, if Circumcision was the Seal of the Covenant of Grace, then it
would follow, that the Covenant of Grace made with Abraham, is Abrogated; for
the breaking off the Seal, all Men know, cancells the Covenant, and makes it of
none Effect: And that Circumcision, which you call the Seal of the Covenant of
Grace, that was made with Abraham, is broke off, or torn off by the Death of
Jesus Christ, is evident (And this proves, if it was a Seal of the Sinai
Covenant, which I say, not but only a Sign) that Covenant is gone, because the
Seal is broken off.

8. Circumcision was so far from being a Seal of the Covenant of Grace to all,
to whom it did b^long, that it sealed not all those outward Blessings to the
Bondmen, or such who were bought with Money, and so were admitted to dwell in
Abraham's Family; for it did not seal to them all the outward and external
Privileges of the Commonwealth of Israel; for they only belonged to those who
were natural Israelites.

Now, from the whole, it seems to me to be a strange Thing, which is lately
asserted, viz.

That the Infant Seed of Believers, (during their Infancy) have all of them a
certain Interest in the Covenant of Grace: By virtue of which, they are
completely Justified before God, from the Guilt of Original Sin, both
Originans, and Originations; and yet, when they come to Years of Discretion,
may (yea must) by their actual closing with, or refusing the Terms of the
Covenant, either obtain the continuation, and confirmation of their Covenant
Interest, or be utterly, and finally cut off from it, and so perish Eternally
in their Ignorance of God, and Rebellion against him.

Answer, To which I must say, That they seem to make the Covenant of Grace,
such a Conditional Covenant, that renders it in Nature and Quality, like the
Sinai Covenant, or Covenant of Works, i. e. If they perform the Righteousness
required, they shall live; if they Obey not, or make not Good, this pretended
Covenant of Grace, they shall dye, or be cut off: Let our Brethren, who are
sound in the Doctrine of Free Grace, consider this.

2. And as the Promises of the New Covenant, will admit of no such partial
Interest, (says a Learned Author) so neither can this Opinion consist with the
Analogy of Faith, in other Respects; for either the stain of Original Sin, in
these Infanrs is purged, and the dominion of Concupiscence in them destroyed,
when their Guilt is pardoned, or it is not; if it be, then the Case of these
Infants, in point of Perseverance, is the same with Adult Persons, that are
under Grace, by actual Faith; and then a final Apostasy, from the Grace of the
New Covenant, must be allowed to befall the one, as well as the other,
notwithstanding all Provisions of that Covenant, and Engagement of God therein,
to make the Promise sure to all the Seed, Romans 4.16.

But this the Author will not admit: If he say, That their Guilt is pardoned,
but their Natures are not changed, or renewed, nor the Power of Original
Corruption destroyed, so as that Sin, shall not have Dominion over them; it
will be replied, That then, notwithstanding their supposed Pardon, they remain
as an unclean Thing, and so incapable of admission into the Kingdom of God.
Thus this worthy Author.

3. To which let me add, Certainly if Divine Habits were in those Infants, they
would immediately be manifested; or be sure when they are grown up, would
appear in them by gracious Operations flowing from thence: But since those
Acts, or Products of such a gracious Habit, appear not in them, it is evident,
they never had them infused.

4. All that are in the Covenant of Grace, (if they live) the Fruits of Faith
and Holiness, will flow naturally from those sacred Habits, God has by his
spirit planted in them, as heat and light does from the Fire, when it is kindled
on the Hearth. The Truth is, such who are united to Christ, and have Faith in
him, and so are actually in the Covenant of Grace, are also washed and purged
from Sin, and Pollution, see Ezekiel. 16. Romans 5.14. Act. 15.10. None can have
Union with Christ, but by the in-dwelling of the Holy Spirit; and wheresoever
the Spirit of Christ is, it applies, The Blood of the Covenant, not only for
Pardon, but also for the purging the Conscience from dead Works, to serve the
living God: And therefore, (as the same Learned Author observes) as certain as
any derive a New Covenant Rite from Christ for Pardon, they also receive a
vital Influence from him, for the renovation of their Natures, and conforming
their Souls to his Image: Therefore, to assert, That the Grace of Christ, is
applied to some, for remission of Sins only, or that the guilt of any Sin, can
be pardoned to any Person, and yet that Sin retains its Dominion over them, is
a Doctrine, I understand, not to be sound, or agreeable to the Doctrine that is
according to Godliness.

5. To conclude with this, it is evident, these Men must, by their Notion, make
every believing Parent to be (considered in respect of that Covenant made with
Abraham) a common Head and Father, not only to his own natural Seed, but to all
Believers also, as Abraham was, and then it would follow, that there are as
many common Fathers, like as Abraham was so called, as there are believing Men
in the World, and so a knowing, or knowledge of Men still after the Flesh,
which the Apostle disclaims, 2 Cor. 5. 17. Besides, the Thing is usurped in it
self: Therefore, let all know, That a Believers Right to the Blessings of the
Covenant of Grace made with Abraham's, or by virtue of that Promise made with
him, do relate to such a Seed as do believe, and not as Coordinate with him,
in Covenant Interest; they are not each one, by this Covenant, made the Father
of a Blessed Seed, as Abraham was the Father of the Faithful, neither can they
claim the Promise for themselves, and their Seed, according to the Tenor of
Abraham's Covenant, as he might, (as this Author observes) but they must
believe as Abraham did, or have a Faith of their own: For if ye be Christ's,
then are ye Abraham 's seed and heirs according to the Promise, Gal. 3 29. This
the same Author notes.

Obj. 7. The Covenant of Circumcision, was an Everlasting Covenant, therefore
it was the Covenant of Grace.

Answ. I Answer, It Is not unknown to our Opponants, that the Hebrew Word, for
Everlasting, sometimes signifies no more then a long continuance. of time. --
And so extensive was the Promise of God's peculiar Favors to the natural Seed
of Abraham, and the original of their Claim therefrom that the severity of
that Law afterward given to them, was so far restrained, as that
(notwithstanding their manifold breach of Covenant with God, and forfeiture of
all legal Claim of their Right and Privileges in the Land of Canaan thereby)
that they were never utterly cut off from that good Land, and ceased, to be a
peculiar People unto God, until the end or period of that time, determined by
the Almighty, was fully come; which was the Revealation of the Messiah, and the
setting up his spiritual Temple, under the Dispensation of the Gospel; and thus
far, the Word Everlasting does extend. It Is said, God promised to give the Land
of Canaan to Abraham, and to his Seed for ever; and again, Genesis 17.8. for an
everlasting Inheritance; whereas it is evident, they have for many Ages, been
dispossessed of it: Nor may this seem strange, if we consult other Texts, where
the same Terms are used with the like Restriction; for the Priesthood of Levi,
is called an Everlasting Priesthood, Numb. 25.13. And the Gates of the Temple,
Everlasting Doors, Psalm. 24.6. so the Statute, to make an Atonement for the
Holy Sanctuary, and for the Tabernacle, and for the Altar, and for the Priests,
and for all the People of the Congregation, is called, an Everlasting Statute,
Levit. 16.34. And this shall be for an everlasting statute, etc. So that from
hence it is very clear, that the Word Everlasting is to be taken sometimes with
Restriction, and referrs to the end of that Dispensation, to which the Law,
Statute, or Covenant did belong; and when Christ came, as all Mosaical Rites
ended, so did the Covenant of Circumcision also.

God never said, he would be the God of Abraham's natural Seed as such, as he
gave himself to him, and to all his true spiritual Seed; for to them he gives
himself, or an Interest in all God is, or has (so far as communicative) even
for ever and ever, or to all Eternity; the Covenant of Grace, being ordered in
all things, and sure, 2 Samuel 23.5. It Is impossible this Covenant, and Covenant
Blessings, which is comprehensive of all Grace here, and Glory hereafter,
should referr to a certain Period of time; and since he was not thus in
Covenant with Abraham's carnal Seed as such, it is evident, the Covenant of
Circumcision, (though called, an Everlasting Covenant) was not the Covenant of
Grace. And so much to this Objection.

8. Obj. There was never but one Covenant of Works, and that God made with
Adam, and in him with all his Post^rity; therefore the Covenant of Circumcision
did not appertain in the Covenant of Works: See Mr. Flavel.

Answ. First, Our Controversy, lies not so much about, the Covenant of Works,
as given to Adam, but about the Nature of Sinai Covenant, since Circumcision
appears to be of the same Nature with that: I do not say, in every respect,
there is no difference between the Covenant of Works made with Adam, and that
made with the People of Israel* though the^ differ not Essentially in
Substance, it is all one and the same Covenant, viz. Requiring complete and
perfect Righteousness.

2. Therefore, though there is but one Covenant of Works, yet there was more than
one Addition, or Administration of the said Covenant: This is evident, although
given upon a different end, purpose, and design, by the Lord.

Adam's Covenant, I grant, had one end and design, and the Sinai Covenant of
Works had another; yet, may be, both, as to the Essence and Substance of them
but one and the same Covenant: Which, doubtless, is all Mr. Carry intends.

1. Adam's Covenant had Happiness, and Justification in it, by his perfect
Obedience thereto; and he being able, in the time of his Innocence, to keep it,
he was thereby Justified.

2. But the Second Edition, or Ministration of the Covenant of Works, given to
the People of Israel, though in its Nature and Quality, it was a Covenant of
Works, and one with the former, yet it was not given for Life or to Justify
them, nor was it able so to do, by reason of their Weakness through the Flesh,
Romans 8.3. But it was added because of Transgression.

1. To restrain Sin, (or as I said before) to regulate their Lives under those
external Covenant Transactions of God with them, as his People, as before
expressed.

2. To make Sin appear exceeding sinful.

3. To discover to them, what Righteousness it is God does require, in order to
the Justification of the Soul in his Sight.

4. To make known to them thereby, what a Righteousness Man, originally, in the
First Adam, had, and lost; and

5 thly, It did discover their woeful Condition to them, and might put them
upon seeking Relief and Justification, by the promised Seed, and so be as a
Schoolmaster, to bring them to Christ.

6. That in their Conformity to it, to their utmost Power, to continue ^ll
those outward Blessings, and Privileges to the House, or Church of Israel, as
God promised to Abraham upon that Account; for it is evident, the Promises made
to them, upon their Obedience, were Earthly and Temporal Promises, and not
Spiritual. Hence the Apostle says, the New Covenant is established upon better
Promises. -- And

Now, that the Sinai Covenant was a Covenant of Works, (as considered ^n it
self) notwithstanding the end and design of God therein, (I find many of our
sound Protestant Divines do affirm) though given with a merciful and gracious
intention* or in subserviency to the Gospel.

1. It commanded, or did require perfect or complete Obedience.

2. On these Terms, Do and Live.

3. It gave no strength, nevertheless, to perform what its just Demands were:
Hence the strength of Sin is called, the Law; it did Condemn, but could not
Save.

4. Nor was there any Pardon, or Remission of Sin, by that Covenant, for any
Soul that broke it; for, He that despised against Moses's Law, dyed without
mercy, under two or three witnesses, Heb. 10.28. -- Moreover,

5. It cursed all that did not continue in all Things that were contained in
the whole Book of the Law to do them, Gal. 3.10.

6. The Holy Ghost calls it the Old Covenant, in contra- distinction, and
direct Opposition to the Covenant of Grace, or Gospel Covenant.

The law is not of fait^: but, the man that does those things, them shall live
in them, Gal. 3.12 And though Moses was the Mediator of that Covenant, yet he was
but a Typical Mediator, and stood between God and them, to plead for the
Blessings of that Covenant, and to prevent the Threatenings of Temporal
Judgments; for there was never but one Mediator between God and us, upon a
spiritual Account, i. e. To stand between eternal Wrath and us, or to make
Peace with God for our Souls. --

Take what the Learned Bishop Usher has said about the Law, as a Covenant of
Works, viz.

Quest. How does this Covenant (i. e. The Covenant of Grace) differ from that
of Works.

Answ. His Answer is much every way, for first, in many Points, the Law may be
conceived, by Reason; but the Gospel, in all Points, is far above the reach of
Man's Reason. Secondly, the Law commands to do good, and gives no strength;
the Gospel enableth us to do good, the Holy Ghost writing the Law in our
Hearts. Thirdly, The Law promised Life only, the Gospel Righteousness also.
Fourthly, The Law required perfect Obedience, the Gospel, the Righteousness of
Faith. Fifthly, The Law reveals Sin, rebukes us for Sin, and leaves us in
it, but the Gospel does reveal unto us Remission of Sins, and freeth us from
the Punishment belonging thereunto. Sixthly, The Law is the ministration of
Wrath, Condemnation, and Death; the Gospel is a ministry of Grace,
Justification, and Life. Seventhly, The Law was grounded on Man's own
Righteousness, requiring of every Man, in his own Person, perfect Obedience,
Deuteronomy. 27.26. And in default, for satisfaction, everlasting Punishment, Gal.
3.10, 12. But the Gospel is grounded on the Righteousness of Christ, admitting
Payment and Performance in another, in behalf of so many as receive it, Gal.
3.13.14. Bishop Usher's Sum and Substance of Christian Religion, p. 159. A
multitude of Protestant Writers, I might produce, who all assert the same
Doctrine.

And if the Sinai Covenant was not a Covenant of Works, Why do all our Brethren
say, as it was a Covenant of Works, it is done away? and, Why does the Apostle
say, Christ is the end of the Law, as touching Righteousness? It is not
abolished, or done away, as it is a Rule of Righteousness, for as so it abides,
as a perpetual Rule and Law to us.

Therefore, I wonder at Mr. Flavel's Out-crys against Mr. Carry, as if it was
impossible for the Saints to be under the Covenant of Works, under the former
Dispensation, and yet in the Covenant of Grace; for I would know, Whether or
not, they were not, at that time, under the Ministration of that Covenant? but
what, though no sooner did they believe in Christ, the Promised Seed, but they
were delivered from the Curse of the Law. Nor is this any strange Thing, For
are not all now, in these Days, under the Dispensation of the Gospel? yet,
until Men and Women believe in Christ, they abide still under the Curse of the
Law of the First Covenant; for Christ is not the end of the Law to all the
World, (so as some erroneously assert, i. e. all are justified in God's sight,
from the Curse of the Law) but he is only the end of the Law, touching
Righteousness to every one that beleiveth, to them, and to no other Adult
Person: Therefore Men might be under the outward Dispensation of the Law of
Works, and yet through Faith, be Justified; and also, others may be, and are
now, under the Dispensation of the Gospel; and yet, for not believing in
Christ, be Condemned, and under the Curse of the Law: For the Gospel is not the
Cause of our Sickness, but our Cure; none believing, is the refusal of the
Medicine: So that there is no Reason for him to say, (because we assert this)
That the Godly, under that Dispensation, hung midway, betwixt Life, and Death,
Justification, and Condemnation; and after Death, midway betwixt Heaven, and
Hell, p. 180. Therefore, as all that lived under the Dispensation of the Law,
or Covenant of Works, were saved by Faith, in the Promise of Christ, or by the
Covenant of Grace, Abraham (says our Savior) saw my Day, and was glad, so
without Faith, or Interest in Christ, such that live under the Dispensation of
the Gospel, cannot be saved; nor are they delivered from the Curse of the Law,
or Covenant of Works. Therefore, (to conclude with this,) it is evident, the
Covenant of Works, though but one, (as to the substance of it) yet there was
several Ministrations of it; as it was given also upon different Ends, and
Designs by the Lord: And therefore, because the said Covenant of Works was
first given to Adam, (by virtue of which he was accepted, and justified in his
Innocence) Could not God give forth a Second Addition, Ministration, or
Transcript of his Righteousness, and Holy Law, requiring perfect Obedience,
though not to Justification, yet to aggravate their Sin, and so to their just
Condemnation? And does not the Apostle assert the same Thing? Romans 3.19, 20.
compared with Romans 7.13. Gal. 3.19. But says Bishop Usher.

Quest. Does not God wrong to Men, to require of him, that he is not able to
perform?

Answ. He Answers No; for God made Man so, that he might have performed it; but
he, by Sin, spoiled himself, and Posterity of those Gifts. Therefore,

To proceed* I do affirm, That always, generally, when the Apostle speaks of
the Old Covenant, or Covenant of Works, he passes by, in silence, the Covenant
made with Adam, and more immediately, and directly, applies it unto the Sinai
Covenant, and to that of Circumcision, as all careful Readers, who read the
Epistles to the Romans, Galatians, and to the Hebrews, may clearly find.

And farther, to evince the Truth we contend for; it is evident, That although
there is (and ever was) but one Covenant of Grace, yet nothing is more plain
then that there were several distinct Additions of it, although we say, the
Promise or Gospel Covenant, was one and the same, in all Ages, in respect of
the Things promised, with the Nature and Quality thereof; which is a free and
absolute Covenant, without Works, or Conditions of foreseen Acts of Obedience,
or Righteousness done, by the Creature whatsoever, Romans 4.5.

The Substance, and Essential Part of this Gospel Covenant, as to the Promises
of it, is Christ, Faith, a New Heart, Regeneration, Remission of Sins,
Sanctification, Perseverance, and everlasting Life: Yet, this Evangelical
Covenant, had diverse Forms, Additions, or Transcripts of it, which signified
those Things, and the various Sanctions, by which it was given forth, and
confirmed.

To Adam, the Promise of it was under the Name Of the Seed of the Woman,
bruising the Head of the Serpent. To Enoch, Noah, etc. in other Terms. To
Abraham, under the Name of His Seed, in whom all the Nations of the Earth
should be blessed. To Moses, by the Name of A great Prophet among his Brethren;
and it was signified also unto him under dark Shadows, and Sacrifices. Unto
David, under the Name of A Successor in his Kingdom. To other Prophets, more
clearer still made known, Unto as a Child is born; a Woman shall compass a Man;
a New Covenant I will make, etc In the New Testament, in plain Words, We all,
with open face, beholding, as in a glass, the glory of the Lord, 2 Cor. 3.18.

But now, because there were so many Additions, or Ministrations of the Gospel,
or New Covenant, Does it follow, there are so many New Covenants? This being
so, Mr. Flavel has done nothing to remove Mr. Cary's Arguments, but they stand
firm: For he says not, That the Sinai Ministration of the Covenant of Works,
was ordained to justify Mankind; nor was it possible it could, after a Man had
sinned; and yet in its Nature, an absolute Covenant of Works, or do for Life,
or Perish. The Man that does these Things, shall live in them.

Obj. 9. Circumcision could not oblige the Jews, in its own Nature, to keep the
whole Law, because Paul Circumcised Timothy: If, in the very Nature of the Act,
it had bound Timothy to keep the Law for Justification, how could it have been
Paul's Liberty so to do? says Mr. Flavel, which he asserts it was, Gal. 2.3,
4. p. 226.

Answ. 1. That Circumcision did oblige the Jews to keep the whole Law, is
evident, Gal. 5.3. and, as I hinted before, our Learned Annotators, on the said
place, speak the same Thing positively. Take more largely their very Words:
They were obliged to one Part of the Law; they must be obliged to all other
Parts of it; besides, that Circumcision was an owning, and professing
Subjection to the whole Law, etc.

Obj. But did not the Fathers then, by being Circumcised, acknowledge
themselves Debtors to the Law? ( he Answers) Yes, they did acknowledge
themselves bound to the observation of it, and to endure (upon the breaking of
it) the Curse of it; but they were discharged from that Obligation, by
believing in Christ, who was made a Curse for them, that he might redeem them
from the Curse of the Law. Thus Pool's Annotations.

2. But, as to Paul's Circumcising Timothy, it was, when he knew Circumcision
was abolished; and therefore, it could not oblige him, Paul well knew, to keep
the Law. Since no Law, in its own Nature, can oblige any Person, according to
the Nature, and Quality of it, when it is abrogated and in no force, though he saw
it was his Liberty, for some Reasons to do it: But those Christians, corrupted
by false Teachers, did not believe, That Circumcision, and other Legal Rites,
were abolished, but that they were in full Force as ever; and therefore, he
tells them, (granting it was, as they believed) if they were Circumcised, they
were obliged to keep the whole Law, though his great Design was to take them off
from seeking Justification by Works. Therefore,

3. It Is evident, Paul did not Circumcise Timothy, in Obedience to the Law
given by the Lord; but for other Politic Reasons, in complying with the
weakness of some Jewish Christians: After the same manner he submitted to some
other Rites also, of the Ceremonial Law, as shaving the head, and purifying
himself, which was then also abolished, though not deadly, say Expositors, then
though those Ceremonies, were dead, and so nothing in them, Act. 21.24.
Circumcision was, alas! dead, and this Paul knew, therefore could not hurt
Timothy: But those, to whom he wrote, thought it was alive; and therefore, it
would not only hurt, but destroy them, or be destructive to them, upon the
Account of the Obligation it lay them under, if it was as they conceived. This
being so, What is become of Mr. Flavel's Argument, which he makes such boast
of, as if unanswerable? page 231.

Obj. 10. The Root is Holy, therefore the Branches; that is, as Abraham was
Holy, so were all his Seed; and as Believers are Holy, so are all their
Children; and as the natural Branches of Abraham was broken off for their
Unbelief, so the Gentiles are grafted in, in their stead, and succeed in their
Privileges, and so their Seed are Holy, with an external relative Covenant
Holiness, Romans 11.16. and therefore, may be Baptized, and have Right to Church
Membership.

I am forced to repeat this Answer again; also you have is at large in Rector
Rectified, in Answer to Mr. Burket, Page 108, 109, 110.
Answ. There is a Two fold Holiness spoken of: 1 st. An external foederal
Holiness. 2 d. A True spiritual inherent Holiness.


Now the Children of Believing Gentiles, are not Holy with an external relative
foederal Holiness nor have they a Right to Baptism, nor Church Membership, for
Two Reasons: First, Because Baptism is of mere positive Right, nothing but a
Command, Example, or some well grounded Authority from Christ, that can give
them a Right thereto. Secondly, Because the Gospel Church is not constituted,
as the Jewish Church was, it is not National, but Congregational; it consists
not of the carnal Seed as such, but only of the spiritual Seed, i. e. Adult
Persons who believe. Where do we find, in all the New Testament, That the
Children of Believers as such, were Baptized, and taken into the Church, as
being in an external relative Covenant? Holy Mr. Tho. Goodwin (as I find him
quoted by a Learned Writer, in a Book called Two Treatises, p. 6^.) says, In
the New Testament, there is no other Holiness spoken of, but Personal, or Real,
by Regeneration; about which, he challenged all the World, to show to the
contrary. I have showed you, The Ax is laid at the Root of all external,
relative, foederal, Holiness, which qualified under the Law, for Jewish
Ordinances, and Church Membership. -- But


3 We will now come to examine this Text of Holy Scripture, Romans 11.16. There
are various Interpretations of what is meant by the Root in this place.

1. Some understand it of the Covenant. 2. Some of Christ. 3. Some of Abraham,
Isaac, and Jacob. 4. Some of Abraham only.
I now agree with the last, and say Abraham is the Root spoken of here: But
pray observe, as he was a Twofold Father, so he was a Twofold Root: First,
The Father, or Root of all that believe, Secondly, The Father, or Root of all
his Natural Seed as such; but this place referrs to him as he was the Root of
all his True spiritual Seed; and if so, the Holiness of the Branches is real,
spiritual, and internal; (and not external foederal Holiness) for such, as is
the Holiness of the Root (as meant here) such is the Holiness of the Branches;
but Abraham was believingly, personally, spiritually, and internally Holy,
Ergo, such are all the Branches spoken of here. And indeed, for want of Faith,
and spiritual Holiness, that was in the Root. were many of the Natural Branches
broken of, from being any more a People, in an external Covenant Relation with
God; for this is the Covenant I have showed, The Ax is now laid at the Root of,
viz. the External Covenant. The Jews were broken off, or cut down by their
Unbelief; their Old Church State, and Covenant being gone, they not believing
in Christ, and so united to the True Olive, and the Gentiles by Faith, were
grafted in; they having obtained the Fatness of the Root, o^ Faith, and
Righteousness of Abraham, and of the Covenant of Grace made with him, who is
called, The Father of all that believe.

A Learned Writer says, 1. The Holiness here meant, is First, in respect of
God's Election, i. e. Holiness, personal and inherent in God's intention. 2. It
is also a Holiness, derivative, not from any Ancestors, but Abraham, not as a
natural Father, but as a spiritual Father, or Father of the faithful; and so
derived from the Covenant of Grace made with Abraham.


From hence it appears, There is nothing in this illustrious Scripture, for
what these Men bring it, who think hereby to prove a Holiness, which the New
Testament knows nothing of; applying, the Holiness and Insection to outward
Dispensation, only in the visible Church, which is meant of Saving Grace, in
the invisible, and make every believing Parent, like Root to his Posterity with
Abraham, to his Seed; which we deny.

Let therefore the Jews Covenant, standing before they were broken off (from
being any more a Covenant People) be what it would, I am sure no Gentile is
graften into Christ, nor Jew neither, but by Faith; nor can any be grafted into
the Gospel Church, without the Profession of such a Faith.

The Jews, it is true, were broken off by their Unbelief, and were also now no
more a Church; nor is there (as I said once before) any such kind of Church,
constituted under the Gospel Dispensation, as theirs was, viz. A National one:
For they, amongst the Jews, who were True Believers, (or the spiritual Seed of
Abraham) who receiving Jesus Christ by Faith, were planted a new into the
Gospel Church; and between them, and Gentile Believers, there is no difference,
since the middle Wall of Partition is broken down, Ephesians. 2.14. Jew, and Gentile,
stand now by Faith, and not by external, relative Covenant Holiness. Thou
stands, (says Paul) by Faith: O Believer! (mark it) not by Birth,
Privileges, but by by Faith; (as worthy Mr. Gary observes) Thy standing is by
Faith, yet not thy Seed by thy Faith, But thou thy self by thine; and they, by
their own Faith* Faith is that, by which (thou standing, and not thy Seed) have
Right to stand in the Church, and not thy Seed; but if thy Seed have Faith, and
thou have none, then they have Right in this Church, and thou shall be
excluded. And, although under the Law, we deny not, but that the natural Seed,
or Progeny of Abraham, were all Holy, with an External, Ceremonial, Typical
Holiness; and consequently, they were then admitted to an external
Participation of Church Privileges; yet now it is otherwise, Old things are
passed away, and all things are become new; now we know no Man after the Flesh,
2. Cor. 5.16, 17. That Old Church State is dissolved, and manner of Admission
into it, by external Birth, Privileges, or ^^^^^ive Covenant Holiness; and it is
very evident this was effected by the Death of Christ: See Ephesians. 2.14. For he is
our peace, who has made both one, and has broken down the middle wall of
partition between us; Having abolished in his flesh, even the law of
commandments, contained in ordinances, for to make in himself, of twain, one
new man, so making Peace, verse. 15.

The Legal External Covenant made with the Jews, whilst it abode, was a Wall of
Separation, or Partition between them, and the Gentiles, and caused Enmity in
them both, in the Jews, because they contemned the Gentiles, as a People
Unclean, and Abominable; not being Circumcised, they Hated them: And the poor
Gentiles, they seeing themselves out of the Covenant, and so deemed Strangers
and Foreigners, and without God in the World, they envied the Jews: But now
Jesus Christ has broken down this Wall of Partition, and slain the Enmity that
was between them, which was the Ceremonial Law, and Covenant of Circumcision,
and all other external Privileges, as they were God's peculiar Covenant People,
and these being abolished, and gone, now both Jew and Gentile are made one in
Christ, and become one new Body, or Church, viz. A Christian Gospel Church: And
hence he adds, And, that he might reconcile both unto God, in one body by the
Cross, ver. 16. That is, The outward Wall of Jewish Rites, and Privileges being
gone, Christ thereby designed, to bring both Jew, and Gentile ( viz. all the
Elect) unto God, and both into one Church State, no Person, nor People now,
having any external Privilege above others, by the Gospel Covenant: And if the
Jews external Birth-Privileges, were a Wall of Partition between them, and the
Gentiles, let Men take heed how they set up another like Wall of Partition
among them, who are Believers, and their Seed, and Unbelieving Gentiles, and
their Seed, lest that prove a ground and cause of like Enmity between
believing, and unbelieving Gentiles, as the Old Rites, and Covenant Privileges
did, between Jews, and Gentiles.

But to open that Text, Romans 11.16. a little more fully, as I have formerly
done, it is evident the Apostle, in the 9th. and 10th. Chapters to the Romans,
is treating of the Election of Grace, and of the Covenant of Grace, God made
with Abraham: These were his People which he had not cast away, chap. 10.1. And
of this sort, God had 7000 in Elias's Days, ver. 4. Even so, says he, at this
present time also there is a remnant according to the election of grace, ver.
5. Hence he says, What, then Israel has not obtained, etc. but the Election
has obtained, and the rest were blinded, ver. 7. He farther shows, That
abundance of the natural Seed of Abraham, were broken off, How were they broken
off? Why, for their Unbelief; they not Receiving Christ, but Rejected Him, and
the Gospel: And the New Church State were broken off; but that the Gentiles
might not boast over them, the Apostle shows, There is ground left, to believe,
all those that belong to the Election of Grace, shall, in God's due time, be
brought in again, and so partake of the Blessings of the Gospel Covenant, or
Promise of Grace made to Abraham's spiritual Seed; and to prove this, he in
ver. 16. lays down an Argument; For, if the First Fruits be Holy, the Lump is
also Holy, and if the Root be Holy, so are the Branches.

By the Root, I understand (as I said before) Abraham, is meant, Root, and
Father, signifying here the same thing; Abraham being counted the Root, or
Father, as God represents him, (not only of his own natural Offspring) but of
all that believe, or the Root of all his true, holy, and spiritual Seed, and so
intended here.

By the First Fruits, may be meant, Isaac, Jacob, and all the Holy Patriarchs,
for they were given to Abraham, as the First Fruits of the Covenant of Grace,
or Free Promise of God to him; and these were Holy, with a true, spiritual,
personal, and inherent Holiness: Also,

Thirdly, By the Lump, may be meant, (and doubtless is) the whole Body of the
Elect, or spiritual Seed of Abraham, from the time the First fruits were given
to him, until the Gospel Days, or whole Lump of God's true Israel, who also
were all Holy as the Root, and First Fruits, were Holy.

Fourthly, by the Branches, he means, the true spiritual Seed of Abraham, or
the Elect Seed, that then were living at that present time, as ver. 5. Even so
then, at this present time also, there is a remnant, according to the Election
of Grace. And these were Holy likewise, even as all the rest, both as the Root;
First Fruits, and Lump, or whole Body were Holy; that is, all the the spiritual
Seed of Abraham, were like himself, viz. Holy, in a Gospel Sense, with a
personal and inherent Holiness. Now observe, he speaks of some Branches that
were broken off, these seemed to be Branches, or Children of Abraham: And so
they were according to the Flesh; (but were like those Branches in Christ, who
bear no Fruit, Joh. 15.2, 3, 4. and therefore taken away) he alludes, to the
natural Seed of Abraham, to whom he stood, not, as a spiritual Father, or Root,
but as a natural, and legal Father, as they were a National Church, and sprang
from him as such, to whom the external legal Covenant was made; and these as
such, for rejecting of Christ, were broken off, (1.) Not broken off from the
Election of Grace, for to that they did not belong. (2.) Nor were they broken
off of the Gospel Church, for they never were grafted into that: but (3 dly,)
they were broken off from being any more a Church, or People, in Covenant with
God, the whole Old Church State, and Constitution, being gone, by the coming in
of the Gospel Dispensation, and they not closing in with Christ, in the
Covenant of Grace, and Gospel Church, but utterly rejected him, and the New
Church State: For this they were broken off as a lost People, because not
re-planted, or implanted into Jesus Christ, and the true Gospel Church, the Old
being gone, quite rased, and taken away: They have now no Root to stand upon,
having lost their Legal standing, and Privileges, as Abraham was their Father,
upon that very Foot of Account, and they not appearing to be the true Branches,
or Seed of Abraham, as he was the Father of all the Faithful, or of all the
Elect Seed, they must, of necessity, from hence be broken off, from being the
People of God, or belonging to any Common Head, or Root, in any Covenant
Relation to God, at all: The Dispensation being changed, the Old House pulled
down Agar, and her Son, cast out. Old things past away, and all things being
now, become New.

But this New State, New Blessings, and New Church Privileges they rejected,
and so were the natural Branches broken off, and the Gentiles ( who were wild
by Nature, that is, never were in any visible Covenant State with God, nor, in
any sense, related to Abraham, as a Root) were grafted into the True Olive,
Jesus Christ, and into the Gospel Church and so Partakers of the sap and
fatness of the Root, and of the Olive, that is, of the spiritual Blessings of
Christ, and of the Covenant of Grace made with Abraham, and Privileges of the
Gospel Church; and this they received, and partook of us, as being first
grafted by saving Faith in Christ, and so united to his Mystical Body. But
since there are a great Number of the natural Branches, that are beloved for
their Father's sake, that is, for their Father Abraham's sake, as the Root, and
Father of all the Elect Seed, they shall, in due time, be grafted in again, and
so become a People visibly owned of God, and in Covenant with him, as the True
Seed now actually are, and formerly were.

And if this be considered* What does this Text do, to prove the natural Seed
of Believers are in the Gospel Covenant, or are externally, relatively, and
foederally Holy; for if the natural Seed of Abraham can lay no claim, nor have
any Right to Gospel Precepts, or Privileges as such, but are broken off, What
ground is there for us, to think within our selves, that we, or our natural
Offspring, as such, should be taken in, and so another Wall of Partition, and
cause of Enmity, set up between believing, and unbelieving Gentiles, and their
Seed as such?

The Apostle speaks, not of Branches, or of being Holy with an external,
relative Covenant Holiness, but of such a spiritual Gospel Holiness that was in
the Root, viz. Abraham, who believed in God, and it was counted to him for
Righteousness: And thus, all his true spiritual Seed, who are actual Branches
and in Covenant are Holy, and also, all the Elect of Abraham, not yet called,
are discretively Holy, or in God's sight so, who calls things that are not, as
if they were; they are all Holy in his Account, and beleved for their Father's
sake, with whom the Covenant of Grace was made for himself, and all his
spiritual Seed: And it is from this Argument, the Apostle argues, for the
calling of the Jews, and grafting them in, who belong to the Election of Grace.
--

Therefore, there is no ground for Infants Church Membership, or Baptism, from
hence* and those who make every Believer a common Head, or Root of their
natural Offspring, as Abraham was, either way, know not what they affirm, nor
what they say: see Rector Rectified. Moreover, the Jews, who were broken off,
are still the natural Seed of Abraham; and if therefore, this Holiness was an
external, relative, foederal Holiness* they are still in that Sense Holy, as
far forth as any Child of believing Gentiles as such, can be said to be; but,
it is evident, this is not that Holiness, of which the Apostle speaks, nor is
there any such Holiness, under the Gospel Dispensation, spoken of, as to that
Text, in 1 Cor. 7.14. Else were your Children unclean, but now are they Holy --
this is so fully answered in that late Treatise Entitled, The Rector
Rectified, etc. that I shall speak nothing now to it; for from the Scope of the
place, it is evident, the Apostle speaks of Matrimonial Sanctification, and of
the Holiness of Legitimation, see page 134. to 140. so that there Mr. Rothwell
has his Arguments answered, touching Infants faedoral Holiness under the Law,
etc.

Obj. 11. If the Children of Believers, as such, are not now under the Gospe^
in Covenant with them, and so to be admitted Members of the Church as formerly,
then the Privileges of the Gospel Covenant (and Membership) are straightened, and
fewer than they were under the Law, Mr. R's. Paedo-Baptismus page 2.3.

Answ. It Is not once to be supposed, but that the External or Temporal
Privileges of the Jews under the Law, were more and larger (as well as
Church Membership) than those we have under the Gospel Dispensation, since
their Church was national, and their Promises and Privileges consisting in
earthly Blessings: (as they were a People considered in that old Covenant
Relation) for the Jewish Teachers or Priests of God had many external
Privileges, which no Gospel Minister can once pretend unto.

Minister's Sons had all a Right to the Ministry, they had a Right to the
Tenths of all their Brethren's Increase and first Fruits, and a multitude of
other Advantages besides, viz. they had a Civil Government of their own, Power
to punish Capital Offenders with Death; their Temporal Rulers were among
themselves, but Christ has not set up such a Gospel political Church State,
nor given such Power and such a Government to his Church under the Gospel: what
will be in the Kingdom of Christ in the last days we know not.

They had a lovely and fruitful Land given to them for their Inheritance, that
flowed with Milk and Honey, they were promised outward Peace, Riches, and
gathering of much Wealth, so are not we; they had a glorious external Temple,
and what not; also all their natural Offspring, were born Members of their
Church. But none of these Privileges can we lay claim unto; all that are to be
admitted into the Gospel Church, have only a Right by Regeneration (by the
second Birth) and not by the first Birth, we are to expect Persecution and
trouble in the World, and not Peace and Prosperity; Poverty and Want, and not
Riches or earthly Fullness: yet our Privileges are better and greater under the
Gospel, than theirs were under the Law, the Gospel Covenant being established
upon better Promises: Our Children when grown up, sit under the clear and
glorious Light, and Preaching of the Gospel; which they, and theirs had then
held forth, but in dark shadows, moreover the Par^ition Wall being now broken
down, the Gospel Church is not confined to the one People or Nation only, but
now all, in all Nations of the World, who believe and embrace Christ by saving
Faith; whether Jews or Gentiles, are Joint-heirs together, and have Interest in
like spiritual Blessings, now greater Infusions of the Spirit. Alas! what
Privileges had the poor Gentiles under the Law, and their Children? Is not the
matter well amended with us? Sir, this being so, what is become of your
Rational Arguments, for Infant Baptism? p. 2, 3.

Obj. 12. Circumcision in the very direct and primary End of it, teached Man,
the Corruption of his Nature by sin, and the Mortification of sin; therefore
(...) Covenant of Works, or Condition of it. ( to this purpose Mr. Flavel
speaks, page 231.

Answ. I answer, though it should be granted, that Circumcision had such an
End, yet that, that was the direct and primary End of it, he proves not; for
the direct and more immediate End and Design thereof (we have proved) was
something else, although we grant it was a dark Sign, Type or Figure of that
they speak of, viz. to discover the Corruption of Nature by sin, and the
Mortification thereof, and so also did most of the Ceremonies of the Law: but
does it therefore follow, those Ceremonies (and so Circumcision) did not
appertain to that Ministration of the Covenant of Works God gave by Moses to
the People of Israel, which is abrogated and done away. Must the Shadow or Sign
be part of the Substance, or belong, or appertain to the Substance?

Wherefore, (as Mr. Carry well says,) until they can prove the Sinai Covenant
and Ceremonial Law, etc. not to be in their own Nature a Covenant of Works,
this which they object here, has nothing in it; since Sacrifices, the Passover,
etc. as well as Circumcision, were Types of Christ, and other Gospel-Mysteries
likewise: and indeed Mr. Flavel seems to me to run upon a Mistake all along in
his Answer to Mr. Carry, as if the latter makes no distinction between Adam's
Covenant of Works, and those after Administrations of the same Old Covenant:
for Mr. Carry, I am satisfied, means no more than what I have said, viz. That
they agree in Nature and Quality, though Adam had Life and Justification by his
own perfect Obedience unto that Law or Covenant, while he stood, and it was
given to him to that end; yet God gave not the Sinai Covenant, which required
perfect Obedience, to the end Man might be thereby justified; nor was it
possible he could, since he had sinned, and lost his power to obey: but that
Law contains a clear Transcript of the first Law, and so of the Holiness of
God, and of that Righteousness Man originally had, and lost; and of the
Impossibility of his being justified, without such a complete and perfect
Righteousness: but the Law as written in the two Tables, was given in Mercy
(upon the Score or Account I have mentioned) to Israel, in Subserviency to the
Gospel, and to it was annexed the Ceremonies, to show that a plenary
Satisfaction must be made for the breach of God's Holy Law, and that this must
be by Blood, though not by blood of Bulls or Goats, but they might have
understood, that by them, the Sacrifice and Blood of Christ was figured, could
they have seen to the end, or purport of them.

Therefore the true Distinction lies here, viz. Both are the first Covenant of
Works; both show Man must live, and sin not, if he would be justified in God's
sight: the first in Man's Innocence, answered the end of a Covenant of Works;
the second Administration thereof could not give Life, nor was it given to that
end, but it answered the end for which God gave it: and so much to this
Objection.

Obj. 13. You cannot deny, but Circumcision sealed the Righteousness of Faith
to Abraham, and how can you prove a Seal of the Covenant of Works can be
applied to such a use and service? Thus Mr. Flavel, p. 234.

Answ. 1. I answer first, who of us say that Circumcision was a Seal of the
Covenant of Works? there is a great difference between a Seal of a Covenant,
and that which was given as a Sign or Token of that legal and external Covenant
God made with all Abraham's natural Seed as such, and that Circumcision was
such a Sign we have before showed; as also of their having the Covenant or Law
of Mount Sinai, and Land of Canaan given to them, etc.

2. But that Circumcision was a Seal of that Faith Abraham himself had, (not
being yet Circumcised) and that he should be the Father of all that believe,
Paul possibly affirms, Romans 4.16. and yet it might well be of use to him also,
as a Sign or Token of those other Covenant Rights and Blessings granted to his
natural Offspring, is evident.

3. And from hence we have proved, that Circumcision could not be so, a Seal of
the Righteousness of Faith to any other Person or Persons, none having the like
Faith before they were Circumcised, as Abraham had; nor were they made common
Fathers to all true Believers, whether Jews or Gentiles.

Obj. 14. Where the Covenant of Circumcision is by the Apostle
contra-distinguished to the Covenant of Faith, Romans 4.13. the Law in that
place, is put strictly for the pure Law of Nature, and metatypically signified
the Works of the Law, p. 235.

Answ. 1. I suppose no Man besides Mr. Flavel, ever asserted such a thing as
this is: I would know how Circumcision (a mere positive Precept) came to be a
part of the Pure Law of Nature? for it is evident, that the Law Paul
contra-distinguisheth from the Righteousness of Faith, had Circumcision in it,
or else the same Apostle needed not to have taken such pains to have
distinguished between Circumcision and the Righteousness of Faith; and had
Circumcision appertained to the Righteousness of Faith, or been a Gospel
Covenant, why does he exclude it with the Law from being so counted? read v.
10, 11, 12, 13.

2. The Law therefore, of which the Apostle speaks, is that Ministration of the
Law given to Israel, of which Circumcision was part, and so of the like Nature
and Quality with it; and both contra-distinguished to the Covenant of Grace, or
to the Righteousness of Faith.

And that the Law here is put strictly for the pure Law of Nature, is wholly
without Reason, Proof* or Demonstration; what Law does the Apostle speak of in
the preceding Chapters, and also in this, see chap. 3.1, 2. is it not that he
calls the Oracles of God, or Lively Oracles, Act. 7.38. given on Mount Sinai?
The Law of Nature, and the written Law contained in the two Tables* are all one
and the same Law; as to the Substance of them, they are materially the same,
though not formally; both convinced of Sin, both bring Sinners under Guilt and
Condemnation, and so that all Mouths may be stopped, and all the World become
guilty before God, Romans 3 19. both are a Rule to walk by, both Witnesses for
God, but neither of them can give Life, nor justify the Sinner in the sight of
God, v. 20. Therefore neither of them are any part of the Covenant of Grace,
for if one of them is a part of it, both of them are; if the Law of Nature be
not so, the Law written in the Tables of Stone was not so: yet the Jews had the
Advantage of the Gentiles, because their Law was wrote in far more legible
Characters than the dimm Law of Nature, Romans 3.2. as well as in many other
respects.

Obj. The denying Baptism to Infants, hinders the Progress of the Christian
Religion.

1. That Principle which hinders the Progress of the Christian Religion, can be
no Christian Doctrine; but the denying Baptism to Infants, hinders the Progress
of the Christian Religion; therefore such a Principle can be no Christian
Doctrine, this is Mr. Rothwell's main Argument, page 2, 3. to prove the Minor
thus he argues, (viz.)

2. That Principle which makes the Covenant of Grace less beneficial and
extensive than the Covenant of Works, hinders the Propagation of the Christian
Religion: but the former Principle does so. Ergo,

To prove the Minor of this Argument, he adds another, viz. That Principle
which allows not as great Immunities, Benefits and Privileges to the Covenant
of Grace, as to the Covenant of Works, makes the Covenant of Grace less
beneficial and extensive than the Covenant of Works; but the Principle that
denies Baptism to Infants, does so, Ergo.

Answ. 1. This Gentleman calls these Rational Arguments; but I have nothing but
his own word for it: but to proceed, he should have showed what those
Immunities and Benefits were in the Covenant o^ Works, which we by denying
Infants Baptism, render the Privileges of the Covenant of Grace to be less than
those were: but, do you not intimate hereby* that Circumcision belonged to the
Covenant of Works? and if so, in vain do you urge Circumcision as a Privilege;
and also since the Covenant of Works is abrogated, what is there in your
Arguments for the baptizing of Infants? For all Jewish Rites and Privileges may
be forced upon the Christian World by this Argument of yours, or else we may
say, the Privileges of the Gospel are less than the Privileges of the Jews
under the Covenant of Works; which I have already answered.

2. His mentioning that Passage of Calvin, is remote to his purpose, he speaks
of the Covenant of Grace made with Abraham, not of the Covenant of Works, which
we say is not curtailed by Christ's coming, but is every way as extensive now,
as it was from the beginning: but we have proved that there was a Twofold
Covenant made with Abraham, and that Circumcision did appertain to his Natural
Seed as such, and so part of the legal Covenant.

Obj But the Commission, Mat. 28.19. (you say) is as full, or rather more
beneficial and extensive than the Covenant of Works; and consequently, that the
baptizing of Infants is a Christian Duty; for had there been as general a
Commission given by Moses to Twelve Elders of Israel, as the Blessed Jesus gave
to his Disciples, and it had been said to them, Go teach all Nations,
Circumcising them; this had been no Prohibition to Circumcise the Jewish
Children, etc.

Ans. 1. Is this that the Mountains have brought forth? we were big in
Expectation by your Title Page, wondering what new Notion or Arguments you had
found out, from the Commission, Mat. 28.19, 20. or what your different Method
should be to prove Infant Baptism -- But truly Sir, the Log is still too heavy,
you cannot lift it up -- I see nothing new in your whole Tract, nor any thing
but what has been answered; but this being the main Pin upon which all hangs, I
shall give a brief Reply to you.

1. I thank you for your plain and just Concession; I see you conclude and
grant Circumcision did belong to the Covenants or Works: I doubt not, but you
are right so far* and with that, your Cause is gone, and Calvin and all that
came after him, have said nothing in calling Circumcision a Gospel Covenant. 2.
But Sir, suppose the People of Israel had never been commanded by the Lord to
Circumcise their Children till Moses came, and Moses had given such a
Commission that you mention, viz. to teach all Nations, Circumcising them; do
you think they would have had ground from thence to have circumcised their
Infants? whereas his Circumcision required the teaching of all Nations first,
before they were circumcised, of which Infants were not capable. 3. It Is
evident, that our Savior in his Great Commission, enjoineth no more to be
baptized, but such who are first taught or made Disciples, and this agrees with
his own Practice, Joh. 4.1. he made and baptized more Disciples than John: he
first made them Disciples, and then baptized them; nor were there any baptized
in the New Testament, but such who first professed Faith in the Lord Jesus. See
our Answer to Mr. Burkit, (which I sent you.) Also our Answer to the Athenian
Society, this is there fully spoken unto. 4. If the Commission be so extensive,
as you intimate, Why do you not go, (or stir up some Ministers to go) into all
Heathen, and Pagan Nations, and Baptize them, and their Children; and so that
way, make them all Christians: You may teach them the Christian Doctrine, i. e.
Faith and Repentance, afterward, as you do your Children; but the Truth is,
there is no need to teach them afterward, the way of Faith, and Regeneration,
(if your Doctrine be true) because the chief Thing they received in Baptism,
you say, is divine Grace, viz. Regeneration, Adoption, and a Title to the
Inheritance of eternal Life, p. 20. Sure those divine Habits can never be lost.
Reader, take what this Man says farther on this Respect.
Obj. But you say, we neither regard, nor consider the chief Thing in Baptism,
viz. The Testification, or Witness of the divine Benevolence, taking them into
Covenant Protection, and Patronage, and conferring, and bestowing Grace upon
them; for, in Baptism, the chief Thing is divine Grace, which consists, and
stands in the remission, pardon, and forgiveness of Sins; in Adoption, or
Sonship, and in a Right, and Title to the Inheritance of Eternal Life, of which
Grace, Infants stand in need, and are as capable as the Adult, etc. p. 20.

Answ. This is such Doctrine, that few Paedo-Baptists, besides your self, do
assert, or believe; but, What Proof do you give us to confirm it, from God's
Word? You say right, we do not regard it indeed -- Does Baptism do all this? --
It Is wonderful: How! conferr Grace, and give Pardon, and Eternal Life! -- You
Ministers of the Church of England, if this be so, can do as strange things, as
the Popish Priests in Transubstantiation; you can, by sprinkling a little Water
on the Face of a Babe, it appears, change the evil, and vicious Habits, form
Christ in the Soul, raise the Dead to Life, and of a Child of Wrath, make a
Child of God. It grieves me to think, a Man called a Minister of the Gospel,
should teach such corrupt Doctrine, and deceive the Ignorant.

For, as it is without Scripture-Evidence, nay contrary to it; for God's Word,
that tells us, Baptism washes not away the Filth of the Flesh, that is, the
Corruption of depraved Nature; so it is contrary to Reason, and without any
rational Demonstration, as Reverend Stephen Charnock, (though a Paedo-Baptist,)
shows, Many Men (says he) take Baptism for Regeneration: The Ancients usually
give it this Term; one calls our Savior's Baptism, his Regeneration. This
conferrs not Grace, but engages to it; outward Water cannot convey inward
Life. How can Water, an external Thing, work upon the Soul, in a Physical
manner? neither can it be proved, That ever the Spirit of God, is tied by any
Promise, to apply himself to the Soul, in gracious Opperations, when Water is
applied to the Body. If it were so, that all that were Baptized, were
Regenerated, then all that were Baptized, should be saved, or e^se the Doctrine
of Perseverance falls ^o the Ground -- And again he says, That some indeed say,
That Regeneration is conferred in Bapti^m, upon the Elect; but how so active a
principle, as a spiritual Life should lie d^a^, and sleep to long, even many
Years, which intervene between Baptism and Conversion, is not easily
conceivable. Charnock on Regen. p. 75. Sir, Do but prove what you here affirm,
and I will write no more against Infant Baptism; and till that is done, all you
say is nothing, in my Judgment.

But to proceed: Such a Commission you speak of, would not, in your sense,
Authorize those Twelve Elders of Israel, to go, and Teach, and Circumcise the
Jews, and their Children only, but all others, in all Nations of the World;
this would be an easy way of making People Christians: But, Sir, The Gospel,
whatsoever you think, according to our Doctrine, is more extensive, then was
the Law to the Jews; for that was restrained to that People. He shows his
word unto Jacob, his statutes, and judgments to Israel: He has not dealt so
with any nation, for his judgments they have not known them, Psalm. 147.19, 20.
But the Gospel is not restrained, or limited to any one particular People, or
Nation, but it is to be preached to all the World; and, whosoever are made
Disciples, i. e. Do believe, and are baptized, shall be saved, Mark. 16.16 (Not
that we suppose, Men cannot be saved without Baptism; for that makes no Person a
Christian, or a Disciple of Christ, neither Young, nor Old, though it is the
Duty of Believers, to submit thereto.)

We doubt not, but that the same spiritual, and eternal Blessings, which the
Jewish dying Infants had, by the Death, and Merits of Christ then, the dying
Infants of Christians have now, according to the Election of Grace: But as
touching the legal and external Privileges of the Jews, we have proved (in this
Tract, and elsewhere) that they had many more, in diverse respects, under the
Law, than those, we Christians, and our Children, have under the Gospel.

As to those great Advantages, Blessings, and Privileges of the Covenant of
Works, which you talk of, I wonder what they were; for the Covenant of Works
could not give Life, no Justification, nor Righteousness (that could) save by
that Covenant, no pardon of Sin; but, contrariwise, Death, Wrath, and the
Curse, is denounced upon every Soul of Man, for the breach of it. How vain then
are your Arguments? in the Gospel is Life, is Justification, is Pardon of Sin,
to every Man that believes; To the Jew first, and also to the Gentiles, Romans
1.16. Time would fail me, to show how absurd your Notions are, to what almost
all our Learned Protestant Divines, have wrote about the Covenant of Works. --

The Jewish Infants received no Soul Spiritual, and Eternal Advantage by
Circumcision: (What the chief Advantage, or Profit was which they h^d thereby,
St. Paul tells us, Romans 3.1, 2.) Though it was commanded of God, for the Ends,
and Designs, I have already mention^d; and if so, What Benefit can any Infant
receive by Baptism, (or rather Rantism) which is a mere humane Innovation? You
confess, it was instituted by the Church, as a needful Thing, p. 37. And the
Church has Instituted it, because it is needful; it was indeed never
Instituted, or Appointed by our Lord Jesus: And, as to that Custom among the
Jews, (you speak of) p. 7, 8 of their Baptising Proselytes, I have fully
Answered it, in my Treaty, called, The Rector Rectified, p. 24, 25. and in my
Answer, to the Athenian Society. Sir, you go upon a Mistake all along, taking
it for granted, That Circumcision, and other legal Rites, were great spiritual
Privileges; for it is no such Thing: It was a Yoke of Bondage, not to be born;
and a great Mercy it was to them, that they were delivered from it, Act. ^5.
And therefore the Jews, did they believe in Christ, and see the Nature of, and
Tendency of Circumcision, would never speak after that manner as you mention,
in p. 9. ( Viz)

Obj. I will rather be a Jew, then a Christian, because, as soon as I own, and
profess their Faith, my Child, after such a Declaration, is in covenant, as
well as my self, and has a Right to the Sign, etc.

Answ. Sir, The Jewish Childrens Right to Circumcision, was not deferred, till
their Parents made a profession of Faith; but as they were the natural Seed of
Abraham as such, it was the Command of God to Abraham, that gave them that
Right, and nothing else.

Obj. So, that by this account, it plainly appears, That denying Infants
Baptism, is an hindrance to the progress of the Holy Gospel.

Answ. True, if Infant Baptism does make them Christians, you say right, it
must follow, That the denying them Baptism, hinders the progress of the Gospel;
but this is false which you assert: Baptism makes them not Christians; we say,
none but Christ, by his Spirit, can Regenerate the Souls of Men, or make them
Christians: True, you may thereby give them the Name of Christians, but cannot
give them the Nature of Christians; you may deceive them, and make them believe
they were so made Christians, and thereby undo them eternally, by relying upon
a mere Cheat and Delusion: This is a way to make false Christians, counterfeit
Christians. What a Christian is he, whose vile Nature was never changed? You
would do well to get a great Number of Ministers, if Baptism does make
Christians, (as I said before) to go into the Heathen Nations, and Baptize
them, and so make all the World Christians; but if you know no other way, for
the progress of the Gospel, then this, of making Christians by Baptism, God
deliver the World, from your way of Christianing the Nations.

You will not see, That the Gospel Church is not National, but only
Congregational; the Jewish Church, in that, differed from the Christian^: For,
What is more clearer than this? Christ's Church, is called, a Garden enclosed;
Christ's Flock, is a little Flock: Those who were added to the Church were
separated, either from the Jewish People, or Heathen Nations, were commanded to
separate themselves, and not to touch the unclean Thing. Ye are not, says
Christ, of the World. -- You would make whole Nations the Church, and from the
Commission, infer such a false Conclusion. I have considered what you have
said in p. 10, 11. Sir, When all the Pagan World are instructed, and believe in
Christ, we will say, they have a Right to the Sign, i. e. Baptism -- but not
till then, has one Soul a Right thereto: prove what you say, if you can, i. e.
That the Children of Christians as such, are Christians, as the Children of
Jews, were Jews: or, that Baptism makes any, either old, or young, True
Christians, or regenerates their Souls: It Is not your bare Assertions, or your
Saying it, that is worth any thing: what Authority have you from God's Word to
affirm such things? you give no more proof for what you assert, than the
Papists do for their vain Traditions and Popish Ceremonies; Grace must be
implanted in the Soul before Baptism, or the Person has no Right to it, it is an
outward Sign of an inward spiritual Grace, as your Church asserts: Baptism is
not Grace, nor conveys Grace, if you can prove it does, I will say no more, but
submit and acknowledge my mistake: but if you err in saying it does, do not go
about to deceive your People any more. -- You plead for making false Christian,
nominal Christians: Christianity is another thing than what you seem to
imagine, The Way is narrow, and the Gate is straight, -- Regeneration is a
difficult Work, it requires the Mighty Power of God to be put forth on the
Soul; nay, the same Power that God wrought in Christ, when he raised him from
the dead, Ephesians. 1.19, 20. As to Infants being capable of the Blessings of the
Gospel, so are Heathens and Pagans, when God calls them, and infuses Grace into
their Souls: I have answered all you say upon that Account, in my Answer to Mr.
Burkit. The Commission in the largest Extent, comprehends no more than such
that are (...) disciplized by the Preaching of the Gospel in all Nations: the
Parents must be discipled, and the Children must themselves in their own
Persons be discipled, as well as their Parents; and as their Parents were
before baptized; and when a whole Nation, both Parents and Children, are by the
Word and Spirit, made Christ's true and holy Disciples, and as such baptized,
then all the Nation may be looked upon to be Christians: but we know what sort
of Christians you make, and your national Church does consist of, that are made
so by Baptism, to our trouble; if God does not make your Members better
Christians than your Sprinkling, or baptizing them (as you call it) has done;
none of them, (as it appears from Christ's own words, Ioh. 3.3.) can enter into
the Kingdom of Heaven. In my former Books you may read Mr. Perkin's, and Mr.
Baxter's Expositions of the Commission they talk; not at such a rate as you do;
though Pedo-Baptists.

And though in your late Letter to me, you seem to boast, as if some admire your
Book, and that your Arguments are invincible, or unanswerable: Yet that is not
my Conceptions concerning it; and had your Antagonist so judged of it, I doubt
not but he would attempted your strongest Fort before this time; for I know
very well his Ability to defend this Cause: indeed I wonder at his silence.

But if you do proceed to provoke a farther Answer, you may have it; -- This
which I have done, was occasioned by my Preaching on this Text; not intending a
particular Reply to every thing you have said, nor is there any need; for you
are fully answered already in our late Treatises: yet I think the Controversy
much concerns you of the Church of England, and such who are for a National
Church.

As for our Brethren, called Congregational, I cannot tell what they mean by
contending for the Practice of Paedo-Baptism, nor do I well know what their
Sentiments are about it: they agree (as I do understand) with us (and other
Christians*) that Baptism is an initiating Rite or Ordinance; now if their
Infants are in Covenant with themselves, and are made visible Church Members by
Baptism in Infancy, and until by actual Sins they violate their Rite and
Privilege, abide Members thereof. (1.) Then I would know whether they have
their Names in their Church-Book, or Register, as Members? And (2 dly,) Whether
they ever Excommunicate (or bring under any Church Censure) such of their
Children who fall into scandalous Sins, or actual Transgressions, or not? (3
dly,) If not, what kind of polluted Churches must thir's be, who have not
purged out such corrupt Members? The truth is, I see not how Infant Baptism is
consistent with any Church State, unless it be National; and no doubt, the
first Contrivers or Founders of it, devised that way for the Progress of that
they call the Christian Religion, and so opened a Door, that Christ shut, when
he put an end to the National Church of the Jews. -- Therefore I wonder at our
strict Independants, considering their Notions, (knowing how their Principles
differ from; and their Understanding or Knowledge of Gospel Church Constitution
exceeds others) for Baptism does not initiate into their Churches, it seems by
their Practice; unless their Children, when baptized, were thereby made Members
with them. It is evident, that under the Law, when Infants were Members of the
Jewish Church, they were born Members thereof, though the Males were to be
Circumcised on the Eighth day; nor was the case difficult to know the Right,
Infants had to Circumcision: it was not from the Faith of immediate Parents;
but it was their being the true Natural Seed of Abraham, according to the
Flesh, or being Proselytes, etc. which gave them a Right to Circumcision, by
Virtue of God's positive Command to Abraham: -- But now if the Infant's Rite
arises only from the True and Real Faith of their Parents, the Child, when
grown up, may doubt if its Parents, or Father or Mother were not true
Believers, whether they had a Right to it or not; or may see cause to question,
whether either of them were in truth in the Covenant of Grace, or no; (for who
knows who are in a true spiritual Sense in Covenant with God,) especially if
their Parents should fall away, or Apostatize, and become vicious; which may
demonstrate, they were not true Believers* and so not the Elect of God
themselves: and if so, their Children had no more Right to Baptism, than the
Children of open and profane unbelievers Children have.

The truth is, what I have said in these Sermons, may serve to reprove such,
who set up a new Wall of Partition, (like that which Christ Abolished by the
Blood of his Cross) and so cause Enmity to rise between the Seed of Believing
Gentiles, and the Seed of unbelieving Gentiles; by making the Children of
ungodly Ones to say, Our Parents were wicked, and not in Covenant with God; and
though we were baptized, yet had no Right to it: we cannot but envy your
Privilege, you are the Children of believing Parents, and are in Covenant, etc.
nay, and it may cause too, to trust to that Birth-Privilege, and so destroy
their Souls, by looking out for no other Regeneration, but that which they had
in Baptism in their Infancy.

Some Reflections on Mr. Exell's new Treatise, Entitled A serious Enquiry
into, and containing plain and express Scripture-Proofs, that John Baptist did
as certainly Baptize Infants, as the Adult.
REader, just as I had closed with all I intended to have added to this short
Tract, a Gentleman brought me another Book newly Published; called, Plain
Scripture Proof, that John Baptist did certainly Baptize Infants, as the Adult:
-- This Book is written by one Mr. Exell, who calls himself a Minister of the
Gospel: but with what good Conscience a Man of his Function can give a Book
such a Title, I know not: for if there is such plain Scripture Proofs, that
Iohu the Baptist did baptize Iufants, as he positively asserts; it is strange
none ever saw, nor found out those Proofs: neither Paedo-Baptists, nor
Antipaedo-Baptists till now: -- but I will appeal to all thinking and impartial
Persons, whether or no, this new and bold Attempt of this Man's, does not give
cause to all People to doubt of all the former pretended Arguments and Proofs
for Paedo-Baptism? since new ways are thought necessary to evince it; but such
who read over this Man's plain Scripture Proofs, etc. will certainly conclude,
that his Title contains a grand Untruth; (to speak no worse) it argues these
Men are strangely left to themselves, or to Blindness, that shall undertake to
affirm for Doctrine, without Scripture Demonstration or solid Reasons, such
things, which are nothing but their own Fancies; but those who are willing to
be mistaken or deceived, let them be deceived: but to undeceive them, I shall
make some short Reflections upon his Proofs, and if any of my Brethren think it
worth their while, to answer either of these two new Asserters of
Paedo-Baptism, let them do it. --

The Texts he builds all his Proofs from, are these, viz. And there went out
unto him, all the Land of Judea, and they of Jerusalem, and were Baptized of
him in the River of Jordan, Mark, 1.5. Then went out to him Jerurusalem and
Judea, and all the Regions round about Jordan, and were Baptized, confessing
their sins, Mat. 3.5, 6.

From hence he inferrs, (if I can gather up his Sense) 1. That by All, every
individual Person, both Men, Women, and Children in Jerusalem, and in the Land
of Judea, went out to be Baptized of John. Or, Secondly, Some of all sorts,
Sexes and Conditions, and then some Infants, as well as some Adult. p. 9.

2. He labors to prove, That by Jerusalem is meant all, both Young and Old.

Answ. Put does it follow, because All sometimes does include every one, both
young and old; or else some of all sorts, Sexes and Conditions of People, that
therefore All must be so taken in all places, and consequently so here.

I am sorry he shows no better skill in Scripture Rhetoric, where frequently
by a Synecdoche, a part is put for the whole; and sometimes the far lesser part
also: -- It Is said, all the Cattle of Egypt dyed, Exodus 9.6. that is, all that
were in the Field, as Famous Glassius and other Tropical Writers note; so
Christ is said to die for all, yet we know he dyed (in a proper and true
spiritual Sense) but for a few, i. e. for none but the Elect. Christ says, when
he was lifted up, he would draw all men unto him, Joh. 12.32. does that import
every Man? or some of all degrees or sorts of Men? see the late Learned
Annotators on that place: it signifies no more than many or some of all
Nations: see these Scriptures, Exodus 32.3.26. Ier. 6.3. 1 Cor. 10, 7. so Isa.
2.2, 3. Mark. 9.23. Ioh. 10.8. Act. 2.5. Phil. 2.21. for all seek their own,
etc. Mat. 10.22. Ye shall be hated of all men for my Sake. Genesis 24.10. All the
Goods of his Master was in his hand: these and many other Scriptures are to be
taken Synecdoccally, and so is this; see Glassius Ill^ricus; also Philol^giae
Sacra, and our Annotators on Mat. 3.5. The term All (say they) here is twice
repeated, is enough to let us know, that it is often in Scripture significati^e
no further than many: -- for it cannot be imagined, that every individual
person in Jerusalem, and the Regions round about Jordan went to h^ar John the
Baptist, but a great many, Joh. 3.26. behold the same Bap^^th, and all M^n came
to him, that is, to Jesus Christ.

If John baptized them all, and Jesus baptized them all, then they were all
re^baptized; all Judea and Jerusalem come to John, and all Men (are here said
to) come to Christ to be baptized; in both places it is meant but some, or it
shows many came to them; nor can it be supposed, any that John the Baptist
baptized, were rebaptized by Christ's Disciples; and yet the Disciples of
Christ baptized more Disciples than John, Joh. 4.1.2. when the Lord knew how
the Pharisees had heard, that Jesus made and baptized more Disciples than John,
though Jesus himself baptized not, but his Disciples, etc. he did it not
personally with his own Hands; and this shows he baptized no Infants, and then
not those he laid his Hands upon: for if he baptized none, he did not baptize
them; from thence I infer, that there is no ground to conclude from these
Scriptures, Mr. Exell has reason to affi^m, that by all Jerusalem and Judea,
etc. must be intended either every individual Person, both Men, Women and
Children; or some of all Sorts, Degrees, Sexes and Conditions: but only it
shows that multitudes came to hear John Baptist, and many of them were baptized
by him.

2. I would have him consider, though all Jerusalem may sometimes intend every
individual, yet it is when the matter spoken of does equally referr to, and
concern all; as when the Famine was in that City, no doubt the Children were as
much concerned in that matter, as the Adult; (of which passage he would fain
make great Improvement) but when the Holy Ghost gives an Account of a great
Prophet Preaching God's Word in the Wilderness of Judea, and of Multitudes
going forth to hear him, it is ridiculous to imagine, there went, or were
carried little Children to hear him, or to be baptized by him; unless, either
directly or indirectly the Scripture gave us any ground to believe the latter;
(I am persuaded, this Man from his Arguments will not make any Proselytes) or
confirm People in the Practice of Infant-Bap^ism. It Is said, Paul Preached
Christ to the Iayler, Act. 16. and to all that were in his house; can any
suppose that he preached Christ to his In^ants? (if he had any) do People carry
their Infants to hear God's Word? (if some poor Women do bring such with them,
it is because of necessity, i. e. they cannot leave them at home:) therefore,
there seems not the least shadow of Reason, as far as I can see, to believe
that Children went, or were carried to hear John Baptist, though it is said all
Jerusalem and Judea went out to hear him, and were many of them baptized of him
in the River Jordan: the Ministration of the Word belong not to Infants, --
when God spoke to all Israel, Deuteronomy. 11.1. by Moses, That they should love and
keep his Judgments and Commandments always, he adds verse 2. And know you this
day, for I speak not with your Children, which have not known, and which have
not seen the Chastisements of the Lord your God. -- What though Circumcision
belonged to Infants, under the Legal Church of I^rael, so did the Passover,
etc. and if Infants have from thence a Right to Baptism, they have also as much
Right to the Lord's Supper: great part of your Book is answered in these
preceding Sermons. But to proceed.

2. Is it not said he Preached the Baptism of Repentance for the Remission of
Sins, Mark 1.4.

Do you suppose he did not require of such that came to his Baptism, first to
repent, or that he would Baptize them, for Remission of Sins, without
manifesting their Repentance? nay, and did he not refuse to baptize such he
found, who did not bring forth Fruits meet for Repentance, or Works, that were
the proper Product of true Repentance, Mat. 3.8. you would (with your Brother
Rothwell) have Persons be first made Christians by Baptism, and then afterward
bring forth Fruits of Repentance: but this, it is evident* was not the Doctrine,
nor Practice of John the Baptist, nor of Christ, and his Apostles. If thou
believe with all thy heart, thou may, Act. 8. He that truly repented, and
did believe might, nay ought to be Baptized, and none else.

Obj. May be, you will say, that respects the Adult.

Answ. I Answer, There is no Account given of any Infant that was Baptized, no
Precept, no President; and that is forbidden which is not Commanded; or, for
the Practice of which, there is no Ground, or Rule from God's Word; for all
humane Innovations, and Inventions of Men are forbid, and sinful: I doubt not,
but if a Man would try his Wit, he might say as much for Infants to receive the
Lord's Supper, as you have said, for the Baptising of them. Pray consider what
you your self speak in p. 1.

And if all must be Acccepters, or Rejecters, then all, and every individual
Pers^^ are under, and must have as great Express, particular and authoritive
Command* to accept and receive Christ, and every Thing of Christianity, in its
Right, Order* and Manner, as another, p. 1.

Though you bring this for to prove Infants must be Baptized, and so receive
Jesus Christ, -- yet, I must tell you, it quite overthrows all you strive to
do. -- For, 1. Where is there an express, particular, and authoritive Command
for them, to receive Christ by Baptism, or any Ordinance, or Principle of
Christianity, whilst Infants? And where is there any Rule, or Order in all the
New Testament, that the Adult must first Believe, and then be Baptized; but
Infants must be first Baptized, and then Believe: Sir, God's Word knows nothing
of the last, and the Right of Baptism only depends upon Christ's positive
Precept, and Example of the Apostolical Church. 2. I affirm, That Infants
cannot be said, as such, to be Receivers of Christ, nor Rejectors of him,
because they are capable to do neither; nor is there any other way taught in
the Gospel of receiving Christ, but by Faith. He that is Baptized, who has no
Grace, no true Grace, true Faith, is but a Baptized Infidel.


Obj. You Object Infants have the the Habit of Faith, or the Habit of Grace.

Answ. We deny it; see how you can prove it, i. e. That Infants as such, have
the Habit of Faith. Who is able to know that? What, though God may change the
Hearts of some dying Infants, or some who did live, were sanctified in the
Womb, Does it from thence follow, all Infants in common, or as such, have their
Hearts changed, or are so sanctified?

2. You are to prove, That sacred Habits, infused by the Holy Ghost, may be
utterly lost; for, it is evident, Infants that live, when grown up, though
Baptized, have no other Habits, then such have, who never were Baptized.

How can you prove, There can be the Divine Habits of Grace in Infants, and yet
those Habits lie still, as dead in them, for so many Years, as it is from the
time they are Baptized, to their Conversion? A sacred Habit, is a Principle of
divine Life; yea, a most active, and lively Principle. Can the weakness of
Nature hinder the Operations of the Holy Ghost, in Infants, when the Power of
the Devil cannot, in the Adult? When God works, who can let? Can there be fire,
and no heat? Sure, such a mighty Cause would have like weighty Effect on the
Souls of Children, were it as you suppose.

Obj You say p. 10. we must prove no Infant is Converted or else grant some
Infants to be there; that is, John did Baptize Infants.

Answ. You mistake, your Work it is to prove what you affirm: We are not to
prove a Negative; yet I shall now, prove that John the Baptist did Baptize no
Infants, but only the Adult.

Arg. 1. If John Baptist required Repentance of all those that came to be
Baptized by him, and Infants are not capable to Repent, then he did not Baptize
any Infants.

But John Baptist did require Repentance of all such that came to be Baptized
of him. Ergo,

He bad them Repent: Repentance was his grand Doctrine; and, he also exhorted
them to bring forth Fruits, meet for Repentance, Mat. 3.8.

Arg. 2. If the being the Seed of Abraham as such, or the Offspring of
Believers, would not give the Jews a Right to John's Baptism, then John
Baptized no Infants: But the former is true. Ergo,

I have proved largely, in this Treatise, That the Covenant made with Abraham's
natural Seed as such, would not give any of his Offspring Right to Gospel
Baptism. Think not to say within your selves, ye have Abraham to your Father.
If you Answer this Argument, you must Answer this small Treatise.

Arg. 3. If the Covenant for the external In-Covenanting of Infants as such is
Abrogated, and the Fleshly Seed cast out, by the Establishing the Gospel
Covenant, then John Baptist Baptized no Infants: But the former is true. Ergo,

This Argument is largely proved in the precedent Discourse.

Arg. 4. If Infant Baptism does them no good, there being no Promise of
Blessing made to them in their Baptism, then John Baptist Baptized no Infants:
But Infants Baptism does them no good, there being no Promise of Blessing made
to them in their Baptism. Ergo.

If it does them good, or there is a Promise of Blessing made to them, in their
Baptism, prove it, since it is denied: But to proceed.

Arg 5. If the Baptism of the Adult, who have no Faith, no Grace, does them no
good, nor can convey Grace to them, then it cannot do Infants as such, any
good: But the former is true. Ergo, What good did Simon Magus his Baptism do
him, or Iudas's, who, no doubt, was Baptized? If you can prove Baptism conveys
Grace to Infants, or makes them Christians do it; for I utterly deny it, and
have a cloud of Witnesses on my side, among found Protestant Writers. Consult
with Mr. Rothwell, on this Point.

Arg. 6. If all those John Baptist Baptized, confessed their Sins; and Infants
cannot confess their Sins, then John Baptist, Baptized no Infant^: But the
former is true. Ergo,

This Argument you endeavor to Answer, p. 36.37. You would know what Confession
it was, which they made of their Sins, whether Verbal, or Moral. It Is said,
With the heart Man believes, and with the Mouth, Confession is made to
Salvation. Therefore, say I, it was Verbal.

Obj. You intimate, that some may want Speech, or Weakness, which may be an
Impediment to them, etc.

Answ. If they can any ways signify, or make it known to the understanding of
the Administrator, they are True Penitents: it is, no doubt, sufficient if it be
by Writing, 'twill do; but Man knows not the Heart. What appears not, is not.

Your Arguments, in p. 37. about their being in Abraham's Covenant, I have
fully Answered already: That will do you no good. John Baptist denies that
Plea, when he said, Think not to say within your selves, we have Abraham to our
Father.

Do you think Baptism turns People to the Lord? for so you intimate at the
close of your 37. Page Prove it, it is denied.

Obj. 4. You say, such a Confession would overturn the Constitution, or
Institution of God by Moses and casting Infants out of that Floor.

Answ. I have showed you, That the Gospel Dispensation has overthrown the
Mosaical Constitution, or Legal Church of the Jews; and that Christ has thrown
out the Fleshly Seed, as such i. e. No Infant is to be a Member of the Gospel
Church; and I have given my Reasons why I have so said, which you may Answer if
you please.

7 thly, Because it was Repugnant to the End, and grand Design of John's
Ministry, to receive and Basptise every body, even Men, Women, and Children,
without distinction; his Ministry being most strict, and severe, (as it is
acknowledged by all Men.) His Ministry of Preaching, and Baptising was held
forth by the Prophet, in these Words, Mal. 4.1. The Day shall come, which shall
burn as an Oven. He lays the Ax at the Root; he Preached no such easy way of
making Men Christians, nor Church Members, as these Paedo-Baptists speak of;
his Ministry seemed like to Fire; in him was the Spirit of Burning kindled, as
Mr. Cotton, On the Covenant, observes; p. 21. The Lord also prepared his People
by a Spirit of Burning, which, as a Spirit of Bondage, he does shed abroad into
the Hearts of Men: This we read of Mal. 4.1. It is spoken of John the Baptist;
which did burn as an Oven against the Scribes, and Pharisees, and left them
neither the Root of Abraham's Covenant, nor the Branch of their own Good Works:
He cutteth them off from the Covenant of Abraham, Mat. 3.9. Think not to say
within your selves, we have Abraham to our father; and so, by cutting them off
from the Root, he leaves them no Ground to trust to.

But this Man renders John's Ministry, to be of a quite contrary Nature, even
the most easiest, flesh-pleasing Doctrine that ever was Preached. If he
received all to his Baptism: certainly he has made sad Work for Repentance, for
abusing the Ministry of this Great and Holy Prophet.

Arg. 7. If John the Baptist was to prepare Christ's Way, i. e. fit Persons, as
proper Materials, for Christ's New, and Spiritual Temple, which consists only
of living Stones, viz. Believing Men, and Women, then John did not Baptize
Carnal Persons, nor Ignorant Infants: But the former is true. Ergo,

Arg. 8. John, upon their unfeigned Repentance, Baptized all that he did
Baptize, for the remission of Sins; and no Persons have remission of Sins,
without such Repentance. Ergo, Can Baptism it self give remission of Sins? or,
Is thete any promise of Pardon, without unfeigned Repentance?

By this Man's Reasoning, all the Carnal People of the Jews, that were willing
to be Baptized, John was to Baptize; and he did Baptize them, as well
Unbelievers, as Ignorant Babes; for all his Arguments are as strong to prove
that, as for John's Baptising of Infants: Which, if so, all Pagans and Infidels
in the World, are to be baptized, and by Baptsm, be made Christians, and
Members of the Gospel Church. O, What a Doctrine does this Man Preach! Do but
see what Work he would fain make of that Confession of Sins, which was required
of all those that came to John's Baptism, in Page 37, 38. to p. 50. i. e. It
was such a Confession that excludes no ungodly, or unbelieving Person, that was
willing to be baptized, so far as I can see. All that were of the Church of
Israel, or in the Legal Covenant God made with Abraham, he intimates, might be
baptized; nay, he tells us, in page 44. A Confession made when John Baptized,
was not a Commanded Duty. Men, after this rate, may even say what they please.

Arg. 9. If John the Baptist baptized all the People of Jerusalem, and Judea,
and all those of the Regions round about, then he baptized Unbelievers,
Profaned and Impenitent Persons, as well as Penitent Persons; but he did not
Baptize Unbelievers, Profaned and Impenitent Persons: Therefore, he did not
Baptize all the People of Jerusalem, and Judea, and all those of the Regions
round about.

Arg. 10. If John the Baptist Baptized all the People of Israel, (as before
mentioned) then he left none for Christ, nor his Disciples to baptize; but John
did leave some; nay, more People for Christ or his Disciples to baptize, than
he baptized: Ergo, he did not baptize all the People of Israel, or all of
Jerusalem and Judea?

That John left some; nay, more People to Christ and his Disciples to be
baptized, than he baptized; is expressly asserted by the Holy Ghost, John 4.1.
When Jesus knew how the Pharisees heard that Jesus made and baptized more
Disciples than John, etc. see John 3.26. And they came unto John, and said unto
him, Rabbi, he that was with thee beyond Jordan, to whom thou bear witness,
behold the same baptizeth, and all men come to him: How! did John baptize all
and yet all come to Christ to be baptized? This is strange, what People were
these, and where dwelt they? if John baptized all the People of Jerusalem and
Judea, etc.

Arg. 11. If John's Baptism, and the Baptism of Christ, was but one and the
same Baptism, as to the Nature, Quality, and Subjects thereof; then he baptized
none but such who were first made Disciples, or who were first taught to
believe and repent: but the Baptism of John, and the Baptism of Christ was but
one and the same Baptism, as to the Nature, Quality, and Subjects thereof:
Ergo, he baptized none but such who were first made Disciples, etc.

That the Nature, Quality, and Subjects thereof, were one and the same, all
generally affirm: I know no difference, but that after Christ was dead and
risen, they that were then baptized, were baptized into him that was come:
dead, buried, and raised again; but John baptized them, as such that believed
in him, that was to die, etc. Christ having then not actually suffered. It Is
evident, that Christ's Commission Impowers his Disciples to baptize only such
who were discipled, or such who did believe, is plain, Mat. 28.19.20. Mark
16.16. and this was his Practice, John 4.1.

Arg. 12. If John baptized all the People of Jerusalem, etc. then how was the
Ax laid to the Root of the Tree? and how was the Chaff sanned-away out of the
Floor? It Is evident, his Ministry was to separate or sever the Wheat from the
Chaff, the good from the bad, the carnal Seed from the spiritual, and not to
continue them together: for his Ministry, and the Ministry of Christ was the
same, though Christ had the Precedence, or the far greater Glory: yet the design
of John's Ministry was the same with the Ministry of Jesus Christ.

Obj. But, says Mr. Exell it can be intended of no other Confession, than what
would consist with John's excluding or casting of none cut, or purging of none
out of (...) Floor, or cutting of no Tree down: for that he did not that, but
threatened them with Christ's doing of it, Mat. 3.9, 10.12 speaking of that
Confession the People made to John.

Answ. This Man would have us believe, that the Doctrine and Work of Christ,
and that of John's, were not consistent, or of one and the same Nature; but
directly or repugnant contrary one to the other, viz. John receives all,
baptized all, both good and bad; and lets every Tree stand and grow as it will,
on its own natural and evil Root: he gathered all into the Garner, even both
the Wheat and the Chaff too: but Christ quite overthrew and destroyed when he
came, all this that John did, i. e. Christ lays the Ax at the Root, and cuts
Sinners down; all must be true Penitent, all must believe, or Christ will
receive them not, baptize them not: and he so purges his Floor, that no Chaff
must be received into his Garner, i. e. into his Gospel Church, for this the
Man's Words implies: Let the Paedo-Baptists view the Strength of this Champion.
Does not John tell the People when they came to his Baptism, now the Ax is laid
to the Root of Trees? his Doctrine is laid to the Root, and tended to purge out
the Chaff, as palpably as did the Ministry and Doctrine of Christ; though it is
true, it is Christ's Work to make all John Preached, or any other Minister,
effectual: John Preached, saying, repent, etc. Christ Preached the same
Doctrine, saying, repent, for the Kingdom of Heaven is at hand: John is the
voice of one crying in the Wilderness, prepare ye the way of the Lord, make his
paths straight, Mark 1.3. The Jews had made the way to Heaven broad and easy;
but John strives to undeceive them, and to show the Way was narrow, and the
Gate straight, like as Christ himself speaks, because straight is the Gate, and
narrow is the way that leads unto Life, and few there be that find it, Mat.
7.14. but this Man intimates that John Preached not this Doctrine, but one
quite different; he makes the way so broad, that all Jerusalem, Judea, and all
the Multitudes round about, might come and walk in it; which if so, instead of
prepairing of Christ's Way, he obstructed and hindered Christ in his way, and
made him more work to do, even to undo all that John had been a doing.

But pray be pleased to take his Answer to one of our Arguments brought against
what he affirms, that John baptized Infants, viz.

All those that John baptized, confessed their Sins, but Infants could not
confess their Sins; Ergo, John did not baptize Infants.

Obj. Says he, We are not to believe any other Confession here intended, than
what was consistent with the Promise and Covenant made with Abraham, etc. so
that if it must give no Right to the participation of the Ordinance, [that is,
a Confession must give no Right,] for then (says he) the Promise and Covenant
must be put an end to, and they must have no Right by them, p* 37.

Answ. 1. Does not John positively deny, that the Covenant made with Abraham's
natural Seed as such, did give them a Right to his Baptism? for this we have
proved to be the proper Purport of that Expression of his: Think not to say
within your selves; we have Abraham to our Father: and Mr. Cotton asserts the
same as I have showed.

2. We have also proved, that the Legal Covenant, made with Abraham's Natural
Seed as such, is put an end to, by the Establishment of the Gospel Dispensation.

Obj. 2. It is not to be taken as intended of any other Confession, than what
would consist with the Capacity of them that were represented to John to be the
Objects of his Ministry, which were Parents and Children, Mat. 4.6. Luke 1.17.
If there should have been any other Confession than what would consist with
these; how should John turn them to the Lord, unless they might be as well
turned without a Confession, and without baptism, as with it, p. 37.

Answ. 1. If the Confession consisted with the Capacity of those that heard his
Ministry, then Infants, were excluded, because they, were not capable to make
any Confession at all, but 'twas so; Ergo,

2. What though it is said John was to turn the People to the Lord, and the Hearts
of Children to the Fathers: was he able to change the Hearts of Infants? or
were Infants Hearts turned from their Fathers, that they need, whilst Iufants
to have their Hearts turned to them? Are not my Sons and Daughters my Children,
when they are 20, 30, or 40, Years Old, as well as they were my Children when
but Two days Old?

Obj. 3. It cannot be taken to be any other Confession, than what would consist
with all the People, being then the visible Church of God, etc. p. 38.

Answ. Then it appears by this Man, all the whole Church of the Jews, both
Parents and Children, were by John Baptist to be taken into the Gospel Church
by Baptism; For else, says he, all the whole Church must be overturned.

And so I have proved it is; even the whole Jewish Church, and
Church Membership.

Obj. 4. No such Confession can be intended as would exalt natural Strength or
number of Years, or acquired Abilities, as Necessary, Qualifications; for this
is contrary to Scripture, 1 Cor. 1.27. p. 41.

Answ. If it be a Confession of Sin, it must be made by such, who are at such
an Age, as are able to confess Sin, and without natural Abilities: what Person
is able to make such a Confession? can an Infant consess Sin?

2. Though all boasting is excluded by the Gospel, i. e. of our own natural or
acquired Parts and Abilities; yet we may glory in the Lord, and in his rich
Grace bestowed upon us: will this Man say gracious Abilities to confess Sin,
are excluded? then all Confession of Sin is excluded.

Obj. 5. No other Confession can be intended, than what would consi^^ with all
the Regions, Jerusalem, all Judea, all the People, and all the Multitudes

Answ. That is, I suppose, all the People, one or another; who could speak or
say they were Sinners, might be baptized, and upon that Confession, their
Children also; who could make no Confession at all: If so, all the World by
this Argument may be baptized, for no doubt, there were many Thousand Families
that lived either in Jerusalem, Judea, or in the Regions round about that were
not Jews; broad is the Way to Heaven, if this Man's Doctrine be true, or into
the Church at least. The Man's mistake lies here, i. e. because great
Multitudes went out either to see, or hear John Baptist; he therefore concludes
John baptized them all, because it is said he baptized them, not observing the
severe Doctrine he Preached, and what a holy Sight and Sense of Sin and godly
Repentance he enjoined on all those he admitted to Baptism: for they he
baptized, confessed their Sins, i. e. their hearty Sorrow for Sin, and were
turned to the Lord; for that was his Work, and the grand Purport of his
Ministry, -- and evident it is, that there were but a few comparatively
baptized by John, because Christ by the hands of his Disciples baptized more
Disciples than he, Ioh. 4.1. and it is said, Christ's Flock was but a little
Flock; and after Christ's Resurrection, the whole Number of his Disciples, were
about One hundred and Twenty, Act. 1.15. though may be some few more there might
be in some orher places.

Mr. Baxter, though a great Asserter of Paedo-Baptism, contradicts this Man, John
Baptist, says he, received and judged of the Profession of his Penitents
before he did baptize them, Baxt. Confirmat. Restor. p. 68.

It was such a Confession that John required of those that he baptized, that
gave him Ground to believe they had Right to Remission of Sin, for he baptized
with the Baptism of Repentance, for the remission of Sin; Read the late
Annotators on Luke 3.3. The Sum of John's Doctrine, (say they) was the
necessity of Repentance and Faith in Christ, in order to the Remission of Sin:
his pressing Faith in Christ, is most clearly declared by the Evangelist John:
Matthew, Mark, and Luke insist more upon his Preaching the Doctrine of
Repentance for the Remission of Sins; Baptism was an Evidence of it: -- John
did not Preach that Baptism was Repentance, or that Remission of Sin was
infallibly annexed to it; but that the way to obtain the Remission of Sins, was
by Repentance; and Baptism was an External Sign and Symbol of it.

It was, no doubt, such a Confession that Philip required of the Eunoch, Act.
8.37. See here is Water, what does hinder me to be baptized? Philip answered,
If thou believe withal thine Heart, thou may.

This Man would render John Baptist less Faithful than any ordinary pious
Minister; I believe says Gullespy, No conscientious Minister would adventure
to baptize, any who has manifested infallible Signs of unregenerations, Gil's.
Aaron's Rod. blossom.

Obj. But, says Mr. Exell, to conclude that this Confession mentioned, Mat.
3.5. was a Confession with the Mouth or Tongue, without considering any thing
of the words? when there is no such discovery in the Text, is somewhat too
quick and too bold; for what is expressed, is expressly asserted of all the
Regions, and all Judea and Jerusalem, and those called Multitudes -- and these
general Expressions contain and comprehend. Men, Women, and Children, etc.

Answ. I must needs say, it is a hard case you dare so boldly affirm all, both
Men, Women, and Children, were baptized by John; whereas, it is positively said,
that they he baptized confessed their Sins: You conclude against the express
Words of the Text, and assert plain Scripture proof, that John Baptist did
certainly baptize Infants, and yet give neither Scripture, nor Reason, to
demonstrate what you say is true: you can draw Consequences to build an
Ordinance upon that which naturally rises, not from the Texts you refer to;
nay, which is more, when the Text is expressly against such a Conclusion: it is
said, They that gladly receive the Word were baptized: You may say, that some
of them were Infants, as well as to affirm some of these John baptized were
such; for Infants are as capable to receive the Word, as to confess their Sins:
nay, when it is said, Acts 20. The Disciples came together to break Bread; you
may affirm, that Infants came then, with others together, to break Bread, or to
eat the Lord's Supper, for you know how to prove them to be Disciples, no doubt
on it; if you have not been too quick in asserting what you with boldness have
asserted, I am greatly mistaken.

You make Baptism a very insignificant Sign, what good can Baptism do that
Parson that has no Grace? If you can prove what your Brother Rothwell affirms
do; viz. That Baptism does regenerate Infants, or is a Converting Ordinance:
Certaintly, but very few of that great Multitude, you suppose John baptized,
received any Spiritual benefit by their Baptism; and I challenge all the World
to prove if they can, that ever one Infant received any kind of Internals,
Spiritual or Eternal Advantage, by being baptized as you call it; or External,
either; by the Word of God.

He adds an Induction of Twenty particulars, to show what a Confession it was
not, that those John Baptist, baptized, made; but they need no further Reply
being all remote to the Purpose brought for: Then he proceeds into ten more, to
show it could not be a verbal Confession of Actual Faith and Repentance; the
most of them follow here.

Obj. There is nothing of a Command requiring such a Confession, neither
declared by John, nor revealed by any other Messenger of God: This contains his
two First.

Answ. Did not John require it when he said, bring forth Fruits meet for
R^pentance, etc* A Confession is a Fruit of Repentance? And did not Philip
require it of the Eunuch? Is not Faith required? and as a Man believes with his
Heart, so a Confession is required with the Mouth, to make known that Faith,
unto Salvation.

Obj. If such a Confession was commanded, it must be gained by their own
personal Obedi^cence, and so the Gospel is a Covenant of Works: 2. If
commanded, then it was not voluntary; 3. If commanded, then it must not be to
show the Grace they had, but their Obedience; these are three more of them,
Page 44.

1. Answ. I answer, if, what God commands us to do; those Virtues so commanded,
are gained or merited by our own personal Obedience; then all our Evangelical
Duties must be meritorious, and the Gospel is a Covenant of Works indeed: For
that the Gospel does command many Duties is evident. Cannot God give Grace, and
then command us by the Assistance of his Spirit, to cause those Graces to
appear in exercise to the Praise of his own Glory?

2. Or cannot that which God commands us to do, be done freely and voluntary by
us? Or, does free Grace destroy the Noble Faculty of the Will, because it
over-powers its vicious Habits, and strongly inclines it to that which is good?
Do not Saints freely and voluntarily by the help of the Spirit and Grace of
Christ, will that which is good and well-pleasing to him? Or, is a Confession
of Sin not good, or an Evangelical Duty?

3. Do we not by our Obedience to God show forth his Grace in us, as well as
our Duty of Obedience to him; what New Divinity is this? Wonder, O Heavens!

Obj. If commanded, then the performance of it externally could not make a
Change upon their State and Relation toward God, any more than the performance
of any other Duty: Much less could it, when not commanded: Page 45.

1. Answ. Because a Confession of Sin cannot make a Change upon our State, or
Relation to God: Must we not make an External Confession of that which God's
Spirit has wrought Internally upon our Souls? Or, must an External Confession
of Sin make a Change, and so all other Duties, or else not be performed by us?

2. It seems to me by your unfound Expressions, as if you conceive, that an
External Confession could make a Change upon our State and Relation to God;
whereas that makes no Change, but only discovers, or makes known what a blessed
Change the Grace of God has wrought, or made on the Soul: Besides, it is not
Universally true, i. e. because a thing is commanded it cannot make a Change;
for sometimes a Command is attended with Power to change the Soul, etc. John
6.28.

Obj. If this, say you, had been a commanded Duty (viz. a Confession of Sin) to
qualify them for Baptism; then they must not be admitted upon the Account of
their being the Children of Abraham, nor as the Children of the Promise, but
the Promise ceases, which is notoriously false, Romans 15.8. Page 45.

1. Answ. We do not say a bare verbal Confession qualifies any Person for
Baptism; but inward Grace or Truth, Faith in the Lord Jesus Christ; this is the
only Qualification which ought to be in all the Subjects of Baptism* and this
Faith must be made manifest by the Confession of the Mouth, and the holy Fruits
of the Life: Hence John required not only a bare verbal Confession, which might
hold-forth or signify their Repentance; but also says he, You must bring
forth Fruits meet for Repentance: Don't think to say you have sinned, or barely
to acknowledge your Iniquities is all I look for; No, your Lives must make it
manifest to me, you are changed, or regenerated; if you would, as true
Subjects, partake of my Baptism: for of such my Master's Kingdom is to consist
of, whose way I am come to prepare; i. e. to make ready such a People for him,
to build his Chnrch with.

2. As to your other Reason, viz. if a Confession be necessary, then their
being the Children of Abraham, and Children of the Promise was made to cease,
etc.

You hit it in that, for their being the Seed of Abraham according to the
Flesh, could give them no Right to Gospel Baptism. John plainly told them the
very same thing; for the Gospel has put an End to the Jewish Covenant Right of
Admission of Church Members; the Text you mention, Romans 15.8. (where it is said,
Christ was a Minister of the Circumcision;) you strangely mistake the Place,
Christ did not confirm Circumcision, nor Infants Right to Church Membership;
the Holy Ghost means no more then that Christ was a Minister of the Jews, as
well as of the Gentiles, or of the Circumcision, as of the Uncircumcision, and
so speak our Annotators on the place; and as to the Promise ceasing, see what
St. Paul says, Romans 9.6. Though the carnal Seed of Abraham, as such, are now
rejected, yet the Promise of God is not made of none Effect. For (says he)
They are not all Israel which are of Israel; Neither, because they are the Seed
of Abraham, are they all Children, v. 7. That is, they which are the Children
of the Flesh, these are not the Children of God; but the Children of the
Promise are counted for the Seed, v. 8.

Cannot you see from hence who are the Seed of the Promise? Even none else, but
such who are begotten and born of the Spirit, or are in Christ, Gal. 3.29. So
that, what you say is notoriously false.

Your 9th. Reason is the same with the part of your 8th.

Obj. You say in the tenth and last Place then, the Command of Christ that
Infants must come to him, was and must be null and void, Mark 10.13.14.15. Or
be a fresh Warrant for their coming to him, if John had cast them out Page 45.

1. Answ. We deny there was ever any Command of Christ for Infants to be
brought, or to come to Christ to be baptized.

2. That Text in Mark 10.13, 14. proves no such thing as you conclude it does,
they were brought to Christ, it is true, that he might put his hands upon them;
which was the way he used when he healed People of their bodily Diseases;
therefore you say right, since John, or rather Jesus Christ, has cast out the
natural Seed of Abraham, and the old Covenant too, as well as the old
Covenant-seed; Infant Church Membership is made null and void, unless there had
been a fresh Warrant for their Admission, i. e. they must be brought in and
made Members by an Appointment of Christ, or by a new Institution, or they must
not be admitted at all; for the old Covenant-right (we have proved) is gone for
ever.

As to what you speak in Page 32. about the Habit of Grace: is nothing to the
Purpose, these are your words; viz.

Obj. And if the habit cannot constitute us Members, the Acts or Exercise of
it, can never do it.

Answ. You do not attempt to prove Infants as such either before Baptism, or in
being baptized, have the Habit of Grace: I have showed in my Answer, to Mr.
Rothwell, that it cannot be proved that Infant as such, have the Habit of Faith
or of Grace, neither before nor in Baptism; if they had, doubtless those Habits
would appear some way or another, but they do not appear; therefore they have
no such Habits infused into them; all are born in Sin, and are Children of
Wrath by Nature; and Baptism does not convey Grace, nor infuse any sacred
Habits: What though God in a miraculous manner, has sanctified some Infants in
the Womb, and may sanctify such Infants that die, who are in the Election of
Grace; does it from thence follow, that all Infants as such, or all Infant of
Believers as such, are so sanctified? -- We read of one Animal that spoke, must
all Animals speak therefore?

If you could prove Infants had Grace in the Habit, or that it appears they are
regenerated, you had said something to excuse their inability, or disability to
make a verbal Confession, though not so much as you think; it is the Act of Faith
that must demonstrate the Habit to us, or the Fruits, or Product of Grace, that
those Habits are in those Subjects Christ commands to be baptized, non
apparentium and non existentium eadem est ration; they must act, must believe,
must repent, or must be actually discipled, that Baptism does belong unto; though
I deny not but that where the Habit of one Grace ^s, there is the Habit of
every Grace, and it is as certain those Habits can never be lost, it is the Seed
that remains, of which the Apostle John speaks; ^or can those pretended Habits
lie still, or asleep, in Persons, so long as your Notion clearly does imply --

1. He goes on to show what the Greek word (...), which the Learned he says)
tells us, signify to confess and give thanks: What of this; yet it is by a
^erbal Confession of Sin, if that should be signified in it.

2. He says, (...) signifies to do it together: that would be Confession. Sir,
(...) not the genuine signification of (...), alike? Similies a-like, do speak
a-like, (...) the same things: see Schrevelius's Greek Lexicon, where you will
find ^^e so defines the word.

3. No doubt (...) signifies to speak out, they made an audible Confession, and
not to whisper in John's Ear.

4. Again, he says, the word signifies a Confession of known faults, no doubt
of (...); and therefore such a Confession be sure that no Infants are concerned
in; ^^nners have known faults enough, to confess when God opens their Eyes,
(...) works Grace in their Souls.

5. And that the word comes from (...), which signifies to confess, or profess,
^^d is to be so translated, which signifies a Confession by practice and
actions. ^^g. 49.

Answ. This does not help the matter; for it is evident, the Practice and
Actions of the Lives of true Penitents, more loudly declares or makes known
that blessed Change that is wrought in them, than a verbal Confession can; but
Infants are no more capable to do the one, than the other.

Moreover, he would have it to be such a Confession that Infants must be
included, for else, says he, --

Obj. They are excluded from the Number that John turned to the Lord; or else
it proves, that Baptism was not a means to turn them to the Lord, or bringing
them to Christ, p. 49.

1. Answ. Did John turn any Children in their Infancy to the Lord? We read of
no Miracles which he did, but sure this would have been no small Miracle, if he
had changed the Hearts of Infants.

2. We see you positively conclude, that Baptism is indeed a Converting o^
Soul-changing Ordinance: you are of Mr. Rothwells Judgment it appears, and I
suppose a true Son of the Church of England; but when you write again, do but
prove this, and you do your Work in a great measure.

3. But it is strange, you should attempt to confute all the Learned; nay, and
your own Church too, for she requires a verbal Confession of such that are
baptized: and since Infants cannot do it, she causes others to do it for them:
unless you suppose that John Baptist Ordained the Rite of God. Fathers and
Godmothers; for there is as plain Scripture Proof for that, a^ there is that
he baptized Infants.

Dr. Du Veil quotes Grotius, who says, It plainly appears by the Rite of
baptizing in the Popish Church, that Baptism is to be asked, before the Person
is baptized, which the Surety does in the Infant's Name, a clear distinct
Confession of Faith is required, -- i. e. Renouncing the World, its Pomps, the
Flesh and the Devil: Dr. Du Veil on Act. 8. p. 282. the sam^ does the Church of
England require; yea, such a Confession that attends Regeneration; for as such,
she baptizeth them; though they answe^ by Proxy, she baptizeth, not Infants as
such, but as they are Believers.

Eun^mius speaks thus, ziz. Baptism is the Seal of Faith, Faith is the
Confession of the Godhead; it is necessary we should first believe, an^ and
then be sealed in Baptism, p. 278. of the same Book.

Hierom says, The Lord commanded his Apostles first to Instruct an^ Teach all
Nations, and afterward should baptize such who were instruc^^ed into those
great Mysteries of the Faith: for it cannot be (says h^^ that the Body should
receive the Sacrament of Baptism, till the Soul h^^ received the True Faith:
see Rector Rectified, where there are diverse of (...) Fathers cited, p. 129. to
p. 237. t the same purpose.

Baptism (says Mr. Baxter) is said to save us, and therefore, they (...) will
be baptized, must profess the Qualifications necessary to be saved, -- as many
as have been batized into Christ, have put on Christ, and are all one in Christ
Jesus, etc. And are Abraham's Seed and Heirs according to the Promise;
therefore says he, it is clear, a Profession was pre-supposed. Our Baptism is
the Solemnizing of our Marriage with Christ; and it is a new and strange kind of
Marriage, where there is no Profession of Consent. Baxt. on Confirmation, etc.
p. 32.

'We find, says the same Baxter, that when John Baptist set up his Ministry,
(1.) He caused the People to confess their Sins, Mat. 3.6. and if we confess
our Sins, God is faithful and just to forgive us our Sins, 1 John 1.9. and
whereas some say (says he) that John called them a generation of Vipers: I
answer, we will believe that, when they prove it. (2.) If he baptized them, it
was not till they confessed their Sins; and and it seems by his Charge, not
till they promised to bring forth Fruits meet for Repentance, Mat. 3.8.
Confirmat. p. 24. as to those in Act. 2.37. it is plain, they made an open
Profession; -- (3.) It is said, They that gladly received the Word, were
baptized: we may not imagine, that Peter was God, or knew the Hearts of those
Thousands; and therefore, he must know it by their Profession, p. 25.


He says in p. 26. The constant Practice of the Universal Church confirms the
same, i. e. that an Express Profession or Confession of Faith and Repentance is
necessary, before Persons are baptized: he adds, The Commission Christ (says
he) directs his Apostles to make Disciples, and then Baptize them (and this
say I, excludes all Infants:) how was it known the Samaritans believed Philip
Preaching the Things concerning the Kingdom of God, etc. but by, their
Profession? Saul had more than a bare Profession before baptized, page 27, 28.
the converted Gentiles, Act. 13.28. showed their Belief, and glorified God
openly; the same may we say of the Iaylor, says he, and Crispus, Act. 18.8. p.
29.

'The believing Ephesians confessed, and showed their Deeds, thus far Mr.
Baxter.

Obj. A Confession could not be of such Concernment as to exclude all, from any
Right to Baptism; for then the Pharisees and Lawyers could not have been guilty
(...) such Sin, in their being not baptized of John, Luke 7.30. p. 49.

Answ. Such arguing I never met with before; does if follow, that a Con^ession
of sin was not necessary, because it is said, the Pharisees and Lawyers ^ejected
the Counsel of God, in not being baptized of John? was that their great^st
Evil? or did not their horrid Evil rather lie in their Impenitency and
Unbelief, which excluded them from having a Right to Baptism, or in their not
receiving John's Doctrine of Repentance for the Remission of ^ins and bringing
forth Fruits worthy of amendment of Life? see our la^^ ^^notators on the place,
They tell you in that lay their great Sin, and th^^^ not submitting to Baptism,
as a Testimony of such a Repentance: (...) say they, the Baptism of John in
Scripture, signifies his whole Administration, or the Doctrine he Preached, as
well as the Ordinance of (...) by him Administered; and so must be interpreted,
where our Savior asked the Pharisees, whether the Baptism of John was from
Heaven or of Men? and they durst not say from Heaven, lest Christ should have
asked them, why then do ye believe him not? they were not baptized of him, is
the same thing with they would be none of his Disciples; they did then, like as
some ungodly Persons do now; reject the Counsel of God against themselves, in
not partaking of the Ordinance of the Lord's Supper: yet their bare rejection
of that, is not so much their Sin and Guilt, as their not believing, repenting,
or embracing of Jesus Christ, or obtaining those previous and antecedent
Qualifications required of all such who ought to come to that Sacred Ordinance.

Obj. It is said, the People asked him, What shall we do? and whether were it
some, for all? or every individual, who can tell? And if the Adult did speak,
and the Children could not, were not the Parents to take care that they might
have the means to fly from Wrath to come, as well as themselves? and to be
taught to take God's Way as well as themselves? it being after Baptism, and was
there any question to be made? but they would take Care about this, if they
were truly awakened? And especially when the Children's Names were as expressly
in John's Commession as the Parents? And if they did not take Care about them,
was it not their Sin? and their grievous Sin too? against the express declared
Will of God concerning them, Luke 1.17. Mal. 4.6. If he that provideth not for
the Bodies of his Children, has denied the Faith, and is worse than an
Infidel, wh^^ notorious Monsters had these People been, if when they were
awakened to see the Wrath of God in the fire of Hell coming in upon them,
should not take Care th^^ it might be prevented from their Children, as well as
from themselves, -- page 50.

Answ. Such Blindness is enough to afflict the Soul of any enlightened Person;
it is evident, this Man concludes the External Rite of Baptism, o^ a bare
Subjection to that Ordinance, was the very means to escape the Wrath of God,
and eternal Burning in Hell; and not only for Infants but the Adult likewise:
whereas, I find no sound and understanding Protestant of his Judgment; nor does
he produce either Scripture or solid Reason for what he asserts: could he prove
that to baptize Children or the Adult, would save their Souls from God's Wrath,
or Hellfire; ce^^tainly, all would be notorious Monsters, that would not
endeavor to pe^^swade all Heathens, Turks, and Pagans in the World, to be
baptized, or n^^ take care to baptize their Infants: but alas! we know that for
(...) Person to be baptized, who is not regenerated, it will avail him nothing,
(...) no more than Simon Magus his Baptism did him: It Is not Circumcision
av^^^ed, nor Uncircumcision, but a new Creature.

Answ. 2. But before he had gone so far as to assert the great Profit of
I^^fant-Baptism, and the dreadful Danger and Sin of Parents in not baptiz^^
them; he should have proved, that God does Enjoin or command (...) thing of
Parents, viz. to see their Children baptized: for, where there (...) Law, there
is no Trransgression: Another Man may argue, that the Ordidinance of the Sacred
Supper of our Lord, is a means or way for our Children to escape the Wrath of
God, and so charge Parents to bring them to that Sacrament, as well as to that
of Baptism. Sir, The Fault and Sin of Parents lies not where you place it, but
in that, when they are grown up, they neglect to teach them their Duty of
looking out for a changed Heart, or to get Faith and Repentance, or to obtain
an Interest in Jesus Christ, for there is no other way to escape the Wrath of
God for our selves, nor our Children when grown up, but by Christ alone, as he
is received through Faith: and whosoever do not so take Care of their Childrens
Souls, are greatly guilty before God; but to baptize them, since there is no
Warrant for it, no Command from God, no President, or Example in all the Sacred
Scripture; that would but bring great Guilt upon their own Heads: add thou not,
to his words, lest he prove thee, and thou art found a Liar.

Answ. 3. You abuse that Holy Text, Mal. 4.6. Luke 1.17. John had no Infants in
his Commission, though he was to turn the Hearts of the Fathers to the Children,
and the Hearts of the Children to the Fathers; yet Children there does not mean
Infants, for it must be such Children, whose Hearts were turned from their
Parents, and who were capable to hear, and and understand John's Doctrine; and
so to be convinced of their Evil, in having their Hearts set against their
Parents: the meaning is, that John was to Preach both to Young and Old, who
were arrived to Understanding, and to turn them to the Lord, and one to another.

Obj. If their Confession was a Confession of true Penitents, then this
Repentance was wrought in them before the Holy Ghost was poured upon them, or
before they were baptized with the Holy Ghost by Christ, and how could that be?
page 51.

Answ. 1. Does this Man think that there was no true Conversion wrought by the
Preaching of John Baptist, nor by Christ himself, or his Apostles, until the
extraordinary Gifts of the Spirit were given, which was not till after the
Resurrection and Assension of our Blessed Savior? he that will heed such a
Writer, let him; for by this Argument, the Holy Apostles were not true
Penitents, until they were baptized with the Holy Ghost, and yet did not Christ
tell them they were clean? though not all, Ioh. 13.10. and that they who then
believed in him, had Everlasting Life, Ioh. 5.

According to this Man's Notion, Christ had no Disciples indeed, or no true
Penitent and sincere Disciples, until after his Ascension.

Answ. 2. It Is evident, that the Baptism of the Holy Ghost did not re^ferr to
the saving Graces of the Spirit, which are in all Believers; but to those
visible, miraculous and extraordinary Gifts of the Holy Ghost, which were only
given to some Persons in the Primative Time, to confirm the Gospel, and to
discover the Glory of Jesus Christ, upon his Ascension into Heaven: The Baptism
of the Spirit, signifies that great Effusion of the Holy Ghost, like that at
Pentecost, Act. 21.2, 3.

Casaubon speaking of that Text, Act. 1.45. Ye shall be baptized wit^^^ Holy
Spirit, etc shows that the Greek Word (...) is to dip or pl^^^ as it were to
die Colors; in which Sense, says he, the Apostles ^^^ be truly said to have
been baptized; for the House in which this ^^^ done, was filled with the Holy
Ghost; so that the Apostles might ^^^ to have been plunged into it, as in a
large Fish Pond; all were not ^^^ the Apostles days baptized with the Holy
Spirit, let this Author show ^^^ he can, that the Word Baptizo, signifies to
sprinkle with the Spirit, or pro^^^ that the weakest Christian in Grace can be
said to be baptized with th^^^ Holy Spirit, -- Ye shall be baptized with the
Holy Ghost not many days henc^ etc. is not applicable to every particular
Believer, but to the Apostles, t^ whom principally our Savior spoke those
Words, and to some others, ^^^ whom those extraordinary Gifts should be given
afterward.

Obj. But this would argue, that then those that John baptized, were ^^^
Penitents, which is contrary to Christ's own Words, Mat. 11.2.7.1^ to 25.

Answ. There appears in those Texts he cites no such thing that he affirm^ but
he takes a Liberty to say any thing so far as I can see: no doubt, ^^^ John
took great Care to baptize only such who were True Penitents; sin^^ he required
so severely Fruits meet for Repentance, of such that came to ^^^ Baptism; though
no doubt, he might be mistaken in some of them, as P^^^ was in Simon, Act. 8.
though he sent some of his Disciples to Jesus to be f^^^ther Confirmed in the
certain Belief, that he was the true Messiah that ^^^ to come.

Nor does Christ's Words imply as this Man signifies in p. 53. that Ioh^^
Disciples had bad ends in going out into the Wilderness to see and he^^ him:
though some of the Multitude might probably go out of Curiosity, ^^ for other
ends, etc.

How Mr. Exell, or any other Man can rationally deny a Confession ^^^
necessary? or doubt whether such a Confession was required before Baptism, viz.
of that Faith and Repentance they then had I see not: for he ^^^poseth that
John baptized them, though ungodly, and without Faith, or the ^^^ thereof
appearing: telling them, they should afterward believe in ^^^ that was to
come: whereas it is evident, he required Faith and Repentance immediately of
them, as antecedent to Baptism, but I shall proceed no further.

O! when shall this Controversy cease? doubtless, none have just Cause ^^
blame us to defend that which we believe to be a precious Truth of Christ when
so many still appear to deny it, and write against it.

The Lo^^ open their Eyes, and send Love and Union amongst all t^^ Lord's
People. Amen.

FINIS.

