Christ praying in ye Garden. ^u. (...)
And there appeared an Angel. etc. v. 43. And when he rose up from Prayer, and
was come to His Disciples He found them sleeping. etc. v. 45. And said unto
them. etc. v. 46.



Midnight THOUGHTS, Writ, as some think, by a London-Whigg, OR, A
Westminster-Tory; Others think by a QUAKER, OR, A JESUIT: But call him what
they please, they may find him a true PENITENT Of the Church of CHRIST.

London, Printed for Benj. Clark, Bookseller, in George-Yard in Lombard Street,
1682.

THe Constant Meditations of a Man who for many ^ears built on Sand, which
every blast of cross Fortune ^as defaced. But now he has said new Foundations
on the Rock of his Salvation, which no Storms can shake; and will out-last the
Conflagration of the World, when time shall melt into Eternity.

TO THE READER.
YOU are to know, that the Author (being no Scholar) had no design to teach
others, nor other Aims by writing these his Midnight Thoughts, then by
reviewing them, to keep up his own heart to Heaven: But by this practice, he
grew to such a habit of Nightly Meditations, (at his first waking) as proved
more pleasant then sleep, and in a short time became more delightful, then any
other Thoughts could entertain his mind with: So that without any intent to
publish them, they swelled into this bulk you see; and brought him such
consolation, that he thought it Gods Mercy to bring him this way to Heaven. And
if any Reader do find the like advantage, by doing the like, he will have as
(...) cause to thank God as the Author has, who set his fancy on work this way,
to defend his heart from indulging such vain Thoughts, as day and night did
formerly invade and seduce him unto evil purposes.

And on this account, the Author was persuaded by some Friends, to transcribe
these loose Papers as they were first writ, and tacked together, without any
method of coherence observed, (as appears by the frequent repetitions of the
same expressions in many of them;) yet they wished him to keep them as they
were, to show how such unlearned men as himself, might better employ their
busy fancies at all times, on the serious thoughts of their Eternity, then to
drop into their Graves, without any consideration whither they are going. And
the Author on the same account, was some time after by the same Friends,
(against his own Judgment) overruled and persuaded to permit them to be
Printed, (without his Name) who gave him such Arguments for it, as he could not
resist, hoping that amongst so much sincere natural Devotion, something of
great use may be found to enrich the Souls of those, who are of no more
capacity then himself, who knew no true felicity, until he learnt to meditate
on his Eternity, which every man has some Talents to practice on.

Midnight THOUGHTS.
I.
MOst men do miss of the Fe^icity they seek on Earth, because the Wealth and
Honors that we gain, and all our joys in them, are with our selves still
perishing in the height of our Fruitions; and in a little time must all return
unto the dust we came from: Yet nothing does disturb the heart of man so often,
and so much, as pampering of it with hopes of what we seldom reach, and always
over-valuing what we aim at, which our Fancies like Magnifying Glasses
represent unto us, with such multiplied Felicities, as dazzle our understanding,
and captivate our reason with an expectation of what we never find. But such
men as can set their hearts on God, (above all his creatures) and delight in
him, and his Celestial joys, will find a constant Felicity here, by an inward
assurance of Eternal Glory hereafter; for such a man can never want arguments
to increase his joys on earth, when his repeated sorrows for past sins do
create new joys for those sorrows; and every new victory over a new temptation
does afford him fresh joys for such frequent conquests over Satan and himself.
So that if we can set our whole hearts sincerely to delight in God, and his
service, We may have so many tastes of his Heavenly joys here, and such frequent
glimpses of that glory, that we cannot hide our comforts in the Holy Ghost from
our own hearts while we live, and when we die, our Souls will rejoice to fly
into Christ's arms, for the consummation of all our hopes, all our joys unto
Eternity. And whoever does observe, will find that the deepest sorrows for sin,
does raise the highest joys for our reconciliation, and will prove our fullest
happiness on earth.

II.
THe more we search into the ways of Devotion, the clearer we shall see, and
experimentally find, that true Divine Philosophy, when fixed in the heart of a
Divine Lover, is the highest extract of all the blessedness that man's nature is
capable of in this world: For God may be said to delight in filling those Souls
with his Celestial joys, that study him, and will bring a regenerate man to
such a sense, and contempt of his past life, that he shall soon arrive at so
great a degree of Felicity in his approaches, and converse with him in Holy
Meditations, as to lament when he thinks of what joys he has lost, by wandering
so long from God. For the felicity to love God, and to be beloved of God, is a
pleasant Meditation to entertain a pious man's heart his whole life; And will
invite him to spend more time with God, then with all his creatures.

III.
WE should always pray with such intention of Spirit in that great duty unto
God, and with such fervent zeal, as if our Souls were that moment to expire,
and to carry our Pardon with us to Heaven. And every time that we receive the
Holy Sacrament, we should consider, that we are climbing a step nearer to
Heaven then we were before, so to show our desires to be there. And whoever
will have patience to read these plain Lessons, and mind them so seriously as
to practice them sincerely, will find more pleasure therein, then he can fancy
before he tries, (if he never tried to Meditate till now,) because a firm,
fixed, ratified Devotion, has in all Ages been experimentally approved of, for
the highest delightful diversion, that the heart of man can enjoy.

IV.
DElight in the Lord, and he will give thee thy hearts desire; that thou may
still increase that delight more and more in his mercies and blessings, in his
love; and thy trust therein, with a comfortable peace of Conscience, until he
brings thee unto the supreme delight of all delights, to see his face in Glory;
and until then, to entertain thy heart with the joyful assurance of that
Felicity to come, as the highest desire a man can have, by continual improving
thy delight in God; for from him who is the Fountain of Mercy, and Grace,
continual joys do flow.

V.
WE are to seek earnestly, and to pray daily for Christ's righteousness as our
chief treasure, and not to rest until our hearts be enriched with some portion
thereof, to carry us to heaven, and in our way thither, so to arm us here, that
no approaching evils may divert us. We are also to consider, that the Gospel
does not invite us to forsake the pleasures of this World, to go into a
Dungeon, (which were a hard lesson) but to remove from hence to inhabit Heaven,
with all its glory to Eternity; yet this natural cowardly disease of fearing to
die, being born with us, is without cure, until the Holy Ghost do fall so on
us, and dwell so in us, as to overcome our frailty by his grace, and to make us
see, and understand how to value our Interest in Heaven on Christ's account; and
by that faith, to raise in us such holy courage, as to pass through the Grave
with joy to our Eternal Bliss; which requires a Divine valor, beyond the reach
of a Natural man's fancy, with assistance from above.

VI.
MOst men do forget that our greatest affair on Earth, is to serve God
frequently, diligently, and publicly to own him; in the first place to secure
our blessed Eternity by his favor, while we have time to do it: And in the
second place, to follow our Callings for a Subsistence, by his providence
prospering our labor during our abode here: But we do often invert this, by
doing quite contrary all our Lives; by hungring and thirsting after perishing
Goods, and serving God at spare times only, as our least concern; until the
Agonies of a Deathbed shows our mistake too late. For it is a great
presumption to neglect God all our days, and expect a Crown of Glory at our
last gasp, as a reward for our neglect; it is dangerous to provoke God so.

VII.
IF we did set our hearts to take pleasure in Piety, as we do to improve our
delight in other things, we should find that Heaven Gates would fly open to our
sincere addresses, and perceived the Spirit of God working in our hearts, with
Divine transports full of unexpressible joys, while that Sacred flame burns
bright within us; And such Emanations from the Holy Ghost, are the greatest
invitations we can have, to encourage us to prepare for a place in Heaven, and
to make us esteem those Celestial joys, above all the glories of this world;
where the greatest Princes terminate their highest ambition to die the Sons of
God, (or should do so.)

VIII.
WHat God has revealed to us at Midnight alone, shall be our portions in the
next World: And if we can repeat the same Communication with joy in the
daytime, which we had with Christ in the night, we may entertain a comfortable
assurance that the Holy Ghost was at first, and is at last enkindling those
Divine flames within us, to raise our elevated transported Souls to Heaven.

IX.
THe greatest Epicure cannot have so much pleasure in satisfying all his
Appetites, as a regenerate man has in his conversation with God, during his
devout Addresses, in which he finds the Holy Ghost raising up his heart to an
assurance of his favor with God, and giving his Soul a delight far above all
Carnal fruitions, by the very victory over them. But this is only intelligible
by Pious hearts, and requires a Divine Valor to encounter, and overcome in
such skirmishes with Satan, and to relish the Felicity and Glory of such
triumphant joys as follow every such victory.

X.
IF we consider that God asks nothing of man for all his benefits bestowed (but
the heart of man) and that nothing but man can give the heart to God, and that
we ever heard, nor read of any man, that ever made* that sincere Present to
God, but did receive it back infinitely enlightened, and enriched with treasures
of never fading blessedness; who then can believe this, and omit to make so
advantageous a Present of his whole heart unto God? To show his Faith, his Love
and Obedience, as his greatest happiness on Earth. For we may in a way of
speaking (and I hope without offense) suppose the heart of man was made
Triangular, as three Seats, for God the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost,
who are all one God, as the three Corners are one Heart, which can no more be
divided, than the Godhead, Who will so fi^ when he dwells therein, as to leave
no place for the World, the Flesh, or the Devil, to abide there: And from hence
it is, that God forsakes us, when we forsake him; When we deliver up his
Habitation in our hearts unto his enemies, when we thrust him out, to admit of
any of those Rivals into any corner of our hearts, we then affront the whole
Trinity, (and drive away all them, all him) to entertain and court a destroying
Guest, instead of the Lord of Life.

XI.
GOd will not suffer those that are his to live in the dark; for if God be with
us, he will make us see that he is with us, and will never go out of our sight,
until he has brought us where we shall never go out of his, and will sometimes
make us start with a surprising joy, to find he is so near us, as to give our
hearts a taste of the same joy we shall have in Heaven; though infinitely
increased then, and superinvested with Glory. How great comfort then must this
be, when long habitual sinners are thus Blessed, thus Converted, and thus
reconciled to God, by faith in Christ's blood, when God does so eminently
manifest his glorious goodness, in visiting the Souls of sinners, and
powerfully calling us great Criminals, to become chosen Vessels, where himself
vouchsafes to dwell? To think fully of this, is to think of nothing else in
comparison of this our great concern, which now begins, and now assures our
Eternity with God, which is above all earthly Felicities that pass away like
Dreams. (As) what signifies the Persian, Grecian, or the Roman Empires now?
Where are those Great, Glorious, Glistering Bubbles now? Never worthy to come
into competition with the higher aims of regenerate men endued with Divine
love, whose Immortal Souls are fed with such Celestial joys, as can only flow
from their Immortal object, (God) on whom their ambitious hearts are fixed with
such a lively Faith, as does create a contempt of all earthly Fruitions, and
stand ever ready as adopted Sons of God, with joy to pass through the Grave, to
an immediate possession of a Crown of Glory; for when God is pleased so to
descend and dwell with us here, it is to assure our Souls they shall ascend,
and dwell with him in Heaven.

XII.
HE that has heard the Bell Toll for him to the Grave, and lives after it, will
do well to call to mind what Agonies he then felt, and what Vows he then made
to God on his Recovery; and now every day to examine his heart, how well he has
performed those Vows, and how much fitter he now is for his next Summons
thither: For every Bell that he hears now Toll for others, is his Alarm to make
ready for his day of Judgment. A concern so great, that no man can guess at the
terrible terrors of a dying, despairing sinner, but he that has felt them; nor
can any man know the Felicity of living ever ready to die, but he to whom God
has given the grace to live so; and to accustom himself to compare frequently
those past amazing terrors of despair (from which God did then deliver him,)
with such new light by grace from above, as will exalt his Soul out of those
dark despairing clouds, to expire in a full reconciliation to God at his last
hour.

XIII.
IF we believe Christ on earth did all those Miracles the Gospel mentions, and
that by Faith so many of all sorts were healed of their Infirmities, the same
faith now no doubt will procure the like mercies from the same Christ, now he
is ascended, an^ united unto God the Father, where he sees all our Maladies,
and hears our Cries, and is as ready now to Cure our Leprous Souls, our
Withered Limbs, our Bloody Issues, and to cast out as many Legions of Devils
tha^ possess us with Pride, Envy, Lust, Revenge, Gluttony, Avarice, and all the
rest of that black train: So that if we be now as desirous to be Cured as they
were then, an^ do cry out for Mercy as they did, we shall be made whole like
them, and follow Christ (...) ever after, until we enter into (...) Eternal
Rest.

XIV.
IF we observe how the Holy Ghost works on our Souls, when our sincere
^^evotions do raise our hearts to Heaven, ^^d how much our fancy soars above
^^r own reach in Ecstasies of joy, and ^elestial delight at that time, we may
^ereby know how God accepts such Sa^^ifices, and by his returns of comfort, and
ardent desires to repeat such adresses, as often as our affection and feli^ity
does increase by our devotion; for ^^en God meets our sincere prayers with ^^ch
consolations, and inward depen^ance on his mercy and grace, as will ^^lighten
our hearts with divine love, and ^^ing us to a constant conversation with ^im,
by living a divine life; So to wean (...) from the World, and fill us with such
^oly flames from Heaven, as noth^ng ^^all shake our faith, nor divert our
^houghts from making ready for our ^ourney thither. But it is neither writing
^hus, nor talking thus, nor praying thus, ^^ut doing thus, must bring us
thither.

XV.
IT were well if we did treat God with as much respect as we give to one
another; for men generally (when invited to a great man's house) in common
civility do dress themselves to their best advantage, suitable to such Company,
and fit for such respect and welcome, as they expect there: How much more ought
we to prepare and adorn our Souls and Bodies, when we are invited by the
glorious Majesty of God unto Heaven, and by his Holy Spirit are daily solicited
to come, where we are sure to be received and welcomed by his Son our Savior,
and all the Host of Heaven, with Divine Caresses, suitable to the dress we
appear in; and what we want of that innocent whiteness, we shall find the
Angels adorned with there, his Son will make up, by covering us all over with
his bright Raiment of Celestial purity. So then, such men whose hearts are
ambitious of that Ornament, and that Honor, will prepare for it before they
go, and then will not miss of being so arrayed when they come thither; So that
our sincerity in making ready, is our work here, as it is Christ's work to own
us there, and is also (in a great measure) the business of God the Father, the
Son, and the Holy Ghost, all three as one, to encourage and contribute to
assist us in our desires and endeavors toward this Holy dressing, for our
blessed reception into Heaven; and our whole lives are given us here, for time
to make ready to enter into that Eternal Glory at the Resurrection. Let no man
then, who has faith in Christ's Blood, afflict himself with doubts, or fears,
that he knows not how to serve God acceptably; for God sees through the hearts
of men, and observes such as are set humbly, and sincerely to love, fear, and
obey him; unto such he will send his Holy Spirit to fill their Souls with his
guiding Light, so fully as they cannot miss their way to Heaven.

XVI.
IF we consider the Soul of man as an Extract of the Divine nature, we may well
think that true devotion is the highest Epicurism we are capable of in this
World, where we may make Evangelical Righteousness our superlative delight, and
by it express our gratitude to God, in raising our hearts to Divine love of
Him; So to manifest our high and glorious extraction, by a constant joyful
conversation with God in humble Addresses; and so fix our election as the
consummation of God's prime purpose to adorn his best Creature (Man) with his
greatest blessings; for nothing can be greater than to give himself (as He
always does) unto those who desire him, in whom they have all that Heaven and
Earth contains.

XVII.
WE are to seek God, and not to leave seeking till we find him, and we may be
sure to find him, who desires to be found by those that seek him as they ought,
and delights to be so sought, that we may be sure we have found him, that is,
when we delight in him, more than in all his ^reatures; So we do not deceive
our selves by mistaking our delight in God, but are pleased with all his
methods, in weaning us from the uncertain glories of this perishing World, that
our Souls may be ever ^oaring up to Him, when we have found him, so as not to
lose him again. But we too often meet with men who have skill to make the World
believe they have found God, and do enjoy him above others, and are full of
Divine joys in show, from their dissembled Piety professed, so to obtain credit
and trust to deceive the Innocent (which when gained) they soon unmasque
themselves to act as they designed: And then, how va^t a difference is seen
between such, and a truly Regenerate man, that has found God indeed, and does
converse with his Great Maker in full tranquillity of Soul, through the
expectation of his joyful Resurrection from the grave! while the Hypocrite has
an aching heart in the midst of all his joys, and all his hopes; that fears to
find God too soon, whom he never had a thought to seek*

XVIII.
THe Divine Lover, who is accustomed to converse with God at midnight, will
then, at first waking, find his heart so full of fervent zeal, so glowing hot,
that no sleepiness can suppress those devout flames from soaring up toward
Heaven, where his Soul enjoys those refreshing comforts it is used to find from
the kind welcomes of his beloved, while that holy flame lasts, and when his
Soul descends from this early visit, it retains the Idea of that delight the
whole day after; still exciting this Divine Lover to retire, and repeat those
Celestial joys, as the highest, and most delightful entertainment he can wish
for on this side of Heaven! for God is the Center of a Divine Lovers Soul, it
cannot move from him without some impulsive force, which we should disdain to
yield unto.

XIX.
HOw frail is humane Nature! that can never be so much pleased on Earth, as
(within some time) not to become weary of what we most delight in: And how much
greater frailty is it to know how to be ever pleased, and for ever happy! but
cannot set our hearts sincerely to endeavor for it. And yet there is another
frailty in some men above all the rest most wonderful! that such as have, on
serious thoughts of their Eternity, resigned their hearts to God, and for some
time, known no joy, like their transports for Heaven; that such men, so raised,
should prove so weakly fixed! as boldly dare make room for Satan in their
hearts again (as the more welcome guest) where God did sometime dwell; this
were a dreadful thing to think on; if the mercies of God were not far beyond
the reach of sinners to deface. And from hence we may learn, that holiness is
the peculiar gift of God, and that we are raised to all degrees of Piety by his
holy Spirit, who of ourselves can neither rise nor stand one moment in his
favor longer than supported by the same Spirit, thus to give us humble
thoughts of our own little or no strength. And yet we are not obliged to rest
in such humility, but ought to labor, and to pray for more and more Talents of
faith and grace, till their increase do raise our Souls higher and higher, in
ambitious zeal to become Divine Lovers, and not to be content with less
preferment than adopted Sons, when we find the Holy Ghost thus at work within
us; and so may strive to raise our new affections, by holy thoughts, to the
highest pitch of devour ecstasies of Devotion, and by this Divine experiment to
try if we can love God too much, and have more zeal in prayer, than he does
like of! or can so tire him with our importunate addresses, that He will turn
away his face, and deny his love unto Souls wholly devoted to serve and please
him. But when we find our hearts full of such sincere raptures in Devotion, we
may assure our selves they come from God, who does ever approve and accept of
such flaming sacrificed hearts, as are enkindled from above, and are much
different from any such Enthusiams as Satan can infuse, only to infect those
wavering hearts, that do still incline to be his Vassals.

XX.
THose who have obtained of God to become truly Regenerate, do find that a
sincere repentance, with contrition and conversion of heart to God, are
rewarded with peace of Conscience, and so great a delight in humble converses
with God, on their meditations of Heaven, and their Eternal b^iss, that all
Worldly pleasures do give way to those Divine transports, which flow from the
Holy Ghost within them. And no time so proper to meet God, as when they awake
at midnight, before any Worldly concerns entertain their hearts; for he that
cheerfully recommends his Soul to God, when he lies down to rest, will to his
infinite comfort, find God ready to receive his first waking ejaculations; who
begins the day with the same adoration, and trusts in him, that he lay down to
sleep with: so that our midnight conferences with God, will by custom grow
more pleasant than sleep, and will fix such a Divine love on our Creator, as
will produce great joy here, and some glimpse of that glory we shall have in
Heaven! for God never receives our sincere Addresses, without multiplying of
his favors in return by such manifestations of his grace, as will preserve us
in his service until we meet again, to pursue those holy meditations, which
will bring us unto Him in Heaven, when we die.

XXI.
A Righteous man is a Divine Philosopher, that enjoys all his heart can wish in
this World, by his faith in Christ, Love to God, Charity to men, purity and
humility. And the Holy Ghost is the great Chemist, that conveys all these
ingredients into the furnace of a pious heart, and there, by His influence, and
operation, produces the grand Elixir of true righteousness, which preserves the
Soul unto Eternal happiness. And whoever finds the Holy Ghost thus working in
him, will find the comfort and consolation of his Salvation in this life, which
with the serious consideration of his future felicity, will be entertainment
for his whole time here, and keep him always ready for his summons to Heaven;
and will make his passage thither as easy to the Righteous, as it is terrible
to an impenitent sinner.

XXII.
IT is impossible to fancy, and to find any Earthly entertainment for the heart
of man (but Devotion) that can raise his delights higher and higher by
fruitions, without la^situde unto Eternity: which elevated devotion, is a
felicity, that the Divine Lover only has; and is created in his heart with his
Resurrection from sin to grace, by a continual succession of growing joys, on
the assurance he finds of his second Resurrection to Glory at the day of
Judgment; which is God's peculiar work in the Souls of his Beloved, to make
them see that He is never absent from such as are totally devoted to love and
serve Him; for such, and only such, can securely enjoy God in all his Creatures
here, and have him also to eternity in Heaven. If then the rugged way thither,
be so pleasant to a Righteous man, what will his Seraphick joys be there! and
how worthy of our utmost endeavors to live so, that we may die capable to
participate of those joys then.

XXIII.
MEn do generally create terrors, to fright their own hearts, as they do
Children, with ugly Vizards; we represent Death unto our fancies in dismal
forms, as a Messenger sent from Satan to hurry us from our present delights
into everlasting flames. And then it is no wonder, that habitual impenitent
sinners, do start back from the approach of Death, when so dressed. But the
Regenerate Man, has an Antidote against this evil; He summons his Celestial
thoughts, and sets his Soul in order, (as a great Prince in State) incircled
with Heavenly joys, (as his Nobility) and is also attended by crowds of
Guardian Angels, to receive the same Death, with caresses of great friendship,
who appears before him, dressed in bright gorgeous Raiments, as an Ambassador
sent from the King of Kings, to consummate a League of Amity, and to give him
possession of his new Conquest, with a Crown of Eternal Glory, long fought for,
and at last obtained; So that we generally mistake our passage into the next
World, and call it death, which is assured Life, (and that Eternal;) It is our
faults, if we be frighted at the terrors of torment there, where everlasting
joys do answer every pious man's expectations, who looks on the pangs of his
departing Soul, but as the momentary touch of a sharp Lancet, that makes him
bleed for future health; So that men prepared for Heaven, may change the
terrible aspect of a grisly Death into a Divine Angelical form, fit to be
courted with a most hearty welcome, who is sent by God to conduct us unto Him,
where every wise good man desires to be; and this is a great ^ark of the Holy
Ghost on the hearts of men, to bring sinners to such an Evangelical felicity,
to live so in Gods favor, as to rejoice to ride on Deaths Chariot in Triumph
into Heaven.

XXIV.
A Pious man is never alone when most alone; but then takes more delight in his
approaches to God, then this World can afford the greatest Epicure; for his
devout heart is ever on the wing toward the Throne of mercy; from whence his
Soul is filled with Divine comforts beyond expression, for God never fails to
entertain a sincere Soul with high consolations.

XXV.
WAtch thy first waking thoughts which will declare thy Soul unto thy self;
whether Carnally minded, or Spirituallized! for then is thy fancy fresh,
unclogg'd with Worldly affairs, and then the time to blow up thy flaming
gratitude to God, in some proportion toward what thou have received from Him
in mercies, and in blessings, (though short in point of merit,) yet such holy
aims, such pious ambitious contests, God allows of, and is well pleased to see
such use made of his grace, by such Divine emulations in the hearts of men, who
do endeavor to raise up their gratitude in competition with his benefits: But
this must be in such humble Addresses, as does become Dust and Ashes, who can
do nothing of our selves, (that is good) nor think beyond what we receive, and
must thank God for the thanks we give him; For it is the Holy Ghost that
excites, and enables us to such a frequent and free conversation with our Great
Maker; by which elevated zeal, and sincere affection in our daily
acknowledgments, we show, that we have some taste of that joy, and some glimpse
of that glory here, which we expect in Heaven; and is some Testimony, that we
have not received the grace of God altogether in vain. For no Man can give
effectual thanks to God for his mercies, until he find some assurance of his
reconciliation by the Blood of Jesus Christ, which is the Fountain of all
mercies, and the great argument for our gratitude to the Father of mercies, who
forgives transgressions to raise our gratitude to Love.

XXVI.
WHoever has so much Faith, as to create true notions of the Holy Trinity, and
Gods eternal habitation of Glory, and Bliss in Heaven; where he believes that
Christ has purchased places for all penitent reconciled sinners; that man
cannot choose but wish, and endeavor to be one of that blessed number so
redeemed from Hell, and raised to everlasting Glory on Christ's account: But how
to attain unto this felicity, and to find in our hearts that we have attained
it, is our greatest work in this World, and our most joyful entertainment here,
which is a pre-possession of Heaven, as much as our frail nature is capable of
with the Divine assistance of the Holy Ghost; So then, we must observe if our
hearts are become so Regenerate, as to find more pleasure in our approaches to
God, and our devout conversation with Him, then all the fruitions this world
can afford us; for then we shall find an inward dependence on God in our own
hearts, such as will guide us by his Divine guiding Light, unto the means and
methods of attaining our wished salvation, and within a little time certainly
grow to a much more habitual delight in Piety, then our forsaken sins formerly
were; and will hold our hearts up to Heaven, ever ready to enter in, when Death
comes to conduct us thither; and it will be great joy to pass the pangs of a
Deathbed, and ^errors of the Grave, with an assurance that our Souls shall be
with God, the moment that we depart from this World, if we live Righteously in
it.

XXVII.
IF we give our whole hearts to God, wherever we are, whatever we do, our minds
will be fixed on Him (the only Center of our Souls intrinsic happiness) it is
like a man forced from his beloved companion, by some great affair; he
dispatches it quickly, and with speed returns where he left his heart; And thus
we may try our hearty Love to God. But when trivial objects, and vain
diversions* do easily withdraw us from his converse, and then detain us whole
days in idleness, so as to afford God but some few moments, for our morning,
and evening Sacrifices; we may reckon that our Love bears the same proportion
with the time spent in his service: we may also find on a strict search, that
we are mistaken in the Donation of our hearts to God, by keeping of a small
corner of our hearts in reserve for diversions, only to gratify some
fair-faced appetites, which do insensibly rob the major part, until that corner
have engrossed the whole heart; by which we fool our selves, to think our
All-seeing God will be mocked with such thin Vizards on our hearts. Take heed
therefore of idle diversions, and pray for grace to become Regenerate, to set
thy heart on things above, which begets true Love to God, with Blessedness
here, and for ever; which eternity can never be too much thought on, nor the
Lord who disposes of Eternity, be too much loved, or too much feared; and if
when we lie down to sleep, we could but learn to think that we might wake in
the other World; we should labor to live close up to God, so that Satan may
find no time, to come between to tempt; and then such reconciled sinners would
discern their conversion to be a sure Testimony of God's mercy, and the Spirit
of Faith fixing the foundation of true Piety, by which we must ascend, as the
first step of that Ladder toward Heaven.

XXVIII.
IT is a stupendous thing, to think how our corrupt Dust and Ashes, may be
exalted, when the Spirit of God is at work in the heart of man, when a great
sinner is cleansed from his pollutions, and all his past transgressions are so
wiped off by the Holy Ghost, in the receiving of the Sacrament, that he finds
Christ born within him, and his Soul filled with a new kind of Divine
transports, which raise him in Meditations up to Heaven, by such devout
Addresses, as grow higher and higher in ambitious zeal to be near God, until he
obtain to be owned an Adopted Son, and while he remains on Earth, by Faith to
share with Angels in some degree of Heavenly joy, and to perceive some beams of
their Glory, which he shall participate of at the Resurrection; and until then,
be here feasted with such devout Celestial delights, as will give him an
assurance that these are the marks of his Election, to comfort, and to fix his
heart on God, who will guide his Soul through his Pilgrimage on Earth (full of
storms, and calms more dangerous) until He brings him unto his Glory; For if
we believe it to be Gospel Truth, that our bodies are capable to become the
Temples of the Holy Ghost dwelling in us, we must also believe that He will
manifest Himself so as we shall discern his being in us, by such a Divine Life,
with such ecstasies of joy, as no Soul can reach without his assistance; which
if we practice to observe, we shall find will prove to be our greatest
consolation that the heart of man can have.

XXIX.
WE talk of Death, as we do of Eating, Drinking, and Sleeping; and do flatter
our selves too much, by thinking we are as ready for the Grave, without a full
consideration, how nice, and great a preparation is fit for our appearance at
the Resurrection; when our whole Lives here, spent in the service of God, is
not too high a price for the Crown of Glory we then expect. And yet few men do
afford the hundred part of their time, to become capable to receive that
inestimable Purchase, which Christ has made for us by his bloodshed. And
nothing is more strange, then that we should so much forget what we are always
a doing, (which is dying) and is God's great mercy to free our Souls from the
Dungeon of this World, to fix them in his Eternal Bliss.

XXX.
GOD sees our first intentional approches toward Heaven, so that we cannot
make more have in our Addresses unto Him, then He makes to meet and welcome our
sincere devotions, with Raptures, and Ecstasies of joy, to encourage, and guide
our frail nature to love, and serve Him above the World; that can in no degree
afford so high delights as our Souls find, when our whole hearts are offered up
to Him in daily Sacrifice, while that holy flame lasts.

XXXI.
OUr greatest concern, is to live so Righteously, as to be ever ready to die;
which no man can think of too often, nor prepare to much for, if he considers
that every moment advances toward the Grave, through which we must pass to
Eternal joy, or Eternal misery; and is an argument enough, not to mispend our
time, but Day and Night to call on God, for his Divine guiding Light to show us
the way to Him.

XXXII.
SLeep is so like Death, that it is no wonder if we Dream often that we are
amongst the dead; for though we are not now visited by Visions as of old! yet
such frequent conversation with dead friends when we Sleep, may be looked on as
kind notions from above, to give us some reflections on the Grave, toward
which we do walk as fast in our Sleep, as when we are awake, so that we ought
to employ more of our thoughts on every minute that so hasts on to our
Eternity, then men generally do; and by such Dreams we may learn to converse
Day and Night with God in our humble Addresses, to make us fit company for His
departed Saints when we Die.

XXXIII.
IF we could attain to as great Faith, as the first Martyrs had, we might have
as much felicity in Piety as they had; who rejoiced so much to leave this
World, that no torments could de^er them from death, to be with Christ. And if
we could raise our Souls to fancy the Glory of Heaven as they did, we should
believe that nothing there, is so dirty as our brightest Diamonds, where the
beauty of Holiness by Faith, as by reflection, does Eclipse all the beauty,
wealth, honor, and glory of this World, in the hearts of such as are become
Regenerate. And if our Souls were so sanctified, and advanced in Divine Love*
as those Blessed Martyrs were, we should admit no Rivals with God in our
hearts, where He delights to Reign alone. And then, we should find our God
every where with us, carefully providing for all our wants, and supplying all
our defects, as if He attended on us Dust and Ashes, with his Providence to
guard us while we sleep, and to watch if our first waking thoughts be set on
Him, and to expect them as his due, and his delight; as if the Almighty courted
us for favors, more then we do him for his mercies, and his blessings; and
when our Souls become thus enlightened by his Divine Rays from Heaven, we shall
find our hearts so full of Him, that a Wilderness, ^ Prison, or a Dungeon will
seem a Throne, and will be our Heaven here; and then we shall know no joy like
having God ever in our sight, with hearts fixed on our Eternal Bliss already
thus begun.

XXXIV.
IF we consider the extent of Miracles, those we call the greatest, are but as
wonderful as the smallest, for every thing we see, all we think, every motion
that answers to our thoughts in every part of our selves is Miraculous, (as to
Dust and Ashes) and so in the same Balance, we may weigh our Birth, and
Dissolution, and Resurrection to be equally Miraculous. But if we consult our
own consciences, and thoroughly examine our own hearts, we may be confirmed in
the belief that there is no higher Miracle, then when the Holy Ghost turns the
hearts of men from their long habitual, idolized, carnal appetites, into a
Spiritual affection toward God, with such Heavenly transports as do create the
peace of conscience, with such a settled joy in God's service, as will
accompany our Souls from hence to Heaven; which Spiritual Resurrection from
sin, being God's work in us, is a sure mark of our Adoption, and by this
Miracle of mercy to become thus Regenerate, we may account it the highest!
because of highest concern to us, to be so raised from Hell, to Heaven; And a
greater Miracle to confirm the Christian Doctrine, no man needs to seek after,
then what he may thus find in himself, if thus led by the Holy Ghost! and thus
exalted from Reprobate Dust, to be the Adopted Son of God.

XXXV.
PIety is the best policy, because by it we obtain all that the heart of man
can wish in this World, and the next, which every Pious man has a great
proportion of here, and the Fool only thinks he can mock God, or flatter Him;
while he does only deceive himself, in hoping to serve God, and the Devil at
once; to satisfy vicious natural appetites, and enjoy Spiritual felicities at
the same time, as if the way to Heaven were through Hell; But if we do doubt
whether Eternal happiness, is preferable before short fruition on Earth, we may
enquire of a Voluptuous sinner when he is become truly Re^generate, if he does
not find that the peace of conscience is a more constant delight, then the
greatest Momentary gratifications of flesh and blood. For when he is so called
to an assurance of his Sonship, by his Spiritual comforts from the Holy Ghost
within him, and such transports as do afford Heavenly joys, with some glimps of
that Glory, which he shall participate of at the Resurrection; He will perceive
it is the same gift of God, beyond humane acquisition; so that man's best policy
is to lead a pious Life, which will fully satisfy all his ambitions, and
answer the highest affections his heart can fancy, by having God so, by whom he
has all that is in Heaven, and in Earth. And whoever God does thus give himself
to, will find that he has Him, and will perceive this is his Spiritual
Adoption, to encourage and enable him to live Righteously all his days in more
honor, Glory, wealth, and felicity, then all the Empires of this World can
afford without God: so that Piety is the best policy to establish our happiness
in this World and the next:

XXXVI.
THere can be no comfort in this World, beyond an assurance of sins forgiven,
with a full reconciliation to God; and no man can have surer marks of his
Election, then to find his former contempt of God, turned into Divine Love of
him, with the Holy Ghost converting the Hell that was in his heart, into a
Paradise by his habitation there; which is an infallible earnest of Glory; for
when God gives us grace to will, and to do his will, by the power of his
Spirit, we shall want no comforts here, and be also filled with holy courage,
and a joyful Faith to turn the terrors of the Grave, into a delightful desire
to be with God; which is a Righteous man's greatest consolation.

XXXVII.
IF a Regenerate man, blessed with Divine Love, do observe how the Holy Ghost
works in his heart, at the time of his sincere vigorous Addresses to the Throne
of mercy; He will find that his delight in the service of God, does increase
with his devotion, and that his devotion is raised by that delight; so that his
Soul* by custom in such approaches, does grow higher and higher, by so joyful a
confidence in God's favor, that no allurements can divert his Love, nor storms
shake that trust on which his peace of conscience is surely founded here, and
his salvation at the Resurrection as sure: Yet care must be had that such
Elevations of the Soul* may not grow beyond those Gospel Rules set us to
follow; So that the felicity of piety may be sometimes allayed by humble
recollections of our own unworthiness, (when at best) lest Spiritual pride do
puff up our hearts with such Seraphick joys, as use to rise from such ecstasies
in devotion; (so as to think) if Angels in the presence of God, do rejoice at
the conversion of a sinner, what joy may that sinner have, above those Angels?
who is so much more concerned then they are, when he finds himself snatched up
from the brink of Hell, and become as an Angel in Heaven, before he arrives
there; Which is a kind of Epicurism in devotion, and may be too much indulged,
if not acknowledged from whence it comes, with gratitude for so great a benefit
received.

XXXVIII.
CHrist gave us a sure Rule to know, and to show our Love to God, which is (to
obey his Commandments) and not to treat Him like our fellow creatures, with
passionate words, sighs, or tears, or joys, but by the sincerity of our
thoughts, and actions, to show our obedience better th^n by vehement ecstasies
in devotion; though such exterior declarations from the heart, do advance our
zeal, they may deceive us with flattering hopes of our being better then really
we are; for it is not our frequent prayers, nor hearing the Word preached with
d^light, nor receiving the Holy Sacrament with an elevated Faith, that ^ully
expresses, or denotes such Love to God, as He expects from us, but it is our
(...) endeavors in all selfdenials, toward an uniform ob^dience to all his
known Commandments, an Evangelical sincerity in the duty required, that
manifests our Love to God, and is most acceptable to Him; for though our
performances do prove short of our Duties, God sees our integrity, and esteems
us for that; our sincerity toward obedience, is very acceptable with God.

XXXIX.
GOd sees our frailties, and knows that no man's fancy can reach the felicity of
Divine Love, but his, who is endued with it from Him; nor can that man by words
express those joys that his transported Soul finds, in such welcoms as God
affords in his Divine endearments to his true Lover, by such Celestial
Raptures, as do make him forget that he dwells on Earth, while that bright
flame of his Devotion lasts; and on his return from Heaven, while the thoughts
of that Blessed Address remains, it grieves him to find that he is still on
Earth, so that his body cannot mount upwards with his Soul, to the Throne of
Glory, and fix there together.

XL.
HOw weak is our Faith, in the matter of Death; and how strong the frailty of
our nature, that makes us fear to go, where we desire to be? So to create
terrors in the passage, when there is really none, or if any, they are such as
cannot be avoided: how vain then is it to raise: melancholly-Clouds to Eclipse
the Glory, and dull the joy we are entering into, the moment that we Die?

XLI.
GReat converted sinners ought frequently to consider the wonderful goodness of
God, for his double mercies, who does not only forgive all past transgressions,
on our reconciliation; but on our future obedience, our Faith, Love, and
gratitude, He rewards such great sinners with grace to obtain Eternal Bliss;
easy conditions to be admitted by God's immense goodness unto this purchase of
mercy, and reward on Christ's account. Which grace we must improve by rising
still higher and higher in God's favor for the future; and then we shall have
a double joy in all such fruitions, and diversions, as we may own in God's
sight here, and at the day of Judgment, and may now thank him for; with hearts
full of purity, and such bright shining innocence, as God delights in.

XLII.
GOd's Spirit is never absent from those that seek him sincerely, and whoever
observes it, will find it so.

God Loves a Souls whiteness, that flies all approaches toward sin, with
detestation. When God delivers a penitent sinner from the slavery of Satan, to
rejoice in the freedom of his service, it is to show him a glimpse of Heaven,
to invite him thither.

XLIII.
AS a good conscience is a continual fea^t, and a great blessing, so it is a
dangerous th^^g to ^e overmuch delighted (...) duties, (though peace be in
(...) should forget from when^^ ^ll (...) p^^^ormances do come; and so (...)
attribute holiness to our se^^es* ^^ich is God's peculiar gift. There ought
also great care to be ha^, that (...) be not mistaken, to think we do enjoy
tru^ peace of conscience, when we have it not; and that we do not flatter and
abuse our own hearts, with some things of fancy, like more holiness then we
have; and so believe our vows, and desires to Piety, are effectual performed,
before our actions do justify those good resolutions, and self-denials, to
avoid such snares, as lie concealed under innocent diversions; lest we fall,
when we think our selves most safe: So that a Pious man is to be as careful how
to manage his Piety, as a sinner is to obtain it.

XLIV.
WHen we are assaul^ed by any temptations to sin, we may recollect our thoughts
thus, shall I, for this moment of sensuality, part with my interest in God?
shall I quit my Sonship, now I am reconciled; and my Title to an Eternal Crown
of Glory in Heaven, to satisfy my vicious fancy, and a few momentary appetites
on Earth? and now cast off the felicity, and security I have by peace of
conscience, while I Love, fear, and serve God, and by my trusting Faith in
Christ, do stand fast fixed above the reach of malice, and all the storms this
World can raise? Shall I depart from this Regenerate state so full of
Blessedness. to become a trembling Coward, frightened at every shadow of every
evil that approaches me; and so become justly terrified with the horror of a
despairing Soul, when Death approaches, which may be this minute, to step into
that Eternal woe, denounced against the sin I am tempted to commit? Such
reflections, with such sincere prayers as such Mediations will suggest, are
surely good guards to defend and free us from the danger of yielding to any
temptations to sin.

XLV.
A True penitent sinner, whose heart is touched (by grace from Heaven) with
remorse for his wicked life, and a sense of God's many mercies to him; (He
repents) and recollects, to the best of his memory, all the actual, and mental
transgressions of his whole life; and offers them up to God in confession, with
an humble sincere contrition; and makes new vows for an universal cleansing
from all iniqui^ies, with a total resignation of himself, Soul, and body, in a
full obedience unto all the Gospel Laws for the future. Thus, this Penitent
sets himself with holy vigor, and his utmost endeavors, to walk after his
Saviors steps, submitting his will, to God's will in all things; whose favor
he now seeks with so great hungering and thirsting affection, that God in mercy
has cancelled all the Records of his long neglects, and insolent repeated sins;
so as to remember them no more: and also by his Divine power does raise this
Penitent to a Spiritual Resurrection from sin, to grace, and so fills his
contented, converted heart with frequent comforts, and such assurance of his
Adoption, as to encourage him to perform this new Covenant unto the end of his
Life.

By which infinite mercy, and grace, this Penitent does become so Regenerate,
as to perceive the Spirit of God at work within him, raising his Soul to such a
Sacred Love of his great Maker, as to think all time misspent, that is not
employed in gratitude to God, for his diliverance from Hell, and his Promotion
toward Heaven; of which Glory, he has now some prospect, and from hence, he
grows higher in Gods favor, until his holy ambitions do increase, desiring to
be always in his Creators ^ight, and aiming at a Favorites Sons place in the
Court of Heaven; Thus by degrees his Soul becomes so elevated, and transported
with these Celestial honors, that he contemns the Empires of this World, with
all the glistering objects here below, as unworthy to divert his thoughts on
such perishing trifles as he did admire, before his heart was fixed above on
his Eternal Bliss; which now fills his Soul with such continual joyful ecstasies
in Devotion, that he is sometimes frighted at the joy he feels, lest he may
embrace presumptuous Enthusiasms, by such high consolations as his Soul
delights in, when his Meditations, and Addresses do ascend in such bright
flaming zeal unto the Throne of Mercy; But when he considers that God, (who
sees his sincerity through his heart) will not reject such sin^ere Sacrifices;
He then hopes that these joys do arise from the Emanation of the Holy Ghost, to
let him see how God receives, and welcoms a whole heart offered up to Him; with
such Divine Lights as Earthly Souls can neither see, nor comprehend; and by
this taste of Bliss, and by this beam of Glory here, he judges how much greater
he shall have in Heaven! And thus, upon a full search of his whole heart
throughout, this Penitent now finds with great felicity, that God is pleased to
dwell in his heart, where Satan did so long triumph: until these new transports
for his Celestial Bliss have quite extinguished those dim shadows of delight
that formerly misled him to neglect his God, without a serious thought of
Heaven, or Hell; or the least concern for his Eternity; until his Soul was thus
raised above the reach of his iniquities, by his conversing day and night in
Heaven. And thus the Soul of this new Convert, is caressed with bright
Seraphick joys, by Grace so fixed, and so enlightened from above, that his
inward dependence on God, is his continual consolation, and support; full of
such high comforts, as he must think do proceed from the Holy Ghost, to furnish
this his new Temple with sufficient Grace, where he now intends to dwell. And
by all these Blessed guiding Lights, this Penitent is invited to live such a
Righteous Life, as will give him an humble assurance to trust, and rejoice in
his reconciliation, with a settled Faith that he shall see the face of God, in
the face of Death, the moment that he dies; his Soul shall be with Christ,
where his departed Saints abide, until the Resurrection.

XLVI.
WE need no better Argument for God's Love to us, then our Love of Him; which
is the highest work of his Grace planted in our hearts, by which only we are
enlightened to know how to love, and serve God as we ought; that we may be
capable to enter into his Eternal Glory, prepared for his Lovers.

XLVII.
[A Prayer.]
LOrd Jesus, I beseech thee forgive my transgressions, and now send down thy
Holy Spirit to cleanse my heart from all impuri^ies, and then dwell there, to
guide my Meditations, and Prayers aright, with such servent Zeal, as will
increase my Faith, my Love, and trust in thee my God; that I may know no joy on
Earth, like my approaches to thy Throne; and from thence empower me so to
practice these great Lessons I have writ, as to live with holy courage, ever
ready to die, and fit to appear at thy Tribunal, on the great day of Judgment,
with such reconciled Sinners as by thy infinite mercy are become the Sons of
God. Lord, I beseech thee let my heart be now so filled with Divine
transporting thoughts of Thee, and thy Salvation, as to leave no place for
Satan there; that my enlightened Soul may be ever on the wing, hasting toward
that Eternal Bliss, which Thou have purchased for me at so high a rate! And
though my Zeal (supported by thy Grace) do now increase, let me never think my
self near enough to Heaven, till I am there. For now I find that no repulses
will make Satan quit the Field, nor my Rebellious Senses to obey, that I may
gain a perfect Victory, beyond the reach of a surprise; nor can I alone
maintain this Christian Warfare, without Thy strong supplies from Heaven; for
which I daily pray, and by which I shall at last subdue the World, and my own
heart, with all the Powers of Hell, and Death together: Then from the Grave, in
Triumph rise with thee, my God, and thy departed Saints, to my Eternal Rest, in
thy Celestial Glory.

XLVIII.
THe uncertain, certain time of death, was by Divine Providence concealed from
Mankind, to make us live ever ready for that great concern, which sets a period
to our Mortality, the same moment on which our Immortality depends for Eternal
joy, or misery; yet this known truth, by all believed, is by our perverse
nature so much neglected, as if not believed, or as if by our wisdom and care,
we could foresee, or prevent the moment of our Dissolution, contrary to God's
decree: by which blind contradiction, few men do prepare for their Pass to
Heaven, until too late; and so become wilfully surprised by an Enemy we might
subdue, if ready Armed, and well prepared for the encounter; for it is we that
make Death terrible, who is sent in kindness to conduct unto everlasting Bliss,
unless we by our Impiety, do compel him to lead us the wrong way, into eternal
Flames. A near dead-despairing sinner, reviving from the Jaws of the Grave, can
best describe its terrors, and best judge of the felicity to become fit to die,
when next summoned to step into his Eternity.

XLIX.
THough we cannot guess at the glorious Essence of God, nor fancy what Heaven
is; nor can tell whether the Joy, or Glory there be greatest, nor do know any
thing whereby we may express either of them; yet by our Faith in all
Gospel Truths, God does so enlighten, and encourage those Souls that are wholly
devoted to love, and serve him, and that approach his presence with such humble
Zeal, and sincere Awe, as is due to His Almightiness! that He sometimes
descends into the hearts of such men, and spiritually dwells there, as in his
own Temple; and sometimes raises the Souls of men, with such high transports of
Sacred Love to Him, that they are filled with Holy Air, or something nameless,
so Divine for joy and glory, while that Seraphick flame does last; it looks
like Raptures, and holy Ecstasies, sent from Heaven to invite men thither, by
showing them so vast a difference of delight, between Heaven, and Earthly
fruitions; so to encourage us to expel all carnal Vapors, when ever they
ari^e to interpose, that nothing may Eclipse that Divine Light from shining on
us, by which God gives us grace to endeavor with all our power to raise up our
hearts to Him, as often and as high as our clogged Souls can mount with such a
weight of flesh and blood about them. But when the Holy Ghost lends wings to a
Divine Lovers heart in his devotions, nothing can hinder his Souls ascent to
Heaven! and by Faith to raise his ^ancy to such a joyful conversation with God,
as will enrich his mind with cheerful thoughts the whole day after.

L.
IF the felicity of Piety were as generally known, as it is despised, there
would be more Saints, then Reprobates on Earth: But, as it is Satan's chief work
to amuse, and abuse our frail natures, with present fruitions of fallacious
delights that last not: so it must be our business to get better Guides, that
we may find our way to Heaven, in spite of His diversions; which the Pious man
finds in a constant conversation wi^h God the Father, the Son, and the Holy
Ghost, in his sincere Meditations and Prayers; when They are all at work within
him, raising his Soul to such a Divine felicity, that he has no room for such
contemptible delights as carnal fancies can suggest to d^vert him: for his
pious Life keeps him as much above all the fading gaieties of this World, as
the Reprobate is enslaved to them. And if it were possible to make a voluptuous
Epicure see, and relish those continual joys, which true peace of conscience
affords to a Regenerate man, it might wean him from his mistaken momentary
happiness; while the Pious man's felicity, is founded on a sure Rock that
reaches up to Heaven, and shows him such a delightful prospect of his Eternal
Interest there, as gives him a holy courage to outface Death, when he
chearful^y submits unto his summons to the Grave, as the only Gate to Heaven.

LI.
THe great felicity of true Piety, is only known to the Regenerate man, become
a Divine Lover, whose Soul is ever busy in servent Addresses to his Beloved,
from whom he receives such welcome, that his transported Soul forgets this
World, while that bright flame burns within him; which fills his heart with
such transcending joys, in conversation with his Beloved, as can only be
expressed, when two such Divine Rivals meet, with pleasure to repeat the great
favors that both do daily receive from the glorious object of their Love, and
with such Angelical affections to each other, as does raise their felicities,
by the holy emulation their united hearts have to join in a constant Adoration
of their Beloved, whose universal kindness does afford so great pleasure, and
consolation to all his true Lovers, that their joys increase by the number of
new Rivals; which makes them invite all they can get, into their Society; and
together sing Hallelujahs on Earth, until they be added unto those Choirs of
Angels, already in the Glory of God.

LII.
WE all know that we are every moment dying, and that Death is but the last
puff of breath; and though nothing else be worth the thinking on, nothing is
less thought on then Death, which we can neither prevent, nor delay; and should
therefore be made as easy as we can, by a constant expectation of his
approach, (because surprises are most terrible) which the Divine Lover is ever
Armed for, and best knows how to baffle that great Conqueror, by cheerful
embraces as a welcome Friend, who comes to conduct him to his Souls joy in
Heaven; which holy Valor, God always provides his Lovers with, at their hour
of death.

LIII.
A Divine Lover has ever in mind the glorious Idea of his Beloved, and
remembers that he is always in His sight, who does observe all his looks,
thoughts, words, and actions, how they do agree with his professed Love; that
is, if the whole man be resigned up to study, and to do the will of his
Beloved, with a chearsul heart, as the supreme delight, and fullest happiness
his Soul can wish for here on Earth. This Divine Lover does also take all the
opportunities he can every day and night, by holy Meditations and Prayers to
approach the Throne of Mercy with a sincere heart, so full of his Beloved, as
to leave no room for sin, or Worldly vanities to abide there, either to divert,
or clog his Soul, when raised on the wings of servent Devotion: And thus he
spends his time, ever striving to please, and as careful not to offend his
Beloved, still jealous lest any undiscerned Rival, should in some friendly
disguise steal into his heart, and claim a place there; so to deface that
Altar, and defame his daily sacrificed heart, entirely offered up to his
Beloved; and every night lies down to Rest with the same Zeal, and inward
dependence on his Souls joy, with a full assurance, that if he awake in the
other World, he shall be with his Beloved there; from whence such growing
comforts do arise, as to confirm his Adoption, and fix his Faith to live so
Righteously, that he enjoys God in all his Creatures here, with great
satisfaction. Yet with holy courage, is ever so ready to die, that in spite of
his natural aversion from the G^ave, he resolves to rejoice at his summons
thither, where he steadfastly believes to meet his Beloved ready to raise him to
his Eternal Glory. For though the Hill we climb to Heaven, be full of Thorns
and Briars, we may gather Roses, and Lillies in our ascent, to make it more
easy; if we do mind how our Celestial joys increase, as we arrive toward the
last step we make, to enter into that Glory.

LIVE.
GOD mocks no man with a false Light, that begs his guiding Light sincerely,
with such a dependence on Him, as shows a Faith capable to receive it, and to
be led by it; so as to embrace, and welcome such Divine operations, and
comforts, as the Holy Ghost conveys with that Light so clearly into his Soul,
that he must see it comes from God; and which will raise his heart by this
Light thus led, to find such a spiritual joyful trust, and confidence in his
great Maker; that no storms can fright him, nor vain delights divert him from
his constant course toward Heaven, nor shake his assurance of a blessed
participation of God's Glory at the Resurrection. So that the greatest sinner
that can obtain Grace to repent, and forsake his sins, so as to be thus led to
live ever after in God's favor, will not fail to be received into God's bosom
the moment that he dies.

LV.
IT is too true that thou art fallen into disgrace, and do deserve it,
(thus:) Suppose thy heart to be a Royal Fort, entrusted to thy keeping and
defense by the King of Kings, (for so it is) and is besieged by Satan, with an
Host of Giant sins, disturbing thee with continual loud Alarms, and frequent
sharp Assaults: yet by thy strong Guards within, (from Heaven sent) and thy
constant vigilance, with holy Valor thou bravely did repulse this mighty
Enemy, and have gained many Victories; for which, thy King did promise to
reward thy Virtues with a Crown of Glory. But by thy success grown proud, and
securely confident of thy own conduct, and mistaken power, thou did become so
negligent of thy Out-guards, and so remiss within, that the subtle Enemy was
encouraged to return with Stratagems, and did by his insinuating Spies, corrupt
thy chief Ossicers who let in a few Pigmie sins, (sly Foes) disguised like
smiling Friends, full of flattering allurements; such, as in short time were by
thee admitted, and enterta^n'd, and so far trusted, as to get an opportunity to
surprise thy Fort, and to lead thee in Satan's Chains toward his Eternal
Darkness. Thus the glory of all thy first Victories, are by thy prosumption and
supine negligence, turned into reproach; and thy reward into a just punishment,
for being so baffled by a Conquered Enemy: until by thy submission, and
repentance, thou be restored to favor, and delivered from this Captivity, by a
more powerful Conqueror.

LVI.
As to love God and fear Him, is certainly to please him; so, to do neither, is
as sure to offend him: and on this, which we so little regard, our present, and
Eternal happiness depends. So that we cannot be too watchful, that our own
hearts do not deceive us, by thinking that God only Reigns there, where his
Creatures have more Interest then Himself. But He is not to be mocked with
outward shows, or formal Ceremonies; He discerns our neglects, when our hearts
are alienated from him in the least degree, and sees through all our disguises,
when with burning Souls we adore his Creatures jointly with Himself, if not
before Him! who never will admit of such Competitors, as those Idols of our
setting up are; whom we worship, love, fear, and delight to converse with more
hours every day, then we do afford Him; by which it is evident, tha^ God has not
our whole hearts, and so does not Reign there.

LVII.
THat peace of conscience which is grounded on the felicity of piety, is such a
continual feast, full of such growing joys, as only the Regenerate man can
feel, by the Divine Love he finds his own heart full of, with such returns of
gratitude to God, as begets a kind of Raptures, and Ecstasies in Devotion, such
as do invite and encourage him to a delightful sincerity in all his Addresses
to his great Maker; with whom he converses day and night, where he ever finds
access, and high returns of grace from God.

LVIII.
A Particular self-denial of some darling sin, may show a good inclination to
Piety, but is not the perfection of that Duty, which must be universal to all
that God forbids; and not only to forbear actual transgressions for a time, but
for ever: else we fortify in vain, by leaving such gaps open, as will invite
the Enemy to re-enter; by which we also hold up a dangerous Treaty, and
commerce with Foes that ever study to destroy those hearts that do admit them:
For while Satan has any part there in possession, or reversion, or but a hope
to claim by, He will disturb the whole man; so that all his pretensions must be
totally abolished, by giving up our whole hearts to God; and this for our good
only, that our carnal warfare may be more easy here, by placing our only joy
on Him. And then our Pilgrimage on Earth will end in the fruition of
never-fading happiness in Heaven.

LIX.
TO die is terrible, when we are surprised by it; but by frequent Meditations
of dying, custom will make it easy: For if we believe Heaven to be better then
Earth, we must believe that we shall find better company there, then we
converse with below, and it is Death that only can convey us unto them. And if
by a Righteous life, with a lively Faith, we can be assured in our passage
through the Grave, that our Souls shall taste some degrees of that Eternal
Bliss, with the departed Saints, the moment we expire; can any thing on Earth
invite us to stay longer here? But our frailty is such, that we generally make
that the least business of our life, for which our life is given us; and is
really the only considerable object, sit for our continual thoughts, so to love
and serve God here, that we may be capable of dwelling with him for ever in
Heaven, and in that hope go cheerful to Him, when He calls for us.

LX.
A Regenerate man, in his highest Divine course of life, may be assaulted, and
diverted by such surprising temptations, as he cannot at first sight so resist,
and reject, but that Satan may pursue, until he drives a Regenerate Soul from
all its Outworks, into its Citadel in Heaven; where God does never fail to
give such powerful Aids, as make the invading Enemy retire and vanish.

LXI.
LEt a long habitual sinner that repents, manifest his conversion to himself,
by frequent sincere retirements with God, and then set his whole heart to raise
and fix his collected thoughts on things above! which will create a delight in
the Lord, more then in all his Creatures; and by such custom, he will grow to
grudge all time as lost, that diverts him from the pleasant conversation of
this new gained acquaintance with his gracious God; who also likes to have him
wholly to Himself, (when he desires to be so:) and when this Convert does
obtain grace to arrive at this felicity of favor here, he cannot rest so, but
will raise his ambitious Zeal to such pure Love, as to hunger and thirst after
the sight of God's face in Glory. For if thus enlightened by the Holy Spirit,
his Faith will increase, and cherish such Divine flames with joy and gratitude,
as the surest marks of his Reconciliation, and Adoption; and will encourage him
to proceed with vigor in his Advance toward Heaven.

LXII.
DO nothing in private in God's sight, that thou dare not do in the view of
all the World, and own at the day of Judgment; and keep this resolution ever in
thy mind, and constantly pray for Grace to do so, by which thou will avoid many
sins.

LXIII.
THere is nothing more deceitfully prejudicial to a new converted sinner, then
to believe himself a favorite of Gods, upon his first serious thoughts and
inclination to Piety, with some light flashes of Spiritual joys in Devotion;
(which novelty) an habitual sinner mistakes for a possession of Heaven, at
first sight, and in too much have, thinks himself an Adopted Son: which time
and perseverance can only make legitimate; and must also be tried by a nice and
serious examination of our hearts, such as is seldom understood by new
Converts; who may rejoice to find they have discarded some presumptuous sins,
and yet be far from a just pretense, and ti^le to a place in Heaven. (For
instance,) a man may resolve well, and pray with zealous sincerity, repent too
with sighs and tears, and have a great proportion of Faith, Hope* and Charity,
with Humility also; but if he want the true Christian purity of heart, the rest
will not prove a full acceptable. Sacrifice to God, who only sets his seal on
our whole hearts resigned unto Him. So that if we keep a reserve but of one
corner for unlawful diversions, to bestow on our fellow Creatures, or on carnal
sinful appetites, all the rest will not be accepted, for God will admit of no
sharer, nor endure competitors. So then, we are to consider, if the value of
such a small reserve, be worth the losing of the whole purchase we pretend to;
and next, what kind of Salvation it would be, if God deal with us accordingly!
if He should accept of so much of our hearts, as we are pleased to spare Him,
and leave the remaining reserved part for Satan. For though God designs a full
perfect Eternal happiness unto all that give their whole hearts to him, and
affords his Divine guiding Light, with power to find the way to Heaven, for all
those who pray to be so guided with sinceri^y and Faith; yet the smoke of our
parcel Sacrifices from our divided hearts, will not ascend half way to Heaven.

LXIV.
IF we believe there is so great joy, and happiness in Heaven; why are we so
lazy, and cold in our approaches thither! why do we not prefer that glorious
Crown of Immortality, before the perishing Goods of this World! for which, our
hearts can have no rest until obtained; which is a sad consideration, to think
how we neglect our greatest concern, by delaying our reconciliation to God, as
if time were at our dispose either to recall, or adjou^n, and do not consider
how every moment that we carelessly mis-spend, carries us on to our last step
in^o the Grave, and our first step into Eternity; but if we did think
frequently, and seriously of Heaven as we ought, and that the Grave is the way
thither, we should not dread Death as we do, nor fear to go, where we desire to
be: but such Holy Valor, does only belong to Righteous men, and not to
habitual sinners.

LXV.
MAny men fear to die, because they are better acquainted with this World, then
the next; which they want Faith for, or else are loath to part from their
beloved sins, and fear God's anger for such crimes as they fear God's anger
for, yet will run that risque, rather then forsake their sins, until they die.
Though all men know, that the best way to triumph over the Grave, is to live so
well, as ever to have in mind the two Eternities of Bliss and Torments; to one
of which Death conveys us. So that it is no wonder if we tremble at the sight
of Death, when we prepare not for it, by considering, that every moment leads
us on to what we so much dread, and yet so much neglect! And also men should
consider that the youngest, and most healthy do stand every minute on the brink
of Eternity to persuade them to be ready for their summons thither: So that
unless we want Faith in Christ's merits, and doubt God's promises, that if we
become so truly Pious, as to love God so much above all his Creatures, that we
cannot fear to part with them, to go to Him. So that nothing can more concern
mankind, then frequent thoughts of our preparation to step into our Eternity,
when we all know there is no true Rest, but that which is Eternal. Is it not
then great folly, to know that we cannot live ever here, and must be gone for
ever, and yet do still set our hearts on these moments, and prefer them before
that for ever! Thus to fear petty troubles here, and not be at all concerned
for endless Torments! and this for want of thinking seriously, that we carry
Immortal Souls within us, and should have Immortal Aims, and Immortal Ends;
when we consider that our Eternity begins with our Birth, and we that moment do
begin to die, and so are dying until we are dead, and gone for ever; which
words (FOR EVER) ought to ring ever in our ears, to mind us to live ever ready
for that For Ever; which will make us not to fear death, when we consider, that
we have a merciful God, who when man's conversion begins, His displeasure makes
a period: So that it is want of Piety and Faith, that makes us fear to die.

LXVI.
IF we believe all we have, that is good, does come from God; we ought in all
our enjoyments, to give Him continual thanks, so to keep up our hearts to
Heaven, by a constant gra^^^ude, which is as acceptable as prayers; and the
pious use of his Creatures, and daily Blessings, we shall fi^d a double delight
in all the good things we receive from God's hand, because we do enjoy Him in
them; and shall avoid all such evils, as we dare not own to come from God: And
if we consider that our l^ves here, are only to make our journey to Heaven, we
cannot have a better Guide thither, then the Holy Ghost, who will never mislead
them, who desire to be guided by Him; and from whom we shall get such a habit
of Holiness, as will bring us to such an intimate acquaintance with Christ, as
will in a short time wean us so much from the Love of this World, as to be
cheerfully ready to die; when we see that the end of our journey is, God's call
to take possession of the Crown of Glory, prepared for us.

LXVII.
APious man, that lives ever ready to die, has a continual prospect of his
glorious Resurrection, and can have no greater happiness on Earth, then his
inward assurance of being one of God's Elect, who, Christ says, shall sit on
his right hand in Heaven, when the Reprobate are cast down into Everlasting
flames.

LXVIII.
IT is said in Scripture, that when Jacob found God was so near him, he was
afraid; which may teach us, that no man ought to think himself fit for a
familiar acquaintance with his great Maker, such as to remove the reverential
fear, that is due unto so high and supreme a Majesty; and yet we may believe,
and find that His Kingdom of Grace is already come, and is amongst us now; so
that we may with humble hearts say as Jacob did, Surely the Lord is in this
place, and in our hearts too, when we are led by his Holy Spirit to study Him;
and can fully consider, that though all our senses are naturally inclined to
like, and covet varieties of all sorts, and that our busy fancies are as
readily subservient to work the same way, and as eagerly do pursue the various
desires of every appetite, though we every day find that all objects do by
fruition soon decay, and cloy our highest desires that are not Rooted in
Eternity. How fit is it then to consider this? and how much better it will be
to persuade our Immortal Souls to rob our perishing senses of their depending
fancies, and employ them on things above, as far as they can reach toward the
glorious Habitation of God; where such objects are as Immortal as our Souls
are, and where our variety of joys will increase by such fruitions as never
fade, but will grow and multiply the more for gathering, so as to be ever
filling our hearts with high delights, but yet never so full, but still to
admit of more and more felicity as our desires rise, until we reach the
Fountain of Eternal Bliss, where our Souls will be replenished with Celestial
joys, but never so to overflow as to be weary of them. And thus we may be as
happy, as Jacob was, if we can persuade our hearts to throw out Satan, with all
his disguised flattering Troops, and entertain the Holy Ghost as cheerfully as
we have indulged our blind affections, that led us on toward our Eternal
ruin: And when we have thus discarded Gods Enemies as our own, we must
approach His glorious Majesty with fear and trembling, though we do adore, and
worship Him at the same time with comfort.

LXIX.
IF we did well consider of dying, and the joy our Souls will have as they
expire, when reconciled to God before that hour comes, it will be ample
reeompence for our whole lives spent in his service, and (...) worthy of our
continual Meditation, and devotion to prepare for so immense a mercy to
penitent sinners; such as will turn the terrors of the Grave into a joyful
assurance of a blessed Resurrection to Glory; beyond which, no man can fancy a
concern fitter for his thoughts to work on, and his utmost eudeavours to obtain
of God; who never rejects a sincere heart offered up to Him in a daily
Sacrifice; which the Pious man never fails to do with delight; and never misses
of the consolation he seeks at his hour of death, and in his way to it.

LXX.
THe true Idea of Holiness, is Divine Love; which we may judge of, by entirely
resigning our wills, to the will of God; and the perfection of Righteousness,
is to live a Divine Life; such as takes delight to abhor the crimes we have
loved, and to press on in our devotions, until we obtain a full Victory over
all our carnal passions; and by worthy receiving the Holy Sacrament, to fix and
confirm our Christianity, on the assurance we find by a lively Faith, (thus
qualified) to live ever ready for our call unto Eternal Bliss, which may be the
next minute, and cannot be too often thought on by those who love God, and
desire his Love, on whose free mercy our Eternity depends.

LXXI.
WE may flatter our selves with a mistaken belief of Holiness, which we have
not, and we may abuse the World, with a disguised show of Holiness, which we
know we have not; but when Death comes, such Vizards vanish, and our hearts
will be displayed in their true colors, to our selves and others. So that the
best marks for Regenerate men to know themselves by, is strictly to observe, if
they love God with their whole hearts, with an universal delight therein; that
is, with thankful hearts to praise his holy Name, to fear, obey, worship, and
trust in Him with such a lively Faith, and clear affection, as to be ever ready
to forsake all we have in this World, and cheerfully to breath our Souls into
God's bosom, when He calls for them: And whoever shall obtain this Treasure of
Grace to find these marks in himself, will have such a proportion of that joy,
and that glory, as will encourage him to persevere in Righteousness, until he
arrives at God's Eternal Rest; where such blessed Souls desire to be, who do
know no diversions so delightful here on Earth, as a daily preparation for
Heaven.

LXXII.
TO think, and try, are two small words of great consequence; because that man
who will not think, or dares not think what he has done, or what he is doing,
or what he intends to do, is in a sad condition; for he can neither confess his
sins, nor repent, nor forsake, nor ever hope for a pardon for them, while he
neither thinks, nor trys to learn to think of his Eternity. He is past cure,
without a miracle of mercy for his conversion; which is seldom afforded to such
stubborn hearts as will not think, nor ever try to think seriously of their
Salvation, before it be too late.

LXXIII.
NO Christian in his senses, will own to love God's Creatures, better then we
love Him; yet we do it, and see it not; that is, not observe how often, and how
long we lay God aside, to enjoy them; for nothing can take us from God, but
what we love better. And though there is no felicity to be compared to Piety,
nor any diversions so delightful as Devotion, when we love God, and serve him
with sincerity; yet we mind it not enough, that mind it most; too much, no man
can.

LXXIV.
WE are naturally apt to cozen our selves, with thinking we believe what we do
not believe, and for want of due consideration of all our ways, we run on in
such undiscernible errors, as must offend God, while we think we serve him
best; and this, by indulging many kinds of innocent diversions, until they
become crimes. though we know that vain and idle thoughts, do often grow to
foul suggestions, which pious men should therefore not admit of.

LXXV.
WE are often misled, by thinking too much of what may be, and too little of
what must be; in providing too much for our uncertain hope of living from year
to year, with too little regard ^o our assured death that must come; as if our
moments here, were of more value then our Eternity in Heaven; though we do know
that nothing in this World is worthy to entertain our Immortal Souls with true
delight, but by making ready to go unto God with cheerful hearts; of which, few
men do think enough, and none can think too much, because it is the greatest
felicity that our Piety can reach, and a sure mark that the Holy Ghost is
working in us; which no habitual sinner is capable of.

LXXVI.
NO man can want a subject for Meditation, nor have a more useful
entertainment, than frequently, and seriously to consider, and examine his own
life, by recollecting what mercies, what blessings, and deliverances he has had
from God; and to enquire of his own heart, how little obedience, gratitude, and
love he has returned; what vows made in sickness, dangers, and in times of
trouble, but never kept. And above all, to consider how often God has knocked
at our hearts for entrance, and been denied, or delayed, to admit of some more
pleasing Guest; or whenever permitted to enter, how coldly received, and
slightly treated, until thrust out again, to make room for some darling sin,
that must be welcomed. This, if fully considered, may bring us to a sense of
our offenses, and shame to think how unfit we are for our Deathbeds, and
Eternity to come, with the amazing terrors, to think how we can call on our so
much offended God for mercy, which He could never prevail with us to accept of;
and what hope then, can such insolent contemners of God, have in their last
day? But on the contrary, this Meditation will bring comfort to a Regene^ate
man, who has entertained Christ in a cheerful heart, with sincere integrity, to
such a joyful trust in God's love, by his fixed Faith, that no carnal
affections can remove his transports for Heaven; the expectation whereof is
delightful to him, above the terrors of death to lessen.

LXXVII.
THe sum of all the great Lessons we can learn, is to show, that a faithful
penitent sinner, who is become so Regenerate as to forsake all his iniquities,
and can perform an universal obedience to all God's Laws, with such Evangelical
sincerity as to make a total resignation of himself, with all his Interests,
into God's hands, must be led by the Spirit of God; which will keep up his
heart to Heaven, in a constant concern for God's favor, where Satan dares not
appear to tempt, when he sees us so united unto Christ; and this will bring a
Penitent to endure his Pilgrimage through all the storms of this World, and
defend him from the glittering vanities also, so as to know no fear, nor joy,
to interrupt his expectation of Heaven, and the happy hour to breath out his
Soul into the Bosom of God; which holy ambition, will entertain his heart here,
with more present happiness* than all the Worlds wealth can afford to a wilful
habitual sinner.

LXXVIII.
[A Prayer.]
LOrd, I beseech thee, let thy Holy Spirit direct my prayers in my approaches
to thy Throne of Mercy, and there pray within me, that so guided, I may find
grace from Heaven, to support me in my passage out of this World, unto thy
habitation of Eternal Bliss. And now wean me from longer wandering in the vain
Labyrinths, and Glories here, by having ever in mind, that all the greatness,
and various pleasures I have seen, and shared in, are vanished like a Dream;
and thereby find, that nothing is so delightful to a Regenerate reconciled
sinner, as a retired habitation, free from the noise of Worldly affairs, where
by thy Grace, peace of conscience may encourage me to be ever ready at thy
call, O God! with a joyful heart, to make my last step into the glorious
Eternity I hope for, by the Merits, and Mediation of Jesus Christ.

LXXIX.
WHen the Holy Ghost dwells in our hearts, we shall find new principles of a
Divine Nature, producing there an universal Victory over all our carnal
appetites, and an universal obedience to all God's Laws, with trust in his
Providence, and such Faith in Christ's Merits, and Intercession, as will assure
us of all God's promises, as if now actually in our possession; from whence
will arise continual comforts, with hearty gratitude for such love and mercy to
penitent sinners. And by this first Resurrection from Sin to Grace, be assured
of our second to Glory; so that to be thus sanctified by the Holy Ghost, we are
united unto Christ, brought home to God the Father, as his adopted Children,
and do begin to enter on our everlasting happiness even in this World, by our
continual Meditations, and Prayers, so to raise this Holy flame as high as here
we can reach, without presumption; so to fix in our hearts the joyful practice
of such a Divine Life, and Divine Love to God, as will produce Divine joys
here, and for ever in Heaven; which no carnal fruitions can attain. And thus we
are led by the Spirit of God, and do become the adopted Sons of God.

LXXX.
IF the most voluptuous sinners could discern the felicity of an Holy life,
what constant elevated joys, the peace of a quiet conscience brings to those
who can wean their minds from the fading pleasur^s, and drudgeries of this
World, to fix their hearts on things above, sinners would make have to become
Regenerate. For if we consider right of Eternity, we must know that our
Immortal Souls, when freed from the slavish appetites of flesh and blood, can
have no transports like those immortal joys they find, when settled in their
Center, God's Bosom, from whence they came; so that our Souls can relish no
felicity like the hope of Heaven, nor be much concerned for any thing less then
Eternal Bliss; which though of our selves we cannot reach, yet if we give our
hearts to God, we cannot miss it: But if in contempt of God, we live and die in
endless sinning, we may justly fear that our Eternity will be in scorching
flames. We ought also to consider, though God has promised pardon unto penitent
sinners, He has not promised one hour of Life to repent in; since therefore we
can neither prevent death, nor foresee it, let us always expect it as at hand;
and prepare for our Eternal Glory in the presence of God, while we have time to
do it.

LXXXI.
MOst men do say, and do believe they love God, and no doubt many good men do,
more or less; but all mankind ought to enquire into their own hearts, if they
find not more joy in their idle diversions, then in God's company; if they be
not quickly weary of conversing with God, in Meditation and Prayers, hasting to
return unto their diversions, which they love better then Him; and then
consider the consequence of such contempts, and how much our selves do scorn a
divided heart, where we love; much more then, does God despise those who prefer
his Creatures before Himself.

LXXXII.
GOD knows our frailties, and does allow us diversions, but they must be such
as we may own in his sight, and see Him in them, with grateful hearts for such
refreshments, as Humane Nature does require, and such as we may glorify his
Name in their fr^itions: and be sure not to flatter our selves into evil
temptations, by our fair-fac'd diversions too much indulged, lest they sting us
to death with smiles.

LXXXIII.
THere is another kind of happy, and blessed diversions, free from sinful
vanities, and fading glories of the World, which David so much delighted in, by
his retirements to converse with God, as his Souls chiefest joy; and whoever
seeks God with the like zeal, no doubt will find Him, as David did, and be as
fully happy as he was in God's esteem; which is an ambition that does become
good Christians, as the best diversions we can have to raise our hearts to
Heaven.

LXXXIV.
MEn ought with great care to watch their diversions, for we are often betrayed
into a neglect of God, even by innocent diversions, which by custom do
insensibly engage our hearts to consent unto evil actions, when we design
nothing that is ill. So that if we serve God as we ought, we shall delight to
converse with him in our retirements, and account our holy Meditations of
Heaven, to be our most pleasant diversions; so to refresh our Spirits, when
tired with Worldly affairs; and we shall find that such Celestial diversions,
will be blessed with Divine joys, that cannot be shaken by Carnal appetites,
nor by glistering Vanities, when once fixed and ratified by God's reception of
us into his List of Adopted Sons; and then be so guided by his Holy Spirit, as
to grow higher and higher in his favor, till we participate of his Glory;
which inward assurance will be a more pleasant subject for our diversion, then
all the Wit, the Wealth, the Honors, and Beauties of this World can entertain
our hearts with. And when God dwells thus in the Souls of men, it is the most
ravishing diversion we can have, to see our selves live ready to enter into His
Eternal joy, at a minutes warning.

LXXXV.
WHen we approach God with sincere hearts, there can be no diversion more
delightful then our Souls union with Him; who knows all our wants, all our
oppressions, and sees all our concerns whatever; and is as ready to redress our
grievances, and to bless our honest endeavors, as we can be to desire it;
which our pious diversions, above all other diversions the most delightful; so
that the best of idle diversions, (though innocent) is like warming frozen
Vipers in our breasts, until we give them strength to bite us to death. And if
we do observe it, we shall find, that there is no real essential pleasure in
any diversions, but in true Devotion; which the Regenerate man finds to be true.

LXXXVI.
WE have two very remarkable notions, fit for frequent consideration, to judge
how our hearts stand toward God, and how we may discern his love to us: The
first is, to observe if we have more joy in our retired Devotions, then in the
fruition, and conversation of his Creatures; in which we cannot be mistaken, if
we diligently observe how his Holy Spirit works in us at those times. From
whence arises the second consideration, to observe how our Souls are elevated
by his Divine comforts descending on us in such Devotions; which is the best
assurancc we can have, that we do love God above all his Creatures, and does
also show that He sees it, likes it, and rewards us for it, by his returns of
Grace, in giving a delightful perseverance in such sincerity to Him; which is
the highest experiment that our frail Natures can make, when we love God so
well, as to c^nverse with Him in our humble Addresses, before all Carnal
selicities, and can rejoice to go to Him, when He calls for us.

LXXXVII.
AFter all that has, or can be said, the only way which God himself, has in
his Holy Gospel fixed on, for the exaltation of his Glory, in the forgiveness
of sins, is, that all sinners should come to Him merely upon the account of
Grace in the blood of Christ; and not to rest on, nor support our selves with
general hopes of mercy, mixed with our endeavors, and obedience; but to come
up to the Gospel Rule by a fixed Faith in Christ, and make that way our all* by
giving Glory to God therein as He has appointed, lest we perish Eternally* For
no man shall receive pardon and forgiveness of sins, but those who come unto
God by the blood of Christ. And the sin against the Holy Ghost is only excepted
from such forgiveness.

LXXXVIII.
ALl the Arguments we can hear, or read, or fancy to our selves, by conversing
with God in holy Meditations of Heaven, and Eternal Bliss in his presence
there, will not extinguish the natural affection between our Souls and Bodies,
so far as to desire, or to be willing to have a separation by death; without a
miraculous addition of Faith, and Grace, to work beyond the reach of our
Nature: though we do believe that the time between our Death, and our
Resurrection, is but a moment to Eternity; and though that moment should last
an hundred thousand years, it will be as undiscernible for its duration, as
while we sleep one minute. So that we must be satisfied in this mystery,
without farther enquiry; and pray to be contented in that point, to be as happy
when we die, as God's departed Saints are, until they and we arise together.
And this is great comfort, to know that we shall be with them in death, if we
do sincerely endeavor to live and die in God's favor, as they did: And so
make ready to go, where we all pretend to desire to be, when we can stay no
longer here.

LXXXIX.
WE must not entertain Spiritual Pride, nor welcome flattering Enthusiasms in
our devotions, nor attribute such Holiness to our selves as is the immediate
gift of God: but we may, nay we must joy, and rejoice to find the Holy Ghost at
work within our hearts, to perform our self-denials for us; and to raise our
Souls to such a selicity here, in our Love to God, and delight in his worship,
as will give us a taste of our Eternal Bliss, when we shall see, and enjoy Him
as the Angels in Heaven do.

XC.
IT is no wonder to see men very devout in a time of danger, sickness, or any
other afflictions; but when the Evils are removed, does our gratitude for
deliverance justify our Love to God by future obedience? do we in health and
prosperity, approach God with the same vigor in our Prayers, as in our
sickness? For Souls led by the Spir^t of God, are alike devout in all changes;
and we being made whole, ought to thank God, and to sin no more, lest a wors^
thing come unto us.

XCI.
Our greatest affair in this World, is to make ready to go out of it for ever;
because every moment may be our last here, and then how dismal an Eternity are
we hasting to! if not reconciled unto God before we die: this is enough to
persuade us to set our hearts on the Love and Service of God, who will never
let their devout endeavors be lost, that seek how to please Him, when with
sincere affections, they prepare to come unto Him.

XCII.
WHoever finds that the power of Divine Love, with the expectation of Heaven at
this distance, does create such joy in his Regenerate heart, as does bring him
to delight in a Divine Life also, by his frequent conversation with God in
humble sincere approaches; he will soon grow to such a habit of Holiness, as
will raise his Faith to foresee some beams of that Celestial Light, which his
Soul shall shine in at the Resurrection, as a reward of his inward dependence
on God here: And if thus reconciled and led by the Holy Ghost, he shall also
find this is a good Antidote to prevent relapses into sin; and thus Armed with
Divine joy, he will be safe from Carnal temptations, and will have his Soul
full of such Heavenly comforts, as will sweeten all afflictions, and at last
beget such Holy courage, as will destroy the sting of Death, by living ever
ready to die; for he that can love God above his creatures, will gladly part
with them to go to Him.

XCIII.
LEt no man boast of his own Righteousness, for no man has any, but what is
given him from God; yet let every man rejoice, and be thankful for such Grace
as does sanctify, and enable his Dust and Ashes to become Regenerate, and
learn so to welcome the Spirit of God in a cheerful heart, that he may make it
Paradise where he is pleased to dwell: And then that man's natural corruptions
will be refined, and his Body consecrated into the Temple of God; and by this
miracle of mercy, the most incarnate sinner may become an Angel of Light: but
not by his own inherent Righteousness, but by God's grace and mercy, with
Christ's Righteousness imparted unto Him.

XCIV.
AMongst all the great Lessons we have learnt, Holiness is most worthy of our
study, to search our hearts if we can find there the Gospel-marks of our
Election; for when God invites us by his Holy Spirit to this sincere enquiry,
He will direct us by his Divine guiding Light, to find, and to feel when we
have found the treasure that we seek; by the comforts that will still grow,
until they fill our Souls with such Celestial joy, that we cannot miss of, nor
mistake what we search for, to assure our Election; for God will not be hid
from such as he sees does seek Him with their whole hearts, and that do hunger
and thirst after Holiness; and when we do obtain Grace to discern such marks of
our Spiritual Filiation, we may in great humility rejoice, and sing Hallelujahs
unto God with the Angels in Heaven, to show the highest Adoration our hearts
can express, in gratitude for such mercy afforded unto men on Earth. And by
thus entertaining our selves within our selves, avoid temptations, and set our
hearts above the power of all vain objects to divert us from the prime end, and
felicity of our Christian calling; which is our Resurrection from sin to grace,
as the chief mark of God's favor to assure our reconciliation; for Grace
accepted, and persevered in, is the infallible earnest of Glory; because Christ
has made the Kingdom of Grace here, all one with the Kingdom of Glory. Which is
much talked of by many that prepare not for it; because most men in health do
think themselves ready to die, and do not find they are not, until the Bell
tolls them to their Graves; hoping to jump from Hell to Heaven at once, but the
ascent is high, steep, and very hard to climb.

XCV.
THough the great art and mystery of self-denial, to subdue all carnal
appetites, is the most difficult part of our Christian calling; yet the same
Holy Spirit that invites us to it, will empower our hearty endeavors, by
diligence and custom to gain so absolute a Victory over our Tyrant fancies,
which before enslaved us, as will raise our Souls by constant self-denials, to
much greater Spiritual delights even here on Earth, which the Regenerate man
can only judge of.

XCVI.
[A Prayer.]
O Lord prepare my heart to pray, and bless me with contrition, and repentance
proportionable to my sins, that my Love, and my Obedience, may now be as great
as my crimes, and my neglects have been; who never thought on Thee in all my
ways, nor of my Souls Eternity till now, being led by thy Holy Spirit to pray
for Grace to set my heart continually on Thee, my God; that I may know no joy
on Earth, like my humble Addresses unto Thee, in my retirements; by which I can
only judge of my new love, and gratitude, for thus turning of me from mine
Iniquities, and by this miracle of Mercy and Grace, have snatched me up from
Hell, into this Heavenly prospect of thine Eternal habitation of Glory. Lord
let these Divine transports in my approaches unto Thee, wean me from the World,
that the remnant of my days may be spent in preparing of my Soul for thy
summons to Heaven, that the terrors of the Grave may not divert my frail nature
from coming with joy unto Thee, my God, when thou art pleased to call. And I
beseech thee, make this Holy flame burn still brighter and brighter, when I
draw near to pray, that my heart may melt with joy for this my Reconciliation,
and comfortable hope of Eternal happiness in Heaven; and that I may be so
strong with Divine valor, as to welcome Death, that only can conduct me thither.

XCVII.
WHen God delivers a penitent sinner from the slavery of Satan, to rejoice in
the freedom and felicity of his service, it is to show him a glimpse of Heaven,
to invite him thither. How great a crime will it then be, for such a man to
turn Reprobate again, after such mercy shown!

XCVIII.
NOthing does ruin more Souls, then not frequently examining our own hearts
strictly, how they stand toward God; and with what sincere delight we serve
him, in our Devotions; for the bright flaming zeal of a sincere sigh, will
pierce Heaven, when lukewarm words uttered aloud, can find no entrance, nor is
at all regarded by Almighty God, who allows us to knock hard at Heaven gates
for entrance, when our groaning hearts express our desires; for He loves to be
pressed with violence for his favors, to show that we value what we pray for.

XCIX.
Endeavor above all things, while thy Soul is in communion with God, to keep
thy affection up to Him, and strive not so much for long eloquent language, as
to be heart-wounded, in thy Petitions, for when thy Devotion flags, thy Prayer
is done. We ought always to pray, as if we were that moment to die, which will
keep our hearts intent on the great work we are about; And he that in praying,
can adorn his sorrow for past sins, with penitential tears, before he parts
from God, will wash them off, with tears of joy, for that sorrow.

C.
THere is nothing in our view more destructful to the Souls of men, then the
false opinion, that Christianity does impose slavish Laws upon us; as if Piety
only consisted in heavy burdens, to be poor miserable dejected Ciphers in the
World, made up for sorrows, and sufferings, with self-denial vows against all
humane natural fruitions, and felicities; For most men being bred up in these
mistaken prejudices, cannot easily be persuaded, that the true Christian Gospel
Rules for a Spiritual life, does exceed those carnal appetites we so much
struggle for, and the Regenerate man as much despises; in comparison of his
Souls continual feasting on the expectation of Heaven, whose firm belief of his
Eternal joy, as an adopted Son of God, is a felicity above all the fading
enjoyments this World can afford the most ambitious, luxurious person, who has
all that his heart can wish that way. So that no man can have a more cheerful
Soul, then he whose faith in Christ, and trust in God, makes participate of all
the lawful pleasures this World affords; and when piously used, is a delight
far above what the wicked can pretend to, when the terrors of an evil
conscience must imbitter his fruitions. And this no man can so well judge of,
as a converted sinner, become Regenerate, who has tasted, and forsaken the most
voluptuous pleasures this World has, for the present joys his Soul finds by
Faith in his Eternal Bliss; which shows that a good Christian lives more
pleasantly in this World, then a vicious man can do.

CI.
WHen Christ has wrought his great miracle of Conversion in the hearts of the
most obdurate sinners, those near lost men, by his grace becoming truly
Regenerate; such Evangelical sincerity will grow in their hearts toward God,
as to take more pleasure in his service, then all their past carnal fruitions
did afford them: So that whoever is enriched with this Grace, will find Divine
comforts in their retirements to be alone with God, such as will beget Heavenly
Raptures, and preserve their hearts the whole day after from Satanical
assaults; and by the custom of such early Morning exercise, will in time beget
an habitual delight to begin the day with God, and never forget those high
Ejaculations, until they meet the Lord again, to renew and confirm their
commerce for Heaven. But it is no wonder, that men generally great sinners, are
so hard to be converted, because they cannot set a true value on what they
understand not; But most wretched those, who have been thus enlightened, and for
some moments raised to Heaven; yet are so frail by nature, and by custom prone
to evil, as to forsake these Seraphick joys, and return to fordid Earthly
fruitions, rather then continue in the assured everlasting joys of Heaven; by
persevering in that Righteousness, which they have tasted, and like not.

CII.
THough David did commit some great faults, he was a man after God's own heart
after that, and one of the best patterns in Holy Writ, fit for us to imitate;
for his love, and gratitude to God, who by custom grew to such a pious
friendship with his great Maker, that much of his life was spent with God alone
in his retirements, with whom he consulted all his affairs, made all his
complaints to, and humbly begged whatever his needs were, with such a familiar
trust in God, as his only support, and only delight: So that if we now consider
David's great affairs, as a King, full of troubles, ever in Wars, though
glorious by his Achievements, yet in frequent dangers, vexed by a stubborn
People hard to govern, besides the disorders of his own Family; so that we may
think he omitted no opportunity to be with God; that has left so many Psalms
full of such high Divine Raptures, extant, to manifest his great piety; that it
is a wonder he could get so much time for so many prayers, praises, and
contemplations. By which we may learn, that in what calling so ever God has set
us, and what troubles so ever He appoints for us, we may find time to converse
with God by day, and night. So that if we repent, confess, and forsake our
sins, with hearts as servent toward God, as David did, no doubt we shall be as
well received, though neither Kings, nor Prophets. We may also call to mind,
that David, as the least considerable person of his Family, had the lowest
employment, to keep his Fathers Sheep; yet his heart was then set high on God,
or he might have been devoured by that Lion, or that Bear he slew, if God had
not been with him. And we may also think, that he was better acquainted with
God at his Flock, then Saul was on his Throne; else he had not escaped Readiness
surious malice, and so soon ascended that Throne. By which we may see, that the
greatest King, and meanest man, may learn of David, to love, serve, honor,
worship, and trust in God, with such a delight, as will grow to a friendship
with his Creator, and raise his Soul up unto Heaven, whatsoever his employment
on Earth is; and those hours, and years of our life, which we trifle away, as a
burden to be rid of, not knowing how to spend idly enough, we may employ as
David did, and never be alone, when most alone. Thus we may enjoy a happy, and
blessed security on Earth; and have a true courage above all such accidents as
make ill men tremble. And thus a pio^^ man enjoys a present communion with God,
and Christ, by a lively Faith, to such a degree, as does assure his Soul of
Eternal Bliss in Heaven; and when Satan finds us always in such company, he
will have small hopes to get an Audience for his Addresses to destroy us. So
that if we can live thus like David, we may hope to die in God's favor like
him; and as cheerfully resign our Souls into God's hands, who loves us more
then we can love him; and though we cannot reach David's highest perfections,
as an inspired Prophet, we may like him, give continual thanks to God for all
we have, and sing praise, honor, and glory to his Holy Name, whose mercy
endures for ever.

CIII.
DId men watch the deceitfulness of sin, and would heartily check the first
appearance of evil thoughts, with the remembrance that our All-seeing God is
ever present, to observe if we do fight, or do invite our long known Enemies,
to their accustomed conquest of us; such precautions would make us either fear
to offend, or joy to please our God, and would soon teach our careless hearts,
how to subdue those Tyrant appetites a far off, which so often do enslave us,
when permitted to approach at a nearer distance; who do hold such a natural
intelligence within, that if we but admit a Parley to Treat with those subtle
Enemies, they will with fair pretenses lead us on, until they undermine our
Souls, and blow us up, before we can discern the danger we are in* and when
once entered at such a Breach, it is then too late to grapple with a Foe that is
in possession of a Fort without resistance gained. Yet this sad truth by long
experience taught, is seldom learnt, because we too much love those glistering
Fetters, and consent to put them on before they be imposed; and then fear to be
too soon freed from such a pleasant Bondage, vainly thinking we can at our own
pleasure shake such shackles off, and be at liberty, until surprised by some
unlook'd-for Doom, from whence is no redemption.

CIV.
A Frequent examination of our hearts, is of use to keep men close up to
Godliness, and some Rules are very necessary to examine our hearts by, to know
when we walk aright, as well to check remissness* as to cherish those Divine
motions which do raise hearts up to Heaven, and may keep them there, when so
raised; which is a great assurance for flesh and blood when converts; and will
beget a joyful hope of being received into God's Bosom, when become so
Regenerate as to find a sincere delight to dwell there; which is a great degree
of blessedness, and a good assurance that we shall be so for ever in the next
World. What labor then, or what time spent can be too much, to obtain Grace to
become so universally cleansed from sin, and universally obedient to Gods
commands, as will produce a total resignation of our selves, and all our
Interests into Gods hands, and keep our hearts close up to Heaven, until we
arrive there? For when God is the prime object of our Souls desire, we shall
take all opportunities to retire from the World, to converse with God in humble
Addresses for our Eternal h^bitation with Him in Glory. But if this Duty of
Meditation be used as a servile Drudgery, to avoid a Rod held over us; we are
not right at heart, and far from being Regenerate, far from loving God, if we
take no delight in being with him; for though Humane Nature cannot reach to
Angelical Holiness, yet Evangelical sincerity may be acquired by the Divine
assistance, if rightly sought! and then, as many as are led by the Spirit of
God, are become the Sons of God; beyond which, no man can wish, nor think; and
when this state of Bliss is obtained, with what diligence ought we to keep it
up to the highest pitch of love and gratitude that our fancy, and our Faith can
reach; for by such emanations from the Holy Ghost* we may judge of Gods love to
us, and thereby guess what immense Glory we shall have in Heaven. And thus we
may daily feast our Souls with Angels food, if we can conve^se with God aright:
So that to be Regenerate, multiplies our joys here, and assures our happiness
in Heaven; and though no man can of himself attain to this state of Grace,
without the Divine assistance; it is never denied, if sincerely begged; nor was
^ver given in vain to deceive any man, in the point of being Regenerate.

CV.
WE have no better way to express our love and gratitude to God, for all his
Mercies and Blessings, then by our self-denyals: For, our obedience to his Laws
is duty, and no virtue to forbear a sin that we take no delight in; but to
crucify a beloved darling Lust, rather then offend God by it; that is
selfdenyal: And unto whomsoever God gives grace to do so, he gives a joyful
satisfaction to his Soul for so great a victory, as lays a firm foundation to
raise his Thoughts to Heaven on: And is a good argument to show that he fears
Gods Threats, and trusts in his Promises, as the greatest Testimony of an
active Faith so much required; And when all this is done, our Christian Warfare
is not done; For when Carnal sins do cease, and our Appetites are overcome by
Grace, Satan still pursues, in hope to frustrate the felicity of our
Conversion, by disturbing our Piety with Spiritual Pride, or some Enthusiasms,
to reduce us into his power again. So that when we are best, we must Watch and
Pray most, for supplies of Grace to enable us to fight on, lest we end worse
then we begun. The sum of all that can be taught, is to bring men to Godliness
and Honesty; which is the perfection of Christianity.

CVI.
IT is said in Scripture, That without holiness, no man shall see the Lord; By
which we may observe, that Gods Injunctions are designed for man's greatest
Happiness; because Holiness is certainly our only true Felicity in this World;
and cannot be less in the next. For if by Righteousness and Faith, we may see a
glimpse of Gods Glory here; We shall see him in fullness of Glory at the
Resurrection; and enjoy him too on Christ's account.

CVII.
NO man did ever seek God with a sincere heart, that missed to ^ind him; God
loves to be so sought, and to be so found, as we shall be sure we have found
him by our delight in him: All which is the work of the Holy Ghost within us,
to our great comfort here, always to enjoy God, if our delight be set on him!
above all earthly fruitions. And thus we may find God, and enjoy him as well in
Courts of Princes, as in a Wilderness, if we prefer nothing before the finding
of him; and so the greatest Courtiers may live like Saints on Earth, and be
Saints in Heaven when they die.

CVIII.
It Is not amiss for a Righteous man sometimes to fancy himself on h^s
Death-B^d, with his Friends bewailing his depar^ure from them; while he pities
their mistake, who pities him, that is going to see the face of God, in the
face of Death; and to meet Christ, who with open Arms comes to receive his Soul
into his Eternal rest; Such Meditatations will raise our hearts to endeavor to
die so, and will bring us great Consolation while we live so, in Gods favor,
that our Faith fail not at the last gasp.

CIX.
THere is no Felicity like Piety, no Peace, no Security, no Conversation, no
diversions can come into competition with a Divine Life, and Divine Love to
God; So to fix our Interest in this world, and the next; for we shall fall as
we live, and shall rise to everlasting Judgment as we fall; For though Christ
came into the world to call, and to enable the greatest of sinners to become
capable of this Felicity here, and Salvation after; We must repent and forsake
our Iniquities, or can have no part in him.

CX.
WE cannot make too strict* a Covenant with our Eyes and Hearts to wa^ch the
deceitfulness of Sin; And observe how every look, and every thought, is
naturally apt insensibly to convert innocent intentions, into evil; before we
discern the subtle enemy undermining of our Souls, with the fair appearances of
harmless diversions, if too much indulged until they become destroying Snares.

CXI.
GOd often treats his professed Lovers, as we do one another, when we find that
a professed friend has some concealed Jewel that he prizes above his
professions, though he offer up all the rest which we desire not, we reject his
Complement, and still desire to have that reserved beloved Jewel which he
values above our Favors. And so God rejects all our Complemental Services,
until our reserved darling Lust be offered up to him, as the Jewel we most
prize, and the only sacrifice he will accept; Then in return, of our whole
hearts, he will give himself to us for ever.

CXII.
LEt him that thinks he stands most fixed in Heaven, take heed lest he fall;
and remember that David* and Solomon, (both of them Gods Favorites) could not
stand longer then by his Grace supported; nor were our Saviors beloved
Disciples, all free from stumbling, by which, and many more examples, we are
taught not to presume on our own righteousness; but to look on our Frailties as
inherent to us, lest Dust and Ashes should presume on our own performances,
without continual Addresses to God for such Supplies as we do every moment
need. And we may also think that God permits some good men to some relapses, to
awaken, and quicken them to the frequent duty of his Worship, so to own him,
that no man may hope to serve him as he ought, without him. For Satan is most
busy and ambitious to reduce a Convert out of Christ's flock, to become his
slave again; rather then to continue his Celestial freedom; such a victory he
accounts his Masterpiece, so to subdue careless men, who too much trust unto
their own Integrity, and take no heed how they stand, lest they fall.

CXIII.
WE cannot Pray too often, because frequent sincere Prayers do bring down
Blessings from Heaven; but when we mak^ negligent Addresses, they show such a
disrespect, that the Glorious Majesty we approach, turns from us, in contempt
of such careless Petitions. For when we are excited to Divine Worship by the
Holy Ghost, God looks for such intention of Spirit, with vigor in our
Devotion, that shows how much we value what we pray for; He admits of our
frequent zeal at all times, though he sees our unworthiness, and never fails to
cherish an humble contrite Spirit, when he rejects a presumptuous Babbler. So
that when we approach to Pray, our first Petition should be, for Grace to
prevent all diversions from Satan, and our selves, who where his public
temptations fail, is ever busy to disturb our Devotions with frivolous or foul
suggestions.

CXIV.
HOw can we think that God does believe the frequent Professions we make, that
we love Him above all things, when we forsake him so often for trivial, and
vain fruitions? for though no man is free from such Frailties, as we ought to
Watch, and Pray for amendment of by Grace from above! For to be absolutely
perfect, is impossible, because our Nature will not admit of such Angelical
perfection; yet no man ought to question his sincerity, because he cannot do,
that which is impossible for men to do.

CXV.
WE spend much of our time in laying foundations for Happiness on Earth; when
our Happiness is, that we have none here, but what we can raise from our Hopes
to find in Heaven; which we are seldom inclined to think on, but when we find
we are not so well provided for here, as we Hope to be there.

CXVI.
ALl men know that every moment of our Lives, every step we make, does advance
us toward the Grave; but we do not seriously enough consider of this our
greatest concern, while we march on with merry hearts toward our Eternal
Habitation of Rest, and happiness in Heaven; (as we think) but in our careless
journey thither, do entertain our Souls with such worthless Vanities, or such
known Wickedness, for our Diversions; that we do often mistake the way, if not
quite lose it, and so arrive at a dismal Habitation of Woe, before we see
whither we are going.

CXVII.
WE cannot Love, or Fear God too much, we cannot Thank Him, or Trust in Him too
much, nor Think of Him too often, from whom we have all that we enjoy, and on
whose free Mercy our Eternal Doom depends; and this Moment may be that Doom to
every one of us. So then he is the most Happy man in this World, that Lives
ever the most ready to Die; With a sincere desire to be with God; which is a
sure mark of his Reconciliation, and Adoption; To love God thus, and to be thus
beloved of Him, will bring us to delight in God above all his Creatures, which
is the highest Felicity our P^ety can aim at.

CXVIII.
[A Prayer.]
LOrd Enrich all Hearts with Divine Love, that desire it, and inflame their
Souls with such desires toward Thee, as to Live Righteously, and to value such
enlightening Comforts as flow from those Transports thou do afford unto
Reconciled sinners, become Regenerate; so to encourage them to Inform, and
Reclaim such as go Astray, by seeing the vast delights that do attend thine
Adopted Sons, in their way to Heaven; And by that bright Light from above, to
judge of thy Celestial joys prepared for them there.

CXIX.
NOt to think at all, is impossible, and to think too much of what we ought not
to think of, is too Natural to us; but to think of the Everlasting Torments in
Hell, comparatively with our pe^ty short Pains here, will Fright us into some
Care not to offend God so, as to send us thither: Pu^ to think of the Ioys of
Heaven as we ought, and by our Faith in Christ to bring us thither; with our
Love to God, our Christian Charity, our Purity of Heart, and our Humility to
God and Man; Which is the Divine Lovers part, who is ever thinking on his
Eternal Bliss, and how to please God most, so to prepare for Heaven, which he
sees every moment is at hand; and the joyful expectation of that Happy Hour, is
his Souls continual Consolation; as those will find, who do Sincerely labor
for it.

CXX.
IT is one of the Devils chief Arts, to cheat men into a belief that it is a
Melancholy thing to be Religious; But a man truly Regenerate, will need no
other arguments to convince the contrary, then what he finds in his own Heart
of Delight, when the Holy Ghost has taken possession there; and when his
Retirements with God, will furnish him so fully with his Loving Kindness, and
those Enlightening Gifts, those Beatifying Graces, and Refreshing Comforts,
those Divine Manifestations of his presence, creating such a Joy, with such
Peace of Conscience, that no Carnal Appetites, nor all the Malice of Men and
Devils, can remove him from his firm Station of Bliss, which he participa^es of
in this prospect of Heaven only. But no man can believe this, nor guess at the
Felicity of a Pious Life, until he do obtain Grace to become Regenerate.

CXXI.
WHoever considers that his day of Death, is his day of Judgment, for his
Eternal Being; will find that his time yet to Live, is little enough to ask God
Pardon for the time he has misspent; Whoever does closely and seriously set to
this great work of Conversion, will find that his Sighs and Tears, will produce
more Joy in his Latter-days, then re-acting his former Crimes would be, when
the two Eternities are put into the Scales.

CXXII.
LEt us not please our selves with presumptuous Thoughts, That we are the
Temples of the Holy Ghost, till we have examined our Hearts strictly, to find
if we are free from all Habitual Sins, in Thought, Word, and Deed; for God will
not dwell in a Polluted Temple: We must next examine what proportion of Divine
Joy, the Holy Spirit ^ills our New Hearts with, to Confirm, and Sanctify our
Souls, in the Love, and Service of God, thus dwelling in us; And then observe,
what a new kind of entertainment it is, to Delight in God, with the peace of a
quiet Conscience; which by frequent Meditations, will hold us up above the
reach of any storms, that Satan can raise, or the malice of Men can contrive
against us; And then we are to fix all this Happiness, by worthy receiving of
the Holy Sacrament, So as Christ may be Born within us, and be so United unto
us, as to confirm our Spiritual Filiation: Thus qualified, we may look on our
selves as Temples of the Holy Ghost; In all humility rejoicing to be so
Blessed, when we are so.

CXXIII.
WE ought to enter Cavea^s in ^ur Hearts, against the approaches of such sorts
of Temptations as we fear most, and on all occasions, to search the Register of
our Vows made to God; to see if we do not stand pre-ingaged to Him, to resist
the Temptation then Assaulting us; and if so, how unworthy shall we be so to
break our Word with God, upon Record; and how dangerous to provoke his anger by
such a Contempt; thus we may destroy many designs from Satan, and our selves
oftentimes the worse Devil of the two.

CXXIV.
WE are too often abused by flattering diversions, as if Holy Meditations were
not more pleasant, and more durable, then vain delights; Which rob us of our
real Essential Joys, for shadows of Pleasures, that ever abuse us.

CXXV.
WE ought often to consider of how little value all is, that we have on Earth,
which we must for ever depart from when we die; and should therefore set our
selves to secure a Blessed Eternity where we go; And which God invites us to,
on the easy terms of repenting our past sins; and forsaking those Crimes,
which we have been so often cloyed with.

CXXVI.
LEt thy Spiritual Resurrection from sin, (which is Gods works within thee)
assure thy reconciliation, and confirm thy Election, so as to fill thy heart
with bright flames of a sincere Evangelical Devotion, that thou may live and
serve God cheerfully, until thy time comes to die; And then with a Holy valor
pass through the Grave with a lively Faith to participate of His Glory, at the
Resurrection; For by a ready submission, thou will Conquer that great Tyrant
Death, by a foresight of those Celestial joys, that raise thy Soul to know thou
shall be with God, the moment that thou die.

CXXVII.
WE ought to Pray continually for the Holy Ghost to dwell in us; to inform and
enable us to do our duty in all things, with the Spirit of Faith; which will
improve our zeal, and to contemn this Worlds Glories, and will fill our hearts
with higher thoughts for a joyful expectation of a Crown in Heaven, prepared
for those who value it.

CXXVIII.
WE should always have in mind when the Spirit and the Flesh contest within us;
That our Will is the Judge between those two Solicitors, and that God leaves
the option of our Eternal Bliss, or Eternal Woe to us; that is, whether we will
become Spiritual Disciples, or Carnal Sinners; for no Temptations can make us
guilty, unless we consent to sin.

CXXIX.
THe greatest argument against Despair, and for a Pious Life, is very short:
That if we do repent, and forsake our sins* with a sincere universal obedience
for the future; we shall be as certain to partake of Gods promised Mercies, as
if we had never gone on in those former sins; Though great and frequently
repeated, which is great comfort unto all such as Hope to go to Heaven.

CXXX.
THe generality of mankind, do spend most part of their Lives, on the
delightful Acquisition of Wealth, Honor, Learning, or the like; and are but
unskilful Merchants, that purchase Rich Jewe^s, with more hazards, and at
higher Rates, then their intrinsic value will afford them to be gainers by,
when obtained. And for which, we pay most part of our precious time, that is
the only Treasure we have; and of much more worth, then all we can purchase in
this World, by the profuse expense of that time, on such glistering Tri^les as
must perish with us, if not before us; When a tenth part of our misspent time,
would procure Eternal Wealth, Ho^our and Joy beyond expression for our Immortal
Souls, if we would devoutly Traffic for Heaven* But we are naturally inclined
to set our hearts on present Fruitions, more then a hundred times their value
in reversion; because Heaven is, or may be far off, and we have time enough to
think of that, when we have nothing else to do; though this minute we may be
called to our Eternal Doom; and too late find the difference between a
Reprobate, and a Regenerate Life.

CXXXI.
A Man truly Regenerate, will not admit of the least contest from Carnal
Appetites, his heart being so fixed on Heavenly joys, that he detests all
approaches to divert him, as below the pleasure he has in his Conversation with
God in private; Who he believes will assuredly bring him to Heaven, if he
prefer his Service, before the fading Bubbles of this World.

CXXXII.
OF all the Blessings that God bestows on men, There is none greater then the
Peace of Conscience, which a Pious man finds when he is dying with great
comfort; And which ought to invite all men to live Divine Lives, with assurance
that God sees our sincerity, and gives sufficient grace accordingly, at the
hour of Death.

CXXXIII.
A Great Reprobate, (by the Grace of God) become Regenerate, can experimentally
judge how much the felicity of Piety does exceed his former Epicurisms: Men in
this World, without putting Eternity into the Scales, against moments; and
observes that the continual tranquillity of a quiet Conscience is much more
pleasant, then all his past unlawful Fruitions, attended with such Terrors as a
guilty Soul is loaded with.

CXXXIV.
EVery Pious man that has forsaken his sins, for fear to offend God, who he
pretends to love also; does begin well: And when God sees his sincerity to obey
him in all things, He will not let him rest there, but adds Faith and Grace
till his heart longs for a nearer Communion with Christ in Heaven; and by a
daily custom of such elevated Meditations, God will bring this Pious man to
despise this World, and to overcome the Terrors of the Grave, by his
expec^ation of Heaven, where his Soul longs to be.

CXXXV.
WE must not desire to die, to be rid of affliction here; But if we can obtain
Grace for so Divine a Love to God, as to be glad to go to Him, when He calls
for us; That will be enough, and such holy courage at the hour of death, will
bring great Joy to our expiring Souls.

CXXXVI.
THe Souls of Righteous men, are said to be with God the moment they expire;
But to what degree of Bliss they are admitted before the Resurrection, is not
revealed unto men; But it is enough for us to believe that God takes care of
those Souls that served, and trusted in Him, as well as for his departed
Saints; We need to desire no more then to be with them.

CXXXVII.
THe Design of Reading the Scriptures, Preaching, Praying, and Fasting, is to
bring us to lead such Pious Lives, as may show our Faith and Love to God; And
so to divert our hearts from Worldly vanities, by constant Meditations on the
Ioys of Heaven, to invite us thither: And also encourage our timorous Souls
with grace from above, to contemn the Grave, where they shall not rest one
moment. Which if well considered, our Holy Resolutions would scorn to fear, and
shrink back from the last step we must make, to take possession of the Crown we
seem to labor for, which will show that we have but cold desires to be with
God.

CXXXVIII.
NO Regenerate man can be mistaken in Gods Service, who sets his Heart
sincerely to that work^ for God who sees our hear^s throughout, will not lose
such a Votarr^ but will Sanctify his zeal, and make him see that an humble
contri^e heart, is the Sac^ifice He likes; And will show by his (...) of
Comfort, and Consolation to such a man, that his Soul will be transported with
Raptures of joy, in his Divine Contemplations; when he finds such inward
assurance of God^ favor, that he cannot doubt of his Reconciliation, when thus
enriched with Grace, and thus led by the Holy Ghost, his devout heart will rise
higher, with bright flames of Love, aspiring to get into Christ's bosom.

CXXXIX.
WE should in our Meditations, often reflect on the unquiet, and uncertain
wealth and Honors of this World, and how unworthy such fleeting fruitions are,
to be preferred before Eternal felicities; that so we may not set our hearts,
and spend our time on such vain acquisitions, when immortal happiness will be
had on easier, and more certain terms, and we surely become the Sons of God.

CXL.
THe greatest business of our Lives is to learn to die with holy courage, and
not to start from the Grave, nor repine at such means and methods, as our kind
God appoints, to make us willing to come to Him, and by such gentle
corrections, to withdraw us from the World, that our hearts may be always
working up toward his Throne of Mercy; where Christ has purchased places for
converted sinners, amongst the Angels, and has appointed his Holy Spirit to
invite, and conduct us thither, by his inward comforts which grow from the
Gospel-promises, (and is the Christian Faith) that repented sins forsaken,
shall not be charged on us in this World, nor the next, which is the foundation
of Divine valor in a dying convert.

CXLI.
THe generality of mankind, are naturally inclined to love those who love them,
and to judge of Friendship and Hatred, by the assisting or crossing our designs
in this World; and the universal object herein, is Death: So then we are to
consider the real effects of this great Monarchs power, that controuls the
World, and see whether he be a more general Friend, or Enemy to mankind: For as
he cuts down some in their first Buds, others in the prime Blossoms of their
youth, and surprises many of ripe^ years, by hurrying them into unexpected
destruction, from such Wealth, and Honors, as their carnal hearts were most
delighted with; yet the same Death, is kind to the most of men, who are
oppressed with various sorts of Agonies, both of mind and body, beyond the cure
of the best Remedies, until by Death released from all degrees of maladies, and
miseries. Now if all this be well considered, we may bring our selves to such
an acquaintance with this mighty Monarch Death, by a daily conversation, and
preparation for our submission to his unresistable command, so as to rejoice
when we are freed from future evils, and by Death conducted to our Eternal
Rest. And the same moment that our Souls expire, we shall conquer Him, who
conquers all the World; and for ever Triumph over his Victories over us. So
that it is our weak Faith, and frail Nature, that makes Death seem so terrible
an Enemy unto unrighteous men only.

CXLII.
THe true joy of a good Soul in this World, is the very joy in Heaven, only
there it is superinvested with Glory, which a Righteous man enjoys that moment
he dies, without any stop by the way.

CXLIII.
THere is nothing more worthy of our continual thoughts, our utmost endeavors,
and hearty prayers, then to obtain the Blessedness to become Regenerate: For
when the Holy Ghost sanctifies the heart of such a man, with the comfortable
marks of his Reconciliation, and Adoption, that man will soon find the
continual feast of a good conscience while he lives, to be more pleasant then
all other things which this World affords; and at his hour of death* the
felieity of his Adoption will fill his Soul with holy valor, and accompany him
to his Everlasting Glory. Which joy no mortal fancy can conceive, and is the
highest works of our strongest Faith to think on, and to prepare for.

CXLIV.
HE that can upon examination, find such comfort in his Soul, as to be ever
ready and willing to appear at the day of Judgment, must be enlightened and
guided by the Holy Ghost, and sanctified by a Spiritual Resurrection from sin
to grace, and from all worldly temptations; so as his chief delight, will be in
a Divine conversation with God, by frequent approaches, for the continuance of
such mercies as have so raised him from the terrors of Hell, unto the joys of
Heaven.

CXLV.
THe truly Pious man, is always blowing up his smoking Flax, to flaming Love,
for those daily mercies and blessings he receives from God; so to teach others
the felicity he finds therein, to invite them to Heaven.

CXLVI.
TO hear, to read, to w^ite and meditate, and to pray often, are the means to
understand our Duty unto God, as also to ^ix our Faith: But if we do not live
and practice accordingly, our great knowledge will aggravate our crimes, and
provoke God's anger against us, for slighting those Divine Instructions, which
the Holy Ghost inspires us with, and for which God expects an account from us.

CXLVII.
HE that can make a total resignation of himself, with all his Interests, into
God's hands, has made a great advance toward Heaven, and may trust in God; so
the foundation of his Trust, be laid deep in a fixed heart, on a Spiritual
Resurrection, universally cleansed from all known sins, and so Reconciled, that
God will accept of the Trust: But we are too apt to mistake such Resignations,
and to flatter our selves with Peace of Conscience on that account, without a
due Examination, whether all our actions and affections, do justify such a
Resignation as we offer up to God; without which, it is a great presumption to
pretend to Trust in God.

CXLVIII.
TO be Regenerate, does include all Blessedness that we are capable of in this
World, with a joyful prospect into those Eternal felicities we shall have in
Heaven; and is a sure Testimony of our Reconciliation.

CXLIX.
THere is nothing more clear, then that Holiness is the foundation of true
Happiness, even in this World, and cannot be doubted in the next; for whoever
lives a Divine life, will have his heart full of Divine love to God, and then
will soon find the felicity of Piety, to be so much more pleasant then all
other Diversions, that he will take all the opportunities he can, both day and
night to approach God in Holy Meditations, and humble Prayers, as the most
delightful entertainment his Soul is capable of on this side Heaven; and will
find God's favor confirmed to him, by Grace sufficient to support his
contented heart through all the Storms this World can raise, and fill him with
joyful thoughts of his Salvation at the hour of death, which is our highest
Aim, by the perfection of Piety to obtain.

CL.
[A Prayer.]
LOrd give us Grace to discern the bottom of our own hearts, that we be not
deceived by too slight a search for Divine Love there; nor flatter our selves
with hopes of being Favorites in Heaven, while we prefer thy Creatures before
Thee, and see it not. Lord guide us by thy Divine Light, and make us see that
true Devotion is the most satisfying diversion we can have; and will enrich our
hearts with desires to be with Thee in Paradise, and will create courage to
pass cheerfully through the Grave, so to ^ustifie our Faith, by our last step
out of this World, into a glorious Eternity with Thee our God.

CLI.
IF we consider how many times we have stumbled, in our Christian course, and
how many times fallen, and by what small Rubs been overthrown, we should take
more care to stumble no more at such Straws; but pray for Grace to enable us to
run over all Mountainous temptations, if they cross our way to Heaven; and when
God sees a vigorous sincerity to serve, love* and trust in Him, He is then
ready to support us through the whole course of our lives; which no man can
doubt of, that observes how God admits of our many risings, after so many great
and wilful falls as most men make; and yet He still invites us to repair past
Evils, by running out our new course better, with a due prospect to our last
step into the Grave, from whence we must arise to claim the Crown we run for.
And this will raise all devout hearts, to the brightest flame of Faith, and
Love, that men are capable of, when we consider that every moment of our life,
may be that last step, by which we must gain, or lose the Crown we run for.

CLII.
BEcause Angelical obedience is a perfection of Holiness above the capacity of
Humane Nature, God does make allowance for sincerity in performance of Duties;
b^t Himself holds the Scales, to see that our sincerity be full weight,
according to the grains He allows us. And the Holy Ghost within us, has a
continual Treasury, where those grains are so reposited, as to be ever ready to
supply our sincerity, and to turn the Scales for our advantage, according to
every man's utmost endeavors, which will never be rejected for want of weight.

CLIII.
LEt no man despair of the forgiveness of his sins, if he do confess them to
God, and do turn from them to Him with sincere contrition, and repentance,
devoutly practiced for the future, in Obedience, Love, and Faith, trusting in
Gods Mercy and Grace, with our reliance on Christ's Righteousness imparted unto
us; on which assurance, we may live with comfort, and die with joy. And whoever
does entertain himself with such frequent Meditations, will find them to be the
most delightful diversions he can have, to consider that though we may fail in
our best endeavors, Gods Mercy and Christ's Righteousness can never fail, can
never be exhausted on our sins, by supporting sincere Penitents, until brought
unto Heaven; so that in this high expectation of future Eternal Bliss, we ought
to be contented with our Lots on Earth, whatever they be; trusting in Gods free
Mercy, and Christ's Merits, without despairing of our Salvation, if we can
repent past crimes, and forsake them for the future: But if we have not a
Resurrection from sin in this World, we shall have no Resurrection to Glory in
the next World.

CLIV.
PIety and Faith, include all Christianity; but we often mistake Praying,
Preaching, and Godly talk, for Piety, which are but steps toward it; for we
are obliged to do Righteousness, or else we are not of God: and so it is with
those who think their Faith sufficient, that can (Parrot-like) repeat their
Creed; when it is our active Faith that is required, to do what the Gospel
teaches. So that if a due regard to Faith, and Piety be settled in our hearts,
we should find more time for Meditations on those great concerns, whatever our
Callings, or Employments be; for our Bodies cannot be so engaged to labor, or
in any Courtcrouds so employed, but our Souls may be raised up to God in
^ervent Ejaculations, without any Tongue-noise, or Facediscovery, to inform
God, who knows our hearts better then our selves do. So that by Faith, and
Piety, we may converse with God here, and begin our Eternal happiness on Earth.

CLV.
IT is a wonder to see that all mankind should be loath to leave this World,
where so few are truly happy, or that think themselves so, (as to be
contented:) The weak Old sick man, would live on in pains; the strong and
healthy Youth, the Rich, the Poor, the great in Titles and Commands, the Mighty
Princes, and their Slaves, all of all sorts are subject to repine, to Envy, and
to Malice, Revenge, and Avarice, to Ambition, or some other discontent that
robs their hearts of peace; and yet all desire to live on: though our days, if
justly divided! we should find three parts of four, allotted unto cares, fears,
troubles, and sorrows; and the remaining part, entertained with shadows of
delight, to mock our senses, rather then such real pleasures as can affect our
Souls; and yet no time, no arguments, no examples, nor our own daily
experience, can divert our fr^il Natures from this infelicity, which was
created with us, by a mighty Providence, to show that our time of Sojourning
here, must not afford any thing of value to divert our hearts from aiming at
our Eternal habitation of Rest; where we are to expect more felicity, then we
now know how to wish for. But this the Regenerate man can only understand, who
knows the felicity of Piety, and finds there is no security on Earth, but in
loving, fearing, and serving God, which assures him of a place in Heaven, and
gives him a comfortable passage thither.

CLVI.
IF men did consider their Christian calling, and the miraculous Plantation of
the Gospel of Christ, by twelve illiterate men, who were taught by the Spirit
of God, for the conversion of the then Heathen World; we should now have more
active Faith, then generally appears by the lives of men; for though we are not
called to a severe bloody Martyrdom, as in the Primitive Age, to justify our
Faith by Torments unto death: But by the great mercy of God, our required
Martyrdom is now so gentle, in comparison of their sufferings, that we are only
called to Obedience, and Faith; only to own what those Blessed Martyrs died
for. So that if we prefer Gods Glory and his Service, before our own Carnal
Appetites, we shall resist all temptations to Lust, and Vanities, which offend
God, and destroy our present felicity also. When this easy happy Martyrdom of
sin, is only required of us, to repent past crimes, and forbear to repeat them;
we shall receive in lieu thereof, Gods favor here, and Eternal Joy in Heaven.

CLVII.
A Frequent consideration of our state toward God, shows us the best prospect
toward Heaven, and does teach us the way thither; and begets holy desires on
the expectat^on of our future joys; and such consideration also, gives us the
prospect of those everlasting flames that attend us in Hell, if we run on in
sinning; and will terrify our hearts with the expectation of future Torments,
if we neither value Gods promises, nor fear his threats: So that nothing can be
more concern to mankind, then frequent and serious consideration, of all we
say, do, and ^^^nk.

CLVIII.
TO fear to die, is a contradiction to our Faith, and all the zeal we profess
to God, when we fear to be with Him in Glory; and by which, we undervalue
Christ's purchase of a place in Heaven for us, by preferring our abode here,
before Eternal happiness with Him, which we can never ob^ain but by dying.

CLIX.
NO considerate man can pretend to fear God, and do what he is sure will offend
Him; nor can he think that he loves God, when by committing wilful known sins,
he contemns his Laws; nor can he believe that he has any argument to trust in
God, who does neither love, fear, nor serve him as he ought; nor can pretend to
any parcel of Divine Gra^e, or comfort in death, if he live and die in his
habitual course of sinning.

CLX.
WHy do Christians fear to die, but because we do not live after Christian
Principles; which neglect, begets infidelity, and makes us doubt to go unto
Christ, else we could not fear to be with Him, who sits at Gods right hand in
Heaven; and where we may participate of his Eternal Glory, if we live after his
Gospel Rules here; by which we shall scorn the terrors of Death, and make our
days on Earth also as happy, as long. But if we go on in Voluptuous Iniquities,
pampered up for the day of Slaughter, 'twill be no wonder that we tremble at
our Dissolution, and the approach of the terrible day of Judgment. But if we
live ready to die, and fit to step into Eternity; the Grave will prove easier,
then a long life, if compared with the short pleasures of our best Worldly
en^oyments, that keep our hearts from Heaven.

CLXI:
FRequent consideration of our Eternity, does beget a due examination of our
hearts, whether God be there, to direct and support us in our way to Heaven; or
if Satan governs, what a dismal Eternity we are hasting to; so that to have God
always in our sight, by a frequent examination of our hearts, we may check the
first appearance of Evil, with the thought of Eternal condemnation; but if
Goodness inhabit here, then to cherish such thoughts, as will blow the holy
Fire into flaming Zeal, and declare an Interest in Christ: And by a daily
custom thus to retire and consider of our Salvation, will ^ill our hearts with
such a pleasing habit of Holiness, as will bring God home to us, who will not
permit a wicked thought where He is pleased to dwell.

CLXII.
IF we did duly consider that our transparent hearts, do show our most secret
thoughts to God, we should not so often provoke him to Anger, by putting our
evil thoughts into action; this would be of great use, if by practices we can
bring our hearts to be as transparen^ to our selv^s, as they are to God; and
would in a little time obtain Grace to cast out wicked fancies, as fast as
Satan can suggest them, or our own fancies create them; which then would leave
no stings behind, to poison hearts so strongly guarded.

CLXIII.
WE ought to be ever mindful that true Religion, is to lead a Divine Life, and
will beget Divine Love in our hearts to God, and to endeavor to endear our
selves so, as to become capable of his Love to us, though we can never be
worthy of it, we shall not fail to have it, if we sincerely desire it.

CLXIV.
THe Gospel says, that our Savior died to satisfy God for the sins of all
mankind, that truly repent, and amend, and do steadfastly believe that if we do
so, all our sins, how many and how great so ever, shall be forgiven us. We must
then enquire of our own hearts, for the truth of our repentance, whether we
shall find Arguments to doubt, or to believe our selves, to be in the number of
them that Christ came to bless, by turning us from our Iniquities; and then it
will be our Duties, as an effect of our Faith, to believe we are amongst such
penitent sinners as Christ has Redeemed with his Blood, and will be no
presumption to think we shall have places in Heaven on His account, if we come
to God by Him; and may also have an humble assurance in our own hearts, of such
a joyful Resurrection, as will allay the terrors of Death, and give us a
cheerful passage to his Eternal Bliss; and thus Pious Penitents may die
cheerfully, without presuming on their own Justification, and less assurance
then this, may prove a groundless despair, on our diffidence in Gods promises,
or an undervaluing of Christ's Merits* and Intercession for us; on which our
Repentance, and Conversion is grounded, and our Salvation depends.

CLXV.
COnsideration has a vast extent, it reaches all past time, and looks on
toward Eternity to come, it searches into Hell, and up to Heaven, and humbly
consults the glorious Attributes of God, and teaches us how to know, and obey
his Will; it enquires into the bottom of our own hearts, and the fathomless
thoughts of our unbounded fancies, how they stand toward the Obedience we
profess to God; And if on a full confideration of all our ways, we find our
hearts fixed on God, it does produce Divine consolations, it entertains and
satisfies us with a continual variety of joyful objects to enlarge our Souls
on, suitable to the great end we aim at. So that consideration is the greatest
and most useful Lesson, that was ever taught to man; and the most delightful
study we can practice, to make our troublesome travels in this World easy to
us, by our constant expectation of Eternal Joy, and Glory at our Journeys end;
which requires much consideration how to reach, lest we miss our way thither.
He that retires to consider what he must do to be saved, makes his Religion his
business, for without retirement, our thoughts ^low at large; but in retired
Holy Meditations, some awe and reverence does seize on the Soul, which while
that Pulse beats, declares it to be alive, and active, in searching for its
Salvation, and never fails of finding those comforts it seeks in this World, by
the assurance of Glory in the next.

CLXVI.
IF the felicity of Piety were generally understood, men would make more have
to become Regenerate; that in our assaults from Satan, and injuries from men,
we might Triumph in such Storms, as terrify the hearts of impious Livers: But
above all, if we consider an impenitent habitual sinner, on his Deathbed, full
of despair (...) through the horror of his Crimes, and apprehension of the Hell
he is falling into; and at the same time observe a converted sinner, reconciled
to God long before, now delivering up his Soul unto his Savior, with a fixed
Faith, and a cheerful heart, hasting to take possession of a blessed Seat in
Heaven, prepared for him; it must needs invite the lookers on to cleansing, and
reconciling to God before Death surprise us. This great concern for our
Eternity, is in few words thus: God has pronounced, that impenitent sinners
shall not enter into Heaven, nor shall true penitents be shut out; which
confirms the felicity of Piety, unto a Regenerate man.

CLXVII.
FAith ever was, and ever will be the foundation of Religion; for no man can
worship what he believes is not, nor can endeavor to please, or fear to offend
he knows not who, nor what, nor why; so that we must believe there is some
Divine Existence from whence all things are, and by which all things subsist,
and we among the rest are what we are: From these natural reasonings, and
notions, we enquire into Traditions, and by searching the Holy Scriptures, we
are powerfully taught concerning God, Christ, and Holy Ghost, and there also
learn to improve our Faith; to believe the Resurrection after death, and that
if we do live Righteously, we shall when we die, participate of that glorious
Being, in the Eternal presence of our incomprehensible Creator. The next step
our Faith leads us toward Heaven is, from the consideration that our Dust and
Ashes is entertained on Earth with so great pomp, and such high delights, that
we must believe, and expect that our Immortal Souls will have much greater
transporting Joys in Heaven, then our flesh is capable of, until refined for
the Day of Judgment: And if thus by pious living, we can raise our Faith to
trust in Christ's merits, and intercession, 'twill bring us unto an humble
confidence of our Salvation when we die; which cannot be had but from above,
and such Grace from God, will encourage us to look more kindly on Death, who
only can conduct us to this everlasting Joy we believe in, and hope for. So
that by such Meditations of Heaven, Death will become so familiar an
acquaintance, as not to fright us from going to God in His company, and will in
our last hour, support those Souls with comfort, whose sincerity God sees,
through all our failings, and accepts of.

CLXVIII.
It Is a wonder to see what pains men ^ake, and what hazards run, to gain
^^rishing wealth, to entertain our Bodi^^ with, which are more perishing then
the wealth we seek, and all that time, neglect our Immortal Souls for their
Eternity. And though Time be our great concern, we value nothing less, but vex
our Brains, and study still how to be rid of what we cannot keep, nor ever can
recall: And though from day to day we are cloyed with our fruitions, and tired
with new delights, even worn out with various diversions, yet in our whole
lives never can afford a few minutes time to gain true Rest; but still from Age
to Age entice, and betray our Souls unto new vanities, till youth and vigor is
decayed; and then too, revive our dead appetites with fresh budding idle
fancies, (often worse then all that went before) until we are surpised by
Death, and hurried into Eternity, before we do see our selves old enough to be
at leisure to think of that Grave, which is every moment ready to swallow us:
whereas, if we did set our selves at first to resist all Assaults from Satan,
with a pious vigor, and observe it, we shall find and feel great pleasure in
every Victory over every Temptation, which formerly did enslave and triumph
over us. And then, what honor, what ambition can be greater, then to conquer
so great a Conqueror? and by practice, thus improving our Divine Military skill
this way, we shall raise daily Trophies so acceptable to God, that we shall
discern our Souls climbing up to Heaven thereon.

CLXIX.
IT is worthy consideration, how many men do spend their whole lives in reading
Books, to learn what has been done of old, thereby to instruct the present Age,
and to inform the future; and when by much study, and by time grown decrepit,
they slip into their Graves with the most ignorant, and do there create, and
feed their own Worms, who understand not that great wisdom, so much labored
for; and then too late such Learned men will find, that more advantage might
have been made, by studying themselves, (never thought on) still laboring for
a few bubbles of momentary praise, as of more use, then to secure Eternal Bliss
for their immortal Souls. Self-study is a continual Inquisition on our own
hearts, to consider all our thoughts, how they work toward a good, or a bad
end, and then to cherish or suppress them as they arise; for some appear in
forms at first fight so ugly, they cannot be too soon smothered, and some so
disguised in pleasing shapes, as may deceive a careless heart, if not
acquainted with the marks the wear^; and that way Armed, and well warned by
former harms, so as to avoid new wounds from Enemies so dangerous, that we must
not Treat, nor dally with, but make them Retreat by a brisk Charge, and bold
Defy. We are also to study to discover another sort of Foes, more dangerous
then all the rest, who lie in close Ambush, until some opportunity do call them
forth for an Assault; and are of form so lovely, and so innocent in show, that
Charity her self would warm their cold Limbs in her own Bosom, and not discern
the danger, until these cunning Serpents bite beyond resistance, and then
declare for the Supremacy over the whole man; and then muster up all his
senses, and all his faculties against himself, and thus steal a Victory, by
corrupting those Guards that were given for his defense. So that by a long
negligence, we grow so ignorant of our selves, that every assault from Satan,
shakes the whole man, until at last he Roots him up for ever: But if our
Eternal Being is considerable, we should allow some ti^^le to study our own
natural inclinations, and affections to good or evil; and to learn such Rules
as may rectify our senses, to submit unto our more rational Souls, when led by
Grace to work upward toward God, which will teach us the wisdom of Salvation,
and raise our Faith to such dependence on Christ, as no worldly Learning can
contest for the priority. Let us then employ our time so, as to learn to know
our selves, and our duty unto God, in which our everlasting happiness is most
concerned.

CLXX.
THere can be no better Arguments for frequent Meditations, then to think
seriously of our sins, of Death, and our Resurrection to Judgment, as we ought;
and to prepare for so great a concern, at a minutes call to step into Eternity;
so ready, that we may so love God, and fear Him, as to serve him with delight
here, and to have Celestial joy when we expire.

CLXXI.
NO man ought to think himself above the reach of temptation; for when Satan
finds us but a little relaxed in our Devotion, or any thing cold in our
affection to God, he can dress an old forsaken sin, so like to an Angel of
Light, as to surprise a young Divine Lover at first sight, (when his Guards are
withdrawn) but when his Beloved sees him in such danger, He will by His Divine
guiding Light, unmask the disguised Fiend, and so reclaim his near lapsed
Lover, unto his devout Addresses as before, and make him see by such Assaults,
that he can stand no longer in favor, then by his Grace supported: But he that
is become a well-settled Regenerate man, so as to stand ever on his Guard, with
holy courage to repel all approaches from Satan, as fast as they appear, will
make such frequent Victories his chief delight; and when our common Enemy sees
that all his attempts on such a man, are in vain, he will desist, who only
watches opportunities for his attempts, on those he finds remiss; and who is
often belyed by some men who do invite him to such easy Victories, on those of
his own complexion, as black within, and as great Devils as himself.

CLXXII.
ALas poor man! do thou complain because thou can not sleep ten hours every
night, when Nature does require but five? Thou fear to die! Yet would be
dead near half the time thou have to live; for sleep is so like death, that we
cannot distinguish wherein they differ, until we awake. But thou art tired for
want of entertainment in long Nights! Alas poor man, that is a sad grievance
indeed, and worthy of pity; for thy Saintship has no sins to confess, nor
pardon to ask of God, no cause to wash thy Bed with tears; Heaven, and Hell,
with Eternity to come, are not worth thy thinking on, until the Bell toll thee
to thy Grave; and then too late thou will wish for some of thy time lost in
sleep, then to watch, and pray, and to lament in Sackcloth and Ashes. While the
Regenerate man finds no time so fit to raise his Soul to Heaven, as when he
awakes at Midnight; nor any consolation so great, as in those hours borrowed
from sleep, to converse with God in holy Meditations; which fills his heart
with present joy, and peace of conscience, that lasts the whole day after; and
is a good remedy to prevent such fancies as do invade the drowsy Souls of
lazy men, when they cannot sleep.

CLXXIII.
ARt thou fallen by a surprise! who has not, or may not fall so? But if these
falls be frequent, there is much danger in such Relapses, and though not fit to
cause despair, yet worthy of great care for the future; lest thy surprises grow
into a habit, and prove but an excuse, when thy self betrays thy self so often,
which will find no credit at the day of Judgment, to procure a pardon from the
Almighty searcher of our hearts; whose Omnipotence is affronted, if we think by
a trick to hide from Him, those crimes we are commanded to confess, bewail, and
forsake.

CLXXIV.
WHen God gives us grace to make holy Vows for self-denials, with power to
perform them, He fails not (by his Holy Spirit) to assure us of his acceptance
thereof, by the joy our hearts will feel after every resistance of Satanical
assaults, which will in little time encourage us to take more and more delight
in those Victories over our selves, who are the greatest Enemies we have.

CLXXV.
IT is no easy work for men in health and prosperity, to think so often and
seriously of Death, as is requisite for our preparation to the Grave, though no
other time is so proper for it: For when pains and sickness d^ distract our
minds, we are only diligent to seek remedies for cure, and often find none, but
do die with a short prayer sighed out; as if [Lord have mercy on us] were a
charm to redeem threescore years misspent in sins and vanities, without any
thought of our Salvation all that time; as if Heaven were too melancholy a
business to trouble our idle heads with, while Youth in vigor reigns, which
seldom affords any credit for the felicity of Piety, and such Romance
discourses as they understand not; while a Righteous man knows no joy on Earth,
like his expectation of Heaven, and living ever ready to die, in hope to be
with God there.

CLXXVI.
WHen God endows the hearts of men with Holiness, it is a sure mark of his
especial favor, to give us a free admission into the Court of Heaven, to be
with Him there, as often as we please, in our Meditations; and if we can
improve this Holiness, so as to become Divine Lovers of Him, we shall be
admitted (as it were) into the Bedchamber of the King of Kings, to enjoy all
the Privileges and Immunities that His departed Saints have there. To know
this, and to do thus, is to enjoy Heaven on Earth; in which felicity, the
Atheist and the Hypocrite can have no share with a Divine Lover, who is ever
ready to be snatched up into Heaven, while he is meditating of his going
thither.

CLXXVII.
IF we have joy in Earthly fruitions, what will our happiness in Heaven be! and
if the hope only, and expectation of Heaven in pious hearts, be pleasure above
all our enjoyments here, what transporting joy will the possession of Eternal
Bliss be! when we shall see God, and participate of his glory as the Angels do;
and if we be so Regenerate as to believe this, and do take delight in such
contemplations, it is a sure sign that the Holy Ghost is at work within us, and
will beget such holy courage in our hearts, as to pass us through the Grave
with cheerful Souls to be with God. And if we love, and trust in Him as we
ought, there can be no Diversions so delight^ul, as such Devotion is to a
Divine Lover, who converses day and night with God, that is never absent from
them who do sincer^ly delight in Him.

CLXXVIII.
WE are taught to pray against sudden death, that is, to persuade and lead us
on to be always so prepared, that no kind of death may be too sudden, but that
we (like Eliah) may every moment expect to be snatched up into Heaven by a
fiery Chariot, or taken up in a flaming zeal of Divine Love, by an Apoplexy, or
some other accident, of as quick an ascent as his Chariot was. But generally
our mistake is, to pray for lingering long sickness, only to gain time for
terrors to awake our sleepy Souls with sighs and tears, to move God to mercy
then, which we valued not before: But the Regenerate man who has so cleared his
accounts with God, at the Holy Sacrament, as to have Christ new born within
him, and is so led by the Holy Ghost as to s^nctifie his future life, that he
lives ever ready, and willing to die: That man will find the most sudden death
to be God's mercy, and a favor to free him from the Agonies of a tedious
sickness; for we too often do mistake such sudden dissolu^ions, for God's
Judgments, to see men fall so; when themselves feel a joy to be caught up into
Heaven, without pain, to take possession of their Eternal Bliss. Now God grant
that all men may be so well prepared for all kind of deaths, as none may be too
sudden, for any who call on his Holy Name.

CLXXIX.
[A Prayer.]
O Holy Ghost, Lord God the Comforter, who art never absent from those that
desire thee with sincerity; vouchsafe, I beseech thee, so to enter my heart
that I may find thee there, consecrating of it for thy Temple, by thy abode
therein; and now direct me how to welcome so great a Guest, with gratitude and
joy, for such Divine comforts, as flow in hearts where thou inhabitest, (and
where Satan dwelt before.) Lord keep possession against Him, and all invading
Enemies; for I cannot defend my self without Thy aid; nor of my self know when,
or how to approach the Throne of Mercy, unless my Addresses be so guided, and
so sanctified by Thee, as God will not reject them.

CLXXX.
[A Prayer.]
O Lord God, I beseech thee give me Grace to employ the great fancy thou have
given me, on my greatest concern, to obtain thy Mercy and Grace, with Christ's
Righteousness, to work out my Salvation; that I may no longer misspend the
time, which every moment hasts on to my Eternity; but with diligent zeal, to
pray for Faith in Christ, such as will be the foundation for a Divine Life, to
show my love to Thee, my God, by an universal obedience, with purity, charity,
and such humility, as will raise my heart unto the highest pitch of Divine
Love; that my conversion may be now more eminent, then my crimes have been. And
now, O God! I beg thy Grace to confirm, and fix my Soul in the assurance of my
Reconciliation, and Adoption, by receiving ^he Holy Sacrament this day with
such faith, and due preparation, as to put off the Old man for ever. And so to
eat, and drink the consecrated Bread and Wine, as the Body and Blood of my Lord
and Savior Jesus Christ, with all his benefits; as He himself gave himself to
his Disciples here on Earth; that I, now by thy Holy Spirit led, may like them,
walk after Him. And let thy mercy, O Lord! supply my defects, in the
pe^formance of this great Duty, according to the sincerity of my heart,
entirely offered up to Thee, my God, in this days Sacrifice; so as the Records
of my sins may be cancelled in Heaven, and my Name be now writ in thy Book of
Life, amongst thy reconciled Sons, on my Savior Jesus Christ's account.

CLXXXI.
TO spend our time on idle thoughts, is like pursuing of vain waking Dreams; a
folly so much less then nothing, that only Mad-mens fancies can delight in, and
is a shame for sober men to imitate, whose Souls refined by Piety, may be ever
on the wing toward Heaven, filled with felicities above the reach of any
worldly hearts to guess at, which is the Pious man's continual entertainment,
and delight; so to pass his time with his Creator here on Earth, as to find his
heart full of something so Divine, that he does think himself in Heaven, while
that Celestial flame enlightens him.

CLXXXII.
IDleness is the fountain of all evil; the Devil directs his chief Emissaries
on Earth, with Addresses to an idle person, who is then fit to take impressions
from all sorts of temptations, when God is absent; it is such men that invite
Satan to steal by degrees into their empty hearts in such disguises, as He well
knows suits best with their idle fancies, so to divert them from all Holy
purposes, with some Idea's of past delightful objects; until they quite forget
their sacred Vows to have God ever in their sight, which secure them from all
such assaults. And it is but a slight Argument, which many men use to excuse
their time spent in idleness, because they want Learning, and the use of Books
for their diversion; when all Ages show, that Piety is not, nor ever was
confined to Learning: It Is not our Wisdom, nor our Eloquence, but our Faith and
our sanctified affections, that is most acceptable to God; and such sincere
affections, will never want devout entertainment to keep our hearts so fixed on
Heaven, and our concern there, as will bassle Satan with all his Arts, as often
as He attaques us.

CLXXXIII.
TO be really contented, is an Epicurism, seldom thought on, and so far from
being understood, as but little valued by the most of men, who are overbusie in
laboring to change our conditions; still aiming to get what we have not,
though the last acquisition rarely brings more satisfaction, then what we had
before. Whereas a contented man, has all that he desires, and enjoys what he
has, because allotted to him by the Divine Providence, who does choose better
for those that do rely on Him, then we can for our selves.

CLXXXIV.
WE ought not to repine at crosses, nor to murmur at sickness, or any other
affliction whatever, because they are God's Cordial Antidotes, to repel the
poison of such sins, as He sees do use to infect our Souls with malignant
diseases, such as create a despairing conscience when we die, and hazard
Eternal Torments in the next World; we are therefore to kiss the Rod that works
so great a cure, and that Hand that smites us in Love, to make us fit for his
Mercy, by repentance, and conversion from being great sinners, to become his
Adopted Sons, and so above the venom of future biting afflictions; for He only
has perfect peace, whose mind is stayed on God, the Rock of our Salvation.

CLXXXV.
NO man can do all that he should do, but all men may do as much as they can
do; and God requires no more, to obtain his Love here, and Salvation hereafter:
But we are naturally so prone to flatter our selves in this point, that when we
think our hearts most safe, we are often surprised by a forsaken sin, and
shamefully subdued by it: For when we make a Covenant with our Eyes, and
Hearts, not to go astray; though we cannot hinder the first look, or thought
that is amiss, we may so check them at first appearance, as they shall not
invade us a second time, nor bite on, to harm us; so that, if we do stumble
heedlesly, we may prevent wilful tumbling into Relapses, and wallowing in them,
for which there is no excuse.

CLXXXVI.
IT is worthy of observing, how some men by a long customed and settled habit
of living ill, have so Naturalized their sins to themselves, and themselves to
the Devil, as in time they grow to think it a point of honor and conscience,
to be constant to that profession, and are ashamed to quit Satan's black Livery,
which they prefer before their first engagement to God in Baptism. I have heard
a Gentleman say, that when he had lived many years in great Iniquities, it
pleased God by a long sickness, to beget such remorse in his heart, as upon his
recovery to become a Convert: But for a long time after, he did conceal this
change, as ashamed to practice his conversion by a public new course of life,
(so much out of fashion) and did many times in conversatio^ seem to like, what
he liked not, to avoid being thought an Hypocrite; until he considered how much
greater a shame it was, to serve God in a corner, so to smother his highest Act
of Mercy toward him, in not daring to own the thoughts of his Salvation; and
how unworthy he was to become an Adopted Son of God, while he feared to declare
his Hope of so high an Advancement: On which account, he did take courage to
profess his Conversion, which he thought not fully to manifest until the hour
of his death. By which we may see, how dangerous it is to run on in habitual
sins, until we grow ashamed to forsake them.

CLXXXVII.
IT is a wonder to consider, that mankind should be so universally bred up from
our Infancy to study, and by laborious callings to employ our Talents of Sense
and Reason, in the acquisition of such perishing goods, as the World affords;
and generally so late begin to inform our selves of our Souls intrinsic value,
being created for a participation of God's Glory, when ascended into Heaven;
how unworthy an exchange then do we make, who believe this, and yet do
violently labor for the shortliv'd vanities, (and indeed) the nothingness of
this World, in comparison with Eternity, at the immense price of our Immortal
Souls loss, and our Eternal joys in Heaven, for everlasting flames in Hell. And
this, because we do not consider, that God did not make the World, to mock man
with fallacious delights in the enjoyment of his Creatures, but intended it for
our entertainment, and diversions in our Journey to Heaven; and therefore has
given us rational Souls, such as by living virtuously, we may enjoy the World
and Him together; and so advance our selves by gratitude, and love here, to a
confirmation of a full ^ruition of Him at the Resurrection: Thus if we would
sincerely study virtue, and set a true value on the perfection of
Righteousness, we might enjoy this World with double pleasure, and have Heaven
hereafter, with all its Glory also.

CLXXXVIII.
WE do mistake nothing in this World, more then our pleasures, which we do
compel our fancies to comply in, and do often take more pains to justify
those vanities, then any delight we find in such short-lived fruitions: Whereas
if our hearts were set on God, and our Souls raised to serious thoughts of our
Eternal Bliss; such Divine entertainments, would grow to a continual feast,
^ull of surprising joys, and such Heavenly delights, that we should with pain
suffer, and with remorse endure our vain diversions, and lament to see that our
Nature does require such frequent relaxes from our most rarefied, and ratified
Devotions.

CLXXXIX.
WE cannot want Arguments for Meditation, if we call to mind our Christianity,
that is, diligently examine if we do participate of Christ's Righteousuess, to
such a degree, that our conversion from sin, and our natural corruptions, be
changed into such an Evangelical habit of Holiness, as to manifest our
Spiritual Resurrection, and Election to our own hearts; for then, nothing can
engage us unto higher gratitude, and love, then a true sense of so great a
benefit received, which when seriously considered, will mount up our Souls to
frequent ecstasies of blessed Joy, by our devout approaches in Adoration of God
the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, who are all three always working us up
to our Salvation. Then which, nothing can be more worthy of our Meditation, and
sincere examination, that we may be ready for the day of Judgment; which no man
can be, that does not live so, as to be cheerfully ready to die; for it is a
much greater business to go out of the World, then to live in it.

CXC.
NO other man can cozen us so much, as we cozen our selves, in what we like;
because we naturally raise fallacious reasonings, against true reason, to
justify our unlawful desires; and do very easily persuade our selves to comply
with our most idle fancies, and eagerest appetites, to what we know is against
all Reason, and Religion too; thinking that our frailty is excuse enough, to
follow our blind inclinations to evil; and do also indulge our aversion to
goodness, on the same account, so long as our endeavors do prosper in
wickedness. But when we are Thunderstruck by some surprising affliction, then
we can begin to think, and to find how much better, and pleasanter it is to
delight in God, and by our utmost endeavors to improve that delight, by
frequent and fervent Addresses, until we obtain new Celestial joys, which soon
discard all our old Carnal fruitions, by a constant fixing of our whole hearts
on Heaven; so as to be really offended at the most necessary diversions, when
they interrupt our Divine communication with Christ, for the hastening on of our
preparation toward that Eternal Glory he has purchased for us. Which is the
most joyful expectation of a Regenerate man, who sees the difference between
momentary Vanities, and everlasting Bliss, and sets him on fire to desire above
all things, to fix his heart on God, and to delight in Holiness, as his supreme
felicity on this side Heaven.

CXCI.
WHoever has the patience to read, and the Piety to practice these plain
Lessons, (if he observe it) will find that his felicity does increase with his
Devotion, and that his days will grow fuller and fuller of tranquillity, in the
midst of Worldly Storms, and feel them not. Let him also observe with what
security he sleeps, with what joy he awakes at all hours to find his heart at
work with God, before his Eyes are quite open, giving God thanks for all his
Mercies, and above all the rest, for thus turning him from all his Iniquities
before it be too late, that he might not trust unto the uncertain security of
the best Deathbed Repentance; but to live and die so reconciled to God, as to
manifest his pre-conversion, by a chear^ul Righteous life, and a joyful
Resignation of his Soul unto Christ when he expires, will be joy indeed.

CXCII.
JUdge not the serious looks of every pensive man, as if his heart were
oppressed with discontents; who may that minute be conversing with God in
Meditation, and triumphing over the Glories of this World, which thou enjoyest
with all its delights, and which he may have had as high as mortal man can
fancy fading happiness; But now, as tired with busy Crowds, and cloyed with
glistering Vanities, He entertains his Soul with inward elevated joys, for so
great a Victory over himself, which thou see not; and do therefore pity, or
condemn, what thou would admire, if clearly understood.

CXCIII.
IF the Spirit of Divine Meditation, were with sincere affection fully
improved, by the diligent practice of raising our Souls as near to God, as our
mortal fancies can reach; the Holy Ghost would at such times assist us with
such increase of Piety, and such growing joys in our near approaches to the
Throne of Mercy, as would show us some bright Rays of that glorious Majesty we
adore, to affect our Souls with such transporting thoughts, as would set our
hearts on fire, with eager desires to be amongst those Angels that do attend on
the Majesty of Heaven; whose love and goodness, in mercy admits us Dust and
Ashes, so to converse with Him, as a clear Testimony to our own hearts of our
Adoption; by which pious practicing to fix our affections on God, we shall so
delight in Him, as now to conquer all those Imperious Appetites, that have so
often conquered us; and may soon learn the Celestial Military Art, to subdue
all temptations that assault us; and from their Ruins, raise fresh Trophies
every day, most acceptable to God, and so beneficial to our selves, that we may
discern our Souls mounting up to Heaven thereon.

CXCIV.
WE ought to look on Death, as chief Jailer on Earth, God's prime Officer, by
Him entrusted only with the custody of our imprisoned Bodies in the Grave,
until the great Jail-delivery at the day of Judgment; when Death must deliver
up our imprisoned Dust, at a moments warning, to meet our Souls at God's
Tribunal; where his Office ends with Himself, who is then no more. So that
instead of quarrelling with Death, for doing of his duty, let us make peace,
and get a Reconciliation with his great Master, that we be not lodged in Deaths
Dungeon, amongst the impenitent Malefactors, but may be placed in his best
Apartment, with the Reconciled sinners, by God's Grace become Saints, and pray
that we may with them appear in their glorious Resurrection, with our Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ.

CXCV.
I That write my own thoughts only to review them, for my own satisfaction,
must say again and again, that whoever seeks God with sincerity, will certainly
find him, and shall find that he has found him: And though early seeking, and
early finding be best, as most safe, because no man can promise himself one
minute longer to seek God, then his first call to it; yet if he find favor to
be called again, and be sent to work in God's Vineyard at the last hour of his
day, and God see that he works then, with such vigor in that last hour, as if
he would equal, or outdo, any that came in to work before him; the Lord of the
Vineyard observes his endeavors, and rewards him equal with the first comers.
(Though no man ought to trust unto a Deathbed Repentance on this Argument)

Because the best Rule is, to remember thy Creator in the days of thy Youth;
the next best is, to remember Him in the time of full Manhood, in the strength
and vigor of thy Age; but if not then, the next best is to remember him in thy
Old Age, before thou have quite forgot him, lest it be too late; for though it
be last, and worst, yet then is not too late with God, if we answer whenever He
calls, He will give us Grace to do whatever he calls for* And to give him then
our whole hearts bathed in peni^ential tears, full of contrition for all past
offenses, he will accept them, and make us see that his Mercy has ^ollowed us,
through all our wild insolent con^empts of the highest nature, which aggravates
repeated sins, after pardons upon pardons begged: So that when God does not
forsake, but follow and watch over such Reprobates, and does snatch them from
the brink of destruction, it is to bring them to a Reconciliation, and such a
Resurrection from sin, as will support them for ever after by his Holy Spirit;
which shows that his Mercy, and his Grace, are beyond the power of our sins to
deface; for if our Repentance, and Contrition, be His own work within us, the
operation of that Grace will testify, that his Mercy endures for ever.

Let no man then despair of Gods Mercy, or think it too late to repent, if he
can forsake his Iniquities, so as for the future to love and serve God as he
ought; for above all things, we must believe that God does abound in Mercy and
Grace, more then we can do in sins; and that Jesus Christ is the Lord our
Righteousness, and when we find that the Holy Ghost dwells so in our hearts, as
to create an effectual application of God the Father, and the Sons work within
us; we may comfort our selves with an humble assurance that all three, the
whole Trinity together, have wrought this Salvation for our sick Souls; when
restored to such health, and favor as to fall into no more desperate Relapses,
after we come to a true sense, and shame for our dangers past, and such a joy
for our escape, as becomes Regenerate men: And then, we shall know no felicity
on Earth, that exceeds such an expectation of Heaven, as will fill the hearts
of men endued with such transports from above. And this great Blessedness, the
most illiterate man is as capable of, as the most Learned; for God will be
found, according to the sincerity of those that seek Him, not for their
Abilities, or Qualities; and Jesus Christ is ever as willing to be the Rock of
our Salvation, as we can be desirous to build on Him, for our Foundation.

CXCVI.
WE do too often mistake Repentance, and abuse our selves with a belief that a
few customary sighs, will blow our sins out of Gods remembrance, and his
Judgments also from lighting on us; but we shall find it far otherwise in the
end: For if by the recollecting* and renouncing of our sins, with zealous
confessing them to God, will not draw tears from our Eyes, we are to heighten
our contrition, by a foresight and aggravation, of such Eternal torments, as
are due unto us from our incensed God, and to pray with vigorous sighs, and
ardent groans instead of tears, until our hearts do melt within us, to express
the sense we have of our offenses, and by frequent repeating our indignation
against our selves, with the greatest remorse we can raise our hearts to; that
so we may divert Gods Judgments, and convert them into Mercy and Grace, through
our Faith in the Blood of Christ, which only can wash all sins, and all sorrows
for sin, from our hearts, and then fill our Souls with a joyful feeling of our
Reconciliation: Thus by sincerity striving with our utmost endeavors to
imitate, and to outdo the returning Prodigal, in our Repentance, we may be
restored and welcomed into our Fathers house, and in his Arms find our Eternal
Rest.

CXCVII.
WHen long habitual sinners are called to repentance by Grace from above, so as
to become fully reconciled to God, such men ought to give Glory unto his Holy
Name, by some eminent way of expressing their gratitude for so great a
blessing, and for ever after to live close up to Heaven, on the strength of
their new Reconciliation, and in expectation that every moment they breath, may
be their last puff of breath, which is Death; in which puff their Souls expire
into everlasting Bliss: So that as often as they lie down to sleep, and when
they awake to work, until they sleep again, they should (with all their worldly
affairs) mingle devout reflections on the Mercies they have received; and feed
on those Celestial Fruits which grow from their Divine Reconciliation, such as
will keep them ever watchful, and ever ready for Gods call to their Eternal
Rest, and make them joyful at their quickest passage thither. For sudden death,
seems only uneasy and unsafe to lookers on, unto whom surprises are most
terrible, but can be none unto them who every minute do expect, what they know
is every minute coming on, and is most welcome to such Souls as the Holy Spirit
dwells with; by which sure marks of their Election, they are ever ready and
desirous to be with God, which expectation is the highest felicity that man can
have on Earth.

CXCVIII.
WE do generally flatter our selves with a belief that our chief aim is to be
in Heaven, and to enjoy God there, while we fear nothing more then going
thither; and it is because we do not seriously enough consider what it is to
die, until the moment we are dying. And yet our tongues do talk so frequently
of Death, as if we thought of nothing else; but such slight thoughts do vanish
with those Airy discourses, and we as soon forget to prepare for what we were
talking of; which makes so many men start back from the fruition of their
highest wishes, and are frighted from taking possession of their Eternal
happiness. And though dying cheerfully be a Divine valor, above the reach of
Dust and Ashes, God does ever support those that are his, with such a
proportion of Holiness and Righteousness, for their Souls spiritual food and
nourishment, as shall add courage unto all that desire to be with Him; and they
shall be so, the moment that they die; which is sufficient consolation, to
invite men to live so piously, as to die cheerfully.

CXCIX.
THough no man's Piety can attain to the purity of Angels, until they become
Angels; yet pious men's Evangelical Righteousness, may be blessed with such a
degree of Angelical Holiness, as to raise their Divine affections toward God
so high, as to delight in Him, above all the glories of this World; and fix
such a conversation in Heaven, as to be humbly assured of a joyful Resurrection
to Glory, with Christ and his departed Saints; which is felicity enough to set
men's ambitious hearts on cleansing, and purifying here, that they may become
capable of so great honor and Eternal joy, as to have Angels places in Heaven
when they die.

CC.
THough the Divine Mysteries of Heaven, and the Joys there, be Gods secrets,
undiscernible by us; yet we are allowed to think that all things there, must be
far more excellent then our highest fancies can reach, and yet by the
sanctified operations of the Holy Ghost, which we find in our own Souls, when
inflamed with elevated zeal to God in our sincere Addresses, and when our
hearts are engaged in Meditations above wha^ any words can express; it is
evident that those Seraphick joys, which are reserved until we see God face to
face, must needs be infinitely more ravishing delightful, then what is revealed
unto flesh and blood; so that it is no wonder if some men (who do believe this)
do retire from the diverting affairs of this World, to entertain their Souls
with such contemplations of Heaven, as may bring them unto a more frequent, and
nearer conversation with God, when they have such a taste of those joys in
Heaven, as no other man can guess at, unless by the same Light led! And then,
such Meditations will be of great use, to prepare such men for a cheerful
departure out of this World for ever; which nothing can so well do, as an
inward assurance from above, that they shall go to a better place for ever, and
to better company for ever; and happy is that man, whose Soul is feasted here,
with the thoughts of the joys in Heaven.

CCI.
OUr Time is the greatest Treasure that we have; which we may call one way,
well spent, when we give it, with our selves, to attend on Gods Vicegerents
here on Earth; by his appointment to serve his Princes, and Himself together;
and so may live eminent examples of virtue, and die with the credit of our time
well spent, to show others that Piety may grow in Courts, and prosper there.

Though it sometimes happens, that some men fail, and that some men's most
lawful acquisitions by honest industry obtained, may be torn from them by Envy,
and undue means, who may also undergo such severe censures as they deserve not,
from the misguided tongues of malicious men, who see not the true cause of
every Ruin, which often does proceed from Gods Justice for some concealed past
sins, to punish us by such means, for such crimes as we have hid from men, but
cannot hide from Him.

So that we may charge our punishment for sin, on the perverse nature of our
own improvident selves, who do neglect the Redeeming of our misspent time
while we may, and by Repentance obtain Gods pardon, on which depends our
present happiness, with our future Eternal Bliss, or Eternal Woe, not enough
thought on, to make us Redeem our time, in time.

And hereon we may with shame consider of, and guess at, what the fallen Angels
would give, if they had whole Worlds to dispose of; what would they not do! how
many thousand years with joy suffer the Torments they are in, to have the time
(we value not) allowed them, to be admi^ted unto a possibility of repentance,
and pardon, by Redeeming their misspent time, of their Rebellion in Heaven,
before they fell from thence to Hell.

While we careless men, do pamper our vi^ious frailties, so as never to value
the time we have, until it be gone beyond recall, un^il the despairing terrors
of a Dea^h-bed state do let us see that God in Justice gives us over unto
perdition, because we would not Redeem our misspent time, and seek His Mercy,
before the Evil day overtakes us; which we all know is every moment hasting on,
ready to swallow us up into everlasting flames. But to such men as the terrors
of Hell cannot fright, nor the joys of Heaven invite to Redeem their time, in
time, nothing more can be said, but Lord have mercy on them, who will not have
mercy on themselves; for no misery can be greater, then when miserable men will
not commiserate their own misery; but will hope from a Deathbed, to jump up
into Heaven at once: But they will find the ascent too high, too steep, and too
hard for those to climb up in such have, who never learnt to know the right way
thither.

CCII.
WHen a Soul is in fervent conference with God, about its Eternity, the Holy
Ghost will be working that Soul up to see that Eternity, gives an addition of
joy, to the joys in Heaven, and those joys do also increase the Glory of
Eternity; all which Eternity, Joy, and Glory there, Christ has purchased for
penitent sinners become Regenerate, and reconciled unto God, by Faith in his
Blood; and as our proportions of Faith do increase, our desires will increase
to be with God; as often as we dare remember that we must die, and are every
moment dying.

Although we cannot attain to be inspired Prophets like David, nor reach the
first Rank of Saints with St. Paul, we may become Penitents, and Divine Lovers
in some degree like them; though not to shine so eminently on Earth as they
did, yet we may follow their steps here, so as to share in the ^ame Glory with
them at the Resur^ection, when converted reconciled sinners are invited to the
same Eternal happiness, as the departed Saints enjoy there And what can be more
wished for to encourage us to live piously, and die cheerfully, then to be with
God in Glory?

CCIII.
WE should avoid many great crimes, if we could d^scern the deformity of sins,
through the Devils gay Curtains always drawn close to hide them, until Death
displays them in their true colors; which then will fright us into despair, at
the sight of such gri^ly Aspects, as we so joyfully embraced for prime
felicities. But if we can learn the pious skill to draw such Curtains timely,
those Fiends behind them will vanish on a full view, not able to endure the
Test of such a discovery.

CCIV.
DId we believe Heaven to be, what Heaven is, we could not prefer this World
before it; and if we did love God better then his Creatures, we should not
forsake Him so often as we do, for them; and if we did think of Eternity as we
ought, we should grudge every moment that diverts our hearts on trifles, when
every minute may be our last here, and the next may crown us with Eternal
Glory. So that we should set our hearts to raise our thoughts on frequent, and
full considera^ions of our Deathbeds, and think seriously how the terrors of
unrepented sins will bite then; and what a joyful passage our Souls will have,
if reconciled before! and then we should need no other Arguments then such
thoughts, to persuade us to live so Righteously, as to be ever ready on the
shortest summons, to step into that Eternity of Bliss.

CCV.
IT is said in Scripture, that as many as are led by the Spirit of God, they
are the Sons of God; which is a sure foundation to raise high structures on, by
which we may climb to Heaven, in a constant conversation with our great Maker,
in most delightful Addresses; for if we can by frequent practice, follow this
Divine-guiding Light, we shall learn that Celestial Road so perfectly, that we
may travel day and night safely, without mistaking of our way, or failing of
our happy Rest at our Journeys end; which we shall more then guess at here, by
the present joy we find in our way thither. And if we observe our sleeps also,
our very Dreams will entertain our Souls with pleasure, above the reach of any
waking fancies; and by all this, we shall certainly find something from above,
that will beget a consolation in a purified heart, to testify that it is Gods
work within us, who mocks no man's sincere ardent desires, with false hopes of a
felicity he shall not find, for by a righteous life, and lively Faith, His
improved Grace will bring our natural frailties to die so cheerfully, that we
shall leave no pleasures behind us, so great, in this World, as we shall have
by going out of it to Him.

CCVI.
A Dream of Heaven.
THough sleep Deaths Image be, I have been now
I know not where, conveyed I know not how!
Where something did appear so dazzling bright,
I could not see its Glory, for the Light:
My Soul surpised with wonder, and amaze,
Methought I prayed, and did forbear to gaze:
Frighted, and pleased, at what I liked, and feared,
I found it was a Dream of Heaven appeared,
Which waking fled* but did my fancy fill
With blessed Idea's, which abide there still:
With such transporting joy, that I can weep
To think of what I had, and could not keep:
CCVII.
HE that would improve the pleasure of Piety, is to consider how his Body does
every moment descend toward the Grave; which will invite him to excite his
Soul to mount much faster toward Heaven, by such a continual devout contest,
which shall move fastest, that he will grow to such a delightful zeal to God,
that every step as he ascends, will raise his holy ambition higher and higher,
with joy on joy, until his last puff of breath conveys his Soul into God's
Eternal Glory; and all the way thither, will teach him to tread on the Thorns
and Thistles of this World, as if he walked on Roses and Lillies, through the
joyful expectation of his felicity at last.

CCVIII.
A Divine Author says, That every man ought to be of some calling, that he may
be of some use unto the State where God has made his station; for he that will
be good for nothing in this World, is as nothing, and shall be nothing in the
next; he is but as an Excrement on Earth, none of Gods useful Creatures; so
that to be of a lawful calling, and diligent in it, may expect a blessing from
Heaven on his honest endeavors. And Princes whose calling is of a general
concern, are set on Pyramids, that all the World may see and imitate their
Virtues; Judges must be vigilant in doing Justice; great Commanders at Sea and
Land, must be prudently, not rashly valiant; the Workman must work; the
Courtier must wait; the Merchant must travel; the Preacher must teach; and the
greatest Reprobate (if he becomes Regenerate!) has a great calling also; for he
ought to declare his conversion, by his future life and conversation, that his
Devotion may be more eminent then his Crimes were; so to manifest Gods mercy to
himself, and by his example to show others the way to Heaven: So that no man
should hide his Talent, that can by any honest means improve it for the good of
others. The Hypocrite is the only unhappy man this way, who will himself
perish, though he do good by encouraging others to Piety by his example, who
cannot discern the Hypocrites counterfeit zeal, that travels through the Church
of God, as his nearest way to Hell.

CCIX.
WHen we have repented our sins, and forsaken them, and received the Holy
Sacrament, (which is the Seal of our Reconciliation) we are not to fright our
selves with the memory of our forgotten crimes, but must express our gratitude,
by recollecting and acknowledging the evils we have done, with the highest
aggravation that we can; so to magnify the free mercy of God, with Christ's
merits, for pardoning such great crimes; and then to comfort our hearts with
the Gospel-consolations thereon. So that no man ought to despair of a place in
Heaven, that does sincerely endeavor to get in, when the Father, the Son, and
the Holy Ghost, are so active to bring us thither; and yet we find it a very
hard Lesson to learn to die cheerfully, when the practice of our whole lives
can seldom teach us in seventy years to be perfect in it when we die.

CCX.
LEt us not lament the long time we lie in Dust before the day of Judgment; for
those who died six thousand years since, and we that die now, with them that
die a thousand years after us, shall all awake the same moment at the
Resurrection; and all this time shall be but as one moment divided amongst us
all; for death, and sleep, distinguishes no time until we awake from both. So
that we may reckon, that we shall be in Abraham's Bosom the moment we expire,
though we shall not know what is meant by Abraham's Bosom, until we, with the
departed Saints, arise from thence together.

CCXI.
HE that considers what Evils he has done, with all the aggravations belonging
to such crimes, must needs be terror-struck at his hour of death, to think what
great punishments are due to such innumerable offenses so often repeated, if
not reconciled unto God before that time; (but if so blessed) what comforts
will that black Soul find! when by tru^ Repentance, and Faith, he is washed
white as Snow, by Christ's Blood in the Sacrament, and purified into Adams first
Innocence, and so be thus metamorphosed from a Devil, into an Adopted Son of
God, by a blessed union with Christ, and filled with such serene joys as are
beyond expression; and yet our frailties are such, that when we know this, and
can do thus, we are still so subject unto Relapses, that we cannot stand in
this happy station, a minute longer then by Gods Grace supported; to let us
see, that we must not depend on our own Righteousness, but are to pray
continually for Christ's Righteousness to bring us to Heaven.

CCXII.
CHrist said, I am in the Father, and you in me, and I in you; he also said,
that if you ask any thing in my Name, I will do it; these are two short Lessons
of mighty consequence, for what can man desire more then to be in God? and what
can we wish for more, then to have what we ask? and what can sinful man ask
more, then forgiveness of all past sins, and Grace to sin no more? by Christ^
s^nding the Holy Ghost to sanctify us, and to dwell with us for ever, and so
to conduct us into Heaven when we die.

CCXIII.
WE ought to think often, and to rejoice as often as we think, that the Holy
Ghost is never absent from them that sincerely desire Him, and do give Him a
warm welcome into a cheerful heart; and he that can afford this Holy Spirit a
full possession at his reception, may keep him ever there, and will always find
that He is with him, by the operation of his Grace where He inhabits, still
exciting him to love and delight in the Law of God, and impowering him by his
Divine-guiding Light, to live after the Law of Righteousness, which will bring
him to such a union with Christ here, as will assure his Eternal Rest with God
in Glory at the Resurrection.

CCXIV.
THough a lazy idle retired life, be not according to the Christian Rule, that
says, no man is born only for himself, but is bound to employ his Talent given
to him, for Gods Glory, and the good of others; yet some men who have spent
many years in the busy affairs of this World, with honest industry in their
callings, may without a crime retire in their old Age, from the noise and hurry
of business, and also quit those gaieties, which they find through a long
custom, that their frailty cannot totally re^ist their participation of; and on
that account may retire from such diversions as do disturb the full
consideration, and preparation for their Eternal Being in the next World. By
which retiring also, they may teach others to become so Regenerate, as to find
more felicity in private contemplations of Heaven, then in all Earthly
fruitions; which those that live in continual crowds, can hardly find time for.

CCXV.
IT is great Piety for a man in health, to live ever ready to die; but it is
another kind of story, for a dying man to rejoice that his hour is come to go
to God, and to quit his share in all the glories of this World. So that we are
often to contemplate this great point of Religion, and to practice on Deaths
Image (sleep) every night when we lie down to Rest, that we may learn to
complete our preparation for that mighty work of dying cheerfully, which is so
much discoursed of, and so seldom seen, though our last Pangs do frequently
seem to comply with what we cannot hinder; and nothing can more conduce to cure
this natural frailty, then setting our hearts to love the Law of God, and to
show it by word and deed, and holding a constant conversation with our Creator,
in the daily raising of our Faith, and our affection to our Resurrection from
Deaths Dominion, unto His everlasting Bliss in Heaven.

CCXVI.
THere is no felicity in this World, without a contented mind; and there can be
no full contentment, without such a fixed dependence on God, as to be pleased
with whatever He appoints, as best for us. Which Divine contentment, will raise
our hearts to such a gratitude to God, with such a conversation in Heaven, as
will beget an holy courage to contemn all the crosses, and all the allurements
this World can afford; and this Spiritual contentment we ought to cherish, as
Gods great favor, for us to delight in while we live, and to trust in when we
die, as a mark of our Election; thus to divert us from longing after the
perishing Glories of this World, that never can assure us any lasting
contentment by their enjoyment, nor any comfort when we expire.

CCXVII.
HE that writes Devotion, walks on a narrow Plank with Precipices on either
side, and is in danger to slip into the Gulf of Spiritual Pride on his own
Righteousness, or else in too much humility for his own unworthiness, may
presume to think, that some things from the Holy Ghost informs him with
Evangelical Rapsodies, when his Soul soars so high toward Heaven. So that in
our best Actions, we are with humble and grateful hearts, to give the honor
and the glory unto God, for all that we do well.

CCXVIII.
TO love God, and to be beloved of God, is an immense Meditation; which by
practice, must needs improve our Interest in Heaven: for when God sees our
Souls set to seek him this way, He will send his Holy Spirit to raise our
ambitions higher and higher, to gain his favor, in hope of such an union with
Christ, as our nature is capable of; by which such elevated enlightened hearts
will find a felicity on Earth, that no man's thoughts can guess at, that does
not feel it, with a joyful assurance of being received into Heaven when he
dies; so that we cannot have a better Argument to invite us to live Piously,
and to die cheerfully, then to love God thus; for the true joy of a good Soul
in this World, is the very joy of Heaven, which Death shall not take away, nor
interrupt it one moment.

CCXIX.
WE may do well to observe David's method in his Victory over his sins, when
they were his declared Enemies: He did not retire from his charge and calling,
to hide himself from their assaulting temptations, but forced them to fly from
him; and pursued them so, as they might never be able to return upon him. And
having thus vanquished, and discarded all those his old Companions, when he
perceived them to be his Enemies; He soon became a man after Gods own heart,
and then found that he had strength, company, power, joy, wealth, and honor
enough in God alone, with whom he spent the most of his time after, in Prayers
and in Praises. So that as He did, we should discard our old evil habits, and
all our old Companions, (workers of Iniquity) and make them fly from us, as
David did, and then we shall find all those joys in our conversation with God,
which David had.

CCXX.
DAvid says, that God heard the voice of his weeping; which shows that the
sighs and tears of penitent sinners, are heard in Heaven without words, and
that devout tears which cannot speak, do speak aloud in Gods ears; nay, when we
desire to weep, but cannot pour out tears themselves, (Doctor Dunne says) that
God sees tears in the hearts of men, before they blubber on their faces; and He
is said to hear the tears of a sorrowful Soul, which for sorrow cannot shed a
tear; the very lifting up our Eyes to God, in a sincere sorrow, opens Him
windows, through which He sees a wet heart through the driest Eyes; and by his
returns of Grace, gives comforts, with the blessed peace of a quiet conscience,
to assure our Reconciliation unto Him; that we may with cheerful hearts expect
Deaths summons unto our Eternal Rest in Heaven.

CCXXI.
THe supine Epicure, the practical Atheist, and the divine Hypocrite have
gained so great a Vogue in some parts of the World, as has almost worn true
Christian Religion out of Fashion, and out of Countenance too; while those are
thought ill-bred men that practice any Piety; and none so well accomplished as
they who have those three eminent Virtues in most perfection, which do very
often dwell together in such careless Hearts, as do not at all consider, or not
enough examine their integrity toward God.

CCXXII.
WE do generally wonder at, and pity the Melancholy Lives of some devout
Hermits, who are retired into desolate Habitations from the converse of Men:
But do not consider the blessed contentment which their Souls enjoy in a
conversation with God, as if themselves were then in Heaven; with such an
ambitious Zeal, as fills their Hearts with Happiness, and holds up their Souls
so fixed on Christ, as to desp^se all the Glories of this World. So that we
ought not to pity those happy men, but to look on them as Divine Objects, fit
for our devout Envy and immitation, who do enjoy felicities above the reach of
Earthly minds to judge of* But yet every pious man, that can give his whole
Heart to God, needs not give his whole time too (for we are required to serve
God more ways than one,) and may convert our Closets into Cells, where we may
be sure to find God as often as we desire to meet him there; as well as on the
tops of Rocks, who will not be confined to time, or place, that is ever with us
every where. So that the Mountain Hermit, and the City Hermit, may have
Spiritual entertainments, and comforts alike, while they Live, and may Die with
as high delight to be with God; and may shine equally as bright in Heaven, when
they meet there.

CCXXI.
LEt us redeem the time we have misspent, while we have time to do it, by
making ready for our summons to the Grave, as our prime business here; and when
God sees our hearts are fully fixed on Him, He will guide and conduct us
through the dark rugged paths of Death, by the bright consolations of his Holy
Spirit, to entertain us with comfort and delight, in our passage unto His
Eternal Rest. Let us then set our Souls joy on this great work, and observe how
Gods Grace, and our felicity does increase together, upon the remission of all
our sins, and Reconciliation to God.

CCXXII.
AN habitual sinner that perseveres in his wickedness unto the end of his days,
seems to think that his Baptismal Vow was to serve the World, the Flesh, and
the Devil, and to forsake God and all his Commandments.

CCXXIII.
IT is not to be thought that any man can die cheerfully, that does not believe
he is then going to God; and no man can believe that he is then going to God,
but he that loves God, and fears to offend Him: so that he only can be truly
happy here, who can so fix his heart on God, as to find that his highest
Happiness in this World, is in preparing to go out of it; but most men in
health, are too apt to think themselves ever ready to die, and do not find that
they are not, until the Bell tolls them to their Grave.

CCXXIV.
IF there be one sin more predominant then all the rest, that by its frequent
Victories over thy frail Nature, is now grown too strong for thy control;
stand always on thy Guard hereafter, to watch its first Assault, and be so well
Armed against surprises, as to have time to call in Aid from Heaven, to assist
when such an Usurping Enemy appears, as thy own strength cannot resist: But let
not thy new courage fail, fight bravely on to thy last gasp, and rather die
then yield; never submit, never comply with such a known Enemy; for when it
cannot compel thee to consent, as formerly, 'twill quit the Field, ashamed to
be so baffled by its Slave, so frequently subdued before. And thus by a stout
resistance, thou will find inward unseen Aids, to humble that Triumphant sin,
that has so often Tyrannized over thee.

CCXXV.
TO die, while we are dying, is not strange;
But to be so unwilling to exchange
Our anxious days, in a distracted time,
For an Eternal Rest, and joy sublime,
Is want of Faith, or value for our God,
To shun his presence, and embrace his Rod:
Pretend to Heaven, but still do from it fly,
Because we will not, dare not learn to dye;
Though we can only when our Souls expire,
Obtain long life, which we so much desire.
Could we divide a moment to the Eye,
We should see Life, the moment that we dye;
And Faith does fully that defect supply,
For though my Body dies, it is not I.
CCXXVI.
POSTSCRIPT.
THe concealed Author, doubting that he may be too soon known, does think fit
to make some Apology for exposing so many loose Lines unto the censure of the
World; and does only hope, that all good men will in charity look on his
Midnight Thoughts, as rough Oar found in a rich Golden Mine, from which they
may wash away the Soil, and lay up the pure Gold for use*

FINIS.
CCXXVII.
NO man can guess at the felicity of holyMeditations but those who constantly
converse with God that way; and who have obtained grace to be admired at all
times to such near aproaches, that their souls seem to be entertained amongst
the Angels in Gods presence, while those Divine Addresses last; by which God
also seems to manifest his Mercy unto the souls of men, in showing them some
glimps of that Eternal glory they shall share in at the Resurrection; to fill
our hearts with blessed Ideas of his Celestial Joys.

CCXXVIII.
HE that would know true joy on Earth must secure his Eternal Bliss unto his
own heart; not only by confessing, bewailing, and forsaking his known sins in
hope of pardon; but must express his Love to God, and his gratitude for that
pardon; with a true value of it, by improving his peace of conscience thereon
with a Continual Conversation in Heaven for the future; and thereby raising his
soul to such a delightful Love of God, as to find that the prime entertainment
of his heart, is to be so retired with his Creator, and Redeemer, that he may
observe how the Holy Ghost is ever present with them to improve his delight in
them, unto as high joy as man is capable off on this side of Heaven: And
whoever can obtain grace, thus to make his Devotion his prime pleasure on
Earth, will perceive a new kind of felicity, by such an exaltation in his soul
as will raise his affection to God above all other Divisions. And then, if such
Meditations do show him such a prospect of his Eternal Bliss, as does create a
Faithful expectation of Heaven so delightful here; He may presume that he shall
not want Divine Valor to die cheerfully, when he is called to take possession
of that glorious purchase which Christ had made for him there.

CCXIX.
IT is worthy of observation, and our most serious Meditations, to see how much
all men of all humors, and all conditions, Young and Old, are generally of one
mind in our great Journey through this world; Where we are humbled together,
and tossed, and tumbled in rough rugged ways up and down steep Hills, full of
hopes and fears, still entertained with more storms than shunshine, and never
free from such dangers, as do fill most men's hearts with unquiet thoughts
through their own Journey; though some good men well Armed, can smile, and
sleep it out with patience, while others sighing, groan and weep the whole way
through: And too many there be in this great Caravan, who Laugh and sing, and
merrily pass their whole time without a thought of whether they are going,
until their turn comes to be tumbled out into the Pit, with as little regard as
they went thither. But almost all, are all the way of the same mind, to Linger
on in their uneasy passage, rather than once heartily to wish to see their
Journeys end; and very few there are, that do entertain any joyful thoughts of
their arrival there at Last; So that till Time by Day and Night, of course
transports them thither; though tied and Cripled by various hardships in their
long travels, very many do wish they might return the rugged way they came; to
endure another age of sorrows, pains, and troubles, rather than to alight from
their Woren-out Wagons, to rest a while in their own Homes, though they know
there is no other way to pass unto Eternal Bliss. But when they find the
wheels, and Axel-trees that bore them up, do crack under their heavy burdens,
past all hope to carry them any Longer on; then to late, they flatter
themselves with vain hopes to flatter God, as if they did desire to be with
Him; When they do know that God does see, that nothing could by them be done,
to keep them longer from Him. For which great frailty in Mankind, the only sure
cure is, to think of, and prepare for our journeys End, all the way we travel
thither; And then the expectation of that joy, and that Glory we march toward,
will sweeten all we suffer on our way to God. And happy are those men, that can
obtain grace to travel so to Heaven, as to get such a taste of those Celestial
joys in their way thither, as will make their hearts glad to think they shall
Arrive, where they are to Rest for ever in peace, and Glory.

CCXXX.
IF we believe Charity to be a prime Christian Duty; to relieve the Poor by our
purses, and by our good council, and virtuous lives, to reform sinners, How
great an offense is it! for Christians to oppress their Neighbors, by unjust
power, and to seduce others unto evil actions, or to defame, and scandalize the
most Innocent on any design, or for envy; and in general to be more eminently
wicked than Heathens; as if we strove in emulation to outdo the Devil in
Malice and rapine, to show how we can defye all Christian principles, that
should lead us unto our salvation.

CCXXXI.
HE who truly loves, desires to be much with his beloved; and if God be that
object of his hearts delight; he will desire to be ever with him, and may
assuredly have what he so desires, by raising his soul in frequent Meditations
unto the Divine Presence, where God will sometimes admit of his transported
elevated affection in prayer, to some degree of his Celestial Bliss; and will
sometimes send down his Holy Spirit, to sanctify his heart with such growing
comforts there, as will consecrate that to be his Temple, where he will abide
so long as he finds a sincere welcome, with a total resignation unto Him. And
this Divine felicity, this pre-possession of Heaven, this holy conversation
with God; will invite such a man unto continual ambitious endeavors to get
nearer, and nearer with delight, toward his entering into the eternal joy of
his beloved. And by such a daily practice, he will find his heart so filled
with grace, and so Armed with Holy courage, as to be always ready to die
Cheerfully; which is our only way to show our love, and our desire to be with
God. And is the chief business that we were born for; and when rightly
understood, is the supremest pleasure we can have on Earth, in our way to
heaven, to be ever so ready for our summons thither, that no crosses, losses,
or afflictions in this world, nor all the glories therein, shall be able to
give us any interruption in our journey thither.

CCXXXII.
IT may sometimes be useful in our Meditations, to compare small concerns with
greater, and so to set our frequent troubles opposite unto our delights in this
world; and then to Judge ingeniously between them; and if our joys do weigh
down the scales; then to re-weigh those joys below, with the joy and glory
above; that when we are most Laden with wealth and honors, most elevated with
the smiles and favors of great Princes here; then to raise our souls unto a
holy emulation with the Saints in Heaven, for Gods favor there; as our supreme
felicity, which will creat such a purity of heart within us, as will be more
constantly delightful, than all this world can give us; And by such a
Resurrection from earthly pleasures, to long after the next worlds everlasting
joys, will fix our affections on that eternal Bliss, with a Divine transporting
joy, to foresee that glory we shall find, ^he moment we expire.

CCXXXIII.
A Regenerate Man's frequent devout Meditations, do raise in him a delight to
converse so with God, and does increase that delight, unto the most immense
joys, that the soul of man can reach on earth. It is like the adding of Ciphers
to a forme^ sum payable from a Banck of treasure that can never be exhausted;
but the more we multiply that score, the more we may; and the greater our
account grows this way, the surer will our payment be; by fast linking our
earthly joys, unto the everlasting chain of Joys in Heaven.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
PAge 9. l. 12. r. will so fill it, p. 10. l. 17. induced r. endued, p. 14. l.
9. then r. there, p. 25. l. 9. mark r. work, p. 26. l. 12 times r. Aims, p. 47.
l. 8. concealed r. cancelled, p. 49. l. 11. r. without p. 150. l. 13. r.
despair, p. 151. l. 19. of r. our, p. 155. l. 7. r. marks they wear.


