THE Bishop of BATH and WELLS's SERMON Before the House of Peers On January the
30th. 1691/2.

Die Lune 10. Februarii 1691.
IT is Ordered by the Lords Spiritual and Temporal in Parliament Assembled,
That the Thanks of this House are hereby given to the Lord Bishop of Bath and
Wells for his Sermon Preached before this House on Saturday last in the
Abbey-Church at Westminster, and he is hereby desired to Print and Publish the
same.

Matthew. Johnson Cler' Parliamentor'.

A SERMON Preached before the Lords Spiritual and Temporal IN THE Abbey-Church
AT WESTMINSTER, The 30th. of January, 1691/2.

By the Right Reverend Father in GOD, RICHARD Lord Bishop of Bath and Wells.

LONDON, Printed by J.H. for B. Aylmer at the Three Pigeons against the Royal
Exchange in Cornhill. MDCXCII.

Matthew. XXIII. 35. That upon you may come all the righteous blood shed upon the
Earth, from the blood of righteous Abel, unto the blood of Zacharias, the Son
of Barachias, whom ye slew between the Temple and the Altar.
WE find our Blessed Savior, in the foregoing parts of this Chapter,
denouncing several Woes against the Scribes and Pharisees. I shall look no
farther back than to the 29th. Verse of this Chapter. Thence we shall be easily
introduced to the words of my Text.

There we find our Lord severely denouncing against the Hypocrisy of the
Scribes and Pharisees, in pretending great honor for the departed Saints, when
they were maliciously bent against the living ones; A piece of Hypocrify which
they were guilty of, and which many since have followed. They professed great
respect for the departed Saints, in building their Tombs, and garnishing their
Sepulchers, (v. 29.) and declaring against their Forefather's impiety; If we
had been in the days of our Fathers, we would not have been partakers with them
in the blood of the Prophets, (v. 30.) Notorious Hypocrites! Their Hypocrisy
appears in the following particulars.

First, In that they continued in their own wickedness, and yet applauded the
Saints departed. They should have imitated their Virtues; but content
themselves with garnishing their Sepulchers. They keep their Sins, and magnify
the Saints; As if they could atone for their own Sins by praising the Virtues,
and preserving the Memory of the Righteous. This is palpable Hypocrisy, and
yet, as gross as it is, it prevails still; There are too many like him who
pleased himself that he had a Levite for his Priest, though he had an Idol for
his God. It Is egregious Hypocrisy to cry up the Saints and Herd with the
wicked: If the Saints did well, why do we not follow them? if not, why do we
cry them up?

Secondly, In professing a profound respect for the Saints departed, when they
were for persecuting them that were alive. They professed that they would not
have done as their Fathers did, and are at the cost of building and garnishing
the Tombs and Sepulchers of the Righteous. All this is but Hypocrisy. Our
Savior's words make this plain: Behold (says He) I send unto you Prophets, and
Wise men, and Scribes, and some of them ye shall kill and crucify, and some of
them shall ye scourge in your Synagogues, and persecute them from City to City,
(v. 31.) Thus at the same time they extol the Saints departed, and are
maliciously bent on the oppressing the living.

Virtutem incolumem odimus. They who love not righteous Men while they live,
yet praise them when they are dead. Such Men are well compared to Batts or
Owls, that rejoice in the light of the Sun after it is set, when its brighter
beams they would not endure. Such Men, after all their pretenses, are but
Children of Darkness. There was much of this Hypocrisy among the Jews. They
magnified their pious Ancestors, and persecuted their righteous Offspring.
They boasted of Abraham, and worried his faithful Children. In a word,
commended Virtue, and oppressed it at the same time. And this Hypocrisy has
been followed by others also. Those who profess great veneration for Saints,
have born very hard upon them; They who have magnified the Martyrs, and
preserve their Memory in their Dypticks, solemn Offices and Kalendars, have
also added to their number and shed their blood.

Thirdly, In taking a false measure of their love to the Saints departed, from
their building their Tombs and garnishing their Sepulchers. It Is not to be
thought that they are reproved barely for this care of their Tombs. But this is
short of that honor we ought to express toward Saints and Martyrs. We must
imitate their Examples, and purge out of our Minds all that hatred and ill will
which possessed their Persecutors. These Men ought to have repented of their
Father's Crimes; We may Canonize and Worship Saints, and yet be far from giving
them all due honor. We then honor them, when we imitate their Virtues and
cherish their Followers. It Is gross Hypocrisy to pay respect to their Relics,
and veneration to their Images, and at the same time to afflict their
Followers. Our Savior requires St. Peter to show his Love to Him, by his
tender care of his Sheep, John 21.17.

Our Savior lets the Jews know that he would lay open their Hypocrisy. He
would send among them Prophets and Wise men, whom they would persecute and kill
after all their false pretenses of their veneration for them. And indeed none
have more severely afflicted the Saints, than those Men have done who have
pretended the greatest honor for them. They have imitated Herod, who intended
to kill Jesus, when he gave out that he would worship Him. Behold I send unto
you Prophets, etc. And then it follows, That upon you may come, etc. And here,
First, I shall endeavor to Explain these words. For there is some difficulty
in them. Secondly, I shall show the Justice of this denunciation: That upon you
may come, etc. Thirdly, I shall make some Application, with a particular
reference to the sad occasion which has brought us together.


1. I shall endeavor to Explain the words.

First, I consider these words, That upon you may come. This is explained by
St. Luke, chapter 11. ver. 50. (...), i. e. That it may be required of this
Generation.

But then it is to be remembered that the Particle (...) in St. Luke (which in
St. Matthew is expressed by (...)) does not always import the End or final
Cause, but the Effect or Consequent. And in this latter sense it is to be
understood in this place. It is not to be supposed that the Prophets were sent,
that the Jews might put them to death, and contract the guilt of their
Righteous blood. This was the consequent and event indeed, but not the end of
sending them. That Particle is sometimes to be understood as Causal, sometimes
as Consequential only. And in this latter sense it is to be taken here, and
elsewhere also. Thus it is thought, not without reason, it is to be understood,
Matthew. 1.22. Again, The Law entered That the Offense might abound, Romans 5.20.

Secondly, It will be a matter of greater difficulty to determine who was this
Zacharias the Son of Barachias, who was slain between the Temple and the Altar.
There are several Opinions about it.

1. That it is to be understood of the Prophet Zechariah, Zech. 1.1. who is
said to be the Son of Barachiah. But this is not likely: For we do not find
that he was slain; and if we had cause to believe that he was slain, yet, have
we no cause to think he was slain between the Temple and the Altar. The Jews in
his time were newly returned from Captivity, and then their Temple and Altar
were not built. If it had, it is not very likely they should there have slain
this Prophet: Be that as it will, we have not Evidence of the fact.

2. That it is to be understood of Zacharias, the Father of John Baptist. This
would well agree with the Context, had we sufficient reason to believe the
matter of fact. We have not ground enough to believe that he was slain by the
Jews; nor does it appear that he was the Son of Barachias.

3. There is another Zacharias that bids fairer than those, named before, to be
the Person meant by our Savior. He is mentioned, 2 Chronicles. 24.20. He was indeed
a Prophet, and a Righteous Man: He was slain by the Hands of the People, and
Command of the King; and that also in the Court of the house of the Lord: And
that agrees well with what is in my Text, expressed by between the Temple and
the Altar. When he was killed, he said, The Lord look upon it and require. His
was indeed Righteous blood, and the guilt was National, and might well be
required of that generation. His Death was a most heinous Sin: He was himself a
Prophet and a Priest, and the Son of an High Priest, who was the great Restorer
of God's Worship, and had deserved greatly both of the King and People. 'Twas
great Impiety to kill so great a Saint, and the Son of one who had deserved a
perpetual Memory from King and People. 'Twas a detestable crime to murder him,
considering his innocence, his birth and character; and greater still to do it
when he was in the execution of his Office, and bringing them back to the
worship of God, and to do all this not only in the sight of the Sun but in
the House of his God.

But after all that has been said, there are two considerable objections
against this (otherwise very probable) opinion also.

First, That the person mentioned, 2 Chronicles. 24. is said to be the Son of
Jehojada, this in my Text the Son of Barachias. R. Isaac Chizuk. Emun. l. 2. c.
22.
This is by a Jewish. Writer urged as an Error in the Text of St. Matthew, and
such an one also as will admit of no salvo.

But the Jews, of all Men, have no reason to make this objection against the
authority of the Text. Such pretenses may be brought against some Books of the
Old Testament, which yet can be of no force to destroy their authority. They
might rather suppose this person to have two Names, that of Jehojada, and this
of Barachias. It was very common among them. Psalm. 34. Tit. with 1 Samuel 21.11.
No man doubts of the Psalmist's authority, because he calls the same man
Abimilech, whom another sacred Writer calls Achish. The same man is called Ner
in one place, who in another is called Abiel, 1 Samuel 9.1. with 1 Chronicles. 8.32.
One sacred Writer calls him Ammiel, whom another calls Eliam, 2 Samuel 11.3. with
1 Chronicles. 3.5. And him Chileab, whom another calls Daniel, 2 Samuel 3.3. with 1 Chronicles. 3.1. The same woman is said to be the daughter of Elon, and in the same
book called the daughter of Ismael, Menass. B. Israel. Council. in Exodus qu. 1.
Joseph. Antiq. l. 2. c. 12.
Genesis 26.34. with Chap. 36. v. 3. Revel, Jethro and Hobab are by the Jews
allowed to be the several Names of the same person. Nothing being more common
than for the same man to have diverse Names, and for that cause no man in his
wits can impeach the sacred Writers for using this variety.

I shall add, that the Gospel of St. Matthew was written originally in Hebrew.
And St. Hierom tells us expressly, Hieron. in Matt. 23.
that in that Hebrew Copy which the Nazarens used, it was Jojada, where we now
read Barachias. We have no reason to doubt of one or of the other. And then
the objection lies not against the Original Text; And it can have no force
against the Greek Version: For Jehojada and and Berachiah being names of the
very same import and signification in the Hebrew (as Eliakim and Jehojakim are,
2 Chro. 36.4.
which belonged to the same person,) and, for what we know, the same person
might be called by both. It Is not strange that Jehojada should by the Greek
Interpreter be rendered Barachias.

Secondly, It may likewise be objected, that it is not likely that the Zacharias
in my Text should refer to the Son of Jehojada, because our Savior beginning
as high as Abel, it is not to be supposed he should descend no lower than that
Son of Jehojada, who was slain Eight hundred years before these words were
spoken. It Is more reasonable to believe that he would descend to the latter end
of the Jewish Polity, and that he refers to some person that was slain a little
before the dissolution of the Jewish State. And upon this Consideration I add,

4. That there is another Zacharias, mentioned by Josephus, De Bell. Judaic. l.
4. c. 18.
that was slain by the Jews awhile before the destruction and dissolution of
the Jewish Polity. Him he calls (...). He was accused as guilty of Treachery,
and too great a Favourer of the Romans. But though he were innocent, and absolved
by the Sanedrin, yet was he unjustly slain by the Jewish Zealots, (...), i. e.
in the middle of the Temple, which agrees very well with between the Temple and
the Altar. This instance answers very well to Abel slain from the beginning; It
agrees well with my Text, he was the Son of Baruch, and slain in the Temple.
And then our Savior's words are proleptical; and being a Prophecy of what was
shortly to come to pass, no wonder that they are expressed in such terms, (a
thing very usual in the old Prophets,) as if the thing had already been
fulfilled. The time past is frequently used for the future among the ancient
Prophets, and sometimes in the New Testament also. Rev. 11.13.
And if the words of Jesus refer to this person, then are they so far from
affording an Objection against the truth of the Gospel-history, that they do
confirm it.

What has been said is sufficient, I hope, for the Explanation of my words. I
proceed now to,

II. Show the Justice of this denunciation: That upon you may come, etc.

And here I am to consider how far Children are obnoxious upon account of their
Father's offenses.

For that they are concerned on account of their Father's faults, is plain from
the Words, and from other Arguments also.

We find God denouncing against the third and fourth Generation of Idolaters,
or of them that hate Him. Exodus 20. Holy Men have confessed the Sins of their
Fathers. Dan. 9.16.
We have sinned with our Fathers, Nehem. 9.
we have committed iniquity, we have done wickedly. Ps. 106.6, 7.
Our Fathers understood not thy wonders in Egypt; they remembered not the
multitude of thy mercies, but provoked him at the Sea, even at the red Sea. And
God promises Mercy to them who confess their iniquity, and the iniquity of
their Fathers, Levit. 26.40. Josiah was a good King, but descended from
Menasseh, a very wicked person, upon his account Judah is afflicted.
Notwithstanding the Lord turned not from the fierceness of his great wrath,
wherewith his anger was kindled against Judah, because of all the provocations
that Menasseh had provoked him withal, 2 Kings 29.2. This is enough to
justify our Church, when she directs us to pray, Remember not our iniquities,
nor the iniquities of our Forefathers.

For the better speaking to this matter,

First, I shall show how this is to be understood. Secondly, I shall consider
the grounds of it.
First, How it is to be understood that the Children are obnoxious upon the
account of their Fathers Sin. And that in the following particulars.

1. It must not be understood of Eternal punishment. A man shall not for his
Father's Sins lie down in Everlasting burnings. As our Fathers Faith will not
let us into Heaven, so neither will their Impiety shut us out. We may be
deprived of many Temporal blessings on their account, but not of Eternal glory.
The Children of those that murmured and lusted in the Wilderness, were admitted
into the promised Land. The Daughters of Zelophehad are not deprived of their
Inheritance, though their Father fell short of the good Land. We shall be
separately considered there according to our own deeds. When the Father dies
for Treason, the Son is not capitally punished, unless he were an associate or
complice. However his Blood be tainted, or his Goods diminished, his Life
cannot be touched. 2. Where the Children continue in their Father's crimes,
there is no injustice in punishing them. Thus have those words ( Exodus 20.5.)
been anciently understood; and thus it is in the case before us. Behold I send
unto you Prophets -- and some of them ye shall kill. v. 34. In this case there
is no shadow of injustice. And they may be said to continue in their Fathers
sins, who do not confess them, nor repent of them; who abhor them not, and root
not out of their Minds those faulty Principles and vicious Propensities that
lead them to the same crimes. There is no injustice in punishing the nocent,
whatever the impulsive cause may be. 3. For Temporal Evils they may be,
without any shadow of injustice, the lot and portion of the best of Men. I say,
without any shadow of injustice on God's part. For on Man's part there is often
great injustice. And though God makes use of Men as instruments of severity to
chastise his Servants, this does not excuse their fault, or lessen their crime.
But it is evident that a good Man may suffer greatly in this World without
impeachment of the Justice or Providence of God. It Is sometimes for the good of
the whole that the Righteous Man suffers, and always for his own. He will have
a more ample reward hereafter, and will not want a sufficient support here.
These things being premised, it will not be hard
Secondly, To give you the grounds of this; That is, to show you why the
Children are many times punished or afflicted upon the score of their Father's
impiety. I shall speak of these with a particular respect to the Jews, to whom
my Text relates.

There are several circumstances in the case before us that do enhance the
crime of the Jewish posterity.

1. Their Sin was the greater, because their Fathers sins (as well as the many
Plagues that were inflicted on them for their offenses) were recorded, and the
record of these things was preserved among them. Whatever things were written
afore-time, were written for their warning and instruction. They were not left
without witness. For besides their Conscience, and their warning by their
Prophets from time to time, they had among them an account in writing of their
Fathers crimes and plagues; This advances their iniquity above the size and
stature of that of their Forefathers. They sinned after the greatest Warning,
and severest Examples. To this purpose it has been well observed, that though
Murder was forbid as a capital Crime to the Sons of Noah, as well as to the
Jews; And there was no sacrifice of Expiation allowed for that Sin by the Law
of Moses, yet Cain, the first Murderer, was exempted from Death by God
himself. He was indeed doomed to be an Exile and a Vagabond; but care was taken
that Cain should not be killed, because in him the World had warning. In
aftertimes it was strictly provided that every Murderer should dye the death.
This is applicable to our present case. The Fathers of these Jews had killed
the Prophets, and had suffered severely for their wickedness; they knew all
this very well, and yet after all this warning they tread in their Father's
steps. 2. Because they repeated the same Sins, and persisted in them to the
last. To repeat our folly, and persist in it, is always a great aggravation of
it. It Is some extenuation of our fault that we are surprised. The liquor of the
Grape has prevailed sometime upon a righteous, but unwary Man. Our persisting
adds weight to our guilt. This was the case of these Jews, they went on to
persecute and destroy the Righteous as their Fathers did; They fill up the
measure of their iniquity, and hasten their own ruin and destruction. 3. They
do this also under the profession of better things. If we had been in the days
of our Fathers, we would not have been partakers with them in the blood of the
Prophets. v. 30. This made their Sin the more detestable, that they were guilty
of the greatest cruelty, when they made profession of mercy and tenderness.
They covered their hatred to God's living Saints, by professing a great
veneration for the Saints departed. That Is a detestable Hypocrisy when Men
shall declaim against their Fathers sins, and make much of their own. This does
mightily enhance their guilt, and call for their destruction. Their iniquity is
now ripe and full, when they condemn and practice the same thing. Their Fathers
sinned greatly, but they owned it. These Hypocrites cloak their own malice by
exclaiming against that of their Father's. No sin is greater than that which is
acted under the disguise of Piety. No Wolf is more ravenous and formidable than
he that lurks under Sheep's-cloathing. He is the great Sinner that indulgeth
himself in that very sin which he pretends to loath. Their Fathers did well or
ill: If they did well, why should they declaim against them? If ill, why should
they imitate them? These Men are without all excuse, they practice in
contradiction to themselves, and add to their Father's guilt the vilest
hypocrisy. They imitate the treachery of Judas, who kissed and betrayed his
Lord at the same time. These Men preface their Villainies with show of Religion,
and follow the worst of Men, when they personate the best. They are like him
who proclaimed a Fast, but designed by it to gain his Neighbor's Vineyard; and
him who plotted Treason against his Prince, when he made a show of paying his
Vows to his God. This is such an aggravation as (added to the rest) does
abundantly show the Justice of this denunciation.
III. I shall now proceed to the Use and Application of what has been said,
with a particular Reflection upon the sad Occasion that brings us together this
Day.

On this Day it was that our Sovereign, of Blessed Memory, fell by the hands of
Violence and Wickedness. Then was his Righteous blood shed. And though we gave no
explicit consent to this barbarous Murder, and perhaps with the Jews have
said, That if we had been in the days of our Forefathers, we would not have
been partakers with them; yet all this while we may deceive our selves and
others, if we do not confess this Sin with great humility, and abandon all
propensities to so great a wickedness. I shall more particularly show you the
Application of what has been said.

1. This will justify our solemn assembling at this time. We come together to
deprecate God's displeasure for the innocent blood that was this day shed. And
we have good cause so to do. For if the Righteous blood, shed so long before,
might justly be required of the after-generation of the Jews, this may be
required of us. We find that the Jews kept a Fast a long time for the slaughter
of Gedaliah, Zech. 7.5. with Jer. 41.1, 2. called by the Prophet the Fast of
the seventh Month: We have greater reason for this. That we consented not to
the shedding this Righteous blood, will not discharge us from the Service of
this day. For neither did those Jews that kept that Fast consent to the Murder
of Gedaliah, Deuteronomy. 21. We know what the Law required in case of an uncertain
Murder: An Heifer was to be killed, the Priests were to be present, the Elders
of the neighboring City were to wash their hands, and say, Our hands have not
shed this blood, neither have our eyes seen it. Be merciful, O Lord, unto thy
people Israel whom thou have redeemed, and lay not innocent blood unto thy
people of Isreal's charge. It follows, So shall thou put away the guilt of
innocent blood from among you, when thou shall do that which is right in the
sight of the Lord. This will be our best course upon this occasion, not only to
disown the fact our selves, but to deprecate the Divine displeasure, and pray
that it may not be imputed to the Nation.

2. We may learn what cause we have to be humbled for our Fathers sins, and
more particularly for that Wickedness committed on this day. Then was the
Nation stained with the Righteous blood of an innocent and excellent Prince.
That blood God will require of the principal Criminals and Accessories also, of
the first Offenders and their Associates. The cry of innocent Blood is loud: It
pierces the Heavens, and finds a direct way to the Ears of God. As we would
not be charged with it, let us humble our selves before God: The stain can be
removed no other way, but by Tears of Repentance and the Blood of Jesus. The
Psalmist was guilty of blood. He was a Prince, and might say to God, Against
Thee, Thee only have I sinned: Ps. 50. But it follows, Deliver me from
bloud-guiltiness, O God, thou God of my Salvation. And, Thou desire not
Sacrifice, else would I give it -- The Sacrifices of God are a broken Spirit --
The Wickedness committed this day was premeditated and studied, colored with a
pretense of Law and Justice, practiced under the cloak of Religion and disguise
of Piety. It will admit of no extenuation. It was an action foul and deformed,
cruel and barbarous, without excuse or plea. He must be lost to the reason of a
Man, and the tenderness of a Christian, whom it strikes not with horror. What
remains then, but that we apply our selves to the Mercies of God and Merits of
Christ for our atonement and expiation. Nothing short of this can give us hope,
and nothing but our sorrow and repentance can give us the hope of this.

3. Let us endeavor to cut off the entail of Curses, which threaten us from
our Forefathers sins. We too often inherit their guilt, and are infected with
their vicious inclinations. Let us do what we can to derive a blessing on our
selves and our posterity. And to that purpose let us be persuaded,

First, To perfect our Repentance both for our Fathers and our own iniquities.
This is the only way to keep off the Evils which threaten us, the best
Security against the Wrath to come. Our timely and complete Repentance is our
defense, and God will do by us all as we do in this matter. As we would avoid
the plagues of this and the next life, let us retire our selves from this World
and all its amusements, enter into our Closets and examine our State toward
God, and humbly deprecate his displeasure on account of our Fathers and our own
iniquities. Let us do it as frequently as we can, and as fervently too. There
is great reason we should do thus. The Wickedness committed on this day
requires it, from which I fear we are not yet purged; our Personal sins, and
their circumstances of aggravation, require it also. We had need of our Solemn
times of Repentance and Humiliation; and the good improvement of them are the
best preservative of our Selves and the Nation. After all our guilts, both
National and Personal, after so many and such crying Sins, so great a decay of
Piety and real Goodness, contempt of God and Religion, we must not think that a
cold confessing our Sins will serve our turn, we must abhor them and be greatly
humbled for them. Secondly, Let us be exemplary in Piety and real Goodness. Let
us own it before all the World, and promote it what we can in those under our
care and influence. Let us do it with all our might in our several places, and
as this will be the best of our titles, so 'twill be our surest defense.
Thirdly, Let us run counter to the crimes of our Forefathers. Let their
Disobedience commend to us Fidelity and true Allegiance; Their Oppression teach
us Mercy and Goodwill; Their Bloud-guiltiness put us upon Compassion and
Kindness; Their Revenge direct us to Forgiveness and Forbearance; And their
Hypocrisy stir us up to Sincerity. This will be a real proof of the Sincerity
of our Repentance. Fourthly, Let us add our constant and fervent Prayers for
the Kingdoms to which we belong, for our Selves and our Relatives, that God
would be appeased, that the Righteous blood shed this day, and at all times
else, may not be imputed to us or them. Let this amazing Providence of God,
which we solemnly remember this day, awaken us to repentance and newness of
life. To a life abstracted from the World, and devoted to God. All the Divine
Judgments, and therefore that of this day, loudly call us to this. And if we
hearken not to them, we shall not be heard when we call for Mercy. The Judgment
of this day ought to move us greatly in this matter. If they did these things
to the green tree, what shall be done to the dry? We are all concerned in this
day's work, to bewail the Wickedness of Men and improve the amazing Providence
of God. This we cannot do, unless we take warning and learn to forsake the
World, and devote our selves to God, and prepare for all Events of things. If
the Righteous scarcely be saved, where shall the Sinner and the Ungodly appear?
We have, since this fatal blow was given, suffered severely; and what the Jews
say of the Calf in the Wilderness, that there is something of it in all their
after-sufferings, may with as much truth be said of the barbarous Murder of
this day: Our Sufferings have been the produce of the horrid Sin of this day.
For many of them they bore the marks and signatures of it. We might easily have
read our guilt in our infliction, and could not but own that our iniquity had
found us out. We have reason to fear that God's wrath is not yet quite turned
away, and that his hand is stretched out still. We have suffered already, let
us Sin no more, lest some worse thing come upon us. Good God awaken us to see
in time the things that belong to our Peace before they be hid from our Eyes. I
shall conclude with the Prayer that is part of a Collect appointed for this
day. Teach us so to number our days, that we may apply our hearts unto Wisdom.
And grant that neither the splendour of any thing that is great, nor the conceit
of any thing that is good in us may any way withdraw our eyes from looking upon
our selves as sinful dust and ashes. But that (according to the example of thy
Blessed Martyr) we may press forward toward the prize of the high calling that
is before us in faith and patience, humility and meekness, mortification and
self-denial, charity and constant perseverance unto the end. And all this for
thy Son our Lord Jesus Christ's sake; To whom with thee and the Holy Ghost, be
all honor and glory, World without end. Amen.

FINIS.
BOOKS Published by His Grace JOHN Lord Archbishop of Canterbury.
THirty Sermons and Discourses upon several Occasions, in three Volumes, in
Octavo. The Rule of Faith; or, an Answer to the Treatise of Mr. J. Sergant,
Octavo. A Discourse against Transubstantiation, Octavo, alone, Price 3 d. A
Persuasive to Frequent Communion in the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper, Octavo,
alone, Price 6 d. bound, and 3 d. stitcht. A Sermon preached at
Lincolns-Inn-Chappel on the 31st of Jan. 1688. being appointed for a Public
Thanksgiving to Almighty God for having made His Highness the Prince of Orange
the Glorious Instrument of the great Deliverance of this Kingdom from Popery
and Arbitrary Power, Quarto. A Sermon preached before the Queen at White Hall,
on Matthew. 5.44. A Sermon preached before the King and Queen at Hampton Court,
on Luke 10.42. A Sermon preached before the Queen, on Matthew. 25.46. A Sermon
preached before the House of Commons upon a Monthly Fast, on Eccles. 9.11. A
Sermon preached before the Lord Mayor at Bow-Church upon a Monthly Fast, on
Jeremiah 6.8. A Sermon preached before the Queen, on Acts 24.16. A Sermon
preached before the Queen at White Hall, upon the Monthly Fast, September. 16.
1691. on Zech. 7.5.
Published by the Right Reverend Father in God, RICHARD, Lord-Bishop of Bath and
Wells.
A Demonstration of the Messiah: In which the Truth of the Christian Religion
is proved, especially against the Jews: The First Part. -- A Second Part will
suddenly be Printed. The Judgment of private Discretion in Matters of Religion,
defended; in a Sermon on 1 Thessalonians. 5.21. The Duty of the Rich: In a Sermon
preached before the Lord Mayor, etc. on Easter-Tuesday, April 22. 1690. on 1 Timothy chapter 6.17, 18, 19.
All sold by Brab. Aylmer.


