AN APPENDIX TO THE ANSWER UNTO TWO Athenian Mercuries, CONCERNING PEDO-BAPTISM.

CONTAINING Twenty seven SYLLOGISTICAL ARGUMENTS, proving Infant Baptism a mere
humane Tradition. The Gentlemen called the Athenian Society, desiring in the
last of the said Mercuries to have Syllogisms.

Ephesians. 4. 5. One Lord, one Faith, one Baptism. By B. K.

London, Printed for the Author, and sold by John Harris at the Sign of the
Harrow in the Poultry. MDCXCII.

Price two Pence.

An Appendix to the Answer to two Athenian Mercuries, concerning
Infant Baptism, containing diverse Syllogistical Arguments to disprove
Pedo-Baptism, and to prove the Baptism of Believers.
Gentlemen,
SInce you desire Syllogisms, I have gratified you therein.

Arg. 1. If none are to be baptized by the Authority of the great Commission of
our Blessed Savior, Matthew. 28. but such who are first made Disciples by being
taught; than Insants, who are not capable to be taught, ought not to be
baptized. But none are to be baptized by the Authority of the great Commission
of our Blessed Savior, but such who are first made Disciples by Teaching.
Ergo, Little Babes ought not to be baptized.

Arg. 2. If Infant Baptism was never instituted, commanded, or appointed of
God, Infants ought not to be baptized. But Infant Baptism was never instituted,
commanded, or appointed of God. Ergo, They ought not to be baptized.

As to the Major; If one thing may be practiced as an Ordinance without an
Institution or Command of God, another thing may also; so any Innovation may be
let into the Church.

As to the Minor; If there is an Institution for it, etc. it is either contained
in the great Commission, Matthew. 28. Mark 16. or somewhere else. But it is not to
be found in the Commission, nor any where else. Ergo.

The Major none will deny.

The Minor I prove thus. None are to be baptized by virtue of the Commission,
but such who are discipled by the Word, as I said before, and so the Greek Word
(...) signifies.

If any should say, Christ commanded his Disciples to baptize all Nations, and
Infants are part of Nations, therefore are to be baptized. I answer;

Arg. 3. If all Nations, or any in the Nations ought to be baptized before
discipled; then Turks, Pagans, Unbelievers and their Children may be baptized,
because they are a great part of the Nations. But Turks, Pagans and
Unbelievers, and their Children, ought not to be baptized. Ergo.

Besides that, Teaching (by the Authority of the Commission) must go before
Baptizing, we have proved; which generally all Learned Men do assert: if the
Institution is to be found any where else, they must show the Place.

Arg. 4. Faith and Repentance are required of all that ought to be baptized.
Infants are not required to believe and repent, nor are they capable so to do.
Ergo, Infants ought not to be baptized.

The Major is clear, Acts 2, 8, 10, 16 Chapters; and it is also asserted by the
Church of England. What is required of Persons to be baptized? that is the
Question. The Answer is, Repentance, whereby they forsake Sin; and Faith,
whereby they steadfastly believe the Promise of God made to them in that
Sacrament.

The Minor cannot be denied.

Arg. 5. That Practice that tends not to the Glory of God, nor to the Profit of
the Child, when done, nor in aftertimes when grown up, but may prove hurtful
and of a dangerous Nature to him, cannot be a Truth of God. But the Practice of
Infant Baptism tends not to the Glory of God, nor to the Profit of the Child
when baptized, nor in aftertimes when grown up, but may prove hurtful and of a
dangerous Nature to him. Ergo. See Levit. 10. 1, 2. where Moses told Aaron,
because his Sons had done that which God commanded them not, that God would be
sanctified by all that drew near unto him; intimating, that such who did that
which God commanded not, did not sanctify or glorify God therein. Can God be
glorified by Man's Disobedience, or by adding to his Word; by doing that which
God has not required? Matthew. 16. 9. In vain do you worship me, teaching for
Doctrine the Commandments of Men: and that that Practice does profit the Child,
none can prove from God's Word: And in aftertimes when grown up, it may cause
the Person to think he was thereby made a Christian, etc. and brought into the
Covenant of Grace, and had it sealed to him, nay, thereby regenerated, for so
these Gentlemen in their Mercury, December. 26. plainly intimate, and that
Infants are thereby ingrafted also into Christ's Church. Sure all understanding
Men know Baptism of Believers is not called Regeneration, but only
metonymically, it being a Figure of Regeneration. But they ignorantly affirm
also, that Infants then have a federal Holiness; as if this imagined Holiness
comes in by the Child's Covenant in Baptism, which may prove hurtful and
dangerous to them, and cause them to think Baptism confers Grace, which is a
great Error. How can Water, says Mr. Charnock, an external thing, work upon
the Soul physically? Nor can it, says he, be proved, that ever the Spirit of
God is tied by any Promise, to apply himself to the Soul in a gracious
Operation, when Water is applied to the Body: If it were so, then all that were
baptized were regenerated, then all that were baptized should be saved, or else
the Doctrine of Perseverance falls to the Ground. Some indeed, says he, say,
that Regeration is conferred in Baptism upon the Elect, and exerts it self
afterward in Conversion. But how so active a Principle as a spiritual Life
should lie dead and asleep so many Years, etc. is not easily conceived. On
Regen. p. 75.

Arg. 6. If the Church of England says, that Faith and Repentance are required
of all that ought to be baptized, and in so saying, speak truly, and yet
Infants cannot perform those things; then Infants ought not to be baptized. But
the Church of England says, that Faith and Repentance are required of all such,
etc. and speak truly, and yet Infants cannot perform these things. Ergo,
Infants ought not to be baptized.

Object. If it be objected, That they affirm they do perform it by their
Sureties.

Answ. If Suretiship for Children in Baptism is not required of God, and the
Sureties do not, cannot perform those things for the Child: then Suretiship is
not of God, and so signifies nothing, but is an unlawful and sinful
Undertaking. But Suretiship in Childrens Baptism is not required of God, and
they do not, cannot perform what they promise. Ergo.

Do they, or can they cause the Child to forsake the Devil and all his Works,
the Pomps and Vanities of this wicked World, and all the sinful Lusts of the
Flesh? In a Word; Can they make the Child or Children to repent and truly
believe in Jesus Christ? for these are the things they promise for them, and in
their Name. Alas, they want Power to do it for themselves, and how then should
they do it for others? Besides, we see they never mind nor regard their
Covenant in the Case: and will not God one Day say, Who has required these
things at your Hands?

Arg. 7. If there be no Precedent in the Scripture, (as there is no Precept)
that any Infant was baptized, then Infants ought not to be baptized. But there
is no Precedent that any Infant was baptized in the Scripture. Ergo.

If there is any Precedent or Example in Scripture that any Infant was
baptized, let them show us where we may find it.

Erasmus says, It Is no where expressed in the Apostolical Writings, that they
baptized Children. Union of the Church, and on Romans 6.

Calvin says, It is no where expressed by the Evangelists, that any o^e the
Infant was baptized by the Apostles. Instit. c. 16. Book 4.

Ludovicus Vives says, None of old were wont to be baptized but in grown Age,
and who desired and understood what it was. Vide Ludov.

The Magdeburgenses say, That concerning the baptizing the Adult, both Jews and
Gentiles, we have sufficient Proof from Acts 2, 8, 10, 16 Chapters; but as to
the baptizing of Infants, they can (...) no Example in Scripture. (...) l. 2.
p. 469.

Dr. Tailor says, It is (...) the perpetual Analogy of (...) baptize Infants:
For besides that Christ never gave any Precept to baptize them, nor ever
himself nor his Apostles (that appears) did baptize any of them: All that
either he or his Apostles said concerning it, requires such previous
Dispositions of Baptism, of which Infants are not capable, viz. Faith and
Repentance. Lib. Proph. p. 239.

Arg. 8. If whatsoever which is necessary to Faith and Practice is left in the
Holy Scripture, that being a complete and perfect Rule, and yet Infant Baptism
is not contained or to be sound therein, then Infant Baptism is not of God. But
whatever is necessary to Faith and Practice, is contained in the Holy
Scriptures, etc. but Infant Baptism is not to be found therein. Ergo.

That the Scripture is a perfect Rule, etc. we have the Consent of all the
Ancient Fathers and Modern Divines.

Athanasius says, The Holy Scriptures being Inspirations of God, are
sufficient to all Instructions of Truth. Athan. against the Gentiles.

Chrysostom says, All things be plain and clear in the Scripture; and
whatsoever are needful* are manifest there. Chrysostom. on 2 Thessalonians. and 2 Timothy 2.

Basil says That it would be an Argument of Infidelity, and a most certain
Sign of Pride, if any Man should reject any thing written, and should introduce
things not written. Basil in his Sermon de Fide.

Augustine says* In the Scriptures are found all things which contain Faith,
manner of Living, Hope, Love, etc. Let us, says he, seek no farther than what
is written of God our Savior, lest a Man would know more than the Scriptures
witness. Aug. in his 108 Epistles to Fortunat.

Theophilact says, It is part of a Diabolical Spirit, to think any thing
Divine, without the Authority of the Holy Scripture. Lib. 2. Paschal.

Isychius says, Let us who will have any thing observed of God, search no more
but (...) which the Gospel does give unto us. (...) 16. on Levit.

(...) though the Arguments of the Anabaptists, from the defect of Command or
Example, have a great Use against the Lutherans, forasmuch as they use that
Rite every where, having no Command or Example, theirs is to be rejected; yet
is it of no Force against Catholics, who conclude the Apostolical Tradition is
of no less Authority with us than the Scripture, etc. this of baptizing of
Infants is an Apostolical Tradition. Bellarm. in his Book de Bapt. l. 1. c. 8.

Mr. Ball says, We must for every Ordinance look to the Institution, and never
stretch it wider, nor draw it narrower than the Lord has made it, for he is
the Institutor of the Sacraments according to his own Pleasure; and it is our
part to learn of him, both to whom, how, and for what End the Sacraments are to
be administered. Ball, in his Answer to the New England Elders, p. 38, 39.

And as to the Minor, it is acknowledged by our Adversaries, it is not to be
found in the Letter of the Scripture. And as to the Consequences drawn
therefrom, we have proved, they are not natural from the Premises; and though
we admit of Consequences and Inferences if genuine, yet not in the case of an
Institution respecting a practical Ordinance that is of mere positive Right.

Arg. 9. If Infant Baptism was an Institution of Christ, the Pedo-Baptists
could not be at a loss about the Grounds of the Right Infants have to Baptism:
But the Pedo-Baptists are at a great Loss, and differ exceedingly about the
Grounds of the Right Infants have to Baptism. Ergo, it is no Institution of
Christ.

As touching the Major, I argue thus; That which is an Institution of Christ,
the Holy Scripture does show, as well the End and Ground of the Ordinance, as
the Subject and Manner of it. But the Scripture speaks nothing of the End or
Ground of Pedo-Baptism, or for what reason they ought to be baptized. Ergo,
it is no Institution of Christ.

The Minor is undeniable; Some affirm, as we have showed, p. 15. it was to take
away Original Sin. Some say it is their Right by the Covenant, they being the
Seed of Believers. Others say, Infants* have Faith, and therefore have a Right.
Others say, They have a Right by the Faith of their Sureties. Some ground their
Right from an Apostolical Tradition; others upon the Authority of Scripture.
Some say, All Children of professed Christians ought to be baptized; others
say, None but the Children of true Believers have a Right to it. Sure, if it
was an Ordinance of Christ, his Word would soon end this Controversy.

Arg. 10. If the Children of believing Gentiles, as such, are not the natural
nor spiritual Seed of Abraham, they can have no Right to Baptism, or
Church Membership, by virtue of any Covenant-transaction God made with Abraham,
But the Children of believing Gentiles, as such, are not the natural nor
spiritual Seed of Abraham. Ergo.

Arg. 11. If no Man can prove from Scripture, that any spiritual Benefit
redounds to Infants in their Baptism, it is no Ordinance of Christ. But no Man
can prove from Scripture, that any spiritual Benefit redounds to Infants in
their Baptism. Ergo.

Arg. 12. That cannot be an Ordinance of Christ, for which there is neither
Command nor Example in all God's Word, nor Promise to such who do it, nor
Threatenings to such who neglect it. But there is no Command or Example in all
the Word of God for the baptizing of little Babes, nor Promise made to such who
are baptized, nor Threatenings to such who are not. Ergo.

That the Child lies under a Promise who is baptized, or the Child under any
Threatening or Danger that is not baptized, let them prove it, since it is
denied.

Arg. 13. If no Parents, at any time or times, have been by God the Father,
Jesus Christ, or his Apostles, either commended for baptizing of their
Children, or reproved for neglecting to baptize them; then Infant Baptism is no
Ordinance of God. But no Parents at any time or times have been by God
commended for baptizing of their Children, etc. Ergo, Infant Baptism is no
Ordinance of God.

This Argument will stand unanswerable, unless any can show who they were that
were ever commended for baptizing their Children, or reproved for neglecting
it, or unless they can show a parallel case.

Arg. 14. If Men were not to presume to alter any thing in the Worship of God
under the Law, neither to add thereto, nor diminish therefrom, and God is as
strict and jealous of his Worship under the Gospel; then nothing ought to be
altered in God's Worship under the Gospel. But under the Law Men were not to
presume so to do, and God is as strict and jealous under the Gospel. Ergo.

The Major cannot be denied.

The Minor is clear; See thou make all things according to the Pattern showed
thee in the Mount, Exodus 25. 40. and Levit. 10. 1, 2. See how Nadab and Abihu
sped, for presuming to vary from the Command of God, and Vzzah, tho but in
small Circumstances as they may seem to us. How dare Men adventure, this being
so, to change Baptism from Dipping into Sprinkling, and the Subject, from an
Adult Believer, to an ignorant Babe? Add thou not unto his Word, etc.

Arg. 15. Whatever Practice opens a Door to any humane Traditions and
Innovations in God's Worship, is a great Evil, and to be avoided: But the
Practice of Infant Baptism opens a Door to any humane Traditions and
Innovations in God's Worship. Ergo, to sprinkle or baptize Infants is a great
Evil, and to be avoided.

The Major will not be denied.

The Minor is clear, because there is no Scripture-ground for it, no Command
nor Example for such a Practice in God's Word. And if without
Scripture-Authority the Church has Power to do one thing, she may do another,
and so ad insinitum.

Arg. 16. Whatsoever Practice reflects upon the Honor, Wisdom and Care of
Jesus Christ, or renders him less faithful than Moses, and the New Testament in
one of its great Ordinances, (nay, Sacraments) to lie more obscure in God's
Word, than any Law or Precept under the Old Testament, cannot be of God. But
the Practice of Infant Baptism reflects on the Honor, Care and Faithfulness of
Jesus Christ, and renders him less faithful than Moses, and a great Ordinance,
(nay, Sacrament) of the New Testament, to lie more dark and obscure than any
Precept under the Old Testament. Ergo, Infant Baptism cannot be of God.

The Major cannot be denied.

The Minor is easily proved: For he is bold indeed who shall affirm
Infant Baptism does not lie obscure in God's Word. One great Party who assert
it, say, it is not to be found in the Scripture at all, but it is an unwritten
Apostolical Tradition: others say, it lies not in the Letter of the Scripture,
but may be proved by Consequences; and yet some great Asserters of it, as Dr.
Hammond and others, say, Those Consequences commonly drawn from diverse Texts
for it, are without Demonstration, and so prove nothing. I am sure a Man may
read the Scripture a hundred times over, and never be thereby convinced; he
ought to baptize his Children, tho it is powerful to convince Men of all other
Duties.

Now can this be a Truth, since Christ who was more faithful than Moses, and
delivered every thing plainly from the Father? Moses left nothing dark as to
matter of Duty, tho the Precepts and external Rites of his Law were numerous,
two or three hundred Precepts, yet none were at a loss, or had need to say, Is
this a Truth or an Ordinance, or not? for he that runs may read it.

And shall one positive Precept given forth by Christ, who appointed so few in
the New Testament, be so obscure, as also the ground and end of it, that Men
should be confounded about the Proofs of it, together with the end and ground
thereof? See Heb. 3. 5, 6.

Arg. 17. That Custom or Law which Moses never delivered to the Jews, nor is
any where written in the Old Testament, was no Truth of God, nor of Divine
Authority. But that Custom or Law to baptize Proselytes either Men, Women or
Children, was never given to the Jews by Moses, nor is it any where written in
the Old Testament. Ergo, It was no Truth of God, nor of Divine Authority: And
evident it is, as Sir Norton Knatchbul shows, That the Jewish Rabbis differed
among themselves also about it: for, says he, Rabbi Elizer expressly
contradicts Rabbi Joshua, who was the first I know of who asserted this sort of
Baptism among the Jews: For Eliezer, who was contemporary with Rabbi Joshua, if
he did not live before him, asserts, that a Proselyte circumcised and not
baptized, was a true Proselyte.

Arg. 18. If Baptism is of mere positive Right, wholly depending on the Will
and Sovereign Pleasure of Jesus Christ, the great Legislator: And he has not
required or commanded Infants to be baptized: then Infants ought not to be
baptized: But Baptism is of mere positive Right, wholly depending on the Will
and sovereign Pleasure of Jesus Christ, the great Legislator, and he has not
required or commanded Infants to be baptized. Ergo, Infants ought not to be
baptized.

This Argument tends to cut off all the pretended Proofs of Pedo-Baptism, taken
from the Covenant made with Abraham; and because Children are said to belong to
the Kingdom of Heaven, it was not the Right of Abraham's Male Children to be
circumcised, because they were begotten, and born of the Fruit of his Loins,
till he received Commandment from God to circumcise them. Had he done it
before, or without a Command from God, it would have been Will Worship in him
so to have done. Moreover, this further appears to be so, Because no godly
Man's Children, nor others in Abraham's Days, nor since, had any Right thereto,
but only his Children, (or such who were bought with his Money, or were
proselyted to the Jewish Religion) because they had no Command from God so to
do, as Abraham had. This being true, it follows, that if we should grant
Infants of believing Gentiles, as such, were the Seed of Abraham (which we
deny) yet unless God had commanded them to baptize their Children, they ought
not to do it; and if they do it without a Command or Authority from Christ, it
will be found an Act of Will Worship in them.

Arg. 19. All that were baptized in the Apostolical Primitive Times, were
baptized upon the Profession of Faith, were baptized into Christ, and thereby
put on Christ, and were all one in Christ Jesus, and were Abraham's Seed and
Heirs, according to Promise. But Infants, as such, who are baptized, were not
baptized upon the Profession of their Faith, nor did they put on Christ
thereby, nor are they all one in Christ Jesus, also are not Abraham's Seed and
Heirs according to Promise. Ergo, Infants ought not to be baptized.

Mr. Baxter confirms the Substance of the Major. These are his very Words, i.
e. As many as have been baptized have put on Christ, and are all one in Christ
Jesus; and are Abraham' s Seed, and Heirs, according to the Promise, Gal. 3.
27, 28, 29. This speaks the Apostle, says he, of the Probability grounded on a
credible Profession, etc. Baxter's Co^firm. Reconcil. page 32.

The Minor will stand firm till any can prove Infants by a visible Profession
have put on Christ, are all one in Christ Jesus, are Abraham's Seed and Heirs
according to Promise. Evident it is, none are the spiritual Seed of Abraham,
but such who have the Faith of Abraham, but such who have the Faith of Abraham,
and are truly grafred into Christ, by a Saving-Faith. If any object, We read of
some who were baptized, who had no Saving-Faith, but were Hypocrites. I answer;
Had they appeared to be such, they had not been baptized, nor had they a true
Right thereto.

Arg. 20. Baptism is the solemnizing of the Souls Marriage-Union with Christ,
which Marriage-Contract absolutely requires an actual Profession of consent.
Infants are not capable to enter into a Marriage-Union with Christ, nor to make
a Profession of Consent. Ergo, Infants ought not to be baptized.

The Major our Opposits generally grant, particularly see what Mr. Baxter
says, Our Baptism is the solemnizing of our Marriage with Christ. These are
his Words, p. 32.

The Minor none can deny: No Man sure in his right Mind, will assert that
little Babes are capable to enter into a Marriage-Relation with Christ, and to
make a Profession of a Consent: And the Truth is, he in the next Words gives
away his Cause, viz. And it is, says he, a new and strange kind of Marriage,
where there is no Profession of Consent; p. 32. How unhappy was this Man to
plead for such a new and strange kind of Marriage: Did he find any little Babe
he ever baptized (or rather rantized) to make a Profession of Consent to be
married to Jesus Christ. If any should object, he speaks of the Baptism of the
Adult. I answer, his Words are these, Our Baptism is, etc. Besides, will any
Pedo-Baptist say, that the Baptism of the Adult is the solemnizing of the Souls
Marriage with Christ, and not the Baptism of Infants. Reader, observe how our
Opposits are forced sometimes to speak the Truth, though it overthrows their
own Practice of Pedo-Baptism.

Arg. 21. If the Sins of no Persons are forgiven them till they are converted,
then they must not be baptized for the Forgiveness of them, till they prosess
themselves to be converted; but the Sins of no Persons are forgiven them till
they are converted. Ergo, No Person ought to be baptized for the Forgiveness of
them, till they profess they are converted.

Mr. Baxter in the said Treatise lays down the Substance of this Argument also,
take his own Words, i. e. As their Sins are not forgiven them till they are
converted, Mark 4. 12. so they must not be baptized for the Forgiveness of
them, till they profess themselves converted, seeing to the Church, in esse,
and non apparere is all one. Repentance toward God, and Faith toward our Lord
Jesus is the Sum of that Preaching that makes Disciples, Acts 20. 21.
Therefore, says he, both these must by a Profession seem to be received,
before any at Age are baptized; p. 30. 31. And evident it is, say I, from hence
none but such at Age ought to be baptized. Philip caused the Eunuch to profess
before he would baptize him, that be believed that Jesus Christ is the Son of
God. Saul had also, says he, more than a bare Profession before Baptism, Acts
9. 5, 15, 17. p. 28. The Promise it self, says he does expressly require a
Faith of our own, of all the Adult that will have part in the Privileges:
therefore there is a Faith of our own, that is the Condition of our Title; Mark
16. 16. p. 16.

He might have added by the Force of his Argument; therefore Infants should not
have the Privileges: for I argue thus, viz.

Arg. 22. If there is but one Baptism of Water left by Jesus Christ in the New
Testament, and but one Condition or Manner of Right thereto: and that one
Baptism is that of the Adult; then Infant Baptism is no Baptism of Christ. But
there is but one Baptism in Water lest by Christ in the New Testament, and but
one Condition and Manner of Right thereto, and that one Baptism is that of the
Adult. Ergo, Infant Baptism is no Baptism of Christ.

Mr. Baxter says, Faith and Repentance is the Condition of the Adult, and as
to any other Condition, I am sure the Scripture is silent; the Way of the Lord
is one, one Lord, one Faith, one Baptism, Ephesians. 4. 4.

If Profession of Faith were not necessary, says Mr. Baxter, coram Ecclesia,
to Church Membership and Privileges, then Infidels and Heathens would have
Right; also, says he, the Church and the World would be confounded. He might
have added, but Infidels and Heathens have no Right to Church Membership, etc.
Ergo, It Is a granted Case among all Christians, says he, that Profession is
thus necessary, the Apostles and Ancient Church admitted none without it; page
21. And if so, why dare any now adays admit of Infants, who are capable to make
no Profession. He adds, Yea Christ in his Commission directs his Apostles to
make Disciples, and then baptize them, promising, He that believes, and is
baptized, shall be saved, Mark 16. 16. page 27. Furthermore he says, If as
many as are baptized into Christ, are baptized into his Death, and are buried
with him by Baptism into Death, that like as Christ was raised from the Dead,
so we also should-walk in Newness of Life, etc. Then no doubt, says he, but
such as were to be baptized, did first profess this Mortification, and a
Consent to be buried, etc. In our Baptism we put off the Body of the the Sins
of the Flesh, by the Circumcision of Christ, being buried with him, and raised
with him through Faith, quickened with him, and having all our Trespasses
forgiven, Col. 2. 11, 12, 13. And will any Mau (says he) yea, will Paul ascribe
all this to those that did not so much as profess the things signified? Will
Baptism, in the Judgment of a wise Man, do all this for an Infidel, (or, say I,
for an Infant) that cannot make a Profession that he is a Christian? page 31,
32. He proceeds.

Arg. 23. the Baptized are in Scripture called Men washed, sanctified,
justified; they are called Saints, and Churches of Saints, 1 Cor. 1. 2. all
Christians are sanctified ones: page 33. Now let me add the Minor.

But Infants baptized are not in Scripture called Men washed, sanctified,
justified, they are not called Saints, Churches of Saints, Christians, nor
sanctified ones. Ergo, Infants ought not to be baptized. If any should say, Why
did you not cite these Assertions of Mr. Baxter's whilst he was living? I
answer, More then twelve Years ago I did recite and print these Assertions, and
many other Arguments of his to the same Purpose, to which he gave no Answer.

Arg. 24. If there is but one way for all, both Parents and Children to be
admitted into the Gospel Church to the End of the World, and that it is upon
the Profession of Faith to be baptized; then both Parents and Children must
upon the Profession of their Faith be baptized, and so admitted, etc. But there
is but one way for all, both Parents and Children, to be admitted into the
Gospel Church to the End of the World, and that is upon the Profession their
Faith to be baptized. Ergo.

Arg. 25. That cannot be Christ's true Baptism wherein there is not, cannot be
a lively Representation of the Death, Burial and Resurrection of Jesus Christ,
together with our Death unto Sin, and Vivification to a new Life. But in the
Rantizing or Sprinkling of an Infant, there is not, cannot be a lively
Representation of Christ's Death, Burial and Resurrection, etc. Ergo.

Arg. 26. That pretended Baptism that tends to frustrate the glorious End and
Design of Christ in his instituting of Gospe-Baptism, or cannot answer it, is
none of Christ's Baptism. But the pretended Baptism of Infants tends to
frustrate the glorious end and design of Christ in instituting of
Gospel-Baptism, Ergo.

That Major will not he denied.

As to the Minor, all generally confess the End or Design of Christ in
instituting the Ordinance of Baptism, was in a lively Figure, to represent his
Death, Burial, and Resurrection, with the Person's Death unto Sin, and his
rising again to walk in newness of Life, that is baptized, as the Sacrament of
the Supper was ordained to represent his Body was broke, and his Blood was
shed. But that a lively Figure of Christ's Death, Burial, and Resurrection,
appears in sprinkling a little Water on the Face, I see not; and as done to an
Infant, there can no Death to Sin, and rising again to walk in newness of Life,
be signified; And therefore Christ's Design and End therein is frustrated.

Arg. 27. If Baptism be Immersion, as to the proper and genuine signification
of the word Baptizo, as also of those Typical and Metaphorical Baptisms and the
spiritual Signification thereof; then Sprinkling cannot be Christ's true
Baptism. But Immersion is the proper and genuine signification of the word
Baptizo, and also of those Typical and Metaphorical Baptisms spoken of, and the
spiritual Signification thereof. Ergo, Sprinkling is not Christ's true Baptism.

1. That the proper and genuine Signification of the word Baptizo is Immersion,
or to dip, etc. we have proved, which is also confessed by the Learned in the
Language.

2. The Figurative Baptism was, 1st. That of the Red Sea, wherein the ^^thers
were buried, as it were, unto Moses in the Sea, and under the Cloud. Pools
Annotations on 1 Cor. 10. 2. Others, says he, more probably think that the
Apostle uses this term, in regard of the great Analogy betwixt Baptism (as it
was then used) the Persons going down into the Waters, and being dipped in
them; and the Israelites going down into the Sea, the great Receptacle of
Water, though the Water at that time was gathered on Heaps on either side of
them; yet they seemed-buried in the Water, as Persons in that Age were when
they were baptized, etc. The 2d. was that of Noah's Ark. See Sir Norton
Knatchb^ll: The Ark of Noah and Baptism, says he, were both a Type and Figure
of the Resurrection, not the Sign of the washing away of Sin, though so taken
metonymically, but a particular Signal of the Resurrection of Christ: of this
Baptism is a lively and emphatical Figure, as Also was the Ark of Noah, out of
which he returned as from a Sepulcher, to a new Life.

3. Metaphorical Baptism is that of the Spirit and of Affliction: the first
signifies not a sprinkling of the Spirit, but the great Effusion of the Spirit,
like that at Pentecost, Acts 1. 4, 5. Shall be baptized, etc. on which Words
Casaubon speaks thus: See Dr. D^ Veil on Acts 2. The Greek Word (...) is to dip
or plunge, as it were to die Colors, in which Sense, says he, the Apostles
might be truly said to have been baptized for the House in which this was done,
was filled with the Holy Ghost; so that the Apostles might seem to have been
plunged into it as in a large Fish Pond. Also (...) on Acts 2. says, A Wind
filled the whole House, that it seemed like a Fish Pond, because it was
promised to the Apostles, that they should be baptized with the Holy Ghost. And
the Baptism of Afflic^^^ are those great depths or overwhelming of Afflictions,
like that of our Savior's (...), i. e. no part free; Matthew. 20. 22. (...) you
have the same Greed Word (...) and like that, of David, who says, (...) him
out of gr^^t Waters.

4. The spiritual Signification thereof ^^ the Death, Burial and Resurrection
of Christ and of our Death to Sin, and Vivification (...) a new Life.

This being so, it follows (...) Sprinkling cannot be Christ^^ true (...) it
must be Immersion, and nothing else.

And in the last Place, Finally, To (...) that Baptizo is to dip, both from the
literal (...) spiritual Signification thereof, as also (...) those typical and
metaphorical Baptism ^^^tioned in the Scripture, I might add (...) that this
evidently appears from the (...) of John Baptist and the Apostles of (...) who
baptized in Rivers, and where (...) much Water: and also, because the (...)
Baptized are said to go down into the W^^^^ (not down to the Water) and came
(...) of the Water. John Baptist is said to (...) them into Jordan, as the
Greek Word (...) it, which shows it dipping and not (...). Would it be proper
to say, He (...) them into Jordan? The Lord open (...) those who see not, to
consider these (...)

FINIS.

